Public Disclosure Authorized

Document

of

The World Bank

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No. 19365 - CD

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE REPUBLIC OF CHAD

May 28, 1999

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of May 28, 1998)

Currency Unit
US$ 1.00
SDR 1.0

CFA franc (CFAF)
CFAF 629.7
US$ 1.34

ABBREVIATIONSAND ACRONYMS
ATETIP
CAR
CAS
CFA
COBAC
COTCO
COTONTCHAD
DRC
ESAF
ESW
GDP
IBRD
IDA
IFC
IMF
MIGA
MINURCA
MINUAR
NGO
PER
PFP
SAC
SONASUT
SOTEL TCHAD
STEE
TOTCO
UDEAC
UNDP

Agence Tchadienne d'Execution de Travaux d'Interet Public
Central African Republic
Country Assistance Strategy
Communaute Financiere Africaine
Commission Bancaire
Cameroon Oil Transportation Company
Societe Cotonniere du Tchad (Cotton processing and marketing company)
Democratic Republic of Congo
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
Economic and Sector Work
Gross Domestic Product
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Mission des Nations Unies en Republique Centrafricaine
Mission des Nations Unies au Rwanda
Non-governmental Organization
Public Expenditure Review
Policy Framework Paper
Structural Adjustment Credit
Societe Nationale Sucriere du Tchad (National sugar company)
Societe des Telecommunications du Tchad (Telecommunications company)
Societe d'Eau et d'Electricite (Water and electricity utility)
Tchad Oil transportation Company
Union Douaniere et Economique de l'Afrique Centrale (Sub-regional tax and tariff reform)
United Nations Development Program

FISCAL YEAR
January 1-December 31

Vice President
Country Director
Sector Manager
Task Team

Jean-Louis Sarbib
Serge Michailof
Luca Barbone
Luca Barbone, Alain D'Hoore, Mary Barton-Dock, Michelle Keane

FOR OFFICIALUSE ONLY
REPUBLIC OF CHAD
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
SUMMARY
Chad is a poor country with limited prospects, unless it seizes the opportunity of exploiting its
oil. If well managed, oil exploitation could lead to substantial improvements in Chad's human
development and physical infrastructure, and allow the country to look forward to a period of
accelerated growth and improved human welfare indicators. There is a tangible chance that a
great number of its people could be lifted out of their deep poverty within one generation.
Without oil, development prospects remain limited and progress would be slower and more
difficult.
Intemational experience teaches that oil revenues can only make a positive developmental
difference if they are well managed. Given the present weakness of Chad's institutions,
preparing for the new era over the remaining years before oil revenues begin to flow, is the
biggest challenge faced by Government and civil society. A key role for the international
community and the World Bank will be to help Chad meet this challenge.
Preparing for the arrival of oil entails:
e

Concerted and sustained actions to increase institutional capacity and enhance socioeconomic management;

= Developing adequate strategies to allow a substantial build-up of human capital when oil
resources come on stream;
e

Removing constraints to the developmentof non-oil activities.

The Assistance Strategv proposed in this document aims to help Chad prepare to make the
best developmental use of its oil resources, and avoid the pitfalls encountered by other countries.
The strategy would support the transition to the oil era by improving the quality and
effectiveness of public institutions, and putting into place safeguards to mitigate the risks of oil
exploitation. It would address key infrastructural and human bottlenecks that constrain growth,
in order to obtain substantial poverty alleviation results and ensure that environmental and social
priorities are adequately addressed.
The strategy builds on the experience of the past few years, and broad consultations with
government and civil society. It proposes to concentrate Bank assistance in the critical areas of
education, health, transport and rural development, the main beneficiaries of the additional oil
resources. Key bottlenecks in energy and telecommunications will be tackled, with a view to
allowing the private sector to participate to the fullest extent.
Because of the importance and "lumpiness" of the oil project and related activities, the
Assistance Strategy proposes only two cases, hinging on progress in the implementation of the

and may be used by recipientsonly in the
This documenthas a restricteddistribution
of theirofficialduties. Itscontentsmay nototherwisebe disclosedwithout
performance
WorldBankauthorization.

measures required for a successful use of oil resources in the new millennium. The Base Case,
which prevails at present, would be maintained if the following triggers continue to obtain: (i)
sustained macroeconomic performance; (ii) successful portfolio implementation with particular
emphasis on sector-wide operations (health and transport); (iii) adequate sector strategies in four
priority sectors for poverty alleviation (health, education, transport, rural development); and (iv)
satisfactory implementation of the first steps of the institutional strengthening program for the
preparation of the oil revenue management.
Lending operations over the coming months include three key projects: support to the
construction of an oil pipeline from Chad to Cameroon (through a US$35 million IBRD loan),
and two IDA-financed capacity building projects aimed at developing government capacity to
manage oil revenues and civil society's participation in such management.
In addition to these projects, the Base Case foresees lending for US$210 million and a
substantial program of non-lending services. The former include: adjustment support (through
one or more operations) aimed at public expenditure reform and completing the remaining
reform agenda for a total of US$60 million; six investment operations, of which four in priority
sectors for poverty alleviation (health, education, transport and rural development, US$120
million) and two aimed at lifting infrastructure bottlenecks and promoting private sector
development (electricity and telecommunications, US$ 30 million).
Non-lending activities include policy dialogue on revenue management, and annual participatory
PERs, focused on the four priority sectors mentioned above, analytical support to strategy work
in the social sectors and in rural development, especially cotton liberalization, and the
implementation of poverty monitoring mechanisms.
Should the implementation of the reform program stall or should any Government action
or change in circumstances severely undermine implementation of the Oil Revenue Management
Program, the program would be scaled back considerably. Under such circumstances - the Low
Case scenario - no adjustment lending would be possible, loans related to oil development (if
already approved) would be suspended and appropriate remedies applied, and the lending
program would be limited to investment in the health sector. The program would then consist of
a total of US$40 million during the period covered by this CAS (in addition to the US$70 million
contemplated for the next three-four months). Policy dialogue on governance would be stepped
up and the non-lending program would focus on the actions needed to return to a satisfactory
implementation of economic reforms and public finance management.
The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:
* The centrality of the exploitation of oil resources to Chad's development prospects, and the
adequacy of the measures proposed in this strategy to ensure adequate utilization of oil
resources and appropriate consideration of related environmental and social risks;
* The adequacy of the assessment of external and internal risks and of the remedies
proposed;
* The adequacy of the Bank's selectivity in intervention.

ii

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF CHAD

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
Chad is one of the world's poorest countries. An estimated 80 percent of its population
of 7 million live with less than a dollar a day. The depth and pervasiveness of poverty is
striking, and only a small fraction of the population escapes its consequences: poor nutrition and
health, high child and adult mortality,
Chart 1. Chad: Large Social Deficit
and limited access to basic amenities,
(Chad vs. Sub-SaharanAfica)
education opportunities and social
protection (Chart 1).
Among
disappointing
indicators,
those
GDP per capita
reflecting
female welfare
are
Gjrls'Enrollments</
L
I nChildswwaloddparticularly
poor, with maternal
/
Girls

Ero\me

Chksurvalodds|mortality
Chad

PranaryEnrollment

Health Expendiures

estimated at 827 per

>100,000
live births, and girls' primary
enrollment rates at 41.6 percent.
Chad's rugged environment is also a
major constraint to development, and
a challenge for sustainable future
growth. Making a substantial dent in
poverty over the next few years is the
overriding objective for the country

)

Accessto Safe Water

and its partners in development.
2.
There is no single cause for this extreme level of poverty. Much of Chad's modem history
has been marred by an unusual combination of many of the factors associated with poor
economic and social performance: political instability, culminating in outbreaks of violent
conflict; inadequate economic policies; rapid population growth, close to 3 percent per year; and
an unfavorablephysical environment, with low population density over a large, landlocked, and
arid country. These factors have sharply curtailed economic growth and left the country with
little physical infrastructure, poor provision of social services, and weak institutions
3.
In the mid-1990s Chad embarked on a dual transition, breaking with past political
patterns and taking its first steps towards economic reform. The Government simultaneously
initiated a democratization process and launched an ambitious macroeconomic stabilization and
structural reform program. Results on both fronts are encouraging.
4.
Exploitation of oil resources will provide Chad with a unique opportunity to make up for
the accumulated delays on its development path and reduce poverty at an accelerated pace.
However, oil exploitation also presents a challenge, given weak institutions. The-challenge is to

1

learn from international experience, so as to make effective use of new revenues while mitigating
the risks associated with their sudden increase.
5.
The Assistance Strategy proposed in this document aims to help Chad prepare to make
the best developmental use of its oil resources, and avoid the pitfalls encountered by many other
countries in the exploitation of natural resources. The strategy would support the country's
transition to the oil era by improving the quality and effectiveness of public institutions, and
putting into place safeguards to mitigate the risks of oil exploitation. It would aim to address key
infrastructural and human factors that constrain growth, to obtain substantial poverty alleviation
results in the short and medium termn,and ensure that environmental and social priorities are
adequately addressed.
II. ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL CONTEXT

6.
When the last CAS was presented to the Board on February 15, 1996, Chad was
contemplating a major political transition and had started to address a financial crisis that had
crippled its economy and the operations of Government. Over the past three years, considerable
progress has been achieved on both fronts.
7.
Political Transition. In the early 1960s, soon after independence, Chad entered a cycle of
political and social instability triggered by political mismanagement. A spiral of violence and
arned conflicts developed, fed by personal feuds, political opposition, foreign intervention, and
ethnic tensions. Permanent insecurity linked to the presence of more than a dozen "political
military groups" in constantly shifting alliances impeded economic activity and claimed
thousands of lives. It was not until the early to mid-1990s that conditions came about for a
peaceful and lasting resolution of internal disputes. A more inclusive form of government
started to materialize. Under the present administration, a serious effort of transition towards
democracy has taken off, and a measure of political stability has been achieved. Presidential
elections were held in mid-1996; in April 1997, legislative elections led to the installation of
Chad's first democratically elected, multi-party Assembly. The government has pursued a policy
of "national reconciliation" building on the "war fatigue" of both the population and most leaders
of "political-military groups", trying to bring them into the political process. Progress is notable
on demobilization, and military expenditures have been reduced from 14 percent of total
expenditures in 1993 to 5 percent in 1998 (the size of the army was cut in half).
8.
Economic policies and outcomes. The Government recently completed its first threeyear adjustment program, supported by an IMF ESAF and three Bank SACs. Fiscal performance
has sharply improved, moving from a current deficit of 5 percent of GDP in 1994 to a slight
current surplus in 1998. This was achieved through tight expenditure control and enhanced
revenue mobilization. Relations with foreign creditors have been normalized and external
arrears were fully cleared by end-1997. The program has also achieved a significant reallocation
of public expenditures towards developmental sectors: the share of public resources going to
education, health, social affairs, rural development and transport has reached 72 percent. The
program also registered strong progress on a variety of structural issues (see Annex E). The
public enterprise divestiture program has rapidly advanced, with most privatizations completed
or underway.

2

Table 1 - Chad: Selected Economic Indicators
Actual

Forecast
1998

1999

2000

2001

4.1
5.2
9.5

7.0
9.5
9.6

1.3
-4.3
1.7

5.5
5.6
5.3

5.5
5.4
5.2

1.9
11.3

1.5
5.6

2.7
2.9

3.5
3.5

4.9
2.9

5.7
2.9

Currentaccountbalance

-12.2

Grossinvestmnent

13.5

-15.0
16.2

-11.7 -15.9
15.2 19.5
2.2
5.2

-19.0
23.2
8.9

-31.0*
36.0
19.7

-7.9
8.0

- 7.9
7.8

- 6.9
7.3

Growthrates(%)
GDP
Agriculture
Industry

Services
Inflation
(%)

1996

1997

3.7
2.7
5.9

Nationalaccounts(%GDP)
Of whichoilsector

1.0

...

Publicfmance(%GDP)
Fiscalbalance
Foreignfinmancing

-11.1
13.2

-10.2
12.0

-8.0
9.7

Source:WorldBankLiveDatabase
* includesoil-related
imports

9.
Macroeconomic outcomes are encouraging (Table 1). Economic growth has accelerated
to an annual average of about 5 percent over 1996-98. The good growth rates have largely
resulted from improved performance in the rural sector, which has been the main beneficiary of
the devaluation of the CFA Franc. Year-to-year growth rates continue, however, to be strongly
affected by exogenous factors, such as rains and world prices-underscoring the importance of
natural resource management policies (especially concerning water and soil fertility). GDP
growth is expected to slow down to 1.3 percent in 1999, on account of unfavorable agricultural
performance, but should return to rates of 5 percent or more in the absence of further external
shocks. Inflation has been brought back to its historical low level of about 3 percent from over
50 percent after the 1994 devaluation of the CFA franc.
10. Despite this recent positive track record on the political and economic fronts, progress
remains fragile. Chad is still struggling with its political transition in an unstable regional
environment. The political scene remains fragmented, with over seventy political parties.
Episodes of localized conflict are recurrent between Government and a few armed opposition
groups who opt out of the democratic process and return to military action. In 1997, an armed
rebellion developed in the South. Poorly organized, it never presented a serious military threat to
the government, but its armed activities and the ensuing repression claimed about 200 lives and
led to civil right abuses before it was defeated in 1998. A political settlement has helped restore
peace, but this episode has left additional scars on the social fabric. More recently, an armed
rebellion led by a former Minister of Defense has surfaced in the Saharan region of Tibesti,
where insurgencies have been the rule rather than the exception since the beginning of the
century. While observers do not believe this guerilla poses a military or political threat to the
Government, it is likely to remain a thorn in its side, until a political settlement is found.

3

11. Chad has also been called upon to participate in several international peace-keeping
efforts. It contributes troops to two UN multinational peace keeping forces: MlNURCA in
Central African Republic and MINUAR in Rwanda. At the request of the government of the
Democratic Republic of Congo, it has also provided a limited contingent of troops which have
been operating close to the CAR border in northern DRC. These troops are now being
withdrawn. Operations, in CAR, Rwanda and in DRC are entirely funded by external sources.
III. DEVELOPMENT
PROSPECTS:THE CHALLENGE
OF OIL
12.
Against this still fragile political and economic background, Chad's economic and social
prospects today, as the country prepares to enter the new millennium, hinge on the prospect of oil
exploitation. This carries enormous opportunities, and commensurate risks. It is no
exaggeration to argue that the Petroleum Development and Pipeline Project under preparation
has already irreversibly affected the prospects of the country, and its relations with the
international community and the World Bank.
Growth prospects without oil
13.
There is a strong case for oil exploitation now, despite the risks and challenges discussed
below, because the likely development prospects in the absence of oil are bleak. Under the
present circumstances, some improvements in poverty alleviation were noted during the past
CAS period, though robust data is scant. Better security over the entire territory has contributed
to better economic performance, and incomes in the rural sector, where most of Chad's poor live,
are thought to have risen. Though quality and outcomes of education still present considerable
challenges, surging enrollment rates broadly distributed across the territory indicate improved
access to schooling, including in rural areas. Growth in donor-financed activities since the mid1990's have in all likelihood had an impact on investments to the benefit of the poor. Looking
forward, there is little doubt that Chad's rural growth potential is high. There are large areas of
underutilized arable land and livestock already represents a considerable source of income,
though caution should be exercised to ensure environmental sustainability.
14.
Nevertheless, Chadians remain very poor and a complete picture requires underlining the
less encouraging elements. Soil fertility appears to be declining, threatening the sustainability of
farmers' incomes, and vulnerability to climactic conditions regularly lead to the emergence of
pockets of famine in regions with poor transport infrastructure. There is also evidence of a
"productivity gap" with countries with similar eco-physical features: agricultural yields on most
crops are much lower, sometimes up to 30 percent lower than equivalent crops in similar
countries (Mali, Burkina, etc.) and infrastructural bottlenecks present an even greater challenge
than in other poor Sahelian countries. Without oil, even in the best of circumstances, Chad
would be faced with unpalatable developmental prospects. Assuming further consolidation of
political stability and improvement in economic policies, Chad could probably sustain a trend
rate of growth of a little over 5 percent of GDP per year. But at that rate, it would take 3 5 years
to double its current low level of per-capita income of US$230. Raising incomes to a level that
would substantially reduce poverty would therefore span more than two generations. The oil
wealth in the ground offers an opportunity to dramatically accelerate the development process.

4

Box 1 - Sizing Up Oil Exploitation in Chad: Investment, Growth and Revenues

A projectto developand exploitoil reservesin the Dobaregion,in the southof Chad,is being considered
by a consortiumof private oil companiesled by Exxon. One of the largestprivate investmentprojectsin subSaharanAfricain recentyears, it would requirean investmentof about US$3.2billion,much of it up-front,for
(i) the exploitationof fields estimatedat about 900 millionbarrels over a 25 year period (an averageof about
100,000barrels a day), and (ii) the constructionof a 1,100 km pipe-linefrom Chad to the Atlantic coast in
Cameroonover a three-yearperiod. Oil exportsare expectedto comeon stream early 2004. The currentCAS
period (FYOO-02)
thus coversonly the constructionand developmentphase.
Growthimpact. As in many developingcountries,oil exploitationin Chad will be an economicenclave,with
limiteddirectemploymentgenerationand other linkages. As a result, we estimatethat at the onset, while real
GDP (measuringproductionin Chad)would grow by about 40 percent,real GNP (measuring.Chadianincome)
would increaseby about 8 percentonly. Giventhe anticipatedprofile of oil extraction,oil GDPgrowthwill start
to declineaftera few years. As arguedin this document,medium-and long-termincreasesin GDP will emanate
from the enhancedformationof human andphysical capitalmadepossibleby oil revenues. Whilethese effects
are difficultto estimate,using availableparameterssuggeststhat oil resources could increase Chad's non-oil
GDP growth rate by some 2 percent over its baseline rate. This would imply doublingof per-capitaincome
every 17years, ratherthan every 35 underthe baselinescenario.
Revenues.As Chad willnot, underthe project,developa domesticoil company. Its share in oil revenueswould
accruedirectlyto the Government.The sharewould includeroyaltieson oil exploitation,taxes on the oil field
companies,taxes on the incomeof the pipelinecompanyin Chad (TOTCO),and, to a lesser extent, dividends
from the profits of TOTCO and of its sister organizationin Cameroon (COTCO),in which the Chadian
Governmentwill havea smallequitystake. Depreciationchargesfor the massiveinitialinvestmentwouldoffset
taxableincomeof the oil field companiesand TOTCOfor the first few years of oil exploitation.
Over the most probable range of future oil prices, Chadian oil revenues accruing to Government would
represent an amount significant enough to make a difference and yet moderate enough to require

continued developmentassistance.At current Bank oil price forecasts, based on a real 1998 price of
US$15per barrel for the Brentreferencecrude,nominaloil revenueswouldaverageaboutUS$80 milliona year,
andpeak at US$110million,over the first 7 full yearsof oil production(2004-2010),or about 22percent of total
fiscal revenues,includingoil,projectedfor the period. Thus,under this scenario,oil revenueswould represent
about 50 percent of fiscal revenuestoday, or 50 percent of the currentlevel of foreignaid. Under a low price
scenario(basedon a real 1998Brentprice of US$11 dollarsa barrel),oil revenueswouldpeak at US$65 million
a year, and averageabout US$45 milliona year. Under a high price scenario (real 1998Brent price of US$20
per barrel),oil revenueswouldpeak at US$381million,andaverageaboutUS$270millionper year.

The Difference Oil Can Make
15. Oil development provides a major opportunity for Chad to break free from a poverty trap
of enormous needs and very limited resources, to diversify its economy and increase its fiscal
revenues (see Box 1)1. If well managed, additional revenues from oil can translate into
significant poverty alleviation, through greater availability of resources for priority sectors,
improved basic infrastructure and wider delivery of better public and social services. The key
here is appropriate use of oil revenues; the coming three years, leading up to the materialization
of oil revenues, will constitute a crucial period. The path leading from increased oil revenues to

A very detaileddescriptionof the PetroleumDevelopmentand PipelineProjectwill be providedat the time of
Boardpresentationof the project andrelatedoperations.

5

accelerated poverty reduction runs as follows. Additional revenues can be allocated to lifiting
the bottlenecks that prevent growth and specifically affect the poor. First, the build-up of human
capital can be increased, thus providing the new generations of Chadians with better tools to take
up economic challenges. Second, in conjunction with measures to increase the strength of
institutions, of property rights and of commerce, greater resources can be assigned to alleviating
the bottlenecks that constrain both private sector activity and public sector delivery of services.
The end result can be a more sustained growth path, with public resources specifically targeted to
empowering the poor, and poor women in particular. Estimates suggest that incomes could grow
twice as fast, for about a generation, than under a non oil scenario, leading in all likelihood, to a
very significant improvement in welfare indicators. This opportunity is too important to pass up,
but the many risks associated with oil production must be identified and properly mitigated.
External Environment
16.
The external environment is relatively favorable. Chad is a member of the regional
Central-African monetary union, which has a fixed-exchange rate arrangement with the Euro,
backed by the French Treasury. In 1998-99, decline in international commodity prices sparked
by the Asian crisis had a moderate impact on Chad's external position, unfavorably affecting its
cotton exports and the cotton company's financial results (and, by extension, government
revenues), though terms of trade suffered only a moderate decline. The current account deficit
(at about 16 percent of GDP in 1998) is best seen as the counterpart to a structural capital
account surplus, driven by highly concessional donor financing for public investment. Based on
current commodity price projections, Chad's external position is expected to remain sustainable
over the next several years, as important donor resources can be counted on to finance the
country's investment program, even prior to the arrival of oil resources.
17.
Chad does not have a major external debt sustainability issue. Its present value of debt to
GDP or exports is moderate, reflecting high concessionality, but debt service still represents
about 20 percent of Government revenues. In the medium-term, oil exploitation would sharply
improve external prospects, although oil price variability (see Box 1) would add sharp challenges
to fiscal and macroeconomic management.
Risks: Poor Governance; Possibility of "Dutch Disease"
19.
International experience has however shown a consistent propensity of governments to
squander and mismanage revenues from natural resources, with negative consequences on
stability and poverty. Experience also shows that lack of transparency and accountability are key
ingredients in the failure to promote development through the use of natural resource revenue.
Governance is thus a major issue that needs to be dealt with in Chad, to ensure that
accountability and transparency are indeed promoted in the very near term. In addition, powerful
economic forces are put in motion by the emergence of sudden wealth. If not appropriately
managed, they can lead to either the emergence of the Dutch Disease, and the attendant
reduction of the non-oil economy open to international competition, and/or to instability in
government revenues and expenditures, in the face of high variability of oil prices. These are
risks that can be managed, if careful policies are clearly understood and implemented.

6

IV. STRATEGIC
IssuEs ANDDEVELOPMENT
AGENDA
20. How to transform oil revenues into concrete and substantial development achievements is
the key issue for Chad over the next several years. This section discusses the main hurdles that
can be expected, and is based on analytical work conducted by the Bank and other partners. The
Government of Chad has been a key participant in this analytical work, and has endorsed the
main tenets of the proposed strategy, most notably through a public document ("Chad: Strategic
Development Options"), presented to the donor community at the Round Table in October 1998.
21.
A More Participatory Development Process. The first precondition for poverty-oriented
utilization of the oil revenues in the years to come is a determined political commitment on the
part of Chad's leadership to bolster and maintain a participatory process. Institutional
development is as much a process of enhancing inclusiveness, increased accountability of public
officials and giving voice to users of public services and potential taxpayers, as one of making
existing institutions more efficient. Both government and opposition recognize that the route
towards greater inclusiveness, participation and democracy has no alternatives worth
contemplating. Provisions to ensure that all strata of society, in particular those living in the
region of potential oil exploitation, will see material benefits from oil, are included in legislation
and are being discussed widely across civil society. Active discussion is on-going and will
continue over the next few years.
22.
Continued commitment from the top and buy-in by civil society are critical elements for
success: it is up to Chad's government and civil society to rise to the task. The intemational
community, and the World Bank in particular, can help facilitate this national debate by taking
the greatest care in ensuring that adequate participation by civil society, local communities, and
NGOs is sought in all interventions, from the most strategic discussions to the projects that can
affect the quality of life at the village level.
23.
In parallel with the deepening of the participatory process, Chad and the international
community face the important task of ensuring that the instruments needed to turn oil into
poverty reduction are put in place over the next three-four years: (i) concerted and sustained
actions are required to increase institutional capacity and enhance socio-economic management;
(ii) adequate strategies must be developed to allow a substantial build-up of human capital when
the oil resources come on stream; and (iii) constraints to non-oil activities must be removed.
A.

Improving Governance and Socio-Economic Management

24.
Governance and Corruption. Governance problems in Chad stem from insufficient
accountability and weak capacity, as well as from the youth of democratic institutions. As a
country which has only recently emerged from conflict, Chad has had relatively little time to
introduce and develop the institutions needed for the satisfactory management of public
resources. The absence of formal controls has often led to misuse of funds in public enterprises
and, as in many other countries, episodes of corruption are frequently reported and complaints
heard from private sector and users of public services. The geographical fragmentation of the
country and isolation of regions also pose severe problems, as local governments and traditional
chiefs are subject to little control, sometimes imposing arbitrary "taxes" for instance. Corruption,
however, is not developed in Chad on the scale and sophistication it has reached in many other

7

Box 2 - Oil Revenue Management Law
Essential Provisions

*

Underthe Law, all revenueswouldbe includedand accountedfor in the Budget.

*

A portion(10 percent)of non-taxoil revenueswouldbe systematicallysavedfor future generations.

.

Of the remainder,80 percentwould go to expendituresin five prioritysectors (education,healthand social
services,rural development,infrastructure,and environmentandwater resources),above andbeyondpre-oil
allocations,15 percent to core civilianfunctions,such as justice, and the remaining 5 percent to the oil
producingregion,in conformitywith the regionaldevolutionprovisionof the ChadianConstitution.

*

Non-taxoil revenueswouldbe depositedinto specialaccounts,whichwill facilitatemonitoringand
auditing,.

.

In addition to ordinary financial procedures,withdrawalrequests would require prior approval by an
oversightcommittee,whosemembershipwouldincludea SupremeCourtjudge, a Senator,a memberof the
National Assembly,the Central Bank director, three administrationofficials, and two civil society
representatives,onefrom a localNGO, and onefrom tradeunions.

countries, in Africa and elsewhere. If nothing else, the paucity of resources available for
redistribution is such that few outward signs of corruption are visible. The challenge is how to
avoid that increased resource flows encourage institutional weakening and lead to higher levels
of corruption.
25.
Oil Revenue Management Policy. Addressing governance and corruption issues will
require a multi-pronged strategy, to ensure transparent management of revenues, in particular oil
revenues, and accountability of public institutions. The present phase of adjustment and
structural reform has resulted in the privatization of almost all public enterprises, thus removing,
eventually, the foundation for corruption and mismanagement in this sector. Nevertheless, much
more is needed, particularly with regard to the management of future oil revenues. The first but
critical elements of this strategy have been outlined in a Government Letter of Oil Revenue
Management Policy. Main features of this policy include: (i) transparent accounting of all
revenues and budget comprehensiveness; (ii) sound sectoral strategies, grounded in strong
participatory design and implementation; (iii) poverty monitoring and other instruments to assess
impacts; (iv) public administration reform, including the strengthening of budgetary processes
and instruments; (v) stronger public oversight mechanisms and institutions (Parliament, Auditor
General, Oversight Committee); and (vi) improved transparency through the dissemination of
public information about policies, revenues and their use.
26.
This policy has been made operational through an Oil Revenue Management Law. This
law is virtually unique in the world and was adopted by the Chadian Parliament in January 1999,
four years before oil revenues are scheduled to come on stream. The law which was recently
published in the Chadian press and has been the object of ample discussions within civil society,
outlines the allocation of future oil resources and the establishment of control mechanisms with
civil society participation.
27.

Legal and Judicial Reform. In the context of the challenges and risks posed by Oil

Revenue Management and of weak capacity and institutions, the improvement of Chad's legal

and judicial systems is one of the key elements of the sustainability of development efforts on
many fronts. Though, no thorough diagnosis of these systems is available, there are indications
that capacity and resources are limited. Experience in other countries has shown that improving
8

the quality of the legal system and the functioning of the judiciary have promoted better
governance and reduced opportunities for corruption. Bolstering capacity and transparency in
the legal and judicial systems is also necessary to enhance the business environment and
stimulate private sector development.
29.
Capacity-Building. Progress in improving governance and in implementing the Oil
Revenue Management Law requires substantial efforts to develop, enhance and deepen the
capacity of public and private actors, which the Bank strategy has supported and will continue to
support through a range of instruments. The Government is fully aware of this challenge. Over
the last few years, it has initiated several actions to develop a coherent framework for its capacity
building efforts. Chad has been at the forefront of the Partnership for Capacity Building in
Africa. It has established a National Secretariat at the Ministry of Planning, which has carried
out a National Capacity Assessment and elaborated a Strategy and Action Plan. Donors, such as
UNDP, are involved in supporting the Government's capacity building efforts. The Government
has also formulated and begun implementing a strategy for civil service reform. The objectives
are to better focus government activities, improve the performance of the public administration,
reduce its cost, and enhance the competence and motivation of staff. The reform calls for a
gradual process based on a broad consensus.
30.
Key progress indicators in strengthening public financial management include, among
others: (i) progress in formulating and monitoring integrated budgets; (ii) streamlining of
budgetary instruments; (iii) functioning treasury operations; (iv) establishment of internal
financial control; and (iv) oversight and control by the judiciary, and an independent Committee
mandated to oversee and control the utilization of oil revenue. As discussed below, an IDA
operation is foreseen to help the Government attain these objectives, and in particular the
introduction of a consolidated budget before oil production starts, and replace the project-based
public investment program with sector expenditure programs covering both capital and operation
costs. The proposed operation would also support civil service reform in the key financial
administrations, to enhance sustainability.
31.
Macroeconomic Stability. Both institution building and orderly exploitation of oil
revenues require that the overall economic environment remain supportive. Maintaining
macroeconomic stability over the last few years has been crucial, allowing Chad to move from
crisis management to a stable and forward-looking policymaking. It has also promoted social
stability and institutional development. Since Chad is a member of the CFA regional monetary
union and benefits from a fixed exchange rate arrangement, the main instruments available to
government to ensure macroeconomic and financial stability are fiscal. Considerable progress
has been made over the past four years to put public finances on a stronger structural footing.
32.
Progress must be consolidated, and the Government intends to pursue its fiscal efforts. A
balance has to be found, however, as the private sector is fragile and cannot support an excessive
tax burden. Efforts should continue to broaden the fiscal base. Bringing the informal sector,
which constitutes the largest part of private sector activities in Chad, into the formal economy is
a long process, which may be slowed down by ill-conceived tax initiatives. More is required to
better understand the nexus of fiscal, policy, and institutional issues, especially those related to
legal and judicial reform, which underpin private sector development in Chad.

9

33.
Regarding the possibility of Dutch Disease and of excessive exposure of government
revenues to the variability of oil prices, it should be noted that the mechanisms implicit in the Oil
Revenue Management Law provide a good basis to minimize risks. Both the "Future
Generations Fund", and the strict mechanisms for utilization of the bulk of the oil resources in
the priority areas are aimed at avoiding spillage into excessive wage-bill growth (one of the main
avenues for transmission of the Dutch Disease) and at preventing unsustainable increases in
public investment (an occurrence that has been typical in many countries faced with sudden oil
price bonanzas). The modalities for the functioning of these mechanisms (including smoothing
price fluctuations) are to be worked out over the next three years, prior to the arrival of oil
revenues, and in accordance with the agreements regulating the Central African Monetary
Community, of which Chad is a member.
34.
Decentralization of Service Delivery. Decentralization, a recent focus for Chad, is very
much at the forefront of the political and economic agenda. Faced with the inadequacy of the
very centralized state structure inherited at Independence, Chad is now beginning to ask
important questions about a more equitable and democratic distribution of power among citizens.
Plans are under development for the creation of three sub-national levels of government:
regional, departmental and municipal, each with elected bodies. But, as is the case in many other
countries, the full implications of proposed choices have not been fleshed out. The reform
process must take into account the issue of existing local government structures, "chefferies",
which play an important de facto administrative role. Equally important the issue of how
authority over expenditure of public funds and responsibility for revenue generation is to be
spread across these levels of government has yet to be addressed.
35.
Experience suggests that the formal decentralization of the state will take time to develop
and will require a careful consideration of alternatives. The decentralization and deconcentration
of service delivery mechanisms are important, however, and can proceed even as the political
decentralization process takes shape. In fact, a defining mark of the success of projected sector
expenditure programs will be the extent to which underlying strategies give users and
communities the appropriate say over the spending and strategic decisions that affect their lives.
B.

Enhancing the Development of Human Capital

36.
To substantially increase in the provision of social services to the poor, appropriate
sectoral policies will be required to ensure that resources are put to the best use. This is the area
that will require the greatest attention over the next few years, and where work has begun in
earnest. Three important challenges must be tackled: addressing the issue of population growth,
improving health services, and providing better educational opportunities.
37.
The demographic challenge. If Chad's population continues to grow at the current rate
of 2.9 percent, it will double in less than 24 years, putting increasing pressure on the growth and
availability of productive resources. The Government has recognized the importance of
addressing the issue of population and reproductive health and has adopted a National Population
Policy in 1994. The first Demographic and Health Survey ever conducted in Chad (1996-97)
points to serious problems: the use of family planning remains abysmally low and maternal
mortality excessively high-women have I chance in 18 to die from a maternity-related cause
during reproductive life. A broad approach is necessary to address these problems and the

10

Box 3 - EIIVIAIDSin Chad: A Key Developmental ChaUenge

As in most developingcountries,AIDS/HIVis a seriouspublic health problem in Chad and has the
potential of substantiallyand dramaticallyaltering developmentalprospects. If existing statisticsare roughly
accurate,Chadis now in a somewhatbetter positionthan many of its neighbors.OverallHIV/AIDSprevalence
rates in Chad are estimatedat a relativelylow 2.72 percent by the Bank's Report on the global HIVIAIDS
epidemicof June 1998(althoughprevalencerates are much higheramongat-riskgroups suchas prostitutesand
the military).
This low rate of prevalenceis no cause for complacency,and is likelyto be erodedif public policiesare
not suitablyadjusted. Reportedcases are often a poor indicatorof existingcases-the number of people living
with HIV/AIDSin Chadis estimatedby expertsat 87 000 in 1997out of a populationof 7 million. Also, the
number of reported cases is increasingrapidly: an 18.6 percent increase from 1995 to 1996 and one of 100
percent from 1996to 1997,thoughimprovementin reportingtechniquesand awarenessis believedto contribute
considerablyto the higherfigures.
In combatingthe epidemic,the Chadiangovernmenthas made considerableefforts. A NationalProgram
to Fight AIDS was created as early as 1988 and the governmuent
has borrowed from the Bank (underthe
ongoing Populationand Aids project) and sought the assistance of other donors, in particular WHO and
UNAIDS,in combatingthe epidemic. Govermment
has also been active in bringingthe issue into the public
forumand to launch a multisectoralapproachto HIV/AIDS,placingthe issue squarelyintothe forum of general
publicissueswith a specificemphasison preventiveactions.
Socialmarketingof condomshas been launchedand has been moderatelysuccessful,essentiallyin urban
settings.Radio and billboardcampaignshavebeen implemented,trainingis being providedto healthpersonnel,
better reportingstructureshave been integratedinto the health system and effortsare being made to include
communityleadersand religiousauthorities,to overcomesome of the culturalreticenceoften encounteredin the
contextof AIDS preventionactivities.
Neverthelessthere are considerablechallengesto be met. Thanksto the Demographicand HealthSurvey
completedfor CHAD in 1998,data on preventivebehaviorin the face of STD's and in particular of AIDS is
robust. If awarenessof HIV/AIDSissuesat the time of polling(1996-7)is considerablefor a countrywith such
high illiteracyrates and poor communicationbetweenregions,knowledgeof what can be done to prevent the
transmissionof aidsremainsvery limitedand the use of contraceptivesevenrarerparticularlyin the rural sector
and for womenin both rural andurbansettings.
TheBank intendsto continueto raiseAIDS as a developmentalissue at the highestlevel. Resourcesand
policy-makingattentionare necessaryto generateprogress in this area. The Populationand AIDS project
financedby the Bank will pursue its support with the aim of continued improvementin reporting and
epidemiologicalsurveillance,of involvingcommunitiesin the AIDS preventionprocess, of training adequate
medicalandnon-medicalpersonnelto carryout HIV/AIDSinformationandpreventionactivities,and of actively
involvingauthoritiesand other actors from a variety of key sectors such as transport, educationand rural
developmentin the campaignagainstthe disease. An AIDS componentis plannedfor one of the capacitybuildingprojects,aimed at increasingawarenessand reducingrisks relatedto the developmentof the pipeline,
andthe attendantincreasein trafficin and out of the country.
challenge will be to coordinate an array of actions including cost-effective and quality education
and health programs, but also intensified rural development actions.
38.
Health. Chad's health status indicators are poor, even when compared with other subSaharan countries with similar characteristics. Crucial factors exogenous to health policy and
service provision, such as lack of access to clean water and poor sanitation and nutrition,
negatively affect the health of a great majority of Chad's population. Despite Government's
recent efforts to increase budget allocations, significant donor contributions, and increased cost
recovery, health expenditures are among the lowest in Africa, (about US$ 5 per capita).

11

39.
The largest obstacle to better access to and the provision of better quality services is the
dearth of qualified health personnel. Chad sorely lacks trained nurses and other paramedical
staff, which constitute the backbone of its health system, especially in rural areas. As a result,
the use and quality of services, as shown by a recent beneficiary assessment, is low. Scarce
financial and human resources are compounded by the Health Ministry's limited capacity.
Mechanisms to ensure an adequate flow of resources, control efficiency or assess results are
rudimentary. Private, for-profit or not, partnerships which could leverage the State's limited
capacity and perform under more adequate incentive systems, are only starting to develop.
Finally, preventive efforts which are being undertaken to combat the HIV/AIDS epidemic must
be enhanced rapidly (see Box 3).
40.
The utilization of donor resources and, in the future, of oil revenue proceeds will take
place in the framework of a strategy developed with donor participation, and embodied in the
Government's National Health Policy. The latter envisages, among other things, the creation of
about 670 primary health centers and the training of health personnel in regional schools to
prevent the drain of qualified health-workers to the capital city. In this context efforts will be
made to increase the proportion of female health-workers, a crucial element of success in the
implementation of reproductive and maternity health policy.
41. Education. Despite recent progress, the Chadian education system is currently one of the
world's most under-resourced, under-managed and inegalitarian. The Government's past
strategy, developed with donor assistance, has led to a surge in enrollment rates, but has proven
inadequate to achieve expected quantitative and qualitative results. Also, important quality-ofeducation issues such as the adequacy of the curriculum, school calendar and language of
instruction have yet to be fully addressed. These results are in large part caused by the
inadequate overall sector strategy and allocation of public resources in the sector. Secondary and
tertiary education continues to receive a disproportionate share of the budget. Wages of civil
service teachers (only about 39 percent of teachers are paid by the government, the rest are hired
by communities) are too high, and absorb the lion's share of sector resources.
42. The design of an appropriate education strategy is a critical task, which the Bank has been
supporting for over a year. The strategy should move away from a centralized and public-sector
dominated education system, and build on the strong involvement demonstrated by communities
in their schools. Increased and improved community involvement could greatly expand the
Chadian education system and improve its management and efficiency, in a way that is more
responsive to the needs of stakeholders and brings more equity across the country.
C

Increasing Chad's Growth Potential

43. In addition to the long-term beneficial effects on productivity provided by greater creation
of human capital, the oil resources can provide a stimulus to non-oil growth, if used to remove
key bottlenecks to private sector development. These have three dimensions: (i) the Business
Environment; (ii) Rural Development; and (iii) Infrastructure Bottlenecks.
44. Business Environment. Reforms already underway to improve the environment for
business must continue. Government has stressed its commitment to deepen the reforms begun
under its first structural adjustment program. Completion of the privatization program and
implementation of regulatory reforms in the telecommunications, electricity and sugar sectors are
proceeding well. Efforts are underway to strengthen institutions crucial to the protection of
12

Box 4 - Rural Development in Chad

Of Chad's three main ecologicalzones, both the Saharan oasis economy of the far North and the
livestockeconomyof the Sahelianzoneface largeclimaticand ecologicalconstraints,whichlimittheirpotential
as engines of growth. In the Sahelianzone in particularenvironmentaland ecological concerns- such as
balancingthe expansionof herdswith the sustainableuse of grazingland - stronglycurtailgrowthpossibilities.
It is the thirdand southernmostSudanianzoneof Chadwhichoffers the best agriculturalpotential,both in terms
of food and cash crops suchas cottonand groundnut.
Efforts to launch a dynamicdevelopmentprocess based on rural growth in the South, have remained
largelydisappointing,however,particularlywhen comparedwith some of the agriculturalproductionand yield
patterns observedin other countrieswith similar eco-geographicalcharacteristics. In Chad's sudano-sahelian
zone, productionis characterizedby low yields and low labor productivity,due among other factorsto limited
use of animal traction and related modem inputs. As a result, stabilizationand intensificationof agricultural
productionlinkedto improvedagriculturalpractices,systematicuse of manureetc, has not takenplace. Basic
rural infrastructure,whether in the form of feeder roads or access to water, is essentially non-existentand
producerorganizationsand other formsof collectiveorganizationare few andweak.
If rural developmentis to make a significantcontributionto Chad's long-termgrowth,the countryfaces
a major challengein developingthe potentialof the Sudanianzone. As has been the case in most other sudanosahelianregionsin FrancophoneAfrica,cotton developmentcan be the catalyst of such growth.However,this
approachwill only be successfulif cotton development,whichis a key source of monetaryincome,triggers a
broaderrange of rural and agriculturalactivities,includingfood crop development,improved rural organization,
and the establishmentof an efficientrural creditsystem, allowingfor the use of modem inputs, animaltraction
and developmentof basic rural infrastructure.Success of this process in other regions in sub-SaharanAfrica
over the last 15years has led to improvementsin ruralwell-beingand demonstratedsome of the types of rural
developmentwhichcouldbe achievedin the Southernregionof Chad.
Despitethe fact that Chad's cotton industrydevelopedearlierthan most others in the region,it clearly
lags far behind that of other countries. Until recently,recurring civil war has wreaked havoc on production
logistics,hamperedtrade and disorganizedproductionand markets. Due to insecurityand mismanagement,the
neededinfrastructure,in particularroads and feeder roads, has remainedinsufficientor was not maintained.In
additionto this difficultenvironment,poor managementand frequentturnoverin the managementof the stateownedcottoncompanyhavetranslatedinto costlyinefficiencies.Finally,from a historicalperspective,prices to
farmershaveremainedmuch lowerthan in other countriesoverthe last 20 yearperiod.
property rights and the exercise of commerce, as are efforts to enhance Chad's business
environment by implementing newly adopted investment regulation and, in the context of
formalization of the economy, launching Social Security reform.
45. Rural Development.
Widespread rural poverty in Chad illustrates the failure of
Government and donor efforts to generate a dynamic process leading to widely shared rural
growth. To reverse the situation, Chad needs to design a practical and participatory rural sector
strategy, to foster broad-based rural activities and to help reduce the considerable physical and
economic fragmentation of its rural world. Cotton Sector reform is one of the essential
remaining actions on the agenda. Restructuring of the Cotton Company, and the introduction of
competition in cotton ginning activities should yield results in the form of considerable
efficiency gains, allowing higher pass-through prices to fanners.

46.

Infrastructure Bottlenecks. Major improvements are required in public infrastructure, in

roads, electricity, water and telecommunication.
Chad lags 25 years behind comparable
countries in the Sahelian region. Such a deficit of basic infrastructure is a major obstacle to rural

growth, to regional and international trade, and to private sector development. Equally
important, the provision of, and access to, social services are severely hampered by
communications constraints and acute shortages of affordable electricity and

13

Box 5: The Petroleum and Electricity Crisis of 1998
Background: Prior to 1998, about two-thirds of Chad's supply of petroleum products were imported from
Nigeria and about one-third from Cameroon. In early 1998, supply from Nigeria stopped as Nigerian refineries
experienced operational problems, then shutdown. This caused prolonged acute shortages in Chad, the closing of
nearly all the filling stations, large retail price increases and the proliferation of unofficial distribution in the
streets of N'Djamena. These shortages, coupled with the poor reliability of the electricity generating units and
the weak financial status of the power and water utility, led to significant power shortages in the capital. The
petroleum and electricity crisis impacted heavily on the activities of the private sector as well as on the
Government's operations. It also created important public safety risks associated with disorganized distribution
of petroleum products and inability to supply electricity to key activities, such as hospitals, water pumping etc.
Lessons Learnt and Strategic Agenda. This crisis helped convince the govemment that key policy and
strategic decisions had to be taken. It illustrated the importance of a financially sound and well managed power
utility able to compete for access to petroleum products and it accelerated the privatization of STEE, which is
now on a fast track (selection of a private partner will take place by mid 1999). It also demonstrated that
alternative sources for the supply of petroleum products need to be secured. In this regard, as Chad is endowed
with crude oil suitable for domestic refining and also with natural gas, a domestic option, the Sedigi/SEERAT
project, is being pursued with donor and private financing. Increasing security of supply may also be obtained
through access to storage facilities in Nigeria and/or in Cameroon's Atlantic coast and at the railway terminal in
Ngaoundere. Finally, the crisis underscored considerable uncertainty in government on the best way to address
it, and while this led to considerable loss of time, it has also helped clarify strategic choices. Administrative
measures initially imposed such as requisitions, elimination of bonded warehouses and import licensing proved
counterproductive and have by now been repealed. New policies are being designed. New petroleum pricing
policies need to be adopted to ensure prompt and regular price adjustments reflecting changes in supply
conditions and in costs.

telecommunications. Finally, in a fragmented country such as Chad, communications constraints
are a major obstacle to nation building and political stability.
47. Transport. Future oil revenues offer a unique opportunity to set up an adequate policy and
institutional framework for the rational development of the road network and the management
and financing of its maintenance.
In the road sector, the proposed strategy rests on the
development of a national priority road network a part of which should be passable throughout
the year. The approach needs to be based on a multi-sectoral methodology, that recognizes
broad economic and social returns to road network (as opposed to single road) development. For
road maintenance, the key principle is having road users pay for maintenance, by structuring fuel
taxation in adequate ways or by introducing road user tariffs, and establishing institutional
mechanism for road maintenance with user involvement.
48. Utilities. In electricity (where a major crisis has disrupted economic activity in recent
months, see Box 5), urban water supply and telecommunications, good progress has been made
recently in regulatory reforms and privatization, with technical support from the Bank. Private
investors may find it extremely difficult, however, to finance a steady development of
infrastructure. Because of a particularly narrow customer base, revenues from utilities will
remain low for a long time, and will not allow for a sizeable self financing of investment. There
will be the need therefore to develop a partnership between private utilities and the public sector
for the financing of a basic investment program in this sector.

14

V. CONSULTATIONS ON STRATEGIC PRIORITIES

49.
Government Strategy. As previously noted, the developmental challenges outlined
above are on top of Chad's government priorities. Chad's Development Agenda and strategic
objectives have been outlined in its "Strategic Development Options" paper, presented at a
general donor Roundtable in Geneva, October 1998. The Government's paper stressed the need
to sustain recent achievements in political stability and financial stabilization as essential
prerequisites for social and economic progress. Consultations with the Bank on all aspects of
the strategy, as well as on sector matters and design, have been intense over a number of months.
50.
Stakeholder participation. For the first time in Chad, a participatory approach has been
used in the preparation of the CAS. The move to a broadened dialogue in the context of the CAS
coincides with other steps to expand participation and consultation in Chadian society, most
particularly in the context of the Chad/Cameroon Pipeline Project and the related oil revenue
management program. A process of dialogue and consultation between government, civil
society and private sector representatives is increasingly moving from a limited marginal activity
to the center of the development and political arenas in Chad. This process is expected to deepen
as Chad moves to consolidate recent economic and political gains, and to prepare for the
petroleum era, whose success and sustainability depends on the participation of a broad segment
of society.
51
The CAS preparation exercise has drawn on extensive consultation with stakeholders
across the country. Five workshops were held, one in the capital, and one in each of two
provinces in the South and the North. The sessions in the provinces were held in small towns,
and included groups from the urban and surrounding rural communities. At each workshop,
Bank and government representatives met with stakeholder groups together. These groups
included women's organizations, producer associations and farming organizations, human rights
organizations, trade unions, local government officials, non-governmental organizations, and
religious groups. The outcomes of these discussions have been incorporated into this CAS.
52. The discussions were marked by a frank and open exchange and yielded important
messages, namely: (i) skepticism regarding Government commitment to the oil revenue
management program; (ii) concerns that public funds, including Bank resources, were not seen to
reach or benefit the targeted communities or the poor; (iii) need to decentralize, moving
expenditure decisions closer to the community-level; and (iv) need to increase participation of
community groups in the oversight of public financial management and service delivery.
Consulted groups also repeatedly raised concerns regarding the Bank's effectiveness in
addressing their needs and to reach the poor, in particular by operating through the Government.
53.
Many of the messages gleaned during the CAS consultation echoed, and in some ways
built upon, the consultation process conducted in the context of the Chad/Cameroon Pipeline
Project. The private sponsors and the government have conducted numerous workshops, village
meetings and meetings with NGOs and other civil society organizations in the project area, as
well as in N'Djamena. The Bank has also conducted periodic sessions with NGOs. -In addition,
the local NGOs recently organized a 3-day seminar in the project area. The three dominant
themes identified during these sessions were: (a) minimizing the negative impact of the project

15

on local communities and maximizing compensation to local populations; (b) using oil revenues
to benefit all Chadians; and (c) expanding consultation and participation.
54.
Although the messages were sobering, they reflect an important movement in Chadian
society to an era of more open public debate and greater involvement of civil society and local
communities. While the Government, and the Bank, are moving to include more of Chadian
society in the development debate, local NGOs and comrmunitygroups are also feeling more
empowered and better organized. The result is a more vibrant public debate, and the potential
for greater openness.
VI. THE BANK'S ASSISTANCESTRATEGY

55.
The discussion presented above sets out Chad's developmental challenge along three
main avenues, each fraught with difficulties. It is neither feasible nor advisable for the Bank's
Assistance Strategy to respond to all of them. Rather, the proposed strategy is tailored to
respond to those challenges where payoffs are likely to be highest, by concentrating our activities
in the areas of our own comparative advantage and taking into full account the lessons of the
past few years.
hat has worked well and what has not
56.
The outcomes of the Country Portfolio Performance Reviews of February 1998 and 1999
point to an improvement in performance over the last three years, and give clear indications of
where the Bank program has been less effective. Sustainability of Bank projects and difficulty in
measuring their direct impact on the poor remain serious concerns. Tangible results have been
much easier to ascertain in the areas of economic management and in sectors where efforts have
been focused on improving policies and management. Overall this has meant that adjustment
and investment lending have been successful where the objectives were set in terms of policy
reform. Except in the Health Sector, it is not clear whether efforts have yielded tangible
improvements at the service delivery level.
57. Over the last CAS period, portfolio implementation has improved considerably. Despite
the unblemished portfolio performance record hailed in the last CAS, ratings given in FY96
quickly appeared unrealistic and misleading as, shortly after Board presentation, the Transport
Project, the Education Project and the Public Works and Capacity Building project were rated
unsatisfactory. Over the past two fiscal years, considerable progress has been made in the
Education and transport sectors- notably overall enrollment targets and female enrollment
targets for primary education were attained, and an agreement was reached on sustainable
financing arrangements for the road sector. Disbursements have been slow for all projects,
which had contracted works through the ATETIP agency financed by the Public Works and
Capacity Building Credit. They have now reached satisfactory levels. The education and
transport projects are now rated satisfactory. Portfolio quality today is satisfactory with a two
problem projects: the Public Works and Capacity Building and Agricultural Extension Projects.
The latter has recently been rated unsatisfactory, suffers from design flaws and will be
restructured. The Public Works project is being entirely restructured, the institutional setup of
the implementation agency entirely reformed and the remainder of the credit allocated to much
needed public works in N'Djamena where environmental conditions are worsening. Projects are

16

achieving visible results despite weak in-country capacity, thanks to strong commitment and
intensive supervision and capacity building efforts made by Government, Project Units, the
Resident Mission and Bank teams.
58.
The Bank's strategy has had the most development impact in the past three years in the
following areas. The support to macroeconomic stabilization and market reforms through
sustained dialogue, capacity building (Cr. 2818), and three single-tranche adjustment operations
has helped establish conditions for sustained growth. IDA participation in sectoral and donorcoordinated investment in health (Cr. 2626 and Cr. 2692) and in transport (Cr. 2520) has helped
prioritize public investment, initiate enhanced private participation, and achieve modest but
significant gains in public provision of health services and transport infrastructure. Ongoing
policy dialogue since 1997 has yielded substantial results in the electricity and
telecommunication sectors and major steps have been taken toward private provision of utility
services and adequate regulatory frameworks for these sectors, with the objective of leveraging
private investments.
59.
On the other hand, project implementation in urban works (Cr. 2614), education
(Cr. 2501), and agricultural extension services (Cr. 2685) has been uneven, often because of a
combination of weak local capacities, design flaws and inadequate Bank supervision. It has also
proven difficult to contribute to an improved dialogue between Government and the private
sector, as the objectives of the macroeconomic program have exposed a potential conflict
between aggressive fiscal goals and an attractive business environment. Lack of continuity in
the Bank's presence in the field has restricted systematic donor coordination, especially on
prioritization. Project performance indicators in the social sectors are satisfactory, but health and
education status indicators are slow to change and considerable efforts remain necessary.
Partnership with other donors is one of the avenues which is being actively explored to address
these issues. Considerable efforts still need to be made in the rural sector. The Agricultural
Extension Project, which has very recently been downgraded to unsatisfactory will be fully
restructured, and the Household Energy Credit will become effective in the near future.
60.
In sum, a review of the last CAS period (see Box 6) yields four main lessons for future
programs which are built into the proposed strategy:
* weak public administration requires continued and systematic focus on capacity building as
both a cross-cutting issue and a case-by-case constraint, to be addressed in the context of
each activity; capacity constraints put a premium on simplicity in project design and close
supervision which is essential to successful implementation;
*

strategic issues both at a macro and sector level (rural development, education policy) need
to be well identified and demand adequate analysis of their institutional, social, political and
economic foundations;

*

donor coordination has paid off in health, transport or adjustment, while lack of coordination
is one of the sources of poor performance in education and rural development; and

* continuity and long term efforts in Bank and donor support, both in terms of policy dialogue
and institution building, are crucial to achieve meaningful results.
17

Box 6 - Chad'sperformanceunderpast CASscenarios
Over the FY96-99period,Chad has successfullycarried out the programenvisagedunder theHigh Casescenario presentedin the
1996 CAS,whichpresupposedsatisfactoryimplementationof the ESAF program,a sharprestructuringof public expenditures,and
continuedsatisfactoryproject andportfolioimplementation.
* Macroeconomic stabilization and structural reform. The mid-termreview for the third year arrangementof the ESAF was
completedin March 1999and the three single-trancheadjustmentoperationsprogrammedwere disbursedfor a total of US$ 85
millionover the last CASperiod. Most public enterpriseshave beenprivatizedand public expenditureshavebeen restructured-the share of expendituresallocatedto developmentsectorsrose to 72 percentin 1998,well abovethe 64percent CAStarget. The
Government'sdemobilizationprogramhas been successfuland the size of the army has been more than halvedduringthe period
(from 52 000 to 25 000 men). Startingfrom a current deficit of 5 percent of GDP in 1994, increasedrevenues and reduced
expendituresoverthe 96-99periodhave, for the first time in decades,generateda currentbudget surplusof 0.1 percentagepoint
of GDPin 1998.
* Project implementation. Project implementationhas been good overall, though somewhatslower than projected. The Pipeline
Project programmedin the FY96 High Case was not presentedto the Board due to considerabledelays in developingthe
public/privatepartnershiparrangementsneededfor such investment,whichlargely hingeson the constraintsof privateinvestors.
This operationis now scheduledto be presentedto the Boardas an IBRD enclaveloan in the first quarter of FY00. A projected
Urban Infrastructureproject was also dropped,due to considerabledifficultiesencounteredin the contextof the ongoingPublic
Worksand CapacityBuildingoperation,its precursor.
Partnerships
61.

The need for selectivity on our part is enhanced by the fact that several donors are active in

Chad with important assistance programs, especially the European Union (EU), the African
Development Bank (AFDB), France and Germany. Other donors, such as the Islamic
Development Bank operate on a more selective basis. Donors contribute about one half of all
public expenditures. The key for maximum developmental effectiveness, especially as the oil
era draws nearer, is to improve donor coordination and provide a framework for an effective use
of external resources. If coordination has been the rule in the past, although perhaps not entirely
successfully, it will become one of the most important yardsticks of success in the three years of
this CAS (see Annex D for a table of partnerships).
Proposed Assistance Strategy

62.
The proposed strategy is driven by the assessment that policy and institutional reforms
over the current CAS period can dramatically leverage the poverty alleviation impact of future
oil revenues. The focus is on facilitating institutional development at the central level and
elaborating sound sector strategies.
63.
Instruments. Under the proposed strategy, the Bank would provide a program composed
of: a) Investment lending, in sectors or activities where two conditions are met: (i) strategic
issues- especially institutional, delivery mechanisms and sustainability - are well identified, and
(ii) Government and donors expect the Bank to take a leadership role; b) Policy-based lending,
building on experience gained under the first adjustment program and on knowledge to be
formalized in a participatory Public Expenditure Review process supporting (i) continued
implementation of major market reforms and completion of the privatization agenda, and
(ii) policy and institutional reforms, with strong linkages between sectoral strategies and central
economic and financial management; and c) Non-lending services, coupled for impact when
necessary, with lending for capacity building where (i) key strategic issues need to be better

18

identified or addressed, and/or (ii) the Bank has a knowledge advantage, in particular on
international experience with oil windfalls and poverty monitoring, and environmental issues.
64. Selectivity of Intervention. According to these criteria, Bank assistance will be
concentrated on four of the five priority sectors in which oil resources will be utilized (health,
education, transport and rural development) where its presence (even as a non-leading partner,
such as in education and rural development) can help make a material difference. We will also
be active in telecommunications and energy where our projects will mark the culmination of a
policy dialogue that has lasted almost two years. The Bank will subsequently exit from these
two sectors and the private sector will provide additional investments as needed. The present
assistance strategy recognizes that, to consolidate future gains generated by better performance
of the Chadian economy, it would be advisable to undertake a full diagnosis of the Chadian legal
and judicial systems, with a view to their reform in the medium to long-term. We will therefore
work with other partners and donors interested in this area to ensure that this full diagnosis is
carried out and an appropriate program drawn up for the improvement of the legal and judicial
frameworks. We will continue to discuss legal and judicial reform issues in the context of our
policy dialogue with Government and Chad's development partners.
65. Poverty orientation of the strategy. Alleviating widespread poverty is at the core of the
proposed Country Assistance Strategy. In Chad this entails aiming for impact on a broad
spectrum of the population. The proposed program attempts to forcefully support the
improvement of basic living conditions for a large number of Chadians in those areas which have
the greatest impact on their daily lives, -- greater opportunities to increase their income, better
education and learning opportunities, improved health services, improved access to transport,
information and means of communication. The strategy aims to address bottlenecks to poverty
alleviation at various levels through a variety of activities. At -the governmental level the
program will support economic policy and structural reform, and the formulation and
implementation of sound poverty oriented sectoral policies. Improved access and equity in the
provision of social services will also be supported by activities aimed at increasing and
supporting the involvement of non-governmental actors in the provision of social services, be
they communities, non-governmental organizations or private enterprises. All projects under
preparation will be examined in light of their poverty impact and specific operations, such as the
social investment fund for the petroleum project area planned under the Petroleum Sector
Capacity Building Project (FYOO)and the Rural Investment/Community Development Project
(FY02) will provide opportunities for poor communities to directly access IDA funds.
66. Gender. As in many other countries, poverty strikes women in Chad with greater
incidence and depth than their male compatriots. Health status indicators and other social
indicators clearly show that their access to resources and services as well as economic and
educational opportunities is severely limited even by Chadian standards: female illiteracy rates
stand out at approximately 95 percent and 77 percent of women polled in the context of the
recent DHS have never had any schooling. Fertility rates are very high (6.8 children), fewer than
4 percent of women use any form of contraception, and 39 percent them have their first child
between the ages of 15 and 19. Experience has shown that improvements in women's education
and health status, as well as the promotion of women's full participation in social and economic
life have had considerable positive impacts on the overall development progress of societies.
The Bank's strategy therefore proposes to build upon the experience gained in the course of the
19

ongoing Health and Safe Motherhood and Basic Education Projects and examine gender issues
in the context of all proposed lending, in particular in the rural development and social sectors,
but also in the context of policy dialogue with the government and its development partners on
all fronts (legal and judicial reform, education, infrastructure, credit). Under operations targeted
at community development, such as the Social Investment Fund for the Petroleum producing
area (Petroleum Sector Capacity Building FY00) and the Rural Investment/Community
Development Project (FY02), measures will be implemented to give women adequate access to
IDA funds.
Objectives of the strategy
67.
Objective 1: Capacity Building for Improved Governance. The Bank group will help
Chad develop its oil resources, and ensure their use for poverty reduction. In partnership with
the private sector, the Bank group will participate in the financing of the Chad-Cameroon
pipeline through IBRD enclave loans to the Governments of Chad and Cameroon2 . In addition,
Bank support will focus on strengthening Chad's capacity to (i) manage the environmental and
social impacts of the oil development and pipeline project; (ii) manage its petroleum sector, and
(iii) adequately manage its oil resources for maximum poverty alleviation impact. It will also
support Cameroon in building capacity to implement the Environmental Mitigation Plan.
68.
To achieve the above objectives, IDA will finance two capacity building operations and
will also use adjustment lending and ESW to help establish sound public expenditure
management systems. The first capacity building operation will help mitigate the social and
environmental impacts in the oil producing area and will help build capacity for the effective
management of the oil sector (legal and fiscal issues). The second operation will (i) address the
key systemic constraints in the management of oil revenues and public resources that are found
at the central level, (ii) continue to support improved budget and macroeconomic management,
and (iii) focus on the development of an independent oversight capacity. In addition, a
participatory public expenditure review will be conducted to give a large group of civil servants
and representatives of civil society the opportunity to reflect on budget allocation issues, even
before the advent of oil revenues. The conclusions of this review will be widely disseminated.
The programs supported by adjustment operations will be heavily focussed on the milestones
necessary to obtain budgetary and civil service capacity reform. Sector expenditure programs
will be prepared in close consultation with donors (see Box 7).
69.
Objective 2: Establishing thefoundations for improved delivery of basic social services.
The Bank program will support the design of sector policies for efficient, equitable and
Although Chad is an IDA-only country, the project qualifies for an IBRD enclave loan as a discrete export earning
project that generates sufficient revenues off-shore to service IBRD's debt service obligations. Given, in part, that
the project involves a large scale commercial petroleum venture, sponsored and to be financed primarily by
multinational oil companies, an IBRD loan was chosen over an IDA credit as the mode of World Bank financing.
The proposed IBRD loan would benefit from the typical support arrangements for enclave loans, namely the
establishment of an off-shore account in which project revenues transit, and from which the Bank is paid directly,
the creation of a debt service reserve to further secure the IBRD loan, and a pre-completion guarantee from the
private sponsors covering commercial risks.
2

20

Box 7 - Sectoral Expenditure Programs
As part of a transition strategy to Chad's "oil era", the Government intends to develop medium-term
Sectoral Expenditure Programs (SEPs) in four major development sectors - education, health, transport and rural
development. These expenditure programs will be phased in over the next three years, and tested before oil
revenues start flowing. The SEPs will improve the quality of strategy implementation and expenditure
management, enhance donor coordination and facilitate an increase in Chad's absorption capacity. Predictable
multi-year spending programs are also an instrument to smooth spending as revenues change with oil prices.
SEPs will be a component of a Public Financial Management reform program, aiming at a fully consolidated
budget management. Because conditions for their successful implementation are not yet met in Chad, the Bank
strategy does not envisage introducing full-fledged Sector Investment Programs in lieu of traditional projects,
but combine Government-led SEPs, investment lending and Public Expenditure Reform Credits.

sustainable delivery systems, especially in education. In this sector, the focus will be on the
design and financing of delivery systems with public-private partnerships. It will emphasize
support to private or community initiative, and decentralized public administration. The role of
the central Govemment will be to provide financial support, ensure quality control and establish
a consensus on strategic issues. It will move progressively away from direct provision of
services, where private stakeholders (for-profit or not) are willing and able to move in and likely
to perform better. This focus requires better management (budget, human resources) of central
and decentralized public administration towards better planning and control at the central level,
and operations and management at the decentralized level.
70.
In the Health Sector, the Bank's policy dialogue will focus on preparing the ground for
oil revenues by increasing the sector's absorptive capacity and ensuring adequate orientation of
expenditures. This effort will be undertaken in coordination with other donors and will focus on
the following instruments: strengthening the capacity of the central health administration,
improving budgetary oversight instruments and procedures to encompass donor and budgetary
contributions,

and enhancing cost-recovery.

Pursuing the work well underway under the

ongoing Health and Safe Motherhood, and Population and AIDS Projects, Bank lending and
non-lending activities in the sector will (i) address the severe shortage of qualified health
workers by reinforcing efforts by the Ministry of Health to significantly and rapidly increase the
number of trained staff, especially paramedical staff; (ii) aim to improve the impact of basic
health services on matemal and child mortality; (iii) support development of private/public
partnerships in the provision of health services, including a range of contractual arrangements
between the Ministry and potential private service providers; (iv) strengthen early waming
systems and preventive capacity to address and control epidemic outbreaks and endemic
diseases, such as malaria and (v) combat AIDS through monitoring, preventive action, training of
adequate personnel and coordination of AIDS initiatives with other sectors, in particular

Transport and Education.
71.
A Health Sector Support Project is scheduled to be presented to the Board in FYOOwith
the main objective of addressing the shortage of human resources, especially of trained nurses,
and to strengthen the professional quality of health and management personnel at the prefecture
and district level. To aggressively address this shortage, solutions are being envisaged which
include the provision of non-national staff through donor supported programs for the period
during which the rate of training of national staff will be insufficient to address existing needs.
The project will also focus on (i) improving the accessibility and quality of basic health services,
especially in the areas of child and reproductive health; (ii) improving the financing and
21

management of the health system including planning for oil resources; and (iii) strengthening the
institutional capacities of the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) in piloting reforms and in
coordinating external assistance.
72. In the Education Sector, the policy dialogue will be centered on the formulation of a
strategy which seeks to accelerate delivery of quality services in preparation for the availability
of oil revenues and to ensure the design of a system sustainable in the long-term. It will
encourage decentralization of the provision of services through the implementation of an
institutional and regulatory framework consistent with close collaboration between communities
and public authorities in the sector. A study of means to increase the absorptive capacity of the
sector will be conducted. The Bank's program will help (i) improve the quality and access to
education, especially for girls; (ii) enhance the quality and selective expansion of education
services beyond the sixth year of schooling; and (iii) build the Education Ministry's capacity to
plan and execute educational programs at the national and regional level.
73.
Other donors, and in particular the African Development Bank, which has already been
approached by government to lead the upcoming Education Round Table, will be closely
associated with this sectoral policy dialogue. Support for the preparation of the Education
Round Table in late 1999 will constitute a first step. In this context, the Bank will assist the
Government in defining a financial framework for the sector and broadly outlining a long-term
expenditure program. It will also support an organizational audit of the Ministry of Education
and a number of studies. Following the Round Table, the Bank will support the Government in
putting together a detailed medium-term expenditure framework for the sector.
74.
The first and foremost priority on the Bank's agenda will be to restructure the ongoing
education project (Credit 2501) to better support (i) the efforts of communities in the primary
education sector; (ii) an increase in investments aimed at addressing the critical elements which
impact on the quality of education, in particular the on-the-job training of teachers and the supply
of educational materials; and (iii) the building of capacity needed for the preparation and
implementation of a more ambitious sector development program. A new investment project is
slotted for FY02 and will aim at further increasing basic education services, reinforcing adult
education, and selectively increasing the supply of post-primary education programs.
75. Objective 3: Removing constraints to growth. The Bank will support continued reforms
to improve the environmentfor private sector growth as part of the long-term agenda to redefine
the role of the State and improve the capacity of the private sector to be the engine of growth and
development. Reform issues include completion of the privatization agenda, pursuit of reforms
to streamline general licensing regulation and the private investment policy framework, support
to reform of the Social Security system and to constructive dialogue between the public and
private sectors, while seeking to identifying further constraints to private sector development.
76. In Transport, the Bank will assist the Government to implement the 1999-2003 Transport
Sector Expenditure Program (PST3), the development of which was also supported by the Bank
under the ongoing Second Transport Sector Project (PST2). The main objective of-the PST3 is
to improve access of the rural population to markets and services (both social and
administrative), by ensuring reliable road connections throughout the year on a very basic
national road network. While other donors will concentrate on upgrading and paving of the most

22

vulnerable road sections, the Bank will mainly support activities designed to safeguard existing
road infrastructure thus avoiding its premature degradation. This will entail activities such as
(i) strengthening the existing paved roads and bridges, and (ii) helping to implement
performance-based road management and maintenance contracts with private firms. On a smaller
scale, the Bank may provide assistance in (iii) the paving of crucial road sections which are
interrupted for long periods in the rainy season and the construction of some bridges. Also, the
Bank will contribute to (iv) capacity-building and institutional strengthening in the transport
sector, which would include support to a small environmental unit within MTPTHU.
77. The Bank's ultimate objective in the Communications Sector is to improve quantity,
coverage, quality, and cost-efficiency of communications services in the country, as well as the
level of access to services, particularly in rural areas, which are chronically isolated. Substantial
poverty impact is to be expected from improved communications, in terms of reduced rural
isolation, access to critical information, promotion of regional and national market integration,
improved efficiency of logistics in social sectors, facilitation of governance and democratic
processes, and economic diversification and growth. Great potential exists in the restructuring
and development of the postal system to encompass a variety of services across the country.
78.
In this context, the Bank's policy dialogue with Chad in the communications sector has
already yielded results: legal and regulatory reform are underway, liberalization of the sector has
been initiated and government has shown ownership and commitment. Through a small
investment operation to be presented to the Board in FY2000, the Bank will support the design
of communication and access strategies, restructuring actions, the conducting of transactions;
capacity building efforts; and some small-scale investments which are necessary for Chad to
materialize the benefits of sector reform.
79.
In the Electricity and Energy sectors Bank will explore the range of instruments,
including IDA investment, IFC and MIGA, to support a developmental approach to private
involvement in these sectors; support to the building of a regulatory capacity. The possibility of
investment in partnership with donors and the private sector will be assessed.
80. Rural Development. The Bank has begun to build up its knowledge base in Chad's rural
sector in the key areas of policy reform and implementation issues, existing initiatives and
activities of other donors, community and NGO capacity and capacity building requirements,
local infrastructural needs and potential for sustainable mechanisms to be put in place. It would
therefore take some time to develop a comprehensive assistance strategy in the sector that takes
into account all the key constraints and what other donors are doing. The Bank is supporting a
participatory process of rural sector strategy and action plan development that would set the
stage for identifying some of the main priority investments in the sector.
81. The Bank's approach, based upon a fair assessment of the limits of its current experience
and knowledge and on an understanding of its comparative advantages, will consist of a limited
range of activities focused along four axes: (i) improving the road network through its sector
Transport investment project; (ii) engaging in in-depth policy dialogue to reform the cotton
sector, (iii) supporting the development of farmer organizations and community participation at
the local level, and (iv) reassessing and addressing agricultural extension and research issues
through the ongoing Agricultural Extension project, which will be restructured to better address

23

existing needs at grass root levels. Under (iii), measures will be taken to address the dearth of
basic rural infrastructure through a grass-roots implemented investment fund/community
development project with a bottom-up approach
82. Cotton sector reform. Progress on cotton sector reform has been slow. The government
was not convinced of the need to initiate an ambitious reform program, did not feel it had the
capacity to implement it while simultaneously addressing many other urgent issues, and was
worried by the exceptional political and economic challenge of implementing a reform program
which would impact the life of about three million people in a region which had recently been
shaken by an armed insurrection. There was also serious divergence of views among key donors
regarding the type of reform that was needed. Finally, our knowledge base was thin. Over the
last year, however, the foundations for future reform have been laid down.
83. First, an initial round of reform has been undertaken and includes refocusing the activities
of the state-owned company CotonTchad, by privatizing activities not directly related to the
cotton/ginning/marketing chain, such as cotton oil production and transportation. Second,
discussions among donors have helped to clarify the needed strategic approaches to Cotton
sector reform in Francophone countries. Third, an experienced consultant has made a
preliminary but detailed analysis of the sector in Chad with recommendations on what should be
the next steps in the reform program. These recommendations are now being evaluated and will
form the basis of extensive policy discussions with the government.
84. A thorough reform of the sector is badly needed for several important reasons: (i) as
regards cotton and related rural development, Chad lags behind other Sahelian countries (yields
are low, animal traction has not developed significantly, input supply is poorly organized etc);
(ii) political interference has had a negative impact on the management of the company and its
performance; (iii) stagnation of production, high costs, and environmental degradation threaten
the development of the sector in the short term and its viability in the long term. But the reform
program is technically complex and politically difficult to implement. Its success requires full
ownership from the government and extensive technical preparation. The risk of sector
disruption needs to be carefully managed, over a multi-year period.
85. The ultimate objective is to move from the current public monopoly to a fully liberalized
and competitive cotton sector; intermediate steps are needed. The capacity of producer
organizations must be developed to take over most functions related to credit, input distribution
and the logistics of primary marketing. These elements are not present today. During this CAS
period, the Bank proposes to proceed as follows: (i) help Chad develop a sound analytical base in
the sector; (ii) assist Government to complete the initial reform program of privatizing the
activities not directly related to the ginning/marketing chain; (iii) initiate, with other donors, a
program to promote and reinforce producer organizations; (iv) pursue dialogue with government
and other actors; and (iv) initiate a pilot privatization of a cluster of ginning factories.
86. Grassroots community development and rural infrastructure. The Bank's strategy to
support rural development will also aim to respond to the global deficit in rural infrastructure
(wells, feeder roads, small irrigation works and watershed management, small bridges and
market places). Experience shows that a participatory approach to rural infrastructure
development is often successful and ensures sustainability of rural investments. Such an
24

Box 8 - Sustainable Development - The Environmental Challenge.

In developingits potentialin a sustainablemanner, Chad faces a myriad of environmentalchallengessuch as
desertification,soil erosionand decreasedfertility,deforestation.,the shrinkingof the wetlandsof Lake Chad,
poor urban waste management,and decreasedbiodiversity.As populationcontinuesto grow rapidlyrelativeto
available resources and 80 percent of Chad's population derives its income from the primary sector,
environmentaldegradationaffectingthe productivityand sustainabilcyof agriculturaland livestockactivitiesis
likely to have a wide-spread impact on rural incomes and, consequentlyon poverty. Sustainablewood-fuel
productionand better access to safe-water are some of the other salient environmentalissues to be addressed.
Both naturaland man-madephenomenasuch as decreasedrainfallover the past 40 years,recurrentwarfare,and
social and culturalpatterns of behavior have contributedto bringing environmentalissues to the fore of the
developmentagenda.
In 1998Chad has adopteda frameworklaw on Environment.Preparationsare underwayfor a National
EnvironmentalActionPlan. However,better knowledgeof the state of the environmentand the economicand
social impacts of the present environmentaldegradationtrends, as well as a comprehensiveframework to
managenaturalresources,which can contributeto growthandhave local,nationaland internationalbenefits,are
urgentlyneeded. Especiallyin the contextof the exploitationof oil, considerableefforts need to be made to
promote sound natural resource managementand ensure that public and private actors in Chad developthe
needed capacity to implement adequate environmentalpolicies and promote environmentallyresponsible
behavioramongChad's citizens.
Under the Bank's current program, environmentalissues are addressed at many levels: (i) under existing
projects,in particularthe AgriculturalExtensionProject,whichin its restructuredform will examinesoil fertility
and erosionquestions;(ii) in the contextof the projectsunder preparationthrough environmentalassessments
and specificcomponentsaimedat developingthe capacityof line ministriesto manageenvironmentalissues,as
in the future Transport Sector Project and the Pipeline Project; and (iii) through environmentally-targeted
operationssuch as the HouseholdEnergyProject,which aims to implementcommunitymanagementof wood
fuel resourcesas a means to addressthe deforestationof the outskirtsof N'Djamena,and the PetroleumSector
CapacityBuildingproject, which will developthe Environmentalmanagementcapacity of governmentaland
non-governmental
actorsin the contextof petroleumexploitation.The latter, scheduledfor Boardpresentationin
FY00will strengthenthe capacityof all actorsinvolved(governmentaland non-governmental)
to ensurethat the
EnvironmentalMitigationPlan relatedto the Pipelineproject is fully and adequatelyimplemented. This will
entail strengtheningcapacity and allocatingresources to the Ministry of Water and Environment,as well as
traininglocal communitiesand organizationsin EnvironmentalManagementtechniquesand involvingthem in
monitoringenviromnentalconditionsduringandafterproject implementation.
approach is predicated on the identification by communities of their essential needs and on their
participation in the planning and implementation of investments and their management of
maintenance activities after project completion. With this in mind, the Bank plans to support a
community development/rural investment fund which would finance a menu of rural investment
micro projects, initially in the petroleum exploitation region and later elsewhere in the country.
87. Environment. The Bank's proposed strategy will address environmental issues in a
number of sectors (Box 8). In addition to the customary Environmental Assessments which will
be carried out for all projects under preparation according to Bank internal rules, considerable
efforts will be made to strengthen the govemment Environmental Management capacity to
address the environmental issues raised by oil exploitation in particular.

IFCActivities
88.

Chad became a member of IFC in April 1998, primarily to qualify the pipeline for IFC

financing. It is part of the Extending IFC's Reach initiative, and is covered from the field office
25

in Douala. There is no portfolio outstanding at this time. An initial promotion mission was
made in July, 1998, which identified a number of potential small projects. Follow up missions
have developed some of these further, and IFC expects to have initial small manufacturing
projects materialize in the coming year, some financed under the PROPARCO Agency
agreement. Additional possibilities for IFC involvement in the financial sector may be
investigated in the future.
89.
IFC's major involvement in Chad is support for the Chad-Cameroon oil pipeline. IFC is
collaborating with IDA and IBRD in arranging the debt financing for the project, expected to be
$100 million for IFC's account, and up to $300 million in participations by commercial banks
under IFC's B loan program.
VII. ASSISTANCESCENARIOSANDTRIGGERS
90.
The challenge posed by the prospective development of the oil economy is an exceptional
one for Chad. It requires vigorous and sustained efforts in policy reform and capacity building.
It is an ambitious undertaking, on which the Base case is predicated. Because of the "lumpiness"
of the investment in the oil project, providing support commensurate with the requirement of a
comprehensive strategy leads to only two scenarios: a Base Case and a Low Case.
Assistance scenarios
91. Base Case. We now consider Chad to be in the Base case, on the basis of its perfonnance.
Maintenance of the present Base Case scenario is predicated on continued sustained
macroeconomic performance, completion of the reform agenda, successful portfolio
implementation, and satisfactory implementation of the first steps of the institutional
strengthening program for the preparation of the oil revenue management (see Table 2 for a
summary of the Base Case lending program).
92. Over the coming months, three key projects would be presented to the Bank's Board of
Executive Directors: (i) one investment operation in support of the construction of an oil pipeline
from Doba Chad to the port of Kribi in Cameroon financed through an IBRD enclave loan for
US$ 35 million; (ii) two IDA-financed Capacity Building projects totaling US$ 35 million
aimed at developing capacity to manage oil revenues and civil society's participation in such
management, and capacity to manage the petroleum sector and implement the environmental and
social mitigation measures related to the oil exploitation project.
93. In addition to these projects amounting to US$70 million, the Base Case foresees lending
for US$210 million over a three year period, together with a substantial program of non-lending
services. The former includes adjustment support (through one or more operations) for a total of
US$60 million aimed at public expenditure reform and completing the remaining reform agenda;
six investment operations, of which 4 in priority sectors for poverty alleviation (health,
education, transport and rural development, US$120 million) and 2 aimed at lifting infrastructure
bottlenecks and promoting private sector development (electricity and telecoms, US$30 million).
94.
Non-lending activities will be key to the successful implementation of the program.
Coherent and consistent Policy dialogue on revenue management, the orientation, effectiveness

26

Table 2

Base case - Proposed lending program FY 00-02
FY 00

Lending

FY01

(US$m)
Pipeline
ChadCameroon
Project

CapacityBuilding
for
PetroleumSector
CapacityBuilding
for
RevenueManagement
HealthSectorSupport

Lending

FY02

(US$m)

$ 35 Transport

Lending

(US$m)

$ 50 Education

$ 20

$ 20 Rural hifr./
Comnunuity
$ 60 Development

$ 10

$130

$30

(IBRD)

$ 25 Electricity
$ 10 SAC/PERC
$ 40

Credit

Telecommunications
Project

$ 10

Total lending for FY
oIwEBRD

$ 120
$ 35

Total lending for CAS
o/w IBRD
o/w IDA

$ 280
$ 35
$ 245

and impact of expenditures in development sectors will be particularly crucial to the success of
the proposed strategy and will require enhanced coordination between sectoral teams inside the
Bank and with other donors. Planned ESW includes a participatory PER, with particular focus
on four priority sectors to which oil revenues are expected to accrue (health, transport, education
and rural development), analytical support to strategy work in the social sectors and in rural
development, especially cotton liberalization, and the implementation of poverty monitoring
mechanisms.
95.
The Base Case presented above is justified by past performance and the continuing
improving policy environment. The lending program proposed is front-loaded (in terms of
number of operations) due to the clustering in FY00 of oil development and capacity building
operations, which go hand in hand. In addition to these, two sectoral investment operations per
year are proposed as well as one adjustment operation in the middle of the period. The demands
of this program on governmental capacity will be substantial but not overwhelming as those
sectors where strategy work is advanced and ministerial capacity has been developed under
existing projects are slotted for FY00 and early FY0 1.
96.
Low case. Should the implementation of the reform program stall or should the steps
taken in preparation of the oil revenue management instruments be grossly inadequate, the
program would be scaled back considerably. Under such circumstances - a Low Case scenario no adjustment lending would be possible, loans related to oil development (if already approved)
would be suspended and remedies applied, as required by the circumstances, and the lending
program would be limited to investment in the health sector. The program would then consist of
a total of US$40 million during the period covered by this CAS (in addition to the US$70 million
contemplated for the next three-five months). Policy dialogue on governance would be stepped
up and the non-lending program would focus on actions needed to return to a satisfactory
implementation of economic reforms and public finance management, such as reinforced

27

economic policy dialogue in coordination with other donors and just-in-time advice and
analytical work in public financial management.
Triggers
96 The triggers for the proposed assistance scenarios are illustrated in Table 3 (below). The
Base Case would be in effect if (i) an appropriate macroeconomic framework is in place, (ii) the
reform program is proceeding as scheduled, (iii) implementation of existing and new projects
remains satisfactory, with particular emphasis on sector-wide operations (Health and Transport),
(iv) sector strategies are adequate for priority sectors, and (iv) satisfactory progress is made in
the implementation of Chad's Oil Revenue Management Program, in particular with regard to
the preparatory steps implementing the Oil Revenue Management Law. The Low Case would be
triggered by non-compliance with at least one of the triggers for the Base Case and by any
Government action or change in circumstances which would severely undermine implementation
of the Revenue Management Program, including material adverse changes to the Oil Revenue
Management Law.
VIII. RISKS
97.
As emphasized throughout this document, the proposed strategy has high potential
payoffs, but also potentially high risks.
98. A number of related risks concem the pace and quality of the national debate on the oil
economy. The political leadership in the period leading up to the beginning of the oil era could
waver; the process of political reconciliation could be delayed, and therefore the internalization
of the strategy for exploitation of oil resources could come to a halt. We classify this risk as
significant, but unlikely: the financial incentives/temptations that could prompt departure from
the agreed utilization of oil revenues would not yet be present. Nevertheless, as discussed above,
slow-down in the implementation of the reforms necessary to enhance good governance would
lead to the low case scenario in our assistance strategy.
99. Other risks could be of external nature. The region remains very volatile and this could
distract the leadership or disrupt the internal reconciliation process. A further risk that should
not be underestimated relates to the commitment of the private investors in the Doba project. If,
for any reason, the project were to be delayed or cancelled, the underlying premise of this CAS,
i.e. to help the country prepare for the arrival of new resources, would no longer be appropriate.
While it is clear that many of the sectoral strategies proposed in this CAS would remain
appropriate under the changed circumstances, it is quite likely that a "non-oil" situation would
call for at least a thorough update of the CAS document.
100. Finally, the commodity slump currently underway, resulting in large part from the Asian
crisis of last year, could intensify and throw Chad's macroeconomy in disarray, both on the fiscal
and external fronts. If this scenario were to materialize, while the overall stance of structural
policies continued along broadly acceptable lines, the Bank would consider enhanced levels of
adjustment assistance to minimize disruptions to the continuation of the oil agenda. An interim
CAS update would be produced to discuss options.

28

Table 3. CAS Triggers
Case
Base Case

Triggers
*
Appropriate Macro

.
*

.
.

Low Case

*

.

Framework
Progressin ReformProgram
satisfactory
SatisfactoryPortfolio
Implementation,including
successfulimplementationof
ongoingsector-wide
investmentprojects(Health
and Transport)
AdequateSectorStrategiesin
four prioritysectors
Progresson implementation
of the Oil Revenue
ManagementProgram

Lending
Oil/Capacity Building

Chad-Cameroon
PipelineProject
PetroleumSectorCapacity
BuildingProject
* Oil RevenueManagement
CapacityBuildingProject
MacroStability
*
SAC/PERC
PrioritySectors
a Health SectorSupport
. ThirdTransportProject
. EducationProject
. PilotRuralDevelopment
Infrastructure
* Telecommunications
Project
* ElectricityProject
Governmentactionor change * HealthSectorSupportCredit
in circumstanceswhich
severelyundermines
implementationof the
RevenueManagement
Program(includingmaterial
adverse changesto the Oil
RevenueManagementLaw)
Non-compliancewith any of

Non Lending Services
.
Sectoral PERs

*

*

.

.
*

*

.

SectorStrategies
PovertyMonitoring
CottonSector
Liberalization

Reinforcideconomic
policy dialoguein
coordinationwith other
donors
Just-in-timeadviceand
analyticalwork on
public financial
managementissues,
especiallyexpenditure

the Base-Case Triggers

IX.

CONCLUSION

101. This is a crucial period for Chad: The strategy proposed in this document aims to ensure
that, with the support of the international community and of the Bank in particular, the country
can aspire to dramatically accelerate its efforts to lower poverty and provide better lives for the
next generation of Chadians. It aims to support Chad in seizing the present challenge and turn oil
into benefits for a large portion of one of the world's poorest populations. This is a challenge to
which the Bank should be proud to rise.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By Shengman Zhang
Managing Director
Washington, D.C.
May28, 1999

29

Annex Al
Page 1 of2

Chad at a glance
SubSaharan
Chad
Africa

POVERTY
and SOCIAL
1997
Population,
mid-year(millions)
GNPpercapita(Atlasmethodo
US$)
GNP(Atlasmethod,US$billions)

LowIncome

6.8
240
1.6

614
309

2,048
350
722

2.5

2.7
2.6

2.1
2.3

32
52
90

500

Development
diamond'
Lifeexpectancy

Averageannualgrowth, 199147
Population(9%)
Laborforce(9%)

..

Poverty(% of populationbelownationalpovertyline)
Urbanpopulation(I%of totalpopulation)
Lifeexpectancy
at birth(yeats)
Infantmortality(per1,000 livebirths)
(%of childrenunder5)
Childmalnutrition
Accessto safewater(I%of population)
Illiteracy(%of populatonage 15+)
population)
Grossprimaryenrollment(%of school-age
Male
Female

21
50
132

Gross
primiary
enrollment

GNP
per
capita

Most recentestimate(latestyear available,1991-97)

..

..

24
15
32
40
23

44
43
75
82
67

28
59
78
61
71
47
91
100
81

1976

1986

1996

1997

GDP(US$billions)
Grossdomesticinvestment/GDP
Exportsof goodsandservices/GDP
Grossdomesticsavings/GDP
Grossnationalsavings/GDP

0.61
19.1
22.9
4.5
17.5

0.75
9.1
19.0
-22.1
-14.0

1.6
13.5
17.5
-2.7
1.3

1.6
16.2
17.6
-1.5
1A.

Currentaccountbalance/GDP
Interestpayments/GDP
TotaldebVGDP
Totaldebtservice/exports
Presentvalueof debfUGDP
Presentvalueof debtexports

-14,9
0.1
16.9
3.6

-23.1
0.2
32.2
5.2

-12.2
0.9
58.0
11.3

-15.0
0.9
65.0
13.4

1996

1997

199842

..

3.7
1.1
-7.2

4.1
3.9
11.2

5.7
3.1
9.8

1976

1986

1996

1997

Growthratesof outputandInvestment(%)

43.9
20.7
17.5
35.3

38.7
20.2
18.1
41.1

37.1
13.4
11.4
46.7

37.4
14.7
12.2
45.1

40 20

-20-

Accessto safewater
-

-Chad

Low-Income
group

KEYECONOMIC
RATIOSand LONG-TERM
TRENDS

Trade

Domestic
omes
Svn

Invesment

..
..

Indebtedness
1976-86 1987-97

(averageannualgrowth)
GDP
GNPpercapita
Exportsof goodsandservices

Economicratios

1.0
-2.3
-1.0

..
..

-

Chad

group
Low-income
1

STRUCTURE
of the ECONOMY
(I%of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

0

o

2

Private
consumption

71.8

102.3

93.7

94.3

consumption
Generalgovernment
Importsof goodsandservices

23.7
37.5

19.8
50.3

9.0
33.6

7.2
35.4

GDl

1976-86 1987-97

1996

1997

Growthratesof exportsandimports(%)

5.2
9.5

(averageannualgrowth)
Agiculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Privateconsumption
consumption
Generalgovemment
Grossdomesticinvestment
Importsof goodsandservices
Grossnationalproduct

0.1
0.6
0.6
1.6

18.0
17.6
2.5
21.5

2.7
5.9
1.9

1.5

4.3
-5.4
-11.3
1.7
0.9

18.9
8.2
28.1
16.4
19.2

1.0
2.1
22.0
5.4
3.7

1.5
-1.1
19.1
6.4
7.3

924

95

as

97

*-GDP

GIO

30
20

10

..

o0

93

95

V

9'7

-20
-Exports

O Imports

I

Note:1997dataare preliminary
estimates.
average.If dataare missing,the diamondviin
'The diamondsshowfourkey indicatorsin the country(inbold)comparedwithits income-group
beincomplete.

Annex Ai
Page 2 of 2

Chad
PRICESand GOVERNMENT
FINANCE
Domesticprices
(%change)
Consumerprices
ImplicitGDPdeflator
Govemmentfinance
(%of GDP,includescunentgrants)
Currentrevenue
Currentbudgetbalance
Overallsurplus/defici

1976

1986

1996

1997

..

-13.1
-16.9

11.3
11.6

5.6
2.6

Inflation(%)
40

8.4

6.8
-2.8
-20.6

13.4
4.2
-5.1

12.7
4.4
-5.2

1986

1996

1997

..
..

99
42
35
5
207

..

..

221
124
42
2
289
4

211
115
46
1
283
4

10
100
100
100
100

12
106
95
102
94

..
..
..

30
20

20

I

10
o
-10

94

95

97

96

GDPdeflator O-CPI

TRADE
1976
(US$millions)
Totalexports(fob)
Cotton
Meat
Manufactures
Totalimports(cif)
Food
Fuelandenergy
Capitalgoods
Exportprce index(1995=100)
Import
priceindex(1995=100)
Terms
of trade(1995=100)

..

..
..

..
..

19
42
0
0

..

.

..

Exportandimportlevels(US$millions)
416T

277
277

139

0W

97

5

l

A

Rimpots

i Exports

BALANCE
ofPAYMENTS
1976

1986

1996

1997

Currentaccountbalanceto GOPratio(%)

27
213
-86

143
378
-235

283
546
-263

267
537
-270

-

0

-9

-32
112

-28
92

-10
s5

Currentaccountbalance

-91

-174

-242

-283

-20 -

Financingiteris (net)
Changesin netreserves

104
-14

155
19

201
41

294

-25

(US$millions)
Exportsof goodsandservices
5
Importsof goodsandservices
Resourcebalance
Netincome
Netcurrenttransfers

Memo:
Reservesincludinggold(US$millions)
Conversion
rate(DEC, localUS$)

-11

23

20

178

174

239.0

346.3

511.6

571.2

1976

1986

1996

1997

103
0
16

242
0
48

939
0
433

983

Totaldebtservice
IBRD
IDA

5
0
0

8
0
2

34
0
4

39
0
5

of netresourceflows
Composition
Officialgrants
Officialcreditors
Privatecreditors
Foreigndirectinvestment
Portfolioequity

5
2

29
0

46
-2

25
0

91

92

93

94

9S

96

97

EXTERNALDEBTand RESOURCE
FLOWS
(US$millions)
Totaldebtoutstanding
anddisbursed
IBRD
IDA

WorldBankprogram
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal
repayments
Nettlow
Interestpayments
Nettransfers
Economics
Development

Composttionof total debt,1997(USSmiillions)
5

0

G. 19

E 161

457

B3;457

28

.D:

..

c. 71
20
5
0
5
0
5

35
10
2
8
1
8

0
17
1
16
3
13

25
49
2
47
3
43

A- IBRD
- IDA
C-IMF

E- Bilateral
D- Othermutilateral F - Private
G - Short-term
|

9/1/98

Annex B I
Page 1 of I

Chad - Selected Indicators of
Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Indicator

1996

1997

1998

1999

12
3.48

11
3.91

11
3.92

10
4.31

25.00
33.89

36.36
43.32

27.27
26.76

30.00
28.28

50.00
54.68
22.88

40.00
50.76
21.31

33.33
49.20
21.70

40.00
51.24
21.76

768.46
64.04

684.93
62.27

848.68
77.15

487.69
48.77

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects under implementationa
Average implementation period (years)b
Percent of problem projectsa, c
by number
by amount
Percent of projects at riska, d
by number
by amount
Disbursement ratio (%)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandumitem
Projects evaluated by OED
by number
by amount (US$ millions)
Percent rated U or HU
by number
by amount

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Since FY80

Last five FYs

23
374.50

8
218.10

57.14
41.10

37.50
38.84

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY)
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the beginning of the
year: investment projects only.

Annex B2
Page I of 2

Chad - Bank Group Program Summary, FY 2000-2002

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program, FY 2000-2002a
Strategic rewardsb
FY
(H/M/L)

2000

Implementationb
Project

CAP.BLDG MGT PET.ECO
CHAD TELECOMM.
HEALTH SECTOR PROJ.
PET. TA/OIL SECTOR
TD/CM PIPELINE
Subtotal

2001

ELECTRICITY
THIRD TRANSPORT SECT
SAC/PERC
Subtotal

2002

EDUCATION VI
PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Subtotal
Total, FY 2000-2002

US$(M)

10.0
10.0
40.0
25.0
35.0

(H/M/L)

risks

H
H
H
H
H

H
M
M
H
M

20.0
50.0
60.0
130.0

H
H
H

M
L
M

20.0
10.0

H
H

L
L

120.0

30.0
280.0

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H),
moderate (M), or low (L).

Annex B2
Page 2 of 2

Chad - IFC and MIGA Program, FY96-99
Category
IFC approvals (US$m)a

1996
0.00

Past
1997
0.00

1998
0.00

1999
0.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

Sector (%)

TOTAL
Investment instrument (%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity b
Other
TOTAL
MIGA guarantees (US$m)
MIGA commitments (US$m)

0.00

aExcludesAEFprojects.
blncludesquasi-equitytypes of bothloan and equityinstruments.

Annex B3
Page 1 of I

Chad - Summary of Nonlending Services
Product

Completion
FY

Audiencea

Objectiveb

Cotton SectorWork - Analytical assessment
of the sector

FY99

Bank, Govemment,
Donors

Knowledge
generation,
problem-solving

Rural Development Strategy- Preparatory
Workshops

FY00

Government,Rural
Society, Bank, Donors

Knowledge
generation,
public debate,
problem solving

FYOO-02

Government,Donors,
Public, Bank

Knowledge
generation,
public debate,
problem-solving

Education

FY00

Govemment,Private
Sector,Communities,
Donors

Problem-solving

Rural Development Strategy

FYOI

Govemment,Rural
Society, Bank, Donors

Knowledge
generation,
problem solving

Cotton Sector Work (continued)

FY00

Govemment,Rural
Society in cotton area,
Bank, Donors

Knowledge
generation,
problem-solving

Analytical support for implementationof
poverty monitoring system in-country

FYOO-02

Govemment, Bank,
Donors,Public
dissemination

Knowledge
generation,
problem solving,
public debate

Extensive Household Survey

FYOO-01

Government,Donors,
Bank, Public
dissemination

Knowledge
generation

Underway

Planned
Economic and Expenditurework
Annual Sectoral PERs -- with emphasis on
Health, Education,Transport and Rural
Development
Sectoral Strategies

Poverty Monitoring

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate,problem-solving.

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

Chad Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group

1970-75

1980-85

1992-97

SubSaharan
Africa

4.0
2.0
15.6
6.0

5.1
2.7
19.9
7.1

7.2
2.8
22.8
6.5

612.4
2.2
32.3
5.5

2,035.6
1-7
28.4
4.0

230
119

510
118

350
122

1.6
2.4

2.5
4.3

1.0

POPULATION
Totalpopulation,mid-year(millions)
Growthrate(%annualaverage)
Urbanpopulation(% of population)
Totalfertilityrate(birthsper woman)

Lowincome

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNPper capita(US$)
Consumerpriceindex(1995=100)
Foodpriceindex(1995=100)

..

..

..

..
..

230

190
77

64.0
63.0
67.0

INCOMEICONSUMPTION
DISTRIBUTION
Giniindex
Lowestquintile(% of incomeor consumption)
Highestquintile(%of incomeor consumption)
SOCIALINDICATORS
Publicexpenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNP)

Socialsecurtyandwelfare(% of GDP)
Netprimaryschoolenrollmentrate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female

Accessto safewater
(%of population)
Total
Urban
Rural

..

..

..

..

0.2

..

..

..

..

..

..

46
59
33

26

31

24

47

69

43
23

..

48

..

17

74
32

80
66

..

..

..

1

30
24

58
53

74
76

35

39

39
38
41

43
41
45

49
47
50

51
49
52

59
58
60

166
252

118
219

100
182

91
147

82
118

554
492
858

556
449
700

448
383
840

428
375

274
255

Immunizationrate
(%under 12months)
Measles
DPT

ChildmalnutHtion
(%under5 years)
Lifeexpectancyat birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant(per thousandlive births)
Under5(perthousandlivebirths)
Adult (15-59)
Male(per1,000population)
Female(per 1,000population)
Maternal(per 100,000live births)
WorldDevelopment
Indicators1999CD-ROM,WorldBank

Annex B5
Page I of 3

Chad - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator

1994

Actual
1995
1996

1997

Estimate
1998

1999

Projected
2000

2001

National accounts
(as % GDP at current
market prices)
Gross domestic product
Agriculturea

100.0
37.2

100.0
35.1

100.0
37.1

100.0
37.4

100.0
37.5

100.0
35.0

100.0
34.8

100.0
33.9

Industrya

11.7

14.3

13.4

14.7

15.0

15.7

15.8

15.9

Servicesa

49.5

48.4

46.7

45.1

43.2

43.2

43.5

43.2

102.2
11.8

105.2
11.6

102.7
11.9

101.5
14.4

100.7
15.2

99.7
19.5

99.1
23.2

97.0
36.0

7.3
9.3

6.3
4.0

6.4
7.1

6.6
9.7

7.1
8.1

7.4
12.1

7.8
15.4

8.2
27.8

Exports (GNFS)b

16.0

21.5

17.5

17.6

19.7

18.2

18.6

19.0

Imports (GNFS)

34.9

36.9

33.6

35.4

35.6

37.4

40.9

51.9

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings'

-2.2
5.3

-5.2
-0.1

-2.7
1.3

-1.5
1.4

-0.7
3.6

0.3
3.6

0.9
4.2

3.0
5.0

1179

1438

1624

1521

1566

1607

1738

1881

230

210

210

240

230

9.9%

0.9%

3.7%

4.1%

7.0%

1.3%

5.5%

5.5%

6.8%

4.0%

3.1%

2.7%

8.3%

1.0%

5.7%

5.4%

7.1%

-1.6%

1.1%

1.6%

4.4%

-1.2%

3.0%

2.9%

1.1%
8.6%

4.5%
5.4%

-1.5%
-3.2%

-1.2%
-0.2%

4.2%
4.0%

-2.7%
-7.3%

2.2%
-0.6%
0.9%
-1.8%
(Continued)

Total Consumption
Grossdomesticfixed
investment
Government investment
Private investment
(includes increase in
stocks)

Memorandum items
Grossdomesticproduct
(US$ million at current
prices)
Gross national product per
capita (US$, Atlas method)
Real annual growth rates
(%, calculated from 1977
prices)
Gross domestic product at
market prices
Gross Domestic Income
Real annual per capita
growth rates (%, calculated
from 1977 prices)
Grossdomesticproductat
market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption

Annex B5
Page 2 of 3

Chad - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

1994

Actual
1995
1996

1997

Estimate
1998

190.0
135.2
411.4
203.7
-221.4
113.3

309.0
247.1
531.2
281.7
-222.2
100.3

283.0
221.1
545.7
289.3
-262.7
112.4

266.8
211.1
537.2
283.6
-270.4
91.7

308.5
247.6
557.7
298.4
-249.2
151.1

292.1
224.4
600.5
329.2
-308.4
124.5

323.1
250.6
710.5
400.9
-387.5
132.7

356.7
276.4
977.1
635.6
-620.4
130.7

-48.7

-53.7

-106.3

-142.2

-134.2

-200.2

-278.0

-532.4

14.2

10.1

14.8

15.8

34.9

83.3

155.0

370.0

123.5

99.5

83.0

1999

Projected
2000

2001

Balance of Payments
(US$m)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports(GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Netcurrenttransfers
(including official current
transfers)
Current account balance
(after official capital grants)
Net private foreign direct
investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other

capital (net, including

errors and omissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of
GDP at current market
prices)
Real annual growth rates
(1977 prices)
Merchandise exports
(FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports
(CIF)
Public finance
(as % of GDP at current
market prices)e
Current revenues
Current expenditures

..

..

..

..

..

38.9

70.3

45.8

41.8

94.0

..

..

..

..

..

76.8

73.8

40.6

-10.7

2.9

-17.1

54.4

18.5

-18.8% -15.4% -16.2% -17.8% -15.9%

-19.2%

-22.3%

-33.0%

-16.2%

26.5%

-7.2%

11.2%

13.2%

-5.3%

7.0%

7.4%

-18.5%
-0.8%
-13.3%

29.0%
22.6%
18.2%

-9.4%
-5.2%
5.4%

10.7%
0.0%
6.4%

11.4%
5.0%
4.0%

-5.5%
6.1%
12.1%

5.7%
8.9%
17.7%

5.7%
12.3%
41.0%

4.9
10.0

6.2
9.0

7.2
9.3

7.7
8.3

7.7
7.7

10.4
9.0

11.8
12.6
11.0
11.4
(Continued)

Annex B5
Page 3 of 3

Chad - Key EconomicIndicators
(Continued)

Indicator
Current account surplus (+)
or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP (at current market
prices)
Growth of M2 (%)
Privatesectorcreditgrowth/
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( 1977 =100)
Merchandiseexportprice
index
Merchandise import price
index
Merchandise terms of trade
index
Real exchange rate
(US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumer price index
(% growth rate)
GDP deflator
(% growth rate)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

1994
-5.1

Actual
1995
1996
-2.8
-2.1

1997
-0.6

Estimate
1998
0.0

1999
14

Projected
2000
0.7

2001
1.2

9.0
14.9

9.1
10.9

9.0
13.2

9.6
12.0

7.9
8.0

9.4
9.7

8.6
7.8

8.1
7.3

12.1

15.0

15.6

13.2

13.3

13.6

13.8

13.9

66.3
51.7

36.0
-41.3

20.2
55.1

-9.3
61.0

-5.7
42.0

6.5
59.0

10.5
84.0

8.9
80.0

103.4

149.4

117.0

106.3

110.5

105.7

110.3

113.2

164.8

192.9

174.7

165.8

149.0

144.6

149.7

155.7

62.8

77.5

67.0

64.1

74.1

73.1

73.7

72.8

57.4

63.0

65.3

65.4

65.4

65.4

65.4

65.4

41.3%

9.5%

11.3%

5.6%

2.9%

3.5%

2.9%

2.9%

43.8%

8.7%

11.6%

2.6%

3.6%

3.1%

2.9%

3.0%

If GDP components are estimated at factor cost, a footnoote indicating this fact should be added.
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Should indicate the level of the government to which the data refer.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Page I of I

Chad - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

Actual
1995
1996

1994

Estimate
1998

1997

Projected
2000
2001

1999

2002

797

875

939

983

1073

1193

1289

1368

1406

Net disbursements (US$m)a

35

77

63

61

82

118

98

79

39

Total debt service (TDS)

25

32

34

39

45

46

46

51

56

..

..

..

..

67.6

60.8

57.8

64.6

..

..

..

..

379.7
74.2
14.6

372.7
74.2
13.4

363.2
72.7
13.6

339.4
68.8
13.6

0.0

80.3

80.0

79.6

324.6
68.5
13.6
83.8

0.0
51.4

0.0
65.5

0.0
67.4

0.0
68.2

0.0
75.6

1.1
65.2

3.4
63.4

5.4
64.8

6.2
69.8

..

..

0

0

0.0
0

0.2
10

0.5
20

0.7
35

0.8
35

643

703

757

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%/0)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)C
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (/o)
IDA TDO (US$m)d

..

0

..

0

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

320

324

433

457

502

577

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
c. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Status of Bank Group Operations in Chad
Operations Portfolio

Project

Number

of

Closed

Active
Projects
TD-PE-528
TD-PE-530
TD-PE-517
TD-PE-533
TD-PE-509
TD-PE-35601
TD-PE-501
TD-PE-35623
TD-PE-532
TD-PE-44974

Original

Fiscal
Year

ID

Projects:

1991
1993
1993
1994
1994
1995
1995
1996
1998
1999

Borrower

US$

Millions

GOVERNMENT
GOVERNMENT
GOVERNMENT
GOVERNMENT
GOVERNMENT
GOVERNMENT
GOVERNMENT
GOVERNMENT
GOVERNMENT
GOVERNMENT

Disbursed
(IBRD and
IDA):
of
which
has
been
repaid:
now held
by IBRD and
IDA:
sold
which
repaid
:
Undisbursed
:

IDA

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

11.00
49.70
19.30
17.40
29.40
20.40
24.53
9.50
5.27
30.00

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig

ENGINEERING
TRANSPORT
SECT II
BASIC
EDUCATION
PUBLIC
WORKS AND CAP
HEALTH
& SAFE MOTHER
POP.
& AIDS
CO
AG SERVICES
CAPACITY
BUILDING
HOUSEHOLD
ENERGY
SAC III

Projects

Closed

114.45
0.00
216.50
0.00
0.00
100.20

Projects
396.98
22.23
363.67
6.00
6.00
.02

216.50

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

4.47
3. 44
10.62
11.36
11.05
10.82
11.35
1.67
5.42
30.00

Frm

4.60
-10.28
10.62
11.44
-2.33
1.73
1.63
2.12
1.31
0.00

100.20

PSR
Rating

Rev'd

Dev

Obj

Imp

b/

Prog

20.84

4.72
1.97
0.00
0.00
-. 56
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

S
S
S
U
S
S
U
S
S

S
S
U
U
S
S
U
S
S

6.13

Total
511.43
22.23
580.17
6.00
6.00
100.22

Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.
Following the FY94 Annual Review of Portfolio performance (ARPP), a letter based system was introduced (HS = Highly Satisfactory,
S = Satisfactory,
Unsatisfactory): see proposed Improvements in Project and Portfolio Performance Rating Methodology (SecM94-901), August 23, 1994.

Note:
Disbursement

Last
Supervision

25

Active

a.
b.

IBRD

0.00

Total
Amount
Of
Total

in

Purpose

Total

Total

Amount

Difference
Between
expected
and
actual
disbursements
a/

U =Unsatisfactory,

HU = Highly

data is updated at the end of the first week of the month.

-

X3

CHAD - Country Assistance Strategy Matrix (2000-2002)
Key Development
Objectives

Strategy/Actions

j_____ending_Donors

______________ _____________________

Instruments

Progress Indicators

Chad

Other

NLS

Lending

PFP, Policy
Dialogue

SAC IV FY01

IMF ESAF

PER, Policy
Dialogue, Donor
Coordination

Capacity Building
for Oil Resource
Management
(FY00)

IMF ESAF

Effective coordination
with other donors.

Policy Dialogue,
Support of
participatory
discussion of
poverty strategy

Capacity Building
for Oil Resource
Management
(FY00)

Effective supervision of
Capacity Building for
Oil Resource
Management and IDF
for capacity building in
Parliament.

Policy Dialogue,
Donor
Coordination
IDF Grant for
Capacity
Building in
Parliament

Capacity Building
for Oil Resource
Management
(FY00)

UNDP
Capacity
Building
Project; EU
policy
dialogue,
AFD policy
dialogue
French
support to
decentralizati
on

IDA

RESOURCES
OB.JECTIVE1: CAPACITYBIJILDING ANDIMPROVEDGOVERNANCEFOREFFECTIVEMANAGEMENTOF OILI.

Maintain
Macroecononic
Stability
Improve capacity for
public financial
management,
especially
expenditure
management

Develop a strategy
for the povertyoriented use of
petroleumrevenues

Strengthen capacity
of civil society to
monitor use of public
revenues and improve
transparency

Broaden fiscal base

ESAF on track

Maintain expenditure control
Improve core central
management processes

Consolidated budget by 2003

Develop statistical base for
monitoring poverty

Capacity to develop
macroeconomic framework in
place in Ministry of Finance

Consensus established
amnongdonor
community to support
consolidated budget and
expenditure programs

Expenditure Programs in place
for priority sectors by 2003

Wide dissemination of
PER conclusions

Parliament review of Executed
Budget
Completion of Household
Survey and village indicator
mapping

Develop long-tern vision and
formulate Poverty Strategy

Poverty Strategy widely
discussed and disseminated

Implement Oil Resource
Management Law

Supporting decrees enacted

Reinforce Parliament's capacity
to oversee budget

Training of the Finance and
Economic Committees on track

Chambre des Comptes of
Build up independent auditing
Supreme Court and Oversight
capacity and capacity of
Petroleum Oversight Committee Committee in place and
adequately staffed
Establish a framework
conducive to NGO development

Legal framework in place

Mobilize additional
resources from donor
community for
enhanced civil society
involvement in public
resource management

N

o x

CHAD - Country Assistance Strategy Matiix (2000-2002)
Key Development
Objectives

Strategy/Actions

Chad
Report on budget execution
widely disseminated

IDA

NLS

Lending

Build up capacity for
management of Petroleum
Sector in Ministry of Mines

Capacity to monitor oil
exploitation activities in place

Maintain intensive
dialogue with all
concerned parties.

Policy Dialogue,
NEAP,

Capacity Building
for Oil Sector
Management
(FY00)

Develop capacity for
management of environmental
and social impacts of oil
exploitation in central and local
administrations, and civil
society

Capacity to monitor
environmental and social
impact of oil activities in place

Mobilize funding for
NEAP

Implement public information
campaign
Develop capacity for
Management of
Environmental and
Social aspects of oil
exploitation and
export

Other
Donors

Instruments

Progress Indicators

Implementation of mitigation
measures on track

AFD, EU
support in the
oil producing
area

Maintain intensive
dialogue with involved
communities, and local
and international NGOs
Draw lessons from
implementation of
Conuiunity Investment
Fund for oil producing

._________________ ________ _________ _________________ region
SERVICES
OFBASICSOCIAL
DELIVERY
FORIMPROVED
FOUNDATIONS
OBJECTIVE2: ESTABLISH
Sector strategies for health and Participation in sectoral
Define role of local
Formulate
Round Tables and other
education formulated and
appropriate strategies communities and private
donor coordination
validated.
providers in service delivery,
for efficient and
mechanisms
equitable delivery
particularly for education.
systems for health
and education
Focus on underserved areas and
Supervision reports are
focused on impact
population groups
indicators
Formulate Sector Expenditure
Sector Expenditure Programs
Programs in close consultation part of the budget process.
with stakeholders
Build up appropriate
monitoring systems to measure
impact

Impact indicators regularly
published

Mechanisms for
participation of
beneficiaries in project
supervision established

____

Policy dialogue
and donor
coordination
Sectoral PERs
Supervision of
ongoing projects

___r
Health Sector
Project (FY00);
Education Project
(FY02)

Health: All
donors
participate in
sector-wide
approach
(EU, WHO,
AFD).
Education:
AfDB and
AFD

(
(D

ox>
hh

G~co

CHAD - Country AssistanceStrategy Matrix (2000-2002)
Key Development
Objectives
HEALTH:
Increase availability
and access to health
services

Improveaccessfor
women,provisionof
servicesrelatedto
mother and childcare
and reproductive
health, and impacton
women's health

Instruments

Progress Indicators

Strategy/Actions
Chad

IDA

NLS

Lending

Full use of existingand
planned de-localizedtraining
facilitiesfor paramedical
personneland use of stafffrom
neighboringcountrieswhere
possible

hInovativetraining
schemesdeveloped,

Policy dialogue
and donor
coordination

Health Sector
Project (FY00)

Supportdevelopmentof
private/publicpartnershipsin
service delivery

Frameworkfor public/private
partnershipestablished

Best practices
disseminated

Strengthenmanagement
capacityof Ministryof Public
Health

Increaseddelegationof
responsibilitiesto regionaland
local offices

Core centralauthorities
sensitizedand
supportive

Continuedfocus on motherand
childcare sustained.

Sector-widepolicy emnphasizes
mother and childcare

Increasenumberof female
health workers

Increasednumber of female
healthworkerstrainedand in
place

Donor support
mobilizedto train more
womenhealth workers

Systemin place to monitor
evolutionof women'shealth
statusand reproductivehealth
practices

Beneficiaryassessment
carriedout withfocus
on women's and
reproductivehealth

Addresssevereshortageof
trainedhealthworkers

SectoralPERs

Other
Donors
Health: All
donors
participatein
sector-wide
approach
(EU, WHO,
AFD).

Supervisionof
Health and Safe
Motherhoodand
Populationand
AIDS projects

OQ
ONw
FhX

CIIAD - Country Assistance Strategy Matrix (2000-2002)
Key Development
Objectives

Instruments

Progress Indicators

Strategy/Actions

Other
Donors

Chad

IDA

NLS

Lending

Increase relative allocation of
primary education in sector

Share of primary education in
sector expenditure is
consistently increased (share of
administration expenditure is
reduced)

Restructure Basic
Education Project

Policy dialogue
and donor
coordination

Education Project
(FY02)

AfDB and
AFD

Define role of local
communities and private
providers of education.
Establish framework for close
collaboration between local
communities and public sector.

Framework is established and
widely disseminated.

Focus assistance on
definition of financial
framework for the
sector and long-term
expenditure program

Sectoral PERs

Improve training and
motivation of teachers

Supervision of teachers is
improved with involvement
from communities

Audit of Ministry of
Education completed

Supervision of
Basic Education
Project

Capacity of Ministry to plan
sector development is enhanced

Studies in preparation
of Round Table
completed

Privatization program
completed: all commercial
public enterprises, except
Coton Tchad are privatized

Support to privatization
program continued

SAC IV (FEY01)

IMF, EU,
France

EDUCATION:
Improve the quality
and access to primary
education, especially
for girls

Expand education
Strengthen management
services beyond 6
capacity of Ministry of
years of schooling
Education
selectively
OBJECTIVE
3: REMOVECONSTRAINTS
TOGROWTH
Improve
Envirommentfor
Private Sector
Growth

Complete Privatization Program

Streamline policy framework

General licensing regulation
streamlned

Improve dialogue with private
Mechanism established for
regular public/private exchange
sector
l___________________________ _ _view
_ _s _ _ _ _ __of

Any further constraints
to private sector
development identified

Policy dialogue

Supervision of
Capacity
Building for
Economic
Management
Credit

OQ
(D
o x
o x

cx

CHAD - Country Assistance Strategy Matrix (2000-2002)
Key Development
Objectives
TRANSPORT:
Invest in a basic
backbone road
network passable year
round

Strategy/Actions

Implement 99-03 Transport
Expenditure program

Instruments

Progress Indicators
Chad
Program is fully fmanced and
implemented on time.

IDA
Program is fully
financed.

NLS
Policy dialogue,
Donor
coordination

Lending
Transport Sector
Project (FY01)
SAC IV

Upgrade and pave the most
vulnerable road sections

Other
Donors
EU, KfW,
AfDB, OPEP
Fund, Islamic
Devpt. Bank

Supervision of
PST2

Safeguard existing road
infrastructure

UTILITIES:
Improve coverage
quality and cost
efficiency of services.

Provide adequate funding and
institutional arrangements for
road maintenance

Adequate funding in Road
Fund is available to implement
annual maintenance plan

Implement improved regulatory
framework

Adoption of implementation
decrees for telecom law,
Creation of OTRT (telecomns
regulator)

Complete privatization of
electricity and telecom
companies

STEE and SOTELTCHAD
privatized

Formulate investment program
in close collaboration with
private partners

Investment programs agreed
with private partners

Establish a participatory process
for the formulation of rural
development strategy

Multi-sectoral approach to rural
development is adopted.

Capacity Building
support to OTRT

Policy dialogue,
aid coordination

Electricity Project
(FY01)

AFD

Telecoms and
Postal Services
Project (FY00)

Assessment of Energy
supply to Chad
completed

RURAL
DEVELOPMENT:
Formulate rural
sector strategy and
action development
plan

._________________

Conmunity
Development/ Rural
Invest. Fund established

Cotton Sector
Liberalization
ESW

PER for Rural
Mechanism for conmnunity
Development
Rural
participation in
Investment Fund is supported
by all parties
________________
_____________________
._____________________________________________________

Capacity Building
for Petroleum
Sector (Community
Development Fund
FY00)

AFD; AfDB,
EU, IFAD,
IDB

d

Rural Infrastructure
Development
02__
Y02)
Project(FY

e
_D

o x

CHAD- CountryAssistanceStrategyMatrix(2000-2002)
Key Development

Instruments

ProgressIndicators

Strategy/Actions

Liberalizecotton
sectorby increasing
role of producersand
privatesectorin its
management.

Other
Donors

Objectives

Developsoundanalyticalbase
Supportdevelopmentof farmer
organizations

Chad

IDA

NLS

Assessmentof sector and next
steps are agreedto by all
stakeholders.

Consensusbuilding
amongall stakeholders
is effective

Restructuringof
Agricultumal
ExtensionProject

Lending

Policy dialogue
and donor
coordination

Representationof farmer
organizationsin decisionmakingprocessis improved.

Privatizenon-core activitiesand Privatizationprogramon track
initiateprivatizationof a cluster
of ginningfactories.
ENVIRONMENT:
Protectthe
Environmentin the
frameworkof oil
exploitation

Mitigateenvironmentalimpacts Capacityto monitor oil
exploitationactivitiesinplace
of the oil project.
Capacityto monitor
environmentaland social
impactof oil activitiesin place
Implementationof mitigation
measureson track
Establishcapacityfor
envirommental
assessmentin
line ministries,particularlyin
the transportand rural
developmentsectors.

Capacityfor environmental
assessmentestablishedin line
ministries

Maintainintensive
dialoguewith all
concernedparties.
Mobilizefundingfor
NEAP
Maintainintensive
dialoguewithinvolved
communities,and local
and internationalNGOs

Policy Dialogue,
NEAP
Supervisionof
Household
EnergyProject.

CapacityBuilding
for Petroleum
Sector(FY00)

AfDB (Lac
Tchad)

Third Transport
Sector Project
(FY01)
Rural Ifrastructure
Development
Project (FY02)

NEAPformulatedin a
StrengthenCapacity Involve localcommunitiesin
for NaturalResource NaturalResourceManagement. participatorymanner.
Management
Formulate a NEAP

__

o X

Annex BPage I c'f2

Chad - C"ASSummary of Development Priorities

Networkarea

PovertyReduction& Economic
Management
* Povertyreduction

o

Country
perfor' ance
a

Poor

Economicpolicy
o

Lviacro
stability

Good

o

EconomicMgmt.

Poor

Country
prioritp

Bank

Country-widepervasivc
and deeppoverty
Limitedfinancialand
humai.resourcesto
addressit

High

High

Policyachievementsnot
supportedby increased
capacityin economic
management

High

High

Major issueb

2

* Publicsector

Poor

Capacity/
Accountability/
Transparency

High

High

Gender

Poor

Not a strategicpriority

Low

Moderate

HumanDevelopment
Departmient
* Educatior,

Poor

Poor access,qualityand
equityLackingcoherent
sectorstrategy

High

High,but
inadequate
policies

* Health,nutiition& population

Fair

Coherentstrategy,but
poor access,lowuse,
impactuncertain

High

High

* Socialprotection

Poor

Systemessentiallynot
functioningand
bankrupt

Moderate

Moderate

Environmentally
& Socially
SustainableDevelopment
* Ruraldevelopment

Poor

Ruralpovertyand
isolation,lacking
coherentsectorstrategy

High

High

i

Recus.uot:cr
of courtry and
BiorifV
ank prioritde,-

Concrete,actio_,
in Healthand
policydialogue
in Education
ongoingto bring
Genderissuesti.'
thefore

Polircdia
oague
ongoingto
addresst!'s
issue

Annex B9
Page 2 of 2

Chad - CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Country

Networkarea

Country

BankpriorityC

performance
a

Majorissueb

prioritYc

* Overall

Poor

Desertification,
soil
erosionand
degradation

Moderate

Moderate

* Issueslinkedto oil

Fair

Lackof capacityin
Environmental
Management

High

High

Fair

Insufficientdialogue
betweencivilsociety
andgovemment

High

High

Finance,PrivateSector&
Infrastructure
* Financialsector

Poor

Pooraccessto credit
esp. in ruralareas

Moderate

Moderate

* Privatesector

Fair

Dialoguewithformal
privatesector
insufficient.
Taxationissues.
Goodprogresson
privatizationand
enablingenvironment

Moderate

High

* Energy& mining

Good

Govemmentcapacity
for managementof
petroleumsector
needsstrengthening

High

High

* Inftastructure

Poor

Strongexpansionof
Infrastructureand
affordablesystemof
maintenanceneeded

High

High

Reconciliation
ofcountry and

Bank
prioritiesd

Environmenmtlly
& Socially
SustainableDevelopment
Contd
* Environment

*

a.
b.
c.
d.

Socialdevelopment

Use "excellent,""good," "fair,"or "poor."
Indicateprincipalcountry-specificproblems(e.g., for poverty reduction,"rural poverty;" for education,"female secondary
completion;"for environment,"urbanair pollution").
To indicatepriority,use"low,""moderate,"or "high."
Give explanation,if prioritiesdo not agree;for example,anotherMDBmay havethe leadon the issue,or there maybe ongoing
dialogue.

Chad - Revenue Scenarios
(In US$million)
Lowoil price scenario/i
Oil revenues
Non-oilfiscal revenues
Totalfiscal revenues
(excl. grants)
Grants/Loans
Total revenues,grants,and loans
Growth of total revenues,grants,and loans
Shareof oil in total revenues,grants,and loans
Base oil price scenario/2
Oilrevenues
Non-oil fiscalrevenues
Totalfiscalrevenues
(excdgrants)
Grants/Loans
Totalrevenues,grants,andloans
Growthof totalrevenues,grants,and loans
Shareof oil intotal revenues,grants,and loans
Highoil price scenario/3
Oil revenues
Non-oilfiscalrevenues
Totalfiscal revenues
(excl. grants)
Grants/Loans
Totalrevenues,grants,andloans
Growthoftotalrevenues,grants,andloans
Shareof oil in total revenues,grants,and loans

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

0
164
164

0
186
186

0
206
206

0
208
208

0
212
212

45
217
262

56
241
297

65
255
320

45
274
320

38
294
332

36
312
348

36
329
365

160
324
0.0%

160
346
6.7%
0.0%

160
366
5.8%
0.0%

160
368
0.4%
0.0%

160
372
1.1%
0.0%

160
422
13.4%
10.6%

160
457
8.4%
12.2%

160
480
5.0%
13.5%

160
480
-0.1%
9.4%

160
492
2.6%
7.7%

160
508
3.2%
7.0%

160
525
3.5%
6.9%

0
164
164

0
186
186

0
206
206

0
208
208

0
216
216

88
239
327

100
265
365

110
274
384

80
291
371

67
309
376

62
327
389

60
342
402

160
324
0.0%

160
346
6.7%
0.0%

160
366
5.8%
0.0%

160
368
0.4%
0.0%

160
376
2.2%
0.0%

160
487
29.4%
18.0%

160
525
7.9%
19.1%

160
544
3.5%
20.2%

160
531
-2.4%
15.0%

160
536
1.0%
12.5%

160
549
2.3%
11.3%

160
562
2.5%
10.7%

0
164
164

0
186
186

0
206
206

0
208
208

0
224
224

142
267
409

156
289
445

381
293
675

308
308
616

258
323
581

318
345
663

301
366
667

160
324

160
346
6.7%
0.0%

160
366
5.8%
0.0%

160
368
0.4%
0.0%

160
384
4.3%
0.0%

160
569
48.1%
25.0%

160
605
6.3%
25.7%

160
835
38.1%
45.7%

160
776
-7.1%
39.7%

160
741
-4.5%
34.8%

160
823
11.2%
38.7%

160
827
0.5%
36.4%

..

..

..

0.0%

1/ AssumingBrent priceof US$11per barrel in 1998
2/ AssumingBrent price of US$15per barrel in 1998
3/ AssumingBrent price of US$20per barrel in 1998
CD

TABLE OF DONOR ACTIVITIES
CHAD
Strategy/Actions
Key
Development
Objectives
Broadenfiscal base
SOCIOECONOMIC
MANAGEMENT Maintainexpenditure
control
Maintain
Macroeconomic
Stability
Improvecapacity Improvecore central
managementprocesses
for public
financial
management,
especially
expenditure
management
Developa
strategyfor the
poverty-oriented
use of petroleum
revenues

Strengthen
capacityof civil
societyto monitor
use of public
revenuesand
improve
transparency

Developstatisticalbase for
monitoringpoverty
Developlong-termvision
and formulatePoverty
Strategy
ImplementOilResource
ManagementLaw
ReinforceParliament's
capacityto overseebudget
Build up independent
auditingcapacityand
capacityof Petroleum
OversightCommittee
Establisha framework
conduciveto NGO
development

Activitiesof Other Donors

IDAInstruments

_

PFP, Policy
Dialogue

SACIV FY01

I[MF:Policy Dialogue,ESAF
France:PolicyDialogue,StructuralAdjustmentProgram
EU: Lome Convention,StructuralAdjustmentProgram
AfDB:StructuralAdjustmentProgram

PER,Policy
Dialogue,Donor
Coordination

CapacityBuilding
for Oil Resource
Management
(FY00)

IMF ESAFand TechnicalAssistance

PolicyDialogue,
Supportof
participatory
discussionof
poverty strategy

CapacityBuilding
for Oil Resource
Management
(FY00)

UNDPNationalCapacityBuildingProject in collaborationwith
WB: includespoverty monitoringsupportand Household
Surveys.

France:TechnicalAssistancein Ministryof Finance

EU policy dialogue
AFDpolicy dialogue

PolicyDialogue,
Donor
Coordination
IDF Grantfor
Capacity
Buildingin
Parliament

CapacityBuilding
for OilResource
Management
(FY00)

Frenchsupportto decentralization.Furtherpartnershipsto be
developedwithEU and other donors.

__

oo>
_

TABLE OF DONOR ACTIVITIES
CHAD
Key
Development
Objectives
Developcapacity
for Management
of Enviromnental
and Socialaspects
of oil exploitation
and export

Strategy/Actions

Policy Dialogue,
Buildup capacityfor
managementof Petroleum NEAP
Sector inMinistryof Mines
Developcapacityfor
managementof
environmentaland social
impactsof oil exploitation
in centraland local
administations,and civil
society
Definerole of local
communitiesand private
providers in service
delivery,particularlyfor
education.

SOCIAL
SECTORS
Formulate
appropriate
strategiesfor
efficientand
equitabledelivery Focuson underservedareas
systemsfor health and populationgroups
and education
FormulateSector
ExpenditureProgramsin
close consultationwith
stakeholders

Activitiesof Other Donors

IDA Instruments

Policydialogue
and donor
coordination

CapacityBuilding
for Oil Sector
Management
(FY00)

RuralDevelopmentProgramsin PetroleumProducingarea:
AFD,EU, Afl)B, IFAD.

Health Sector
Project(FY00);
EducationProject
(FY02)

Health
All donorsparticipatein sector-wideapproach
WHO: Sectorco-leadershipwithBank. Policy Dialogue,expert
assistance

SectoralPERs
Education
Donor coordinationto be reinforced

Supervisionof
ongoingprojects

Build up appropriate
monitoringsystemsto
measureimpact
HEALTH
Increase
availabilityand
access to health
services

Addresssevere shortageof
trainedhealthworkers

Policydialogue
and donor
coordination
SectoralPERs
Supervisionof
Healthand Safe

Health Sector
Project (FY00)

Health:Alldonors participatein sector-wideapproach (EU,
WHO,AFD).
EU: PolicyDialogueand Technical Assistancein sanitary
districts.
AfDB:Policy Dialogueand Investmentprogram.

__
OX

TABLE OF DONOR ACTIWITIES
CHAD
Key
Development

IDA Instruments

Strategy/Actions

Objectives

Activitiesof Other Donors

_____

BEAL (cont'd) Supportdevelopmentof
private/publicpartnerships
in servicedelivery

AFD:TechnicalAssistancein sanitazydistricts

Motherhoodand
Populationand
AIDSprojects

KfW:Socialmarketingof contraceptivesin contextof WB
AIDS and PopulationProject

Strengthenmanagement
capacityof Ministryof
Public Health
EDUCATION
Increaserelativeallocation Policy dialogue
Improvethe
and donor
qualityand access of primary educationm
coordination
sector
to prmary
education,
SectoralPERs
especiallyfor girls
Expandeducation
servicesbeyond 6
yearsof schoolig
selectively

Supervisionof
Establishframeworkfor
close collaborationbetween BasicEducation
Project
local communitiesand
publicsector.

EducationProject
(FY02)

AfDB: Sectorleadership.Full investmentprogram in
constructionof classrooms
EU: Classroomconstrution and rehabilitation,policy and
insttutional supporL
OPEP:Supportto SecondaryEducation
IDB: Classroomconstructionand trainingof engineecrs
FAC:Classroomconstructionand trainingof teachers.

Improvetrainingand
motivationof teachers
Streng management
capacityof Ministryof
Education

0

Key Development
Objectives

PRIVATE
SECTOR

GROWTH
Improve
Environmentfor
Private Sector
Growth

Strategy/Amlons

strum

1DA

.
Complete Privatization
Program

Streanlinepolicy
framevork

Policydi; a

0 her Der
OtherDons.

ts
I

ArCIV

DPY}

|MF

ea,
Spls.qsnhnP,
ad
Buiklingfor
Eoonomic
Managemet
credt

Improvedialoguewith
private sector

TRANSPORT
Investin a basic
backboneroad
networkpassable
year round

Implement99-03Transport
Expenditureprogram

Policydialogue,
Donor
coordination

Upgradeand pavethe most
Supervisionof
vulnerableroad sections
PST 2
Safeguardexistingroad
infrastructure

Setor
Tra?-soxt
Projec (FY01)

for
All donorspartcipate in sectorwide framework
futureinvestmentand maintenance.

SACIV

EU, KfV IslamiicDivtBank Afl)B, OPEPFund:
Road c3nstructionaad rehabilitation
AFPT:Airort Rehabilitation

Provideadequatefunding
for roadmaintenance
UTILITES

Improvecoverage
qualityand cost
efficiencyof
services,

Implementimproved
regulatoryframework

Telecomsaid
Postal Services
Project (FY00)

Completeprivatizationof
electricityand telecom
companies
Formulateinvestment
programm close
collaborationwithprivate
partners

France/AFD:Supportand TA to ElectricityCompany
STEE; Smallbusinessdevelopment;Market
development

ElectricityProject
(FY01)

Policydialogue,
aid coordination

.

1

AfDB:Technicaisupportto ElectricityCompany
STEE; Technicalsupportto Telecommunications
CompanyONPT

_

aQ>
'z0

o

TABLE OF DONOR ACTIVITIES
CHAD
Key Development
Objectives

Strategy/Actions

IDA Instruments

RURAL
DEVELOPMENT
Formulaterural
sector strategyand
action development
plan

CottonSector
Liberalization
Establisha participatory
processfor the formulation ESW
of ruraldevelopment
PER for Rural
strategy
Development

Developsoundanalytical
Liberalizecotton
base
sectorby
increasingrole of
producersand
privatesectorin its Supportdevelopmentof
farmer organizations
management.
Privatizenon-core
activitiesand initiate
privatizationof a cluster of
ginningfactories.

CapacityBuilding
for Petroleum
Sector(Community
DevelopmentFund
FY00)

Activitiesof Other Donors

Heavyinvolvementof donorsin localizedintegrated
rural development Coordinationis gradually
emergingespeciallywithFrance,EU, GTZ and IFAD

CooperationFrancaise/AFD: Integratedrural
developmentprojects,rural water over entire country,
Rural Infrastructure Livestocksupportproject; Cottonsectorsupport,
cottonfeederroads
Restructuringof Development
Project (FY02)
Agricultural
AfMB:Integratedrural developmentprojects ExtensionProject
Soudanianzone; rural water
Policydialogue
EU: Analyticalwork on RuralDevelopment;
and donor
InfrastructureDevelopmentand irrigationin CHARIcoordination
BARGUIMI,coumtrywide rural water program.
IFAD:Intregratedrural developmentOUADDAI
BILITlNEProject
IDB: Integratedrural developmentprojects
GTZ: OUADDAIBILTTNEProject- Supportto
Livestockdevelopment,MAYOKEBI Project-Supportto rural communities,credit,farmers
organizations.
KuwaitiFund: Rural Water.

o0e

TABLE OF DONOR ACTWITIES
CHAD
Key Development

Strategy/Actions

IDAInstruments

Activitiesof Other Donors

Objectives

ENVIRONMENT
Protect the
Mitigateenvironmental
Environmentin the impactsof the oil project.
frameworkof oil
exploitation
Establishcapacityfor
environmentalassessment
in line ministries,
Strengthen
particularlyin the transport
Capacityfor
and rural development
Naural Resource sectors.
Management
Involvelocal communities

PolicyDialogue,
NEAP
Supervisionof
Household
EnergyProject.

CapacityBuilding
for Petroleum
Sector(FY00)

AfDB: Project toprotectthe zone of Lake CHAD.

Third Transport
SectorProject
(FY01)
Rural Infrastructure
Development
Project(FY02)

in Natural Resource

Management.
Formulatea NEAP

-e
CDp

oa U

Annex E
Page 1 of 1

ANNEX E- Structural reforms, 1995-1998

Tax and trade
(i) continued implementation of tax, trade and tariff reform under sub-regional UDEAC
trade reform initiative
(ii) elimination of special tax advantages for large enterprises
Demobilization. Completion of demobilization, a multi-year program that halved the
size of the army from 52,000 in 1992 to 25,000 in 1998
Public expenditures
(i) census of civil service and elimination of 500 ghost workers
(ii) significant increase in allocation of public expenditures to recurrent budgets of
developmental ministries (education, health, transport, social affairs) and to investment
(counterpart funding)
Market reforms and privatization
(i) privatization of all banks completed
(ii) small and medium enterprise privatization on track (45 out of 50 enterprises
privatized or liquidated, and three large enterprises at an advanced stage of privatization
preparation.)
(iii) privatization of the sugar company, second largest PE, in progress
(iv) adoption of new regulatory frameworks in utility sector (power/telecom)
(v) privatization of urban electric and water utility reaching completion point
(vi) competition in telecom sector being put in place, through opening to cellular
operator, and privatization process engaged
(vii) new Labor Code adopted; Investment Charter in progress
(viii) regularization of State payments into Social Security system; audits of Social
Security agencies; reform working group in place
Sector policies
(i) road maintenance transferred to private companies
(ii) updating of National Health Policy; essential drug policy in place
(iii) Education: Substantial increase in enrollment rates.

IBRD25991
The boundaries, colors,
denominationsand any
other information shown
on this map do not
imply, on the part of
The World Bank Group,
any judgmenton the legal
status of any territory,
or aniy endorsement

20

15~

ar acceptonce of such
~~~~baundaries.

L

,

CHAD
Limits of Agro-Ecological Zones
Main Roads

r

!

Secondary Roads

--

20

Rivers

|

Prefecture Boundaries

BORKOU - ENNEDI - TIBESTI

International Boundaries

0
KILOMETERS

50

100

I

I

I

r

Mo LES

I

150

200

I _I-7

50

A

250

I

I

150

150

KANEM

5 -i

HAR9

fI

Z

'

BILTINE,f

/

~~~Ma
0

\

g-\_
> / 11

\

ssdkori

ENA

.1

f+

j

an

dau 0 C, 4

6

'Tikam

1

/Bitk

OUAEDAI
I,

.

'li

i\o

0 Goz-Beida

i
>

,

10~Bkar

ON

_'

,.

t

Massenya

\i

Baibaksa~

I
Mong

[r'~~~~~~~~~~~~
1,,,R

/

,4

-BAGURiM~~CHAI

NIRIA

4__<

BATHA

~~Moussoro

\

_

}>"

'

Irba

iltiner

-_\Nokou

.

CET71

,;r'i1

NLOO ='

G1.\o20
June 1994

