Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR OFFICIALUSE ONLY
Report No.: 21607 KZ

MEMORANDUMOF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONALBANK FOR RECONSTRUCTIONAND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE
INTERNATIONALFINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA
COUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE REPUBLICOF KAZAKHSTAN
January 16,2001
Central Asia Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization

LastCAS Discussion: August 26, 1997
[R97-190-1(IFC/R97-173)]
Currency Eauivalents
(Exchange Rate Effective December 4, 2000)
Currency Unit = tenge
I tenge = US$ 0.007
US$ 1.00 = 144.15 tenge
Weights and Measures
Metric system
Fiscal Year
January 1-December 31

IBRD
Vice President: Johannes Linn
Country Director: Kiyoshi Kodera
Task Team: Arup Banerji
Kristin Hallberg
Fred King
Rossana Polastri
K. Tanju Yurukoglu

IFC
Assaad J. Jabre
Khosrow Zamani
Gorton de Mond
Andrew Baldwin

FOR OFFICIALUSE ONLY
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AAA

-

Analytical and advisory activities

ADB

-

Asian Development Bank

APPAP

-

AgriculturalPost Privatization AssistanceProject

CAS
CEM

-

Country Assistance Strategy
Country Economic Memorandum

CIS

-

Commonwealthof Independent States

CPC

-

Caspian Pipeline Consortium

CPPR
CSAL
EBRD

-

Country Portfolio Performance Review
ConsolidationStructural AdjustmentLoan
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

EFF
EU
FBS
FDI

-

Extended Fund Facility
European Union
Family Budget Survey
Foreign direct investment

FEDL
FIAS

-

Finance and Enterprise DevelopmentLoan
Foreign Investment Advisory Service

FSU
FY

-

Forner Soviet Union
Fiscal year
Gross domestic product

-

Global Environmental Facility
InternationalBank for Reconstructionand Development
Institutional Development Facility
International Finance Corporation

IMF
IsDB

-

International Monetary Fund
Islamic Development Bank

JBIC
KLSS
MIGA

-

Japan Bank for International Cooperation
Kazakhstan Living Standards Survey
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

GDP
GEF
IBRD
IDF
IFC

NBK

-

National Bank of Kazakhstan

NGO
OED
OEG

-

Non-governmentalorganization
OperationsEvaluation Department
Operations Evaluation Group of IFC

PPP
PSA
PSD

-

Purchasing power parity
Private Sector Assessment
Private sector development

PSRMAL
SME

-

Public Sector Resource ManagementAdjustment Loan
Small- and medium-scaleenterprise
State-owned enterprise

SOE

-

SPRAL

-

Social Protection Reform AdjustmnentLoan

TA

-

Technical assistance

TAL II
TACIS

-

Second Technical Assistance Loan
Technical Assistance for the CIS (EU)

UK

-

United Kingdom

This documenthas a restricteddistributionand may be used by recipientsonly in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

Abbreviationsand Acronyms
UN
USAID

-

United Nations

-

United States Agency for International Development

VAT
WBI

-

Value-added tax
World Bank Institute

This Country Assistance Strategy was producedby a team that included Arup Banerji, Kristin
Hallberg, Fred King, Rossana Polastri, and K. Tanju Yurukoglu, with assistance from Zhanar
Abdildina, Roman Solodchenko,Andrew Baldwin, Anthony Gorman, Jariya Hoffman, Carolyn
Jungr, Emestina Madrona, Gorton de Mond, and Van Roy Southworth. Other members of the
Bank-wideKazakhstan Country Team also made valuable contributions throughoutthe process of
developing the strategy.

THE REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN: COUNTRYASSISTANCE STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVESUMMARY..............................................

I

I.

KAZAKHSTAN'SDEVELOPMENTCHALLENGES.1

II.

RECENTMACROECONOMICAND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS
A. External Shocks and Economic Growth
B. Poverty and Inequality

III.

.2

.2
.5

THE GOVERNMENT'S DEVELOPMENTSTRATEGY

.

.

IV. THE BANK GROUP STRATEGY..............................................
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
V.

Reformingthe Public Sector.............................................
StimulatingBroad-BasedPrivate Sector-Led Growth .............................................
Social Servicesand Social Protection .............................................
Protecting the Environment.............................................
Fiduciary Framework .............................................
Applying Lessons from the Previous CAS.............................................

MEDIUM-TERMPROSPECTS AND PROPOSED LENDING PROGRAM ..

7
9
10
14
19
20
21
22
24

A. MacroeconomicSimulations.25
B. Lending Program and Triggers.27
C. Non-Lending Services .30

D. Partnerships.31
E. Project Implementation.32
F. Performance Indicators.33
VI. RISK AND CREDITWORTHINESS..............................

34

ANNEXES
Annex 1: Kazakhstan at a Glance..................................................
36
Annex 2: Key Economic Indicators..................................................
38
Annex 3: Social Indicators................................................... ,,.,.,,,,.40
Annex 4: Bank Group Portfolio.
41
Annex 5: Status of Bank Group Operations..................................................
43
Annex 6: Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management..........................45
Annex 7: Country PortfolioPerformance Review 2000.................................................46
Annex 8: MacroeconomicSimulations 2001-2003.................................................. 49
Annex 9: Proposed IBRD Lending program, FY 2001-2003.........................................54
Annex 10: Non-LendingServices...................................................
55
Annex 11: Exposure Indicators...................................................
56
Annex 12: CAS Program Matrix 2000-2003
.........................................
57
Annex 13: Summary of Development Priorities
......................................
64
Annex 14: Private Sector Development Strategy
......................................
65
Annex 15: Poverty and Living Standards
...........................................
74
Annex 16: The Government's DevelopmentProgram
..................................
76
Annex 17: The CAS Consultation Process
..........................................
82
Annex 18: Partnerships..................................................
85
MAP (IBRD 29325)

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN:

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.
Kazakhstan was one of the leading reformers in Central Asia in the 1990s.
Nevertheless, growth in the non-extractive sectors has not yet taken off - partly because
many of the measures were taken too recently to yield results, and because stronger
reforms are needed to improve the environment for the entry and growth of private
enterprises. In fact, in some areas, the pace of structural reform has slowed down. The
privatization program for the large blue-chip companies has stalled, important fiscal
measures have been delayed, land and social sector reform has slowed down, and there
have been some reversals in trade policy with increased restrictions on exports of
petroleum and petroleum products.
2.
In addition, the economy remains vulnerable to external shocks. Oil and metals
account for about four-fifths of total exports, so that changes in international prices for
key export commodities significantly affect year-to-year economic performance.
Economic growth may be fueled even more by oil revenues in the near future, as the
completion of the Caspian Pipeline Consortium (CPC) oil pipeline will substantially
increase oil exports and therefore fiscal revenues. The recent discovery of large oil
reserves in the Caspian area raises the possibility of an oil boom late in this decade.
Appropriate management of oil revenues will become critical, and avoiding Dutch
Disease impacts on the non-oil economy will be a challenge.
3.
For the majority of the population, macroeconomic and structural reforms have
not yet translated into improved living standards. Real GDP in 1999 was only about 60
percent of its 1990 level, and real wages fell by over 75 percent between 1990 and 1997.
While Kazakhstan is better off in terms of absolute poverty than most of the other
countries in the former Soviet Union - only 6 percent of the population live on incomes
below US$2.15 per day (in 1996 Purchasing Power Parity value) - there is some
evidence that poverty has increased in recent years as a result of low rates of growth of
GDP and employment as well as the decline in real wages and continuing wage arrears.
4.
Thus, despite the prospects for oil-fueled growth in the future, Kazakhstan faces
two main challenges: avoiding the volatility inherent in commodity-led growth, through
careful management of oil revenues and promoting growth in non-extractive sectors; and
ensuring that growth is widely shared, thereby improving living standards for the
majority of the population and reducing poverty.
5.
Consistent with the Government's priorities, the overarching objective of the
Bank Group's Country Assistance Strategy is poverty reduction and the improvement of
living standards. Key inputs to the process of developing the CAS came from
discussions with clients and stakeholdersin Kazakhstan, the Bank's own analytical work,
lessons from the regional crisis, and diagnoses of the performance of the Bank's portfolio
in Kazakhstan. The strategy is also guided by the findings of a recent Country Assistance
i

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Evaluation that was prepared jointly by OED, OEG, and MIGA. The CAS focuses on
four main areas:
*

Reforming the public sector so that fiscal resources are managed in a transparent
manner, and public services are effectively and efficiently delivered to the people.
One of the primary impedimentsto growth in Kazakhstan is the lack of public sector
institutional capacity. At the same time, the Government is falling behind in its
central role as a provider of public services. The Bank Group's strategy for public
sector reform has two main objectives: to help the Government reduce public sector
constraints to private sector development -- including corruption -- and improve the

efficiency of public services. The strategy focuses on assisting the Government in (i)
fiscal stabilization,(ii) strengtheningtransparency and accountability, and (iii) putting
in place the institutional and administrative mechanisms to improve the quality of
public services.
* Promoting broad-based private sector-led growth to increase employment
opportunities and incomes across a broad segment of the population. Kazakhstan's
prospects for stable and widely-shared growth hinge on generating employment
opportunities and incomes in the non-extractive sectors. Efforts must concentrate on
(i) improving the business environment through an improved legal and regulatory
framework, a more friendly environment for the creation of new enterprises, and
reducing the high cost of setting up and doing business that affects SMEs in
particular; (ii) continuing the privatization agenda in an open and transparent manner
and restructuring or closing non-performing enterprises; and (iii) addressing the
problem of declining productivity in the farm sector. The assistance of the Bank,
IFC, and MIGA are all directed to foster a dynamic private sector, particularly in the
non-extractive sectors.
-

Supporting the most vulnerable through the enhancement of both temporary and
permanentprograms of income support for the poorest. While improvementsin living
standards are expectedto result from increased growth and employment, there is still
a need for targeted assistance to the poor. Central to this strategy is reform of the
social assistance system. Improving the targeting of interventions will be supported
by regular monitoring of poverty and living standards. The Bank would support
additional measures to improve social protection, including an efficient public works
program, reforms in the health and education sectors, rural roads, and improvements
in the delivery of municipal and industrial water supply and sanitation.

* Protecting the environment, to reduce the damage to the quality of life for current
and future generations. Despite Kazakhstan's wealth of natural resources,
environmental problems could limit the country's growth potential. Addressing
environmental degradation will require cleaning up contaminated rivers and water
sources, restoring marginal lands, and improving management practices for water and
sewerage. The Bank's strategy concentrates on addressing industrial pollution in the
Northeastern industrial area and the marginal agricultural lands.

ii

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy
6.
Transparency, accountability, and effectiveness in the management of public
financial resources are central to the CAS. Particularly in an environment of increasing
fiscal resources from the oil sector the Governmentneeds to pay more attentionto overall
public financial management and hold itself accountable for the use of public funds.
Consistent with the recommendations of a recent review of the Bank's fiduciary
arrangementsfor adjustment lending, the Bank will assist the Government in improving
its public financial management arrangements,reducing the risks that these arrangements
may pose to Bank programs and funds. In addition, to guide the allocation of public
resources and to improve project design, more attention will be paid to monitoring and
evaluating the development impact of interventions.
7.
To be most effective, the Bank's approach needs to be selective. The Bank will
focus its assistance on areas in which the motivation for reform is driven by the
Government,not the Bank, and where there is demonstrated commitment and consensus
for reform.
8.
The Bank Group's assistance strategy for FYO1-03depends on three critical sets
of issues:
3

The macroeconomic framework: the lending program is predicated upon an
appropriate macroeconomic environment. Transparency is required with respect to
the contribution of the oil sector to fiscal revenues -- to allow for due diligence in
fiscal analysis -- and with respect to the design and operation of the National Fund
(oil fund) to ensure the quality of expenditure and investment of oil-related revenues.
A sound macroeconomic framework would be evidenced by the satisfactory
completion of the IMF review of the current EFF. If the EFF is not in place,
satisfactory review of the macroeconomicframework under an IMF Staff Monitored
Program would be required.

* The reform agenda: the Government's commitment to a continuing agenda of
policy and institutional reforms. Bank Group support for some elements of the
reform program takes the form of investment operations, and for others - particularly
in social protection, public sector management reform, legal reform, and private
sector development - support is in the form of adjustmentlending.
*

9.

Financing needs: The amount of adjustment lending in particular will depend upon
fiscal needs, which in turn depend upon the price of oil and the fiscal impact of
reforms.
The Bank lending program has three possible cases:

* A low case would occur if policy and institutional reforms are delayed, and there is a
continuing lack of transparency in the management of oil revenues. In this case, the
Bank lending strategy would focus on a small number of carefully-targeted
investment and technical assistance operations to achieve poverty, governance, and
environmental objectives. Given the current status of structural reforms, the starting
point for the CAS is the low-case scenario.
iii

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

* A base case is predicated upon sound fiscal management and would respond to a
moderate pace of reform. The lending program would contain a social protection
adjustment loan in the first year of the CAS period, but in outer years would shift
from adjustment lending to investment and technical assistance loans.
* A high case would be pursued if the pace of structural reform is accelerated, and the
management of oil revenues is sound - i.e., the National Fund is cast in a mediumterm fiscal framework and is subject to public accountability. Predicated upon
financing needs, the high-lending strategy includes a mix of investment, technical
assistance, and adjustment loans supporting policy and institutional reforms across
several sectors.
10.
The level of IFC's investment operations and activities will be determined by
further strengthening of the macroeconomicframeworkas well as the extent to which the
country undertakes actions to reform the framework and environment for the private
sector activities, particularly for the developmentof SMEs.
11.
The operations of the Bank Group will be guided by analytical and advisory
activities - studies of cross-cutting policy issues, sectoral studies, and rapid-response
notes. The World Bank Institute's services will include in-country and regional seminars,
workshops,and conferences.
12.
Improved portfolio management will be essential to reach the objectives of the
CAS. To date, implementation of projects has been slowed by a lack of understanding of
Bank procurement and disbursement procedures and a lack of counterpart funds. The
Government and the Bank are determined to work together to improve project
implementation, and will improve the monitoring of projects by holding annual CPPRs
as well as semi-annual"mini-CPPRs".
Agenda for Discussion
13.

Board members may wish to consider the following questions:

* Are the strategic priorities outlined in the CAS appropriate?
* Does the proposed mix of operations (adjustment, investment, and technical
assistance) and non-lending services adequately address the policy and institutional
reform challenges facing Kazakhstan?
* Do the proposed lending scenarios appropriately reflect the strength of the reform
program and the need for Bank financing?

iv

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN

I.

KAZAKHSTAN'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

1.
Kazakhstan was one of the leading reformers in Central Asia in the 1990s. Over
the past five years, the Government has stabilized the macroeconomy, liberalized the
financial sector, comprehensively transformed the pension system and streamlined the
public sector. Prices have been liberalized so that, on the whole, economic agents
respond to market signals. Most small- and medium-scaleenterprises and farms are now
privately owned. Foreign investment per capita is high compared to the rest of the
region, although it has mainly been limited to the oil and gas sector. To most observers,
the process of market-oriented reform is now seen to be irreversible. Yet despite
impressivereforms, growth in the non-oil and non-mineralsectors has not yet taken off partly because many of the measures were taken too recently to yield results, and because
more reform is needed to improve the environmentfor the entry and growth of private
enterprises. In some areas, the pace of structural reform has slowed down - for example,
there have been delays in the privatization of blue chip companies, delays in important
fiscal measures, a slowdown in land and social sector reform, and reversals in trade
policy.
2.
Institutional reforms have lagged behind macroeconomicstabilization and policy
reforms. The institutions and legal framework necessary for a market economy to
function are not fully developed; governance and accountability issues in the public
sector hinder the efficient allocation of public resources; and corruption and a lack of
transparency raise the cost of doing business, constraining private sector development.
Implicit subsidies to enterprises as well as wage and pension arrears create an
environmentof "unpaid bills" that slows the process of transition.
3.
The economy remains vulnerable to external shocks. Oil and metals account for
about four-fifths of total exports, so that changes in international prices for key export
commodities significantly affect year-to-year economic performance. Ongoing oil
exploration and the opening of export routes is likely to increase the economy's
dependence on oil in the next several years. The completion of the CPC oil pipeline,
expected in end-2001, will substantiallyincrease oil exports and fiscal revenues, and the
recent discovery of large oil reserves in the Caspian area raises the possibility of an oil

1

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

boom late in this decade. Appropriate management of oil revenues will become critical,
and avoiding Dutch Disease effects on the non-oil economy will be a challenge.'
4.
Thus, despite the prospects for oil-fueled growth in the future, Kazakhstan faces
two main challenges: avoiding the volatility inherent in commodity-led growth, through
careful management of oil revenues and promoting growth in non-extractive sectors; and
ensuring that growth is widely shared, thereby improving living standards for the
majority of the population and reducing poverty.
II.

RECENT MACROECONOMICAND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS

A.

External Shocks and EconomicGrowth

5.
Since independence in 1991, Kazakhstan has made significant progress in
macroeconomic stabilization and economic reforms: price liberalization, a reduction in
trade distortions, privatization of small- and medium-scale enterprises, and the
introduction of a new tax code and bankruptcy law. However, the collapse of the Soviet
system had caused severe disruptions in input supplies and production, as well as major
fiscal imbalances due to the loss of budgetary transfers from the Soviet Union. As a
consequence, the initial years of transition were characterized by a persistent decline in
output and living standards. By 1995, output had dropped to about 60 percent of its 1990
level (Figure 1). Industry and agriculture declined even further - to 47 percent and 55
percent, respectively, of their 1990 levels - compensated by growth in the services sector.
6.
Modest growth was
recorded for the first time

Figure 1: Trendsin Rel GDP

during

100

percent and2
1.7 percent
respectively). The short-lived
recovery was interrupted in
1998: output fell by 1.9 percent
due to the impact of the Russian
financial crisis and a severe

70 -

\-

-

-

-

-'

E

drought that caused agricultural

output to fall by 19 percent in
real terms.
Growth was
restored in 1999 with the help

5040-

1996 and

1997 (0.5

110-

.
19901991 19921993 199419951996 19971998 19992000e
-

-

MDP-E0-AgricWtm

of higher oil prices, the
devaluationof the tenge, and a

--A- Industry 4-- Semcstrong

for

grain harvest. Prospects
2000 are even more

The Dutch Disease hypothesis is that a positive shock (boom) to an important primary product causes an
appreciation of the real exchangerate. This results in a movement of resources to the non-tradeable sector
and the boom sector, and away from tradeable manufacturingand agriculturalproducts. The exchange rate
shifts can cause problems in promoting competitive diversificationinto non-commoditysectors.
2 The previous CAS had expected a continuation in this trend, predicting real GDP growth of 4.6 percent
per year for 1998-2000.
2

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

positive: boosted by record high oil prices,the economyis expected to grow by 8 percent
in real terms. During the first nine months of 2000, industrial output increased by 15.5
percent in real terms, and agriculture by 5.5 percent.
7.
The shocks to growth in 1998-99 resulted in a fiscal crisis. In 1998, the overall
deficit reached 7.7 percent of GDP. Fiscal contraction was achieved in 1999 by slashing
expenditures, including social sector spending and public investment, and by
accumulatingarrears. Tax revenues in Kazakhstanremain low at 17.4 percent of GDP in
1999 (comparedto 22 percent in 1993). External public debt rose to 25.3 percent of GDP
in 1999from 17.9 percent of GDP in 1998, mostly due to the devaluation of the tenge.
TABLE 1: KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS
GDP growth

GDPper capita(US$) '
Oil Production (000 barrels per day)

1996
0.5
1,351
459

1997
2.0
1,446
517

1998
-1.9
1,469
518

1999
2.7
1,059
602

28.7
67.3
35.0
12.0

11.2
75.4
18.5
14.2

1.9
78.9
25.0
13.1

17.8
119.9
18.0
18.1

l
9.0l
142.5
14.0
28.0

PRICES
CPI (% change Dec-Dec)
Exchange Rate (tenge/US$, year avg.)
RefinancingRate (%, year-end)
Oil export price (US$ per barrel)
EXTERNAL SECTOR
Exports FOB (US$m)
o/w Oil exports (US$m)
Imports FOB (US$m)
Current Account Balance (% of GDP)2
External Debt (% of GDP)
NBK Foreign Exchange Reserves
(months of imports)
PUBLIC SECTOR
,OverallBalance (% GDP)
|OverallBalance exc. Privatization
revenue(% GDP)
1/ Includeseffectsof exchangerate changes.
2/ Includesunder-invoicingof oil exports.

__

2000p
8.0
1,031
676

6,292
1,257
6,617
-3.6
20.0
2.0

6,899
1,671
7,176
-3.6
28.6
2.3

5,871
1,650
6,672
-5.6
37.5
2.8

5,986
2,318
5,645
-1.1
47.4
3.4

_
8,981
4,256
6,602
4.1
43.6
2.5

-3.1
-5.3

-5.6
-8.9

-3.3
-7.7

-3.4
-5.2

3.9
1.2

8.
In 1999, the growing fiscal deficit and overvalued exchange rate caused delays in
reaching agreement on an economic program supported by the IMF, and in disbursement
of the Bank's adjustment loans. With capital markets also reluctant to lend, the 1999
cash deficit fell to 5.2 percent of GDP. The financing situation improved in late 1999

3

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

with a Eurobond issue of US$300 million, followed by another US$350 million in April
2000.3
9.
To address the fiscal imbalance, the Governmentembarked on a fiscal adjustment
program supported by the IMF. The program attemptsto lower the fiscal deficit until the
stock of public debt stabilizes (expected in 2002). During the first half of 2000, larger
than expected revenue collections (mainly due to high commodity prices) and low levels
of expenditures (around 40 percent of the initial budget allocation) contributed to a cash
budget surplus. However, this is a temporary improvement and does not reflect a
fumdamentalchange in the fiscal policy stance.
10.
The previously tight monetary policy was relaxed in early 2000 through a
reduction of reserve requirements and lending rates. From a high of 25 percent, the
refinancing rate fell to 14 percent by June 2000. Inflation has been kept under control as
higher tax revenues reduced the need for deficit financing, and the increase in
govermnent deposits in the NBK acted as a de facto sterilization of capital inflows. In
addition, the NBK has intervened in the foreign exchange market to counter upward
pressure on the tenge from higher oil exports. As a result, the tenge has remained stable
in nominal terms at about 142.5 per U.S. dollar since March 2000. In real terms,
however, the tenge has appreciated against the U.S. dollar by about 5 percent since early
2000.
Figure 2: GDP Growth and Oil Prices
-

GDP growth (left)

10%

-oil

price (right)
35

-

8%

3

60%
2%~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~2
0%~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~2

-2%

15
Russian
crisis-5

-4%

_

5

-6% 1996Q1

0
1997Q1

1998Q1

1999Q1

2000QI

3The 1999 placement came at a high premium-825 basis points over US five-year Treasuries, compared
with only 245 basis points prior to the Russian crisis, as Kazakhstan became the first country in the region
to tap the market after the 1998 crisis. The April 2000 placement, however, was at 500 basis points over
Treasuries, reflecting both a reduction of the market's uncertainty about emerging economies and improved
prospects for Kazakhstan due to the commodity boom and its own economic adjustment.

4

Kazakhstan. CountryAssistance Strategy
Figure3: PovertyIncidence
by Region,1996

i

250 20_--50

-0

-

*

- - -- --- -- --- --------- -------NaonalAverage

_

---

11.
Kazakhstan's economy is
highly dependent upon the export
of a few commodities, and thus
remains vulnerable to external
shocks.

Since

independence,

industrial production has become
iless
diversified, with the two

851

main export commodities - oil

and semi-processed metals
_0-

------

0

- --------

-_
South

East

West

The
Center

North

________________________-

-

dominating industrial production.

share of

resource-based

industries accounted for about 65
percent of industrial production in

1999and increased to an estimated 70 percent in 2000; more than half of this corresponds
to crude oil and derivativesproduction. As a result, fluctuationsin internationaloil prices
have a strong impact on economic growth (Figure 2).
B.

Poverty and Inequality

12.
For the majority of the population, macroeconomic and structural reforms have
not yet translated into improved living standards. Real wages fell by over 75 percent
between 1990and 19974,and per capita income (PPP) fell from $6,547 in 1989 to $4,372
in 1999. Average wages in 1998 ranged from US$50 per month for workers in
agriculture, forestry and fishery to US$180 for those employed in industry.5
13.
Kazakhstan is better off in terms of absolute poverty than most of the other
countries in the former Soviet Union. Only 6 percent of the population live on incomes
below US$2.15 (in 1996 PPP value) per day. The Bank's last Poverty Assessment found
that, in 1996, about a third of the population lived below a "subsistence minimum"
income.67 More striking is the regional dispersion of poverty (Figure 3). The northern
part of the country, which is more industrialized and better endowed with natural
resources, has a much lower poverty rate than the south - whose residents are, for the
most part, extremely poor. Rural poverty is more severe than poverty in urban areas.
(Box 1).
Although data are scarce, anecdotal evidence suggests that poverty has increased
14.
as a result of stagnant growth of GDP and employment as well as the decline in real
wages and increasing wage arrears. The problem is most evident in rural areas and in the
4ECA Labor Market Study. This measure puts Kazakhstan as the fifth worst among the former Soviet

countries in terms of real wage decreases.
These official figuresonly cover larger enterprises, and exclude payments in-kind on the one hand, while
obscuring delayed payments on the other.
6
Kazakhstan. Living Standards During the Transition. Report No. 17520-KZ,March 23, 1998. The
analysis was based on data from the Kazakhstan Living Standards Survey (KLSS), carried out in July 1996.
See Box 1.
7 This situation was better than that in Russia in 1995, but worse than in Ukraine. The depth of poverty,
however, while still better than in Russia, was comparable to that in Ukraine at the same time.
5

Kazakhstan: CountryAssistance Strategy
Box 1: Poverty, Living Standards and Gender in Kazakhstan
Analysis of the data from the 1996 KazakhstanLiving Standards Survey (KLSS) found that over
a third of the population lived below a "subsistence minimum". Poverty varied greatly by region,
with two out of three poor people living either in the south or the east of the country. Rural
poverty was more severe than poverty in urban areas.
The study did not find that female headed households were more likely to be poor, but some
indicators of female well-being,such as maternal mortalityrates have deteriorated. Female life
expectancy has also fallen in the last ten years, but less than that for males and male life
expectancy is more than ten years less than females. Anecdotalevidence has shown that while
gender-based discrimination in the formal labor market is not extensive, women may be
increasingly at risk of being excludedin access to credit and areas of public service delivery. At
the same time there is no evidence that girls school attendancerates are lower than boys.
While almost half the unemployed were poor, poverty was also marked among the selfemployed-demonstrating that in transitionalKazakhstan,employment itself was not a
guaranteedescape from poverty. As in other parts of the world, the poor are especially at risk of
receiving low levels of public services. A major factor affecting the quality of life for the poor in
Kazakhstanis the extensive environmentaldegradationin such areas as water supply that is its
legacy from the Soviet and early post-Sovietera.
A fundamentalproblem in accurately gauging the impact of recent socio-economicchanges on
poverty in Kazakhstanis the poor quality of availabledata. The Governmenthas committed itself
to implementinghousehold surveys on a regular basis and using them as input to its policy
decisions.
southern part of the country, as many farm workers lost their ownership shares in farm
restructurings and face the threat of unemployment as labor shedding accelerates. In both
rural and urban areas, services previously provided by enterprises - including electricity,
heat, health facilities, and kindergartens - are no longer reliably available.
15.
The provision of social services has also suffered from the fiscal constraints of the
post-independence years. However, the health sector has become more diversified and
decentralized, moving away from the Soviet system of centrally administered, hospitaldominated, and inefficient health care. Yet the transformation that is taking place is often
driven at the local level by fiscal constraints, rather than a coherent strategy coordinated
among oblasts. Morbidity indicators have worsened, and while infant mortality has
declined -- from 28 per thousand in 1993 to 22 per thousand by 1998-the prevalence of
diseases, including sexually transmitted diseases and tuberculosis, has risen.
16.
The well-developed, high-enrollment education system inherited by Kazakhstan
at independence is being challenged by the lack of funding and remaining inefficiencies.
Enrollment rates have declined, from 93 percent in basic education in 1990 to 89 percent
by 1997. Enrollment in secondary, vocational and technical education has also declined.
In higher education, however, enrollment has remained fairly steady, due to the rise of
The officialinfantmortalityfiguresare contestedby someinternationalagencies,whichquotefiguresup
to threetimesthatamount.
8

6

Kazakhstan: CountryAssistance Strategy
private providers of higher education. Access to education by the poor is, however, in
question, as the drop-off in public funds for education have been accompanied by a
corresponding rise of formal fees in higher education and the existence of informal
charges in some schools. At the same time, the poorest sections of the population have
not been protected effectively by social assistance. In 1999, as a result of the fiscal crisis,
in 1999 the social assistance system paid out only a fraction of what was budgeted.
III.

THE GOVERNMENT'S DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY

17.
Kazakhstan, like most former Soviet republics, has a political system dominated
by the president. President Nursultan Nazarbayev has been leading the country since
even before independence. The January 1999 presidential elections, won by the
incumbent, and the Parliamentary elections of fall 1999 were criticized by many outside
observers including the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, but they
have solidified the political landscape. With the Parliament and political process also
dominatedby the pro-presidentialFatherland, Agrarian and Civic parties, Kazakhstan has
a political consensus, at the highest levels, on economic liberalization and reforms. The
stability of the President and Parliamentis in sharp contrast to the frequent changes in the
Prime Minister and other cabinet officials in the Government. For example, in the last
three years there have been four ministers of finance. Almost all officials below the
national level are still appointed, but electionsof local officials are likely to be introduced
in the near future. The Government of Kazakhstan remains committed to building a
democratic system and has continued discussions on this topic with internal and external
critics.
18.
The Government's vision for the development of Kazakhstan, described in
Kazakhstan 2030-Prosperity, Security and Improvement of the Welfare of All
Kazakhstani People, is to "build an independent, prosperous and politically stable state
with its inherent national unity, social justice and economic welfare of all the
population." 9

19.

Key goals were set in seven areas:

* National security: to ensure the development of Kazakhstan as an independent and
sovereign state with the maintenanceof complete territorial integrity.
* Internal political stability and consolidationof society: to maintain and strengthen
the internal political stability and the national unity, enabling the country to achieve
its strategicgoals.
* Economic growth based on an open-market economy with high levels of foreign
investment and internal savings: to achieve higher and more sustainable economic
growth.

9The detailed development agenda of the Governmentis presented in Annex 16.
7

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy
* Health of the nation and citizen welfare: to improve the living standards, health,
education,and abilities of all Kazakhstanpeople, and to improve the environment.
* Energy resources: to efficiently use the country's energy resources through a rapid
increase in the extraction and export of oil and gas, in order to receive revenues
promoting sustainable economic growth.
*

Infrastructure,particularly transport and communications:to strengthen national
security, political stability, and economic growth.

* Professional government: to create an effective and present-day corps of committed
civil servants in Kazakhstan capable to act as representatives of the nation while
achievingpriority goals.
20.
The medium-term priorities are determined in the Program of Actions of the
Governmentfor 2000-2002. The main objective of the Government in the economicfield
is to ensure sustainable economic growth through careful management of the exchange
rate, inflation, and external and fiscal balances. The Program projects real GDP growth
of 3 percent per year, a decline in the inflation rate to 5 percent by 2002, and a reduction
of the fiscal deficit to 1.2 percent of GDP in 2002.
21.

To achieve these objectives the Governmentintends to:

* Maintain macroeconomicstability and strengthensustainable economic growth with a
tight monetary policy, restrained fiscal policy, and a floating exchange rate.
* Ensure dynamic development of the real sector of the economy with an emphasis on
agriculture,energy and infrastructure.
* Continue improving the investment climate of the country in order to increase direct
external and internal investment into the economy.
* Reduce poverty by improving the provision of health care and rendering of social
assistance.
* Pay close attention to improvingthe environmentalconditions in the country.
* Continue developing internal financial markets and capital markets for the
sustainabilityof the banking system of the country and expanded lending to economic
entities.
* Continue improving the public sector management system -- its transparency,
decentralization,and planning.
* Prudently manage public debt, including close monitoring and prioritization of the
public investment program.
8

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

22.
Despite agreement on this overall development strategy, there are some areas
where the Bank Group and the Government differ:
* In private sector development, the Bank Group feels that a key obstacle that deserves
more emphasisis the unfriendly business environment,particularly the high incidence
of corruption and the underdevelopedlegal and regulatory framework.
* While the Bank supports the Government'soverall plans for the reduction of poverty
and unemployment, it is concerned about implementation issues in targeting of social
assistance and in development of a public works program. Moreover, given the
regional disparities in poverty, increasing employment and development of rural areas
will be necessary.
* The Bank is also concerned about some of the Government's investment priorities,
particularly some large infrastructure investments such as a proposed refinery in
Atyrau. Many investments are associated with the development of the new capital of
Astana and are seen by the Bank as being of lower priority compared to improving
the investmentenvironmentin general and investmentin human capital in particular.
IV.

THE BANK GROUP STRATEGY

23.
The overarching objective of the Bank Group's Country Assistance Strategy is
poverty reduction and the improvement of living standards. (The proposed program of
lending and non-lending services are contained in Annexes 9 and 10, and highlighted
with underlining in the section below.) This section presents the issues and the Bank
Group strategyfor assisting the Governmentin each of four areas:
* Reforming the public sector so that fiscal resources are managed in a transparent
manner, and public services are delivered effectively and efficiently.
*

Promoting broad-based private sector-led growth to increase employment
opportunitiesand incomes across a broad segment of the population.

* Supporting the most vulnerable through the enhancement of both temporary and
permanentprograms of income support for the poorest.
* Protecting the environment, countering environmental damage that has a negative
impact on the quality of life of current and future generations.
24.
The current CAS period is a critical window of opportunity for the Bank to work
with the Government to support this reform agenda. The completion of the CPC pipeline
and the possibility of exploiting newly discovered oil reserves later in this decade create
opportunities for increased growth driven by the oil sector. However, there is also a risk
that the availability of increased oil revenues will slow the momentum of structural
reforms and make fiscal management more difficult. In addition, the possibility of Dutch
Disease effects of the oil boom may reduce the competitiveness of non-oil sectors. It will
9

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

be important for the Government to improve mechanisms for expenditure management
and financial accountability before increased revenues are available to be spent, and
continue to move on the reform agenda to ensure that barriers to investment and growth
in the non-extractive sectors are removed.
25.
The Bank's strategy recognizes that ownership of the policy and institutional
agenda - by both the Government and civil society - is critical for the success of
reforms.'0 Therefore the Bank will focus its assistance on areas in which the motivation
for reform is driven by the Government, not the Bank, and where there is demonstrated
commitment and consensus for reform. This implies that the Bank will be selective in
choosing specific reforms to support in the four main areas described above.
A.

Reforming the Public Sector

26.
The Bank Group's strategy for public sector reform has two main objectives: to
help the Government manage increased oil revenues in a transparent and efficient
manner, and to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of public services. These will
require efforts to address the root causes of corruption and lack of transparency;
continuing administrative and civil service reform; restoring fiscal stability through tax
reforms and expenditurerealignment; and increasing the efficiency of delivery of public
services -- health, education, water, and transportation -- to those who need them most.

Reforms are needed at both the national and local government levels.
27.
Resource management. Macro-fiscal stability is a precondition for private
sector growth, reduced poverty and improved living standards. Fiscal stabilization,
through an improved revenue system, is key to this effort. It is also important how fiscal
stability is achieved: it can be temporary and illusory if achieved through ad-hoc
measures. In the past, expenditures were often reduced in response to lower-thanexpected revenues and budget targets. In the future, the Government needs to implement
a more strategic fiscal policy. The Bank's recent Public Expenditure Review (FY00)
identified key areas to help move in this direction (Box 2).
28.
The Second Public Sector Resource ManagementAdjustment Loan (PSRMALII)
in FY02 and an associated Technical Assistance Loan (TAL II) would support the
Government's policies on intergovernmental fiscal reform and tax reform issues, civil
service reform, and budget management at local levels. A Financial Infrastructure Project
in FY03 will help consolidate the financial stability of the country, by helping the
creation of long-term financial instruments, while addressing the pressing issue of
housing construction through improved housing finance. Once the legal and regulatory
framework is put in place through this project to support private sector investment in the
housing finance market, IFC would support experienced sponsors that undertake to make
investments in this field. Finally, analytical work done in the recent Public Expenditure
Review will be followedby a Note on Revenues in FY01 that will examine issues related
to the management of oil revenues.
'° Key inputs to the process of developing the CAS came from discussions with stakeholders in
Kazakhstan. The participatory process followed in shaping the CAS is summarizedin Annex 17.

10

Kazakhstan: CountryAssistance Strategy

29.
Managing increased oil revenues. A key component of public resources will
come from the oil and gas sector. At the end of 1999, Kazakhstanhad proved oil
reserves of 8 billion barrels, including 6 billion in the Tengiz oil field. This compares
with 7 billion barrels in Azerbaijan,and 48.6 billion in Russia.' l A new discovery has
been made in the Kashagan structure in the Northern Caspian Sea. While it is too early to
determinethe size of the reserves, the structure itself is more than twice the size of
Tengiz, suggesting that this could result in a significantaddition to Kazakhstan's reserve
base.
30.
The Government, through the state-owned oil company Kazakhoil, owns about 30
percent of current production, with the balance in the hands of foreign investors. The oil
sector has attracted over 80 percent of cumulative foreign direct investment since 1993.
Investor ownership is a mixture of joint venture/equity ownership (e.g., Tengizchevroil)
and production sharing agreements (e.g., Karachaganak, and the Offshore Kazakhstan
International Oil Co., or OKIOC).
31.
Oil production in 2000 is projected to total about 34 million tons (Figure 4);
exports could exceed 27 million tons. Production and exports are forecast to increase to
77 million tons and 66 million tons, respectively, in 2010. The projected doubling of
Kazakhstan's production of crude oil and gas condensate implies that current proved
reserves could be depleted in 43 years.
32.
Currently, Kazakhstan transports crude oil for export through the Atyrau-Samara
link with connects to Russia's Transneft pipeline network. Capacity is about 10 million
tons per year, but is expected to increase to about 15 million tons per year. The Caspian
Pipeline Consortium (CPC) pipeline is expected to come on stream in mid-2001 and
provide 28 million tons of additional capacity to the Russian Black Sea port of
Novorossyisk. Phase 2 of the CPC, expectedby 2010, will increase capacity further to 67
million tons. Substantial volumes of crude oil have been exported by rail (more than 7
million tons in 1999). The start-up of CPC will cut the transportation costs associated
with these exports in half, from about $50 to $25 per ton.

Source: British Petroleum and Amoco,Gas and Oil Journal.
11

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Figure 4: Oil Production and Exports
45,0000

6,000 0

40,0000

5,00-0

35,000 0
4,00O0
30,000,0
3.000 0
25,000 0
2,000 0

15,0000

t 000.0

1994

t995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

projections
(ba cas)
UMVolume ofotl podcion i tons (left)

-Oil

e

Expons in millions of USS (right)

33.
The oil sector is becoming more dominant in the Kazakhstan economy, reflecting
the increasing share of oil revenues in both foreign exchange earnings and fiscal
revenues. During the first half of 2000, exports of crude oil and oil products accounted
for almost half of total merchandise exports, up from 40 percent before recent increases
in oil prices. Fiscal revenues from oil (corporate taxes, royalties, and bonus payments)
may have been as high as 6 percent of GDP in 2Q00(or about 26 percent of total fiscal
revenue), up from 1.7 percent of GDP before 1999. Even under conservative oil price
forecasts, the expansion of exports due to the CPC pipeline imply that oil-related fiscal
revenues will remain at over 5 percent of GDP for the next ten years.
34.
To ensure that higher oil revenues do not become a mixed blessing for the
economy, the government faces several challenges. The first is to avoid the Dutch
disease syndrome: a loss of competitiveness of the non-oil sectors resulting from real
exchange rate appreciation. The second is to stabilize the impact of volatile oil prices on
fiscal revenues. And finally, recognizing that oil is a stock natural resource, the
government may choose to save part of the revenues from oil for future generations.
35.
The Government has prepared a draft decree creating a National Fund for oilrelated revenues. In this current proposal, the objectives of the Fund are to ensure
sustainable social and economic development,reduce the negative impact of oil revenues
on the domestic economy, and provide for the welfare of future generations. It is not yet
clear what rules will govern the transfer of fund resources to the budget, and how
spending priorities will be chosen. The National Fund would receive all or a portion of
oil-related revenues and would transfer some of those funds to the budget for
expenditure. The central bank is responsiblefor managing the assets of this fund.
36.
It is important that the National Fund be designed and operated in a transparent
way - i.e., that expenditures are subject to the budgetary process, cast in a medium-term
fiscal framework, and subject to public accountability. In addition, accurate fiscal
analysis and macroeconomic monitoring require transparency with respect to the
12

Kazakhstan: CountryAssistance Strategy
Review
Box 2: PublicExpenditure
The recent Public Expenditure Review for Kazakhstan' identifies five priority areas for
fiscal and institutional reform:
Fiscal sustainabilitv and resource mobilization: The management of domestic resource
mobilization remains inefficient. Reforms should be geared towards achieving fiscal
sustainability by enhancing domestic resource mobilization without discriminating against
domestic savings, capital accumulation,and the developmentof non-oil sectors. Among the
policy options suggested are: focus on fiscal deficit reduction to stabilize the public debt to
GDP ratio at the current level; complete the implementationof ongoing structural reforms,
such as large scale privatization, public employment and wage reform, and financial sector
reform; adopt and implement a new Tax Code; and establish an independent and accountable
oil stabilizationfund.
Role of Governmentand spending priorities:The involvementof the state in the economy is
still sizeable. The public sector share of the wage bill is large, and public debt is rising at a
fast pace. At the same time, capital investment and maintenanceoutlays are low, and social
expenditures are unstable. Reforms in this area should focus government intervention in few
areas of market failure and social equity.
Expendituremanagement: Both the formulation and execution of public expenditure suffer
from serious weaknesses: lack of coordination and clear definitions of functions; lack of
budget transparency; the accumulation of arrears, soft loans, and tax offsets; and lack of
accountability. Reforms calls for a new budgeting approach based on program outcomes,
multiyearbudgeting, and performanceevaluation.
Fiscal decentralization: The system of intergovernmental relations lacks formal central
coordination, and the tax sharing system is inefficient. Fiscal decentralization should
proceed by extending the scope of decentralization, but enhancing central control and
coordination of the process; clearly specifying funded mandates, increasing managers'
autonomy to perform, and making local authorities accountable for results; and adjusting tax
sharing and transfer mechanisms.
Social sector expenditures: Disparity in per capita social expenditure across regions in
Kazakhstan is a reflection of the inverse correlation between local fiscal capacity and social
needs. These disparities are felt on social assistance, healthcare, and education sectors.
Reforms should aim at increasing the efficiency of spending and the quality of service
delivery and access, while compensatingfor regional inequalities.
"Kazakhstan:PublicExpenditureReview."ReportNo:20489-KZ,June27,2000.
contribution of the oil sector to fiscal revenues. Both the Bank and the IMF have
underscored the importance of these transparency issues for sound fiscal analysis and
offered assistance to the Government in this area.
37.
Transparency and accountability. The Government has begun to take measures
to improve performance, transparency, and accountability of the public sector - including
reforms in auditing, procurement, and civil service. PSRMAL II will build on PSRMAL
I to support the Government's efforts to provide the checks and balances, institutional
13

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

restraints, and accountability that constitute the central pillars of good governance. A
Governance and Service Delivery Survey, requested by the Government for FY01, will
(i) identify the main areas and causes of corruption; (ii) recommend public
sector/governance reforms to address more directly the underlying causes of corruption;
and (iii) identify ways to broadenthe participation of civil society and other stakeholders.
These measures would complement other actions-preventive, educative, and
enforcement-oriented-aimed at addressing the phenomenon of high-level corruption.
These include the declaration of assets and incomes of civil servants to the tax
authorities. The adoption of these reforms would be supported by the second tranche of
PSRMAL II and by the proposed Consolidation Structural Adjustment Loan (CSAL) in
FY03. The TAL II would also support a follow-up survey to gauge progress made under
the first round of reforms. A public sector Financial Accountability Assessment will also
be included in the Bank's analyticalwork program in early FY02.
38.
Institutional and administrative mechanisms. The Government is moving
public expenditures away from non-priority areas and towards investment in
infrastructure and social assistance, informed by the findings of the PER and supported
by the proposed Social Protection Reform Adjustment Loan (SPRAL) in FY01. Such
budget reforms, including intergovernmental finance reforms, will also be supported by
PSRMAL II. PSRMAL II will also support the continuing agenda of civil service reform,
including institutional reform at the local level, to improve the efficiency of the public
sector and to decrease waste and fraud. Moreover, it will support the extension of
administrative reorganization and realignment to local levels, and the strengthening of
resource management institutions, such as audit and procurement. The TAL II and
possible IDF grants will help finance the investment in institutional and human resources
needed for these reforms.
B.

StimulatingBroad-BasedPrivate Sector-LedGrowth

39.
Kazakhstan's prospects for stable and widely-shared growth hinge on generating
employment opportunities and incomes in the non-extractive sectors, even as the
potential Dutch Disease effects of increased oil exports make this objective more difficult
to achieve. Efforts must concentrate on continuing the privatization agenda and
restructuring or closing non-performing enterprises; improving the business environment
to encourage the entry and growth of efficient enterprises; promoting agricultural growth
and rural development; upgrading infrastructure through focused public investment;
improving access to financing; and fostering a flexible labor market.
40.
Privatizationand restructuring. The private sector accounts for 60 percent of
GDP, a share that about average for the region, but considerably smaller than that in the
Baltics or Central Europe.12 The privatization of small- and medium-scale enterprises
(SMEs) and farms is nearly complete, but about 100 large and 260 medium enterprises
remain under public ownership. In addition, the State has minority holdings in about
2,000 enterprises, is the most important shareholder among large transport, oil and gas
sector firms, and maintains considerable control in the industrial sector through
shareholdingin joint ventures with foreigner investors.
12EBRD Transition Report 2000.

14

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

41.
The pace of privatization has slowed, due to a lack of political will and effective
bankruptcy mechanisms, corporate governance issues, and the availability of other
sources of budgetary expenditurefinancing. The slow progress in privatization of larger
enterprises has come at a cost to the economy and to society, since many of the large
state-owned firms are inefficient. While their assets are deteriorating, these enterprises
survive only by building up large arrears to their workers, creditors, and suppliers. The
privatization of "blue-chip" enterprises is likely to begin in 2001 as the environment for
foreign investment improves. Shares in Kazakhtelekom, electricity generation
companies, regional power distribution companies and other large and medium-sized
enterprises (mainly in the extractive sector) are planned for full or partial privatization.13
However, finding good strategic investors for these companies has been a challenge due
in large measure to the non-transparent privatization process, the absence of a good legal
and regulatory framework, and the hostile private sector environment. An improved
business environment and a more transparent privatization process should lead to more
IFC investment activity in projects outside the extractive industries, either through direct
lendingor credit lines through financial intermediaries.
42.
Although privatization of SMEs is more advanced, in many cases this has not led
to improved corporate governance, efficiency, and growth - a likely cause of the lack of
supply response to liberalization. Many enterprises sold under the mass privatization
programremain without a majority owner, and investment funds have been ineffective in
consolidating ownership and forcing improved efficiency on such firms. The need for
effective corporate control and monitoring of management is acute.
43.
The Bank will assist the Governmentin designing and implementinga program to
manage state assets: a program for restructuring and privatization of Blue Chip
companies, sales of residual State shares, a program of divestiture of other large
enterprises, and accelerated sale of municipally-owned companies. Through the CSAL
and the TAL II, the Bank will support these reforms and help the Government devise
guidelines on the necessary sector restructuring and an appropriateregulatory framework.
These operations will also support measures to improve corporate governance and
facilitate the creation of an effective framework for bankruptcy and liquidation of nonviable enterprises. They will also provide support for the development of transparent
procedures for the sale of SOE's as well as the remaining Government interest in
enterprises which have undergone partial privatization. If these reforms succeed in
improving the institutional mechanisms governing Kazakhstan's market, there would be
scope for increased IFC and MIGA operations involving loans to larger enterprises.
44.
Business environment. New start-up companies, especially SMEs, have been
constrained by an unfriendly business environment arising from corruption, weak legal
enforcement, and high transactions costs. Pervasive licensing requirements and
regulatory practices increase immensely the cost of doing business and provide
opportunities for corruption. Licensing procedures are often complicated and involve
3 It was recently announced that the EBRD is planning to acquire a 30-percent stake in Kazakhtelecom-15 percent from Kazakhstan's largest bank, Kazkommertsbank,and 15 percent from the Government's
share. As a result, the Government's stake will fall from 50 percent to 35 percent.
15

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

several state authorities. In many cases, the legislative framework for licensing has not
been followed up by promulgation of relevant implementing regulations. Where such
regulations exist, lack of disseminationenhances opportunities for corruption.
45.
Licenses and the associated complexity of procedures also add greatly to
transactions costs, and a weak real estate system in many regions has led to high formal
and informal costs of acquiring premises for operating businesses. Moreover, the
application of the existing legal and regulatory framework is sporadic, with even the
administration and implementation of adopted legislation (including those for taxation)
depending greatly on the regional governors' attitude toward individual entrepreneurs.
While the key pieces of legislation needed in a market economy are in place and conform
with international standards, enforcement has been uneven because of the weak courts.
The quality of governance in Kazakhstan, as measured by EBRD indicators, is lower than
the region as a whole, and considerably lower than that in C'entralEurope and the Baltics.
46.
The Government is making progress in reducing excessive and overlapping
licensing requirements to ensure greater transparency and accountability. A Justice
Ministry review of 6000 state enterprisesto identify and remove the remaining regulatory
functions, both at the republican and local levels, has been completed and 284 entities
that have regulatory functions have been identified. A new labor law was approved in
late-1999 and came into effect in 2000. Judicial review of bankruptcy, leasing, and
collateral laws has been completed, but only the new leasing law has been approved by
parliament.
47.
The Bank Group will assist the Government in its efforts to improve the business
environment through an improved legal and regulatory framework, a more friendly
environment for the creation of new enterprises, and reducing the high cost of doing
businessthat affects SMEs in particular.'4 In FY98, the IBRD, IFC, and FIAS carried out
a joint assessment of the policy environment and constraints to private sector
development in Kazakhstan. The document has provided valuable background for the
Bank's dialogue with the Government on business environment issues. In the future, the
Bank will work with the Government to diagnose remaining impediments to private
sector activity through a series of studies, beginning with the Growth Strategy Study and
a Governanceand Service Delivery Survey, both in FY01. Some elements of the reform
package to remove these impediments-de-licensing, reduced interference from civil
servants, improving transparency in public procurement and reducing other public sector
impediments-will be supported PSRMAL II and TAL II. A second group of reforms,
pertaining more directly to the private sector environment--for example, financial sector
issues, the regulatory framework, and leasing laws-would be supported by the CSAL.
The Bank will work in partnership with the EBRD, USAID, and TASCIS in this area.
48.
In the mining sector, which has suffered from the legacy of non-transparency in
early privatization efforts, the Bank will prepare a Mining Sector Note in FY01 to
provide recommendations on improving the investment climate. The IFC and MIGA will
also examine potential operations in the mining sector and will continue their support of
selectedinvestments in the oil and gas sector both upstream and downstream.
14 See Annex 14 for a more detailed description of the PSD strategy.

16

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

49.
Assistance to SMEs is most efficiently channeled through local financial
intermediaries. IFC has taken a leading role in the area of institution building in the
financial sector and this activity will continue during the next three years. It is expected
that IFC will provide investment and technical assistance to additional local banks in
order to strengthen their financial position and develop their management and lending
capacity to service SME borrowers. In addition, IFC will work to develop new
institutions and financial vehicles, such as leasing and equity funds, to open additional
opportunities for access to investment capital by SMEs. In the agricultural sector, the
Second Agricultural Post Privatization Assistance Project (APPAP II) in FY03 supports
financial services for rural enterprises.
50.
The IFC will continue its ongoing activities in the SME sector, attempting to
alleviate the financial constraints faced by SMEs. Through a planned new SME project
facility, it will also provide technical assistance to SMEs to develop their business plans,
establish local consulting and training capacities, support overall Bank efforts aimed at
bringing about improvements in the business environment, support new information and
technology initiatives of relevance to SMEs, and attempt to forge linkages between SMEs
and large enterprises. Related to this, the Bank Group will discuss with the Government
the possibility of grant-financed programs that help in the diffusion of information and
technology and upgrading of technical and managerial skills.
51.
Thus, IFC's investment program is likely to include one to two loans annually to
banks for on-lending to SMEs and the private sector, direct investment in additional
financial institutions, possible investments in leasing, an equity fund, and housing
finance, as well as one to two loans annually to medium/largesized projects in the private
sector, primarily in extractive sectors. As the legal and regulatory framework is
developed and reputable strategic investors express a desire to invest, IFC would also be
willing to support infrastructure projects, primarily those in telecommunications and
power. The IBRD will also consider activities to follow up on its KEGOC electrical
transmissionproject.
52.
MIGA's on-line information services, IPAnet and PrivatizationLink. feature
information on the investment climate and investment opportunities arising from the
national privatizationprogram in Kazakhstan. MIGA has also partnered with the OECD
and other donor agencies through the Private Sector Development Center in Istanbul to
provide training in investment promotion strategies and techniques to Central Asian
Republics. The key focus has been on attracting investment in mining and tourism and
the use of informationtechnology for effective research and outreach.
53.
Finally, the Bank Group will developthe Global Development GatewayProject to
increase access in emerging economies to knowledge and information, bringing these
economies into the world market and spurring economic growth. Kazakhstan is one of
15 pilot countries selected to participate in this initiative.
54.
Agriculture and rural poverty. At independence, Kazakhstan inherited a stateowned farm sector characterized by large rain-fed grain farms in the north and smaller,
largely irrigated, mixed farms in the south. Since then, the Government has launched
17

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

successivereforms in the sector-price and trade reform, privatization of farms and agrobusiness, and the creation of land markets based on fully tradable long-term leasesaimed at halting uneconomical farming and improving productivity and corporate
governance on the remaining farms. All too often, however, privatization was nontransparent and led to poor corporate governance and declining productivity, exacerbated
by a lack of hard budget constraints.
55.
During the past two years, the Government has imposed hard budget constraints
on farm enterprises by reducing subsidies and eliminating directed credit programs, and
has strengthened the management of the Ministry of Agriculture. It has also supported
financial restructuring through bankruptcy proceedings for non-viable farms and the take
over of badly managed, though potentially viable, farms by creditors or strategic
investors. The results of these initiatives are encouraging. The retreat from marginal
areas is nearing completion, corporate governance is improving, there are signs of
renewed investment in the sector (especially in the north), and there is hope that last
year's yield increases signal the beginning of agricultural recovery.
56.
A significantreform agenda remains, with the greatest challenges in the northern
marginal lands and the irrigated southern farms. Land reform needs to be completed by
converting remaining certificates of entitlement to land into actual land titles. The
availability of farm credit, a key constraint especially for the smaller farms, must be
increased. For both the northern and southern farms, efficiency and profitability must be
improved by improving agricultural services (extension, marketing, and research). In
addition, the overall policy framework encouraging hard budget constraints and
aggressiveuse of bankruptcy needs to be maintained.
57.
The Bank's strategy focuses on addressing the problem of declining productivity
in the farm sector. The first phase of the Agricultural Post Privatization Assistance
Project (APPAP I) supported the development of rural advisory services and financial
services for rural enterprises through commercial banks in Almaty (a smallholder area)
and Akmola (large farm) oblasts. The second phase of the project (APPAP II) will
expand program activities to additional oblasts, including oblasts in poorer areas. The
project also promotes the use of recently promulgated legislation on bankruptcy and
registrationof liens on moveable property, especially important in the North. Additional
interventions in the second phase will focus on broadened support for development of
rural financial markets, including equipment leasing-an approach where the IFC also
has an interest-and microfinance, which will be particularly important for smallholders
in the south.
58.
In addition, an Agricultural Services Project in FY03 will assist in delineating
public and private sector roles in the provision of services to farms and provide targeted
investment in infrastructureand training to demonstrate delivery of services to clients in
the areas of farm production and marketing. Although the Project will be national in
scale, it will provide support for selected agricultural services, the focus of which will
differ from region to region according to differences in farming systems. A pilot
Drylands Ecosystem Management Project, to be supported through a Global
Environmental Facility (GEF) grant, would seek to restore marginal dry lands to natural
vegetation and seek more sustainable uses of such lands. A proposed Rural Roads
18

Kazakhstan: CountryAssistance Strategy
Project in FY03 would lower marketing costs in rural areas. Land registration is a critical
element in Kazakhstan's land reform program, and will be supported by a Real Estate
Registration Roll-Out Proiect in FY02, following the Real Estate Pilot Project initiated
during the previous CAS period. It will build on the lessons of the pilot, and aim to
improve the quality of services provided to clients. There is an on-going Irrigation and
Drainage Improvement Project and the Syr Darya and North Aral Sea Project in FY01
which would improve irrigation and water control along the river. In order to assist the
farm sector to increase yields and thus profitability, IFC will examine the possibility of
establishing a model leasing project which would provide farmers with access to
financing for needed farm machinery and equipment.
59.
The work on this extensive program aimed towards restoring agricultural viability
and growth will be supported by analytical work, including (i) the completion of an
examination of the marketing infrastructure for grain; (ii) inclusion of Kazakhstan in a
Regional Study of Farm Debt; and (iii) an analysis of the efficiency of the various farm
structures emerging from the Government's farm restructuring as part of the Growth
Strategy Study. A Livestock Study in FY03 will examinethe possibilities for growth and
development of the livestock industry in Kazakhstan on marginal farming lands.
C.

Social Services and Social Protection

60.
While improvement in living standards is expected from increased growth and
employment opportunities, there is still a need for targeted assistance to the poor. A key
objective of the social assistance strategy is improving targeting so that transfers reach
the poorest. Given the regional dimensions of poverty, attention should be focused the
poorer regions of the country. For the working poor, whose jobs in unrestructured
enterprises or self-employment are unable to provide them with support, "workfare"
programs could provide subsistence incomes until economic growth offers better
opportunities.
61.
Reform of the social protection system. The PER and other studies have found
that the poorest do not receive the largest share of transfers, and social assistance
payments are often not made due to fiscal constraints at the local level. The Government
and the Bank have been developing a set of policies and reforms to improve social
protection of the poor for over a year. It would be supported by the SPRAL to help offset
the increased costs of the reforms. The SPRAL's objectiveswould include (i) developing
policies to provide the population with an adequately funded and well-targeted safety net;
(ii) ensuring that budgets for social assistance are adequate, are not transferred to other
uses, and account for regional differences in poverty; (iii) developing self-targeting
public works programs; (iv) improving both the efficiency and equity of social assistance
administration ; (v) instituting a comprehensive labor market policy that will increase
labor market flexibility; (vi) developing policies towards the private sector to facilitate
and rationalize business licensing and registration procedures; and (vii) developing
Government's capacity to monitor and evaluate poverty data, trends in household income
and consumption, labor market trends and efficiency and effectiveness of the
Government's social policies. In addition, PSRMAL II will support reforms to improve
the administrative structureto deliver social assistance.
19

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

62.
Access to markets and jobs. To help the working poor through the process of
transition, the SPRAL would support an efficient public works program to provide
employment opportunities at minimum wages. The Rural Roads Project aims to increase
the access of the poor to employment opportunities,education, and health care, as well as
market access for buyers and sellers of agricultural products. The Poverty Assessment
and Labor Market Study in FY02 will also investigate the labor market opportunities
available for the poorest, and propose options for reform. The Livestock Study will
examine options for the improved living standards of the poor in some of the most
depressed areas. A proposed IDF Grant on the Silk Road in FY01 will attempt to
stimulate economic activity in economicallydepressed communities.
63.
Health and education. The inefficient post-Soviet social structures will need to
be reformed so that critical services are deliveredto the poor. In the education sector, the
lead has been taken by the Asian DevelopmentBank, which currently plans a follow-up
lending operation in the sector. In the health sector, the ongoing first-phase Health
Project focuses on two pilot oblasts and addresses problems of under-funding and
inefficiencies. The project promotes better use of resources, supports health promotion
activities, strengthens the primary health care system, improves information systems,
provides training in new treatment protocols, improves clinical capability for general
practitioners,and upgrades practitioner skills. The second phase of the project (Health II),
planned for FY04, would extend reforms in health financing, primary health care, and
hospital restructuring to the cities of Astana and Almaty and six other oblasts. The
Poverty Assessment and Labor Market Study will also examine the central issue of
access to social services by the poor.
64.
Water supply and wastewater services. Currently, water systems fail to deliver
servicesto those who need it because of poor institutional capacity, inefficient operations
of plants and networks, severe financial shortfalls due to low tariffs and collection rates,
undersized and unfinished wastewater treatment facilities, and limited access to
investment financing. The Northeast Vodokanal Proiect in FY02 will support reforms to
improve services by creating better performing institutions, putting the sector on a
financially viable footing, and ensuring cost effective utilization of the scare financial
resources available. Safety net arrangementswill be developed to allow the poor to pay
for water and waste disposal. Concurrently, a Water Sector Strategy Note in FY02 will
examine this critical issue by identifying needs for reform and investment across the
nation.
65.
Gender issues. Gender issues will be explored in the Poverty Assessment and
Labor Market Study and a proposed IDF Grant on Gender and Violence in FY01.
Participatory workshops may be used to identify gender issues and integrate a gender
perspectiveinto the Bank's policy dialogue with the Government.

D.

Protecting the Environment

66.
Despite Kazakhstan's wealth of natural resources, environmental problems could
limit the country's growth potential. Addressing environmental degradation will require
20

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

cleaning up contaminated rivers and water sources, restoring marginal lands, and
improved management of water use and sewage practices. The Bank's strategy initially
concentrates on addressing industrial pollution in the Northeastern industrial area and the
marginal agricultural lands.
67.
Industrial pollution in the Northeast. The Nura River Cleanup Project in FY02
will address the issue of mercury contamination of the river. Other outstanding issues,
which will be tackled by bilateral and multilateralpartners, include mercury and kerosene
contamninationof the river Irtysh.
68.
Pollution in the Northern Caspian Sea. The fragile ecosystem of the area is
suffering from oil spills and the encroachment of the Sea into numerous abandoned oil
fields. This poses a threat to marine life, especially the sturgeon, for which it is the only
remaining spawning ground. Technical assistance from TACIS, USAID, the GEF, and
others in the areas of bio-monitoring, development of hatcheries, etc. will continue to
play a critical role in addressing these issues.
69.
Water shortages and water pollution in the South are caused by inefficient
irrigation and livestock practices as well as run-off of non-treated waste water from cities,
as well as a lack of coordination of water sector activities in the region. An acute water
shortage, contaminationof the Syr Darya River, and an acceleration of desertificationare
occurring in the Southern regions. These are likely to increase the tradeoff between
potable water for human consumption on the one hand, and irrigation, livestock, and
agricultural production on the other. The Syr Darya and North Aral Sea Project, which is
part of the transnational effort for the Aral Sea basin, is the Bank's primary new
instrument in this region. The Bank will also look for other ways to improve regional
coordinationin water and energy issues.
70.
Restoring marginal lands. In the marginal lands which are being taken out of
cultivation, reclaiming and restoring the lands will provide for a better ecosystem and
livelihood opportunities. The Drylands Ecosystem Management Project will pilot an
effort, with GEF funds, to support the Government's policy to restore marginal dry lands
that are agriculturallyunsustainable back to natural vegetation and seek more sustainable
uses of such lands.
E.

Fiduciary Framework

71.
Assisting the Government to strengthen transparency, accountability, and
effectiveness in the management of public financial resources is a central objective of the
CAS. In an environment of increasing fiscal resources from the oil sector there is an
increased urgency to improve overall public financial management and accountable for
the use of public funds.
72.
Consistent with the recommendations of a recent review of the Bank's fiduciary
arrangementsfor adjustment lending, 15measures have been and will be taken to improve

5 "Fiduciary Framework for Adjustment Lending", OCS /PREM draft, September 13, 2000.

21

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

the Bank's dialogue on the Government's public financial management arrangements.
These include:
* The recently completed Public Expenditure Review (see Box 2), which identified
priorities for reform in the management of public expenditure. This report is now
being widely disseminated in the country and while still very recent, it has already
had an impact on the budgetary process, e.g., encouraging the move to a medium term
framework. It also has provided insights on the role and operation of a National Oil
Fund and helped the Government in their work on reforming the financial relations
between the central and local governments.
* PSRMAL I, a Country Procurement Review (FY00), and an IDF Grant on
Procurement (FY00) all contributed to recent improvements in the procurement law
and the establishment of a State Procurement Agency. It is estimated that improved
procurement practices saved the Government almost 5 billion tenge in 1999, about 5
percent of the total value of contracts passing through the agency.
-

A Financial ManagementAssessment (FY98) has contributedto strengthening of the
supremeaudit authority in the country.

*

The proposed public sector reform loan (PSRMAL II and/or TAL II) in FY02 will
support further reforms in public administration and civil service, public expenditure
management, accountingand internal/external audits, and tax and customs policy and
administration. In addition, in FY01 an evaluation of the auditing capacity of local
accountingfirms will be carried out using Rapid Response funds.

* The Governance and Service Delivery Survey planned for FY01 will propose public
sector governance reforms to address corruptionissues.
* A Financial Accountability Assessmentin early FY02 is intended to be a complement
to the Public ExpenditureReview.
73.
In addition, the Bank will place more emphasis on monitoring and evaluating
development impact, particularly with respect to poverty and inequality, by strengthening
M&E components in individual projects and building institutional capacity to conduct
ongoing impact evaluations. The SPRAL provides for the establishment of periodic
household surveys to monitor poverty and inequality; PSRMAL II will support collection
of governance indicators, and it is expected that the CSAL will include measures to
evaluate improvementsin the business environmentand enterprise performance.
F.

Applying Lessons from the Previous CAS

74.
The CAS is guided by the findings of a recent Country Assistance Evaluation that
was preparedjointly by OED, OEG, and MIGA (Box 3). Looking at the period since the
last CAS, performance has been mixed. Lending targets were met in the early years, but
by the end of the CAS period lending slowed significantly as a result of changed
circumstances, fiscal difficulties, and policy differences. In some cases, reforms have
22

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

moved more quickly than the Bank anticipated, making components of projects obsolete
and leading to restructuring. Project implementation often has been slow. The
importance of economic and sector work was recognized in both the previous CAS and
the CAE, but the quantity and depth of the Bank's ESW has been limited by tight budget
constraints.
75.
One of the key lessons learned from the previous CAS period is the need to
ensure sustained ownership in the Bank financed projects in an environment where the
changes in the government personnel are very often. First, it is critical that the projects
to be financed by the Bank are included in the Public Investment Program and widely
reviewed within the Government at various stages of preparation. In order to sustain
ownership and support, Bank task teams will also be expected to carry out periodic broad
based consultations during the project implementation. Second, the transition from the
Project Implementation Units (PIUs) to streamlining project management into the line
ministries - a decision taken by the Government last year which the Bank supporteddemonstrated the need to build capacity during the preparation phase by focussing on
financialmanagement and procurementfunctions.
projecting and budgeting
76.
Another lesson learned is the importance of
disbursementsand counterparts fund adequately every year. In Kazakhstan, the proceeds
of Bank loans run through the republican Budget and are subject to budget rules. If
adequate amounts are not budgeted, project implementation may run the risk of
suspended until the beginning of the next budget cycle. The annual consultation
mechanism to agree on next year's budget proposals will be strengthened to avoid
disruptions. Furthermore, a semi-annual review of emerging issues on project
preparation and implementationwill be undertaken at senior levels.
77.
Finally, there is a need to facilitate NGO participation in design and
implementationearly on during the project cycle. This would involve developing with the
Governmentground rules for increasedNGO participation.

23

Kazakhstan: CountryAssistance Strategy
Box3: Country AssistanceEvaluation
A Country Assistance Evaluation was recently prepared by OED, OEG, and MIGA to assess the
relevance and efficacy of World Bank Group assistance in Kazakhstan.l/ The report concludes
that IBRD adjustment lending since 1991 was successful in promoting policy reforms, and
project outcomes were rated satisfactory by OED. The Bank supported price and trade
liberalization, privatization, financial sector reform, and improvements in the legal framework.
Despite these achievements, per capita GDP dropped by 40 percent, poverty grew significantly,
major social indicators deteriorated, and public financial accountability remains poor.
In hindsight, the report notes, the Bank and other donors were overly optimistic in their
expectation that transition could be accomplished in a relatively short time and with low costs.
The Bank's assistance strategy did not focus enough on the protection of the poor and gender
issues. Although the Bank emphasized public sector reform, there is an unfinished agenda to
strengthen systems of public financial accountability that help ensure effective use of public
resources. The report finds that privatization outcomes were mixed, with poor corporate
governance contributingto decapitalization.
On the whole, investment projects have not fared as well as adjustment lending, some because of
weak commitment. Together, the outcomes of the Bank's adjustment and investment lending are
rated partially satisfactory. The role of the IFC, particularly in the financial sector, was found to
be generally timely and effective.

Forthe future,the reportrecommendsthat the BankGroupfocus on the protectionof the poor,
strengtheningpublic financial accountability, and improving the environment for private sector
development. The Bank needs solid analytical work to focus its assistance, including periodic
reviews of public expenditures, a financial accountability assessment, and an updated poverty
assessment. The report recommends that the CAS incorporate lessons from IFC and MIGA
transactions experiences and exploit fully the mix of instruments available to the World Bank
Group.
1/ "Reoublicof Kazakshtan: CountrvAssistance Evaluation."CODE 2000-108 (December2000).

V.

MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS AND PROPOSED LENDING PROGRAM

78.
The proposed lending program for FYO1-03 depends on three critical sets of
issues:

* The macroeconomic framework: the lending program is predicated upon an
appropriate macroeconomicenvironment. In addition, the program requires greater
transparency of the fiscal accounts, both with respect to the contribution of the oil
sector to fiscal revenues -- to allow for due diligence in fiscal analysis -- and with
respect to the design and operation of the National Fund (oil fund) to ensure the
quality of expenditure and investment of oil-related revenues.

* The reform agenda: the Government's commitment to a continuing agenda of
policy and institutional reformns.Some elementsof the reform program are associated
with particular investment projects, and others - particularly in social protection,
24

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

public sector management reform, and private sector development - are associated
with adjustment lending.
* Financing needs: The amount of adjustment lending in particular will depend upon
fiscal needs, which in turn depend upon the price of oil and the fiscal impact of
reforms.
79.

The Bank lending program has three possible cases:

*

A Low Case would occur if policy and institutional reforms are delayed, and a lack
of transparency in the management of oil revenues implies that it is difficult to
understandhow oil revenues are being used. In this case, the Bank lending strategy
would focus on a small number of carefully-targeted investment and technical
assistance operations to achieve poverty, governance, and environmental objectives.
The volume of lending would be $271 million over the three-year CAS period. Given
the current status of structural reforms, the starting point for the CAS is the low-case
scenario.

-

A Base Case is predicated upon sound fiscal management and would respond to a
moderate pace of reform. The lending program would contain a social protection
adjustment loan in the first year of the CAS period, but in outer years would shift
from adjustment lending to investment and technical assistance loans. Lending
volume would total $566 million over the three-year CAS period.

* A High Case would be pursued if the pace of structural reform is accelerated, and the
management of oil revenues is sound - i.e., the National Fund is cast in a mediumterm fiscal framework and is subject to public accountability. Predicated upon
financing needs, the high-lending strategy contains a mix of investment, technical
assistance, and adjustment loans supporting policy and institutional reforms across
several sectors, totaling $816 million over the three-year CAS period.
Lending operations will be complementedby a program of non-lending services (paras.
90-91).

A.

MacroeconomicSimulations

80.
A macroeconomicconsistency model was used to simulate the effects of different
combinations of oil price and policy reform assumptions, roughly corresponding to the
three lending scenarios described above. The assumptions and results of the
macroeconomicsimulations are contained in Annex 8.
81.
In the Low Case, it is assumed that policy and institutional reforms stagnate. The
unfavorable business environment results in a standstill of domestic and foreign private
investment (as a share of GDP), and slow growth of non-oil exports. Progress on
privatizing the remaining state-owned shares in blue-chip companies continues but at a
slow pace, and tax collection fails to improve. As a result, GDP growth is driven by the
oil sector. Under the assumption of continued strength in oil prices (US$25-30 per
25

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

barrel), the current account is in surplus through 2002, tuming to a deficit of -0.7 percent
of GDP in 2003. Fiscal account deficits are small, ranging from -0.4 percent of GDP in
2001 and 2002, to -1.1 percent in 2003.
82.
The Base Case assumes a moderate pace of policy and institutional reforms, as
well as moderate oil prices. Fiscal deficits lie between the Low and High cases, at -1.8
percent of GDP in 2001 and -2.0 percent of GDP in 2003. The Bank's lending program
includes one adjustment loan (the SPRAL in 2001) with the remainder in investmentand
technical assistance. While the projects in the first two years of the program are firm, the
lending program for FY03 is more tentative in nature and some of the projects may be
subject to change as the Government revises its rolling Public Investment Program. In
the event that there would be significant changes to the projects in the FY03 program, a
CAS update would be presented.
83.
In the High Case, the pace of structural reforms accelerates: privatization moves
more quickly, improvements in the business environment lead to an increase in private
investment and non-oil exports; tax collection improves, and there is an increase in
capital expenditure for priority public investments. Under the assumption that oil prices
return to a historical average, the current account goes into deficit, and the fiscal deficit
rises to -3.2 percent of GDP in 2001 and 2003. External financing is assumed to include
three adjustment loans from the Bank (SPRAL, PSRMALII, and CSAL).
84.
The simulation results are particularly sensitive to oil price assumptions, which
are an important determinant of both export and fiscal revenues. Table 2 illustrates the
impact of oil price assumptions on fiscal revenues (corporate taxes, royalties, and bonus
payments). Using production quantities in the Base Case scenario, a US$1 decrease in
the price of oil results in a fiscal loss of US$97 to US$117 million each year.
Table 2: Fiscal Impact of Oil Price Assumptions

(US$million)
2000
2001

2002

2003

Oil price assumptions and fiscalimpact

Oil price(US$barrel)
Production(tons)

28.0
33,648

25.0
36,626

21.0
38,544

21.0
39,598

Oil-related fiscal revenues
Tax
Non-tax a

1,288.6
713.5
575.1

1,062.0
704.3
357.7

1,125.8
586.3
539.4

1,048.8
733.3
315.5

20.0
38,544
109:0
84.6
24.4

20.0
39,598
116.6
92.6
23.9

Impact of a US$1 per barrel decrease in theprice of oil
Oil price(US$barrel)
24.0
ProductionTons
36,626
Fiscalrevenueloss
96.7
Tax
73.3
Non-tax
23.4
a Non-taxoil revenuesincluderoyaltiesand bonuspayments.

26

Kazakhstan: CountryAssistance Strategy
B.

Lending Program and Triggers

85.
The program of loans in the three lending cases is detailed in Table 3. The triggers
for the lending cases relate to the macroeconomic framework, the reform agenda, and
project implementation(Table 4). The triggers shown are additive - in other words, all
triggers in the first column are required for the Base Case lending program, and all shown
in the second column are necessary for the High Case. In order to judge whether the
triggers are being met, the Bank will seek from the Government a statement of policy and
institutional reforms taken or underway, and evaluate the status of the reform program
against this plan.
86.
The types of lending instruments chosen and the amount of lending are also
dependent upon overall and incremental financing needs. Even under an aggressive
reform program, the overall demand for external financing may be limited by external
developments(e.g., high oil prices). In the absence of financing needs, reforms will be
supported by investment and technical assistance loans (the Base Case) and by nonlending services (in the Base and Low Cases).
87.
The High Case supports an aggressivereform program - evidenced by significant
progress in public sector reform, private sector development, and social protection - as
well as the need for external financing. It requires a sound macroeconomic framework,
evidenced by (i) satisfactory reviews by the IMF under an EFF or Staff Monitored
Program, (ii) full and transparent accounting of the oil sector's contribution to fiscal
revenues, and (iii) operation of the National Fund such that it is a transparent part of the
budget, cast in a medium-term fiscal framework, and subject to public accountability.
Predicated upon financing needs, the High Case lending program includes three
adjustment loans: the SPRAL ($200 million) in FY01, PSRMAL II ($150 million) in
FY02 and the CSAL ($100 million) in FY03. These would be complemented by
investment loans in the areas of agriculture, health, tax reform, rural roads, housing
finance, financial infrastructure,and the environment.
88.
The Base Case includes the SPRAL in FY01, triggered by significant social
protection reforms and financing needs based on increased social assistance expenditure.
After FY01, the Bank's lending program shifts toward non-adjustment lending
instruments. Policy and institutional reforms in public sector management and private
sector development are supported through a technical assistance loan (the TAL II in
FY02) and possible investment loans. The Base Case requires a satisfactory
macroeconomicframework and transparent management of oil revenues.
89.
The Low Case excludes adjustment lending in all three years, and in addition
trims the number of investment loans in FY03. These projects focus on the priority areas
of environmental protection,rural development, governance, and financial infrastructure.

27

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Table 3: Proposed IBRD Lending Program, FY01-03
(US$ million)
Hi h Case
FY01
Social Protection Reform Adjustment Loan
(SPRAL)
Syr Daria and Northern Aral Sea
Subtotal

Base Case

Low Case

_

FY02
Northeast Vodokanal Water Supply
Second Public Sector Resource
Management Adjustment Loan
(PSRMALII)
Second Technical Assistance Loan (TAL
II)
Nura River Cleanup
Real Estate Rollout
Subtotal

200

200

78
278

78
278

78
78

80

80

80

10

10

10

42
16
298

42
16
148

42
16
148

40
35

40
35

150

FY03
Agricultural Services
Second AgriculturalPost-Privatization
(APPAP II)
ConsolidationStructural Adjustment Loan
(CSAL)
Financial Infrastructure
Rural Roads
Subtotal

15
50
240

15
50
140

15
30
45

Total FY01-03

816

566

271

100

28

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy
Table 4: LendingProgram Triggers
Lending Case
Base Lending Case
|High
MacroeconomicFramework
Same as Base Case, pu: Operation of the
Sound macroeconomic framework evidenced
National Fund such that it is a transparent part
by the satisfactorycompletion of the IMF
review of the current EFF. If the EFF is not in of the budget, cast in a medium-termfiscal
place, satisfactoryreview of the
framework, subject to public accountability,
macroeconomicframework under an IMF Staff and invested professionallyabroad.
Monitored Program.
Governance
Same as Base Case.
Implementationof measures to tackle highlevel and low-level corruption: (i)
implementationof annual declaration of assets
and incomes of civil servants to the tax
authorities; (ii) establishment of clear rules for
the interests of public sector officials and their
direct families in the private sector, and
developmentand enforcement of regulations
dealing with conflicts of interest; (iii) effective
enforcement of code of ethics for civil service;
(iv) public declaration of all significant new
governmentcontracts (defined, e.g., by size,
procurement,privatization, etc.); and (v)
assessmentof public financial accountability
by 2001 followed by implementationof
reforms.
Private Sector Development
Revision of licensing, registration, and land
acquisition rules/regulationsand other
bureaucratic barriers to entry, particularlyfor
SMEs; limits on audits and inspections of
private businesses.
Social Sector Reform
Improvedpoverty monitoring: (i) design of a
household consumption survey and progress in
its implementationon at least an annual basis;
(ii) establishmentof a poverty line; (iii)
continuous monitoring of poverty levels and
health indicators.
Project Implementation
Implementation of actions agreed during the
latest CPPR; adequate budgetary allocations for
project funding. Improvements in
disbursementlevels (indicative targets: at least
10% by end-FYO1, at least 12% by end-FY02,
and at least 15% by the end of the CAS period).

Same as Base Case, plus: Acceleration of the
sale of remaining state shares in privatized
enterprises;vigorous implementationof
bankruptcy and liquidation laws.
Same as Base Case, plus: Enforcement of new
labor and employment laws. Adequate
budgeting and improved targeting of social
assistance; implementationof a povertytargeted public works program.
Same as Base Case, plus: further
improvements in disbursement levels
(indicative targets: at least 12% by end-FYOI,
at least 15% by end-FY02, and at least 20% by
the end of the CAS period).

29

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

C.

Non-Lending Services

90.
The operations of the Bank and IFC will be guided by the Bank's analytical and
advisory activities (AAA). Economic and sector work was identified as a key area in the
last CAS and some major work has been done, including a Public Expenditure Review
and a Poverty Assessment. Over the current CAS period, four types of AAA are planned:
* Major studies to analyze cross-cutting policy issues, prepare detailed sets of options
for the Government, and contribute to the design of adjustment loans. This group will
include the Growth Strategy Study in FY01, the Poverty Assessment and Labor
Market Study in FY02, and a Country Economic Memorandumin FY03.
*

Studies which would inform decisions regarding the desirability and need for the
Bank to provide future lending, and help the design of future loans. These would
include the Note on Revenues in FY01 and the Water Sector Strategy Study in FY02.
The note on revenue issues, for example, would help define the extent and scope of
the planned Revenue Project. Due diligence requires the early conduct of a country
Financial Accountability Assessment jointly with the Government and the donors in
FY02. Other studies, as needed, would be carried out using grant funding.

*

Sectoral studies to update the state of the client's knowledge on specific issues. This
will include a Governanceand Service Delivery Surve and a Mining Sector Note in
FY01, and a Livestock Study in FY03.

*

Specific focused notes produced on demand from the client, and informal reports on
trends in economic and financial sectors, social and environmental indicators,
institutional development and the like. In the past, the Government has found these
"rapid response" notes quite useful. In the low-lending case, more resources would
be devoted to these rapid-responsepolicy notes.

91.
The World Bank Institute's activities complement the rest of the Bank Group's
program by expanding knowledge and enhancing the capacity of Kazakhstan's
policymakers to best implement their development objectives. WBI will conduct incountry and regional seminars, workshops, and conferences in close consultationwith the
authorities in Kazakhstan and the Bank's country team. The thematic areas of WBI
training are aligned with the priorities of the CAS. The objective of private sector
development is supported by Corporate Governance and Business Ethics program and a
course on Global Integration and the New Trade Agenda. Health Sector Financing,
Pension Reform, and Poverty Analysis initiatives are aimed at social assistance reform
and capacity building to conduct poverty analysis and to link analytical work to policy
formulation. The continuation of Intergovernmental Fiscal Relation Prograrn will
support the envisaged reforms in the area of public sector and governance.
Environmentalconcerns will be incorporatedin the newly developed Rural Development
and Natural Resource ManagementProgram that will be launched in FY02.

30

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

Table 5: Areas of Activity of Principal DevelopmentPartners
Policy

Growth / PSD

Public Sector Reform / Govemance

Environment

Social Sectors

Obiectves/

Partners

Macro Financ- Legal
Frame- |
lial | Reform
Note:
A|

92.tilsteral B

Bank

a Lc

PSDI
Invest.
Cliactivt

Infrastr.
ucture

Fiscal
Refom
S

Modem.
AntiCapaacty Environ.l Irrigatiorl
ofState Corruption Building Forestryl Agrc
Water N Aition

wg o

r

Health

Educa
tion

s

GroupX_XX

NGOs and

/

X

DBi

Paertnrsip

D.

Partnerships

92.

The Bank has a close working relationship with other donors in Kazakhstan.

Private
X X

T

Table 5 shows the major areas of activity of the partners in Kazakhstan's development
process, including the Government, the private sector and groups in civil society.
93.
Four Consultative Group Meetings were held between 1992 and 1996. Since that
time there has not been a formal consultation forum, as Government has not felt the need
for such a meeting. Informal meetings and coordination among donors takes place in
Kazakhstan. However, there is a need for the Government to be more pro-active in
coordinatingexternal assistance.
94.
A central part of the Bank's strategy is to be selective in choosing the niches
where its support is needed and where the Bank has a comparative advantage. The Bank
will operate within areas consonant with each of the four objectives of the CAS.
However, within these areas, it will both complement and supplement the activities of
other foreign partners, including Japan, USAID, the IMF, ADB, EBRD, and other
bilateral and multilateral partners. Within social services, for example, the Bank will
concentrate on the health and social protection sectors, while the Asian Development
Bank will focus on investments and reforms in education. The Bank's partnership with
the IMF has major complementarities in the fiscal and banking sectors. While active in
some parts of the transport sector, the Bank has not been in the railways sub-sector,
where Japan (JBIC), ADB, EBRD and France are all involved. The EBRD has a major
role in private sector development and infrastructure provision, and other major actors
include the Islamic Banks and Funds, USAID, the UN System, ADB, the IMF and Japan.
In public sector reform, the Bank's work is harmonized with major inputs from USAID,
the EU and the UN. Finally in environment, the most active partners are the UN, the EU,
31

Social
Protec-

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy
the UK, France and Japan, and the Bank is working with the Global Environmental
Facility on a number of activities. The Bank will not invest in areas where the private
sector is active (e.g., oil and gas). The Bank has played a limited role in the rest of the
energy sector, and has not been involved in urban development.
95.
Technical assistance for Kazakhstan is increasingly being provided on a grant
basis by bilateral partners. Agencies such as EU/TACIS, UK Know-How Fund and
USAID, which provide targeted technical assistance through grant financing, have joined
with the Bank in supporting areas such as governance, fiscal reform (including
decentralization), legal reform, and private sector development. The mantle of providing
technical assistance, therefore, is increasingly moving to such bilateral aid agencies, and
away from IBRD loans.
E.

Project Implementation

96.
Improved portfolio management will be essential to enable the attainment of the
CAS goals. To date, portfolio performance has been disappointing. Implementation of
investment projects has been slow. Disbursement ratios, during the period of the last
CAS, FYs 1998-2000, have been from 8.5 to 10.6 percent per annum, well below the
expected rate of 15 to 20 percent. Annex 7 presents a summary of the latest Country
Portfolio and Performance Review (CPPR), which was held in Astana in July 2000.
While project specific issues affected individual projects, there were some over97.
riding problems as well. Three recently held Country Portfolio Performance Reviews
(CPPRs) found that Government officials felt that Bank procurement and disbursement
procedures were cumbersome and poorly understood. However, the steady replacement
of Government officials and reorganization of Governmentstructures have contributed to
this problem, resulting in the appointment of officials who are unfamiliar with Bank
procedures to implement Bank-financedprojects. A major transitional cost has been the
elimination of project implementationunits (PIUs) at the end of 1999, and the associated
mainstreaming of project management responsibilities to the ministries. Although this
move is a welcome increase in ownership and accountability structures for projects by the
Government itself, there have been implementation delays caused by the relatively slow
integration of project management responsibilities into the existing ministerial structures
and associated staff changes. Previously, reorganizations of the Government and
movement of the capital to Astana in 1998 also had an adverse effect on project
implementation.
98.
Implementation of projects also has been slowed by the Government's budgetary
difficulties, which has reduced the allocation of counterpart funds. In addition, the
Government feels that in some cases Government agencies were not ready to implement
projects when they had been approvedby the Bank's Board.
99.
Delays in project effectiveness have continued during the last three years, with the
average time from board approval to effectiveness being 171 days. This is a high figure,
but still an improvement on the average of 197 days in the previous three years. In
addition, requirements of financial management systems being in place have delayed
effectiveness, given the serious lack of financial management skills within the country.
32

Kazakhstan: CountryAssistance Strategy
Improved project preparation, including increased Government participation and putting
more conditions up front instead of at effectiveness should decrease these delays in the
future.
100. The Government believes that the Bank has at times been slow in processing
applicationsor giving no objections. In most instances Bank service standards have been
met, but there have been occasional failures. To deal with this issue, the Bank has
strengthenedthe capacity of the Country Office.
101. The Government and the Bank are determined to work together to improve
project implementation. CPPRs will continue to be held annually, but in addition semiannual "mini CPPRs" will be held to monitor implementation in between the annual
CPPRs. The role of the Country Office will increase as staff posted there receive
additional training. In addition, the Bank will work with the new Ministry of Economy to
improve the monitoring of projects, especially the attainment of development objectives.
Moreover, the Bank is taking concrete measures to address the problems identified
above:
* The Bank has conducted seminars and other training for Government officials and
also strengthened the Country Office to help with project processing, particularly with
the capacity for pre-screening of withdrawal applications in the Country Office with a
view to significantly reducing processing delays. Seminars on procurement,
disbursements and financial management will be repeated as necessary in FY01 and
beyond.
* A process has been in put place to review the financing requirements of projects for
the coming fiscal year during the budget preparation process. Bank staff will work
more closely with their Government counterparts to ensure timely availability of
counterpartfunds.
* Processing delays will be reduced in the future, and more responsibility has been
given to Country Office staff who are most able to deal quickly and directly with
Government officials.
F.

Performance Indicators

102. The Bank has agreed with the Government on a set of country performance
indicators which provide critical benchmarks towards achieving Kazakhstan's four-pillar
development strategy outlined in this CAS (Table 6). The set of benchmarks are closely
aligned with the set of Government, Bank and other donor initiatives planned over the
CAS period, and will be developed and adapted in line with the major initiatives in each
area.
103. Indicators to monitor progress in poverty alleviation will be taken from the
Household Budget Survey, now being reformulated. A feasible target would be a
reduction in the poverty rate by five percentage points over the next three years.
Macroeconomicgrowth and stability would be measured by targets agreed with both the
33

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy
Bank and the IMF. In the social sectors, targets would be agreed upon for primary and
secondaryeducation rates, child and mother mortality rates, and life expectancies for men
and women. Governance improvements would be tracked by the regular Transparency
International survey. Progress on environmental goals would be measured by access to
clean water.
104. For its own portfolio, the Bank will continue the practice of annual CPPRs and
semi-annual "mini-CPPRs", and will condition future disbursement to an adequate
disbursement ratio, as shown in the triggers in Table 3 above. The Bank will also
continue the process of regular consultations with other donors and members of civil
society, and incorporate the feedback from these parties as well as the Governnent to
update the strategy as the socio-economic milieu and outlook for Kazakhstan evolves
over the CAS period.
Table 6: PerformanceIndicators
Poverty

Government benchmarks
Poverty head count ratio-reduce by

Bank benchmarks
Poverty Assessment completed;

5%;One quarterofthose in extreme povertymonitoringsystemin place
povertyescapethat levelby 2003;
and resultspubliclydisseminated.
Macro
Social Sectors

Governance
Environment
Implementation

VI.

Unemployment rate-reduce by onefifth
Improved macro-monitoringand data
Growth rate of 5% per annum and
inflation rates averaging less than
systems developed and data made
available publicly.
10%
TB infection rate monitoringand
Primary and Secondary School
enrollment rates-(gender
mortality rates; reduce latter by onedisaggregated) return to 1990 levels third by 2003.
by 2003
Maternal, peri-natal and Infant
Mortality rates-reduced by onequarter by 2003
Successful implementationof
TI and other annual surveys show
Governance and Service Delivery
annual improvement
diagnostic recommendations
Environmentalassessments carried
Increase population with access to
clean water by 2 percent.
out for all major projects
Half of NEAP projects underway
Agreed funds budgeted and spent;
M&E systems in place-development
effectiveness times reduced to Bank objectives met; disbursement targets
met
average

RISK AND CREDITWORTHINESS

105. The macroeconomic scenario underpinning the Bank's assistance strategy is
predicated on: (i) sustained strong policy performance, laying the foundation for
realizing the full potential of the country's resource base and for encouraging growth in
the non-extractive sectors; and (ii) a relatively benign external environment. Slower than
envisaged progress on policy reforrns and/or unfavorable external shocks could therefore
34

Kazakhstan: Country Assistance Strategy

result in less favorable macroeconomic outcomes and adversely affect Kazakhstan's
creditworthiness.
106. There are a number of key risks in terms of policy performance. There is, for
example, a risk that the government may slow the pace of fiscal adjustment and
stabilization, including delaying fiscal consolidation, failing to clear budgetary arrears,
and reversing the commitment to liberalization of trade and the exchange rate. Such a
policy stance would increase vulnerability of the economy to external shocks. Similarly,
on the structural side, slower progress on privatization and restructuring would imply
lower growth, constrained access to needed foreign investment, and would add to
government financing costs. Developmentof the non-extractive sectors is also important.
Failure to stimulate growth in the non-extractive sectors and to limit Dutch disease would
reduce the potential for broad-based economic development. In the extreme, the oil and
gas sector could be reduced to an enclave industry, with adverse consequences for
income distribution and poverty alleviation.
107. On the external side, Kazakhstan is highly vulnerable to adverse commodityprice
and volume shocks and this vulnerability is expected to increase over the medium term
with the growing dependence on hydrocarbon exports. As borne out by recent
experience, an adverse oil price shock directly impacts the government budget and
balance of payments position, and can therefore lead to sharp increases in the country's
financing needs. Kazakhstan's current foreign exchange reserves and debt profile also
suggest limited capacity to withstand exogenous shocks. The current level of foreign
exchange reserves (equivalent to 3.5 months of imports) provides only a limited liquidity
cushion in the event of financing difficulties. The government has already built up a
relatively high external debt burden (debt to GDP exceeds 30 percent) and a sustained
improvementin the trade balance--which would, over the CAS period, mostly come from
a growth in commodity exports--will be required to reduce the stock of external debt to a
more manageable level.
108. Delays in completing oil export pipelines would slow progress towards debt
sustainability and imply a heavier fiscal burden. Even if oil revenues increase as
projected, a large external financing requirement will persist over the medium term
owing to large amortization payments falling due and persistent capital flight. While
Kazakhstan can meet its current financing requirementby attracting significantinflows of
foreign direct investment and by borrowing from private and official sources, access to
international capital markets in the future is not assured and could be constrained by
global economic conditions or by a loss of confidence in prospects for the Kazakh
economy.
James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Sven Sandstrom

Peter L. Woicke

Washington,D.C.
January 16, 2001
35

Kazakhstan at a glance
Europe& LowerCentral middleKazakhstan
Asia Incorme

POVERTY
andSOCIAL
1999
Population,
mid-year(millions)
GNPpercapita(Atas method,US$)
GNP(Atlasmethod,US$billions)

14.9
1,300
19.4

475
2,150
1,022

2,094
1,200
2,513

-1.7
-1.5

0.1
0.6

1.1
1.2

35
56
65
20
8

67
69
22
8

43
69
33
15

..

..

86

1/16/01

Development
diamond'
Lifeexpectancy

Averageannualgrowth,1993-99
Population(%)
Laborforce(%)
1993-99)
Moatrecentestinatellaten yearavailable,
Poverty(%of populationbelownationalpovertyline)
Urbanpopulation(%of totalpopulation)
Ufeexpectancy
at birth (years)
Infantmortality(per1,000livebirths)
Childmalnutrition
(%of childrenunder5)
Access to improved water source (% of population)

Illiteracy(%of populationage 15+)
Grossprimaryenrollment
(%ofschool-agepopulation)
Male
Female

KEYECONOMIC
RATIOSandLONG-TERM
TRENDS
1979
GDP(US$ billions)
Gross
domestic investment/GDP

..

1
98
97

3
100
101

16
114
114

98

99

116

1998

1999

22.1
14.3
30.3

16.9
14.6
42.5
16.9
14.7

1989
..

Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

9.8
8.8

25.8

-1.0
1.8
47.4

13.0

18S9

-5.4

Current account balance/GDP
Interestpayments/GDP
Total debt/GDP

t1.1

Totaldebtservice/exports
PresentvalusofdebVGDP
Presentvalueof debt/exports

Gross
pnmary
enrollment

GNP
per
capita

Accessto safewater
Kazakhstan
group
Lower-middle-income

Economicratlos
Trd

rade

Dom0tic
SomesgsInvestment

I

S

Indebtedness
1979-89 1989-99

1998

1999

1999-03

-0.2
-1.5

-1.9
-1.8

2.7
7.5

5.8

10.1

12.7

4.9
5.1
8.

1989

1998

1999

9.1

10.5

20

31.2

34

20

59.7

54.6

79.4
10.8
34.9

72.5
10.6
40.1

-0e-

1979-89 1989-99

1998

1999

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

-2.9
-0.7

-18.9
-0.1

21.6
3.6

w
s

0.5

-0.

-1.0

20

-4.8
-4.9
-13.0
2.3

-7.0
-14.5
-11.4
-2.6

-24.1
77
12.6
-18.3

20t
40-

-2.9

-2.4

(average annualgrowth)
GDP
GNP per capita
Exports of goods and services

Kazakhsfan
Lower-middle-incomegroup

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY
1979
(% of GDP)

40

Agriculture

Industry

Growth of Investmentand GDP (%)

.

..

Manufacturing
Services

Privateconsumption
Generalgovemment consumption
Imports of goods and services

-20
40-9

_

G01

-

-GDP

(averageannualgrowth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing.40

Services

Privateconsumption
Generalgovemment consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services
Gross national product

4 -

97
-Exports

-*Imports

2.0

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) comparedwith its income-groupaverage. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete

36

Kazakhstan
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE

prices
Domnestic

1989

1998

(%chanqe)
Consumer prces
ImplicitGDP deflator

Inflation(%)

1999

2,500

..
..

..
..

7.1
5.7

8.3

2.000

13.3

1.500

s00
0 s

GovernmentHmm0e
(%of GDP,includescurrentqrants)
Cunrentrevenue

..

..

18.0

17.8

Currentbudgetbalance

..

..

-5.1

-2.5

Overall surplus/deficit

..

..

-7.6

-5.2

,

-500

---

94

9s

97

96

95

U9

@'-CPI

-",.,--GDP deflator

TRADE

IUSS mil/ions)
Totalexports(fob)
1
Commodity
2
Commodity
Manufactures
Totalimports(cifl
Food

1979

1989

..

.

Fuel and enerqy

1998

1999

5 839
2,068
771
1,356
6)780
617
61

5 989
2,288
886
1377
5,645
893
341
127

Capitalgcoods112

Export and Import levels(US$mil.)

sooo
7000
6oo0
so 0
2000
200

1000
93

Export price index (1995-=100)
ImportDrice index (1995=100)
Termsof trade (1995-100)
BALANCE

..
..

..
..

..

..

100
118
85

0
0
106

94

97

96

95

U Exports

o

9e

go

Imports

I

of PAYMENTE_

Current accountbalanceto GDP(%)

1998

1999

6735
7,716

6,921o
6,749

Resourcebalance

-981

172

2

Net income
Net current transfers

-9

50

-

(USSmillions)

Exportsof goodsandservices
Importsof goodsandservices

1979

1989

..
..

..
..

i|

157

.4

Currentaccountbalance

-1,201

-171

5

items(net)
Financing
Chanqesin netreserves

778
423

247
-76

5
-7

1901
78.3

2Q003

2.10E-3

1979

1989

1998

1999

..

..

5,715

7,934
1,136

.

.

..

..

..

..

.

..

..
-

*-

.
..
..

..
..
..

315
211

Net flows

..

..

211

236

Interest payments
Nettransfers

..
..

..
..

44
167

75
161

..

78

..

Memo:
Reserves includinq gold(USS millions)

rate(DEC,localWlS$)
Conversion

..
..

..

119.5

EXTERNALDEBT and RESOURCEFLOWS
Composition of 1999 debt (USSmill.)

(USS millions)

anddisbursed
Totaldebtoutstandinq
IBRD
IDA

Totaldebtservice
IRD

flows
of netresource
Composkion
Official grants..
Official creditors

Privatecreditors
Foreiqndirectinvestment
Portfolio equity

WorldBankproqram
Commitments
Disbursements
Principalrepayments

899
0

884

1326

44

95

..

.

339
925
*-

0

1

G

0

A: tl6

C 509

*

226
-573
*

0
256
20

D: 4,157

|

A- IBRD
B- IDA
C -IMF

E - Biateral
multilateral F - Private
D - Other
G - Short,term

__1

1/16/01

Economics
Development

37

ANNEX 2: KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS

National accounts(as % of GDP)
Gross domesticproduct'
Agnculture
Industry
Services

100
13
27
60

100
12
27
61

100
9
31
60

100
10
33
52

100
9
35
56

100
8
37
55

100
8
39
53

100
8
38
53

Total Consumption
Gross domesticfixed investment
Govemment investment
Private
investment
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)'
Imports(GNFS)

87
17

87
16

87
17

..

..

..

..

..

..

84
15
2
13

72
15
2
14

74
15
2
14

77
16
2
14

77
16
2
14

33
36

35
37

31
35

41
40

59
45

57
46

56
48

54
47

Gross domesticsavings
Gross nationalsavings'

13
13

13
12

13
12

16
14

29
22

25
18

23
16

23
15

21035

22166

21979

16870

17423

18062

19366

20644

1270

1340

1320

1260

1250

1160

1210

1280

-1.3

1.7
3.2

-1.9
-11.9

2.7
3.3

8.0
16.7

4.0
2.9

4.5
2.3

4.0
4.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1993prices)
Gross domesticproduct at market prices
Total consumption
7.8
Private consumption
10.6

2.5
3.6
4.5

-1.3
-10.5
-10.4

7.2
-9.3
-14.8

8.4
9.4
7.1

4.2
5.5
4.0

4.5
3.7
3.7

4.0
3.6
3.4

7741
6899
8300
7176
-559
75
-794

6735
5839
7716
6589
-981
78
-1201

6921
5989
6749
5645
172
i05
-171

10225
9265
7906
6698
2319
140
1082

10249
9246
8394
7129
1856
140
490

10751
9619
9250
7599
1502
140
9

11137
9953
9697
7923
1440
135
-91

-54

1320
713
434
279
-749
-490

1149
632
339
293
-1004
423

1583
114
234
-53
-416
-76

1400
182
218
175
-1190
-1083

1300
-158
241
165
-1197
-185

1500
88
283
-394
-1104
-133

1500
136
72
-587
-787
-157

-2.8

-2.5

-4.5

1.1

13.3

10.3

7.8

7.0

..

.

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Memorandumitems
Gross domesticproduct
(US$ millionat current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1993prices)
Gross domesticproduct at market prices
Gross Domestic Income

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)5
MerchandiseFOB
Imports (GNFS)5
MerchandiseFOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl.errors & ommissions)
Change in reserves'
Memorandumitems
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR93 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

6966
6292
7546
6618
-580
50
-750

335
334
1

38

Kazakhstan- Key EconomicIndicators
(Continued)

Publicfinance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues

13.2

13.2

18.2

17.8

24.7

21.9

..
..

18.4
-5.2

23.3
-5.1

20.3
-2.5

'1.3
3.5

22.0
-0.2

..

2.1

2.8

2.4

3.3

2.6

2.7

2.8

2.4

27

Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M421%1
Privatesector credit growth I

22.6
21.8
0.8

21.4
21.6
-0.2

3.1

3.0

2.7

0.7

-1.0

0.2

9.5

10.2

8.6

13.5

14.4

15.1

15.3

15.1

13.8

27.6

-13.1

83.4

30.5
78 8

16.5
75.5

11.3
76.3

7.9
74.0

-

-

261 2

266.7

274.9

total credit growth (%)

Priceindices( YR93 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index

..

.

..

142.3

162.4

175.5

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (", change)

39.3

174

7.1

8.3

4t)

6.5

5.5

5.0

GDP deflator (% change)

38.9

16.1

4.9

13.3

13 7

6.5

5.5

5.0

5

Real exchange rate (US$!LCU)

a. GDP at factor cost.
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includesnet unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

39

250.4

282.3

Annex 3: Social Indicators

Latest single yvar

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year(millions)
Growth rate (% annual average)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1970-75

1980-85

1993-98

14.1
1.5
52.2
3.3

15.6
1.0
55.9
3.1

15.6
-0.9
56.4
2.0

Same regionrincomegroup
LowermiddleEurope &
income
Central Asia
474.7
0.1
66.2
1.6

886.5
0.9
57.7
2.5

2,200
155

1,740
131

4.0
5.1

3.0

POVERTY
(°/ ofpopulation)
National headcountindex
Urban headcount index
Rural headcountindex

.

..

..

..
..

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

..
..

..
.

..

.

1,340
175
150

..

..

35.4

..

.

6.7

..

..

42.3

..

..

2.1
4

.

.

..

8.8.

..
..
..

..
..
..

.
..

100
100
99

94
95
93

..
..

..
..

97
96

91
89

89
89

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowestquintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

34.6
30.0
39.0

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education(% of GNP)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(%/o
of age group)

Total
Male
Female
Access to safe water
(% ofpopulalion)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunizationrate
(lo under 12months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancyat birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)
Under 5 (per thousand live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000population)
Female (per 1,000population)
Matemal (per 100,000live births)

4.9

8

..

..
..
..

69
64
73

65
59
70

69
65
74

68
65
72

.

30

22
29

22
26

35
44

318
149

312
140

283
120

244
137

..

..

382
167
70

..

2000 World DevelopmentIndicators CD-ROM,World Bank

40

Annex 4: Bank Group Portfolio
IBRD: Ongoing and Recently Closed Projects

Projects

Fiscal
Total
Year
Amount
Approved
USS(M)

Disbursed
as of
Dec. 31, 2000
us$ (M)

Technical Assistance Loan
Petroleum Technical Assistance Loan

1994
1994

38.0
15.7

37.1
13.4

Finance & Enterprise DevelopmentLoan
(FEDL)*
Social Protection Loan*

1995
1995

62.0
41.1

12.5
19.9

Irrigation & Drainage Loan

1996

80.0

29.0

Uzen Oil Field Rehabilitation Loan*
Treasury ModernizationLoan
Pilot Water Supply Loan
Real Estate RegistrationPilot Loan

1997
1997
1997
1997

109.0
15.8
7.0
10.0

22.2
8.6
6.5
5.7

Public SectorResource Management
AdjustmentLoan (PSRMAL)
AgriculturePost Privatization Loan (APPAP)
Pension Reform Adjustment Loan (PRAL)

1998
1998
1998

230.0
15.0
300.0

230.0
4.1
200.0

Road TransportRestructuring Loan
Health Restructuring Loan
Legal Reform Loan
Atyrau Pilot Water Supply Loan

1999
1999
1999
1999

100.0
42.5
16.5
16.5

10.9
2.2
0.9
1.9

Electricity TransmissionRehabilitationLoan

2000

140.0

1.9

*

These loans have been restructured recently

41

IFC and MIGA Programs, FY97-00

1997
1998
1999
2000
Total
USS (M) USS (M) USS(M) USS (M) USs (M)

IFC approvals

9.1

30.7

49.6

19.5

108.9

-

30.7
-

1.1

-

30.7
1.1

9.1

-

17.5

15.0-

41.6

-

-

11.0
20.0

4.5
-

15.5
20.0

-

-

14.3

-

14.3

Sector:
Mining & Extraction of Metals & Other Ores
Cement & Construction Materials

Financial Services
Industrial and Commercial Services
Infrastructure

MIGA guarantees

42

Annex 5: Status of Bank Group Operations
As of January 9, 2001

Closed
Projects:

7

Difference Between
Expectedand Actual

Last PSR

Board Date
Fiscal Year

Disbursements SI

Orieinal Amount in US$ Millions
Cancel.
IDA
IBRD
ImDlementation
Progress

Undisb.

0
14.2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

49.5
6.9
51.0
0.5
7.2
86.8
10.9
100
14.6
40.3
15.6
89.1
138.1

Supervision Rating
Active Projects
1995
1995
1996
1997
1997
1997
1998
1998
1999
1999
1999
1999
2000

P008508
P008506
P008510
P045303
P037960
P008507
P008503
P050780
P008500
P046499
P046046
P008499
P065414

FINANCE& ENT.DEVEL
SOCIALPROTECTION
IRRIG.& DRAINAGE
PILOTWATERSUPPLY
TREASURYMODERNIZATION
UZEN OIL FIELD REHAB
AG POST PRIVATIZATIONASST.
PENSIONREF SAL
ATYRAUPILOT WATER
HEALTHRESTRUCTURING
LEGALREFORM
ROADTRANSPORTRESTRUCT.
ELEC. TRANSMISSIONREHAB.

Develonment
Obiectives

S
U
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
U
U
S
S

S
U
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
U
S
S
S

a! Intendeddisbursementsto date minusactual disbursementsto date as projectedat appraisal.

43

62
41.1
80
7
15.8
109
15
300
16.5
42.5
16.5
100
140

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Orig. Frm Rev'd
49.5
17.1
21.8
0.5
7.2
64.8
5.5
100
4.9
9.7
4.8
22.1
3.1

31.4
0
0
0
0.2
3.1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Kazakhstan
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of June 30, 2000
(In US Dollars Millions)
IFC Held
FY Approval Company
1994/95/98/00
1999
1998
1994/96
1997/98/99
1999
1999
1999
2000

IFC Disbursed

Loan Equity Quasi Partic

ABN AMRO Kazak
Alautrangas
Ispat Karrnet
Kazgermunai
Kazkommertsbank
Rambutya LLP
SEF Const. Mat
TuranAlem
SEF LP-GAZ

Total Portfolio:

0.00
20.00
29.60
0.00
9.7
11.00
0.88
15.00
2.00

4.57 0.00
0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00
0.68 35.30
1.00 0.00
0.00 0.00
0.25 0.00
0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

86.18

6.50 35.30

0.00

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.00
0.00
29.60
0.00
9.7
11.00
0.68
15.00
2.00

65.98

ApprovalsPending Commitment
FY Approval
2000
2000
2000
2000
2000

Project Name
ABN Amro Standby
Agrokaz
FIOC
Sazankurak
SEF-Helios

Total Pending Commitment:

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
15.00
0.00 0.00 0.00
3.50
0.00 0.00 0.00
0.00
0.01 0.00 0.00
15.00
0.00 5.00 0.00
2.50
0.00 0.00 0.00
36.00

0.01

5.00

44

0.00

4.57 0.00
0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00
0.38 17.25
1.00 0.00
0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

5.95

0.00

17.25

Annex 6: Indicatorsof Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

1997

1998

1999

2000

Number of Projects Under Implementation'

11

13

16

15

AverageImplementationPeriod (years) b

1.8

2.3

2.4

3.0

9.1
10.4
9.1
10.4
18.1

23.1
19.4
23.1
19.4
9.4

12.5
13.7
12.5
13.7
10.6

6.7
4.1
13.3
14.2
8.0

No
820.5
74.6

Yes
857.0
65.9

Yes
1067.9
66.7

No
1735.0
115.7

Indicator
PortfolioAssessment
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e

PortfolioManagement
CPPR-during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Memorandum Item
6
6
Proj Eval by OED by Number
822.36
822.36
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
0
0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
0
0

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on developmentobjectives (DO) and/or implementationprogress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investmentprojects only.

45

Annex 7: Country Portfolio Performance Review 2000

Governmentof Kazakhstan and the World Bank
Fourth Country Portfolio Performance Review
July 4-5, 2000
The Fourth Country Portfolio PerformanceReview (CPPR) for Kazakhstanwas held in
Astana on July 4 and 5 of 2000. The meeting was co-chaired by Mr. E. Utembayev, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Republic of Kazakhstanand Mr. Kiyoshi Kodera, Director of the Central Asia
Country Departmentof the World Bank.
It was stressed that improving project implementation was a major goal of the Government.
The current budget situation required that projects were effective or they be closed. The
Governmentplans to finalize the revision of the current portfolio by the end of July and will
officially informthe Bank on the proposed changes in the program. It was agreed that the last year
had been disappointing and frustrating with project implementation poor with low disbursements
and therefore limited development impact. It is likely that the portfolio is starting to stabilize at a
level of about 15 projects, a challenging, but manageable number. The need to go beyond
disbursementsand do more work on developing effective Monitoring and Evaluation systems to
track developmentindicators was stressed,
Figures for the low disbursement rates were given. It was stated that now factors such as
changes in Governmentpersonnel, organizationand procedures have been overcome and
disbursementsshould pick up as the increase in the fourth quarter seemed to portend. It was
pointed out that there had not been enough follow up on last year's review of budget cycle and
project allocations. Bank staff should be more proactive in working with Governmenton realistic
budget allocations. There has been an improvement in the number of problem projects, but some
projects now rated "Satisfactory" are in danger of falling into the "Unsatisfactory"category unless
corrective actions were taken.
The change in project implementation arrangementswas very detrimentalto 3rd quarter
results, but things were seen to be picking up. The Bank fully supports the rationale for these
changes and there was general agreement that the system had led to better Govemrnent controls,
more ownershipand improved implementation. To help the new implementation groups, Ministry
of Finance has approved by the Minister's Orders the Standard form of contract, roster and salary
scale for consultants as well as Instruction for opening the special account. At the moment these
documents are pending registrationby Ministry of Justice and will become effective right after
that. The Bank has asked the Governmentto send the Standard form of contract for Bank's "no
objection" to simplify clearance of the individual contracts in the future.
The rules on special accounts were discussed and it was explained that their placement was
agreed during loan negotiations. The use of commercialbanks was found to be the most efficient
way to get funds disbursed, but Governmentcould request other arrangementsduring negotiations.
The Departmentof State Borrowing, which has taken over from the previous Committee on
External Loans explained its organization and role. Similarly,the organizationand roles of the

46

Ministry of Economy were explained. In addition to medium term planning and budgeting,
(including the development of the Public Investment Program) the ministry had an important role
in project monitoring and evaluation. This meant the development and tracking of better indicators
than were now available. The PIP should include all loans, grants and Governmentguarantees.
Projects could be initiated by sector ministries, local governments, corporationsand others. In the
end the MOE would be sure that a consistentprogram that fit within the macro-frameworkwas
developed. It was agreed that it was importantfor all visiting Bank missions to keepthe Ministries
of Economy and Finance involved in their work.
There was agreement that there was insufficientdialogue between the Ministriesof Finance
and Economy and the sector ministries and agencies on budget allocations. The Ministry of
Finance stressedthat this year they were sending many more questions and clarificationsto the
sector ministries and the tight budget ceiling will require some projects to be restructured and cut.
The Governmentagreed to investigate making changes in procedures which would allow reallocation of the loan funds from one project to another at least within one sector.
Bank courses on procurementand disbursementwere welcomed and regular presentations,
both by local staff and by HQ staff were agreed to on a regular and more frequent basis, especially
by Country Office staff. The Bank explained the rationale and some examples of Bank rules and
procedureson procurement. It was pointed out that a recent study showed that ICB saved on
average 20% for borrowers. It was recognized by the meeting the Government's concern about
using more local firms and contractors, but this can be done without changing Bank rules. Project
design and TORs for consultants often excluded local participation. Qualifications shouldbe the
criteria, not foreign or local registration.
In order to speed up the disbursement process and reduce the number of withdrawal
applicationsthat are rejected, the role of the Country Office has been increased and they will help
by pre-screening applicationsand conducting periodic workshops. Increaseduse of e-mail and
other electronic means should help to accelerate processes and improved use of special accounts
would be encouraged.
A review of developmentsin financial management since the last meeting showedthat only
limited progresshas been made. Both the Bank and the Government need to improve the overall
financial management situation and implement some of the more important activities identifiedat
last year's CPPR. A practical seminar involving accountancy staff will be carried out and
increased use of local auditing companies will be investigated.
A detailed review of each of the projects in the portfolio was carried out and a detailed
Action Plan was drawn up.
In summingup, the Governmentexpressed a better understanding of each of the projects in
the portfolio. This would help as the country moved to a three year rolling budget. A whole range
of procedures would be reviewed to improve the budgeting and implementation process. More
involvement of the Ministries of Economy and Finance would take place as projects were
developed. The overall portfolio must fit within the ever changing budget limits and Government
priorities.

47

The Bank expressed its view that the negative impact of recent changes was now behind us
and improved implementation could be expected. The number of problem projects was dropping
and should be kept down. It was agreed that the Governmentand the Bank will workjointly on
restructuringor canceling projects if this is needed. The Bank will work with the Governmentto
increase the use of local consultants and contractors, but ICB was in the best interest of the
borrower. It was agreed that a mini-CPPR would be done in six months and another full CPPR
would be held next year.

48

Annex 8: MacroeconomicSimulations2001-2003

1. A macroeconomicconsistencymodel (RMSM-X)was used to simulatethe effects of
different oil price and policy reform scenarios:
* In the Base Lending Case (B), it is assumed that the Government continues to move
forward on its policy reform agenda at a moderatepace. Oil prices remain relatively
high, based on World Bank price forecasts. In this scenario, there is little financing
need for adjustmentlending in outer years. Bank operations include investmentand
T.A. loans but only one adjustmentloan (the SPRAL in 2001).
* The High Lending Case (C) assumes that world oil prices fall gradually from current
high levels to a historic average, resulting in larger fiscal deficits. The reform agenda
is pursued more aggressively,and is supportedby adjustmentlending over the entire
CAS period.
-

The Low Lending Case (A) assumes high oil prices and that policy reforms are
delayed or insignificant. In this case, there is no adjustment lending from the Bank.
In addition, the number and volume of investmentloans are smaller than in the Base
Case.

2. The assumptionsmade in the three scenarios are shown in Table A8.1, and the
simulationresults in Table A8.2. In all three scenarios,it is assumed that the CPC
pipelinebecomes operationalas scheduled(mid-2001),non-tax oil revenues (royalties
and bonuses) are captured in the fiscal accounts,and domestic consumptionof oil is
driven by economic growth. In addition,it is assumed that the National Fund
accumulatespart of each year's oil revenues to reach 10 percent of annual oil exports by
2004. As modeled in the simulations, the National Fund as included in the model plays
the role of a price stabilizationfund only, and does not include further savings for future
generations or revenues (and associated fiscal expenditures) for developmentprojects.
3. The Base Case assumes a moderate pace of policy and institutional reforms:
compared to the High Case, privatizationis slower, moderate improvementsin the
business environmentlead to smaller increases in private investment and non-oil exports,
and tax revenue increases are less significant. Oil exports increase somewhat, but less
than in the Low Lending Case, and the current account moves into deficit in 2002. The
fiscal balance is in surplus until 2003. The Bank's lending program includes one
adjustmentloan (the SPRAL in 2001) with the remainder in investmentand technical
assistance.
4. In the High Lending Case, privatizationmoves more quickly, resulting in greater
fiscal receipts; improvementsin the businessenvironmentlead to an increase in private
investmentand non-oil exports; improvedtax collection raises tax revenues; budget
discipline leads to a reduction in current governmentexpenditure, but this is balancedby
an increase in current expenditureon social protectionprograms; and there is an increase
in capital expenditure for priority public investments. However, under the assumption
49

that oil prices return to a historical average (i.e., from $28 per barrel in 2000 to $18 per
barrel in 2003), the fiscal take from oil rises by only about $200 million between 2000
and 2003. There is a fiscal deficit in years 2001 and 2003. Oil exports actually decline
between 2000 and 2003, and the current account moves into a deficit between 0.4 and 1.4
percent of GDP. External financing is assumed to include three adjustmentloans from
the Bank.
5. In the Low Lending Case, it is assumed that policy and institutional reforms stagnate.
The business environmentremains unfavorable,with the result that both domestic and
foreign private investment do not increase as a share of GDP, and non-oil exports grow at
a relatively low rate of 2 percent per year in U.S. dollar terms. Progress on privatizing
the remaining state-owned shares in blue-chip companies (valued at approximately 5
percent of GDP) continues but at a slow pace, and tax collection fails to improve. Higher
rates of GDP growth are driven by the assumption of continued strength in oil prices and
increased dominanceof the oil sector in the economy. High oil prices also result in a
current account surplus throughout the period, as well as a fiscal surplus until 2003.
6. The simulation results are particularly sensitive to oil price assumptions,which are an
importantdeterminant of both export and fiscal revenues. Table A8.3 shows the impact
of the three sets of oil price assumptionson fiscal revenues. A continuation of current
high oil prices results in a fiscal take between $1.3 and $1.7 billion per year. Compared
to the high-price scenario, moderate oil prices lower oil-related fiscal revenues by $266
million to $566 million per year during 2001-03, and low oil prices cost the fiscal budget
$658 million in 2001, falling to $606 million in 2003.

50

Table A8.1: Simulation ModelAssumptions

T
I

LowLendingCase
BaseLendingCase
HighLendingCase
(A)
(B)
(C)
OverallDescription:
Highoil prices,delayed Moderateoil prices,
Lowoil prices,faster
policyreform,lackof moderatepolirelicrespoy
reform,
transparency
transparency
transparency
OilSectorAssumptions:
* Oil pricesremain * Oilpricesremain * Oil prices
high andstablein
relativelyhigh
graduallydropto
2001-03
levelsconsistent
withhistorical
averages
* Higheroil revenues * Higheroil revenues * Due to loweroil
allowa significant
allowa moderate
revenues,public
increasein public
increasein public
investmentremains
investment
investment
at currentlevels
PolicyAssumptions:
* Slowprogresson
* Fasterprogresson * Fasterprogresson
privatization
privatization
privatization
* Continuationof
* Moderate
* Significant
unfavorable
improvement
in
improvement
in
business
business
business
environment
environment
environment
* No reformsin
* Improvedfiscal
* Improvedfiscal
publicsector
discipline
discipline
management
* Greaterinvestment * Greaterinvestment
in publicgoods
in publicgoods
* Moderate
* Significant
GrowthAssumptions:
* Higherratesof
*
economicgrowth
drivenby oil sector
FinancingAssumptions:
* No adjustment
*
lending
* Reduced
*
investmentlending

*

Oilprices

*

Capital
expenditure/GDP

*

*

Privatization
receipts/GDP
Private
investment/GDP
Non-oilexport
growth
Current
expenditure/GDP
Capital
expenditure/GDP
Taxrevenue/GDP

*

GDPgrowth

*
*
*
*

improvementsin

improvements in

tax collection

tax collection

Moderateincrease *
in growthrates
drivenby oil sector

Slowereconomic
growthdueto
loweroil prices

Adjustmentlending *
in 2001only
Fullinvestment
*
lendingprogram

Adjustmentlending *
in 2001-03
*
Fullinvestment
lendingprogram

51

Assumption
Variables
Affected

Externalborrowing
Intereston external
debt

Table A8.2: SimulationResults
Oil Prices (US$ brl) a
Low lending case (A)
Base lending case (B)
High lending case (C)
GDP Growth a
Low lending case (A)
Base lending case (B)
High lending case (C)

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

18.1
18.1
18.1

28.0
28.0
28.0

28.0
25.0
22.0

25.0
21.0
20.0

24.6
21.0
18.0

2.7
2.7
2.7

8.0
8.0
8.0

6.5
4.0
3.5

5.5
4.5
4.0

5.0
4.0
3.5

8.4
8.4
8.4

9.0
9.0
9.0

6.5
6.5
6.5

5.5
5.5
5.5

5.0
5.0
5.0

1,133
1,133
1,133

1,170
1,170
1,170

1,247
1,217
1,212

1,352
1,308
1,295

1,455
1,394
1,374

-1.0
-1.0
-1.0

6.2
6.2
6.2

4.9
2.7
-1.8

3.7
0.2
-0.2

3.4
-0.4
-2.7

2,318
2,318
2,318

5,020
5,020
5,020

5,382
4,806
4,229

6,114
5,136
4,891

6,222
5,311
4,552

-3.5
-3.5
-3.5

3.5
3.5
3.5

-0.4
-2.0
-3.4

0.1
-0.9
-1.4

-1.1
-1.7
-3.6

47.4
47.4
47.4

43.8
43.8
43.8

40.7
41.6
43.8

35.5
39.2
42.1

32.7
36.6
42.5

Inflation a

Low lending case (A)
Base lending case (B)
High lending case (C)
Per Capita Income
Low lending case (A)
Base lending case (B)
High lending case (C)
Current Acct./GDP
Low lending case (A)
Base lending case (B)
High lending case (C)
Oil Exports (US$m)
Low lending case (A)
Base lending case (B)
High lending case (C)
Fiscal Balance/GDP b
Lowlendingcase(A)
Base lending case (B)
High lending case (C)
External Debt/GDP
Low lending case (A)
Base lending case (B)
High lending case (C)
a: Assumedvalues.
b: Includesprivatizationreceipts.

52

Table A83: Fiscal Impact of Oil Price Assumptions
(US$ million)
2001
2002
2000
High oil

2003

prices(A)
28.0
1,288.6
713.5

28.0
1,356.4
904.3

25.0
1,682.7
928.7

24.6
1,315.8
1,045.4

575.1

427.7

637.3

401.8

28.0
1,288.6
713.5
575.1

25.0
1,062.0
704.3
357.7 1

21.0
1,125.8
586.3
539.4

21.0
1,048.8
733.3
315.5

28.0
1,288.6
713.5

21.0
697.9
433.7

20.0
1,014.8
499.8

18.0
709.2
465.6

575.1

264.9

515.0

243.6

Difference in fiscal
revenues (A-B)

0.0

294.4

556.9

266.9

Difference in fiscal

0.0

658.5

667.9

606.6

Oil price (US$ barrel)
Oil-related fiscal revenues
Tax
Non_tax a
Moderate oil prices (B)

Oilprice(US$barrel)
Oil-related fiscal revenues
Tax
Non-taxa
Low oil prices (C)

Oil price (US$ barrel)
Oil-related fiscal revenues
Tax
Non-taxa

a

revenues (A-C)
Non-tax oil revenues include royalties and bonus payments.

53

Annex 9: Proposed IBRD Lending program, FY 2001-2003

Proposed IBRD Lending Program,FY01-03
(US$ million)
High Case

BaseCase

Low Case

200

200

--

78
278

78
278

78
78

80
150

80

80

--

--

10

10

10

42
16
298

42
16
148

42
16
148

40
35

40
35

--

FYO1

Social Protection Reforn Adjustment Loan
(SPRAL)
Syr Daria and Northern Aral Sea
Subtotal
FY02
Northeast Vodokanal Water Supply
Second Public Sector Resource
ManagementAdjustment Loan
(PSRMALII)
Second Technical Assistance Loan (TAL
II)
Nura River Cleanup
Real Estate Rollout
Subtotal
FY03

AgriculturalServices
Second AgriculturalPost-Privatization
(APPAP II)
Consolidation Structural Adjustment Loan
(CSAL)
Financial Infrastructure
Rural Roads
Subtotal

100

--

--

15
50
240

15
50
140

15
30
45

Total FYO1-03

816

566

271

54

Annex 10: Non-LendingServices
Product

Completion

Audienceb

Objectivec

FY

Costa
(US$000)

1998-00
1998
1998
1999
1999
2000
2000
2000

252
146
161
125
520
448
75
350

G,B
B,G,D
G,D,B,P
G,B,D
G,B,D,P
G,B,D,P
G,B,
G,B,D

PS
KG
KG,PD
KG,PS
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS

2001
2002
2001

366.4
47.6
250

G,B,D
G,B
G,B,D

KG,PS,PD
KG,PS
KG

Upon Request
Upon Request
2001
2001
2001
2001
2002
2002
2002
2003
2003

375
n/a
159
32
25
25
150
200
200
150
250

G
G
G,B
G,B,D
G
G
G,B,D,P
G,P,B,D
G,B,D
G,B,D
G,B,D,P

PS
PS,KG
KG,PS
KG,PS
PS
KG,PS
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS,PD
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS,PD

Recent Completions
Rapid Response Policy Notes
Private Sector Assessment
Living StandardsStudy
Farm Restructuring Study
National Environmental Action Plan
Public ExpenditureReview
Procurement(IDF)
Financial Sector Study (FSAP)

Underway
Growth Strategy Study
Wheat Seed Industry (IDF)
Mining Sector Study

Planned
Policy Notes
WBI courses
GovernanceSurvey
Note on Revenue Reform
Silk Road (IDF)
Gender and Violence (IDF)
FinancialAccountability Assessment
Poverty Assessment/LaborMarket
Water Sector Strategy Study
Livestock Study
Country Economic Memorandum

Notes:
a. Figuresforfirst seven items are direct costs, all others are full costs
b. G=Government;B=Bank; D=Donors;P=Public Dissemination
c. KG=KnowledgeGeneration;PD=PublicDebate; PS=ProblemSolving

55

Annex 11: Exposure Indicators

Total debtoutstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)-

2922

4078

5715

7934

7662

7662

7231

7169

7513

Net disbursements(US$m)-

730

1214

1379

238

-386

0

-431

-63

343

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)'

322

483

885

1376

1618

1076

1291

846

1282

41.6
13.9
4.6

52.1
18.4
6.2

83.7
26.0
13.0

112.6
50.8
19.5

80.2
48.4
16.9

78.4
45.9
11.0

74.1
41.2
13.2

69.8
39.3
8.2

71.7
39.6
12.2

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TO
UIRD exposureindicators (%)
IERD DS/public DS
PreferredcreditorDS/public
DS (%)
IBRDDS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)e
Of which presentvalue of
guarantees(US$m)
Share of EBRDportfolio(%)
1DATDO (US$m)'
IFC (USSm)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /d

..

..

..

4.9

6.4

7.8

9.0

9.5

9.0

9.1
31.6

9.9
21.1

8.5
34.3

8.5
35.0

9.8
58.3

23.1
33.5

18.6
26.0

43.1
59.7

23.9
32.6

0.3
490

0.4
648

0.6
899

1.0
1082

1.0
1234

1.5
1408

1.7
1578

2.0
1658

2.2
1729

0
0

1
0

1
0

1
0

1
0

1
0

1
0

0

0

0
4.6

0
0

0
0

8.1
1.0

30.7
0

49.4
0.25

19.0
0.5

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includespublic and publicly guaranteeddebt, private nonguaranteed,use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services,including workers' remittances.
c. Includes present value of guarantees.
d. Includes equityand quasi-equiity pes of both loan and equity instruments.

56

Annex 12: CAS Program Matrix 2000-2003

Llf
TFr-/tTric,
(j ,Ir:r,

/
Theoperational
environment
for small
and mediumenterprises,
evenwhenpnivatized,
is
extremelydiffmult.

Newenterprisesare
not beingformedin great
numbers.Whenthey
are, theyhavelarge
incentivesto remainin
the informalsector.
Constraintsto their
growthneedto be
identifiedand removed.
/ Somelargeand
mediumenterprises
whicharefuncftonally
bankruptneedto be
closedor restructured.
Othersneedimproved
corporategovernance.

Trrrr. rrI *

I F'3fi

/

Establishment
of an
enablingenvironmentfor
postprivatization
restructuring
and SME
development,

/ Removingor simplifying
tax,regulation,licensingand
controlburdens.
/ Ensuringa competitive
environment.
/ Reformingthe bankruptcy
and liquidationprocess,and
establishingfunctioning
capitalmarkets.

V Accelerating
the
privatizationprocess
with an emphasison
improvingthe qualityof
privatization.
V Decidingon the
appropriatemethodsto
attractand maintain
qualityowners.

Privatization
of the
remraining
largeand medium
enterprisesand the Minority
shareholdings
of the Statein
about2,000privatized
enterprises.
v Institutingclearpolicies
on financialdiscipline,
restructuringpriorto
privatization,
liquidationof
non-privatizable
enterprises,
naturalmonopolies,property
rightsand adjudication
of
contractualdisputes.

V

/

57

rz r
ii ,i ,Ff

rfr4iP-Id [
THr:rt.
l[r--Tr7
i rtsr T!Irri"ir

/
Improved
Lendina
business
/
PSRMALII
environment
/
CSAL
shownin follow- v TA loan
up surveyunder V IFCloans
TA loan.
V IFC equity
/ Numberof
V IFC support
newenterprises - generalleasing
registeredper
IFCsupport
yearincreased - equityfunds
by 10 percent.
Guarantees:
/ MIGA
Nohnjagding.
/
Growth
V Bankruptcies
Strategy
effectedfor lossStudy
makingmedium / Noteon
and largefirms
Revenues
morethanfour
V Govemance
yearsold.
Survey
v CEM
V WBI
seminars
/
IPAnet&
Privatization
Link(MIGA)
SMEDept.
CASSS

Lendinq
/
EBRD
Te_hnical
Assistane
V Tacis
V UNDP
V USAID

Currentlabor laws
mayproveto be too
restrictiveoncethe

Amendlawsto
makethemmore
flexible.
v

Passageof a Lending:
V Identifyconstraintsas
/ SPRAL
theymanifestthemselvesand newLaborLaw
acceptableto the Non-lending:
instituteappropriate

amendments.

expands,
economy

Continue
concentration
on ruralfinances,
including
bank
increased
commercial
financing
anddevelopment
of
micro-credit
initiatives.
V Helpprovidemarketing
services.
v Devise
measures
to
X Thereis verylittle
mitigate
thesocialimpactof
non-agricultural
rural
development.
thetransition
on rural
communities.
backto
drylands
usesand V Restore
agricultural v Alternative
I Marginal
naturalvegetation
andseek
landisbeingtakenoutof employment
usesforsuch
opportunities
needto be sustainable
cultivation,
developed
there.
lands.
$ Agricultural
growthis
constrained
bylowcredit
availability
andlackof
accessto technology
andmarketing
opportunities.

/ Weaklandrightsdo
notprovide
a sourceof
collateral.

Makeagricultural
support
services,
including
credit,more
widelyavailable
to those
whoneedthem,
non-farm
rural
including
enterprises.
/ Findalternative
sources
of ruralincome
generating
activities.
/

v

Bank

in
Increase
ruralcreditby20
a year
percent
from2001.
I

I
Household
surveyresults
showsdeclining
ruralpoverty.
V Successful
implementation
GEF
of proposed
projecton
marginal
lands.
/
Deviseprocedures / Followupon lessonsfrom / Landreform
pilotlandregistration
lawacceptable
to
to haveefficient,lowincluding
more
Bankis passed.
costlandregistration. exercise,
affordable
feestructure.

Poverty
Assessment
andLabor
MarketStudy
Lendina:
/ APPAPII
I
RealEstate
RolloutProj.
V Agricultural
Services
Project
/
CSAL
IFClending
foragric.
equip.leasing
Grant:
/
Drylands
Ecosystems
Mgmnt.Proj.
Non-lending:
/ Growth
Study
X Reg.farm
debtstudy
/

v

adequate
/ Towards
theendof V Ensuring
theCASperiod,greater reformofthemining
oil revenues
needto be sector.
managed
andredirected V Ensuring
thatoil
towards
sustainable
flowsareusedina prouses.
development
manner.
v Prevention
ofan
enclaveeconomy.

Identifyoptionsforreform
ofminingsector
/ Identify
optionsforuse
andmanagement
ofoil
funds.
wealth,e.g.,offshore
V AdviseGovernment
on
bestuseof increased
public
resources.
X

58

Lending
v ADB
/ IFAD
Technical
Assistance
/
Tacis
v FAO/UNDP
V Germany
V UK
Knowhow
Fund
V Israel

Livestockst.

Agreedplan Lending:
n
v EBRD
onreformof the V CSAL
miningsector
Non-lending:
/
Japan
v Agreedplan X Mining
Technical
onuseand
SectorStudy Assistance
v/ Tacis
management
of X Growth
oilrevenues
StrategySt.
CEM
I

preconditions
forgrowth, reformns-(below).
reducedpovertyand
improvedliving
standards.

Supportthe
deepeningof the
financialsector.

v Publicdebt is rising
to unsustainable
levels.
Medium-termn
fiscal
sustainability
is only
possiblethrough
loweringthe fiscaldeficit.
X Increasingthe
efficacyof the tax and
customssystemis
essentalto attainthis
goal.
/ Publicexpenditures
will needto be realigned
awayfrom non-priority
areasand towards
investmentin
infrastructure
and
people,so as to improve
deliveryof public
services.

I
Supportthe
Govemment's
fiscal
reforms,as the primary
componentof its
macroeconomic
stabilizationprogram.
/ Supportreformof
the policy,procedures
and administration
of
revenues.

/

IMF

project

/USAID

Non-lendina:
/ Growth
StrategyStudy
V Revenuenote
/ CEM
/
Analyzeand helpto
V Tax and
Lending;
LeInding:
implementinter-governmentalcustomcollection I SPRAL
X IMF
fiscalreforms,to enablebetter levelsincreased / PSRMALIf
Techni-a
sharingof resourcesand
by 0.2 percentof / CSAL
Assistance
improvedfinancingof locally GDPper year.
I
Revenue
v Tacis
deliveredservices.
Mobilizn.project
V UNDP
I
Provideoptionsfor more
Non-lendinc:
V USAID
efficientintegratedtaxand
X Growth
customssystem.
StrategyStudy
/
Providesupportfor
/
Revenuenote
overhaulof tax andcustoms
/
CEM
systems.
/
Public
o Supportpublic
Expenditure
expenditurerationalization
levelsand mixes
goalsthroughsectoral
agreedwith the
operations,especiallyin
Bank,monitored
socialsectors.
throughSPRAL
and PSRMALIt
operations.

59

/

orruption
in the
publicsector,atall
levels-localand
Republican-is
a key
barrierto privatesector
growth.

Identifymajorareas
Conductsurveyof private V Follow-up
Tendinnicae
andcausesof
sectorandcivilsocietyto
surveyshows
PSRMAL
11 Assac
corruption.
identifykeyareasof
improvement
in vCSAL
-/ UNDP
V Extendinstitutional intervention.
levelof
V TAloansfor / USAID
reformsat Republican v Buildcommitment
from
corruption.
PSRMAL
11and
levelsto local
theGovemment
to address
CSAL
governments,
significant
problems.
Non-lending:
V Tailorpublicsector / Devise
policyactionsfor
V Governance
reformstocontinue
to
thepublicsectorthatincrease
Survey
addresstheunderlying accountability
andinstitutional
causesof corruption. restraints.
V Thequality
of
Esusre adequate V Helptoimplement
inter- V Successful Lending:
Lending:
deliveryofpublic
fiscalresources
atthe
govemmental
fiscalreforms, implementation V SPRAL
V ADB
services
in Kazakhstan locallevelarefoundto
witha particular
emphasis
on of PSRMAL
11. V PSRMAL
11 (possible
in
is declining,
dueto both assurethequalityof
anadequate
fundingformula V ImprovementV Health11
education)
fiscalconstraints
and
socialservices,
including forsocialservices.
inlifeexpec(FY04)
V France
(in
lackof institutional
healthandeducation. V Ensuremoreequitable tancy,child
V Northeast water)
reforms.
costandtariffstructure
of
mortality,
Vodakanal
proj. V Germany
services.
enrollment
rates. Non-lending: (KFW-inwater)
V PER
V Kuwait
V Improve
thequality V Forwater,improvement V Surveyof
V Poverty
Fund(inwater)
of municipal
and
of institutional
arrangements, watercustomers Assessment
and Technical
industrial
waterand
introduction
of commercial andothersusing LaborMarket
Assistance
wastewater
services.
principles
andsystems,
and socialservices Study
V Tacis
adoption
ofsafetynet
showsimproved V WaterSector V Germany
arrangements.
qualityof service. Strategynote
(GTZ)
V UK
Knowhow
Fund
V UNDP
V USAID

60

Manyof the poorin

tfProvide income

to cushionthe
arealready support
Kazakzhstan
employed,

Incometransfers
needto bere-oriented
thepoorest
towards
/ Thereneedstobe
for
budgeting
adequate
bothat
socialprotection,
localandRepublican
levels.
V

V Oneeffectof the
in
experience
transition
thesocialsectorsisthat
criticalpublichealthand
do
services
education
notalwaysreachthe
poorest.

transitionto more

Deviseguidelinesfor a

XSuccessful

Lendina:

publicworks implementation v
Poverty-targeted
program,with appropriate

of agreedpublic

SPRAL

Non-lending:

worksprogram. V Labormarket
of the
component
PovertyAssessmentandLabor
MarketStudy
Lending:
Successful
X
of
up
setting
the
asthe / Support
v Usepoverty
SPRAL
V
implementation
administrative
and
legal
for
solecriterion
II
/ PSRMAL
of SPRAL
to givesocial
for framework
eligibility
determining
Non-lendin:
to theneediest.
assistance
socialtransfers.
V PER
thatlocalbudgets
-' Ensureadequate V Ensure
V Poverty
"nonsufficient
allocate
are
publicfinances
and
Assessment
fundsto
sequester-able"
forsocial
available
Market
Labor
socialassistance.
assistance,
~~Study
_
Lending:
Poverty
V
sector
work V Devisea planned
V In bothsectors,
V SPRAL
questions
survey
in
strategy
rationalization
outefficientmechanisms
II
V PSRMAL
access
poor's
on
are
poor
the
that
so
health,
assistance
targeting
of
tosocialservices V HealthII
protected.
feesfor adequately
anddiscounted
showsimproved (FY04)
V WorkwiththeAsian
thepoorest.
accessbetween Non-lending:
the
in
Bank
Development
2001and2003. V PER
sectorto ensure
education
V Poverty
thataccessbythepooris
and
Assessment
aswell.
protected
LaborMarket
Study
remunerative
employment
opportunities.

minimum
(below-market)
wage.

Technical
Assistance
v UNDPIILO
v USAID

_

V UNDP
V

61

_

Lendi
V ADB
in
(possible
education)
Technical
Assistance
V Tacis
V Germany
(GTZ)
v UK
Fund
Knowhow
USAID

~'Tepoorin remote
areasmaynotbeableto
accessemployment
opportunities
andpublic
services.

V Incres accessby
Identifyb
bilding and
V/ Successful Lendina:
selectively
renovating
or rehabilitation
needsin poorest initiation
of Rural / RuralRoads
building
rural
regions.
RoadsProject project
transportation
systems. / Supportconstruction
and
repairof theseroads.

62

Tivf-~~

V In the Norheast,
industrialpollutionhas
raisedthe contamination
levelto a pointwhereit
threatensto limitthe
futuregrowthpotentialof
the areaand posesa
publichealththreat.
X In the South,
ineffcientirrigationand
livestockpracticesas
wellas run-offof nontreatedwastewaterfrom
citiesare creatingan
acutewatershortage,
and contaminationof the
Syr Daryariver.
V The Northem
CaspianSeais suffering
from oil spills from
offshoreoil exploitation,
posinga threatto marine
life,especiallythe is the
sturgeon.

rlt/a7

r,,

/
Cleaning
contaminated
riversand
watersources,thereby
providingsustainable
sourcesof watersupply.

X

Cleanup
contaminationwhile
ensuringbetterwater
useby farmersand
otherconsumers.

V Cleanthe Syr Dariariver
and promotebetterwater
managementandirrigation
practicesin the region.

V Work on preserving
the habitatfor sturgeon
and other marinelife,
V Cleanup oil-related
damage.

V

v

Cleanmercuryfromthe
Nurariver,
V Workwith partnersto
addressmercuryand
kerosenecontaminationof the
Irtyshriver.

Providetechnical
assistancein the areasof biomonitoring,development
of
hatcheriesetc.
V Workwith privatesector
to cleanup oil spillsand
preventfuturedamage.

63

Periodic
surveyson water
qualityin the
riversystems
show
improvement
in
waterquality.
/

Successful
implementation
of Syr Daria
Project
V

V Development
of suitable
technical
assistance
projects.

r'T

Lending:
V NuraRiver
cleanupproject
V North-east
Vodakanal
Project
V Syr Daria
Project

.i:Ir

Lending
V France
Grant
V GEF
Technical
Assistance
V Tacis
v UK
KnowhowFund
V UNDP
V
USAID

Annex 13: Summary of Development Priorities
Network area

Country
performance

Major Issue

Country
priority

Bank
priority

Medium

High

High

High

High

High

Reconciliation of country and Bank
priorities

Poverty Reduction & Economic Management
Povertyreduction

Fair

Regional Poverty

Economic policy

Good

Public sector

Good

Gender

Fair

Fiscal contraction, management of oil
funds
Improving governance, civil service
reform
Intra-householdviolence

Human DevelopmentDepartment
Education
Health,nutrition & population
Social protection

Environmentally& Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development
Environment
Socialdevelopment

Finance,Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector
Private sector
Energy & mining
Infrastructure

Fair
Fair
Poor/Fair

Low

Restructuring sector for improved
Medium
efficiency and service delivery
Restructuring sector for improved
Medium
efficiency and service delivery
Targeting social transfers to the poorest Medium

Fair

Providing adequate and accessible
agriculturalservices
Fair/Good Realizing the National Environmental
Action Plan
Poor/Fair Building community-levelmanagement
resources

Good
Fair

Deepeningthe financial market
Improving corporategovernance and
ease of entry and exit
Fair
Improvinggovernance in the mining
sector
Fair/Good Building adequate and reliable
transportation and energy network

64

Dialogue in context of CAS, proposed
SPRAL and Poverty Assessment

Medium Dialogue spurred by IDF on gender
and violence

Low

Dialogue led by the ADB

High

Dialogue in context of Health APL

High

Dialogue in context of proposed
SPRAL and Poverty Assessment

High

High

High

High

Low

Low

High
High

High
High

Medium

Medium

High

Low

Infrastructure projects from the EBRD,
ADB and bilateral donors.

Annex 14: Private SectorDevelopmentStrategy
Introduction
1.
The private sector in Kazakhstanhas about a 60% share of GDP compared to the 7080% share in the more advanced reformersin the ECA. But enterprise restructuring
performance in Kazakhstanhas not progressedas much, hindered by a poor corporate
governance framework. Since 1990, there has been major changes in the structure of GDP,
notably the fall in the share of agriculturefrom 34% to around 10% between 1990and 1999
and the doublingof the share of the trade sector.
Privatization,Governance,and Restructuring
2.
Privatization. Kazakhstan has utilized multiple methodsof privatization since 1991,
including mass privatization, agriculturaland small scale privatization, and case by case
privatization. In the process, some 13,000small establishmentswere transferred to private
owners,about 1,700enterprises were included in the mass or voucher privatization,and shares
in about 1,600companies were sold in cash auctionsor negotiated sales. Under the "blue chip"
program,the Governmentplanned to sell shares in 56 large enterprises in the stock market, but
this program has stalled, first due to unfavorable market conditions and then due to a
reassessmentof the privatizationexperience. The Governmentalso entered into management
contracts covering 94 large enterprises and trust managementcontracts for about 21 enterprises,
but these contracts will not be renewed due to negativeexperience with this initiative.
3.
Despite the above accomplishments(including the completionof small scale
privatizationand most of farm privatization)about 100 large and 260 medium SOEs were yet
to be privatized by end-1999 and this has changed little in 2000. These large and medium
SOEs account for about a third of GDP. In addition, the State has minority holdings in about
2,000 enterprises.Completing the privatizationprocess remains a major task for the
Government,and while the Agency for State Property and Privatizationhas been developinga
program for selling state holdings in these enterprises,progress has been very slow. The
Agency is also reviewing plans for privatizing some of the so-called "national companies" in
the infrastructure,transport, energy, and telecommunications.The Government is now
proceeding to initiate consultant contracts for preparing a sub-set of the blue-chip enterprises
for privatization.
4.
The method and preconditions for the privatizationof the remaining SOEs are critical to
ensuring good governance,restructuring, and investmentafter privatization. In the case of the
privatizationof the "national companies",there may need to be a review of the respective
sectors to determine whether prior sector restructuringis necessary (e.g. the break-up of a
monopolyoperator and sale of all or part of the separate pieces) and whether there is a need to
put in place a legal and regulatory frameworkthat enables private ownership/participationand
ensures improved sector efficiency. The large enterprises and perhaps some of the medium
SOEs may require investmentbankers to handle the case by case privatization,although some
SOEs may be placed in privatizationpools where each pool is handled by one investment
banker or privatization agent who may recommendbreaking up certain enterprisesprior to sale.
Sale to foreign investors would most likely be the preferredroute for most of large enterprises.
65

The smaller enterprises and the minority holdings could be sold in cash auctions or through the
stock market. Of critical importancewith regard to any privatizationis that the process be very
open and transparent. This has not been the case with large scale privatizations in the past and
has precluded involvement of IFC.
5.
With the exception of the nationalcompanies, the Bank recommends that the
Governmentprivatize the remainingSOEs within a reasonable period of time (e.g. 18 months)
and to possibly liquidate (i.e., sell the assets separate from the liabilities- a form of
privatization)these enterprises if the sale of the enterpriseas an ongoing concern does not
occur. The organizationof the privatizationprocess is also important- in many countries,
decentralizingthe privatizationto the line ministries have resulted in delays since the ministries
do not have the proper incentivesto pursue privatization. Fragmenting the privatization
process also causes problemswith respect to the provision of technical assistance.
6.
Given that it will most likely take up to two years to complete the privatization process,
the Governmentwill need to formulatean explicit policy to manage the SOEs in the interim.
The most important considerationis the maintenanceof financial discipline. As discussed
later, in the section on industrial policy, initiatives by sector ministries to subsidize losses and
restructure SOEs are worrisome. These initiatives tend to worsen the fiscal situation, weaken
the banking system, and delay the privatizationprocess.
7.
The Bank, in coordinationwith IFC, could send its top experts on privatizationto assist
the Agency for State Property and Privatization design the program for completingthe
privatizationprocess. This would enable Kazakhstaniofficials to receive the benefits of the
recent lessons of experience. The remaining funds under the existing Finance & Enterprise
DevelopmentLoan (FEDL) for the privatizationcomponent could be used to design and
partially fund the implementationof the program.

8.

CorporateGovernance. Corporate governancehas been identified as a major issue in
Kazakhstan. The EBRD rates governance and enterprise restructuring in Kazakhstan as a 2indicating "Moderately tight credit and subsidy policy but weak enforcementof bankruptcy
legislation and little action taken to strengthencompetitionand corporate governance." Many
enterprises sold under the mass privatizationprogramremain without a majority owner.
InvestmentFunds have been ineffective in providing governance to privatized firms. Many
enterpriseshave complainedthat the State has been blocking important decisions through its
minority ownership. In a survey of firms in Central Asian Republics and Russia in 1998,
Kazakh firms have the highest share of non-insiderownership. This requires effective
mechanismsfor corporate control and monitoringof management. Improving corporate
governancemechanisms would also encourage foreign investmentwhich has been absentin
most privatizationsto date.
9.
One of the building blocks for good corporate governance is the establishmentof good
accountingand auditing (internal and external) systems to ensure the provision of information
on a timely basis that adequatelyreflects the financial condition of an enterprise. The laws and
regulations on corporate governance should ensure that stockholdersand board members have
access to appropriateinformationand that there exists a mechanismfor independent reviews or
audits.
66

10.
Once major gaps in governancehave been identified,the Government could address
them with Bank support. Funds available under the capital markets component of the FEDL
could be used finance implementationof recommendedreforms, and policy reforms could be
supported by the CSAL. Better accountingand auditing standards, improved corporate
governance , and a more developed legal and regulatory frameworkwill improve the business
environmentand lead to a greater involvementof the IFC in the development of Kazakhstan's
private sector.
11.
Bankruptcy and Liquidation. The process of bankruptcy and liquidationin Kazakhstan
is long and arduous. Many bankrupt SOEs have not been liquidated which prevents the sale of
the assets to those who can make best use of them. In the meantime, these assets are
deteriorating. There are two areas of reform. First, the relevant laws, procedures,and
institutionsneed to be reviewed and analyzed as a basis for defining fundamental reforms to the
bankruptcyand liquidation framework. Second, an interim fast track process should be
introducedto deal with existing bankruptor nonprivatizeableSOEs.
12.
Over the past few years, the Bank has developed expertise and experience in bankruptcy
and liquidation, mainly due to the work in East Asia. Reformof bankruptcy and liquidation
laws is also under way in some ECA countries, notably Bulgaria and Macedonia. In Bulgaria,
the Bank made the assessment and providedthe conceptualdesign, while donors funded the
more detailed design work and implementation. In the case of Kazakhstan, the Bank could
send its experts to evaluate and develop recommendationsfor improving the legal framework
and the FEDL could finance the implementationof the Bank recommendations,which would
then be supported by the CSAL.
Small and Medium Enterprises
SMEs today play a much less importantrole in Kazakhstancompared to developed
13.
countriesor advanced transition economies. The potential contributionof SMEs to growth is
well recognizedby the Govemnment,and for the past few years there have been two Presidential
Decrees, four laws, ten Governmentdecrees, and seven regulatory acts that deal with SME
development. In November 1998, the Governmentapprovedthe "National Program for the
Developmentand Support to Smaller Businessesin Kazakhstan, 1999-2000". The new
programrecognizes that in the past, substantialfinancial resources have been expendedby both
the Governmentand donors, with little impact on SME development. The new programtries to
focus on establishing an entrepreneurshipmentality, building business skills, and encouraging
SME creation. The new instrumentsinclude developing the franchising of existing businesses,
increasing the availabilityof consulting services,simplifyingthe tax system (e.g., the use of the
patent system), and introducing a mechanismfor certifying goods. While all of these potential
instrumentsare beneficial, little progress will be made on stimulating SME growth without
substantialimprovement in the private sectorbusiness environment.
14.
There is considerable scope for increasingthe number and contributionof SMEs,
especially in non-trade sectors of the economy. However, maximizing the contributionof
SMEs requires innovativeorganizationarrangementsto allow for the formation of linkages
among SMEs and with larger enterprises,such as the programbeing developed by IFC with
Ispat Karmet - the experience in countries such as Italy Denmark and South Africa are also
67

worth noting. In addition, SME programs should also focus on other determinants of SME
growth, such as diffusion of informationand technologyand upgrading of technical and
managerial skills. Programs such as the Central Asian Business Support Services being
developed by the Bank Group SME Departmentshould support this effort.
15.
Access to medium- and long-termfinancing is also very important for SME growth.
Generally, SME access to financing is most efficiently channeled through financial
intermediaries. IFC has taken a leading role in the area of capacity building in the financial
sector to support the financing of SMEs and this activity is expected to be expanded during the
next three years.
The Private Sector Assessment(PSA) recommendedthe developmentof leasing as a
16.
means of increasing the flow of financialresources to SMEs. Unfortunately there has been
little investmentin leasing due to the weak civil code provisions pertaining to leasing
activities. The PSA recommendationto develop a leasing law was finally implementedwith
the adoption of the leasing law, drafted by the National Bank, on July 5, 2000. The passage of
this law should give impetus for the developmentof leasing companies in Kazakhstan,once
implementingregulations are adopted. Developmentof leasing is an area of focus for IFC
activity in Kazakhstanwhich will be developed together with foreign technical sponsors. There
is also a need to review the legal and institutional frameworkfor secured lending.
17. The most pervasive constraint to SME developmentcontinues to be the high transaction
cost resulting from the difficult business environment. Licensing requirementsand regulatory
practices in Kazakhstanincrease immenselythe costs of business activities and provide
opportunitiesfor corruption. A wide range of activities require licensing before an
entrepreneur can commence activity. The proceduresare often complicated and involve several
state bodies. The approval process is lengthy and some state bodies charge significant fees for
their services. Interviews at the Congressof Entrepreneurs'6 suggest that there are currently 26
different state bodies authorizedto supervisebusiness activities (State Committee for
Standards, Fire Inspection, Tax Inspection,Energy Inspection,Sanitary Inspection,etc.). By
some accounts a business can be subjectedto 20 inspections a month and more than one
hundred agencies can control, inspect and monitor SMEs. Several attempts have been made to
limit the number of supervisorybodies that deal with the private sector in order to shield
entrepreneurs from excessive interference and rent seeking (including the PresidentialDecree
of June 14, 1996 on SME Regulations,the "Law On State Support to Small Entrepreneurship"
of June 19, 1997, the April 27, 1999 PresidentialDecree "On the Protection of Rights of
Citizens and Legal Entities to Freedom on EntrepreneurialActivity", and the "Law On the
Introductionof Changes and Amendmentsto Some Legislative Acts of the Republic of
KazakhstanConcerningQuestions of Protection of November29, 1999). Unfortunatelythese
laws and decrees have failed to bring tangibleresults, in many respects due to the lack of
implementation at the regional level.

16 Two additional sets of issues were identified. First, the administration and implementation of adopted
legislation depends greatly on the regional governors' attitude towards them. Second, dissemination of
information on new regulations and entrepreneurs' rights is not adequate, and often comes with a significant lag
after a law is actually implemented,resulting in penalties for businesses.

68

The licensing regime needs to be streamlinedby reducing the range of activities for
18.
which licenses are required, simplifyingfiling procedures,and shortening the time involved for
licensing approval. Business regulationsshould be reviewed with the goal of eliminating
unnecessaryregulations and simplifyingthose that are required. Work done by the Bank in
conjunctionwith the Growth Strategy Study and PSRMALII will present, in a systematic
manner, a more detailed analysis together with recommendationsas to which licensing
requirementsshould be eliminatedand with regard to the licensing that remains, which
procedural steps or procedurescould be eliminated. PSRMALII will then support the reform
of the licensing and regulatory regime.
Foreign Direct Investment
19.
Due to the low levels or private and public savings in Kazakhstan,growth prospects in
the short and medium term, outside the oil and gas sector,are dependent on the level of foreign
investment.. While the level of FDI in Kazakhstanon a per capital basis is higher than that of
its neighbors such as Russia, Uzbekistan,and Azerbaijan,more than 80 percent of such
investmenthas been in oil, gas, minerals and metallurgy. In 1998, Kazakhstan attracted $1.2
billion of FDI compared to a $1.4 billion annual average during the period 1994-97,due in
great measure to the financial crisis' in Asia and Russia. South Korea, a major investorin
previous years, significantlyreduced its investmentflows in 1998. The US, Japan, and the UK
have increased investmentactivity in Kazakhstan,however, very little is invested in activities
outside natural resources.
20.
The survey of foreign investors conducted by the International Tax and Investment
Center in 1997identified the importantfactors influencinginvestment decisions and the
investor perceptions of the investmentclimate in Kazakhstan. Investor interest was driven by
accessto raw materials and natural resources, market potential, a desire to preempt competitors,
and Kazakhstan's strategic location. The study noted that while many investors consideredthe
changesin the investmentclimate as generallypositive, about a third of the respondents viewed
the investmentclimate as negative. The most significantbarriers to investment were identified
as: excessive bureaucracy and corruption,complex and burdensometax regime, the absenceof
good legal infrastructure,and poor physical infrastructure. The PSA and FIAS reports of 1998
both identifiedthe immediate and high priority FDI issues as the improvement in the legal and
regulatory regime and the eliminationof rampant corruption. These findings were further
confirmed by the Bank/IFC/MIGAOED/OEGteam during their March 2000 mission. They
surveyedforeign firms operating in Kazakhstanand found that the significantproblems with
the business environmentincluded: (I) a weak regulatory framework with a lack of clarity
combined with constant amendmentsand changes in policies, personnel and responsibilities;
(ii) arbitrary tax laws including an overlappingof taxes; and, (iii) ad-hoc decision making due
to the absence of a well structuredlegal and tax framework. The active and unrestrained
interventionof Akims (Regional Governors)in the investmentprocess and the operation of
private firms was also mentioned as a major impediment.
21.
In order to attract more foreign investment,Parliamentpassed the "Law on Foreign
Investments"which provides guarantees for foreign investors against changes in legislation,
expropriation,illegal action by state agencies and officials, as well as guaranteesof unrestricted

69

use of income and currency convertibilityfor dividendsand other specified uses. In addition to
the guarantees, the promotion of FDI basically uses two types of incentives. First, the "Law on
the State Support of Direct Investment" grants state assets and concessions, income, land and
property tax holidays for five years with an additionalperiod of reduced rates, as well as duty
and VAT exemption on imported machineryand raw materials,for varying periods. Second,
the "Decree Concerningthe Creation of EconomicZones" reduces the corporate income tax
rate by 10 percentage points. In both cases, the incentives are granted on an arbitrary and nontransparent case by case basis and are included in a contract signed between the investor and
the granting authority. There is a list of priority sectors that include electricity and
telecommunication,domestic market oriented manufacturing,advanced technologiesin
agriculture, and development of special economic zones. The 2000 revision of the Tax Code is
expected to take a fresh look at these tax incentives..
22.
The Bank will engage the Governmentin a dialogue to rationalize the incentives, define
the role of the Agency for Investments,and assist the Agency in designing a set of instruments
to support FDI promotion. Reform should move away from discretionary incentiveswhich
distort the market and instead focus on improvingthe overall investment and business climate.
It should also be directed toward developmentof programs that provide support and assistance
to investors in the form of facilitation services and the disseminationof information.
Financial Sector
23.
Banking. Banking reform over the past five years has focused on: (a) establishmentof
the legal and regulatory frameworkfor the banking system; (b) upgrading of supervision
capacity; (c) consolidationof the banking system;(d) privatizationof banks; and, (e) entry of
foreign banks. The legal and regulatory frameworkfor banking is basically in place,
supervisioncapacity is continuallybeing upgradedwith technical assistance from the Bank and
USAID. The consolidationof the banking system has resulted in the reduction of banks
froml84 in 1995 to 70 in March 1999.
24.
There has been significantprogress in bank privatization. In 1998, two large banks TuranAlemBankand Zhilstroibank- were sold to private investors. While EximBank has been
on the market for several years, there has been no successin selling the bank after discussions
with Bank Bumiputra of Malaysia collapsed due to the Asian crisis. There are continuing talks
on the merger of Kazkommertzbankand Savings Bank, which would result in a bank with more
than 50% of banking assets and more than 60% of total deposits (but more than 80% of
household assets) if the merger materializes.With respect to Eximbank, the liquidation route
shouldbe seriously considered.
25.
The banking system seems to have withstood, at least in the short term, the 1999
floating of the tenge. However,the impact on the portfolio will not be evident for some time to
come. A major problem for the large banks (about 80% of the banking system) is the
concentration of the loan portfolio. The top ten borrowers account for 30 to 50 percent of the
loan portfolio of five of the largest banks; the top twenty borrowers account for 40 to 75
percent of the loan portfolio. A review of the impact of the floating of the tenge on the banks'
portfolio is necessaryto determine what actions the National Bank of Kazakhstan (NBK)
should take if the review projects a high increase in bad loans. The table below already
70

indicates a deteriorationof loan portfoliosduring 1998. On a more fundamental level, a
vulnerability analysisis recommendedto identify the risks to which banks are exposed and to
recommendappropriaterisk managementmeasures.

Standard
Substandard
Unsatisfactory
High Risk
Loss
Total

Table 1: Loan Classification(in percent)
As of December 31, 1998
As of December 31, 1997
63.7
72.5
25.6
15.1
4.7
3.4
2.6
1.7
4.7
6.0
100.0
100.0

Capital Markets. There have not been any new initiatives or activities in the area of
26.
capital markets development. The Blue Chip program, which envisioned the listing of 56
companies, has stalled, and equity market activity is basically dead. While the problem one
year ago was an absence of securities available for purchase, the problem this year also
includes a absence of demand- there is little interest from foreign portfolio investors in
Kazakh securities. The lack of movementin the developmentof capital markets is of concern
for the success of the pension reform program.However, should there be progress in the
privatizationof large and medium size firms, including the national companies, coupled with
corporate governance reform, such actions would lay the foundation for further developmentof
capital markets. The Bank's role in capital markets development,should the Government
request assistance, would be undertaken through its activities under the FEDL and CSAL.
Industrial Sector
27.
Background.The industrial sector accountsfor about 22 percent of GDP and 12 percent
of employment. Power, oil, gas, and coal account for more than 50% of GDP, with mining and
agriculture/foodprocessing each having a 21% share. There are about 9,400 enterprises listed
as being in the industrial sector, of which about 7% are state owned and another 7% with
foreign participation. Only 515 industrial enterprisesare classified as large. An analysisof
performance of industrial enterprises showedthat for the first nine months of 1998,the
consolidatedfinancial statementsof the enterprisesshowed losses, compared to profits during
the years 1995-97.
28.
Industrial Policy. The policy initiatives being envisioned by the Government to
restructure the industrial sector are disturbing. Three initiatives are being contemplatedor
implementedwhich will focus on three major sub-sectors- chemicals, machine building, and
light industry. First, a credit program is being developed where funding from the Government
will be providedto commercialbanks which will choose worthwhileprojects, subject to
approval by the Ministry of Energy, Industry, and Trade. Second, protectionistmeasuresin the
form of high tariffs and quantitativerestrictions were imposed on some products, althoughmost

71

of these have been eliminated after the floating of the tenge. Third, the Ministry of Industry
plans to propose VAT and other tax holidays for selected sub-sectorsand enterprises.
29.
Government policies to promote industrializationcan be divided into two types: (a)
those that influence the factors that would facilitate industrial growth without prejudgingthe
resulting industrial structure; and, (b) those that attempt to target a certain industrial structure.
The former uses general or functionalincentives such as tax measures to encourage savings and
investment,public investmentin education,general FDI promotion, etc. The latter utilizes
industry-specific(and sub-sector specific) incentivesand subsidies, such as the ones currently
being envisionedby the Ministry of Industry, Trade, and Energy. In the case of Kazakhstan,
there should be a strategic shift in the focus of governmentpolicy from industry specific
targeting towards general incentives. This shift should take place not only because the mixed
performance of current industrial targeting,but also due to the lack of institutional capacity
and the absence of transparency which had led to significant corruption.
30.
The proposed shift to general incentiveswould change the role of the Industry
Departmentof the Ministry of Industry, Trade, and Energy to one of promotion and advocacy,
rather than the design of industry specific policies. In addition, there may be a role for the
Ministry in the: (i) setting of product quality standards (e.g. introductionof ISO 9000 ); (ii)
disseminationof informationrelated to new technologies,informationexchange and marketing
(e.g., trade fairs, MSTQ, etc.); and, (iii) fostering of industry wide organizationalarrangements
(clusters, improved transportlogistics, etc.). Pursuantto such a revised focus, industrial
structuringwould be driven by market forces that could be supplementedby improved
economy-widepolices to supportprivatizationand post-privatizationactivities.
PSD Strategy for Kazaklhstan
The recommendedPSD strategy focuses on the completion of structural reforms and the
31.
establishmentof policies and institutions that would facilitate restructuring, increase
investment,and improve productivity. The componentsof such a strategy would include the
following.
(i) Privatizationof the remaining large and medium size enterprises as well as the
Government's divestiture of its minority shareholdingsin about 2,000 privatized enterprises.
Such action would require decisionson the most appropriatemethods and organizational
arrangementsto maximize the potentialfor strategicownership positions in such privatized
enterprises. Clear and transparentpolicies on financial discipline,restructuring prior to
privatization,liquidationof non-privatizableenterprises,and natural monopolies must be
developed. A frameworkfor the regulationof property rights and the adjudication of
contractualdisputes must be developed if foreign investors are to be encouraged to participate
in the privatizationprocess.
(ii) Establishmentof the enabling environmentfor post privatization restructuring.
This could be accomplishedby ensuring a competitiveand transparent business environment,
improvingcorporate governance,reforming the bankruptcy and liquidation process, as well as
the establishment of functioning and active capital markets. An importantbuilding block of

72

corporate governancereform is the adoptionby enterprises of internationalaccountingand
auditing standards.
(iii) Sustainingthe current pace of banking sector reform with special emphasison: (i)
the privatizationof Halyk Bank: (ii) liquidation of the Exim Bank: (iii) upgradingof
supervision capacity;, (iv) eliminationof current restrictions on the share of foreignbanks in
the banking system; and, (v) encouraginginstitutionand capacity building in the banking
sector, especiallyin the area of risk management. A vulnerability analysis of the general
banking system together with a review of the impact of a floating tenge on the portfolioof the
banks' should also be implemented.
(iv) Improvingthe business environmentby reforming the licensing, regulatory,tax
and customs procedures as well as the institutionswhich administerthese areas in order to
reduce the high transactioncosts and reduce the opportunitiesfor corruption. Specific reviews
should result in the eliminationof many of the existing licensing and regulatory requirements
as well as simplify current tax and customs procedures.
(v) Definingthe role of governmentin the design and implementation of programs
that would upgrade the structural determinantsof competitiveness. Apart from reinforcing
sound macro economic policies, there are four areas that need attention: (i) skills development
(education,training, etc.); (ii) informationand technology diffusion (intellectualproperty
rights, MSTQ, etc.); (iii) physical infrastructureand logistics development; and (iv)
organization(clusters,etc.).

73

Annex 15: Poverty and Living Standards

The last accurate and comprehensivesurvey of living standards in Kazakhstan was
undertakenin July 1996, with the KazakhstanLiving Standards Survey (KLSS). Analysisof
the data, summarizedin the report Kazakhstan: Living StandardsDuring the Transition
(1998), found that over a third of the population lived below a "subsistenceminimum". The
most strikingdifference in povertyincidence in Kazakhstanis its variance by region (Figure 2
in the main report). In terms of the number of poor, two out of three poor people lived either in
the south or the east of the country. Rural poverty was higher, deeper and more severe than
poverty in urban areas. There was not much differentiationin poverty across gender, although
any difference may have been obscured due to methodologicalissues.
While almost half the unemployed were poor, poverty was also marked among the selfemployed-demonstrating that in transitional Kazakhstan,employmentitself was not a
guaranteedescape from poverty. This is because employmentin traditional enterprises often
provided low and delayed wages, while incomes from self-employmentor start-up businesses
were fraught with uncertainty. Alleviatingpoverty will entail the creation of broad-based
remunerativeemployment for the population, and a more efficient public sector to facilitate the
provision of fundamentalsocial infrastructureand social protection. Once again, growth will
need to be diversified-away from dependence solely on a dynamicextractive sector and
including ruraldevelopment-to provide increasedincomesfor the poor in the most vulnerable
regions, which have little mineral wealth.
As in other parts of the world, the poor are especiallv at risk of receiving low levels of
public services. Access to education and health services are worse among the poor. This is
compoundedin parts of Kazakhstanby the enormous distances that they may need to travel to
reach facilities, and the increasing cost of the servicesdue to the ongoing fiscal crisis, which
has resulted in both de facto and de jure privatizationof provision. Public delivery of health
and educationin Kazakhstan will need to improve, to enable the poor to best avail of income
opportunitiesin Kazakhstan's growing economy. Part of the solution is to build better access
systems. Another is to ensure a more effective andfocused public sector delivery system, that
the poor are assured of an affordable minimumpackage of services, and targeted social
protection.
A major factor affecting the quality of life for the poor in Kazakhstanis the extensive
environmental degradationthat is its legacy from the Soviet and early post-Soviet era.
Chemical contaminationof rivers in the industrial zones, and inefficient irrigation and livestock
practices have created a problem with both the quantity and quality of water in the northeast,as
well as in the south, where much of the poor live. Oil explorationand production practices
have made the Caspian Sea region vulnerableto possible major environmentalcatastrophes.
The cleanup of toxic wastes and efforts to manage drylands and control desertificationare
imperative to improve the quality of lifefor the poor.

74

A fundamentalproblem in accurately gaugingthe impact of recent socio-economicchanges
on poverty in Kazakhstan is the poor state of available data. For example, the poverty headcounts mentionedabove, from the KLSS, are substantiallylower than poverty estimatesbased
on the existing and ongoing Family Budget Survey (FBS) in Kazakhstan,due to problems in
measuring income correctly in the FBS. The Government,with help from the Bank, is
intending to address this problem with immediateeffect. In 2000, it has begun designing and
intends to implement a new Household Budget Survey. The Government has also committed
itself to processing and analyzing the datafrom the survey, and, by early 2001, disseminatinga
profile ofpoverty in Kazakhstan on a regular basis and using it as input to its policy decisions.

75

Annex 16: The Government'sDevelopmentProgram

A. The Long-Term Development Vision to 203017
1. Thelongertermvisionfor the developmentof Kazakhstanis embodiedin Kazakhstan 2030 Prosperity, Security and Improvement of the WelfareofAll Kazakhstani People. This vision was
articulated by the President, Nursultan Nazarbayev on October 6, 1997,and it declared "building an
independent,prosperous and politically stable state with its inherent national unity, social justice and
economic welfare of all population" as Kazakhstan's longer-termmission.
2.

Developments were foreseen in seven areas, in order to ensure:

* National Security. To ensure the development of Kazakhstan as an independent and
sovereign state with the maintenance of complete territorial integrity.

* Internal Political Stability and Consolidationof the Society. To maintain and strengthen
the internal political stability and the national unity which will enable Kazakhstan to realize
the national strategy during the present and following decades.

* EconomicGrowth Based on the Open Market Economy with High Level of Foreign
Investmentsand Internal Savings. To achieve real, sustainable and increasing economic
growth.

*

Health of the Nation and Welfare of KazakhstaniCitizens. To improve the living

*

standards, health, education and abilities of all Kazakhstan people, to improve the
environment.
Energy Resources. To efficiently use the energy resources of Kazakhstan by rapid
increase in extraction and export of oil and gas in order to receive revenues promoting the
sustainable economic growth and improvement of the life of the nation.

*

Infrastructure,in Particular,Transport and Communications. To develop these key

*

sectors so that to help to strengthen the national security, political stability and economic
growth.
Professional State. To create an effective and present-day corps of committed civil
servants in Kazakhstan capable to act as representatives of the nation while achieving
priority goals.

B.

The Medium-TermProgram

3. The medium-termpriorities are determined in the Program of Actions of the Governmentfor 20002002 approvedby the Decree of the President. The implementationof this Program, developed on the
basis of"Kazakhstan-2030" Strategy, is supported by international financial organizations,agencies and
donor countries. The main objective of the Governmentof the Republicof Kazakhstan in the economic
field is to ensure sustainableeconomic growth whilst maintaining a balance of the most important
macroeconomicparameters: exchange rate of tenge, inflation and deficit of the international balance of
payments of the country. The Program provides for achievement of annual three-percent growth of the

17

Thissectionwaswrittenby the Governmentof Kazakhstan.

76

real GDP,decreasein the inflationrateto 5% in 2002and reductionof the deficitof the Republican
budgetto 1.2%of the GDPin 2002.
4. To achievethe objectives set forth the Government intendsto:
*
*
*
*
*
*

maintainthe macroeconomicstability and strengthenthe principles of sustainable
economic growth;
ensure dynamic development of the real sector of the economy;
continue improvingthe investment policy of the country and active attraction of direct
external and internal investments into the economy of Kazakhstan;
switch over to targeted rendering of social assistancebased on the poverty criteria; and
transfer the core work on rendering social assistanceto the regions;
continue developing internal financial markets and capital markets for the sustainability
of the banking system of the country and expanded lending to economic entities;
continue improvingthe public sector managementsystem, its transparency,
decentralization,and strengtheningof the planning system.

5. In the monetary field, the policy will be aimed at maintaining low inflation and stability of
the financialmarket, further consolidatingof the banking system, developing of the insurance
market and creatingconditions for increased lending to the real sector of economy. The
authorities of Kazakhstan intend to follow the policy of floating exchange rate of tenge and
maintain the financial sustainabilityof operations in the open market, regulation of official
rates and two-tier bank refinancing as the key instruments. Special attention will be given to
the actions related to creation of new types of financial institutes such as investmentfunds and
agencies authorized to have transactions with corporate bills. Also assistance will be given to
creation of an organized real estate market and developmentof mortgage lending. Particularly,
the system of obligatory collective insurance of individuals' deposits, which is being createdby
the National Bank, is designedto raise confidenceof the population in banks and increase the
funds attracted to the banking sector as the ensuing consequence. The consolidationof the
banking system will be continued. The two-tier banks should be transferred to international
standards by the end of 2000. The prudential supervision will be made stricter including active
use of check-upson sites and improvement of the risk evaluation system. Active development
of financial leasing instruments is planned to expand lending to small and medium-size
enterprises including in rural areas. The stock market will be highly stimulatedby a security
mechanism for banks' assets and expansion of activities of banks with corporate securities.
The state intends to create necessary conditions for increased supply of non-state securitieson
the Kazakhstani organized stock market. Special focus will be made on increasing information
transparency of activities of organizations- issuers of non-state securities and organizers of
security sales.
6. In fiscal policy the actions of the Governmentwill be aimed at increasing the revenuesto
the state budget, and equitable distributing of the tax burden between the population and
economicentities. Provided the stability of taxation, the transparency and comprehensionof
the tax legislationwill be improved, tax privileges will be regulated and eliminatedin the
perspective,and the tax legislation administration will be controlled stricter. In the near future,
with the participationof internationaland domestic experts and active discussionswith all
interestedparties, the Governmentof the country will develop and submit a new Tax Code to
the Parliament,which will become a single codified legal act reflecting all issues of relations

77

between the budget and a taxpayer at the same time strengtheningits role as of the Law of
direct effect. While ensuring continuity in the structure of basic taxes and payments, the world
experience in the tax practice will be taken into account as well as the current economic
situation in Kazakhstan. Special significancewill be given to the improvementof tax
administrationprocedures with a clear-cut regulation of relations between fiscal bodies and
taxpayers as well as promotion of small business. The main purpose of the Tax Code is
moving away from the practice of giving tax privileges to special categories of taxpayers and
creation of equal conditions for taxation. The budgetary policy of the Governmentin the
medium term will be aimed at deepening budgetary system reforms on the basis of perspective
budget planning, transferring inter-budgetaryrelations between the center and regions to the
principles of mid-term stable norms, increasing the efficiency of state borrowings,managing
state expenditures on the basis of budgetary programs and strict regulation of the budgetary
process, priority financing of socially significant budgetary programs, applying stricter
approachesto the recovery of budgetary loans by borrowers within the current legislation,
steady reducing the deficit of the budget and stabilizing the state debt to the GDP correlation.
7. In the fieldof statedebtmanagement,duringthe periodof gradualreductionof the deficitof the
Republicanbudget,theGovernmentof the Republicof Kazakhstanintendsto:
* expand and improve the lending tools in operation in order to reduce the liabilities of the
state and promote direct investment flows into the economy of Kazakhstan;
* ensure the development of criteria and strict observation of the procedure for selection and
control of investmentprojects funded within the Public Investment Program as well as
further monitoring over fulfillment of obligations by borrowers;
* ensure strict agreement of the Public Investment Program funding with the Republican
budget of a relevant year;
* create a centralized system of monitoring and management of loans and debts of local
bodies, and to exercise stricter control over issuance of governmentalguarantees.
8. The Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan will undertake measures to complete the
program of privatization of the Republican state property, to increase their efficiency and to
ensure full transfer of dividendsto state share packages while implementing a single policy
aimed at increasing the disciplineof organizations-issuers of non-state securities regarding
charges and payments of income on shares and bonds.
9. The investment climate will be improved and direct investments will be increased through
further improvement of the legislation, development of the private sector, development and
introduction of mechanisms ensuring effective use and protection of deposited investments,and
transparency of investmenttenders. The state investmentpolicy will be determined by the
Public Investment Program within the annual limits of the Republican budget. In addition to
that the work will be carried out to develop mechanisms for attraction of investments with no
direct participationof the state, including through active development of the Kazakhstani
insurance and stock markets.
10. In regard to the stock market the policy of the state will be focused on its development as an
effective mechanism for mobilization and re-distributionof internal savings and funds of
potential foreign investors with creation of necessary conditions for attraction of portfolio
investmentsinto the real economy. Issuance of shares and bonds by Kazakhstani

78

organizations,issuers of non-state securities should become one of the key mechanisms for
attraction of investments into the economyof Kazakhstan.
11. The policy in the agricultural sectorwill be developed through promotion of competitive
industries. For the purpose of comprehensivedevelopment of industriesof the agroindustrial
complex, the agrarian policy will be planned and coordinatedwith the Program of development
of the light, food processing, pharmaceuticalindustries, and the agriculturalmachinery building
industry and the industry of construction materials. The Government will continue land reform
aimed at improvement of the land legislation and land relations in the Republic, development
of the land market, creation and improvementof the normativeand legal framework and the
system of state registrationof rights for real estate, and developmentof mortgage lending
against pledged land and land titles. The process of technical demarcationof lands of farming
units will be completed followedby registrationof land titles in the justice bodies.
12. In the field of housing construction the authorities of Kazakhstan intend to develop new
methods of mortgage lending to the population and commercialbuilders including provision of
housing for long-term lease with the right of subsequent purchase. Pilot projects will be
developed and introduced to create a system of construction savings.
13. The regional policy in the medium-term perspectivewill be aimed at ensuring effective
interaction between the central and local management bodies in implementationof the social
and economic reforms, developmentof the principles of territorial self-governmentwith
correspondinglegal and financial provisions. The Governmentof the Republic of Kazakhstan
is to improvethe current system of formation and executionof the budget at all levels whilst
strengtheningthe power of local executivebodies. It is expectedto expand the competence of
Akims in regard to determinationof the size and types of social assistance. To solve the social
problems of the population of the least developed districts the Governmentwill continue the
microcreditingprogram using grants and loans of internationalfinancial agencies. The
Government also intends to increase the interregional competition on the financial markets, on
the markets of labor and investments by promoting free movement of labor, capital and
investments.
14. In the field of social protectionand fight against poverty the Governmentof the Republic of
Kazakhstan will pursue the policy aimed at stabilizingthe living standards of the population by
effectiverealization of the labor potential, timely payment of salaries, pensions, allowances and
targeted social assistanceto the poor. The social assistance will be targeted to the really needy,
and the poverty level will be the only criteria for its provision. The Governmentof the
Republic of Kazakhstan confirms its commitmentto the Pension Reform started in 1997 and
absolute and timely fulfillment of its obligations on payment of pensions and allowances. The
fully-fundedsystem will be strengthenedthrough improvementof the pension asset recovery,
strengtheningof prudential control over activities of pension funds based on internationally
accepted accounting standards, and expanded supplies of first-rate assets for investments,. One
of the most important conditions for successful implementationof the Pension Reform is
creation of a sustainable and stable insurancemarket capable to ensure life annuities for the
participantsof the fully-funded pension system and creation of a system for payment of
allowances on disablement and loss of a bread-winner.
15. In the employment field the Governmentof the Republic of Kazakhstanintends to establish
permanentmonitoring of the poverty and unemploymentlevels, to improve the system of

79

public works with an allowanceto the change of their payment system and source of financing;
to improve and develop the system of microcreditingto the poor unemployed citizens; develop
and implement a number of measures aimed at encouraging employers who createjobs,
especially in rural areas as well as promote business in the Republic in order to provide
employmentfor the unemployed. A social insurance system will be developed.
16. In healthcare the efforts of the Governmentof the Republic of Kazakhstan will be focused
on the implementation of the State Program "The Health of the Nation"; introductionof cost
recovery mechanisms for medical assistance and restructuring of the sector in order to develop
a free market of medical services and keep the healthcare affordable to large groups of the
population.
17. The main aspects of the activities include:
*

stage-by-stagetransfer from in-patient to out-patient principles of treatment through
arrangementof day-time in-patience, at-home in-patience and further introductionof the
institute of family doctors;
* as well as further development of the non-state healthcare sector and stage-by-stage
privatizationof treatment-and-preventativeinstitutions.
18. In the field of environmentthe Governmentof the Republic of Kazakhstan intends to
optimize the nature management system, to expand the participation of the state in international
environmentalprograms, to create conditions to transfer to ecologicallysafe technologies and
increase the level of recycling. The work will be continued on creation of an effective system
of nature management, subsurface use and environmentalcontrol on the Republican and local
levels. Within this work it is expectedto modernizethe production of cartographic and
topographic and land-surveyingproducts with the help of internationalfinancial institutions.
19. One of the key priorities of the authorities of the country in the real sector of the economy
is developmentof the transport infrastructure,reduction of the transport component in the cost
of the domestic production and further development of the transit capacity of the Republic. For
this purpose the Governmentwill improve the legislative framework for carriers and operators
on the transport and communicationsmarket of the country and will continue its policy of
sectoral reform implying narrowing of the sphere of activities of natural monopolists and
transfer of special functions to the private sector.
20. The energy policy will be aimed at developing a competitiveand technologicallyconnected
fuel and energy complex. For this purpose active measures will be undertaken for the
developmentof the fuel and energy complex of the countryto ensure energy independence and
delivery of energy resources to the world consumptionmarkets. The Government intends to
determine its position with the layout of export gas and oil pipelines and proceed to the design
and construction of its separate parts taking into account creation of multi-optional ways of
energy resource transportation. For the purpose of further reformationof the energy sector,the
Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan intends to complete privatizationof energy
producingcapacities by 2002, and create a competitive wholesale energy market. In 2002, the
Governmentwill develop and introduce a new tariff policy which will fully cover the cost and
aimed at reducing the independence of the tariff on electricity transmission distance which will
create stricter competition between energy sources in distribution of the generated energy and
ultimatelywill reduce energy prices.

80

21. The Governmentwill continue improvingthe public sector management system, interdepartmentaland inter-sectoral coordination;will undertake further steps to restructure the civil
service and increase professionalism of the central and local executive bodies. For this purpose
a Program will be developed and introduced on decentralizationof the functionsof state
bodies, functionalanalysis of each central state body and further functionalcodification of state
bodies and civil service positions; improvementof the civil service law and increase in the
efficiency of the state decision-makingprocedure.
22. Within the AnticorruptionProgram the work will be carried on disclosureof corruption,
and acts will be developed and adopted to regulate the procedure for imposition of disciplinary
penalties, taking oath by civil servants and observation of the ethic code. The Governmentof
Kazakhstan is assured that the measuresproposed in the Program will help to put the economy
on the path of sustainable economic growth. The implementation of the Program will help to
correct the existing imbalances in the economy,to create conditions for the development of
domestic commodityproducers, to expand the taxable base and expedite solution of social
problems on this basis.
23. The cooperationwith the World Bank Group will be implemented on the principles of
partnership and active involvement of financial, administrativeand intellectual capacity of the
Group in solutionof urgent issues related to the developmentof the economy of Kazakhstan.
The authoritiesof the Republic will specially focus on optimization of the current credit
portfolio of the country, the balance of investment and adjustment loans and improvementof
the managementand implementation of the projects both on the level of individual borrowers
and the level of the Government on the whole.

81

Annex 17: The CAS ConsultationProcess
Between November 1999 and June 2000, several rounds of consultations took place with
different members of the civil society in Kazakhstan. These included non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), focus groups of citizens in Kostanai, Ust Kamenagorsk, Astana, Karaganda and Zhambul
oblasts of the country, the donor community, Parliamentarians, and representatives from the private
sector.
The following table is a summary of the comments raised by the groups, and Bank staff
responses to the comments and issues as it relates to the strategy.

Comments from Civil Society
A.

Bank Staff Response/Proposals

Stimulating broad-basedprivate sector led growth

1. Addressthe problemsdealingwith a lackof
creditin the economy,especiallyfor longer
than9-12months.This is especiallytrue for
agriculture,but alsoforsmalland medium
enterprises.

1. TheBank would address these issues in
agriculture through the APPAP II and
agricultural servicesprojects. The Financial
Infrastructureproject would also help deepen
the marketfor financial instruments.IFC would
continue to support medium and long term
credit lines for on-lending to SMEs.
2. TheAPPAP I will explore lending through

2. Collateralrequirementsof the commercial
banksare too strictand limitscreditto
cooperativesand theReal EstateRegistration
agriculture.Landregistrationand reregistrationis too expensiveto be affordable
Project would roll out the infrastructure for
forfarmers,specificallythe issueis vitalfor re- registri pope rightst theetire
settlers.

country. Work carried out under the Rapid

Response to help design a "warehouse
receipts" scheme would help address the
collateral concerns.
3.

Broaderareneededforthe3
instruments

Continued implementationof the Pension
Reform Loan by pushingforward the "bluecis
rvtzto
n h iaca
chips" privatization and the Financial
Infrastructureproject would help develop new
instruments such as mortgage.

3.Braernents
renFned fo the
investmentsof the Pension Funds to make
efetv

us doesi

fiaca

saig.

4. Servicesneededfor developmentof rural
businessessuchas transportingproductsto
market, procurementof eliteseeds,accessible
veterinaryservices,businessconsultingfor
beginningfarmersandmanagersof fanning
entitiesare weakor not available.

4. Agricultural Support Services Project would
focus on streamlining delivery of services to the
farmers, including the seed sub-sector and
veterinary services Rural Roads project is
expected to help ease transport constraints.
5. Public information componentof the Legal
Reform project which is under implementation
wouldfocus on disseminating basic legal
information. The Bank Group SME Dept. is
working on the development of CABSS to
provide pre- and post-project support to SMEs.

5. Lackof legalknowledgeandunaffordable
consultingservicesdiscouragemanypeople
fromtheirownbusiness.

82

B.

Enabling a reformed public sector
1. Local officials are not accountable, and need 1. The civil service reforms supported by
to be made so. Activities of akimats (provinces) PSRMAL II are aimed to increase the system of
are to be transparent, open to public scrutiny.
accountabilityfor local officials.

C.

2. Doing business is made difficult because of
numerous licensing, auditing requirements
imposed by Government officials Lack of
transparency and impunity of government
officials lead to bribery and corruption
especially in getting licenses or credits. Abuse
of power by government officials lead to
collapse of some businesses.

2 Survey on Governanceand Service Delivery
is expected to identify impedimentsto the
private sector development originatingfrom
excessive controls and audits.. Streamlining
excessive controlswould be addressed under
the programs supported by SPRAL, PSRMAL
11and CSAL.

3. Stability of legislation is critical. Very often
laws are adjusted to convenienceof the
governmentofficials. Vague parameters allow
free interpretationof legal and normative acts.
No consistency and little public knowledge of
legislation.

3. Trainingofjudges and improvementsin the
c
court administrationas well as elimination of
inconsistencies in the legislation are handled
under thejudicial strengtheningand legislative
drafting components of the Legal Reform
Project respectively.

4. Though petty corruption is more visible, it
can not be dealt separately from high level
crptn.
corruption.

4. Actionsagreedby the Governmentas CAS
tions agredabthe Governmen asCAS
triggers such as the public declaration as well
as clear separation ofprivate sector activities
by government officials would help set
examples. Further actions such as public
disclosure of all government contracts will be
discussed with the Government during
PSRMAL preparation.

Supporting the most vulnerable
1. The Health 1lproject would take special
care to make essential services affordable to
the poor. Thepolicy conditionalities
associated with SPRAL would allow better
targeting of social protection expenditures to
the poorest.

1. The income to pay for social services, such
as health and education, were lacking.

2 The restructuringeffort of the primary care
Thi wastiatunder
theHealt
care
which was initiated under the Health I project
in two oblasts will be expanded by six more
oblasts under the proposed Health llproject,
covering more than 60percent of the
population.

2.Health indicators and the quality of health
sevie ar deeirtn
rail

3. The quality of education is in the decline.
There are concerns about the coverage, decline
in enrollment rates, relevance of the curricula.
4. Unemployment is very high in rural areas.

3. The Bank is in dialogue with the Asian
Development Bank which is taking the
leadership in providing external assistance to
the sector.
4. Discussions are underway on the
development of a sensiblepublic works

Young people leave for cities, old people have

83

D.

to let out their land under crushing terms.

program in the context of the SPRAL
preparation. The proposed Rural Roads project
would be designed with a view to providing
jobs in the rural areas for the rehabilitation
and the maintenance of rural roads. Housing
Finance component of the proposed Financial
Infrastructure project would be, inter alia,
creation of employment in the construction
industry.

5. Pension payment is regular, however, the
assigned amounts are discriminatory. Earlier
retired are under unfair payment.

5. Agreements under the Pension reform Loan
provide for indexation ofpensions from the old
system to cost of living changes.

Protecting the environment

1. There is a need to coordinate the array of
activity by donors on various environmental
projects.
..
2. Degradation of land is a 2.problem.
rolmndy
Derdto Inf dry
adi
years the areas of alkali soil are growing fast

1. The Bank has, and will continue to, work
closely with other donors to ensure that our
efforts are complementary to those by the
others, and provide added value.

~~~~~~2.
Theproposed GEE grantfor Drylands
2 h rpsdGFgatfrDyad

Management wouldpilot conversion of virgin
lands taken out ofproduction to pastures in two

rayons in Northern Kazakhstan.

3. Water and sewerage systems are a threat to
environment and health of people.

3.Reform of the urban water sector would be
undertaken in a number of cities under the
proposed Northern Vodocanal project based on
the experience developed though the Atyrau
Pilot Water Supply project.

4. Solid waste and dumping sites including
disposal of poisonous chemicals are a problem.
It also has impact on water in rivers.

4. Nura River Clean-up project will address the
issues of pollution of water bodies together
with the multi-donor financed projects in Zone
B

. Semipalatins
test.siteproblemhasnoe

5. A UNDP/Japan led multi-donor program
(including a component of the Health I project)
is underway to address the issues of

5. Semdpalatisk test site problem has not been
resolved.

Semipalatinsk.

84

Annex 18: Partnerships

Kuwait
UN
SysteIsDB FrancGermJapa Fund UK

World BankGrou_
IBRDIFC MIGAWBI IMF ADB EBRDEU
Macroeconomic
Framework
FiscalPolicyand Management
LegalFramework
Adminstrative- Civil Service Reform

Governance- Anti-Corruption
SocialProtection
Other EconomicManagement
Agricultureand RuralDevelopment
Irrigation
FinancialSector
Small And Medium Enterprises/PSD

Industry
Transport/Telecommunications
Oil and Gas
Power

.,k

-

-

A3,

*

-

-

3

PastAdjustmentLending

-

-

-

_

_

-

UNDP

3 .

_
*

*

TA

_A

hA

UNDP
,

-AEL

FAO

-

I.

KHF

"

-

_

-

T A__

-

UNDP

Js

-

==SW

L
_

-

-

r

-

_

-

UCANADA
CANADA

A

_=ANADA

C

UNDP

=

S
BGR

_

T2W

-

-

I

TURKE_

M
-

_

i

=_

-

-

_K

__CA
-

_

UNDPALO

-

Health

Past InvestmentLending

-

_=

_

Environment

3

-

_

Water
Education

-

=GTZ

USAIOther

_-

-

PlannedInvestment

PastTechnicalAssistar

PlannedAdjustmentLendingI Guarantees

85

-

GTZ

ML_
KHF
KHF
KHF
I

PlannedTechnicalAssistance

T

MAP SECTION

T

ToChelyabinsk

\>
>

/

yween
- tS-a

K

u

60n

r

g

a

0

/80°

g

n

FoOmsk Novosibjfsk gg

XE
A
TDIER N
t

S

g

~~~~
~ ~~~~~~~~~~ToC~lb,,

KAZAKHSA
t

AKB

A

3 ;/ATYI

v

\

KZLR

A

YSAU

W

Y

Y

O

Yo

o

KARAHA
r\

De'

ZA

wMn

BL

UZBKOSTANA

A

ad

dono,sonon

4§6~~~~~~~~~coos

Osoop,
oo jo

-L ooy ete

!

\

BeinROADS

-. -w
aa

._.

-

-R>--

/

t-halkr
0

--

Li

I

'-'

oga ooyl

INTERNATIONAL

aboepdoneof

o5 tO

|

h

5

of

/te

-'

-

/

y, 1990LEVELOFARALSEA
o

anyoote

suh-

y,
orl

HN

I -ji-KAZ
STA
>*,j4 N

\o

oykih

reermstoy

map

REGIONBOUNDARIES
BOUNDARIES

0

T |>,;-

koNks

O~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4
CAITL
;Zv)

Zi,
y

PA LO A

Zhezk

Q '0

T. Borau-

200Miles~~~~~~~~~~~~t
00 ile

ZA

l~RD

Ei

-P' Chapaevo

O REIO

A

>~~~~T
O

400 Kilometers

-E

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~B
E
ToMNGHS
TA-ouoos.

ADS

+

300

AN

A

Kf

p

200

11

A

Samora
Chapoevo
rO

KAZAKHSTAN
~~~~S

100

-

/

SELCTE

hN

1

1

);-

CITE
hCpH
oTh
N as_ °Id°ah
1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~bR)

Tstotta
'

_

</'\

AFGHANISTAN
70G

-

- 1

_

I'J

_

80°

