20886

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

December 18, 2000

Country Department for Uganda
AFC04
Africa Region

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR: July 1- June 30

Currency Equivalents
Currency Unit = Uganda Shilling ( U Sh)
US$1= U Sh 1,820 (September 2000)

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

ACP 
Aids Control Program 
BFP 
Budget Framework Paper 
BOU 
Bank of Uganda 
CAE 
Country Assistance Evaluation 
CAS 
Country Assistance Strategy 
CD 
Country Director 
Comprehensive Development Framework 
CDF 
CG 
Consultative Group 
CPAR 
Country Procurement Assessment Report 
DflD 
Department for International Development (UK) 
DO 
Development Objective 
DP 
Democratic Party 
DRC 
Democratic Republic of Congo 
EAC 
East Africa Community 
ESAC 
Education Sector Adjustment Credit 
EU 
European Union 
FIAS 
Foreign Investment Advisory Service 
FSAP 
Financial Sector Assessment Program 
GDLN 
Global Development Learning Network 
HIPC 
Heavily Indebted Poor Country 
HIV/AIDS Human Immunodeficiency Vims/ 
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
Health Sector Strategic Plan 
International Country Risk Guide 
Information and Communication Technology 
International Development Association 
International Finance Corporation 
Institute of Public Health 
International Monetary Fund 

HSSP 
ICRG 
ICT 
IDA 
IFC 
IPH 
IMF 

LGDP 
MIGA 
MTEF 
NGO 
NPV 
NRM 
NURP 
NURP 
OED 
PAF 
PEAP 
PER 
PMA 
PRGF 
PRSC 
PRSP 
PSD 
QAG 
SME 
UAC 
UCB 
UIA 
UPC 
UPE 
UPPAP 

USAID 
WBI 
WorLD 

Local Government Development Program
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
Non-Governmental Organization
Net Present Value
National Resistance Movement
Northern Uganda Reconstruction Project
Northern Uganda Reconstruction Project
Operations Evaluations Department
Poverty Action Fund
Poverty Eradication Action Plan
Public Expenditure Review
Plan for the Modernization of Agriculture
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Private Sector Development
Quality Assurance Group
Small and Medium Enterprises
Uganda's AIDS Commission
Uganda Commercial Bank
Uganda Investment Authority
Uganda People's Congress
Universal Primary Education
Uganda Participatory Poverty Assessment
Project
U.S. Agency for International Development
World Bank Institute
World Links for Development

Vice Presidents: 
Country Directors: 
Sector Managers: 
Task Managers: 

IDA 

Callisto E. Madavo 
James W. Adams 
Fred Kilby 
Gedion B. Nkojo, Satu Kahkonen 

IFC

Assaad Jabre
Haydee Celaya
Abdelkar Allaoua
James Emery

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ....................................................
;
1. ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT .................................................... 1

A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 

E. 

ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE .1
PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT FOR ECONOMIC GRoWTH .3.
POVERTY REDUCTiON .5...
PROGRESS IN SOCIAL AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT .7.
POLITICAL CONTEXT 
..

2. THE GOVERNMENT'S STRATEGY ................................ 

8...

9

A. 

B. 

3. 

THE POVERTY ERADICATION ACTION PLAN AND POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY PAPER 

...

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 

Directly increasing the ability of the poor to raise their incomes .10
Directly increasing the quality of life of the poor. 
D
Creating an enabling environmentfor economic growth and structural transformation 11
Ensuring good governance and security .11

9

PEAP/PRSP IMPLEMENTATION, MEDIUMTERM EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK AND COMPREHENSIVE

DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK ............................................................ 
THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ................................ 13

12.

A. OBJECTIVE OF THE 2000 CAS .13.

B. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

LESSONS LEARNED FROM PAST BANK GROUP ACTIVITIES 

STRATEGIC ELEMENTS OF THE CAS 

SELECTIVITY IN BANK GROUP'S PROGRAM .16
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ...................................................... 

.14

.15.

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 
(iv) 

Directly increasing the ability of the poor to raise their incomes ...
18
Directly increasing the quality of life of the poor. 
20
Creating an enabling environment for economic growth and structural transformation 21
Ensuring goodgovernance and security .................................... 
23

17.

27..

27

30.................................... 

3Q

..... 

......................................... 31.

31.... 

32.
34.

4. MACROECONOMIC PROSPECTS FOR CONTINUED POVERTY REDUCTION .

F. MANAGING THE EXISTING PORTFOLIO .25
G. DONOR COORDINATION AND COLLABORATION .25
H. 

BANK GROUP DECENTRALIZATION .26

I. RESOURCE 
REQUIREMENT .27.
J. CAS CONSULTATIONS .............. 

TRIGGERS .3.Q..
BENCHMARK INDICATORS ..................

A. MACROECONOMIC SCENARIOS .2.
B. 
EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT .................
C. 
D. 
E. MONITORING AND EVALUATION .32.
F. 
CONSTRAINTS AND RISKS. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS. 

5. 

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

CONTENTS (cont'd)

FIGURES

Figure 1: 
Figure 2: 
Figure 3: 
Figure 4: 

GDP and GDP per Capita Real Growth Rates
Annual Inflation
Corruption Index
Quality of Bureaucracy and Law and Order Indexes

TEXT BOXES

Box 1: 

Box 2: 
Box 3: 
Box 4: 
Box 5: 
Box 6: 
Box 7: 

The Participatory Poverty Assessment Project and the Nature of Poverty in
Uganda
Government's Policy and the Fight against HIV/AIDS Epidemic
Government's Strategy and Priorities in Private Sector Development
Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) in Uganda
Examples of Uganda's Participatory Processes
Comments on the Draft CAS by Some Key Stakeholders in Uganda
Triggers for the Low Case Scenario

TEXT TABLES

Table 1: 
Table 2: 
Table 3: 
Table 4: 

Macroeconomic Performance
Components of the Bank Group's Assistance Program for Uganda, FY2001 - 2003
Uganda's Partnership Matrix, Current Situation
Macroeconomic Projections

ANNEXES

Annex 1: 
Annex 2: 
Annex 3: 
Annex 4: 
Annex 5: 

Overview of Planning
Progress with Sector Plans for Implementing the PEAP
Results of the Client Survey and OED Review
Portfolio Overview
Standard Annexes

Map: 

Uganda - IBRD 25052R1

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. 
Over a decade ago, PresidentMuseveni's Government inherited a country in economic and
social shambles, with practically all economic and social indicators portraying an abysmal
picture. Given this background, Uganda's economic performance over the last decade has been
impressive. The average real rate of GDP growth has been about 6.9 percent per annum,
resulting in an annual 3.7 percent increase in real GDP per capita. Consumer price inflation has
fallen from 24.6 percent in 1990/91 to -0.2 percent in 1998/99. The Government's reform
program has had considerable success in establishing fiscal discipline, restructuring public
expenditure, opening up the economy and anchoring its reliance on market forces. Also, there
has been a significant reduction in the country's debt overhang, as a result of the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative. Uganda was the first country to reach a completion
point and to access the original HIPC initiative in April 1998 and the enhanced HIPC initiative in
May 2000, respectively. More significantly, there is clear evidence that the country's high
economic growth and poverty reduction efforts have yielded positive results. According to the
Government's household surveys, there has been a clear and impressive decline in poverty
(headcount index) of more than 20 percent over the five years since 1992.

2. 
This impressive progress notwithstanding, with 44 percent of the population remaining
below the poverty line, poverty remains a major issue; its eradication is the number one priority
on the country's development agenda. Maintaining growth at levels sufficient to reduce poverty
will require addressing the remaining constraints to growth, especially, impediments to private
sector development. Moreover, despite the substantial increase in the government's resources
allocated for social services, there has been less than commensurate progress in social and human
development. Though most key education and health indicators have improved in the past
decade, almost all the social indicators are still worse than average in Sub-Saharan Africa. The
main challenge in the education sector is quality. 
In health, the major issues are limited
availability and poor quality of health services, adult mortality and life expectancy which are
adversely affected by the HIV/AIDS epidemic. However, Uganda is one of the first countries in
Africa where the incidence of HIWV/AIDS is declining as a result of the country's aggressive
response to the epidemic.

3. 
The previous country assistance strategy (CAS) was considered by the Board in April
1997. 
It focused on poverty reduction through accelerated growth, and emphasized continued
macroeconomic stability and increased analytic work to facilitate policy formulation and
determine investment priorities. This CAS for FY01 -03 seeks to build on the previous CAS by
reinforcing its focus on poverty reduction through sustained growth. The CAS was developed in
consultation with the Government, private sector, civil society and other donors. Its over-arching
objective is to support Uganda's economic transformation and poverty reduction strategy spelled
out in the Governrnrnt's Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP)/Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP). While the work to maintain macroeconomic stability will continue, in the period
ahead emphasis in assistance will shift to the sector level and cross-cutting public sector
management issues. Effectively addressing these issues and facilitating economic transformation

i

calls for broadening of the decision-making process to involve all key stakeholders, particularly
the sector ministries and civil society. Secondly, it calls for a change in the Bank's lending
modalities. This would entail moving away from the traditional combination of adjustment
operations with discrete investment projects, to supporting a comprehensive reform program
through the government's budget, via a series of Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs). In
addition to PRSCs, the Bank would continue supporting some self-standing projects for capacity
building and infrastructure investments directly targeted to poverty alleviation and private sector
development. 
IFC expects to increase substantially its support for Uganda's private sector
development agenda through increased investments focusing on infrastructure, SMEs, and
agriculture/agribusiness advisory assistance and capacity building.

4. 
Only two economic scenarios are considered in the Bank Group's strategy over the next
three years: the high case and low case. Based on Uganda's track record, the Bank and
Government consider the assumption of Uganda continuing in the high case scenario realistic.
This scenario is consistent with the Government's program supported by the IMF's Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF). Moreover, if the Government is to achieve its poverty
reduction objective, it has to continue operating in this scenario. Under this scenario, GDP is
projected to grow up to seven percent per annum with annual inflation rates of about five percent.
International reserves would be maintained at a level equivalent to about five months of imports
of goods and services. Under the scenario, IDA commitments during the three-year CAS period
would total about US$ 1. I billion.

5. 
Falling to the low case could result from a deteriorated intemal security situation and/or
the country being drawn deeper into regional conflicts, leading to diversion of public funds for
defense purposes and decline in growth. 
It could also occur if government pursued adverse
economic policies, pushing the macroeconomic program off track. Under this scenario, GDP
would grow between 3-4 percent with an annual inflation of between 6-15 percent. Foreign
reserves would be drawn down to 2.5 to 4.0 months of imports. IDA lending program would be
reduced to a total commitment of US$300 million over the CAS period. The probability for this
case is low.

6. 
There are several risks which threaten Uganda's ability to achieve its set goals. The
country is vulnerable to exogenous shocks, especially droughts, plant diseases and commodity
price changes which could affect rural incomes and export earnings. However, Uganda is
progressively diversifying its export base. 
In addition, the projected level of international
reserves together with the HJPC debt relief increase the country's abilities to absorb the shocks.
Other risks include institutional capacity weaknesses, corruption, HIV/AIDS and political
transition. In practically all these areas, actions are under way and/or planned to mitigate the
risks. For the Bank, the highest risk is a possible overestimation of the Government's capacity to
implement the PEAP/PRSP. However, the Bank's three-year work program is designed to help
overcome these constraints and minimize the risk. Finally, a deterioration in the security situation
is possible with attendant pressures to increase military expenditures.

7. 

The following issues were suggested for Board discussion:

* Does the Board consider that the Bank Group's proposed assistance Strategy
adequately addresses the development challenges facing Uganda?

* Does the Board consider the Bank Group's proposed instruments, including a shift to
providing support through PRSCs, appropriate?

ii

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

1. 

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND POLITICAL DEVELOPMENT

1. 
Over the period 1971-85 both the Ugandan economy and society collapsed. By 1986, when
the National Resistance Movement (NRM) captured Kampala and formed a government, Uganda
had suffered the mismanagement of previous governments, including civil wars, mass emigration
of the skilled, and mass murder. The performance of the Ugandan economy needs to be reviewed
against this background, keeping in mind that Uganda has been and still is recovering from an
extended period of instability and disastrous economic policies.

A. 

ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE

2. 
Given the above context, Uganda's economic performance has been impressive. The
average real rate of GDP growth has been about 6.9 percent per annum since 1990/91, resulting in
an annual 3.7 percent increase in real GDP per capita (see Figure 1) and over a 20 percent decline
in poverty (headcount index) from 1992 to 1997. The annual average consumer price inflation has
fallen from 24.6 percent in 1990/91 to -0.2 percent in 1998/99 (see Figure 2). The reform program
implemented since President Museveni came to power in 1986 has aimed at establishing fiscal
discipline, opening up the economy and promoting reliance on market forces. 
It has been
successful in establishing fiscal discipline and restructuring public expenditure. Progress has been

Figure 1: GDP and GDP per Capita 
Real Growth Rates

Figure 2: Annual Inflation

(%) 

12 

6 

(9')

60

402
20

91 

92 

93 94 95 96 97 98 99 

91 

92 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98 

99

Fiscal Year 

Fiscal Year

-GDP 

a 

PercapitaGDP 

GDP deflator ...... Change in CPI

Source: Uganda Bureau of Statistics 

Source: Uganda Bureau of Statistics

made on trade liberalization, privatization, civil service and financial sector reforms and an
impressive decentralization effort is ongoing. Further, the high stock of debt that constrained
economic development in Uganda has become a smaller obstacle as a result of Uganda's
participation in the Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) initiative. By end-June 1997,
Uganda's net present value (NPV) of debt-to-exports ratio was 243 percent. As debt sustainability
analysis concluded that this was unsustainable, the IMF and World Bank agreed in 1997 to support
a debt reduction package under the HIPC. Uganda was the first country to reach the completion
point in April 1998. After the Interim and Development Committees endorsed enhanced relief to

I

Indicator 

1990/91 1991/92 1992193 1993/94 1994/95 1995Y96 1996/97 1997/98 1998t99

Table 1: Macroeconomic Performance

24.6 

42.4 

30.0 

6.5 

6.1 

7.5 

7.8 

5.8 

-0.2

9.3 
8.4 
8.3 
4.4 

15.2 
6.7 
8.5 
1.1 

73.8 
62.9 
68.2 
1.9 

1.8 
13.0 
6.4 
3.1 

14.7 
5.4 
9.2 
4.3 

53.9 
49.0 
90.5 
3.1 

5.9 
20.3 
11.5 
8.2 

16.4 
5.4 
11.0 
7.4 

4.3 
16.6 
9.1 
6.0 

16.1 
5.3 
10.7 
4.6 

25.8 
23.5 
155.8 
3.4 

23.1 
21.8 
110.2 
3.6 

2.18 
0.88 
0.48 
0.28 
0.11 

1.94 
1.02 
0.45 
0.15 
0.04 

1.1 
11.4 
4.7 
1.8 

16.1 
4.7 
11.4 
g.0 

20.3 
17.9 
97.3 
4.5 

2.61 
0.86 
0.81 
0.16 
0.04 

1.9 
11.5 
5.6 
2.6 

15.0 
4.6 
10.4 
5.6 

6.9
9.1
7.4
4.4

16.4
4.7
11.7
4.9

27.2 
26.4 
109.2 
4.8 

24.6
18.4
103.8
4.9

2.68 
0.69 
0.41 
0.12 
0.04 

3.15
0.78
0.72
0.11
0.19

3.94 

3.60 

4.49 

3.94 

4.95

38.8 

38.7 

41.3 

42.2 

45.5

Annual average inflation (%) 

National accounts, % growth rates
Agriculture 
Industry 
GDP at market prices 
Real per capita GDP growth (%) 

National accounts, % of GDP at market prices
Gross domestic investment 
Public investment 
Private investment (incl stock changes) 
Gross domestic savings 

2.9 
8.2 
5.6 
2.6 

15.2 
7.4 
7.8 
0.7 

-1.0 
8.4 
3.4 
0.5 

15.9 
7.4 
8.5 
0.4 

External indicators
Debt service/exports GNFS (/o - before HIPC/resch) 
Debt service/exports GNFS (% -after HIPC/resch) 
Terms of trade index, 1990/91 = 100 
Gross reserves, months of imports GNFS 

95.9 
95.9 
100.0 
0.9 

127.7 
127.7 
75.1 
1.5 

Public expenditure on priority sectors,
% of GDP at masket prices
Education 
Health 
Roads 
Agriculture 
Water and environment 

Total expenditure on priority sectors 

Total expendltures on priority sectors,
% of total domestic non-interest expenditures 

Source: Governnent of Uganda, IMF and staff estimates.

HIPCs in 1999, Uganda was again the first to begin receiving additional assistance' 2
The
estimated NPV of debt-to-exports ratio is currently about 150 percent. Key macroeconomic
indicators for 1990-99 are presented in Table 1.

3. 
Uganda was also the first country to present a full Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP)
to the Boards of the Bank and IMF in May 2000.2 A summary of the Government's Poverty
Eradication Action Plan (PEAP), a home-grown medium-term development plan, was used for this
purpose since the objectives and content of the PRSP and PEAP are consistent.

4. 
The sustainability of high economic growth in Uganda is, however, an issue. First, the
economy is heavily dependent on agriculture (currently accounting for about 44 percent of GDP
and employing about 80 percent of the labor force) which leaves Uganda vulnerable to droughts
and plant diseases. Second, the economy is subject to comnmodity price fluctuations since
agricultural products account for nearly 100 percent of the country's merchandise exports. 
In

12 Total relief provided to Uganda under the original HIPC framework was about US$650 million (or
US$347 million in NPV terms). The completion point under the enhanced framework was reached in May
2000, and it is expected that assistance under the enhanced initiative will be about US$1.3 billion (or
US$656 million in NPV terms), or total relief of almost US$2 billion from the two operations.
2 The Board considered Uganda's PRSP (Report No. IDA/SecM2000-145 dated April 3, 2000) on May 2,
2000.

2

particular, changes in coffee prices are a cause of concem because over half of Uganda's export
revenues come from coffee and Uganda's high economic growth rates in the past decade were
partially driven by high international coffee prices.3
Third, the potential for growth from
macroeconomic reforms has now been largely exploited, and therefore further economic growth
requires a broader reform agenda. Specifically, there are sectoral and difficult governance issues
which need to be effectively addressed.

5. 
An overarching consideration 
is that development and growth must occur 
in an
environmentally sustainable manner, given that 90 percent of Uganda's population is directly
dependent on the country's natural resource base. Due to lack of awareness of the longer term
implications of current resource use for sustainable economic growth and poverty alleviation,
economic expansion poses a threat to the integrity of Uganda's rich and diverse natural resource
base. The key environmental concerns are deforestation, soil erosion, loss of wildlife and habitat,
and the degradation and loss of prime agricultural 
land and wetlands through poor land
management practices. The Government has in place a legislative framework and regulatory
system to facilitate environmentally sound development and to govern the use of natural resources.
However, 
institutional weaknesses and governance problems have so far undernined 
their
enforcement.

B. 

PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT FOR EcoNoMIc GROWTH

6. 
To ensure continued high economic growth and to mitigate vulnerability to exogenous
shocks, an economic transformation is needed in Uganda. Specificaly, as underlined in the PRSP,
the modernization of agriculture and diversification into non-farm private sector activities are

critical. There has been progress: the Govermment is pursuing a comprehensive privatization

program and has already successfully liberalized marketing of Uganda's coffee. Uganda has been
lowering tariff and non-tariff barriers to regional trade, removed all restrictions on intemational
capital transactions, and about two-thirds of Uganda's public enterprises have been privatized in the
past decade. A recent noteworthy success was the privatization of the telecommunications utility in
the spring of 2000 and the accompanying sector reform which have brought in a second national
operator and a second cellular licensee, expanding service options and lowering prices. In addition,
reforms of the power utility, airline, railways, water, and other public enterprises are ongoing.
Overall, private investment as a share of GDP has increased from 7.8 percent in 1990/91 to 11.7

percent in 1998/99.

7. 
Inefficiencies in public service delivery and markets are hindering both growth and
diversification to non-farm activities. According to 1998 surveys of domestic and foreign
investors, there are four key impediments to the development of Uganda's private sector: (i)
inadequate and poor infrastructure; (ii) an underdeveloped financial sector; (iii) high levels of
corruption; and (iv) restrictive regulations, red tape and a lack of business services. In addition,
the availability of skilled labor is constraining development. The Bank Group has supported
government efforts to address critical constraints in these areas through Bank projects, IFC
advisory and technical assistance on privatization and regulatory reform in key sectors, and FIAS
work on the investment environment. However, given the complexity of these issues, progress has
been slow and further work on each area is needed.

8. 
Infrastructure. Inadequate and unreliable electricity 
is ranked as the most binding
infrastructure constraint to growth by most domestic and foreign firms. Frequent load shedding,

3 However, the role of coffee in the country's export earnings has decreased from 72 percent in 1990/91 to
56 percent in 1998/99, as non-traditional agricultural exports (fish, horticultural and other agricultural
products) have grown from US$49 million in 1990/91 to US$242 million in 1998/99.

3

power failures and voltage fluctuations complicate production and force firms to invest in private
generators and voltage stabilizers. 
In addition to power, surveys indicate that the state of the
transport network, including roads and railways, poses a considerable burden on business activities
in Uganda.

9. 
Financial sector: The performance of the financial sector has improved, but access to
financial services remains a problem. In 1993, the Government launched a financial sector reform
program. Under this program, weak banks were restructured, insolvent banks closed, and banking
supervision strengthened at the Bank of Uganda (BOU). The new Financial Institutions Statute
increased the capital requirements for all banks, and included provisions for prompt corrective
action by BOU for noncompliance. 
The reform did suffer a setback, however, when the
privatization of the Uganda Commercial Bank (UCB) was reversed owing to breach of contract
and other questionable practices on the part of the investor. Since then, UCB has been operating
under BOU appointed management; the Government is considering options for its re-privatization.
Given UCB's dominance in the financial sector, privatization and improved management of this
Bank is key to overall financial sector performance. As a result of reforms carried out and more
aggressive banking supervision by BOU, the ratio of non-performing assets to total assets has
fallen. However, the ratio of credit to GDP is still low: 5.6 percent of GDP, while the average for
Sub-Saharan Africa is 14 percent.

10. Corruption: Corruption 

in Uganda 

is 

systemic and negatively affects private sector 

development by raising the cost of doing business
and thereby, growth. A recent survey of Ugandan
firms indicates that the majority of firms pay
significant bribes. 
A survey of households 
reveals that bribery is most common in the police 
and judiciary, with two-thirds of users paying a 
bribe to the workers in the judiciary services. 

Further, 

the 

corruption 

indicator of 

the 

International Country Risk Guide 
(ICRG) 
suggests that perceived corruption has worsened 
in Uganda in the past five years (see Figure 3).4

Figure 3: Corruption Index

Range. 1-6, 6=iess corrupt

6

4

3

,

097

__ 

._9_3_9_____7_ 9_9

Source: Irternational Country Risk Guide

11. 
Legal and regulatory environment: Survey Figure 4: Quality of Bureaucracy and
data for foreign investors 
in Uganda show that 
Law and Order Indexes
weak governance, 
including ineffective enforce- 
Range: 1-6, 6=better bureaucracy,
ment of laws and contracts and excessive red tape, 
law and order
also 
seriously 
limits private 
sector growth. 
Ineffective 
law enforcement and outdated laws, 
regulations and practices in many areas create 

,

6

4-

unproductive administrative burdens on the private 

sector, in addition to multiplying opportunities for 
corruption. There are some signs of improvement 
in these areas. Efforts to reduce "red tape" have 
been partially successful, but further reforms are 
still required. 
Indexes of the ICRG, presented in

Figure 4, suggest that the quality of bureaucracy 

3

2 

I
0 

-- _ 

llt 

tt 

IIL

91 

93 

95 

97 

99

I .Lw 

.. d .

- D 

..i,iy

Source: International Country Risk Guide

4The 

ternational Country Risk Guide reflects the perceptions of banks, multinational companies and other
institutional investors. The corruption index ranges from 1 to 6, the higher scores indicating less corruption.
4

especially the rule of law, has been steadily improving in the past nine years.'

12. Labor markets and standards: Firms also consider lack of skilled labor to be a constraint to
their activities in Uganda. Moreover, the health status of the work force is a concern for investors:
absences from work due to prolonged illnesses (such as HIV/AIDS and malaria) or mourning are
common and have a negative effect on firm operations. Uganda has labor laws and regulations,
but their enforcement has been weak and inconsistent due to capacity constraints at different levels
of Government. The Constitution of Uganda provides for the right of every person to join
workers' associations or trade unions, and the law allows unionization if the majority of the work
force supports it. Further, the law prohibits forced or bonded labor, but the lack of resources has
prevented the Government from enforcing this prohibition effectively. Also, the law prohibits
employers from hiring workers below the age of 18. However, due to weak enforcement, child
labor is common. Most working children are employed in the informal sector, often on the
subsistence farms of extended family members or as domestic servants. Uganda is a signatory to
the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
and to the Vocational Rehabilitation Employment (Disabled Persons) Convention of 1983, though
it has not ratified yet the relevant ILO Conventions. Finally, minimum wage legislation exists, but
the minimum wage rate has not been adjusted since the 1960s.

C. 

POVERTY REDUCTION

13. High economic growth in the 1990s has translated into substantial increases in the living
standards of Uganda's poor. Since 1992, the Government has been monitoring living standards
through annual household surveys. 6 The Bank and Government have cooperated in analyzing the
results of these surveys and, as noted in the PRSP, this analysis confirms that there has been a
clear and impressive decline in poverty (headcount index) of over 20 percent over the five-year
period from 1992.7 Average real household income has risen by 17 percent over the period and
expenditures of the bottom 10 percent have risen even more (by 29 percent). The income group
which has benefited most is cash crop farmers: the incidence of poverty in this group fell from 60
percent to 44 percent between 1992 and 1997. The reduction in poverty can be traced to two
factors. First, liberalization of coffee has had a fundamental impact on small-holder coffee
farmers who have directly benefited from the removal of market controls and the emergence of a
dynamic group of private traders. Second, the international coffee prices soared in the mid-1990s
and remained high for several years. The resulting increase in the returns to coffee farmers has led
to a significant number of small-holder producers moving out of poverty.

14. 
In spite of this progress, poverty remains a major issue in Uganda. About 44 percent of the
population still lives below the poverty line, and the average per capita income in Uganda is only
now approaching the level achieved in 1970. The significant regional disparities in poverty are of
concern: in the central region, the incidence of poverty is 20 percent compared to 59 percent in the
northern region. Further, as pointed out in the PRSP, poverty among the largest group of the poor
in Uganda -
subsistence food crop producers' -
declined only marginally during the five year
period: from 64 percent in 1992 to 62 percent in 1997.

The indexes reflect the perceptions of banks, multinational companies and other institutional investors. The
quality of bureaucracy and rule of law indexes range between one and six, the higher number hidicating
better quality bureaucracy and sounder legal institutions.
6 As an exception, in 1998, the survey was not conducted due to lack of funds.
7 The poverty lines were calculated as expenditures required in order to obtain specified amounts of calories
(depending on sex and age) and to meet minimum non-food requirements.
8 In 1996, subsistence food crop producers represented 44 percent of the total population and 57 percent of
the poor population.

5

Box 1: The Participatory Poverty Assessment Project and the Nature of
Poverh in Ulganda

Povear anaisis in Uganda is breakinrg nevr grcwund Traditionall%. poterty indcitstrs uf incomne. consumption. educauon
leveIs, and health srtatu are derited solels from household surtess 
In LTganda. the Government is de%eloping a broader set
to define povne. %hbi,h 
of 
cators 
ph%ical and social isolation. powerlessness, and
tnsecur-t 
These net mindicators hate emerged from dtrel consultation tmh the poor. undertaken b% the Gosernment in the

inhIude risk. vulnerabdlit 

Uganda Poterty Ptrcipaltoy Assessment Project OUPPAPi Thiu assessmenl made it clear to polivtnakers that the poor

have the capaci 
acknowledged 
differed from those assumned bh polm makers

to snaisze poXert-; and appraise tlovernmeit polics 

to a greater c%'eni than hid been previousiN

In addilion LIPPAP enabled poor people 1t wi,e their realities and tspre-s the'ir pnonties. which otlen

Priortites, as espressed by poor consmmnities. include.
* 
Improuing securnn

Improving access to clearn water

Elimmiting corruplion. %%hi,h undermines et'lectve servi.e dehiern
Ch ercoming lack of access to, and inlormation on markeb
Improving inadequate road and transport sstse±r

Addre:sinsg he lack of aintrol oer [enridv
theporAddresing 

tbe l:k oood .d 

r! 

nutnti -n

The poor are moire likely to be:
Female, widows, orphans, those Iit mne ith Hi AIDS. disibled. .nd refugees

Lit ung Ln rural dreas rather tiwan urban areas
Living uin insec ure areas
living mi the North

I 

* 

I 

I 

! 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 
* 
* 
* 

I* Dependenl on smali-holder tFaninm and produi.ion ot tfod orop,
* 

Vulnerable to risks-the moat .ommon being bad hanecst drought illness and death in family
Sociajh and politicalb, e\cluded

* 

The dcateriatcs of poor households indude:
* 
Head of hou!ehldJ is not emphived
* l1nw dependents make limiLed fInam is] contiutbtions

* 

* 

* 

* 

Social network oi ,upport is less deteloped xr eroded
LaLk of access lo land and inpuLt 

t.'r pnnarn production

Cannot afford bassuc ertLc

Dependent oii remruttnce,

The foliowing tralls characferize poor 
rommmiitles:
* 
Lack of adequate basic sen ies AsiLuhr the communities
* 
Lick of productive assets and lvelivhood opporturities
* 
Lack of social ur,itE
* 
Physical isolation
* 
Locaion in cunrlict or insectrre areas

Source: Uganda Participatory Poverty Assessment Project Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

15. 
To better understand what poverty means in Uganda, the Government has supplemented
household surveys by participatory poverty assessments over the past three years. 
The
participatory work demonstrates that, in addition to material or income poverty, there are non-
economic dimensions to poverty that need to be addressed (see Box 1). Specifically, the poor in
Uganda are concerned with the lack of access to basic services (health care, education, safe water),
land, and production inputs. Further, they are particularly concerned about insecurity (in terms of
the presence of wars, rebel activity, cattle raiding and theft) and corruption. The comments made
by the poor clearly highlight that corruption does not only increase the cost of doing business, but
has a broader detrimental effect by constraining the access of the poor to public services.

6

D. 

PROGRESS IN SOCLAL AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

16. Despite the macroeconomic success and significant increases in government resources
devoted to social services, progress in social and human development in Uganda has been
relatively modest (see Annex B5). Though most education and health indicators have improved in
the past decade, almost all Uganda's social indicators, except primary school enrollment rates,
remain worse than average in Sub-Saharan Africa.

17. Education: The government policy of Universal Primary Education (UPE) that was
initiated in 1997 has more than doubled the number of children in primary schools, to over six
million. The policy has been successful in providing primary education throughout the country
and reaching the poorest groups. However, as the PRSP made clear, the Government recognizes
that the quality of education remains an acute problem: pupil-teacher, pupil-classroom ratios and
dropout rates are high in government-aided primary schools. While past public expenditure
tracking surveys indicated that a relatively small portion of non-wage funding reached schools,
this situation has dramatically improved in recent years. Budgeted fumds reaching schools have
increased from 20 percent in 1995 to over 90 percent in 2000. This was a result of, among other
things, Government using media and notice boards at schools. Reform in the tertiary education
sector has led to increased enrollment and dramatically increased resource mobilization, re-
establishing the Makerere University as a leading institution in the region.

18. Health and HIV/AIDS: Adult mortality rates and life expectancy, have been adversely
affected by the HIV/AIDS epidemic. 9 Uganda's aggressive response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic
has, however, resulted in Uganda being one of the first countries in Africa where national HIV
prevalence is declining. At the end of 1999, HIV prevalence in the adult population (age 15-49)
was 8.3 percent; this proportion was as high as 15 percent in 1993. The largest decline is in the

Box 2: Government's Policy and the Fight against HIV/AIDS Epidemic

The rovemment s p.liics to fight IIl\ XIDS in Li'g.uda his centered arnund three pillars openneis. participalion, and a multi-
se,tor approach

* Openness Thb Goremrrient's frsl polkv reactl0n to Hlt AIDS uas to open up pubiLc debate on HIV AIDS at the timne
when this waas Still a taboo aLToSs mSst M 
I1 
frica Mi the 1986 World Heahth Assemrbl. 
for example Uiganda's hilruster ot
Health operdn re-ognized LiSi AIDS v, is a problem in Uganda and asked for uiternational support. That sane ye3r, the
Crovernment established an AIDS Control Progira 
(ACP). rne of the frst of is knd in the world. The aim %%as to

- estakl,idh ir epiderrLiologi a- suneeilan.e .sitem
- create a%areness o iHIt AIDS among LUg3dan people:
indisidaLd and farnh support

- offer paLient are. couIseling 

* Panlicipanon 13s being opcn, abhca HI\ AIDS. the Gonemment 
tia en-ouraged large participation ot people livinag witb
HIV. NGOs, co mmuitny-based groups, relgiogs institutiwns and intermational orgarnzations in the fight against HIV. AIDS.
By 1997. there m ere al least l.1J.0 NGOs and * ntmrunity-based organizations in%olved in HIV 9JDS vork in 
!iganda Tl`hs

has permined e-ersbods to be aciii-eh imnoled in the planritng and implementation of ACP activities

* 

tfulto-secororapprosah 
The third pillar .i1 th Goc,emmem s policN has been the recognition that Hlx is not only a health
issue, it aLju affecti economriv lie Therefore HLI AIDS policies have to he placed in the broad context ofthe governlenr's

development a:nd pF ert, redustn sutaieg% 
r.o address M-V AIDS problemr 
al this broad conteKt, the govemtitent
established mt 1992 the Uganda AIDS Commission (IJACI and created ACPs in 12 I'ne muustnes By 1994. the LIAC had
prepared a multi-iectoral approach 1. HlV, and a Ndti[nal Operation Plan for the period 19941998. These have been Lhe
basis for the first Nalion3l Strategic Franem,ork for the period 1998-2002. and the new National Strategic Framework Ior
HRIAIDS aLdviilies Icr 20u0 01-2u1.15 Ot i ilaich 
2i()i P

Source: Open Secret, People Facing up to HIV and AIDS in Uganda, Strategies for Hope Series, 15; and UNAIDS-WHO,
Epidemiological Fact Sheet, 2000

9 Life expectancy has dropped from 48 years in the mid-1980s to 42 years.

7

HIV prevalence among young people (age 15-19) which dropped from 32 percent in 1992 to 10
percent in 1998. Once number one in the world for HIV infection, Uganda has today dropped to
number 14. This success in reducing HIV prevalence clearly reflects the impact of Government
policy and its commitment to fight the epidemic (see Box 2). Despite this progress, however, the
number of people infected with HIV/AIDS is still high (802,000 people) and the number of
H1V/AIDS orphans remains a staggering 1.1 million.

19. Other health indicators have improved. As detailed in the PRSP, infant mortality rates have
fallen; the decline has been particularly rapid among the poorest quintile of the population.
Immunization rates have also improved: for instance, rates for measles and DPT have jumped to
60 percent and 58 percent of children under one year of age, compared to 17 percent and 14
percent, respectively, in the mid-1980s.'0 The percentage of the population with access to safe
water has risen from 16 to 41. However, child mortality among the poorest quintile of the
population has persisted at high levels.

20. Gender: Gender disparities in participation in policy-making and in access to services have
also decreased. The Government has implemented a far-reaching affirmative action program to
promote women's political participation. National and local elective offices have been reserved
for women, and the number of women holding seats in Parliament has risen. A woman is now the
Vice President of Uganda and about 30 percent of ministerial posts are currently held by women.
The UPE initiative has corrected the gender disparities in primary school enrollment: primary
school enrollments are currently divided almost equally between boys and girls. The existing
statistics indicate that there is no striking gender disparity in the access to basic health services.

21. However, other gender inequalities remain. 
The subsistence food crop farmers that
constitute the largest group of the poor in Uganda are predominantly women. Women provide in
aggregate 75 percent of total agricultural labor and over 80 percent of labor in food crop and non-
traditional export sectors. Even though the farmer in Uganda is typically a woman, the current
legal framework constrains women's access to land: when husbands die, the wife often looses the
rights to the land. The HIV/AIDS epidemic, by increasing adult mortality rates, has made this
problem particularly acute. 
In addition, the spread of HIV/AIDS has placed particularly heavy
burden on women who are typically responsible for caring for the sick.

E. 

POLITICAL CONTEXT

22. The 1996 Presidential election came one decade afterMuseveni rose to leadership. 
In that
election, which observers confirmed was fair and open, he received almost 75 percent of the votes.
The 1996 Parliamentary election ushered in a very active Parliament determined to play its
legislative role and more effectively exert executive oversight. 
In particular, Parliament is now
taking a more active role in scrutinizing proposed foreign borrowing.

23. Uganda continues to operate under a "movement system", where people compete for
election as individuals under the umbrella of the National Resistance Movement (NRM);
traditional parties have been banned from operating, even though many in the political leadership
have been associated with parties in the past. A Referendum on whether multiparty democracy
should be allowed or whether the present system should be maintained was provided for under the
1995 Constitution and held in June 2000. An overwhelming majority of nearly 90 percent

10 However, it should be noted that recent figures reflect a fall from the immunization levels of the mid-
1990s under donor-financed programs that proved to be unsustainable. Government and donors are now
addressing the issue of how to increase imnunization rates on a sustainable basis.

8

supported the continuation of the "movement system." Although there was some criticism about
the Government's management of the Referendum and participation was lower than in the 1996
elections, Uganda's development partners have generally accepted its constitutionality and results.
The traditional political parties, including the Democratic Party (DP) and the Uganda People's
Congress (UPC), boycotted the Referendum and do not recognize its results. Both parties have
sued the Government and are challenging the legitimacy of both the Referendum and the enabling
legislation. The important question which will continue to be an issue during the CAS period is
whether and how the political system will evolve. PresidentMuseveni has indicated that the issue
of opening up the system to political parties can be reconsidered in the future. It is likely that this
issue will re-emerge after the Presidential and Parliamentary elections next year.

24. 
Security remains a serious development constraint, as the participatory poverty work has
demonstrated. The strife in Northern Uganda has continued. An opposition group, the Lord's
Resistance Army, continues to attack civilian targets from bases in Southern Sudan and conflicts
have occurred in Western Uganda between government forces and opposition groups. Insecurity
constrains economic activities in both of these areas. 
In an effort to address the internal security
issues, Parliament has passed amnesty legislation, which provides for forgiveness for all rebels
who agree to lay down their arms and abjure future violence. In addition, PresideniMuseveni and
President Bashir of Sudan signed a peace accord in late 1998, brokered by former U.S. President
Jimmy Carter. Progress in implementing the accord has, however, been slow.

25. 
In addition, Uganda's involvement in the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC) has emerged as an issue. The original justifications for Uganda's and Rwanda's
involvement were security concerns and threats against minority groups, but the issue has become
more complex with the entry of other regional powers into the conflict. Donors have become
increasingly concerned 
that 
increased defense spending will divert resources 
from 
the
development effort, that Uganda's involvement in the DRC will not be easy to bring to closure,
and that the aftermath could be difficult to manage. Uganda has committed itself to enforcing the
Lusaka Peace Agreement withdrawing 
some 5,000 
troops and accepting 
international
peacekeepers. However, the recent clashes with its erstwhile ally, Rwanda, and the lack of a
commitment to the Lusaka Agreement by some participants are of concern.

2. THE GOVERNMENT'S STRATEGY

A. THE POVERTY ERADICATION ACTION PLAN AND POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY
PAPER

26. Government's strategy for economic 
transformation 
is spelled out in the Poverty
Eradication Action Plan (PEAP). The PEAP is a medium-term development plan to guide
government policy and the development of detailed sector and district plans. The initial PEAP,
which was a result of an 18-month long participatory process involving all key stakeholders, was
prepared in 1997. A revised PEAP was finalized in the spring 2000.

27. 
The overarching goal of the PEAP is to develop policies and resource allocations aimed at
reducing the incidence of poverty (headcount index) in Uganda from 44 percent in 1997 to 10
percent or less by the year 2017. In addition, the PEAP sets forth the specific goals of achieving
universal access to primary education, primary health care, safe drinking water, guaranteeing
political freedom and human rights and establishing an effective disaster relief system targeted
principally at the poor.

9

28. As noted earlier, because thePEAP's objectives are fully consistent with those of the PRSP
process, a summary of the revised PEAP was used as a basis for Uganda's PRSP that was
presented to the Boards of the Bank and IMF in May 2000. According to the PRSP analysis, the
Govermment's goal to reduce poverty to ten percent or less by 2017 can be achieved if the real
GDP grows at seven percent per annum and the growth is equally distlibuted. As will be
discussed later in Section 4, this growth rate, though high, is attainable in Uganda. The joint staff
assessment of the PRSP underlined that it provides an excellent framework for the Government's
attack on poverty, though it did point out that further work on monitoring indicators and costing of
activities is needed. Since then output targets for education, health, agricultural extension and
water have been defined and preliminary costing estimates of activities to reach the targets have
been prepared. Further work in these areas is, however, needed.

29. Government's strategy for economic transformation and poverty eradication is based on
four key pillars: (i) directly increasing the ability of the poor to raise their incomes; (ii) directly
increasing the quality of life of the poor; (iii) creating an enabling environment for economic
growth and structural transformation; and (iv) ensuring good govemance and security. The
specific actions to be taken under each pillar are as follows:

(i) Directly increasing the ability of the poor to raise their incomes

30. As most Ugandans live in rural areas and earn their living from agriculture, increasing
agricultural growth 
rates, diversifying agricultural production and expanding non-farm
employment in rural areas are essential for poverty reduction. The first pillar therefore focuses on
actions to promote rural development. As detailed in the PEAP/PRSP, the Government's Plan for
Modemization of Agriculture (PMA) provides the strategic and operational framework for
environmentally sustainable rural development and agricultural transformation from subsistence to
commercial agriculture. Although it does not provide a detailed plan of action, it does describe the
types of interventions required to promote rural development (including rural roads, markets, and
water), define the responsibilities of the public sector, private sector and civil society in this effort
and outline participatory processes through which packages of interventions will be designed. The
vision of the PMA is of a competitive, dynamic and sustainable agricultural and agro-industrial
sector. The PMA aims to increase incomes and improve the quality of life of subsistence food
crop producers that are mostly women and form the largest group of the poor as well as ensure
food security and create gainful employment. Accordingly, the PMA identifies six core areas for
public action in agriculture and rural development: research and technology, advisory services,
education for agriculture, providing a framework for rural finance, access to markets and
sustainable natural resource utilization and management. It includes further strengthening of land
rights and land administration to ensure equal access to land.

(ii) Directly increasing the quality of life of the poor

31. As the participatory poverty work indicates (see Box 1 in Section 1), public services, in
particularprimary education, health care and potable water and sanitation, have a direct impact
on the quality of life of the poor. Consequently, their delivery is a central element of the
PEAP/PRSP. In the education sector, the Government plans to continue emphasizing the delivery
of quality universal primary education (UPE) by providing the necessary infrastructure and
teachers, while also developing a strategy for post-primary education. Government's National
Health Policy and Heaith Sector Strategic Plan (HS SP) will continue guiding the delivery of public
health care. At the heart of this plan is the minimum health package which includes the most
important and most easily treatable diseases. The plan also attempts to strengthen health care
delivery and ensure equal access to health services. The National Strategic Framework for
HIV/AIDS Activities (2000/1-2005/6) will guide the work to control the spread of HIV/AIDS, to

10

mitigate its effects on households and communities and to strengthen the national capacity to
respond to it. According to the results of the participatory poverty work, one of the key
development priorities of the poor is to increase the access to safe water. Responding to this need,
the PEAP/PRSP sets as a goal sustainable provision of accessible, safe water and sanitation
facilities to the entire rural population.

(iii) Creating an enabling environment for economic growth and structural transformation

32. As emphasized above, continued high economic growth in Uganda requires aframework
within which the private sector can expand Actions listed under this pillar aim to provide that
framework. Specifically, 
the Government 
intends 
to address 
three key elements: 
(i)
macroeconomic stability, without which economic growth will not be sustainable; (ii) the removal
of constraints on private sector competitiveness. Government's "Medium-Term Competitive
Strategy for the Private Sector (2000-2004)" guides action in this area" 
(see Box 3 for further
details); and (iii) equitable and efficient collection and use of public resources, involving further
strengthening of budget processes, a review of the local taxation to make it more progressive, and
gradual introduction of equalization grants to make the delivery of public services more balanced
across the country.

Box 3: Goiernment's Sirategp and Prioritief in Private Sector De%elopment

The G(%3errment s Aledium. Term COmperiri,e Sirzm-gi ior A Prit-aye Sectir 2y)d..'.O41 ,ets ut the mediutm term %trateg'
for pri'ale se.io.r dleelopmeni and identifies fi'e mr.ior priontc area. for public interventl n.

I 

' 

3 

4 

5 

Refoirms in irfraslrui iure provis-on 

The goeniment 

si sr3egN aims al unIpr'cing access ic,. and qualiIN of.

ifrastiru.iure and at reducing the c-;:st cf uutlt 
servwie with the pnvate secor assuming responsibditn 
ofutlitn seri.ve, 
It i',.uses un three sedtors tran3polt pov,er. and ielecornmani,atian.n

for the provi6sion

Siiengrheiaiig i/he tfibncnl sector 
the goiernment s Ituiancial polivy refirm aims at Impro%ing the fran-eiuork for
focus on lthree irez formnal banking e,ilor. miic,-fiiance irstituLions, and protLsiou ot

financial ervlce' Refinm 

rinancial ser' i .e; L *rnrMI finmm

Commrcialzusike ,.lgor refoirmi Relomms in this se.ior are intended tco develop an elIecCixe ; --mmer.Cial lel 
sy3tem
ard lo make contratds entorceable Te 
airnr 31 atimproing inslatuuorui 
:.pa,m 
comnieri,L.I ourl procedures and

enforcemcnL of lai,

lInsrunionol reformrs Tlle g"er-rmenrlis fk.;u on rislitutional rel; or`s LoncenreLtes an reduing c..rruption m public

adminrustrauon 

improsing the public procurement Nisem. sunmphf-Lng admniistraive prcwdwcureq ani impro%ing taX

administration
Promotio,o of eporr% T'he goernrnenl's poli, 

stalegN almn il promoung expot-led gxrowth. 

It focuses on removing

amn remainng anLi-e-pnrt blia miugaling riNi, 
legi flation lor penshable and non-tr3diLional e.xporI

a-ssociated with c'.pon finance and guarantees and 

introducing

Source: Medium Term Competitive Strategy for the Private Sector (2000-2004), Govemment of Uganda, Ministry of Firance

(iv) Ensuring good governance and security

33. 
Finally, good governance and security are essential for making progress in the first three
pillars. Actions detailed under the fourth pillar focus onimproving public service delivery and
decentralization; reducing corruption; ensuring law and order and security; and providing
disaster management. To improve the service delivery on the ground, Government has
decentralized the delivery of health, education, water and agricultural extension services to local

11 Uganda is not yet fully integrated into the multilateral trading system. Further work to harmonize the
country's trade policy and regulatory framework with WTO agreements is needed. To facilitate that work,
the Government has developed an integrated framework for trade related technical assistance to coordinate
donor assistance.

governments. 
The key challenge facing this effort is improving 
the capacities of local
governments for effective planning, management, and implementation of related policies and
programs. The Government plans to address these concerns by the introduction of results-oriented
management, pay reform and by strengthening bottom-up accountability. Some of these actions
are expected to address the pervasive corruption plaguing public service delivery by diminishing
opportunities for misconduct. To reduce corruption, the Government also plans to implement the
revised Plan of Action (Government Strategy and Plan of Action to Fight Corruption and Build
Ethics and Integrity in Public Office 2000-2002). Actions to be undertaken under that plan include
the implementation of public procurement reform, enforcement of the Leadership Code,
strengthening the role of the Auditor General and other enforcement agencies, a review of the legal
framework relating to corruption, and nurturing and empowering civil society to monitor and hold
Government accountable. Further, to improve law and order and security, the Government plans
to launch a criminal justice sector reform; seek a resolution of the remaining internal and regional
conflicts; and develop a national strategy to improve the country's ability to respond to disasters
(such as drought, floods and conflict).

B. 

PEAP/PRSP IMPLEMENTATION, MEDIUM TERM EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK AND

COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK

34. 
The PEAP/PRSP is the Government's overall development strategy and elaborates the
Ugandan Government's approach to the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF). This
approach is then articulated in more detail in sector and district plans (see Figure in Annex 1 for a
summary of the planning process). These plans are prepared by sector and district working groups
that convene regularly to discuss actions and set priorities within the sector or district over the
medium term in the context of the PEAP/PRSP. 
In addition to government officials, donors,
NGOs and private sector representatives participate regularly and actively in these groups. The
sector and district plans prepared will guide the sectoral and district expenditure allocations.

35. 
Since 1997/98, the Government has utilized the Medium Term Expenditure Framework
(MTEF) 
to allocate resources and better align the spending priorities articulated 
in the
PEAP/PRSP and in sector and district plans. Another key objective of the MTEF is to ensure
medium-term financial stability by coordinating the allocation of all public expenditure in a
framework that ensures consistency with overall resource constraints. The MTEF sets sector and
district spending ceilings within a rolling three-year framework (the first year being the annual
budget), taking into consideration the macroeconomic environment and prospects for revenue
mobilization. Subsequently the sector and district working groups discuss budget options within
these expenditure ceilings to meet sector and district priorities. This process culminates in
working groups preparing sectoral and district Budget Framework Papers (BFP) that are ultimately
consolidated into the MTEF.

36. 
The MTEF is intended to guide all public expenditure decisions, including the use of
resources committed by donors. For this reason, the Government is introducing a sector-wide
approach, wherever feasible, under which Government and donors contribute to a common pool of
resources used to achieve sector objectives. 
Sector-wide plans/strategies have already been
developed in education, health, rural development, and main roads. Annex 2 summarizes the
status of different sector plans.

37. Within the MTEF, the Government has created a Poverty Action Fund (PAF) to ensure that
increased funds are allocated to poverty reducing services specified in the PEAP/PRSP. Initially,
the PAF was created to "ring-fence" HIPC debt relief for basic services in 1998. Subsequently,
the PAF has attracted additional donor funding and has in practice become a mechanism for
ensuring the reallocation of the incremental expenditures directly to poverty reducing services

12

including primary education, primary health care, agricultural extension, 
feeder 
roads,
water/sanitation, and law and order. About five percent of PAF resources are used for monitoring
and evaluation purposes. Overall, the budget and planning process in Uganda has improved
considerably over the past five years.

38. As noted above, the implementation of the PEAP/PRSP (and related PAF) provides the
central mechanism to operationalize Uganda's approach to the CDF. Work on the CDF in Uganda
has focused on three issues: (i) providing a govermment-led and owned comprehensive framework
for donor intervention; (ii) improving partnerships among the Government, donors, civil society
and private sector; and (iii) addressing capacity constraints. More specifically, the PEAP/PRSP
provides a framework for government actions and donor interventions towards common goals, and
specifies the actions that Government and donors have agreed to take. Box 4 discusses further the
CDF approach in Uganda.

Box 4: Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) in Uganda

The CDF apprFacb in Ug-anda is built on thr.e 
lessons from ecpenemce 
The 
irsi lesson is ihat enuring microeconomrc
transformuton in LTgandi 
stabibh' is necessaN but not sutlficienr 
for long-term poxertm eradICation and economir 
In Uganda,
seIForal perornmance his clearhl 
lagged behLnd macroecv.nomic perlbrmance 
Reflecting 
ibis a more comprehensive

including addressuig weaknesses in senrice delisen. sectora]

developmcnt stratep 

thai take, a hohstic lo.o 3a the ecornom-, 

policies. goemmnce etc . ii Jeard 
needed- The second ies-on i 
that io increase the eflacimeness ot external assistance. donor
programs need Lo he nire careleulI coo:rdinated in respeLl Io their consistencs 'itth the comprehensi%e development stralep

developed hb tLe Guoerr.menrt 
(erUpping 
d..nor proFgrarm ssith dLiferent sets of disbursement and procurement rules ara
switing scr ce resources and txing the countn & ILmited admimstrair.e capacirs 
Thrrd. the development strategv needs to be
'isned bi the courntn ic. he fully effe,Li'e

The PEAP PRSP and the process of ILt development provide the %ehlcle lu put the CDF concept into practice in Uganda The

PE .? PRSP is a home-grosan comprchensive development strateg) for Llganda that speCIfies pnonn areas fFr Lhe GoveMmenit

It u aq deieloped thr >ugh a parlicipsiors pricesi that included all kes Ligandan sakAeholders. and is thug owned bs the ccuntrn.
The progress un Its in-plementation is di,cussed on a quarteriv basis s ith NC-Os and donors under the aegis of the Mlinistry ol
Finance Further 
the implernentation of the PEAP PRSP provides a frarrwamerk for greaLer GovernLment and donor coordination
than before and a medhaninm 
i. reduce oerlip' in donor amcivtices 
[n taL t. he Gosernnen hopes that the PEAPPRSP
inplementatioin will lejd to an end of individual parallel COunitn programs and stand-alone projects as doncrs buE 
into the
overall countr-. deselopmenct Srrateg

3. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

39. 
The previous CAS of 1997 for Uganda focused on poverty reduction and the importance of
continued work on the macroeconomic front. In addition, it sought to increase the emphasis on
analytic work to guide policies and investment priorities. As a result, a fair amount of analytic
work has been carried out and the Bank Group's assistance program has been increasingly
focusing on poverty reduction over the last three years.

A. 

OBJECTIVE OF THE 2000 CAS

40. 
This CAS for FYO1-03 seeks to build on the previous CAS by emphasizing poverty
reduction and high-quality analytic work. Reflecting this, the CAS is the Bank Group's business
plan to support Uganda's economic transformation and poverty reduction strategy as spelled out in
the PEAP/PRSP. To achieve this objective, work to maintain macroeconomic stability will
continue, but in the period ahead the focus of Bank's assistance will increasingly shift to the sector
level and to cross-cutting public sector management issues. 
In parallel, IFC will support key
private sector initiatives which can reduce poverty. Over this CAS period, the key challenge in

13

Uganda will be to replicate the excellent policy and implementation record on the macroeconomic
front at the sector level to facilitate economic transformation and poverty eradication.

B. 

LESSONS LEARNED FROM PAST BANK GROUP ACTWITIES

41. 
This CAS builds on analysis of recent economic developments, and on the lessons learned
from the implementation of the past Bank Group activities in Uganda. Specifically, the CAS is
shaped by: (i) lessons learned from the implementation of the past Bank assistance strategy and
IFC's experience as an investor and advisor; (ii) the results of the 1999 Client Survey and (iii) the
results of OED's recently completed Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE). Annex 3 provides a
detailed discussion of the results of the Client Survey and CAE.

What worked:

* The Bank's emphasis on poverty and related analytic work has greatly enhanced
understanding of poverty in Uganda and supported other donors' increased emphasis on
poverty reduction in their assistance strategies. The PEAP/PRSP, which involved close
interaction between Government, civil society, donors and the Bank during its preparation,
has emerged as a central strategy document in Uganda. At the same time, the results of
the Client Survey propose even greater focus on poverty in future Bank assistance.

* Macroeconomic work has paid significant dividends and economic growth has resulted in
a significant reduction in poverty. Both the Client Survey and CAE rate the Bank's
assistance in this area as highly effective.
* Bank's support to the government's budget process has strengthened the MTEF process
which is now central to govemment resource allocation decisions. Moreover, the Bank
has worked very closely with the Government in opening up the budget process to civil
society and the donor community. As a result, budgetary decisions are made in an
increasingly participatory manner and budgetary allocations to poverty-reducing activities
have increased significantly.

* The donor community has worked together to build a more open CG process and
improved coordination has led to improved cooperation among Uganda's development
partners. The Govemnment has been able to draw on this partnership in its formulation of
plans.
* Bank Group support for private sector development has had some successes. In particular,
IFC played a key role 
in the transformation of the telecommunications sector by
supporting the first cellular operator and advising the Govemnment on sector reforms and
privatization, which have contributed to an expansion of services in the sector.

What did not work:

* As discussed earlier, though improving, most social indicators (except primary school
enrollments) in Uganda are lower than average in Sub-Saharan Africa. The impact of
increased spending on social and human development has been less than anticipated partly
due to problems in public service delivery. The Bank's assistance must continue to focus
on addressing these inefficiencies.
* With hindsight, the Bank should have pushed the work on rural development and on the
PMA further upstream in the reform/assistance process. As discussed in previous
sections, given that the majority of Uganda's poor are rural and work in agriculture,
increased 
focus on rural development is central to sustained poverty 
reduction.
Implementation of the PMA is now urgent.

14

• 

Both the CAE and the Client Survey call for increased anti-corruption efforts by the Bank
given that corruption is constraining private sector development and undermining the
access of the poor to social and other services. Though Govemment's actions on
increasing transparency in fiscal management, enhancing accountability and combating
corruption have been impressive, 
the continuing corruption and other govemance
problems are keeping intemal and external partners dissatisfied.

* Despite explicit Bank Group support, several key reforms related to private sector
development remain incomplete. These include the privatization of UCB and sector
reform and private participation in key infrastructure sectors, such as power. Both these
areas did not reach critical milestones in the past CAS period and thus need to be further
addressed during this CAS period.

C. 

STRATEGIC ELEMENTS OF THE CAS

42. 
The lessons learned -
specifically the substantial progress in macroeconomic policy and
weaker policy and implementation performance at the sector level -
point to the need to refocus
the Bank's assistance on sectoral and cross-cutting public sector management issues. Weaknesses
in service delivery are among the key constraints to economic transformation and poverty
reduction in Uganda. Basic services (such as electricity, roads, health care) that are critical inputs
to development are inadequate. 
In addition, the services delivered, in particular by the public
sector, are of poor quality due to various governance problems and capacity constraints.
Addressing these problems effectively requires interventions at the sector level (including
privatization) so that sector-specific constraints can be addressed. It also requires public sector
management reforms to address problems that cut across sectors, such as corruption, ineffective
contract enforcement and weak personnel management. Bank Group's assistance in these areas
will be provided in the context of the PEAP/PRSP pillars described in Section 2.

43. 
Looking to the future, the required assistance cannot be delivered by "business as usual"
modalities. Shifting the focus to the sector level and to public sector management issues means
that key decision-making can no longer be limited to the Ministry of Finance; sector ministries and
civil society need to be more effectively engaged in the development effort. Further, the shift in
focus requires a change in the Bank's lending modalities. Specifically, the shift would entail a
move away from supporting the traditional combination of structural adjustment operations and
discrete investment projects, to one of supporting a comprehensive reform program through a
series of Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) over the PRSP period, disbursed against
progress in policy and institutional reforms.12 Such a shift to programmatic development support
would be justified on four grounds: 
(i) the progress on macroeconomic reform has lessened the
need for traditional structural adjustment lending; 
(ii) the proposed PRSC instrument's focus on
sectoral policies would provide a more effective mechanism to address constraints at the sector
level than discrete investment projects; (iii) the PRSC instrumentwould provide a mechanism to
focus on cross-cutting reforms in public sector management, such as strengthening public
procurement, auditing, financial management and overall performance of the civil servicde 
and
(iv) the instrument would be valuable for donor support of a country-owned program. These
issues could not be as effectively addressed by a series of traditional, sector-specific projects. The

12 PRSC will be prepared within the PSAC framework as discussed in Programmatic and Emergency
Adjustment Lending: World Bank Guidelines (R98-249), October 2, 1998 and Operational Memorandum
Guidelines for Programmatic Adjustment Loans/Credits, Februay 11, 2000. See also Supporting Country
development: World Bank Role and Instruments in Low-and Middle-Income Countries (DC/2000-19),
September 8, 2000.
13 Details of the sequencing and complementarity of cross-cutting reforms will be provided in the context of
the PRSC that is currently being designed.

15

shift to PRSCs is also attractive in that it can provide direct support for the Bank work (as well as
other interested donors) on implementing the CDF and the PEAP/PRSP in Uganda. 
Indeed, the
PRSC instrument is opportune and is intended to support, over time, the implementation of a sub-
set of reforms critical for poverty reduction, which are covered byUgandas well articulated
PEAP/PRSP. The shift to PRSC approach would be effectively underpinned by the broad and in-
depth ESW already carried out on Uganda (see para. 48). Overall, channeling IDA resources
through the budget, and thereby reducing the number of IDA interventions, would conserve the
Government's limited administrative resources. It is important to note, however, that in addition
to PRSCs, the Bank expects to continue with stand alone projects for capacity building and
infrastructure investments directly targeted to poverty alleviation and private sector development,
and where 
institutional strengthening 
is required for improved service delivery. Where
appropriate, as in power, these projects will also explicitly support private participation, with the
Bank supporting regulatory reform and institutional development and IFC providing financing and
technical assistance for the private investors entering the sectors.

44. 
The shift to PRSCs is a feasible strategy, given Uganda's advanced budget process. The
Government's PEAP/PRSP and sector programs provide clear policy objectives and the MTEF
ensures consistency between public spending allocations and policy priorities, as discussed in
Section 2. Significant improvements in budget management have raised confidence that budget
resources will be used for intended purposes. Moreover, CAS-based program support has already
proven effective in Uganda: since 1997/98 the Bank has successfully been providing programs
support for the Government's UPE initiative through an Education Sector Adjustment Credit
(ESAC). 
In less than three years, the implementation of the UPE has almost tripled primary
school enrollments.

45. 
There are transitional challenges. Specifically, there are two areas where progress will be
essential to support movement to PRSCs. First, continued progress in the area of financial
management will be necessary. Second, sector strategies must be prepared for those sectors such
as water where it has not been done yet in order to deepen the policy dialogue with the Bank and
other development partners on sectoral issues. The assistance program proposed under this CAS
has been designed to address these challenges. Moreover, the transition to the PRSC instrument
will be carefully phased.

46. Assuming continued progress, two PRSCs are planned for the CAS period. PRSC I is
scheduled for FY01 and will focus on the delivery of basic services in education, health and water
and sanitation and cross-cutting reforms in public sector management, particularly procurement
and financial management. PRSC II will concentrate on rural development (including rural roads,
water, markets, environment, etc.) and continue cross-cutting public sector reforms. It is planned
for FY03, since the Government needs to operationalize the PMA -
that is, develop structures
and capacities at local levels, and test/pilot some of key approaches -
before PRSC II can be
effective.

D. 

47. 

SELECTIVITY iN BANK GRoup's PROGRAM

The Bank Group's assistance program is selective in two ways:

(a) selectivity is exercised in the activities being pursued:The Bank Group assistance
will concentrate on the key areas covered by the PEAP/PRSP but, within each area,
the Bank will provide support only to a sub-set of activities specified. In the spirit of
both selectivity and the Bank's desire to facilitate improved donor cooperation, a
consistent effort will be made to ensure that other donors take the lead in some
activities. For example, the USAID will take the lead in rural/micro-credit, while the

16

Bank will merely continue the dialogue with the Government on best practices in that
area. More broadly, Bank activities in the area of private sector development, in
addition to the support to privatization, will be limited to ESW only as other donors
(notably USAID, the EU, DflD and Austria) are providing significant capacity
building assistance in this area. Similarly, the Bank is not envisioning any financial
support for the development of a sector-wide approach in the legal sector as support
for this is already being provided byDflD, Norway and the Netherlands. In addition,
in all areas of Bank involvement, the Bank will be tailoring its support to take into
in the health sector, the Bank's
account other donor activities. For example, 
assistance will concentrate on the provision of primary health care and prevention of
HIV/AIDS, leaving hospitals or tertiary care to the Govemnuent and other donors. In
education sector, the Bank's efforts will focus on primary and secondary education,
while vocational and tertiary education will be taken care of by others. Finally, no
IDA investments will be made in Government parastatals after the Power IV project.

(b) selectivity is exercised in the instruments for providing assistance: As discussed
earlier, the Bank is moving toward mainstreaming its financing for various sectors via
budget support 
in 
lieu of specific 
investment 
requiring a multiplicity of
implementation arrangements. When appropriate, 
the Bank will explore 
the
possibility of using guarantees in place of lending so as to catalyze private
investments in infrastructure.

E. 

ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

48. Due Diligence Economic and Sector Work (ESW): The Bank Group has, in cooperation
with the Government of Uganda and other donors, established a broad-based information and
analytic base which provides the underpinnings 
for its policy dialogue and operations.
Participatory annual reviews of Public Expenditure have been carried out successfully since
1997/98, in the context of Uganda's MTEF exercise, and this work will continue to be undertaken
annually. As discussed earlier, poverty analysis in Uganda is breaking new grounds through
annual participatory poverty assessments, which are helping Uganda to develop and monitor the
progress in reducing poverty levels via a broad set of indicators and lessons of experience. 
In this
regard, Uganda's work on the PEAP, which served as its PRSP, is noteworthy. A CEM on the
"Challenge of Growth and Poverty Reduction" has subsequently been supplemented by a series of
in-depth strategic plans in the key sectors (see Annex 2), prepared by Government, with assistance
from donors including the Bank Group. Fiduciary/institutional assessments in, inter alia, the
financial and health sectors, have been carried out and service delivery survey/expenditure
tracking work is planned to gauge the quality and adequacy of public services in various areas,
such as health, education and agriculture. Significant work on the external debt 
and related
sustainability analysis has also been carried out in the context of the HIPC initiatives. Diagnostic
work in the areas of private sector development, governance and public sector management, has
been completed; further work, particularly in the area of accountability/anti-corruption, is planned.
The planned non-lending work in the Bank's Uganda program is designed to expand on and update
the rich analytical work already done, with a view to further improving the quality of the policy
dialogue and enhancing the impact of the Bank's lending interventions.

49. 
The Bank Group's proposed assistance program is fully consistent with and supports the
four pillars of the PEAP/PRSP. Under each pillar, the Bank is going to selectively support reforms
at the sector level and in governance. These activities will complement the existing portfolio (see
Annex 4 and Annex B8). Table 2 summarizes the proposed activities by fiscal year. The lending
and non-lending activities under each pillar will be as follows:

17

Table 2: Components of the Bank Group's Assistance Program for Uganda, FY 2001-2003

NON-LENDING TASKS AND ESW

FY01 

FY02 

FY03

* 
Support for PRSP: Progress Report 
* 
Poverty Overview 
* 
Public Expenditure Review (PER) 
* 
Exponditure Tracking 
* Accountability & Corruption 
* 
Rural Development 
* 
Consultative Group (CG) Meeting 
* 
CPPR 
* WBI Workshops/Capacity Building 
* MIGA Guarantees 
* 
IFC Private Sector 
Development/Advisory Services 
Pilot on Commodity Risk 
Management 

* 

* 

* 
* 
* 

Support for PRSP: Progress Report 
PER 
Expenditure Tracking 
* Accountability & Corruption 
* Decentralization 
* Rural Development 
Private Sector Development 
* Debt sustainability 
* CG 
* CPPR 
* WBI Workshops/Capacity Building 
* MIGA Guarartees 
IFC Private Sector 
Development/Advisory Services 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Support for PRSP: Progress Report
* Country Assistance Strategy
(CAS)
Poverty Overview
PER
Expenditure Tracking
* Accountability & Corruption
* Health/Education/Water Sector
Studies
CG
* CPPR
* WBI Workshops/Capacity
Building
* MIGA Guarantees
* 
IFC Private Sector
Development/Advisory Services

* 

LENDINGIINVESTMENT (amounts in USS million)

FY01 

FY02 

FY03

PRSC I - Service Delivery 
Power IV 
Agricultural Extension II 
Privatization & Utility Sector 
Reform (approved) 
Regional Trade Facilitation 
HIV/AIDS Control Project 
IFC Investments 
MIGA Guarantees 

225 Northern Uganda Reconstruction II 
57.8 Energy for Rural Transformation 
40 Capacity Building/Civil Service 
Refonm 
48.5 Roads II 
I 5 Environmental Management 
30 Capacity Building 11 
IFC Investments
MIGA Guarantees

90 
30 

PRSC 11 - Rural Development 
Lake Victoria 11 
Roads III 
40 Bujagali Hydropower 
90 
IFC Investmnents
MIGA Guarantees

15

200
30
85
100

(i) Directly increasing the ability of the poor to raise their incomes

50. Given the dominant role of agriculture in Uganda's economy and as the majority of the poor
live in rural areas, the Bank Group will assist a number of activities that aim to enhance
environmentally sustainable rural development and reduce regional disparities. Specifically, the
Bank will help the Government to identify interventions to be carried out under the PMA to
promote agricultural diversification and modernization and expansion of non-farm activities in
rural areas with two goals: (i) reducing poverty among subsistence food crop producers who are
predominantly women; and (ii) reducing economy's vulnerability to exogenous shocks caused by
commodity price changes, droughts and plant diseases. PRSC II will provide support to the
Government to carry out these interventions. Parallel with this work, analytic work on poverty
will continue. This work will examine progress on poverty reduction, identify regional and
sectoral disparities in poverty, and assess the benefit-incidence of public services to allow better
targeting of interventions. The specific lending and non-lending activities to be undertaken
include the following:

* Lending/lnvestment:

- Agricultural extension: The Bank Group will continue working with the Government
and donors to revitalize the agricultural extension system. This is expected to result in
a free standing agricultural extension project in this fiscal year.

18

Rural development: PRSC *I will focus on rural development (including rural roads,
rural water, rural finance and rural markets). The Bank Group will continue to work
with the Govermment and key donors to support strengthening of environmental
management capacity at the national and local levels, through an Environmental
Management Capacity Building II project. The Bank will also continue to support the
conservation and sustainable use of nationally and globally significant ecological and
biological resources. Also, PRSC II will build on PRSC I in addressing cross-cutting
public sector management issues.

Commercial agriculture and agribusiness: IFC will continue to focus on both large
scale and SME projects in non-traditional commercial agriculture and agribusiness.

Alleviation of regional disparities: The Second Northern Uganda Reconstruction
Project (NURP II) will target the relatively poor districts of Northern and Eastern
regions in the country that have not benefited proportionately from economic reform
and liberalization. Building on an earlier operation, the project will include a social fund
element to engage local communities in the development effort.

Non-lending:

Rural development studies: In preparation for PRSC II, the Bank Group will support
analytic work on rural development to identify interventions to be carried out under the
PMA to promote agricultural diversification, modernization and expansion of non-farm
activities in rural areas and reduction of poverty among subsistence food crop fanners.

Rural finance: While bilateral donors are taking the lead on funding rural finance, the
Bank will continue its dialogue with the Govemment on policy and on best practices in
rural micro-finance.

Pilot on commodity risk management: As a part of an international pilot, a test of a new,
market-based approach to manage commodity price risk will be carried out in the coffee
sector in Uganda. The pilot introduces a price insurance program which will give
small-holder coffee farmers in Uganda access to risk management tools widely used in
intemational markets.

Workshop on Policy and Institutional Reform for Sustainable Rural Development: The
World Bank Institute (WBI) will offer a course onPolicy and Institutional Reform for
Sustainable Rural Development to address Uganda's training needs in this area. The
course focuses on the latest thinking and good practice in rural development and
sustainable natural resource management. WBI will also offer a distance learning
version of the course through the Global Development Learning Network (GDLN).

Poverty overview: Joint analytic work with the Government and other donors on
poverty will continue. This will include assessments of the incidence, and regional and
sectoral differences in poverty and the benefit-incidence of public services.

PRSP: In collaboration with the IMF and other donors, the Bank Group will assist
Government's efforts to implement its PEAP/PRSP. This will involve more robust
costing of the poverty programs and development of improved impact and outcome
indicators and monitoring systems. Further, effort will be made to improve local
capacity to undertake poverty analysis.

19

- Regional workshop on poverty reduction strategies: WBI will organize a distance
learning version of its regional workshop on Poverty Reduction Strategies. The purpose
of the workshop will be to encourage and empower all stakeholders 
to seek
participatory and sustainable solutions for the poverty and underdevelopment in the
national, regional, and global setting. It will allow Uganda to consolidate its early gains
from the PRSP process by exchanging lessons of experience with countries that are also
pursuing participatory development.

(ii) Directly increasing the quality of life of the poor

51. As the participatory assessment work on poverty indicates, the poor in Uganda are
particularly concerned about their lack of access to basic services, such as health care, clean water
and the quality of pri-mary education. Given that these services have a major impact on the quality
of life of the poor, the Bank Group will assist activities that improve the delivery of these basic
public services. The specific lending and non-lending activities will be as follows:

* Lending/Investment:

Delivery of education, health, water and sanitation services: PRSC I will focus on the

delivery of education, health and water and sanitation services and on cross-cutting
reforms in public sector management. The specific actions to be taken to improve
service delivery will be specified during the program preparation.

HIV/AIDS: The HIV/AIDS Control Project will support Uganda's effort in combating
the HIV/AIDS epidemic by attempting to alleviate its impact, increase access to
treatment and care by those infected and affected by HIV/AIDS and strengthen the
national capacity to respond to the epidemic. The project will provide HIV/AIDS
prevention, care and treatment services at all levels and in a number of sectors and
provide support for community-driven initiatives.

IFC investments in social sectors: IFC will build on its existing investments in
education and will support private initiatives in health and education which can have
broad impact. This work will be supported by IFC's newly established Social
Services Department.

* Non-lending:

- Education sector studies: An ESW task will be undertaken to review progress on UPE,
assess the impact of UPE on the demand for post-primary education, and examine
financially sustainable altematives to increase access to post-primary education.

- Health sector studies: In the health sector, the impact of government health programs
will be reviewed, the role of the NGOs and the private sector will be assessed. There
will be an assessment of decentralization's impact on health services and an expenditure
tracking study.

- Water sector studies: In the water sector, studies which have just been completed will
be followed up by further analytic work.

- Workshops on health: WBI will work with the Institute of Public Health (IPH),
Makerere University, on adapting its course on Adapting to Change: Population,
Reproductive Health and Health Sector Reformto Uganda's specific needs. The long-

20

term aim of the course is to improve the population and reproductive health outcomes in
Uganda. In addition, WBI will organize a training-of-trainers workshop in Uganda on
Gender, Health and Poverty Reduction. The workshop will explore the relationships
between gender, health, education, and poverty.

- World Links for Development: WBI's World Links for Development (WorLD) program
provides Internet connectivity and computer integration training for teachers, teacher
trainers and students in Uganda. In 1999, 22 schools in Uganda were connected to the
program via Internet. Ten additional schools will be added in FYO1. It is estimated that
300 teachers and 1,200 students will participate in activities organized by the program.
Additionally, WBI will continue to support public and private partnerships designed to
help Ugandan schools experiment with various connectivity solutions to the Internet.

(iii) Creating an enabling environmentfor economic growth and structural transformation

52. 
To promote economic growth and development of the private sector in Uganda, the World
Bank Group will support activities that focus on removing the constraints to private sector
competitiveness, in particular infrastructure constraints, including inadequate and unreliable power
and roads. The Bank Group will also continue to support the privatization process and particularly
the utility reforms. These efforts will address the main constraints on new investment, in
particular foreign investment. IFC will directly support foreign investment in telecommunications,
power and other key sectors. In addition, the Bank's work to ensure macroeconomic stability will
continue and support will be given to further strengthen the budget process. Different lending and
non-lending activities will be as follows:

Lending/Investment:

-

Infrastructure. A number of projects will be undertaken 
to alleviate 
the key
infrastructure constraints to development. The Power IV project will aim to increase
the power generation capacity and support reforms to promote private participation in
the power sector in Uganda. Also, the project will support the establishment of a simple
regulatory framework for the petroleum sector that has been liberalized but is currently
operating unchecked. 
IFC is considering financing theBujagali Hydropower project
under IFC A loan and IFC B loan, while IDA will catalyze the participation of
commercial banks under an IDA partial risk guarantee. TheBujagali Hydropower
project is tied to milestones in the sector reforms, including progress towards the
privatization of the Uganda Electricity Board. Completion of this initiative will double
the country's power capacity and ensure that the transmission and distribution networks,
both in terms of physical and institutional capacity, can deliver the power. IDA and IFC
are also supporting the rural electrification effort to improve access to electricity and
thereby increase the quality of life in rural areas where the bulk of Ugandans live. IFC
will continue its support to the telecommunications sector and seek to support other
private infrastructure initiatives with financing and advisory assistance as appropriate.
Roads II and III will complete IDA's contribution towards the Government's 10-year
roads sector development and investment program. Rural roads are expected to be a
major component in PRSC II.

- Privatization: IDA's recently approvedPrivatization and Utility Sector Reform Project
will support the reform of key utilities and complete the divestiture of the remaining
public enterprises slated for privatization. 
lFC will seek to finance key investments
arising from the Govemnment's privatization program.

21

Financial sector development: During the CAS period, IFC will seek to take on a more
significant role with direct financial and technical support for financial institutions.
building on existing investments in development finance, leasing, insurance and on
advisory work with the Govermment on the stock exchange. This will complement the
already approved Financial Markets Assistance Project. Under this project, the Bank is
promoting the financial sector reform agenda by supporting the restructuring and re-
privatization of UCB, further strengthening regulation and supervision both in banking
and the other sub-sectors and by initiating reform of the National Social Security Fund.

SME support: IFC will build on its strong portfolio of direct SME investments to
provide additional financial support to key private initiatives.

Regional integration: The Bank is considering support for a Regional Trade
Facilitation Project which is scheduled for Board consideration in FY01. 
In addition, it
is planned to undertake the second phase of the Lake Victoria project to sustain the
effort to protect Lake Victoria's ecosystem.
Non-lending:

Private sector advisory services: The new joint Bank/IFC Private Sector Advisory
Services Department will continue its support for improving the private sector enabling
environment in Uganda. FIAS will work with the Government and the Investment
Authority in particular, on reducing investment related bureaucracy and improving
investment regulations and promotion. Specifically, an assessment of the progress on
reducing investment red tape will be carried out and assistance on implementation of
further reforms will be given. Corporate Finance Services division will seek to support
other government privatization 
initiatives with advisory 
services, 
as with
telecommunications.

Private sector studies: Successful implementation of the Government's Medium Term
Competitive Strategy for the Private Sector (2000-2005) will require support from the
donor community, including the World Bank Group. The formulation of the strategy is
a significant step forward, the challenge now is to translate its broad agenda into
actions. Additional analytical work will be carried out to help the Government to
formulate a specific set of policy measures and to help the Government to finalize and
implement the key measures according to an agreed timetable.

SME capacity building and technical support: In addition, the Bank Group will provide
capacity building and technical support 
to SMEs 
through 
the Africa Project
Development Facility and the African Management Services Company. Other services
will be developed under the management of the new joint IFC/Bank SME Department
which manages these facilities. This will include advocacy work with the Government
to support reforms critical to SMEs.

Financial sector: Together with the IMF, the Bank is planning to carry out a Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) mission to Uganda in FY01. The FASP analyzes
the sensitivity of financial institutions to macroeconomic shocks; measures the depth,
development and diversity of the parts of the financial system; evaluates the adequacy
of legal and institutional infrastructure; assesses compliance with selected intemational
standards; and proposes priorities for work to strengthen the financial sector. The
ongoing Financial Markets Assistance Project will play an important role in supporting

22

follow-up actions agreed with the Ugandan authorities that arise out of the FSAP
findings and recommendations.

-

Strengthening of public expenditure management: To strengthen further the budget
processes, annual Public Expenditure Reviews (PER) will be carried out. These will be
complemented as needed by expenditure tracking studies that focus on the utilization
and cost efficiency of government expenditures in selected areas.

- Debt sustainability: Analytic work will be carried out on long term debt sustainability
under current IDA and donor funding scenarios.

- MIGA guarantees: To date MIGA has issued a total of 16 guarantees for 10 projects in
the agribusiness, manufacturing, mining and telecommunications sectors, and has held a
number of regional events relating to investment promotion, trade and financing
strategies. MIGA stands ready to expand its portfolio in the country over the CAS
period, as Uganda offers good opportunities for foreign investment in a number of
sectors.

-

Information and communication strategy and policy: It is recognized that the use of
information and communication 
technologies 
(ICTs) and modern 
information
management systems can increase the credibility and effectiveness of efforts to improve
access to information, transparency in public sector decision-making and build private
and public sector capabilities. To promote the use ofICTs in Uganda, the Bank will
support the Government's efforts 
to 
(i) develop a National 
Information and
Communication Strategy to establish a national ICT policy framework to promote the
use of information and communication technologies for development; (ii) implement an
integrated Public Sector Management Information System to promote fiscal oversight,
transparency and accountability; and (iii) provide support for the establishment of the
Uganda Country Gateway web-site.

- Regional integration: Uganda is a member of the East African Community (EAC)
which aims to create a common market for the three member countries (Kenya, Uganda
and Tanzania). The Bank Group will arrange workshops and provide technical
assistance to address key economic and social development issues of interest to the
three member countries. In addition, the Bank Group will continue to provide advisory
support to the ongoing Nile Basin Initiative, in which nine riparian countries of the Nile
River basin are cooperatively seeking to harness the potential of the Nile 
in
environmentally sustainable ways.

(iv) Ensuring good governance and security

53. Corruption remains a serious issue in Uganda and considerable effort has been made to
ensure that Bank investments meet the highest test of propriety. Nevertheless, given the
prevalence of corruption, fiduciary considerations and vigilance are critical. The importance of
addressing the issue is heightened by the focus of the proposed PRSC instrument.

54. 
Since poor governance compromises the effect of the Government's, Bank Group's and
other donors' interventions, support will be given to selected public sector management reforms
and analytic work will be conducted in this area. Improving governance and combating corruption
that is systemic requires strengthening of institutions in particular, 
institutions promoting
accountability and transparency in Government. In Uganda the Bank's work will focus on (but not
limited to) the strengthening of the offices of the Inspector General of Government, the Minister of

23

the Ethics and the Accountant General. Other donors are working with the Judiciary and the
Accountant General. 
In addition, making progress requires a strong political commitment to
reform: the anti-corruption efforts need to be strongly grounded in the political system, and the
system needs to ensure that corruption will not be tolerated. The Bank Group's approach is to
provide a coherent set of interventions designed to address both of these concerns and to work
closely with the Government, donor community and civil society in ensuring their implementation.
Specific tasks to be undertaken are as follows:

• 

Lending/Investment:

- Public sector reforms to promote accountability and reduce corruption: PRSC I and II
will provide a framework 
for addressing various cross-cutting public sector
management reforms, in particular at the central level, to increase accountability, reduce
corruption and thereby improve public service delivery. These will include reforms in
public procurement, public sector pay, monitoring and evaluation, personnel
management and accountability. These institutional reforms will complement the on-
going work on financial accountability (on accounting, auditing, and inspection
functions) and public sector management delivered through the Second Economic and
Financial Management Project and Local Government Development Project.

- Public sector capacity building: In order to improve the performance of public service
delivery, the Bank will support a Capacity Building/Civil Service Reform project that
assists institutional development in Uganda. The project will aim to strengthen the
analytic, managerial and implementation capacity at different levels of government.

• Non-lending:

- Decentralization: Analytic work will focus on assessing the performance and impact of
decentralization on public service delivery. 
Specifically, the work will attempt to
identify the constraints to effective decentralized public service delivery and provide
guidance for further reform. A conference is proposed to be held in Kampala in 2002 to
assess the first five years of decentralization in Uganda. All levels of Government,
Parliament, civil society and donors will be involved in this event. Also, WBI will
provide a course on Decentralization: Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations and Local
Financial Management that will continue to be open to Ugandan participants. A special
effort will also be made to work with local partner institutions to adapt the course to
Uganda's specific needs and incorporate it into their curriculum. Finally, an effort is
being made with the Rockefeller Foundation to develop a set of courses devoted to
capacity building at the district level.

- Accountability and corruption: Improving accountability and tackling corruption will
be given high priority in the work program. While the Government has taken many
steps in establishing public institutions and has successfully pursued a number of high
level investigations into corruption, the general view is that corruption remains too high
and that the Government needs to take bolder measures to improve transparency and
accountability to address the problem. Analytic work on corruption in Uganda has
moved beyond anecdotal evidence to a more robust assessment of the cost of
corruption. An effort to build on and continue this work will be sustained. For
example, expenditure tracking studies will be conducted to assess possible leakage of
funds. To enhance Government's awareness of corruption and its commitment to
address the problem, a high-level conference on corruption is planned to be held in
Kampala in early 2001. This event will bring together recent analytic work, an

24

assessment of the Government's efforts to curb corruption and, hopefully, conclude
with agreement and commitment to the way forward. The World Bank Group will also
continue to support Government's efforts to reduce corruption through its anti-
corruption Plan of Action.

F. 

MANAGING THE EXISTING PORTFOLIO

55. With 24 ongoing projects in various sectors, and commitments totaling about US$1.1
billion, the IDA's Uganda portfolio is one of largest in the region. Sustaining and introducing
further improvements in the implementation of this portfolio is a key component of the CAS.
Considerable efforts on improving implementation over the past three years have had a dramatic
and positive impact on disbursements. The disbursement ratio in the past two years has been
above 25 percent - a superior performance on both regional and Bank-wide basis. Furthermore,
the implementation quality of the program, as measured by pro-activity and realism ratings, has
improved as well. Presently less than ten percent of the Uganda portfolio is rated as unsatisfactory
on the basis of implementation performance and development impact. Overall, the Uganda
program is deemed to be substantively achieving its development objectives (DO) and contributing
toward the achievement of Government's key priorities. The DO ofall active projects is currently
rated satisfactory or highly satisfactory. However, 
the relative performance 
(and related
development impact) of certain sectors, and of selected projects within each sector (for example,
the education sector and the Education Sector Adjustment Credit), is stronger than that of other
areas within the portfolio, such as agriculture and roads. The Bank will continue to conduct
annual portfolio reviews in order to identify and address portfolio-wide bottlenecks. A more
extensive discussion of the portfolio is provided in Annex 4.

56. 
IFC's portfolio (as of July 2000) remains modest at US$4 lmillion in a total of 25 projects.
Portfolio performance has been reasonably good and no systemic problems have emerged at the
country level in IFC's investments. The US$75 million under consideration for theBujagali
Hydropower project would increase this total exposure substantially.

G. 

DONOR COORDINATION AND COLLABORATION

57. 
The Bank's work in Uganda has become increasingly participatory in the past few years.
Civil society has been fully involved in the PER discussions, and the Consultative Group (CG)
meetings have been moved to Kampala and opened to the public and press (see Box 5).
Participation will continue to be central in the implementation of this CAS in Uganda.

Box 5: Examples of Liganda's Participatory Processes

i 's1da"' Ci[il 

hi [De.ernhr 
I 
srd *Iirch 
nS 
uIfr, Lhe Go,emment of 1Igandd ho,ted ,r-eounUn CCO meetings %ILh 1-gandas donorn 
in
K.nipals. IILtead cli PawS .Lu Vd beer the practw.e before. Holding the meetings in Kampala alk.%sed bro,ad parti,ipation bN
in addition 10 Government clficiali and dooss v ho traditionally parulcipAte 
in CG meetings
icprcnui-.es Ironm i.Trida * Ia.ulianient, the pr, ale se.tor, aeademia. NGO.i and CIVLI soeet) attended. Presidenk Nluse%eni
not ..nlv opetred 
the medtirg,. but aitjvel 
pa.ikLpiJled un the prnseedings LocaL 
regional and 
ntiernalornal media
repie4enLuI 
- i,re .I!' inl%ted tk. mnend the CO e,sioro

'0.i2i; 

Further .. er the p-',t tv. 
c. ar,. PER '.sork h.* direalv tupperted the 
oer-nments budget proces4 
In Lhis ontext a wv.rkhop
hid eah prnng Ln kampala I., revie" Lhe Go%emment'. enmisioned NME . f-using on spending allneauions brid resource
i-tImpis.rc after %%hkih Lhe .'.nnu.l budgel Is prepared Thi3 senrrnar ii open io donors. parliamentanans. 6i0i ,niet% and the

58. 
Facilitating partnerships and donor coordination will be an increasingly 
important
component of the Bank's work in Uganda, given that the Bank is the country's largest donor. A

25

wide range of donors, both multilateral and bilateral, are active in the country. For many years,
these donors pursued their programs in relative isolation from one another. The pressures and
distortions to government capacity that resulted from this past behavior is, however, no longer
manageable or sustainable. There has been significant progress in donor coordination over the
past years, the PEAP/PRSP and the CDF processes have intensified this effort. All key bilateral
donors, the United Nations and multilateral agencies are supporting Uganda's PEAP/PRSP/CDF
with interventions across most sectors (see Table 3, the partnership matrix), with some overlap
therefore inevitable across sectors. While duplication and overlap remains, it is clearly at a lower
level than in the past.

Table 3: Uganda's Partnership Matrix, Current Situation

Improving the Quality 
of Life of the Poor 

Creating a Frmnewoxk for Economic 
Growth and Transformation 

Promoting Good Governance
and Security

PRSP 
Pillar 

Increasing the 
Incomes of the 
Poor

Party/
Activity 

Govt. 

.

0 

Bilateral 

ll 

|1iiiiii 

World
Bank

IFC 

civil 

S ociety 

. . .. l II i 

_____ 

___ 

~,

of 

llllllllllllll

li lI 

I 
I 
___________ 111 111iiiiiii IIII H I iiiiiii

llll 111IllIIll

I 

lii 

F- 1 Little Focus 

lJ]JJ Some Focus 

Significant Focus 

High Focus

59. Over the CAS period, two donor coordination areas will receive attention. First, the
strengthening of donor coordination at the sector level will be emphasized as a key component of
the PRSCs. Considerable donor interest has emerged in respect to this instrument and substantial
co-financing is likely. Second, while there is already close collaboration on Uganda within the
World Bank Group (IDA, IFC, MIGA, FIAS and WBI), and between the Bank and the IMF, these
relations are being reinforced as new efforts, including the PRSP and Enhanced HIPC, will require
even closer collaboration within the World Bank Group, and between the Bank Group and the

IMF.

H. 

BANK GROUP DECENTRALIZATION

60. 
The Bank's Uganda program is now led by the Country Director (CD) stationed in Dar es
Salaam. A 30 person mission in Kampala is visited at least monthly by the CD. The mission
plays a leading role in the macroeconomic dialogue and is staffed to support key sectors. Looking
to the future, IDA anticipates moving some social sector capacity from the headquarters to the
field and expects to strengthen the macroeconomic team in Kampala. 
IFC also has a country
office in Kampala, located in the joint Bank office. IFC's local presence has proven very useful to
the Bank Group's work on private sector development.

26

I. 

RESOURCE REQUIREMENT

61. 
It is estimated that there will be a modest increase in resource requirements to deliver the
proposed program. As indicated above, the shift from the traditional project approach to the PRSC
instrument is expected over time to free up some resources which will be applied to more analytic
work and improving supervision. Poverty and sector analysis in particular will require incremental
resources.

J. 

CAS CONSULTATIONS

62. 
This CAS reflects the consultations that the Bank staff held with the Government and the
civil society at the beginning of the CAS preparatory process. Subsequently, the Bank circulated
and discussed a draft CAS document with the Government, donors, parliamentarians, NGOs,
private sector as well as other civil society representatives in April/May 2000. Box 6 summarizes
the comments received on the draft CAS.

Box 6: Comments on the Draft CAS by Some Key Stakeholders in Liganda

Parharnenla,w,13.

.

.

.

• 

.

Endorsed the CAS atrd %e%omed the ld, 
that it supports the PEAP. the) emphasized the belief
thai -home-gro% n de% elopment programs are likeI 
to be more reahstic and have higher chances
of success m addressing po err issues
Suggested 
that to mnunmize delaNs and 

to be consistent %ith the GC7xernment's pOihc 

ol'

decentralization. 

IDA funds be disbursed to the dcstrict admninistrations instead of the central

Go% eminenl
Expressed the hope that more or the IDA resources ii ill he disbursed for direct po%ertn reducirg
programs than for tie administration of the programrs toerheads).
Hoped that the CAS "zc,lUld addres, one binding constrairt: 
lack of finance for mvesting in

agnculture.

Suggested 
corrupion.

that the CAS assist strengthemng the capacities ol the n:tionai institutions fighting

Pnioare sector.

.

Suggested that the CAS 3ddress the three binding constraints to de-elopment 
sector. poor and inadequate economic infrastntcrure. and conmupiion

the 

eak- financial

Aion-governmen&2/ org0aizatiop1S 

(\-30s)U

.

* 

Some do not agree that the good economic performance has trarslated into appreciable po%ert5
reduction.
Suggested that the CAS foxus orn Lhree ke% issues: pouertm eradication, irnpro%ed ser ice deh% ery
and good governance

4. MACROECONOMIC PROSPECTS FOR CONTINUED POVERTY REDUCTION

A. MACROECONOMIC SCENARIOS

63. Only two economic scenarios are considered inthe Bank Group's strategy for the next three
years: the high case and low case. The high case scenario is treated as the most likely case, as in
the previous CAS. Given Uganda's track record in maintaining macroeconomic stability and its

27

demonstrated ability to live up to its commitments, the Bank and the Govemment consider the
assumptions set out below to be realistic with Uganda continuing in a high case scenario. Also, for
the Govemment to achieve its poverty reduction objective, it has to continue operating in the high
case.

(i) 

The High Case:

64. 
The high case framework is consistent with the Govemment's program supported by the
IMF's Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) program and assumes that the reform
program will be sustained, vital extemal support will continue, normal weather pattems will
prevail and the security situation remains under control. 
It also assumes that the identified
constraints to private sector growth will be effectively addressed. Under this scenario it is
expected that there will be: (i) sustained growth in the agriculture sector as a result of the PMA
implementation effort; (ii) improvement in efficiency of capital and capacity utilization resulting
from ongoing and planned structural reforms (including privatization) and investments addressing
infrastructure constraints, particularly in the power and transport sectors and (iii) aggregate fiscal
discipline with efficient allocation and use of public resources. The proposed CAS activities are
precisely aimed at alleviating existing constraints and facilitating the realization of these
assumptions.

65. 
Consequently, private investment is assumed to increase from about 10 percent of GDP to
nearly 12 percent of GDP by 2002/03. The agricultural sector is assumed to grow by between 4
and 4.5 percent per annum. On this basis, GDP is projected to grow up to seven percent per annum
with annual inflation rates of about five percent. 
International reserves will be maintained at a
level equivalent to about five months of imports of goods and services (see Table 4). This
performance assumes that the industrial sector will grow at about 10 to 12 percent a year and the
service sector will increase by between 6 and 7 percent per annum.

66. 
The analysis carried out for the PRSP indicates that although seven percent real GDP
growth per annum is difficult, it is attainable, provided action is taken to improve contract
enforcement and reduce risks (in terms of reducing the risk of expropriation and contract
repudiation by Government and improving bureaucratic quality and the rule of law). 
If the real
GDP grows at seven percent per annum, Government's objective to reduce poverty (headcount
index) to ten percent by 2017 will be achieved, if the growth is broadly distributed (that is, no
sector lags behind). Since agricultural incomes are projected to grow at only between 4 and 4.5
percent per annum in the next three years, to ensure that poor rural households do not lag behind,
Government's and Bank's strategies need to target these households 
through agricultural
modernization and by switching to non-farm private sector activities.

67. Financial Requirement: To implement the PEAP/PRSP program through the MTEF under
the high case scenario, Uganda's total external financing requirements are estimated at US$7.3
billion for the three-year period. Of this amount, about US$5 billion are expected to be generated
from Uganda's own resources, leaving a gap of about US$2.3 billion to be financed from external
sources including debt relief. According to the outcome of the CG meeting held in Kampala in
March 2000, donors pledged adequate resources to cover Uganda's external financing gap over the
next three years (2000/01 to 2002/03) which coincide with the CAS period. The prospects for
disbursements of that high level of donor financing, particularly for social sector and other priority
areas, appear favorable. Consequently, the targeted level of donor financing is a reasonable
expectation, provided Uganda sustains its high level of performance and lives up to its
commitments to the CG.

28

Table 4: Macroeconomic Projections

Indicator 

Estimated 

1999/00 

Hghf/Base Case 

Low Case

2000/01 

2001/02 

2002/031 

2000/01 

2001/02 

2002/03

-nnuriaJ aerage inilationII 

63 

5.6 

5.0 

5.0 

66 

120 

IS 'j

Nanonal accounts. 00 growth rates
Ari7ulture 
II.dustr, 
Scn Ke, 
t,DP at market pnes 
Rcl per 
ipiuGDP 

Natonal accounLs. °o ofGDP at market pilces
Grols drme,tl 
ime,unent 
PubIi; in%eitrnent 
Pri' alem ne,trnerI 
dornmestc ~3%tngs 
lr,- 

Balancefpa)mens. 6* ofGDPaI market prices
1. rnenl -t. bjlmnce. evI grantb 

External indicators
Di h 
%en evs 
r.m GNFS i 
Re,ene; in m.nths ot inpot 

helnre IIPIl resch I 

G.oiernrmnnt financt. 0o oifGDP at markel prices
D.:.m,ijre% enue 
l'ubhII 
\pendirure 
I b.erall defiit cxl grants 
Fx\emarnl borr,mrig net 
D.'rne,ll, hn,'-%inmg net 

Pubhc expendirure on priorit sectors.
00 if total no.n-inteiesi espenditures
[micludes donor finantane

I dunatk.n 
i eiaJih 
Roa.do 
\gn,uhure 
a .1Lwr atnd en% ironrient 

T4Lu espenditure on pnorirt seetors 

Total expenditure *,n priorit setomos.
0. of GDP at nmarkel prices 

3 0 
8 6 
5 6 
5 1 
2 3 

17 2 
6 9 
11)3 

I 37 

4.0 
9.7 
6.3 
6.0 
3.0 

17.6 
7.3 

10t 3 
2.3 

4.5 
11.5 
73 
7.0 
4.0 

lii 

7.0 
11.0 
4.0 

4.4 
11.4 
712 
7.0 
4.0 

13.3 

6.7 
11.6 
4.9 

3u 
7 8 
4 4 
4 O 
1 0 

IS 0 
7 6 
74 
1 

2 5 
5 4 
3 
3 5 
0 6 

14 1 
7 1 
71 

29 

2 5
5rj
31 2
3(n
0 1

13 8

7 1
68 
4 ii

.12 9 

-13.4 

-12.6 

-11.7 

-12 1 

-II) 

-8 4

2t' 
4(1 

266 
3 1 

49 
18 4 
-8 5 
2 1 
I 1 

9e 
I 1.1 
- 4 
2 u 
2 1 

28 5
2 

97
IS I
-IS 4
1 7
.1

2 
5 0 

10 6 
2(0 2 
9 6 
I ) 
-o 3 

21 9 
11.6 
13 7 
4 3 
i 8 

57.3 

247 
5.1 

10.6 
20.1 
-9.5 
4.1 
*LI 

20.6 
11.6 
14.6 
4.7 
7.5 

5.9 

21.2 
5.0 

IQ8 
19.7 
-9.0 
3.6 
-1.1 

21.0 
9.6 
14.8 
4.0 
7.8 

20.5 
5.0 

10.3 
19.2 
-8.4 
3.1 
-0.8 

21.7
9.2

14.8

4.3
7.9

Sa0 

5a.4

17 9 

203 

19.1 

132

Pe,.ertN Action Fund (PAFi expenditures
P -iF e%penditure, a. total oi non-mterest expenditures 
P \J e,penditures a1 r: ol GDP mp 

19 8 
3 5 

21.5 

1.4 

22.9 
4.4 

25.3

4.6

Source: Governnent of Uganda, IMF and staff estitnates.

68. 
IDA commitments during the three-year CAS period would total approximately US$1.1
billion (consistent with IDA allocation for Uganda), almost half of the external financing
requirements. About 40 percent of the IDA funding would be provided in the form of budget
support. 
IFC support to Uganda, driven by the US$75 million anticipated for the Bujagali
Hydropower project. would substantially increase over the CAS period reflecting increased
investment levels as well as other opportunities in infrastructure requiring intemational project
finance.

29

(ii) The Low Case:

69. 
Falling to the low case would result from a deterioration in the internal security situation
leading to declining growth and/or Uganda being drawn deeper into regional conflicts resulting in
increased military spending. The low case could also occur, if the Presidential and general
elections scheduled for 2001 result in a government less committed to reform and subsequently,
pursues inappropriate economic policies. The low case scenario presented in Table 4 is built
around the assumption that the macroeconomic program goes off track in 2000/01. This scenario is
characterized by GDP growth rates of between 3-4 percent, with agricultural and industrial output
decreasing respectively to about 2.5 to 3 percent and 5 to 7.8 percent per annum and an annual
inflation of between 6-15 percent. Foreign reserves would be drawn down to 2.5 to 4.0 months of
imports and the fiscal deficit would be covered by a greater share of domestic bank financing and
non-concessional external borrowing.

70. Financing Implications under the Low Case: Under this scenario, the IDA lending program
would be reduced to total commitments of US$300 million over the next three years, and would
result in the formulation of a new CAS with Bank support focusing primarily on key infrastructure
investments. At present the Bank sees the probability for this case as low. For IFC, such a case
would also mean lower investment levels. Specifically, a low case for IFC implies a series of
events in which the government's support for power sector can not sustain the Bujagali
Hydropower project or in which there are intrinsic issues arising during appraisal which preclude
IFC investment.

B. 

EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT

71. 
Several external and exogenous factors will influence Uganda's economic prospects. First,
as discussed in Section 1, because the economy is dependent on agriculture, the country is
vulnerable to droughts and plant diseases that could decrease agricultural outputs and rural
incomes. Second, the economy is subject to terms of trade shocks. 
In particular, changes in
international coffee prices are a cause of concern because over half of Uganda's export revenues
come from coffee. Declining coffee prices could result in sharp reduction in export revenues and
rural incomes. Also, recent increases in international oil prices are negatively affecting the
economy by increasing the cost of imports. Third, internal and external security situation
discussed in Section 1 poses a serious risk to the economy and could result in diversion of
resources to defense expenditures and undermine the investor confidence in the economy. The
current level of international reserves together with the HIPC debt relief increase, however, the
country's ability to absorb temporary external shocks. Also, the proposed assistance program is
addressing the issue of further diversification of agricultural production to mitigate 
the
vulnerability to the shocks.

C. 

TRIGGERS

72. 
The regular consultations which take place during the MTEF process andsector reviews
with key stakeholders will provide the framework within which judgments will be formed on
whether the Bank's program should shift to the low case scenario. Three sets of triggers are
proposed for this move (see Box 7). First, deterioration in the macroeconomic environment as
evidenced by weakened fiscal discipline (including defense expenditures rising above recent
levels) constitutes the first trigger. The second set of triggers relates to the implementation of
poverty programs. The triggers include a declining share of budgetary allocations to and spending
in the key anti-poverty areas and unsatisfactory implementation of poverty reducing programs
(including the PMA). The third set of triggers relates to governance: specifically, to unsatisfactory

30

implementation of the Anti-Corruption Plan and civil service reforms. The macro trigger and/or
the implementation of the PEAP/PRSP are enough to shift the Bank's program to the low case
scenario. Whether the other triggers will lead to a move to the low case cannot be determined
apriori; the decision will depend on the country's overall performance in all three areas (macro,
poverty, governance). These triggers and means of verification are laid out in more detail in Box 7.

Box 7: Triggers for the Low Case Scenario

Triggers 

Means or-, erifkation

N lacro

* 

Delenor3teon m the marVeN)Mn-Mk Cl1ronnmenl 
a-, e%iderced bN %seakened flsciil disciplinE.
including detense eivenditures rising above
recent le%els

* 

Joint INhF-A odd Bank macroeconorrde missions

Poserty Progran

* 

A declmning ehae ,1 pulLc resoiarve6 allocated t. 

and spent in the antu-po%eM proparns.

* 

Vrnual PER

* Unsalisflor. irprip!ementalion ol the 

PEAP. PRSP ptgram in the ke poiertv reducing
se.tors * hera there are sec tir %% 

ide approaches.

* 

ioint serni-annual Government-donor sector reviews

* 

Failure ic. implement Lhe PMIA. iniudurg 
inadequ.le budgeian rcsources and e%penditares 

* 

Bank s monitorirg of the PMA plan of action; PER
prcess

Govemance
* 
L'n iaaistaci.r'. implenientauion c,i ihe xn 

Ccrrapiion Plan as demristrawed b-, failute to 
implement public prnuremenr relo.rm and
sirengffhen die rt le of the Auditor General

* Unsautslaiorn unplemeoLason of ckiil ser% ice 
refLrm a. demontrated h% failure to de% elop 

viable p.r. reform strateg and restIt, -nented
management &,stern

D. 

BENCHMARK INDICATORS

* 

Bank and other dei elopment partners' monitoring of the

plim implementation

* 

Bank's moriulorng of minplemeriLation Of a public service
and pa!- reform strateg&

73. Benchmarks for Government Performance: Annex B9 lists performance indicators that the
Government intends to use to assess its progress in implementing the PEAP/PRSP program
through the MTEF. It is recognized, however, that many of these benchmarks change slowly over
time, while others will require more robust sectoral information systems, which are currently being
developed. Over the CAS period, some of these measurable benchmarks include:

* Poverty eradication: Maintain the PAF share of total expenditures at least at 25 percent
of the budget; increase per capita consumption of the poorest quintile; reduce proportion
of Ugandans falling below the poverty line; reduce regional disparities in poverty.

* 

Infrastructure: Increase kilometers of main roads improved and maintained (163 km of
new bitumen roads and 70 km of gravel roads upgraded to tarmac in 2000/01); increase
kilometers of rural roads maintained and rehabilitated (15,000 km and 1,800 km
respectively planned for 2000/01); increase rural access to electricity.

4 Defense expenditures in the 2000/01 budget are set at two percent of GDP (at factor cost).

31

* Health: Increase immunization rates (increasing DPT3 coverage rates from 35 percent
to 80 percent by 2002/03); increase percentage of health centers with trained staff from
present 55 percent to 65 percent by 2002/03.

* Education: Improve quality of education by reducing the pupil/teacher ratio (falling
from 58:1 to 47:1 by 2002/03), pupil/classroom ratio (declining from the current 118:1
to 87:1 by 2002/03) and pupil/book ratio (falling from 6:1 to 3:1 by 2002/03).

* Water supply and sanitation: Increase rural coverage from 40 percent to nearly 82
percent by 2002/03 by adding 1,500 boreholes, 700 protected springs and 1,700
protected wells to the stock of rural water sources.

74. Benchmarks for Bank Group's Performance: The Bank Group's strategy is designed to
support the Government's anti-poverty program and help the Government achieve the above
indicators. Successful implementation of the CAS can be measured by: (i) maintenance of
macroeconomic stability based on inflation, growth and fiscal performance targets, monitored
jointly by the Bank and IMF during periodic review missions and annual public expenditure
reviews and (ii) achievement of the Bank Group performance benchmarks will focus in the areas
of quality of life (PRSC I) and rural incomes (PRSC II). The quality of Bank portfolio
performance can be measured by: (i) the number of at risk projects is not to exceed 15 percent of
total projects and (ii) an overall disbursement ratio in excess of 20 percent is to be maintained.
IFC's performance can be assessed by the level and development impact of IFC investments,
number and effectiveness of advisory and other technical assistance projects and the financial
performance of IFC'c country portfolio.

E. MONITORING AND EVALUATION

75. 
To monitor the progress in achieving the performance benchmarks, the Government is
developing a system that tracks indicators at three levels: inputs, outputs, and outcomes. Several
instruments will be used to collect the information: national accounts, balance of payments, annual
household surveys, national service delivery surveys, regular sector reviews, participatory poverty
assessments, expenditure tracking studies and other specific studies that will be commissioned for
the purpose. The CAS matrix in Annex B9 lists which instruments will be used to measure the
progress in each area. Further work in developing and coordinating the indicators and instituting
the monitoring and evaluation system is, however, required. The PRSC will support work on
monitoring and evaluation during the CAS period.

F. 

CONSTRAINTS AND RISKS

76. Constraints and Risks for the Country: Several risks could threaten Uganda's ability to
implement its development agenda:

. As already discussed above, there are pervasive 
institutional and human capacity
weaknesses, which need to be addressed, at the center but especially at the district level.
There is a risk that these constraints could undermine the implementation of the
proposed PRSC and thus impede the much-needed improvement in public service
delivery. However, in addition to ongoing projects, the CAS includes both lending and
non-lending instruments to address identified gaps and help mitigate against the risk.

* The security situation both in Northem and in Westem Uganda could deteriorate and
result in diversion of substantial resources to defense expenditure. 
It could also
undermine confidence and reduce foreign as well as domestic investment, and prevent

32

the local population undertaking economic activities. The Govermnent is acutely aware
of the risk and is making a determined effort to minimize it, including an offer of
amnesty to the country's dissidents and reconciliation with the neighboring countries
supporting rebel activities.

* Corruption remains a serious development issue which, hitherto, has shown only limited
signs of responding to the Government's anti-corruption measures. 
It could inhibit
private sector confidence and investment and hamper improvements in public service
delivery. However, the President is committed to aggressively addressing the problem.
The challenge facing the Government now is the implementation of its anti-corruption
Plan of Action.

* The devastating effects of HIV/AIDS can potentially disrupt the economy in two ways.
First, the disease robs Uganda of many of her highly trained, technical personnel in a
capacity-constrained environment. Second, the number of AIDS orphans is rising,
putting pressure on family and social structures. However, Uganda is committed to
intensifying 
its information program, reducing mother-to-child 
transmission and
promoting community involvement in the care of AIDS patients.

* Exogenous risks such as adverse weather patterns and/or terms of trade shocks, would
decrease agricultural output and exports and could result in sharp declines in rural
incomes where most of Uganda's poor reside.

* Political transition in Uganda presents a clear challenge to Government. Despite the
results of the Referendum on multiparty democracy held in June 2000, there will be
continued pressure on Government for further political reforms as Uganda approaches
presidential and local elections in 2001. The Govemment is aware of the potential
risks. President Museveni has indicated his openness to dialog on this issue.

77. Risks for the Bank Group: The greatest risk faced by the Bank Group in achieving its CAS
objectives is overestimating the Government's ability to implement the PEAP/PRSP. The Bank's
three-year program laid out in Section 3 is designed to address each of the potential risks by:

* 

Increasing 
the Government's planning, monitoring and accountability capacity,
particularly at the district level;

* Building an effective Government's incentive system needed to improve service
delivery.

33

5. CONCLUDING REMARKS

78. 
The main goal of the Government's development plan and the Bank Group's Country
Assistance Strategy is to support Uganda's economic transformation and reduce poverty. The
economic and sector work and lending operations proposed in this CAS are specifically designed
to help Uganda reach this goal.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter L. Woicke

By:
Shengman Zhang 

Washington, D.C.
December 18, 2000

34

UGANDA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

ANNEXES

Annexes

Annex 1: 
Annex 2: 
Annex 3: 
Annex 4: 
Annex 5: 

Overview of Planning
Progress with Sector Plans for hnplementing the PEAP
Results of the Client Survey and OED Review
Portfolio Overview
Standard Annexes

35

Overview of Planning

Annex 1

POVERTY 

ERADICATION
ACTION PLAN

............. .. .... 

--- -- 
-- 

A ' 

Donor programs ' 

SECTORPLANS 4 

s'A 

ISTRT............. 
PNS

4..

..

'

,Res4its of

' NGO programs 

' 

----

_---------------- 

.mon0toring

Private sector 

Xinitatives 

3 year Medlum 

Term
Expenditure 
Framework 

Local Govt
S 3 year Medium 

4

Expenditure
Framework

-Budget Speech 

I 

Anul udget 

DistrIct Budget

-

-----

CivlSociety 

j-

QUick guide to planning processes:

The PEAP: 

Sector planning: 

District planning: 

MTEF: 

District MTEF: 

The national planning framework on which to develop detailed sector strategies

Technical specifications of sector priorities, disciplined by hard budget constraints

Implementation plans for sector strategies based on local priorities/needs

Annual, rolling 3 year expenditure planning, setting out medium term expenditure priorities and
hard budget constraints against which sector plans can be developed and refmed

Setting out medium term expenditure priorities and hard budget constraints against which district
plans can be developed and refined

National and DistAict budgets: Annual implementation of the three year planning framework

Donor, NGO; prnvate sector: 

Participating and sharing information/ideas in developing sector plans and budgets

Participatory processes: 

Bottom-up participation of districts in the planning and monitoring process, as well as participatory
poverty assessments, providing essential feedback on progress towards poverty eradication goals

Source: Uganda Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and Joint World Bank-lMF Staff Assessment of the PRSP

36

Progress with Sector Plans for Implementing the PEAP

Annex 2

Sector 

Plan

Roads 

* 

10 year Main Road Sector Development Plan (1996)

Rural Development 
Education 
Health 
Water 
Land 

Social development 
Environment 
Justice/law and order 

Cross-cutting plans:

HIV/AIl)S 
Combating corruption 

Pay reform 

* Transport Sector Investment and Recurrent Expenditure Program (detailed budget plan)
* Plans for rural and urban feeder roads under preparation
* Plan for the Modernization of Agriculture (draft April 2000)
* Education Sector Investment Plan (1998)
* Health Sector Strategic Plan (1999)
Separate plans for rural and urban water under preparation
* Land Act Implementation Plan under preparation

* 

* Under preparation
* Under preparation
* Sector-wide plan under preparation encompassing separate plans for Commercial Justice
System Refonn (July 2000) and Criminal Justice System Refonr 
(under preparation)

* National Strategic Framework for HIV/AlDS Activities 2000/1-2005/6
* Government Strategy and Plan Action to Fight Corruption and Build Ethics and Integrity
in Public Office 2000 - 2002
Under preparation
3 

3 7

Annex 3

Results of the Client Survey and OED Review

Client Survey Results

1. 
The results of the latest Uganda client survey, that was undertaken in 1999, are mixed.
There are a number of areas including staff's technical competence, clarity of communication,
knowledge about international best practices and reliability, which Ugandan clients consider
important and where the World Bank is perceived to be effective. In addition, the World Bank
received high effectiveness 
rating 
in helping 
to: 
(i) strengthen and maintain sound
macroeconomic and trade policies; (ii) establish the physical 
infrastructure essential for
development; and (iii) bring about economic growth. However, there are other areas in which the
Bank's efforts were viewed as being less effective. These include: poverty reduction assistance;
establishing conditions for long term sustainability; helping to ensure value for money in Bank
funded projects; facilitating beneficiary participation; showing flexibility with regard 
to
procurement rules and procedures; building capacity at the community level; promoting private
involvement in delivery of public service; and helping improve govemance.

OED Review and Findings

2. 
The results of OED's recent Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) for Uganda are also
mixed. Noting the "remarkable" economic recovery since 1986 and the sustained growth since
1992, OED gave high praise on macroeconomic performance. 
It complemented the significant
impact of growth on poverty levels, noted the progress on gender issues and in social sectors
programs and acknowledged 
the emphasis of the IDA program on participation. OED's
judgement on Bank's project performance was less favorable. OED's view of the structural
adjustment program was very positive, but was not so positive on the sectoral portfolios- in
particular with the programs in infrastructure and private sector. On capacity building, OED
recognized some progress, but criticized the IDA interventions as ineffectual. OED also felt more
effort was required on decentralization and corruption. Finally, OED expressed concern on the
sustainability of Uganda's growth efforts, noting that the potential gains from increased capacity
utilization have been fully exploited. Key lessons of the evaluation are presented below.

Key Lessons of the CAE

1. The Bank needs to lisien betier. respect local ideas and expertise. and engage in wider consultations

%% 
ith stakeholders
2. Agnculiural gro% thl small-holder de% elopment. and commercialization are criucal to Uganda's
future progress and poxvertn 
reduLtion
3. To eradicate po ertv. the Bank should focus on reducing dispanties (urban/rural. regional, gender).

4. The Bank needs to adopt an integr3ted holistic approach to sector de% elopment. go- emance. and

pnm ate sector development
5. Liberalization of markets is necessarn but noL sufficient for prihate sector development.

i 6. To promote go% emance. the Bank should enlist civil societi allies

7. 

Pax relorrn is dhe kes to impro% ing efficiency and capacity in the public sector

8. The Bank- should address decentralization in depth

Annex 4

Uganda: Portfolio Overview

Current Status of the Uganda Portfolio

1. 
As of July 31, 2000 a total of 83 credits and 9 loans, amounting to some US$2,948 million
(US$2,905 million from IDA and US$43 million from IBRD) had been approved for Uganda.
Total disbursements amounted to nearly US$2,408 million. The active Uganda portfolio
comprises 24 projects (as well as a US$33 million supplemental credit to the Power III Project)
with commitments totaling US$1.1 billion. 
Two new interventions (Local Government
Development Program and Second Economic and Financial Management Project) totaling some
$115 million were approved in FY00, while two projects closed during the fiscal year. A
Privatization and Utility Reform Project in the amount of US$48.5 million has also been
approved in August 2000. The undisbursed balance (not including recent approvals) is about
US$408 million or about 36 percent of the total commitments, reflecting broad-based
improvements in implementation progress over the last three years or so. While this percentage
was well below that of recent years and supported the proposed move to increase new
commitments over the planning period, the somewhat static disbursement rate (26.2 percent) in
fiscal year 2000 has been a result of increased focus on strengthening 
the procurement
performance under the portfolio in light of the findings of an in depth Country Procurement
Assessment Report (CPAR) conducted recently.

2. 
Sustained improvement in portfolio implementation was a key focus of the last CAS (April
1997). Involving a comprehensive evaluation of the actual status of the portfolio, our joint
objectives with Govemment were to make: (i) the portfolio consistent with theGOU's priorities
outlined in its Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP); and ii) identify and address capacity
constraints and portfolio - wide bottlenecks to timely project implementation. The latter would
help raise the percentage of successful projects through more effective supervisions and
retrofitting of the existing portfolio with performance indicators.

Structure of the Portfolio

3. 
Uganda's active investment portfolio falls in the following broad sectors: agriculture,
environment (including GEF supported operations), human capital development, private/public
sector management, and infrastructure. In addition, IDA has two adjustment credits in Uganda -
one for the overall economic policy reform, and the other for reforms in the education sector. If
one compares the evolution of the portfolio from the last CAS, it has evolved in directions
consistent with the objectives reflected in the Uganda PEAP. There has been a significant rise in
lending in the social sectors for human capacity development: an adjustment operation in the
education sector was approved in FY98, in the amount of US$80 million (also the proceeds
(US$75m) of the initial HPC relief were dedicated to the education sector) and IDA approved an
investment operation in Nutrition and Early Childhood Development. 
In addition three earlier
projects in health and education remain under implementation.

4. 
The lending in the agricultural sector has been consolidated, with the focus being on the
provision of research and extension services. Lending in the area of environment has increased:
the total lending in environment related projects now stands at nearly US$50 million. The Bank
also continues to support Uganda's efforts in policy and institutional reform to encourage private
investment and ensure a competitive business environment. In tandem, improvements in public

38

Annex 4

sector performance for enhanced public service delivery is being stressed. The portfolio in
infrastructure investment is being consolidated with an emphasis on roads and power.

Disbursements Under the Portfolio

5. 
Total FY99 disbursements were close to US$156 million (a disbursement rate of 26.2
percent). Total disbursements for FY00 amounted to US$152 million, of which investment
disbursements are to the order of US$113.4 million. The (annualized) disbursement ratio
currently stands at about 21 percent, which continues to be well above the 13 percent level
attained in both FY94 and FY95 and compares favorably to both Africa Region and Bank-wide
averages. As noted earlier, this relative slow-down in the disbursements ratio is indicative of
conscious efforts to further strengthen procurement performance under the ongoing projects.
Disbursement has also been effected under the Third Structural Adjustment Credit during April
2000. Some US$38.5 million equivalent was disbursed in April and processing of the final
tranche of US$38.6 million was underway at the time of writing. The third and finaltranche of
some US$34 million equivalent under the Education Sector Adjustment Credit was disbursed this
fiscal year.

Current Portfolio Improvement Efforts

6. 
Increasing focus on the implementation performance of Bank projects in Uganda has been
leading to a steady improvement over the past few years; portfolio quality as measured by
"problem projects" has reflected this trend. In FY96 and FY97 the share of problem projects in
the portfolio increased steadily, largely due to an effort to improve the accuracy and realism in
project ratings. This downgrading trend led to an increase in the number of problem projects in
the portfolio from no problem projects at the end of FY96 to seven projects out of 20 rated as
being unsatisfactory at the beginning of FY97. However, the conscious portfolio strengthening
efforts over the past three years have reduced the number of problem projects in the portfolio.
Concerted project level actions and a 1998 CPPR focusedinter alia on resolving generic issues
like poor procurement and disbursement record, 
inadequate project management or non-
compliance with covenants, etc., have lead to a decline in the share of problem projects
(commitments) from over 34 percent in FY97 to under four percent in FY00. As of end-July
2000, the number of problem projects in the portfolio has fallen significantly with only two
projects - the Financial Markets Assistance and the El Nino Emergency Projects being rated
unsatisfactory in light of inadequate implementation progress. The 
two are being carefully
monitored. Overall, Uganda's portfolio performance indicators compare quite favorably with
Bank-wide as well as Africa Region averages:

* 

* 

• 

Ninety-two percent of the portfolio (in terms of numbers) is now rated satisfactory-
up from some 65 percent in FY97.

OED's evaluation of completed projects with ratings of "unsatisfactory outcome"
has improved somewhat from over 40 percent in 1995 to 33 percent currently.
Likewise, the net-disconnect between the PSR and OED ratings has improved from
40 to 33 percent respectively in the period under review.

The pro-activity index has improved from a level of 50 percent in 1997 to 100
percent currently compared to the Africa Region ratio of 83 percent.

39

Annex 4

* 

The realism index stands at 67 percent compared to 86 percent for the Region. In
this respect it is noteworthy that all Uganda projects are impacted by the blanket
imposition of a "risky country" status or flag, which implies that active operations
with even two project-specific issues/flags, default to a "potential problem" status as
a result of the application of the risky country flag.

IDA's Future Lending Program and Portfolio Improvement Strategy

7. 
The principles guiding the development of a sound lending pipeline for Uganda continue to
include: (a) operations designed to be fully consistent with the objectives of the Uganda PEAP -
reinforcing the Govemnment's goal of poverty reduction through measures aimed at improved
economic growth performance and improved access to socio-economic services; (b) superior
quality of projects at entry, ensured through: greater ownership by the borrower and key
stakeholders as well as rigorous preparatory work at the design stage and capacity building over
the life of the operation; and (c) diligent supervision on the Bank's part and particularly intensive
supervision in the case of emerging implementation issues. Project design is being sharpened
through upstream peer reviews and a focus on the development of clearly defined and
monitorable project impact (including outputs and outcomes) indicators. 
In addition to a
transparent and ongoing dialogue with Government and Bank efforts under ongoing operations, a
number of cross-cutting IDA and Government initiatives (including internal semi-annual portfolio
reviews, the ARPP exercise, the CPPR, the CPAR, CFAA and the PERIMTEF) will contribute to
enhanced implementation and further the efforts at addressing generic portfolio-wide issues. In
this regard:

* 

* 

The Bank's Quality Assurance Group's (QAG) "Rapid Quality at Entry" assessment
carried out for two recent entrants into the Uganda portfolio resulted in overall
satisfactory ratings.

The QAG review of the quality of economic analysis in the context of relatively
recent projects also earned satisfactory grades.

8. 
Other efforts at reshaping the portfolio to enhance the quality, sustainability and impact of
Bank operations are underway:

* 
In developing its PEAP, Government is attempting to provide a sharper framework
within which the development partners are expected to provide support for growth and
poverty eradication. These efforts are consistent with the Comprehensive Development
Framework (CDF) endorsed by the Government to further Uganda's adoption of the
principles of ownership and partnership. With increased ownership, it is expected that the
portfolio's emphasis will shift to areas with greater urgency of reform.

* 
The Country Team is applying lessons of experience and utilizing new instruments.
An Adjustable Programmatic Lending (APL) approach has been adopted for 
the roads
sector in line with GOU policies. Two PRSCs are envisaged in areas of social service
delivery as well as rural development and environment in FY01 and FY03, respectively.
These and the other parts of the lending program draw heavily from the findings of the
substantive analytic work being carried out to review the record in economic growth and
sectoral development in Uganda as well as the grassroots impact of the policies and
programs; the analytic work is largely based on the household surveys and the surveys of
the private firms and investors. All these actions should further improve quality at entry
and are expected to contribute to improved portfolio implementation.

40

Annex 4

* 

The Country Performance Portfolio Review is scheduled for May 2001.

Remaining Challenges

9. While the perfonnance of the Uganda Portfolio is now quite robust, there area few
remaining areas which merit closer follow-up:

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Pace of implementation: The average age of the portfolio at about four years
continues to be high as compared with the Bank-wide average age of 3.6 years (but
in line with the Africa Region average). The number of projects with extended
closing date increased from 2 to 6 between FY97 and FY00. The number of
projects under implementation for five years or more now stands at nine, or some 38
percent of the portfolio.

Financial management continues to be an issue. The number of projects with
outstanding or overdue audit reports nearly doubled from eight at the end of FY97 to
14 active projects in March 2000, but is now down to eight projects again.
Measures to improve this situation are being launched by the financial specialist in
the Country Office with back-stopping by the Operations Support staff in
Washington, and the results will be carefully monitored over the coming months.

A key sub-sector, which merits a closer follow-up on implementation performance
within the portfolio, relates to the transport/roads sub-sector. All four roads
projects have significant undisbursed balances, the IP rating of the El Nino
Emergency project was downgraded while the Roads Sector Institutional Support
project is a "potential" problem project 
- largely a consequence of inadequate
capacity within the sector. However, progress is being made on the institutional
front in Uganda. A Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU) is now operational and
should be able to cope with the present and planned workload, until 
the
establishment of a semi-autonomous road agency is in place by mid-2002.

Although attention to social sectors in the lending portfolio over the past several
years has grown with the Bank responding to the emerging challenges in Uganda's
human development performance, the effectiveness of services remains low. This is
an issue that will be a key focus of the proposed PRSC I operation; PRSC I will seek
to improve the quality of public service delivery in the areas of primary education,
basic health and water and sanitation. The Bank is also reviewing the modalities for
strengthening its support for Government efforts at containing the HIV/AIDS
pandemic.

Decentralization from the center to the district councils is expected to be a major
challenge in the medium-term, but is affecting the implementation of some of the
projects (particularly, the ongoing or planned agriculture extension and social sector
interventions). Strengthening of local capacity and sound procedures for funding
district councils and a solid accountability framework need to be established.

41

Annex 5

UGANDA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Standard Annexes

Annexes:

A2 Uganda at a Glance
B2 
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
B3 
Bank Group IDA Program Summary
B3 
Bank Group Fact Sheet-IFC and MIGA program
B4 
Summary of Nonlending Services
B5 
Poverty and Social Development Indicators
B6 Key Economic Indicators
B7 Key Exposure Indicators
B8 Operations Portfolio
B8 
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
B9 
CAS Program Matrix
B1O CAS Summary of Development Priorities

42

Annex A2
Page I of 2

Uganda at a glance

Sub-
Sahamun 
Africa 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Low-
Incorne 

Uganda 

Development dlamond

1999
Population, mid-year (midDons) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, USS) 
GNP (Atlas methoo, US$ bions) 

21.5 
320 
6.8 

642 
500 
321 

2,417 
410
988

Lfe expectancy

Average annual growth, 1993-99
Population (°X) 
Labor force (X) 
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1993-99) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty lne) 
Urban population (% oftotalpopulation) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000ie births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Acoess to improved water souroe (% ofpopulation) 
IllIteracy (% ofpopulation age 15-) 
Grossprmaryenrollment (% ofschoolagepopulation) 
Male 
Female 

2.9 
2.7 

26 
2.6 

1.9
2.3 

GNP 

Gross

per 

\; 

enprimary

44
13 
42 
97 
26 
41 
38 
122 
129 
114 

34 
50 
92 
32 
43 
39 
78 
85 
71 

31
60
77
43 
64
39
96 
102 
86

Acoess to safe water

-Uganda
Low-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERuM TRENDS
1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

Economic ratdoe

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic jnvestment/GDP 
Exports ofgoods and servioeslGDP 
Gross domestic savingslGDP 
Gross natonal savings/GDP 

5.3 
111 
8 0 
1 0 
1 9 

6.8 
15 0 
10 3 
5.6 
13.4 

6.4
164
11,3 
4.9
10.5

Trade

, 

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest paymentsGDP 
Total debtlGDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debtlexports 

-69 

-10.4 
0.6 
53.6 
27.2 
26.7 
267.8 

-11.6 
0.6
54.3 
24.6
27.3
225.3

Dneestoen

-

36.2 
78.8 

Savings 

Indebtedness

1979-E 

1989-99 

1998 

1999 

1999-03

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exportsofgoodsandservices 

3.4 
0 9 
1.2 

7.1 
4.1 
148 

5.6 
2.8 
-14.9 

7.4 
4.3 
33.0 

6.3 
3.3 
6.4

-Uganda
Low-nocmne group

STRUCTuRE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of Investment and GOP(%J
s
o
30
20
o 

(% of GOP) 
Agniculture 
Industry 
Manufacturng 
Services 

.. 

56.8 
10.7 
5.9 
32.5 

44,6 
17.6 
8.9 
37.8 

44.4 
17.8 
8.7 
37.8 

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

92.0 
7.0 
18.1 

84.8 
9.6 
19.7 

85.2 
9.9
22.9 

-1D 

94 s9 

s 9o 

ee 

se

GC 

_GOP

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Grwth of exporta and imports

(average annualgrolh)

Agiculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

2.7 
64 
36 
3.2 

3.7 
121 
135 
81 

1.9 
115 
144 
686 

6.9 
9.1 
11.3
7.2 

e0
40

20

Private consumption 
General government oonsumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross nabonal product 

3.4 
0 6 
13.1 
7.3 
3.5 

6.3 
8.2 
8.2 
9 0 
7.3 

8.6 
8 0 
3.7 
3.1 
5.8 

0 8 
17 4 
9.0 
2.8 
7 3

o9, 

0

94 

se

20

-Exports 

---lmpouts

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond wi1
be incormplete.

43

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Uganda

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domesticpdcox 
(% change) 
Consumer prices 
ImplikitGDPdeflator 

11979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflatlon (%)
40
30
20

131.0 
115.4 

5.8 
10.7 

-0.2 
4.4 

Govrnment hico 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 
Currentrevenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplusideficit 

10 
0

5.5 
-1.3 
-4.8 

10.3 
0.9 
-5.6 

10.9 
0.9 
-5.9 

-10 

04 
95 
-GDP 

go 
97 
ge
denator C PI

.

TRADE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)

(US$ millbons)

Total exports (fob) 
Coffee 
COtton 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif)562 
Food40
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

282 
276 

458 
269 
1 

549 
307 
1 

',00
400
1,200

1 

..-

1,411 

1,376 

76 

84 

65 

-
o

Export price index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms oftrade (1995=100) 

92 
79 
117 

74 
106 
70 

67 
101 
67

93 94 95 go 
*Exports 

97 98 
wimports

rr

.

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ ndvtsls 
Exports of goods and servioes 
Importsofgoods and services 
Resource balance 

1979 

1989 
304 
712 
-408 
-66 
114 

1998 
634 
1,871 
-1,237 
-9 
539 

1999 
726 
1,834 
-1,107 
-14 
375 

Current account balance to GOP (%)
0
-2
4

Net income 
Net current transfers 

-
-8 

' 

ll 

"

Current aocount balance 

-360 

-706 

-746 

10

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 
Memo:
Reserves induding gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, localPVS$) 

342 
18 

840 
-134 

780 
-33 

12
14

.
.

46 
170.4 

750 
1,149.7 

748
1,362.0

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ mdions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 

Composition of 1999 debt (USS mill.)

1,903 
24 

3,631 
0 

3,480
0 

.

F:58

IDA 

.

605 

1,971 

1,9 

E:S44

Totaldebtservice 

.

240 
5 
5 

172 
0 
24 

179 
0
30

N

IBRD 

IDA 
Compositon of net resource fbws 
Officil grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Pottoli equity 

o: 47I

131 

380 
2.. 20 
1 
190 
0 

277 
188
4
230
0 

a 194S

0 
13 
0 

C.351

World Bank program
Commitments 

0 

141 

172 

165 

A - IBRD 

E - silateral

Disbursements 

100 

242 

245 

B-IDA 

D- Ohermufilsteral 

F- Private

Pnncipalrepayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Nettransfers 

4 
96 
6 
90 

10 
231 
14 
217 

13 
232
17
215

C-IMF 

G-Short-term

Dr velopment Eoonomics 

91 00

44

1997 

21 
3.76 
28.57 
34.03 
47.62 
49.77 
27.86 

23 
3.97 
17.39 
15.86 
26.09 
21.31 
29.33 

24 
3.58 
4.17 
12.13 
16.67 
22.48 
26.17 

26 
3.9 
7.69 
3.62 
7.69 
3.6 
26.2 

Yes 
2,817.00 
134.1 

Yes 
2,807.00 
122.0 

no 
2,521.00 
105.0 

no 
2,572.00 
98.9 

24
3.9
8.33
3.65
11.5
6.36
21.2

Yes
2,905
121.0

Annex B3

Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 a/

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Lmplementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent nf Problem Projects by Number a 
Percent ofProblem Projects byAmounta "C 
Percent ofProjects atRiskbyNumber 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount ad 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
SupervisionResources (total US$'000) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

d 

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 

Last Five FYs

39 
1591.54 
42.1 
48.06 

6
375.93
33.33
20.53

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). Current FY data as of July 2000.
b. Average age of projects in the Banks country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Banks portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investmentprojects only. FY01 annualized.

45

Annex B3
page 1 of 2

Imnplementation'
Risks (HIMIL)

H
M
M
H

H

M

H
M

M
M
M

H
M
M
H

Strategic 
Rewardsa 
(HIML)
H 
H 
M 
H 

M 

H 

H 
M 

H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 
M 

2001 

2002 

2003 

IDA Program Summary: UGANDA
Proposed IDA High-Case Lending Program

Fiscal year 

Project 

USS(Mill.) 

PRSC I - SERVICE DELIVERY 
POWERIV 
AGRIC EXTENSION II 
PRIVATIZATION & UTILITY 
SECTOR REFORMb
REGIONAL TRADE 
FACILITATION
1IV/AIDS CONTROL 
IFC INVESTMENTS
MIGA Guarantees
Sub-total 

225.0 
57.8 
40.0 
48.5 

15.0 

30.0 

416.3

90.0 
30.0 

NORTHRN UGANDA RECON 2 
ENERGY FOR RURAL 
TRANSFORMATION
CAP BLDG/CIV SVC REF 
40.0 
ROADS 11 
90.0 
ENVIROMENTAL MANAGEMENT 15.0 
CAPACITY BUILDING n
IFC RIVESTMENTS
MIGA Guarantees
Sub-total 

265.0

PRSC II - RURAL DEVELOP. 
LAKE VICTORIA II 
ROADS II 
BUJAGALI HYDROPOWER 
IFC INVESTMENTS
MIGA Guarantees

Sub-total 

Total (2001-2003) 

200.0 
30.0 
85.0 
100.0 

415.0

1,096.3

a/ H= High; M= Medium; L= Low risk or reward
b/ Approved in August 2000

46

Annex B3
page 2 of 2

Uganda - rFC and MIGA Program, FY 1998-2001

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

IFC approvals (US$m) 

240 

1.40 

7.29

Sector (%)

FOOD &AGRO-BUSINESS 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
Total 

Investment instrument(%/6)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

25
75
100 

90
10

100 

100 

100 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

55.841 

59.541 

59.541 

0

0

0

47

Annex B4
page 1 of 2

Product 

Completion Cost 
FY 
(US$000)

Audiencea 

Objectiveb

Summary of IDA Nonlending Services

FY2000

FY2001

Recent completions 
PER 
Investment and Expenditure 
PRSP 
PEAP Lessons 
Foreign Investors Study 
Corruption and PSD 
Consultative Group (CG) Meeting 

Underway 
PRSP Progress Report 
Poverty Overview 
PER 
Accountability & Corruption 
Rural Development 
Consultative Group (CG) Meeting 
CPPR 
WBI Workshop/Capacity Building
MIGA Guarantees
IFC Private Sector
Expenditure Tracking 
Pilot on Conununity Risk Management 

FY2002

PRSP 
PER 
Expenditure Tracking 
Accountability & Corruption 
Decentralization 
Rural Development 

110 
16 
207 
11 
12 
12 
100 

60 
100 
140 
50 
150 
110 
110 

40 

150 
140 
40 
50 
100 
150 

GOU, donors, public 
GOU, Bank 
GOU, Bank, public 
GOU, Bank, donors, public 
GOU, donors, public 
GOU, Bank 
GOU, Bank 

Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving, donor coordination
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.

GOU, Bank, public 
GOU, Bank, donors, public 
GOU, donors, public 
GOU, Bank, donors, ~public 
GOU, donors, public 
GOU, donors, public 
GOU, Bank 

Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving, donor coordination.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving, donor coordination.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.

GOU, Bank, donors, public 
GOU, Bank, donors, public 

Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving

GOU, Bank, public 
GOU, donors, public 
GOU, Bank, donors, public 
GOU, Bank, donors, public 
GOU, Bank, public 
GOU, donors, public 

Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving, donor coordination.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.

48

Annex B4
page 2 of 2

Summary of Nonlending Services (contd...)

GOU, Bank, donors, public 
GOU, Bank, donors 
GOU, donors, public 
GOU, Bank 

Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving, donor coordination.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.

GOU, Bank, public 
GOU, Bank, public 
GOU, Bank, donors, public 
GOU, Bank, donors, public 
GOU, Bank, donors, public 
GOU, Bank, public 
GOU, donors, public 
GOU, donors, public 
GOU, Bank 

Knowledge generation, public debate, problem solving, donor coordination.
Knowledge generation, problem solving.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving, donor coordination.
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving, donor-coordination.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.
Knowledge generation, problem-solving.

Private Sector Development 
Debt Sustainability 
Consultative Group 
CPPR 
WBI Workshop/Capacity Building
M1GA Guarantees
IFC Private Sector
Development/Advisory Services

PRSP Progress Report 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Poverty Overview 
Expenditure Tracking 
Accountability & Corruption 
Health/Education/Water Studies 
Consultative Group (CG) Meeting 
PER 
CPPR 
WBI Workshop/Capacity Building
MIGA Guarantees
IFC Private Sector
Development/Advisory Sector

FY2003

100 
100 
110 
110 

60 
150 
100 
40 
50 
100 
110 
140 
110 

a. Government, Donor, Bank, Public Dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving, donor coordination.

49

Annex B5

Uganda Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-98 

Sub-Sabaanm
Africa 

Low-income

POPULATION

Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growthrate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% ofpopulation) 
Total fertilty rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY

(% ofpopulation)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNPpercapita(US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOME!CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintik (% of incomne or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS

Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enroDlment rate
(°/ of age group)
Total 

Male 

Female 
Access to safe water

(% ofpopulation)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 

DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant(perthousandlivebirths) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adul (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 

2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

20.9 
2.5 
13.5 
6.5 

44.0
16.3
48.2

310 
115 
107 

39.2
6.6
46.1

1.8 

2.6 

93 

.

.. 

41
45
40

60 
58 
26

42 
42 
41 

97 
170 

579 
615 
510

11.2 
2.7 
8.3 
7.1 

14.1 
2.0 
9.9 
7.3 

.

.

.

.

.
.. 

6.0 
47.0 

2.7 

3.5 

.

.
.. 

51 
50 
52 

104 
185 

447 
393 

.

41 
44 
38 

16 
45 
12 

17 
14 

48 
48 
49 

116 
180 

463 
395 
-

50

627.3 
2.2 
33.3 
5.4 

3,536.4
1.4
30.5
3.1

510 
128 
,1

1.5 
4.1 

.

.

.

58 
53 

50 
49 
52 

92 
151 

432 
383 

520
136

1.3
3.2

86
89
82

80
82

63
62
64

68
92

235
208

Annex B6
page 1 of 2

Uganda - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 

Esbmate 

Projeoted

Indicator 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

Nattloni lccounts (as % of GDP)
Grossdomesthcproduct/a 
Agnicultume 
Industry 
Services 

100.0 
49.9 

100.0 
49.4 

100.0 
45.1 

100.0 
42.0 

100.0 
44.6 

100.0 
44.4 

100.0 

100.0 

100.0 

100.0
40.1

42.9 
19.0 
38.1 

42.1 
19.7 
38.3 

41.1 
20.5 
38.5 

13.9 
36.2 

14.3 
36.3 

16.2 
38.7 

17.6 
40.5 

17.6 
37.8 

17.8 
37.8 

21.3
38.6

Total consumption 
Grossdomestccfixedinvestnetlt 

95.7 
14.6 

92.6 
16.4 

95.4 
16.1 

92.0 
163 

94.4 
15.1 

95.1 
16.4 

96.3 
17.2 

97.7 
17.6 

96.0 
18.1 

95.1
18.3

Governmentmnvestment 

5.4 

5.4 

5.3 

4.7 

4.6 

4.7 

6.9 

7.3 

7.0 

6.7

Pnivateinveatmeat 
(includes increasein stocks)
Exports(GNFS)/b 

9.2 

11.0 

10.7 

11.4 

10.4 

11.7 

103 

10.3 

11.0 

11.6

8.7 

11.8 

12.0 

13.1 

10.3 

11.3 

10.2 

10.7 

11.5 

11.8

Imports (GNFS) 

19.1 

20.8 

23.4 

21.2 

19.7 

22.9 

23.7 

25.9 

25.5 

25.1

Gross domestic savings 

4 3 

7.4 

4.6 

8.0 

5.6 

4.9 

3.7 

2 3 

4 0 

4.9

Grossnabtonad savings/c 

10.4 

12.1 

10.8 

12.8 

13.4 

10.5 

10.2 

8.7 

9.9 

11.0

Memorandum itets
Grossdomesticproduct 
(US$ million at current pnces)
GNPpercopita(UJS$,AtlasinetLod) 

3997 

5756 

6045 

6297 

6777 

6412 

6286 

6544 

7144 

7798

200 

250 

290 

320 

310 

320 

330 

310 

310 

320

Real annual growth rstes (%, calculated from 1991 pnces)
Grossdomesticproductatmacketpnces 
Grossdomesticinicome 

6.4 
7.6 

11.5 
17.7 

9.1 
6.1 

4.7 
4.5 

5.6 
5.4 

7.4 
2.7 

5.1 
5.0 

6.0 
5.0 

7.0 
7.1 

7.0
7.3

Rest annual per cTpita growth rates (%A, calculated frost 1991 prices)
Grossdomesticproducatmsiarketpnces 

3.1 

8.2 

6.0 

1.8 

2.6 

4.4 

2.3 

3.0 

4.0 

4.0

Total consumptsoss 
Private consurnption 

1.7 
1.3 

11.2 
11.7 

5.6 
5.7 

-0.7 
-1.2 

5.4 
5.5 

-0.4 
-2.0 

3.1 
2.6 

2.3 

2.6 

3.3

13 

2.7 

3.3

Bahnce of paymsnts (USS ntillions)
Exports(GNFS)/b 
Merchajidise FOB 
Imports(GNFS) /b 

333 
254 
841 
672 
-508 

667 
595 
1383 
1085 
-716 

726 
590 
1601 
1218 
-875 

825 
671 
1651 
1246 
-826 

634 
458 
1871 
1411 
-1237 

726 
549 
1834 
1376 
-1107 

639 
451 
1861 
1393 
-1222 

698 
496 
1994 
1477 
-1297 

822 
585 
2145 
1586 
-1323 

919
664

2305
1706
-1387

MerchandiseFOB 
Resourcebalance 

Net cunent transfers 
Currentaccount balance 

304 
-37 

330 
-142 

421 
-223 

322 
-213 

539 
-327 

375 
-470 

424 
-475 

428 
-471 

426 
-499 

477
-487

Netpnvatefoeign directinvestment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other cpital (net, mcl. etrors orninsissions) 
Changeinreserves/d 

5 
338 
180 
158 
-216 
-90 

2 
686 
293 
393 
-400 
-146 

110 
495 
223 
273 
-309 
-73 

160 
539 
210 
328 
-353 
-132 

190 
608 
194 
414 
-338 
-134 

230 
468 
187 
280 
-195 
-33 

215 
577 
239 
337 
-280 
-36 

229 
536 
261 
274 
-192 
-101 

246 

268

541 
253 
288 
-199 
-89 

504
233

272
-173
-113

Memort-ndm items
Resource balmnce (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates (YR91 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary
Manuftetures 
Merchandiseimports(CIF) 

-12.7 

-12.4 

-14.5 

-13.1 

-18.3 

-173 

-19.4 

-19.8 

-18.5 

-17.8

24.9 

26.2 

31.4 

27.6 

-38.2 

33.0 

-10.8 

10.0 

14.2 

8.2

.. 
31.5 

.. 
49.8 

.. 
5.3 

.. 
1.4 

.. 
14.9 

.. 
2.8 

..
-0.1 

6.6 

6.7 

6.4

51

Annex B6
page 2 of 2

Ugandu -Key Ecosomk Indicators

(Contibned)

Actual 

Estimate 

Projeced

Indicator 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

Pubei tn..an 
(as % of GDP at mnarket prices) le
Currmetrevonues 

8.3 

9.8 
9.2 

10.2 
9.0 

11.0 
10.0 

10.3 
9.3 

10.9 
10.0 

10.6 
10.5 

10.6 
11.2 

10.8 
11.0 

10.8
10.9

Currentexpenditures 
Curret account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 

8.9 

-0.6 
9.7 

0.6 
7.5 

12 
7.1 

1.0 
6.7 

0.9 
6.5 

0.9 
6.8 

0.1 
9.7 

-0.5 
8.9 

-0.2 
8.8 

-0.1
8.3

Foreignfliancing 

12.1 

8.9 

74 

7.6 

7.8 

7.7 

9.9 

11.3 

10.1 

9.2

Monetary bdleators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2() 
P&vatesectorreditgrowth/ 

10.2 

10.6 

11.2 

121 

131 

13.3 

14.2 

14.6 

14.9 

15.2

32.8 
-540.2 

27.4 
-92.4 

19.7 
71.6 

18.3 
49.7 

26.1 
481.2 

13.8 
72.3 

15.9 
33.9 

15.0 
1462.5 

15.0 
230.4 

15.0
486.9

total credit growth (-)

Price iadlce(YR9I =100)
Merchandiseexportprice index 
Merchandiseimportpnceindex 

96.7 
107.1 

179.6 
115.5 

135.6 
123.2 

120.7 
124.3 

133.6 
122.5 
109.1 
37.2 

120.3 
116.2 

110.6 
117.7 

110.7 
117.0 
946 
33.0 

114.3 
117.7 

119.8

119.0
100.7
33.0

Merohandisetarm oftradesidex 
Real exchange rate (USS/LCU) /f 

90.3 
33.5 

155.5 
36.2 

110.1 
35.6 

97.2 
36.4 

103.6 
32.3 

94.0 
33.0 

97.1 
33.0 

Consumerpnceindex (%change) 
GDPdeflator(%cchange) 

65 
68 

6.1 
9.4 

7.5 
4.6 

7.8 
3.9 

5.8 
10.7 

-0.2 
4.4 

6.3 
3.5 

5.6 
5.5 

5.0 
5.3 

5.0
5.3

a GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS' deotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Indudes net unrequited transfers excluding offiaal capital grants.
d. Indudes use oflMF reources.
e. Consolidated cental govemment.
f. *LCU- denotes "local currency units. An increane in US$/LCU dasotes appreciation.

52

Annex B7

Uganda - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 
1996 

Estimate 
2000 

Projected
2002 

Indicator 

1994 

1995 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2001 

2003

Total debtoutstandingand 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m) /a

2999 

3387 

3517 

3660 

3631 

3480 

3503 

3768 

4002 

4217

Net disbursements (US$m) /a 

120 

297 

160 

211 

192 

168 

217 

214 

199 

182

Totaldebtservice(TDS)(tJS$m)/a 

IS0 

172 

167 

168 

172 

179 

180 

172 

174 

188

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGS /b 
TDO/GDP 
TDSIXGS 
ConcessionalUTDO 

872.1 
75.0 
53.9 
85.0 

496.2 
58.8 
25.8 
90.0 

470.7 
58.2 
23.1 
95.0 

424.0 
58.1 
20.3 
95.0 

536.9 448.4 
53.6 
54.3 
27.2 
24.6 
97.0 
97.0 

509.6 
55.7 
28.2 
98.0 

500.1 
57.6 
24.7 
98.0 

453.3 
56.0 
21.2 
98.0 

424.9
54.1
20.5
98.0

IBRD exposure indicators (°)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public DS (0/.) 
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m) Ic 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (/) 
IDATDO(US$m)Id 

4.3 
38.5 
2.2 
7 

8.8 
61.1 
2.2 
0 

0.0 
57.2 
0.0 
0 

0.0 
63.0 
0.0 
0 

0.0 
64.0 
0.0 
0 

0.0 
63.4 
0.0 
0 

0.0 
64.4 
0.0 
0 

0.0 
66.1 
0.0 
0 

0.0 
68.7 
0.0 
0 

0.0
68.2
0.0
0

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

1473 

1784 

1797 

1898 

1971 

1948 

2200 

2400 

2600 

2800

IFC (US$m)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity 

6 
I 

1 
0 

25 
4 

3 
0 

6 
0 

2 
0 

2
0

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0 

0 

1 

0 

53 

140 

..

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of INF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. 'XGS' denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Includes present value of guarantees.
d. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

53

Closed 

Projects 

78

Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

Last PSR 

Annex B8
page 1 of 2

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Disbursements'

Board FY Active 
Projects 
P002929 
P002938 

1991 
1993 

1993 
1994 
1994 
1994 
1994 
1995 
1995 
1996 
1996 
1997 
1997 
1998 
1998 
1998 
1998 
1999 

1999 
1999 
1999 
1999 
2000 
2000 

P002953 
P002977 
P002963 
P002957 
P002923 
P002971 
P002976 
P002978 

P035634 
P046836 
P002987 
P002972 
P057007 
P040551 
P049543 
P059127 

P044213 
P002941 
P059223 
P002970 
P002992 
P044679 

POWER III 
AGRIC. RES & TRG. PHASE I 

PRIMARY EDUC. & TEAC 
COTrON SECTOR DEVELO 
SEXUAL.TRANS.IN 
SMALL TOWNS WATER 
TRANSP. REHAB. 
DISTRICTHEALTH 
INST. CAPACITY BLDG 
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT 
PRIV. SECTOR COMPETI 
LAKE VICTORIAENV. 
SAC III 
EDUC SECTOR ADJ CRED 
ELNINO EMERGRD REP 
NUTRIT.CHILD DEV 
ROAD SECT/INST.SUPP 
AGRICRES & TRNG. II 

FIN MKTS ASSISTANCE 
ICB-PAMSU 
NAKIVUBO CHANNEL REH 
ROADS DEVT PROGRAM 
LOCAL GOV DEVE.PROGRAM 
SECOND ECONOMIC AND FIN> MGMT> PROJ. 

TOTALS 

Development 
ObNectives 
S 
S 

Implementation 
Progress
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 

U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

IBRD 

IDA CanceL 

Undisb. 

Orig. 

Frm Rev'd

0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

158 
25.04 

52.6 
14 
50 
42.3 
75 
45 
36.4 
11.8 
12.3 
12.1 
125 
80 
27.6 
34 
30 
26 

13 
12.37 
22.38 
90.98 
80.9 
34.04 
1110.81 

0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

23.49 
0.63 

8.28 
1.42 
8.58 
9.29 
25.35 
11 
5.89 
2.48 
5.43 
5.7 
39.28 
34.83 
24.69 
27.22 
24.25 
23.63 

12.93 
4.11 
21.3 
86.43 
77.09 
32.87 
516.17 

-4.57 
0.41 
8.04 
1.6 
9.22 
7.05 
26.39 
4.86 
7.65 
3.34 
6.1 
2.13 
42.66 
35.2 
23.08 
5.25 
25.59 
2.63 

7.36 
2.26 
7.64 
-0.07 
0 
3.56 
227.38 

-5.41
0
2.56
1.62
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
42.13
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
40.9

IBRD 

IDA 

TOTAL

Original Principal: 
43,199,700 
Cancellations (closed project): 
277,411 
Disbursed: 
42922,289 
Undisbursed: 
0 
Repaid: 
34,606,753 
Due: 
0 
Exchange Adjustment 
0 
Botomwer's Obligation 
0 
Sold 3' Patty: 
8,315,536 
Repaid 3- Party: 
8,315,536 
Due 3' Party: 
0 
a. Intended disbursements todate minus actual disbursements todate as projected at appraisal.

2904,561,052 
80,747,774 
2,365,296,803 
516,187,175 
252,223,546 
2,067,542,279 
0 
2,067,542,279 
17,500,000 
17,500,000 
0 

b. HS = Highly Satisfactory; S = Satisfactory; HU = Highly Unsatisfactory; U= Unsatisfactory

2,947,760,752
81,025,185
2,408,219,092
516,187,175
286,830,299
2,067,542,279
0
2,067,542,279
25,815,536
25,815,536
0

54

Annex B8
page 2 of 2

Uganda
STATEMENT OF IFC's HELD AND DISBURSED PORTFOLIO
As of July, 2000

(Amounts in US Dollar Millions)

IFC Disbursed
Loan 
Equity 
0.55 
0.40 
0.84 
0.00 
1.22 
0.00 
1.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.17 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.64 
0.00 
0.16 
0.00 
0.10 
0.00 
0.79 
0.00 
0.35 
0.19 
0.00 
0.00 
0.51 
0.00 
0.30 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.43 
0.64 
0.00 
0.98 
0.00 
0.10 
13.33 
3.60 
1.90 
0.00 
0.56 
0.33 
5.18 
0.00 
28.02 
6.24 

Quasi 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.80 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.80 

Partic
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

FY Approval 
1996 
1990 
1997 
1998 
1999 
1998 
2000 
1997 
2000 
1998 
1993 
1995 
1995 
1994 
1998 
1996 
1998 
1999 
1995 
83/87/9 
1993 
1995 
1999 
1993/1997 
1984 

Company 
AEF Agro Mgmt 
AEF Clovergem 
AEF Conrad Plaza 
AEF Exec. Invmnt 
AEF Gomba 
AEFKampalaFlwr 
AEF Kasambya 
AEFKiwaII 
AEF Ladoto 
AEF Mosa Court 
AEF Nile Roses 
AEFPolypack 
AEF Rainbow 
AEF Rwenzori 
AEF Skay Electro 
AEF Skyblue 
AEF White Nile 
AEFWstemnHgh 
Celtel 
DFCU 
Jubilee 
Kasese Cobalt 
Tilda Rice 
Uganda Leasing 
Uganda Sugar 
Total Portfolio: 

IFC Held 
Loan 
0.60 
0.84 
1.22 
1.00 
1.40 
0.50 
0.99 
0.17 
0.80 
0.64 
0.16 
0.10 
0.79 
0.35 
0.22 
0.51 
0.30 
0.50 
0.43 
0.00 
0.00 
13.33 
2.40 
1.16 
5.18 
33.58 

Equity 
0.40 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.19 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.64 
0.98 
0.10 
3.60 
0.00 
0.33 
0.00 
6.24 

Quasi 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.80 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.80 

Partic 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

FY Approval 
2001 
2000 
1998 
2000 

Approvals Pending Commitment
Project Name 
Loan 
Equity 
AEFKaboja 
0.35 
0.00 
AEF LongFreight 
0.80 
0.00 
AEF Ramn Oil 
1.00 
0.00 
CelTel Uganda 
4.00 
0.70 
Total Pending: 
6.15 
0.70 

Qusad 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

Partlc
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

55

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Substantially reduce 
Poverty in Uganda by 
2017 

Annex B9
page 1 of 10

CAS Program Matrix: Framework for Country Program

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement 
Tools 

Partner Programs 

Bank Group
Instruments

Between 1992/93 
and 1996/97 
proportion of 
Ugandans living 
in absolute 
poverty declined 
from 56% to 44% 

Implement Poverty 
Eradication Action Plan 
(PEAP) by: 

I. Actions which 
directly increase 
the ability of the 
poor to raise their 
incomes;

II. Actions which
directly increase
the quality of life
of the poor,

III. Creating a
framework for
economic growth
and struchtral

transformation;

IV. Ensuring good
govenance and

security. 

See below 

See below

Reduce proportion Annual National 
of Ugandans 
Household
below poverty line Surveys
to 10% by 2017.

Participatory
Increase per capita Poverty
consumption of 
Assessments
poorest 20%.

.

_

56

I. Actions Which Directly Increase the Ability of the Poor to Raise Their Income

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement 
Tools 

Partner Programs 

Bank Group
Instruments

Annex B9
page 2 of 10

Improved Agricultural Agriculture 
Performance 
employs about 
80% of population 
and poverty is 
mainly rural. 

Increase productivity 
of subsistence fanner 
via Plan for 
Modernization of 
Agriculture (PMA). 
PMA provides
framework for local 
governments' 
initiatives in support 
of rural development. 

Sustained 
agricultural sector 
growth of 4% or 
more. 

National 
Accounts 

Crop production 
data. 

EU, DflD, USAID Agriculture Extension
and Danida are all 
Project will focus on
involved in the 
demand-driven
agriculture sector. 
approach to
agriculture extension.

PRSC II will provide
additional resources
for implementation of
PMA.

Lake Victoria
Environmental
Management Project
will support local
initiatives within
Lake Victoria area.

IFC investments in
commercial
agriculture and
agribusiness.

57

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Conserve natural 
resource for sustainable 
growth 

* Reduce soil erosion 
* Reduce 
deforestation 
* Reduce loss of wild
life

Increased maintenance 
and rehabilitation of 
rural roads. 

District roads fully 
repaired and 
maintained by 2016. 

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Improve Natural 
Resource Management 

Improved RuralRoads 

Rural Energy 

* Lack of awareness 
of the importance 
of enviromnental 
conservation and 
protection 
* Poorland
management
practices
* Degradation and
loss of prime
agricultural land
wetlands
* Loss of wild life
and habitat.
Inadequate rural road 
maintenance has 
reduced agricultural 
market access. 

Less than 1% of rural 
population have 
access to 
energy. Lack of 
access to energy 
identified under PMA 
as key constraint to 
rural development. 

Measurement 
Tools 

Finalization of a 
management 
program. 

Partner Programs 

EU/AJNDP/AFDB. 

Annex B9
page 3 of 10
Bank Group
Instruments

Environmental
Management Capacity
Building II

Improve environment 
for commercial 
generation and 
distribution of energy in 
rural areas. 

Increase proportion of National 
rural areas with access Household 
to electricity. 
Surveys 

Kilometers of rural This is covered under Roads II and m will
roads 
10 Year Roads Sector provide support for this
maintained/rehabili 
Strategy, funded by 
activity.
tated. 
EU, Danida, and
IDA.
This is to be 
addressed through 
Africa Rural 
Electrification 
Initiative funded by 
IDA, GEF and other 
donors. 

Energy for Rural
Transformation Project
which will provide
appropriate
framework and
incentives for
commercial energy
development.

Increase Assets in 
PoorestRegions 

Significant regional 
Provide demand-driven 
disparities. East and 
interventions aimed at 
North, pose particular 
increasing livelihood of 
problems with 
people in East and 
incomes significantly North. 
lower than the rest of 
the country. 

Reduce regional 
disparities in poverty. 

National 
Household 
Surveys. 

EFC support for rural
electrification strategy.
NURP II which will
Numerous donors 
involved in Northern 
support strengthening of
Uganda: i.e., Italy, 
social structures in
Netherlands, USAID. Northemn and Eastern
Uganda and provide
support for locally-
developed initiatives to
increase welfare.

58

II. Actions Which Directly Increase the Quality of Life of the Poor

Annex B9
page 4 of 10

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Immunization 
ratios (DPT3) to 
increase to 80% by 
2002/03. 

Increase 
Percentage of 
health centers with Semi-annual 
trained staff to 
reviews of
65% by 2002/03. 
implementation
of Health Sector
Program.

Measurement 
Tools 

Health Ministry 
Surveys. 

National 
Household 
Surveys. 

Partner Programs 

Bank Group
Instruments

Sector-wide approach PRSC I will support
in health sector 
improved health care
incorporates all 
delvery services.
donors active in the
sector: IDA, EU, 
Netherlands, DflD, 
Ireland, WHO,
USAID.

IFC investments in
private health care.

HIV/AIDS Control
Project.

Improve access of 
poor to basic health 
care services through 
implementation of 
Health Sector 
Program. 

Broad based 
campaign on 

HIV/AIDS

Issues of educational 
quality at primary 
level addressed in 
education sector wide 
approach 

Improved Health Care Low health 
Services 
indicators: 

Primary Education 

* Life 
expectancy 
42 years. 

* 

35% of 
children 
immunized. 

HIV/AIDS 

Introduction of 
Universal 
Primary 
Education (UPE) 
has led to sharp 
increase in 
enrollments 
(gross enrolhment 
in excess of 
100%) but

reduction in 

educational 

quality. 

Education 
Ministry data. 

Sector-wide approach PRSC I will support
in education sector 
improved service
incorporates all 
delivery in primary
Semi-annual 
donors active in the 
education.
reviews of 
sector: IDA, EU,
Education Sector Netherlands, DfID, 
Program. 
USAID, UNICEF. 

IFC investments in
education.

At primary level: 

* Pupilteacher 
ratio of 47 by 
2002/03; 

* Pupil/class 
ratio of 87 by
2002/03;

* Pupil/book

ratio of 3 by

2002/03;

59

Annex B9
page 5 of 10

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Water and Sanitation 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement 
Tools 

Partner Programs 

Bank Group
Instruments

Increase access to 
safe water in rural 
areas. 

Boreholes drilled: Data from 
1,500 by 2002/03. Ministry of 
Water. 

Protected springs: 
700 by 2002/03. 

Protected wells: 
1,700 by 2002/03.

National
Household
Surveys.

Danida is active in 
water sector. 

PRSC I will provide
support for improved
service delivery in
water sector.

Access to safe 
water identified 
by poor in 
Participatory 
Poverty 
Assessment as 
key feature of 
poverty. 
Currently less
than 40% of
people in rmal
areas have access
to clean water.

60

III. Creating a Framework for Economic Growth and Structural Transformation

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement 
Tools 

Partner Programs 

Bank Group
Instruments

Annex B9
pagc 6 of 10

Sustaining High Rate Poverty reduction 
of Econonic Growth 
since 1992/93 
almost entirely 
attributable to 
economic growth
of 7% per year. 
Growth rate of 
7% needed to
achieve 2017 
target. 

Macroeconomic 
Stability and 
Incentives 

Predictable 
economic 
environment to 
promote 
investment. 

* Guarantee 
macroeconomic 
and fiscal
stability;

* 

* 

Improve
infrastructure;

Improve
institutional
structures for
private sector

development.

Sustained low rate of 
inflation to reduce 
risks and promote 
investment. 

Realistic exchange 
rate to maintain 
domestic competivity. 

Adequate reserves to
absorb external 
shocks. 

7% real growth. 

National 
Accounts. 

See below for details 
of specific programs. 

See below for details
of specific programs.

Inflation of 5%. 

CPI 

IMF/PRGF 

Non-appreciating 
Balance of 
real exchange rate. payments 

5 months import 
coverage. 

Balance of 
payments 

Annual Poverty
Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP) which
will include
agreement on fiscal
framework for
consistency with
poverty reduction
objectives.

PRSC I and II which
will provide budget
support in context of
agreed fiscal

.____________ 

__ _ _ __ _fram ework.

61

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement 
Tools 

Partner Programs 

Efficient and Equitable Low revenue to 
Tax System 
GDP ratio, 
currently less 
than 11%. With 
Government 
spending at 
around 20% 
increase in ratio
needed to reduce
reliance on
external finance
over time.

Reliance on fuel 
excises which act
as tax on
production and
raise transport
costs.

Improve tax 
administration by 
Uganda Revenue 
Authority (URA) to 
broaden tax base and 
allow reduction in 
specific rates. 

Increase in 
revenue to GDP 
ratio. 

Government 
Budget and 
National 
Accounts. 

IMF/PRGF 

DfID support for 
capacity building in 
URA. 

Reduce fuel levies.

Annex B9
page 7 of 10

Bank Group
Instruments

PRSP which will
include agreement on
overall fiscal
framework and
consistency with
poverty reduction
objectives.

Poverty Focus of 
Government 
Expenditures 

Increase spending Funding for poverty 
on poverty 
programs is 
programs 
increasingly 
identified in 
channeled through 
PEAP. 
Poverty Action Fund 
(PAF). PAF 
expenditures currently 
account for 20% of
total non-interest 
expenditures. 

Increase PAF 
share of total 
expenditures to at 
least 25% by 
2002/03. 

Budget. 

IMF/PRGF 

In addition other 
donors (DfID, EU)
are increasingly 
involved in oversight 
of budget process 

Annual PERs, which
will support
Budgetary process.

Agreement on fiscal
framework in the
PRSPs.

PRSC I & II which
will agree on specific
spending levels.

62

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Improved
Infrastrscdure

* Power 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement 
Tools 

Partner Programs 

Annex B9
page 8 of 10
Bank Group
Instruments

Power 
availability 
identified by 
private investors 
as most serious 
constraint to 
investment. 

Improved 
Separate UEB into 
performance of 
entities 
Uganda Electricity 
responsible for 
Board (UEB). UEB 's generation, 
low rate of operating 
transmission, and 
efficiency (as 
distribution and 
reflected in system 
provide for private 
losses and poor 
participants at
billing) raises costs to 
each stage. 
consumers. 

Investment in new
power generation 
capacity. 

Increase in generation 
capacity. Current 
power deficit 
estimated to be at 
least 40-50 mgw, i.e.,
roughly 20% of
production.

Norad, SIDA are 
involved in on-going 
investment in Owens 
Falls Extension, 
which will add 
roughly 80-90 mgw
to existing capacity.

Support for UEB
restructuring
provided for under
Privatization Project
(FY00).

IDA support for new
capacity provided for
under Power IV.

IFC financing and
IDA partial risk
guarantee for
Bujagali
Hydropower.

* Main Roads 

Poorly 
Improve existing 
Increase funding 
maintained main main road network 
for routine and 
road network 
through 
periodic 
significantly 
implementation of 10- maintenance 
reduces 
Year Roads Sector 
competitiveness 
Strategy. 
given Uganda's 
land-locked 
situation.

Increase GOU
share of funding
for maintenance.

Kilometers of 
road improved 
under roads 
program. 

EU, Danida 
participate with IDA 
in Roads Sector 
Program. 

Roads II and III will
support
implementation of the
10-Year Roads
Program

63

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Improved 
Environment for 
Private Sector 

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Measurement 
Tools 

Partner Programs 

Weak 
institutional 
structures 
constrain private 
sector investment. 
Banking system 
plays virtually no 
role in provision 
of long-term 
financing. 
Commercial 
justice system 
remains weak, 
affecting contract 
enforcement. 

Strengthen: banking 
supervision 
department and 
reform pensions
sector as source of 
medium to long term 
finance. 

Enhance competition 
in commercial 
banking sector. 

Sustained 
Pursue of agreed 
supervision of 
bank supervision 
commercial banks. program. 

1MF PRGF. 

Increase financial 
sector competition. 

Privatize UCB to 
credible partner.

Increase capacity of 
commercial justice 
system. 

Efficient handling 
of commercial 
cases. 

Implement sector DflD, Netherlands, 
wide approach 
Norway in sector-
for commercial 
wide approach. 
justice. 

Annex B9
page 9 of 10
Bank Group
Instruments

ESW on constraints
to private sector
development.

Capacity Building
Project can support
capacity building in
commercial justice
sector.

PSAS advisory
assistance on
privatization.

FIAS assistance on
improving investment
environment.

Bank Group SME
Department technical
assistance to SMEs.

EFC direct fmnancing
for private
investment.

IFC advisory
assistance on
financial sector
regulation and direct
investments and
institution building in
the fmiancial sector.

64

IV. Ensuring Good Governance and Security

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Benchmarks 

Development 
Objectives/Issues 

Effective 
Decentralization 

lTransparent, efficient 
and poverty-focussed 
public expenditure 

Many of specific 
interventions 
identified under 
the PEAP 
provided at local 
Govemnment 
level. Service 
delivery and 
accountability
capacities at local
govenunent
levels are poor.
Poor delivery of 
services for funds 
provided, due to 
inefficiency and 
corruption. 

Strengthen local 
government capacities 
through 
implementation of 
Local Government 
Development 
Program (LGDP). 

Number of 
districts eligible 
for District 
Development 
Grants under 
LGDP 

Measurement 
Tools 

Size of district 
development 
grant program. 

National Service 
Delivery Surveys. 

Partner Programs 

District level 
programs by Danida, 
Netherlands, Ireland 
among others.

Enhance capacities of 
Implement reform National Service 
Danida, Norway, 
institutional systems 
programs for 
Delivery Surveys. DfID, Netherlands 
at central govermment. procurement and 
involved in many 
improved financial 
aspects of this. 
accountability. 

Increase incentives 
for delivery of 
services. 

Develop and 
implement 
sustainable pay 
reform program. 

Results Oriented
Management. 

Enhance capacities of Reduction in 
anti-corruption 
perceptions of 
institutions. 
corruption.

National Integrity 
Surveys. 

65

Annex B9
page 10 of 10

Bank Group
Instruments

Support for
Implementation of
LGDP.

Support
implementation of
decentralization
program.

PRSC I and II will
focus on cross cutting
issues (procurement,
accountability, pay
reform) affecting
service delivery.

Conference on
Corruption will
review progress and
map out way forward
in dealing with
corruption.

Capacity Building
Project will provide
support to strengthen
institutions.

CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex B1O

Network area 

ntry b 
per-formance' 

Country 
Majorissue 

priorityc 

Bank 
priorityc 

Reconciliation of
country and Bank
prioritiesd

Poverty reduction 

Poverty Reduction & Economic Management
excellent 
excellent 
fair 
good 

Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

eradicate poverty 
continued stability 
govemance, decentralization 
access to services 

high 
high 
high 
moderate 

high
moderate 
high
high

Lead shared with IMF

Human Development Department
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection 

good 
fair 
fair 

quality of primary education 
improved delivery 
targeting the most vulnerable 

high 
high 
moderate 

high
high
moderate

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable Development
Rural development 
fair 
Environment 
fair 
Social development 
good 

raise rural incomes 
natural resource degradation 
participatory planning 

high 
moderate 
high 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
fair 
Private sector 
fair 
Energy & mining 
poor 
Infrastructure 
poor 

improve access 
enabling environment 
inadequate, unreliable delivery 
inadequate, poor quality 

moderate 
high 
high 
high 

high
moderate
high

moderate
moderate 
high
high

Other donors active

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use "low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

66

IBRD 25052R1

30 ' 

32 

34' / 

36&

SUDAN 

A

-_'2 

zr 

tw /UGANDA
z 

^ 

/-~ 

)

0

'

Konk 

) me 

s 

e 

9 ,. 

.

TG4JM 

-f 

F 

. ) 

shes,o

J 

V', 

\ ,. -

4 

¢ 

g 

d 

jAdholbu; 

r X , TS 

t 

RIVERS

! .ETh 

.

, 

~ 

-

'C.TILC/ 

* 

FALLS

DEMOCRATIC 

Zulu 

Op 

a 

~ 

_UI 1Suoyct 

Y 

* 

FERRIES

DEMOCRAIC 
REPUBLIC 

J 

B 

/ 

-. --

Ok. 

ij 

) 

-

PRIMARY BITUMEN ROADS
GRVE RAD
PIAYGAERAD

DOORIAR 

OF CONGO 

MOTO. 

OF. CONGO L-NEBBi 

eLA5b) 

\; 

'~ : 

tIN \ 

<\_<! 

'- 

-

.

t> 

UNSURFACED ROADS
RAILROADS

'1.*-- 

' 

7-_i 

* '4 

J WnimoniR. 

2- 

L 

2APAC 

2, 
° SELECTED TOWNS AND VILLAGES 7
.' 

NhiIskk; 

i'

.- r. 

' -- .

F- r 

o 

~ /- 
= 

> 

i 

c? 

I 

1

A IrlCI 
1 

; 

~ 

; r TI 

IT.OioI 

.

DISTRICT CAPITALS

* 

'ri 

|ri 

/ 

®5) NATIONAL CAPITAL
DISTRICT BOUNDARIES'

7 

H-1t .. 

*H 

.
-Io 

/ 

n 

-J 

/ 

~ 

~~ ~ ~~ ~~ -~ 

( 

\ 

ev&: 

w 

REGION BOUNDARIES
*- INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

PALLIS~A 

"toi - .be,s _ 

1
tLUWERC 

-J 

* District c 

-es coincide with Dr 

, wth

.i 

-

-, 

.-, 

~ 

\~o- 

~-~(cid:143)--ItS-L 

cpi- 

Fot Potl 

is the Disit C 

f Khr 

District.

.; 

\soesi) 
; 

PORT_ 5,4 A__t_~Lt*v 
bt 

-rF 

T 

- Lit i 

:rJE 

1-! 

,, 

-f 

-8 

-

, s oo oL 

KLOMETERS0 

50 

100 

50

ILE05 0

' ;1 

-K-lembR 

:t-- 

( 

' ~ ' 

_ 

~ 

' 

< | 

|KENYA

T 

dn 

I -, i .- 

|r

' 

.

i.'!1sw 

.

) 

'

L 

te 

fh; 

;;8w' 

1 -

s 

-

.' 1: 1 

1. 

KreLAN-NALA 

I

Ed. 

; 

-

.

(

c 

*§ I 

*i:> 

i 

d 

~ 

*|/il 

_ 

L4KE LlICTOPIA 

I 

¶

-- .ts_ /f 

_, 

-TANZANIA

v 'otoio 

vRWAN DA 

.

JUNE 1998

