d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank
For Official Use Only

Report No. 20327 MOZ

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR THE

REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE

May 8, 2000

Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The last Country Assistance Strategy was dated November 21, 1997

Currency Equivalents
Currency Unit= Metical (Mt)
US $1 = 15,717Mt (as of April 2000)

Abbreviations and Acronyms
Analytic and Advisory Activities
Africa Management Services Company
Africa Project Development Facility
Adjustable Project Loan
Country Assistance Review
Country Assistance Strategy
Comprehensive Development Framework
Diphtheria, Pertussis, Tetanus
Economic Management and Private Sector Operation
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
Education Sector Strategic Program
Economic and Sector Work
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Frente de Libertacao de Mocambique
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Joint Staff Assessment
Monitoring and Evaluation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Non-Governmental Organization
Net Present Value
Action Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty
Operations Evaluation Department
Public Expenditure Review
Enterprise Development Program
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Programa Nacional Para o Desenvolvimento Agricola
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Resistencia Nacional de Mocambique
Southem African Development Comnunity
Small- and Medium-sized Enterprise
Sector Wide Approach
Technical Assistance
United Nations
United Nations AIDS Program
United Nations Development Programme
World Bank Institute

AAA 
AMSCO 
APDF 
APL 
CAR 
CAS 
CDF 
DPT 
EMPSO 
ESAF 
ESSP 
ESW 
FDI 
FIAS 
FRELIMO 
GDP 
GEF 
HIPC 
IDA 
TFC 
IMF 
JSA 
M&E 
MIGA 
NGO 
NPV 
PARPA 
OED 
PER 
PODE 
PRGF 
PROAGRI 
PRSP 
RENAMO 
SADC 
SME 
SWAP 
TA 
UN 
UNAIDS 
UNDP 
WBI 

Vice Presidents: 
Director: 
Task Manager: 

IDA 
Callisto Madavo 
Michael Sarris 
Jehan Arulpragasam 

IFC
Assaad Jabre
Cesare Calari
James Emery

FOR OMCUL USE ONLY

MOZAMBIQUE

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Summary 
Introduction 
I. Social, Political, and Economic Context 

A. Historical and Political Context 
B. Poverty, Social Context and Issues 
C. Economic Context and Issues 
D. Governance 

E. Medium-Term Economic Outlook and External Environment 

II. Developing the Bank Group's Country Assistance Strategy 

A. The Context for Developing this CAS 
B. Performance Under the Previous CAS 
C. Portfolio Management 
D. Lessons Learned 
E. Strategic Orientation 

III. Mozambique's Development Agenda and the Bank Group's CAS 

A. Increasing Economic Opportunities through Private Sector Led Growth 

1. Strengthening the Private Sector Environment and the Financial Sector 

2. Developing Infrastructure 

3. Promoting Rural Development and Agriculture 

4. Ensuring Sound Environmental Management_ 
5. Promoting Innovation, Competitiveness and Employment 
B. Improving Governance and Empowerment_ 
1. Reforming the Public Sector 
2. Improving the Rule of Law 
C. Increasing Human Capabilities 

1. Preventing and Reducing the Impact of HIV/AIDS 

2. Improving Health 
3. Improving Education 
4. Social Protection 
IV. The Bank Group's Country Assistance Strategy: Implementation 
A. Alternative Scenarios for the Lending Program and Non-Lending Services 
B. Development Partnerships_ 
C. Program Monitoring and Evaluation 
D. Risks and Risk Management 
Conclusion 

i
1
1

I
2
4
6

7

8

8
9
10
12
13

15

16

16

17

18

19
20
21
21
22
22

23

23
24
24
25
25
27
28
28
29

This document has a restricted distriution and may be used by recipients only in the
pfIormance of thei official duties. Its contents may not othewise be disclosed without
World Bank authoriation.

MOZAMBIQUE

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Table of Contents

TEXT TABLES

Table 1 
Table 2 

Mozambique: Social Indicators
Outcomes Under the Last CAS

TEXT BOXES

Box 1 
Box 2 
Box 3 
Box 4 

Box 5 
Box 6 

ANNEXES

HIV/AIDS in Mozambique
Sources of Mozambique's Recent Growth
Mozambique's Program of Liberalization and Economic Reform
Sector Wide Approaches (SWAPs) and Development Partnerships in
Mozambique
Mozambique: Country Assistance Review (CAR) 1998
CAS Non-lending Activities

Annex A2: 
Annex B 1: 
Annex B2: 

Annex B3: 

Annex B4: 
Annex B5: 
Annex B6: 
Annex B7: 
Annex B8: 

Mozambique at a Glance
Mozambique: Summary of Proposed IDA Program, FY2001-2003, by Case
Mozambique: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
Mozambique: Bank Group Program Summary
Mozambique: IFC and MIGA Program, FY97-00
Mozambique: Summary of Non-lending Services
Mozambique: Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Mozambique: Key Economic Indicators
Mozambique: Key Exposure Indicators
Mozambique: Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
Mozambique: Statement of IFC Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex B9: 
Mozambique: Country Assistance Strategy Matrix FYO1-03
Annex B1O: Mozambique: CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Annex C: 
Mozambique: The Government's Program, its Poverty Reduction Strategy and
the CAS
Mozambique: CAS Consultations
Mozambique: A Framework for Development Partnership

Annex D: 
Annex E: 

Map: 

Mozambique

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The last World Bank Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Mozambique, covering fiscal years
1998 through 2000, was discussed by the World Bank Board in December 1997. The World
Bank Group CAS presented herewith covers the fiscal years 2001 to 2003. It supports the
Government of Mozambique's Five-Year Program and its interim Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP). In April 2000, the interim PRSP, which included the Government's Action Plan
for the Reduction ofAbsolute Poverty ( PARPA), was considered by the World Bank Board to be
an adequate framework for the enhanced HIPC Initiative decision point and a sound basis for the
future development of a full PRSP, scheduled for completion in March 2001. Mozambique
reached the completion point under the original HIPC framework in June 1999.

Mozambique has made enormous strides since the end of the war in 1992, when it was still
heavily reliant on food aid and its economy was centrally planned. Today the country is at peace,
a market economy is in place, and substantial progress has been made on a challenging reform
agenda, all leading to a growth rate among the highest in the world. Even so, the lives of most
Mozambicans continue to be characterized by poverty, illiteracy, and disease, in a country which
continues to be one of the poorest in the world.

The challenge for Mozambique today - and the focus of the Government's program and emerging
poverty reduction strategy - is to sustain broad-based, private sector led growth and ensure that
its benefits are broadly distributed and reach the poor. For the implementation of an effective
anti-poverty strategy, institutions, norms and attitudes need to change so that governance is
improved and people are empowered to initiate and control the actions that affect their lives.
Public sector capacity to deliver basic services and enforce a consistent legal and regulatory
framework supportive of private sector development remains limited; physical infrastructure is
inadequate; and the financial sector is still developing. The domestic private sector also faces
significant challenges in acquiring the skills, experience, and innovation needed to exploit new
sources of growth and to compete successfully in the world economy. Despite progress on many
fronts, more needs to be done to increase private sector skills, productivity, and competitiveness;
to strengthen and diversify foreign direct investment; to integrate under-served areas with high
growth potential into the national economy; to continue to improve economic management; and
to create economic opportunities for all, including the poor. Action is also needed to control
HTV/AIDS, which now constitutes the greatest single threat to development.

Preparations of this CAS involved extensive consultations with a wide variety of groups,
including government officials, donors, NGOs, trade unions, religious leaders, academics,
joumalists, the private sector, and the rural poor. These groups largely agreed that the highest
priorities on Mozambique's development agenda over the next few years should be to improve
the quality of human resources (especially linked to labor needs), expand capacity in public
administration, increase support to rural development, better assist the private sector, expand
infrastructure (including roads, electricity and telecommunications), and improve health care.

- 11 -

These are long-term goals with short-term implications for Mozambique's policies and public
spending choices and for this CAS.

Poverty reduction is the overall goal of the Government and of the Bank Group in Mozambique.
In supporting the Government's program, the CAS is designed to help (i) increase economic

opportunifies, (ii) improve governance and empowerment, and (iii) improve human capabilities.
These are the pillars of the Government's new Five Year Program (2000-2004) and of this CAS.

A key objective of this CAS is to improve the focus, effectiveness, and monitoring of poverty
reduction efforts, especially by helping the Government to operationalize its poverty reduction
strategy. Most new IDA lending, as well as IFC investments and advisory services, will focus on
increasing economic opportunities which, through growth promotion and participation, is likely

to have the greatest impact on reducing poverty, even in the short-term. IDA lending will

contribute to developing infrastructure (particularly in the rural areas), improving the
environment for private sector activities, and promoting investment, innovation, competitiveness
and employment. In support of this agenda IFC will provide advisory assistance, capacity
building, and financing to develop private infrastructure, build the financial sector, and support
small and medium-scale enterprises (SMEs), as well as foreign investors, in developing key
sectors where Mozambique is competitive. New IDA lending under this CAS will also be
directed to improving governance and empowerment, as limited administrative capacity and
effectiveness is currently a primary constraint to reform, growth, and development. Operations in
this area will focus on improving public sector management and capacity as well as strengthening
the Government's decentralization efforts; this will promote empowerment as well as the
effectiveness of programs addressing poverty reduction. Support will also be given to improving
the legal and judicial system, with a view to facilitating private sector led growth. New IDA
lending in support of improving human capabilities will be limited, because there already is
substantial IDA support from ongoing programs (particularly in delivering basic health and
education) as well as from planned Bank analytical services. IFC will support private providers
of health and education services. The Bank will also provide support to the Government's new
program to fight HIV/AIDS.

Lending under the base case over FYO 1-03 will range up to the indicative IDA allocation of
US$540 million but is likely to be below this allocation as a consequence of IDA's strategic
decision to match lending with the country's absorptive capacity and the availability of grant
funds from other donors. Lending under the high case will range up to US$655 million and is
contingent primarily on increased absorptive capacity, implementation of related public sector
reforms, and progress in implementing the poverty reduction strategy. The low case, which
would result from significant deterioration in governance, economic management, or
implementation of the poverty reduction strategy, would involve lending at about one-third of the
indicative IDA allocation. The Bank Group's business strategy presented in this CAS is
complemented by an extensive complement of advisory and analytical activities to Mozambique.
Triggers include performance with respect to the portfolio, the poverty reduction strategy, the
public sector reform program, the HIV/AIDS program, and various economic reforms (including
demonopolization of the energy, transport, and telecommunication sectors for the high case, and
policy reversals in the areas of privatization, the financial sector, and trade policy for the low
case). IFC's investments, with a current portfolio of about US$150 million, are expected to
increase substantially over the CAS period, so that Mozambique will remain one of the
Corporation's largest portfolios in Africa.

Mozambique is a high-reward country, but the strategy also carries several medium-term risks.
There is a political risk that the opposition's dissatisfaction with the 1999 election results,
drawing on a feeling among some groups of civil society that popular participation in decision-

-

iii -

making is unduly limited, could lead to political paralysis and possibly civil strife. The
perception that growth is not sufficiently benefiting most people, or not sufficiently benefiting
Mozambican businesses and workers, could result in protectionist and distortive regulations and a
more general backsliding on reform. The growth of HIV/AIDS could substantially increase
poverty. Efforts to improve public sector capacity may not yield results quickly enough to
improve absorptive capacity and program implementation. Adverse developments in neighboring
countries, which are increasingly linked to Mozambique, can dampen growth prospects. In
addition, climatic variations and natural disasters can adversely affect agricultural productivity
and growth and limit poverty reduction. The Bank recognizes these risks and is working to
mitigate them. To this end, it is supporting decentralization and good governance, supporting the
participatory development of a poverty reduction strategy, improving awareness of Government
work on poverty reduction and its achievements, and better disseminating analytical work on the
Bank's own poverty-reduction activities, the impact of policy choices, and the benefits of
strategic thinking on competitiveness. The Bank is also supporting implementation of the
Government's HIV/AIDS Plan to help limit the spread of the disease. Trade diversification and
active participation in regional organizations will help mitigate the risk that regional crises will
impede Mozambique's growth; and efforts to identify, reduce and transfer risks associated with
hydro-meteorological hazards should provide better protection against natural disasters.

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:

-

-

Is the World Bank Group's proposed support to the Government's evolving poverty reduction
strategy appropriate and adequate?

Is the evolving division of labor appropriate among the Government, the Bank and
Mozambique's other external partners?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE

INTRODUCrION

1. 
Mozambique has made tremendous strides in the past few years. A sound economic
reform program has been implemented, with substantial support from external partners. The
transition from war to peace and from a central planning system to a market economy is reaping
results. Mozambique's growth rate has accelerated and last year was among the highest in the
world. Heavily reliant on food aid just a decade ago, the country now produces almost enough
food to feed itself. Mozambique ranks first among 20 countries on the "optimism index" in a
survey of business people active in Africa.

2. 
But alongside this good news are daunting challenges which face the nation, its people,
and its partners. Mozambique is still one of the poorest countries in the world. Poverty,
isolation, illiteracy, and disease characterize the everyday life of most Mozambicans, who often
feel that the benefits of growth are not reaching them. The country is also vulnerable to floods
and droughts. Most recently, in February and March 2000, devastating floods killed 700 people,
displaced 250,000 and put about two million people into severe economic difficulties.
Mozambique's growth and poverty reduction strategy is based on environmentally sustainable
and inclusive private sector growth. But the public administration remains weak, despite
significant reform and improvement, and it continues to face challenges of capacity and resources
to deliver basic infrastructure and services and to properly enforce a consistent legal and
regulatory framework essential for private sector development. The emerging domestic private
sector needs access to infrastructure and financing, and must also acquire the skills, experience,
and innovation required to exploit new sources of growth and to compete successfully in the new
world economy. Finally, Mozambique's young democracy remains fragile, and underlying
political tensions continue to task nation building and threaten national stability.

3. 
The challenge facing Mozambique today is how to sustain growth and reduce poverty.
Many important economic reforms have been completed, but others are needed to increase private
sector skills, productivity, and competitiveness and create economic opportunities for all,
including the poor. Infrastructure has been built to support service delivery and the growth of
markets, but more needs to be done to integrate under-served areas with high growth potential.
Institutions as well as norms and attitudes need to change so that governance is improved and
people are empowered to initiate and control the actions that affect their lives. These are long-
term goals with short-term implications for Mozambique and for this CAS. Increasing economic
opportunities, enhancing governance and improving human capabilities are key actions for
reducing poverty in Mozambique, and this CAS outlines the Bank Group's contribution to this
enormous endeavor.

I. SoCIAL, POLITICAL, AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT

A. Historical and Political Context

4. 
Since the end of the civil war, Mozambicans have made tremendous progress in
reforming their country. The transition from a socialist command economy to a democratic
market economy is largely complete. The Frente de LibertaVao de Mogambique (Frelimo),

- 2 -

which governed Mozambique during the war, retained control of government through national
elections in 1994 and 1999, transforming itself in the process from a socialist to a market-oriented
democratic party. The main opposition party, Resistencia Nacional de Mo9ambique (Renamo),
which came close to winning the December 1999 elections, has generally supported
Mozambique's political and economic transition, though there continues to be political tension.
Government policies are under intense scrutiny and often the subject of contentious public debate.

B. Poverty, Social Context and Issues

5. 
Per capita income in Mozambique, at $230 in 1999, is below the average for sub-Saharan
Africa ($480) and the low income group ($520). The Human Development Index, an index of
income, education and life expectancy, ranks Mozambique 169th out of 174 countries. Key social
indicators for Mozambique continue to be below the averages of Sub-Saharan Africa and those of
low-income countries as a whole (see Table 1).

GNP per capita (atlas method, US$) 
Poverty: national headcount index 
Life expectancy (at birth, years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to safe water (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment 
Male 
Female 
HIV/AIDS prevalence rate 

Table 1.: Mozambique: Social Indicators
Mozambique Sub Saharan Africa Low Income
230 
480 
69
47 
134 
41
24 
60 
71 
79 
60 
14.5 

74
32
108
113
103

51 
91 

47 
42 
77 
84 
69 
7

520

63
69

6. 
A 1996-97 Household Survey on Living Conditions, the first integrated survey
undertaken nationally, shows that poverty is pervasive. About seven in ten Mozambicans
reported consumption below the national poverty line (US$0.40 per day). One-third of the
population is considered to be 'ultra poor', with consumption expenditure 60 percent or less of
the poverty line.

7. 
About 80 percent of Mozambique's poor live in rural areas; about 70 percent of the rural
population is poor; and over 90 percent of rural adults work in agriculture. There is significant
regional variation in poverty. Sofala, Tete, and Inhambane have the highest poverty incidences,
but 40 percent of the poor live in densely populated Nampula and Zambezia. Rural households,
poor or non-poor, typically have low access to services. In 1996-97, the mean distance of rural
households to a market was 16 km and to a health center 29 km. Poor households are also larger
and have higher dependency ratios than the non-poor. Nearly all rural households have land, but
land per capita is higher for the non-poor, chiefly because household size is lower. In urban
areas, the non-poor tend to be wage-laborers employed in commerce, services, and the public
sector, whereas the poor declare themselves to be self-employed or unemployed.

8. 
Widespread poverty is reflected in Mozambique's social indicators (see Table 1). The
poor and ultra-poor tend to miss more days of work from illness than the non-poor, and are less
likely to seek treatment. Lack of health care, hygiene, and access to safe water and sanitation
allows preventable disease to flourish. Malaria, measles, diarrhea, and acute respiratory
infections remain leading killers of children. HIV/AIDS, having already infected about 14.5
percent of the adult population, has serious implications for Mozambique's development

- 3 -

prospects (see Box 1). Though poverty explains some of the differences in health and education
outcomes, these differences correlate more closely with gender and rural-urban divisions.

Box I.: HIVIAIDS in Mozambique

The civil war ended in 1992, but the war againstAIDS continues, and now constitutes the greatest
single threat to Mozambique 's development. In Africa most carriers oftheAIDS virus will die of
AIDS-related illness within ten years. In Mozambique, as elsewhere, the HIVprevalence rate is
rising exponentially, and has already reached about 14.5 percent in the adult population. The virus
is no longer localized in high-riskgroups but affects the whole population. The overall picture is
bleak. Health services are beginning to be overloaded with AIDS-related cases, diverting resources
away from other serious illnesses. As a result, hard-won gains in life expectancy and infant and child
mortality are being reversed AIDS-related deaths are now projected to make as many as 800,000
Mozambican children orphans by 2002. Moreover, adults die ofAIDS-related illnesses such as
tuberculosis during what should be their most productiveyears. Multi-country evidence suggests that
at HlVprevalence rates of 15 percent, GDP growth per capita is reduced by about 0.8 percent per
annum, and at 25 percent, as in Zimbabwe, growth per capita is reduced by 1.5 percent. In
Botswana, for example, despite rapid growth, HIVIAIDS has brought poverty back to levels last seen
ten years ago. Mozambique is vulnerable to similar reversals. Action is needed now, at all levels of
society, to prevent and control the spread of HIV.

9. 
Food insecurity, prevalent during the war, continues to contribute to malnutrition.
Though Mozambique has nearly achieved food self-sufficiency, the average rural household still
suffers through a pre-harvest hungry period of several months per year, and malnutrition remains
widespread. In 1996-97, with 64 percent of Mozambicans living in food-insecure households, 43
percent of children were stunted and 6 percent wasted. Even though the degree of market
participation has increased since 1993, in 1996 only half of all agricultural households sold any
part of their output.

10. Mozambican girls and women continue to do less well than boys and men. The maternal
mortality rate, at 1,100, is high. There is poor access to health services in general and poor
quality of services directed specifically to women. Literacy rates among women (particularly in
rural areas) are much lower than among men, with negative implications for agricultural
productivity and child health and nutrition. While access to education is increasing, the gross
primary enrollment rate among females (60 percent) is still much lower than among males (79
percent). One in five households is headed by a female; these households have less adult labor
and consequently cultivate less land, and they participate less frequently in paid employment.
Although remittances from absent family members make these households on average no worse-
off than male headed households, households without remittances are typically worse-off.
Households with male adults working elsewhere are also more at risk of HIV/AIDS. Family law
in Mozambique also discriminates against women. A married woman has limited rights to make
independent economic decisions or enjoy full ownership of assets, and a widow's rights to
inheritance are secondary to males in the family. Finally, domestic violence against women is a
hidden issue, which requires a legal response. To address these issues, the Government, in
coordination with civil society, is implementing the National Post-Beijing Plan of Action
(NBPA), and key sector ministries have included gender in their sector plans.

11. 
The national poverty assessment, recent analytical work, and the interim Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) highlight important policy implications for a poverty reduction
strategy based on an analysis of the determinants of poverty:

- 4 -

* Accelerate economic growth, particularly in agriculture and rural areas.
* 
Improve educational levels, particularly among girls and women.
* 
Improve the productivity of small-holder agriculture, through simple technology and input
improvements.
* Generate off-farm employment opportunities.
* 
Increase the market integration of small-holder households, mainly through increasing
infrastructure.

C. Economic Context and Issues

12. 
Economic Performance and Policies. Mozambique's recent economic performance,
buoyed by good agricultural seasons, has been impressive, though it represents a recovery from
very low base levels. GDP growth averaged 5.5 percent annually between 1987 and 1996 and 11
percent annually between 1997 and 1999. Inflation dropped sharply from almost 50 percent in
1996 to low single digits today. At the same time, investor confidence has grown. Between 1996
and 1998, consumption grew by an average of 9 percent annually, and investment by 13 percent
annually. Merchandise exports increased by 42 percent from 1996 to 1998 as a result of increased
export volumes and higher commodity prices for prawns, cashews and cotton. Foreign direct
investment (FDI) has also increased, and, as a result of large investment associated with the
Mozal aluminum smelter, it reached US$213 million in 1998. At about 3.3 percent of GDP over
1996-98, FDI is high relative both to the size of the economy and to other African countries.
These are indications that foreign investor confidence is growing rapidly and FDI sources are
becoming more diverse.

Box 2.: Sources of Mozambique's Recent Growth

Mozambique 's economic growth has been led by smallholder agriculture. Value added in the agriculture
and livestock sectorgrew at more than 9 percent peryear after 1996, fueled by expansion in land under
cultivation. Agricultural growth has been particularly strong in the north and center. The services sector
has also grown well, at 6 percent per annum on average, buoyed by revival in transport, tourism, and the
financial sector. Slower to recover have been large-scale commercial agriculture and industry. Many
companies have gone through protracted privatization and restructuring processes and have suffered
market losses. However, a firm survey undertaken in 1997 showed that manufacturing, concentrated in a
few sectors (food, drinks, and tobacco; chemicals; and minerals), experienced robust growth of almost 40
percent annually between 1995 and 1997. In terms of sales growth, firms outside Maputo appear to be
growing as rapidly as firms in the capital, despite lower quality infrastructure. This growth is mostly due
to increased capacity utilization, which averaged about 50 percent (compared to 10 to 30 percent in 1989),
rather than expansion. Employment levels in aggregate have remained stable. All three types offirms
surveyed (private firms founded before 1991, new entrants, and privatizedfirms) had strong average
growth rates in sales, but employment growth in privatizedfirms had stagnated or declined It is the new
entrants that have been creating most of the new jobs in manufacturing; new firms recorded a 6 percent
average rate of employment growth from 1992 through 1997.

13. Mozambique's strong performance has been, and continues to be, supported by
substantial foreign assistance. Since 1986, the Government has received US$8 billion in external
aid, or almost US$600 million per annum (currently about 17 percent of GDP). In recent years,
50 percent of government spending and 75 percent of public investments were financed by
external aid. These aid flows allowed Mozambique to maintain consumption levels while
increasing public investments needed to expand the economy in a post-war period where financial
demands for reconstruction exceeded potential revenues from a debilitated economy. High levels
of aid have allowed Mozambique to focus its fiscal policy on stimulating growth while reducing
domestic financial imbalances only gradually. From 1987 to 1998, expenditures increased by
four percent annually, with revenues growing slightly more.

14. 
A sound program of economic reform and management - based on privatization,
financial sector reform, investment promotion, trade and price liberalization, sound
macroeconomic management and substantial public investment - has underpinned Mozambique's
ongoing economic transformation and growth record (see Box 3). While Mozambique's recent
accomplishments have been impressive, this success is fragile: the local private sector has
limited market experience and has yet to find avenues for sustained growth; the financial sector
remains inefficient with limited ability to finance investment; employment creation needs to be
accelerated; public sector institutions are weak, including in their capacity to enforce and regulate
the new market economy; the country remains dependent on aid and vulnerable to external and
weather-related shocks; and the reform program is subject to protectionist sentiment within
segments of civil society, particularly in urban areas.

Box 3.: Mozambique's Program of Liberalzation and Econonic Reform

Privatization: Government has restructured orprivatized over 1,200 companies.
Financial sector reform: The Government created a central bank; adopted regulations on licensing,
capital adequacy, and exposure limits; and sold the two state-owned banks. The private financial sector
now includes eleven banks, a leasing company, and seven otherfinancial institutions.
Investment promotion. The Government established a progressive investment regime, promotedfree trade
zones to encourage manufactured exports, transformed the Investment Promotion Center from a regulatory
to a promotion agency, and reduced administrative red tape for investors.
Sound macroeconomic management: Monetary control, and the sale of the two state banks, brought
macroeconomic stability. In 1996, the Government transferred customs management to a private
company; in 1999 it introduced a value added tax (VAT); and it is now implementing a new budget
framework law and a rolling medium-term expenditure framework (fMTEF).
Exchange, trade, and price reforms: Mozambique today has one of the most open trade regimes in
southern Africa. The exchange rate regime has been liberalized and import licenses abolished Prices
have been liberalized except for afew consumer goods.
Public expenditure: Gradualfiscal adjustment in a context of improved revenues and sustained aid has
enabled Mozambique to increase spending on roads, health and education. Today 55 percent of the 27,000
km road network is in good or fair condition, and only 10 percent sometimes impassable, compared to 10
and 30 percent respectively in 1992. From 1994 to 1998, the Government nearly doubled its share of
current expenditure on health (from 10 to 18 percent) and education (from 5 to I 0 percent). Health care
has improved as over 300 first-levelfacilities have been rehabilitated or constructed, often in remote rural
areas, and about nine in ten reliably carry essential drugs and medical supplies, In addition, over 3, 000
lower primary schools have been rehabilitated or constructed over the 1990s, doubling the number that
existed at the end of the war.

15. 
Economic Prospects: Mozambique benefits from a variety of agroecological and other
natural resources which, if sustainably managed, provide a good basis for growth. Agricultural
growth is key to ensuring that growth translates directly into poverty reduction. Short and
medium term prospects for agricultural growth are good: only 15 percent of arable land is
currently cultivated. Other sources can also be exploited. The 2,700 km coastal zone has many
unique habitats, offering opportunities for wildlife and tourism developments. Large perennial
rivers offer significant prospects for irrigating agriculture and developing hydroelectric power.
Substantial gas and coal reserves have been found, and prospecting continues for petroleum and
mining. Tourism, mining, agroprocessing, and light manufacturing can generate significant
employment. Attracting foreign investment will be important to this effort. Large investments
exploiting the transportation corridors or exporting energy (gas, coal or electricity) or energy-
intensive manufactured products (iron, steel and aluminum) are under active consideration by
large international companies. Here the challenge will be to develop linkages, especially to the
growing service sector, to maximize the benefits for the poor; this is likely to occur primarily
through spin-off effects, such as employee training, connected infrastructure developments, and
improved Government tax revenues that can subsequently be channeled into poverty-reducing

- 6 -

activities. Substantial and permanent poverty reduction will also require sustained growth in
value added and in jobs created within the Mozambican economy. To grow, over the medium- to
long-term Mozambican firms will need to become increasingly competitive in evolving world
markets, capitalizing on knowledge and innovation.

D. Governance

16. Mozambique has consolidated some gains in governance in recent years. An active
multiparty parliament debates national policy; freedom of the press is respected; and core labor
standards, which include the rights to free association and collective bargaining and prohibit
discrimination, are protected in the labor law. National elections were held in December 1999 as
planned, and though the opposition initially denounced the results as fraudulent, the elections
were declared free and fair by international observers.

17. 
Red tape and associated corruption continue to impede business. A 1996 study by IFC
and the Foreign Investment Advisory Service of the Bank Group (FIAS) detailed the
administrative red tape facing investors. An inter-ministerial working group established to
address those problems has since achieved significant improvements; however, obstacles remain.
A recent firm-level survey found that governance problems - primarily related to onerous
regulations, weak enforcement, and bureaucratic burden - were the most important problems
faced by businesses. Excessive bureaucracy and poor enforcement related to a weak judiciary
branch create incentive and opportunity for corruption. This is exacerbated by low levels of pay
among public sector staff, who may therefore seek additional sources of income, as well as low
levels of training, which hinder their ability to efficiently administer government systems. Firms
acknowledge that, at least in customs, progress has been made in this regard through introducing
private management. With regard to public sector accountability, the Administrative Tribunal
(the supreme audit body) is constitutionally independent but, like the Inspector General (the
Government's internal auditor), lacks the resources to be an effective monitor. Reform and
capacity building efforts in the areas of budget management, accounting, and auditing are aiming
to address the areas of economic governance, and implementation of a recent budget law has
resulted in some improvements in the transparency and management of the budgetary process.

18. 
Taking a broader view of the governance area, the Government is refocusing its activities
on the core areas of public sector responsibility and moving from being a direct provider of
services to a facilitator in areas where private initiative is likely to improve efficiency. The
Government has started to decentralize public functions, most notably in 1998 by establishing 33
municipal governments, to improve public services by bringing political accountability down to
the local level. It is also deconcentrating decision-making responsibility to make government
bodies more responsive to local needs. It has undertaken civil service reform, decompressing
salaries in 1998, implementing a revised career stream and remuneration system in 1999, and
initiating various capacity-building programs. The emphasis now is on broadening and
deepening the reforms required to manage a market economy. This is necessarily a medium and
long term agenda.

19. Much remains to be done. Changes in institutions continue to lag legislative changes,
and changes in the norms and attitudes of civil servants lag further. Although the civil service is
learning that its role in a market economy is to assist the private sector in every way that it can
without impeding competition, its capacity to fulfil this role is constrained by low education,
limited private sector experience, and low morale resulting from poor wages and the uncertainty
that reform inevitably engenders. The size of Mozambique's civil service relative to population
is low by African standards; hence the state is thinly spread and has difficulty in delivering
services and enforcing legislation in every district. Ancillary functions remain weak (e.g. there

- 7 -

are only 500 legal practitioners and no internationally certified accountants in the country).
Continued weakness in the public sector and an expansion in corruption could compromise
economic growth and constrain service delivery by creating bureaucratic bottlenecks, deterring
private investment, and undermining public confidence in the reform process. Thus, improving
governance is an important part of Mozambique's poverty reduction strategy.

E. Medium-Term Economic Outlook and External Environment

20. Medium-Term Economic Outlook: Sustaining the current level of broad-based
economic growth while, simultaneously, keeping inflation low and improving the delivery of
social services, are central elements of the Government's strategy to reduce poverty in the
medium term. Although the growth target for 2000 has been revised down as a result of the recent
floods, prospects remain sound that Government can achieve its objectives of annual GDP growth
rates in excess of 7 percent and inflation rates below 5 to 7 percent over the medium-term (200 1-
2003), assuming no further adverse exogenous shocks and continued satisfactory implementation
of the reform program (Annex B6). Achieving these growth objectives is expected to reduce the
national poverty headcount index from 69 percent in 1997 to about 60 percent in 2004, as
targeted in the Government's interim PRSP. Success will require Government to continue to
maintain a prudent monetary and fiscal stance, improve the environment for the expansion of
private sector activities and investment, and foster the development of a strong export base
through liberal investment and trade policies. Domestic fiscal balances will gradually be reduced,
but improvements in revenues in the context of a growing economy, together with sustained
external aid, will permit continued expenditures in support of poverty reduction efforts. While
external aid will remain necessary, Mozambique should be able to reduce its aid dependency in
the coming years. Under this base case economic scenario, it is expected that small-holder
agriculture will expand, large-scale commercial agriculture will begin to revive, and
manufacturing will grow across all sectors and in non-traditional areas, increasing employment.
At the same time, deeper regulatory reform should encourage further investment in energy,
transportation, and telecommunications; and megaprojects such as Mozal should remain on track
to begin productive activities, further increasing and diversifying the export base. Mozambique's
medium-term prospects, while favorable, are subject to risks; these are discussed in paragraph 79.

21. 
External Debt, Debt Sustainability, and the HIPC Initiative: In December 1998
Mozambique's external public debt totaled about US$6 billion (US$2.7 billion in net present
value (NPV) terms). Of this, 49 percent was owed to Paris Club bilateral creditors, 37 percent to
multilateral creditors (of which 55 percent was owed to IDA), and 14 percent to non-Paris Club
and commercial creditors. Debt service payments amounted to about 20 percent of export
earnings on average. The NPV of debt-to-export ratio was 538 at end-1998. In June 1999,
Mozambique reached the HIPC completion point and received debt relief amounting to about
US$3.7 billion (US$1.716 billion in NPV terms), with IDA granting relief amounting to US$975
million (US$381 million in NPV terms). Enhanced HIPC debt relief, which Mozambique is
expected to obtain at the completion point in 2001 (the decision point was reached in April 2000),
will amount to about US$254 million more in NPV terms, bringing the cumulative assistance
under the HIPC Initiative to US$1.97 billion in NPV terms and lowering the NPV of debt-to-
export ratio to 150 and the debt service-to-export ratio to below 5 percent from 2002 onward. In
NPV terms, the debt remaining after relief is about one-fourth of the US$2.7 billion that would
have been owed without HIPC Initiative assistance. This will substantially improve
Mozambique's external viability and sustainability and, as debt service savings are directed to
poverty reduction, it will also bring benefits to the poor.

22. 
External Financing: Continued and stable support in the form of bilateral and
multilateral grants and credits, with debt relief, will be important in enabling Mozambique to

- 8 -

meet its medium-term development objectives. At an international donors' conference in Rome
in May 2000, Mozambique's external partners pledged US$453 million to finance the costs of
emergency reconstruction following the severe floods in February and March. Financing needs
for the Government's new five-year program will be discussed at a Consultative Group meeting
planned for June 2000. Reliance on aid flows is projected to decline gradually over the next
decade, as strong economic growth and increased levels of private sector financing diminish aid's
share of GDP and of the budget.

23. 
Regional Context: Though its economy is more inwardly oriented than its neighbors',
Mozambique's dependence on regional trade and investment flows is high, and developments in
the region can significantly influence the pace and sustainability of its development. Trade flows
with South Africa are the most important, representing 15 percent of total exports and 53 percent
of imports in 1997. Mozambique in December 1999 ratified the SADC trade protocol, which
aims to gradually establish a regional free trade area. Mozambique is also likely to join a regional
trade guarantee facility covering Eastern and Southern Africa. With political stability and greater
investor confidence, Mozambique has also become an attractive destination for South African and
more recently other regional investors, such as Mauritius.

24. 
Regional cooperation is slowly emerging in energy, transportation, and water resource
management. FDI concentrated around the Maputo corridor, and rail and port rehabilitation in
the Beira and Nampula corridors, will increase economic interdependence between Mozambique
and its westerly neighbors. Energy reserves near Cahora Bassa and planned megaprojects based
on coal and hydroelectricity can result in further integration as the energy is sold directly to
foreign markets (particularly South Africa and Zimbabwe). Mozambique is a central member of
the South African Power Pool, as a key supplier of electricity and owner of the main trunk
transmission line, and interconnection with Malawi and Tanzania is currently under
consideration. Regional approaches to water resource management are also needed. Since the
1 970s, upstream riparians have diverted much of the yield of several cross-border rivers for
irrigation and other uses, creating a need for Mozambique to negotiate a more equitable water
distribution to satisfy its own requirements. Regional cooperation on watershed management and
hydrologic and climatic monitoring is also essential for natural disaster mitigation.

II. 

DEVELOPING THE BANK GROUP'S COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. The Context for Developing this CAS

25. Mozambique stands at an important juncture in its development. Its first elected post-war
Govemment has completed its term and much of the economic reform agenda, set out in its five-
year plan, has been completed. Over the period in which this CAS was developed, the new
Govemrnment formulated and presented to the National Assembly a new five-year Government
Program (2000-2004), focused on the reduction of poverty, and published its accompanying
Action Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty (PARPA) as part of its interim PRSP. The
PARPA is expected to evolve, through extensive consultation, into a full PRSP. (See Annex C).

26. 
This CAS is designed to support the Government program and the emerging national
dialogue on Mozambique's priorities for poverty reduction. It was developed through an
extensive consultative process, fully described in Annex D. The CAS process was designed to
initiate a wider Government-led dialogue to forge a common long-term vision and development
framework for Mozambique. There is an emerging consensus regarding the importance of
defining the country's development agenda, increasing government ownership, and fostering
strong partnerships among government, donors, civil society, and the private sector. These are
some of the principles of the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF), and they are

- 9 -

critical to achieving Mozambique's poverty reduction goals. They have been discussed with
Mozambique's key development partners with a view to jointly articulating Government
priorities and mapping out the current development activities of the Government, donors, NGOs
and the private sector (see Annex E) so as to improve coordination and coverage of the country's
development agenda in the future. Further steps in this process will build on Mozambique's
accumulated experience with four ongoing sector wide approaches (SWAPs) to strengthen
existing partnerships (Box 4).

Box 4.: Sector Wide Approaches (SWAPs) and Development Partnerships in Mozanbique

A SWAP is an agreement between the Government and its development partners concerning sector
policies and strategies, resource projections to support strategy implementation, and common
management arrangements using national administrative systems to the fullest extent possible.
Implementation of IDA-supportedprojects in health, education, agriculture and roads has been, or
soon will be, integrated into SWAPs. With fourteen or more donors represented in each SWAP, most
large donors have moved away from supporting discrete free-standing projects in these sectors. This
has resulted in greater organization and complementarity in each sector, lesser demands on
Government capacity, and improvedfiscal management (as the approach enables the Government to
incorporate allfundingfor each sector into the national budget). Moreover, by consolidating
accounting, auditing and monitoring procedures, SWAPs allow donors to distance themselves from
day-to-day operational issues and enhance Government leadership, transparency and accountability.

IDA has been heavily involved in developing SWAPs, including in identifying sector strategies and
appropriate procurement, disbursement, management and monitoring systems. Joining forces behind a
common strategy has been relatively easy. The main difficulties have resultedfrom the SWAP s heavy
reliance on relatively weak national administrative systems andfrom the centralizing effect of a single
nati onalfunding system. To improve performance, current efforts are focused on strengthening
financial management capabilities for sectoral ministries in Maputo and the provinces. Decentralized
planning mechanisms, combined with greater, predictable and consistentfundingfor sectoral
programs, are being used to drive the provincial agenda and increase regional responsiveness.

Although Mozambique is not a CDFpilot country, SWAPs give effective operational implementation, at
the sectoral level, to the CDF principles of shared vision, Government ownership, and partnership.
This approach has worked particularly well in expanding infrastructure. With about US$475 million
or 55 percent of the IDA portfolio programmed in SWAPs sectors, the Bank has made a large
investment in this approach, which is already providing returns.

B. Performance Under the Previous CAS

27. 
The previous CAS defined three strategic priorities: promoting rapid broad-based
private-sector-led growth; building capacity and developing human resources; and strengthening
development partnerships. Throughout the CAS period the Bank operated broadly in the base
case, with new lending concentrated on infrastructure and on sector programs in water,
agriculture and education. Lending, at US$521 million, was slightly above the projected base
case total of US$480 million. Although two projects were postponed due to implementation
delays in predecessor projects, the resulting decline in lending was more than offset by increased
lending in other operations including an adjustment operation, which was delivered as an IDA
grant in the form of HIPC interim assistance, and an unprogrammed flood emergency recovery
project. IFC's portfolio increased substantially to about US$150 million; it is now among the
largest IFC portfolios in Africa. IFC invested US$120 million in the Mozal aluminum smelter,
the Corporation's largest single committed investment anywhere in the world, and played a key
role in mobilizing other commercial finance for this US$1.3 billion project. MIGA also supported
Mozal with a US$40 million guarantee, and is working on a possible US$75 million guarantee to
support investments on power transmission lines to Mozal. IFC supported the establishment of a

- 10-

foreign bank that has established a wide branch network, created an investment banking affiliate,
and brought new levels of service and competition to the sector. Other IFC investments, including
SMEs, were concentrated in agribusiness, which helped re-establish cormmercial agriculture in
rural areas, and in tourism. Overall, under the previous CAS, progress was made against stated
development objectives and most country performance indicators and benchmarks were met,
though sometimes with delay (see Table 2), generally resulting from capacity problems.

28. 
The Government's program, coupled with continued stability, good weather for several
years, and support from external partners, is contributing to welfare gains in Mozambique. There
is no definitive data on income/expenditure trends at the household level and many service
delivery indicators are monitored with a lag. Yet all available data point to continued
improvements. Since 1994, per capita consumption has grown by about 6.4 percent per annum,
and per capita agricultural GDP by about 8.4 percent per annum, while cereals production by
smallholders has doubled. Survey data suggest that poverty in the provincial capitals fell from 73
percent in 1992/93 to 65 percent in 1996197. Access and coverage of education and health
services has improved. Between 1996 and 1998, an index measuring health service delivery per
person increased by 38 percent; DPT immunization rose from 63 percent to 77 percent;
geographical disparities in service delivery fell; and quality indicators (such as the proportion of
health units with basic drugs and trained personnel) improved. Over this period, the gross
primary enrolment rate increased from 62 percent to 71 percent, and the number of students in
primary schools from 1.6 million to 2.1 million.

C. Portfolio Management

29. 
As of May 1, 2000, there were 15 projects in the portfolio totaling US$813 million,
compared to 18 projects totaling about US$840 million at the start of the last CAS (November
1997). About 38 percent of this portfolio has been disbursed, and the disbursement ratio is now
about 20 percent, at about the same level as at the beginning of the last CAS. Disbursement lags
have fallen, with earlier delays partly resulting from increased Bank involvement in relatively
slow disbursing SWAPs. Portfolio performance has improved dramatically and is still improving.
At present, there are no problem projects and no projects at risk, compared to one problem project
and six projects at risk in early 1998. Improvement in risk indicators has resulted in large part
through proactive portfolio management and the removal, through continued progress on
economic policies, of the economic management risk, which applied to all IDA-assisted projects
in Mozambique at the beginning of the last CAS.

30. 
Efforts continue to be made to improve portfolio management. There is closer
coordination with the principal donors through the SWAPs. IDA lending is being limited to fit
the Government's absorptive capacity. Portfolio management has been devolved to the Country
Office to ensure that emerging issues are promptly and satisfactorily resolved. Monitoring now
includes both a formal annual review to check portfolio status and review progress (next
scheduled for June 2000) and weekly meetings between the Resident Representative and the
Governor of the Central Bank. The Country Office has recruited a financial management
specialist and local project officers now cover most sectors, permitting more realistic project
preparation that is sensitive to local conditions as well as closer monitoring of project
implementation and quicker resolution of emerging problems. Local staff are also being trained
in procurement and disbursement procedures with a view to accelerating implementation. Within
Govemnment, progress in public sector reform is addressing capacity constraints. In addition,
technical assistance in accounting and budget execution, to be strengthened under the new CAS,
is improving financial management, and public procurement issues are to be addressed through
diagnostic work on the public sector. A financial assessment and procurement review will also be
an integral part of the work to be done under a public expenditure review in FY01.

: .-.. .. -

-. e 
.Performiance Indiators 
rm n 
o. 

A. Pttote broadbas'e4 7rivate-sectoFk.ro;edh 

Tablel.: OWome6sUnder:theELAstCAS':

* Maintain real growth of non-energy GDP at an annual 
rate of at least 5%. 
* Maintain single digit inflation. 
* Value added tax in place by mid-1998. 
* HIPC completion point reached by mid-1999. 
* Agricultural SWAP (PROAGRI) implemented by 1999. 
* 
Satisfactory progress on ROCS program, including 
maintenance of 15,000 km of road by 2000. 
* Comprehensive restructuring plan for CFM, the national 
railway, including private concessioning of all three 
ports and railway lines by end-I 998. 

* 

* 

* 

Liberalization of telecommunications sector 
commencing in 1998. 
Private management contracts in place for five major 
urban water companies by 1999. 
Sale by 1999 of all companies currently on the 
privatization rolls under the privatization program. 

* Role of the Center for Investment Promotion (CPI) 
modified to enhance its investment promotion functions. 
* Commercial Code revised by mid-2000. 
* New land law passed in 1997. Regulatory framework to 
be implemented.

U R.B dcapad-yaaddeve.op .hwnw Sre 

ceS

* 

* 

* 
* 

* Budgetary Framework Law implemented; budgetary 
scenarios for the medium-term developed; rules and 
procedures for budgetary execution simplified. 
Local elections held in 1998 in 23 cities and 10 towns. 
Increase health coverage under the Health Sector 
Recovery Program from 40% of the population currently 
to 60% in the year 2000; increase DPT vaccination 
coverage from 55% to 80%. 
Improved health outcomes; significant reductions in 
maternal and infant mortality rates.
Increased education coverage; primary school 
admissions rate up to 80-86% by 2000 (from 75% in 
1996). Special programs implemented for girls and 
provinces with lowest coverage.
Improvement education quality indicators: repetition and 
drop-out rates in primary education to fall to 14-17% 
and 10-12% (down from 24% and 14% respectively).
* National poverty assessment and poverty action plan 
completed by end-l 998. 
C. &renegh1enparfnesheps ._ 
* 
IDA portfolio management responsibility to be 
delegated to Resident Representative by end FY98.
Increased Government commitment to and ownership of 
reform program. 
SWAPs in roads, education, health, and agriculture by 
1999.
Strengthen partnerships. 

* 

* 

* 

* 

: 

-:.-:. 

::.-Outcorme-: 

O7tTom

-

: 

:::.

__:--.____.___:____ 

:__ --_

* 

* 

* Non-energy GDP grew 11.3% in 1997, 9.2% in
1998 and 9.3% in 1999.
* Achieved: inflation 1.5% in 1999.
* Value added tax was introduced in June 1999.
* HIPC completion point reached in June 1999.
PROAGRI implemented in August 1999.
* ROCS progress satisfactory, 3,800 km roads
rehabilitated and 15,000 km being maintained.
In progress: CFM will concession main ports and
railway systems; five main port terminal
concessions already operational and several small
concessions/leases have been awarded.
* Cellphone market to be liberalized in north and
center, TDM seeking 30% strategic equity partner.
* Water companies serving the five major cities were
leased to the private sector in September 1999.
90 large enterprises and over 1,100 small and
medium enterprises privatized or restructured;
majority public share retained in 33 companies.
* Achieved.
In progress.
* Regulations for the Land Law of 1997 were
approved in December 1998.

* 

* 

* 

* 
* 

* 

* 

Law adopted in September 1998. Medium-term
expenditure framework elaborated for 1998-99
budget.
Elections held in June 1998.
In progress: health coverage rose from 40% in 1995
to 50% in early 1999; vaccination coverage rose
from 63% in 1997 to 77% in 1998.
Infant mortality rate fell from 162 to 134 over the
1990s.

Primary admission rate increased to 79% in 1999.
Special programs for improving female access to
education implemented.

* Repetition rate still at 24% but dropout rate
decreased to 8.4% in 1998.

* 

Poverty assessment published in December 1998;
action plan published in April 1999.
-
: 
* Achieved.

_'':

* Government ministers acknowledged increased
ownership during CAS consultations.
* Achieved.

* Done through Consultative Group, Development
Partners Group meetings, as well as meetings on
SWAPs and topical issues (HIPC, PRSP process,
UNDAF, and HIV/AIDS).

- 12 -

D. Lessons Learned

31. 
As the CAS consultations confirmed (see Annex D), the key challenge for Mozambique
and for this CAS is sustaining rapid poverty-reducing growth and accelerating the delivery of
tangible economic and social benefits to the poor, particularly in rural areas. Participants in the
CAS consultations acknowledged that much has been accomplished recently, including
maintaining peace and stability; increasing food security; constructing roads, schools, and clinics;
consolidating democratic freedoms; reducing inflation; and developing a more vibrant market
economy. At the same time, they also expressed concern about the sustainability of growth and
the participation of the poor in the benefits of growth, reinforcing many of the issues raised by the
Bank's ongoing analytical work on Mozambique's growth prospects:

* The ability of the Government to absorb aid, to implement policies, and to do so
accountably and transparently, is weak, particularly in understaffed remote regions.
* Investment in primary health care and education needs to increase, especially in rural areas.
* The single most important investment area for growth and poverty reduction remains
infrastructure. Investment in roads, energy, water, and telecommunications will need to be
directed to the rural areas to reduce poverty, integrate the nation, and bring densely
populated areas with high agricultural potential into the market network.
* Mozambicans agree that reform is necessary for growth, but disagree about the scope and
substance of reform. Some favor further liberalization, particularly in key cross-cutting
sectors (energy and telecommunications) and regulatory areas (visas, customs, licensing,
land law, and labor law). Others, feeling that domestic firms cannot adjust so quickly to
international competition, are calling for subsidies or increased protection.
* The rule of law is critical to Mozambique's development. A weak legal and judicial
administration needs to be strengthened, to serve an expanding and increasingly complex
business environment, stimulate investment, and secure individual rights.
* Many Mozambicans feel that they lack the skills required to benefit from or contribute to
growth. Many Mozambican businesses seem to be trapped in low-growth traditional
industries. The few that are innovative, competitive, and high-growth frequently hire
foreign labor into technical and managerial posts. Hence, many Mozambicans sense an
urgent need to improve skills through higher education, vocational training, and other
strategies to enhance knowledge transfer.
* Many Mozambicans feel that they are not sufficiently empowered to participate in the
development process or consulted in the decisions that affect them.
* Most Mozambicans do not speak openly of HIV/AIDS, but many recognize that it has
emerged as a major threat to their security and well-being and that it can easily reverse
hard-won social and economic gains.

32. 
The CAS consultations, the 1999 Client Survey, the 1998 OED Country Assistance
Review (see Box 5), and IFC experience indicate what worked well and what worked less well in
Bank Group operations during the previous CAS periods. What worked well: The Bank has done
well in working with the Government, which is constrained by limited capacity, to effectively
sequence reform efforts in response to evolving development priorities over the past years. The
Bank continues to demonstrate comparative advantage in delivering analytical inputs to guide
policy dialogue. In particular, client and partners value the Bank's work on economic
management, both for its technical competence and its sharing of international experience. The
Bank is also able to leverage financial assistance by capitalizing on partnerships with bilateral and
multilateral donors, and it has taken important first steps in widening partnership and
consultations to include civil society and the private sector.

- 13 -

Box 5: Mozambique: Country Assistance Review (CAR) 1998

The 1998 CountryAssistanceReview was completed asthe 1997CASwas beingfinalized. The CAR
concluded that the Bank played a critical role in Mozambique 's recovery process by helping to assess
problems and opportunities, design the evolving policy agenda, and mobilize IDA and other resources,
thereby providing financial, administrative and analytical contributions to Mozambique 's transition
process. The CAR noted that partners continue to look to the Bank to deliver advisory and analytical
servicesfor sectoral and thematic programs and to provide leadership in the dialogue on economic
management and sector strategies, particularly in the area of economic governance (e.g. fiscal
management, public sector reform, trade policy andfinancial sector development). The CAR also found
that the availability of grant financing in some sectors, and the Government 's preference not to incur debt,
may limit the scope for IDA financing. Development effectiveness has also been limited by weaknesses in
aid coordination and excessive focus on traditional investment and technical assistance projects rather
than results-based sectorwide programs.

On the basis of these findings, the CAR recommended that the Bank be more selective and cede leadership
to other donors where they have a comparative advantage or substantialfinancial presence; use country
dialogue and aid coordination mechanisms to nurture policy reform and capacity building; enhance
partnerships among donors and civil society to improve resultsfor sector programs; support Mozambican
authorities' increased leadership in development and aid coordination; and increase the responsiveness
and effectiveness of Bank assistance by further decentralizing authority to the field. These
recommendations have begun to be observed in the Bank 's practices over the last CAS period and are also
reflected in the current CAS.

33. 
What worked less well: While many recognize Bank efforts to share information, develop
common understandings, and improve coordination, the Bank needs to be more systematic and
inclusive in reaching out to civil society and the private sector and in disseminating its analytical
work. The link between the Bank's policy and lending program and poverty reduction, as well as
the Bank's important role in many of the social sectors, is poorly understood. Although the
Bank's analytical products are valued, the Bank needs to do more in this area, and it needs to
better follow-through 
in applying upstream ESW to inform project identification and improve
quality of entry. At times, the scale and complexity of Bank projects have not been appropriately
tailored to match government's implementation capacity. Simpler project design, involving more
local expertise, could result in higher levels of client ownership and participation and in more
flexible project structures that would better allow for effective mid-course corrections. Given the
escalating HIV/AIDS crisis and its likely repercussions on the entire development effort, the
Bank should have acted sooner and been more systematic in joining the battle against this
pandemic. The fact that IFC's objective of financing SME investments with local sponsors has
only been partially met also indicates a need for the Bank Group to do more to develop the local
private sector. Finally, with respect to infrastructure, the recent flood emergency has indicated a
need to improve Bank evaluation of hazard exposure, to reassess or develop standards, and to
help the Government incorporate appropriate measures for reducing or transferring the risks of
future loss or damage.

E. Strategic Orientation

34. 
Bank support will aim to improve the effectiveness of Mozambique's overall poverty
reduction effort, taking into account the special needs for partnership in a country with weak
capacity and substantial access to grant financing. The orientation of this support recognizes a
dual role for the Bank: one as a catalyzing, strategic, and analytical partner to the Government's
development efforts, and the other as a financing partner. In the first role, the Bank will continue
to draw on its comparative advantage - as recognized in the CAR, ICRs, and the Client Survey -
in aid coordination and in analytical services, especially in sector analysis and policy and
program design. In particular, the Bank will continue to assist the Government in the critically

- 14-

important tasks of selecting the areas where reform is strategically needed, formulating and
sequencing appropriate programs, and coordinating development assistance. This is particularly
needed in the Mozambican context where public sector capacity to undertake these tasks is
limited. In its financing role, the Bank will be more selective, recognizing that other partners
have a comparative advantage in project implementation and are able to provide grant financing.
For example, IDA will provide no financing in telecommunications; limited financing in the
environment sector; and secondary financing behind other lead donors in the education and
agriculture sectors. Moreover, even in sectors where the Bank leads, IDA financing will continue
to constitute only a share of total sectoral financing (e.g., up to or about a fifth of total financing
in the health and roads sectors).

35. 
The focus of the ongoing program and the previous CAS are in accordance with the
strategic principles presented above. The lessons learned during the previous CAS and the CAS
consultations imply that the focus of the ongoing program has been appropriate and effective.
These efforts should be continued, but they will now need to be deepened in certain areas.
Specifically the Bank will need to:

* Redouble efforts to accelerate growth, diversify its sources, and increase economic
opportunities for the poor, particularly in rural areas. To this end, investments in
transportation will continue, together with deeper regulatory reform and private participation
with IFC support in the key cross-cutting sectors of energy and telecommunications. Efforts
to promote pro-poor rural development and agricultural growth will need to be strengthened.
Further improvements are needed in the basic enabling environment, in the performance of
the financial sector, and in the development of SMEs.
X Continue to support service delivery to improve human capabilities, with emphasis on
improving quality while continuing service expansion in basic health and education. The
Bank will also need to continue to provide advice in the area of social protection, including
to reduce vulnerability through improving the Government's capacity for disaster prevention
and mitigation.
* Continue to improve our development effectiveness through enhanced partnerships,
particularly among the donors and civil society. To this end, working with Government and
donors in supporting the PRSP and possibly a CDF provides a means to defining joint
priorities, assessing comparative advantages, and making strategic selections within
strengthened development partnerships.

36. With this CAS, the Bank Group will also strategically address newly binding constraints
in Mozambique and new imperatives among Mozambicans. These are areas that require action,
particularly in the development and design of new programs. As such, the Bank can apply its
comparative advantage in a timely manner, especially to provide analytical inputs, support
program design, and act as an aid coordinator. Specifically, the Bank Group will need to:

* 

* 

* 

Improve the focus, effectiveness, and monitoring of poverty reduction efforts. The
Government's commitment to design and implement a Poverty Reduction Strategy, as noted
in the Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) of the interim PRSP, provides a basis for the Bank, with
other partners, to support its work in poverty analysis, policy formulation, and monitoring
progress against objectives.
Increase emphasis on improving governance. Good governance and the rule of law are
critical for private sector led growth, and advantageous for the poor. Capacity constraints
urgently need to be addressed so that they do not stall Mozambique's ability to grow.
Increase emphasis on preventing HIV/AIDS. Having learned from global experience that
HIV/AIDS negates growth and poverty reduction, and seeing that the epidemic is reaching

- 15 -

crisis proportions in Mozambique, the Bank will make the fight against HIV/AIDS a critical
component of its work in the country.
Increase emphasis on promoting innovation, competitiveness, and employment. Skills
shortages are constraining growth and employment and undermining support for reform by
constraining the participation of Mozambicans in growth opportunities. There is a need for
Mozambican workers to improve their skills through technical, vocational, and higher
education and for Mozambican firms to address the challenges of competing in a global
economy that rewards high-quality innovation.

III. MOZAMBIQuE'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA AND TBE BANK GRouP's CAS

37. 
The Government aims to promote growth to reduce poverty and improve the well-being
of the Mozambican people. Its medium-term development strategy (as stated in its Five-Year
Government Program (2000-2004)) and its emerging Poverty Reduction Strategy (as stated in its
interim PRSP) include efforts to increase economic opportunities by generating poverty-
reducing and employment-creating growth through the private sector; improve governance and
empowerment, through a more effective public sector, improved rule of law, and greater
transparency and accountability; and improve human capabilities. Annex C outlines these
documents and their link to the CAS.

38. 
Poverty reduction is the overall goal of the Bank Group in Mozambique and there are no
major disagreements between the Bank and the Govemrnent on Mozambique's development
objectives and strategies. Differences do exist sometimes on the specific instruments or scope
and timing of reform. The Government favors protection in certain industries and restrictions in
the labor market. The Bank Group would like the Government to lower trade taxes and
surcharges and to proceed more quickly in demonopolizing sectors such as air transport and
telecommunications. The Bank also thinks that tax exemptions or other types of fiscal incentives
for internationally financed megaprojects or regional development schemes generally prove to be
more costly (in relation to benefits) and should be avoided where possible. These issues have
been the subject of continuing dialogue, and their debate has contributed to the increasingly
candid and open relationship between the Government and the Bank. The Bank is providing
technical and analytical inputs to inform the debate. In addition, the Bank is also supporting the
Government's efforts in developing the full PRSP, an integral part of which would be the broader
participation of civil society in discussing such issues and evaluating trade-offs.

39. 
The three pillars of this CAS are supported by new lending as well as a strong existing
lending program. (See Annex B9). Most new IDA and IFC activities will focus on increasing
economic opportunity which, through growth promotion, is likely to have the maximum impact in
reducing poverty in Mozambique even in the short-term. Ongoing work in this area will be
consolidated with a view to ensuring that the benefits of growth are distributed as broadly as
possible. This CAS will also direct increased IDA support to improving governance and
empowerment, as limited administrative capacity and effectiveness is currently a primary and
binding constraint to reform, growth, and development. Finally, this CAS will continue to
support improving human capabilities, with limited new lending but substantial ongoing
programs and continued strong analytical products. To the extent that other partners have a
strong presence and comparative advantage and are willing to finance activities on a grant basis,
the Bank will scale back IDA's financing contribution. The Bank will structure new lending to
maximize synergies and complementarities and maintain an overall focus on promoting poverty-
reducing private-sector-led growth; IFC will provide direct support to the private sector to help
generate that growth.

- 16 -

A. Increasing Economic Opportunities through Private Sector Led Growth

40. 
To promote growth and poverty reduction in Mozambique, the Government aims to
create an environment which will enable the private sector to expand its activities and generate
employment, especially among the rural poor. In the interim PRSP, the Government aims to
achieve real GDP growth of 7 to 10 percent per annum and limit inflation to 5 to 7 percent per
annum, thereby reducing the poverty headcount index to 60 percent in 2004 from 69 percent in
1997. Whereas growth and inflation targets may be compromised in 2000 because of the flood
emergency, they could be achieved in general by strengthening the private sector environment
and financial sector, investing in infrastructure, promoting agriculture and rural development,
ensuring sound environmental management, and improving innovation and competitiveness to
promote employment.

1. 

Strengthening the Private Sector Environment and the Financial Sector

41. 
Issues and Government strategy: Macroeconomic stability has been achieved and needs
to be maintained: low inflation provides a stable environment for private sector growth and
benefits the poor. This will require continued financial discipline. A key outstanding issue is
reducing fiscal imbalances, which the Government hopes to achieve gradually through
expenditure efficiency, HIPC debt relief, and increased revenues (accrued by broadening the tax
base, simplifying tax structures, and limiting exemptions). Continued external aid will permit
fiscal adjustment to be gradual and allow for expansion in spending on key poverty-reducing
programs. Another issue is expenditure control, which the Government will address with reforms
in accounting and budget execution. To help develop a more diversified export base, liberal
trade and investment policies will need to be strengthened, while addressing other constraints in
infrastructure, access to finance, and business capacity. To remove red tape, simplify the business
environment, and ensure the fair and efficient operation of newly privatized companies, the
Government will also undertake legal and regulatory reform. To this end, a new Commercial
Code and new urban land use regulations are being prepared, while regulations in the energy,
transportation, and telecommunications sectors are being revised to encourage entry, private
participation and competition. The Govermment will continue to strengthen its capacities of
poverty analysis, policy-formulation, and monitoring to improve the impact of policy on poverty
reduction.

42. 
In thefinancial sector, further work is required to effectively mobilize savings so as to
finance growth and to improve supervision of the expanding private financial sector. Despite
improvements in regulation, privatization, and the entry of new banks, access to financial services
remains limited in rural areas and among the poor, real interest rates and lending margins remain
high, and medium and long term finance is limited. Government policies are aimed at
encouraging lowering financial intermediation costs by enhancing competition, including
encouraging the development of non-bank financial intermediaries, as well as by addressing
systemic problems that constrain the financial sector, such as the poor enforceability of contracts,
lack of accounting standards, and legal obstacles to effective use of collateral. The Central Bank
aims to enhance pro-active supervision of the banking system to ensure financial stability.

43. 
Bank Group support: The Bank will continue actively to support areas of economic
management, as this answers to its comparative advantage. The Bank will provide policy advice
to the Government for improving fiscal management and strengthening the poverty focus of its
programs, most notably through assisting in preparing and implementing the PRSP, and will help
Mozambique to attain debt relief under the enhanced HIPC framework. A public expenditure
review (PER) will be undertaken to identify spending strategies for reducing poverty, and there
will be studies of the linkages between economic growth and poverty reduction as well as of

- 17-

targets for effective public service delivery. In addition to analytical contributions, in support of
the PRSP, Bank projects and studies will contribute to strengthening poverty analysis as well as
systems of poverty and program monitoring and statistical strengthening. An IDA proposed
Economic Management and Private Sector adjustment operation (EMPSO), as well as TA to
be included under a new public sector operation, will focus on private sector development and on
improving fiscal management (accounting, executing expenditures, developing consolidated
accounts, and reforming the pension system). The Bank, possibly with participation from FIAS,
will also support further work on improving and simplifying the regulatory framework, including
in the labor market, through a new study on constraints to private sector development. In addition
to ongoing work in the water and transportation sectors, the Bank Group will support improving
the regulatory and legal frameworks in the energy and mining sectors. Bank and IFC support to
the annual private sector conferences will continue. IFC is expanding its financing and advisory
support for SMEs, and will continue its focus on agribusiness to raise rural incomes. As the
investment environment improves, MIGA will support the Investment Promotion Center and
make guarantees available to attract increased foreign investment.

44. 
In the financial sector, the Bank will complete a diagnostic study and continue to provide
advice to improve banking supervision and financial intermediation, particularly by analyzing the
causes of high interest rates, by advising on financial sector efficiency and implementation of
contract law, and by strengthening bank supervision in accord with the Basle Core Principles. The
Bank Group will continue to work with the IMF to assist the Government in monitoring the
stability of the financial sector, particularly in the wake of the recent floods. To promote
competition in the banking sector, IFC will seek to expand its involvement with additional equity
investments, term resources, and institution building. IFC will work to spur increased
competition and intermediation through the establishment of new non-bank financial institutions,
particularly in leasing, insurance, housing finance, and microfinance, which will help increase
access to financial services for the poor. IFC will also provide advisory and technical assistance
on regulatory and institutional issues.

2. 

Developing Infrastructure

45. 
Issues and Government strategy: To promote growth, generate off-farm jobs, and
increase rural access to markets, the Government is upgrading infrastructure, particularly in areas
of high growth potential and population density. In the short-term, the Government is prioritizing
the rehabilitation of critical infrastructure damaged by the February 2000 floods with a view to
improving siting and construction standards so as to reduce damage from such events in the
future. Over the medium- to long-term, the key issues addressed by the Government's roads
program include incomplete road systems, limited funding for maintenance, and limited
involvement of national contractors in road construction. Work on the three major port-and-
railway systems aims to reduce transport costs, expand traffic, and increase earnings to ensure
sustainability. Government actions include concessioning operations to the private sector,
restructuring Caminhos de Ferro de Mofambique (CFM), and establishing an appropriate
regulatory framework. In energy, the principal issues are expanding household access and
sustainably exploiting resources for maximum macroeconomic and development impacts while
ensuring sound environmental management. To these ends, the Government is undertaking
structural and pricing reforms to encourage expanded private sector provision of electricity as
well as defining strategies for exporting energy and energy-intensive products. In
telecommunications, monopolization remains the key issue, but the Government is now opening
the cellular market to free entry and seeking a private sector equity partner for the state
telecommunications company as first steps towards liberalization. It is also trying to expand
entry into the international telecommunications market and improve access to services such as

- 18-

satellite connectivity and the internet. To improve the quality, reliability and sustainability of
urban water services, in September 1999 the Government placed water services in five major
cities under private management supervised by a new regulatory agency. It is also taking
measures to increase access to safe water in rural areas and small towns, aiming to raise rural
access from 12 percent in 1998 to 40 percent by 2004. Improving household access to markets,
energy, and safe water are key aims of the Government's strategy to reduce poverty, lower
household costs, improve the productivity and welfare of women and girls (who are responsible
for collecting water and fuel wood), and also improve the welfare of children (who benefit from
greater time allocated to child care).

46. 
Bank Group support: The Bank Group has considerable experience and comparative
advantage in infrastructure and will remain active, in partnership with the major bilateral donors
and alongside private investors. A proposed Roads and Bridges (APL) project (FY01) will help
rehabilitate trunk roads and bridges, support rural road rehabilitation and maintenance, develop
institutional capacity for managing the network, reduce vulnerability of transport infrastructure to
flood and storm hazards, and increase the participation of local contractors in implementing
works. The recently approved Railways and Ports Restructuring project will help to restructure
CFM, develop a policy and regulatory framework, and place port and railway management in
private hands. IDA will also continue to provide policy advice on the development of the
transport corridors. An Energy Reform project will provide TA for structural and pricing
reforms; test financing and delivery options for electrification in small towns; and promote the
sustainable urban use of traditional fuels. IDA will also assist in developing strategies for
exporting energy and energy-intensive products and establishing a market-based regulatory
framework for the gas and power subsectors. IFC, together with IDA and MIGA, will selectively
review megaprojects for their viability and potential support from the Bank Group; IFC will
examine further financing of Mozal for its expansion. In telecommunications, IDA will help to
assess the new law and support a national policy workshop; IFC has been in discussions with the
national telecommunications company to support its privatization. The national water program
will be supported in three ways: National Water Development (NWD) I will continue to focus on
reforming rural water supply and sanitation and managing regional and national water resources;
NWD II will continue to support concessioning of urban water services; and a new Municipal
Development project will help to strengthen the ability of Mozambique's 33 new municipalities
to provide basic urban services, including sanitation and drainage. IFC is also seeking
opportunities to finance private infrastructure projects across sectors, with other potential projects
in industrial park development and investments arising from the development of the transport
corridors. IFC will also sponsor a workshop on best practice in private participation in
infrastructure at the request of the government.

3. 

Promoting Rural Development and Agriculture

47. 
Issues and Government strategy: As most of the poor are subsistence farmers,
promoting agricultural growth and rural development is critical to reducing poverty over the short
to medium term. Key issues include improving access to land, increasing productivity, expanding
off-farm employment, facilitating rural trade, arresting land degradation, and improving
management of climate variability and extremes. To address these issues, the Government's rural
development strategy includes adopting and enforcing land tenure regulations, developing rural
roads, and creating rural market incentives. The agriculture SWAP, PROAGRI, supports
agricultural extension services, with a special focus on reaching female farmers to disseminate
information on farming practices and gender-specific legislation, and is establishing a regulatory
framework (for land markets, land tenure, and forest and wildlife management) that will promote
an efficient and environmentally sustainable use of resources.

-19-

48. 
Bank Group support: The Bank will remain active in this area. The IDA-supported
Agricultural Sector Public Expenditure Program, a 15 -year APL in its first phase, supports
PROAGRI to strengthen the institutions needed to provide a core set of services in agriculture
and natural resource management. A Rural Action project will bring resources down to the
community level and strengthen the capacity of local authorities through supporting small-scale
community-driven investments in rural infrastructure and services. The Roads and Bridges
project will support efforts to rehabilitate and maintain rural feeder roads. New lending,
combined with large existing programs in health, education, and water, contribute to IDA's
significant support to improving infrastructure and service delivery in rural areas. IFC's SME
program is concentrating in agribusiness and tourism to expand opportunities for rural
development and off-farm employment. Finally, a rural development study underway, which
focuses on key elements in the state's role in facilitating rural development, will inform the PRSP
and enhance the design of Bank operations.

4. 

Ensuring Sound Environmental Management

49. 
Issues and Government strategy: Agriculture, fisheries, mining and tourism-activities
based on exploiting the environment-contribute about 45 percent of GDP and 70 percent of total
exports. Ensuring that resource exploitation is sustainable is critical to long-term prospects for
growth and poverty reduction. Although Govemment policy in this area is fluid and capacity
limited, there is general movement towards integrating environmental aspects into all major
policies and strategies, implementing programs for environmental management, and subjecting
major economic activities to environmental impact studies. The Government will also participate
in regional efforts to manage the environment, particularly in tourism, transportation, and water
and wildlife conservation. Over the past five years, the Government has adopted an Environment
Framework Law, a new Land Law, and a new Forestry and Wildlife Law. At present, key
Government objectives include increasing capacity to ensure that regulations are properly
implemented, formulating cross-sectoral approaches, and encouraging environmentally and
socially sustainable private sector investment.

50. 
Bank Group support: IDA will support a study aiming to identify critical environmental
pressures, including climatic hazards, and appropriate responses, in a context of rapid growth and
weak institutions. With GEF support, and in partnership with the private sector, IDA is helping
to develop a framework for forestry and wildlife management through the Transfrontier
Conservation Areas project and will test and refine mechanisms to promote environmentally and
socially sustainable development through the proposed Coastal and Marine Biodiversity
Management Project accompanying this CAS. The Transfrontier project will also address issues
of watershed management that will mitigate flood risk. Through its presence on the Maputo
Corridor working groups for environment, tourism, and biodiversity, the Bank will continue to
provide advice on environmental management as well as support to the development of a
Strategic Environmental Management Framework for the corridor. IDA's sectoral programs
(particularly health, PROAGRI, National Water I, and Municipal Development) will also provide
support. In addition, a Natural Resources Management project will develop an environmental
information system as well as build capacity within Government to enforce environmental
regulations and address mining-related environmental challenges. Through the projects it
finances, IFC will bring Bank Group environmental standards to the private sector, including
financial intermediaries' assessment of environmental risk.

- 20 -

5. 

Promoting Innovation, Competitiveness and Employment

51. 
Issues and Government strategy: Creating on- and off-farm employment is a key
objective of the Government's poverty reduction strategy. This requires a response both to build
the capacity and competitiveness of Mozambican firms so they expand and create jobs, as well as
to enhance skills in the workforce and professions to fill the technical positions in an expanding
local economy. To sustain growth and employment at levels high enough to reduce poverty
permanently, Mozambican firms will need to adopt new technologies and individuals to develop
new skills, so that Mozambican businesses will become increasingly able to compete in extemal
markets. To do so requires exposure to competition and competitive practices, access to
information, increased capacity, and financing. In addition, the shortage of skilled personnel is
constraining growth and limiting the distribution of its benefits among Mozambicans. To address
this problem, the Government in January 2000 created a new Ministry of Higher Education,
Science and Technology to focus on higher education, technical and vocational training as part of
its growth and employment strategy. The Government is also developing a strategy aimed at
improving opportunities for Mozambicans to participate in the labor market by strengthening the
quality and improving the relevance to market demand of vocational and higher education, while
strengthening the sustainability of these institutions and programs through fostering appropriate
private-public partnerships in financing and service provision. Special efforts are aimed at
promoting employment among women by targeting them for delivery of small and medium
enterprise credits, tool kits, and training for informal sector employment. With NGOs, the
Government is also supporting women's associations that assist women household,heads with
weak economic capacity.

52. 
Bank Group support: The Bank will study labor costs, market policies and regulations
to complement Government efforts to develop a strategy for higher education and vocational
training. While the Bank is already supporting a large and fully-subscribed basic education
program (see paragraph 63), under this CAS IDA will also support a Skills Development project
focusing on tertiary, technical and vocational education and aiming to infuse, in Mozambique's
labor market, the skills, practices, and attitudes required to create value-adding knowledge and
innovation in production. The project, like the strategy upon which it will be based, is to be
developed through a strategic partnership among Government, academic institutions, and the
private sector. It will support comprehensive reform in the sector to enable the most effective
delivery of the training and skills being demanded in the context of Mozambique's evolving labor
market. IFC will support private education, focusing on the tertiary level, and has an initial
project under development for a technical college. IDA's recently approved Enterprise
Development project (PODE), as well as technical assistance and policy advice in the areas of
private sector development and competitiveness, will expose local entrepreneurs to best-practice
business techniques, management systems, and technological innovations and support knowledge
transfer by promoting inter-company linkages. IDA is also prepared to provide small credits to
support Mozambique's participation in the Regional Trade Facility (a facility permitting
entrepreneurs to insure productive activities against political risk) as well as consultancy-led
assistance to improve the competitiveness of one or more major Mozambican industries. IFC
support facilities, including the Africa Project Development Facility (APDF) and the Africa
Management Services Company (AMSCO) will be expanded to provide assistance to the local
private sector, complementing the PODE. Through these facilities and outreach efforts, IFC will
seek to involve more Mozambican businesspeople as sponsors in the SME projects it finances,
and expand the number of those investments. AMSCO will provide training and capacity building
for local firms, as well as management assistance. In addition, WBI's World Links program is
introducing information technology and communication infrastructure into secondary schools
outside of Maputo to improve student and teacher familiarity with this new technology: over the
next few years, the program will be expanded to cover up to 100 schools.

- 21 -

B. Improving Governance and Empowerment

53. 
This CAS will support efforts to develop a public administration that is responsive to its
constituents and that effectively supports the country's poverty-reduction efforts. Limited
administrative capacity and effectiveness is currently one of the primary constraints to growth,
development, implementation of reform, and service delivery to the poor. Government efforts
have been aimed at bolstering the civil service, reforming the institutional framework, including
decentralization and deconcentration, and simplifying and increasing the transparency of
administrative procedures and improving accountability. Under the governance pillar, the Bank
will not be involved in providing support in the areas of peace, public safety, and personal and
human rights, given the Bank's lack of comparative advantage and the support of other
development partners in these areas.

1. 

Reforming the Public Sector

54. 
Issues and Government strategy: Public administration until very recently was highly
centralized in Mozambique. Quality is also a concern: 80 percent of staff have no more than a 6t
grade education and only 3 percent have higher degrees. To attract and retain qualified staff, the
Government has decompressed salaries and instituted a new career stream system; it will also
implement a medium-term pay policy and merit-based reward system, as well as a training
program to reorient existing staff. In 1998, the Government's decentralization program created
33 elected autonomous municipalities and devolved to them the responsibility for urban
management within their jurisdictions. The Government intends to increase the number of
municipalities with each election cycle, and gradually transfer responsibility for other services. It
is also exploring ways to deconcentrate responsibility for local development to provincial
authorities and to encourage development planning at the district level. Further reforms, being
developed by an interministerial group supported by a technical group, will develop a more
results- and service-oriented public sector by redefining the sector's role and restructuring it
accordingly. The Government will continue its efforts to improve budget and expenditure
management and control to ensure that resource allocations are in accordance with national
poverty-reducing priorities. Upon reelection, Mozambique's President has reiterated
Government's commitment to fight corruption; Mozambique is one of the eleven countries which
drafted and approved the 25 Principles to Combat Corruption under the auspices of the Global
Coalition for Africa.

55. 
Bank Group support Support to the public sector reform program is threefold, with an
emphasis on capacity building, including at the local level. First, the Bank will provide support
to the technical group and initiate a Public Sector and Legal Reform project to assist the
Government in implementing reforms in system-wide areas such as wages, decentralization,
financial and personnel management. A public sector study, including an assessment of
governance and of public procurement, will provide the diagnostic underpinnings for design of a
program of reform. Second, given decentralization's role in improving service delivery while
also empowering citizens, including the rural poor, this will be a principal focus of new Bank
lending. IDA's Municipal Development project will assist in developing a framework for fiscal,
financial and human resource management for the new municipalities and include a capacity-
building component linked to the new National Institute for Public Administration, which will
play a key role in wider public sector reform. IDA's Rural Action project will use small-scale
community-driven rural infrastructure investments to strengthen the capacity of communities and
local governments to plan and manage local infrastructure and services. Through WBI's pan-
African Municipal Development Program and AFRICITIES conference series, the Bank is also
strengthening capacity in the areas of inter-governmental fiscal relations and financial
management as well as community participation in local government. Third, to help the

- 22 -

Government improve economic management as well as transparency and accountability in its
budget system, the Economic Management and Private Sector operation will help to strengthen
budgetary execution, accounting, and auditing. The Bank will also continue to provide policy
advice in support of reforms in customs administration. In the area of corporate governance, the
Public Sector and Legal Reform project will help to strengthen capacity in accounting and
establish a professional accountants group. IFC (through AMSCO) is providing training to
selected firms in the area of corporate governance, and strengthening capacity in accounting in
the private sector.

2. 

Improving the Rule of Law

56. 
Issues and Government strategy: In Mozambique, the legal and judicial system is
outdated, inefficient and poorly equipped to ensure the rule of law. Dissemination and
enforcement of current laws is poor, particularly outside the main cities, and weakness in the
legal sector is impeding progress in other sectors as well as the development of the private sector.
Commercial law, family law, and the criminal code are critically in need of reform. These are all
on the Government's agenda. A strategic plan for the justice system should be completed in
2000, and a legal reform commission has been established. The plan is expected to address key
legislative reforms, capacity-building needs, and institutional reform in the Ministry of Justice,
Supreme Court, Attomey General's Office and Administrative Tribunal. To increase capacity, a
Center for Judicial Studies and Training is being opened and efforts are being made to
disseminate legal texts throughout the country to legal professionals. The Government has
prioritized the adoption of legislation that will foster private sector activity, and work is
continuing on revising the Commercial Code. To help secure women's rights, the Government is
expected to revise the Penal Code to include provisions for prosecuting domestic and sexual
violence and Family and Succession Laws to guarantee women's rights to succession and to
independent economic activity. The Government is also working with NGOs to combat violence
against women, and female officers are being recruited into the police force.

57. 
Bank Group support The Bank's Legal Sector Capacity Building project has supported
the training of legal professionals, strengthening of the Faculty of Law, developing legal code
reform, and disseminating knowledge of the law. The Bank is also supporting revision of the
Commercial Code. After the Government finalizes its strategic plan, the Bank expects to renew
its support in this area. An assessment of the legal and judicial sector will be undertaken. It will
direct the development of a legal component in the Public Sector and Legal Reform project,
which will aim at improving the legal environment and judicial system witlh a view to promoting
private sector growth. IDA's work in the judicial sector will be undertaken in coordination with
other external partners, some of whom have extensive previous involvement in this sector, and
IDA's financial support to the sector will be scaled accordingly.

C. Increasing Human Capabilities

58. 
The short-term urgency of improving low living standards and the longer term objectives
of improving human capabilities, increasing growth, and reducing poverty motivate the Bank's
continued support of efforts to improve human capabilities. Most of the Bank's financial support
under this pillar, chiefly in the area of primary health and primary education, will continue to be
delivered through ongoing operations.

- 23 -

1. 

Preventing and Reducing the Impact of HIVWAIDS

59. 
Issues and Government strategy: About one in seven adult Mozambicans carries the
AIDS virus, which is now the largest single threat to Mozambique's prospects (see Box 1). To
date, resources directed to the fight against HIV/AIDS has not reflected the magnitude of the risk
that it poses to the nation's development effort (as is evident in Annex E). In September 1999 the
Government adopted a National Strategic Plan (2000-2002) for Fighting STDs/HIV/AIDS at a
national workshop presided by the President. The Plan aims to provide essential services to
prevent infection and reduce the impact of AIDS, targeting some 1.6 million people with high-
risk sex partners as well as 15,000 people and their families living with HI-V/AIDS along the
main transport corridors. Given the cross-cutting developmental implications of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic, the Government has recognized that effective H1V/AIDS prevention, care, and control
strategies require a multisectoral response. To this end an Interministerial Committee for AIDS,
involving eight ministries, is being created to have general oversight responsibilities for
implementing the National Plan, and a National AIDS Commission is being established with
more direct national management responsibilities.

60. 
Bank Group support: The existing IDA portfolio and pipeline are being reviewed and
revised to include appropriate HIV/AIDS prevention and care activities wherever possible. The
ongoing Enterprise Development project and the roads program already include components with
this objective. Through an IDF grant, IDA is supporting the establishment of the National AIDS
Commission, which will define objectives and strategies in priority areas for HIV/AIDS
prevention and control; integrate these strategies into government sectoral plans; and establish
workplans, budgets, management, and monitoring mechanisms for their implementation. The
Bank also supports UNAIDS and, in its capacity as an aid coordinator, will play an active role in
increasing HIV/AIDS awareness in Mozambique. Because Mozambique and some of its external
partners are expected to finance the US$40 million National Strategic Plan through grants, no
IDA operation in support of this Plan is currently anticipated. However, IDA is prepared to
expedite new lending should any financing gap emerge.

2. 

Improving Health

61. 
Issues and Government strategy: Despite increased Govemment spending, health
outcomes continue to be poor and health resources inequitably distributed, with per capita
spending on health being four to five times greater in Maputo city than in Zambezia and
Nampula. The Government's health program aims to improve access and quality, particularly in
rural areas, with a view to reducing morbidity and mortality and increasing economic
productivity. The program is oriented toward primary care, which will benefit the poor, and
targets reductions in infant, child, and maternal mortality and increases in DPT coverage. It also
focuses on improving health service coverage in rural areas. The program includes capacity
building and training of traditional birth attendants in rural areas with a view to reducing levels of
maternal mortality, consolidating preventative programs for women's health, and reviewing staff
recruitment methods and training to incorporate gender concems. The Government is now
formulating a new sector strategy in consultation with its partners, who will be reorganizing their
support to the sector in the form of an expanded SWAP.

62. 
Bank Group support: The Government has asked the Bank to help facilitate the
transition from a sector program to a full SWAP and coordinate donor support of the new
strategy. The Bank will continue to support the sector through its existing Health Sector
Recovery program (HSRP), which aims to increase access to health services through improved
service delivery and institutional development. IDA will also develop a new Health (SWAP)
credit to support the new program, but because many external partners are channeling grant

- 24 -

money into this sector, new lending is likely to be limited. The Bank is also prepared to support
the Government's Roll Back Malaria campaign with advisory services and financial support. IFC
will support the expansion of private medical services.

3. 

Improving Education

63. 
Issues and Government strategy: Improving access and quality, particularly for primary
education, remain key objectives. In launching its Education Sector Strategic Program (ESSP) in
1998, the Government placed education at the center of its efforts to boost economic and social
development. The fully subscribed program of over US$700 million aims to improve quality
(through increasing teacher training, improving learning materials, and revising the curriculum)
and access (through constructing classrooms and improving internal efficiency); it also aims to
strengthen institutional capacity for management, policy development, monitoring and evaluation.
To mitigate regional and rural-urban disparities, the Government is further decentralizing
education management and shifting budget allocations. In the effort to reduce the gender gap in
schools, provinces with highest gender disparities have been targeted, and a program is in place to
sensitize communities and reform curricula and texts to demonstrate the issues and benefits of
girls' education. To improve adult education, literacy programs, which target women and include
courses on domestic violence, women's rights, and land access, are being provided outside
schools.

64. 
Bank Group support: The Bank assisted, with 18 other partners, in developing the
education sector program and will continue to support its implementation with the ongoing ESSP
project, focused on strengthening quality, access, and institutional capacity. The Bank is also
assisting the Government in an ongoing study to explore alternative models for financing the
education sector and it will initiate a Skills Development project under this CAS (see paragraph
52). IFC support for private education will be expanded.

4. 

Social Protection

65. 
Issues and Government strategy: The Government's Integrated Program of Social
Action, Employment and Youth includes safety net programs to protect the vulnerable and the
chronically poor, and training and job-creating programs to assist the able-bodied poor; social
assistance and psycho-social rehabilitation are also covered. Currently targeted groups include
female heads of households, malnourished pregnant women, the elderly disabled, and the
chronically ill. The PARPA calls for improving the quality of social protection programs which
will require assessing appropriate targeting, eligibility criteria, and coverage levels as a step to
developing programs for marginalized groups currently not covered. Pension schemes are also a
matter of Government interest; to ensure the sustainability and efficacy of these schemes, the
Government is developing regulations for private schemes and undertaking a study on the main
national schemes. In restructuring and resizing public institutions, such as customs and the
railways, the Government is putting into place programs that will support the transition of
workers to other productive activities, including through retraining. Disaster mitigation and
management form part of the Government's social protection programs. Three govermnent
agencies, the National Water Directorate, the National Meteorological Institute, and the National
Institute for Disaster Management share direct responsibility for anticipating hazard events to
prevent and prepare for disasters; existing capacity to perform these functions is to be
strengthened, including with respect to local, regional and sectoral linkages. The advancement of
women is also a stated objective of the new Government, and responsibility for gender issues was
recently given to the Ministry of Social Action and Women.

- 25 -

66. 
Bank Group support Given the substantial scope for grant financing in the area of
social protection, the Bank's support here will be principally in the form of analytical work and
policy advice. In particular, the Bank will provide informal policy advice on social protection
and safety net issues as part of its overall assistance to the Govermnent in developing its Poverty
Reduction Strategy. WBI will also play a role in providing training and capacity building in this
area. Through the Railways and Ports Restructuring project, support is to be provided for the
retraining and redeployment of workers resulting from the restructuring of CFM. In addition, the
Bank will assist the Government in undertaking diagnostic work on its pension system through
this project and will provide further support in this area, if required, through the next programmed
adjustment operation. The Bank will also provide informal policy advice and technical assistance
in the area of institutional capacity building for disaster prevention and preparedness. In addition
to related measures being implemented through the Bank's National Water Development Project
(NWDI), should the need arise, a small, free-standing technical assistance operation will be
considered to support efforts in disaster prevention, preparedness, and management.

IV. 

THE BANK GROUP'S COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY: IMPLEMENTATION

A. Alternative Scenarios for the Lending Program and Non-Lending Services

67. 
The Base Case: Base case lending over the three-year CAS period (FY0 I-FY03) would
range from US$455 million up to the IDA authorized lending envelope of US$540 million. (See
Annex Bl). Lending levels in the base case are likely to be below the authorized envelope to take
into account the country's absorptive capacity, the availability of grant funds from other donors,
the Government's debt management strategy, and a recognition that in Mozambique's current
political environment some time is needed to ensure adequate public information and debate
about new reforms. Adjustment lending (the US$100 million Economic Management and Private
Sector operation programmed for FY02) would decline relative to the previous CAS and
represent about one-fifth of total lending. The base case lending program (described in Section
III above) aims to help Mozambique sustain high, broad-based and inclusive growth, and to
ensure that the benefits of growth are equitably distributed, particularly to the poor. Capitalizing
on the Bank's comparative advantage, a substantial non-lending work-program is designed to
contribute to developing the PRSP and to provide analytical foundations for the design of
Government programs as well as the Bank's lending program (see Box 6). The number and
volume of IFC investments, which will depend on demand from private investors, is expected to
expand significantly during the CAS period given the expansion of infrastructure, and the
potential for further large projects.

68. 
The triggers for the proposed base case lending program will be monitored on an ongoing
basis by the Bank's Country Team and will include:

* Formulation by end 2001 and implementation thereafter of a comprehensive public sector
reform and governance program, that includes specific government actions to improve
public sector capacity and fiscal management and to contain and reduce corruption.
* Substantial adherence to the agreed timetable for developing a poverty reduction strategy
paper (PRSP) with monitorable indicators through a consultative process; and subsequent
satisfactory implementation of the PRSP, including satisfactory progress in achieving
targets under programs in health, education, water, and roads.
* Substantial progress in implementing the National Strategic Plan to Fight
STDs/HIV/AIDS.
* Continued satisfactory portfolio performance, including continued high disbursement
ratio (around 20 percent) and low percentage of problem projects (around 10 percent or
less).

- 26 -

69. 
The High Case. The high case will materialize principally on the basis of an increase in
absorptive capacity. Absorptive capacity would be improved through progress in reforming
public administration, strengthening public and private sector governance and capacity, and
expanding skills and knowledge, thereby also improving portfolio performance. Under the high
case scenario, economic growth would be close to or in excess of seven percent per annum for
2001 and beyond, based on successful and timely implementation of Government programs as
well as increased investor confidence and private investment. This would result in continued
expansion of the agricultural, manufacturing, and tourism sectors, as well as faster growth in
exports, including from megaprojects.

70. With strong growth, improving social indicators, and improved participation through
decentralization, political support for the reform program would
broaden and reforms in the energy, transport, and 
telecommunications sectors would be accelerated. The Energy
Reform project would be advanced into FY01, and, if 

Public Sector Reform Study

Box 6: CASNon-LendihgAdivities

deregulation of the energy sector is substantially completed in the 
next two years, an Energy Development project (not in the base 
case lending program) would be brought into FY03. If public 

sector reform accelerates, and there is substantial adherence to 

agreed pay reform, training systems, and career stream systems, 

work on the Public Sector Reform Strategy and on the Legal and
Judicial study would be expedited, permitting the Public Sector 
and Legal Reform project to be advanced into FY02. With 

relevant sectoral progress and adequate upstream AAA, the 
second phase of support to the Health SWAP could be advanced 

into FY02 and a second adjustment operation, to be focused on 
private sector development, could be brought into the current 

CAS period. Lending volumes under the Rural Action and 

Energy Reform projects would be increased. Depending on a 
number of factors, including overall economic performance, the 
degree of political consensus, the pace of reforms in the various 

sectors, the extent of Bank preparedness as demonstrated in 
relevant and high-quality upstream ESW, and Government 
capacity-and willingness-to absorb higher levels of 
indebtedness, lending could increase up to US$655 million in the 

high case.

71. 

Triggers for the high case would include all indicators 

for the base case plus: 
* Formulation by end 2000, as well as satisfactory and 
accelerated implementation thereafter, of a 

a Public Expenditure Review
e Legal and Judicial Study
* Poverty and Growth Linkages

D Constrapnts 
to Private Sector

* 

Environment: Critical Pressures

Policy Advce and TA

* PRSP Support
* Enhanced HIPC Initiative

E HIV VA IDS
* Private Sector/Competitiveness

Advice

* Maputo Corridor Advice
a Disaster Prevention and

Mitigation and Management

* Regional Energy and
MegaprojectsAdwce
* Financial SectorAdvice
* Global Distance Learning
Network, Schoolnet World Links
for Development; Municipal
Development/AFRICITIES (WBI)

IFC
* Technical assistance tofinancial

institutions

* FIAS work on investment red tape
* Advisory assistance to SMEs
Infrastructure advisory work
* Megaprojects advice

* 

comprehensive public sector reform and governance
program, including progress specifically in actions to improve public sector capacity and
fiscal management.
* A full PRSP endorsed by the Bank's Executive Directors, together with a record of
timely and substantial implementation, achieving or exceeding key targets on or ahead of
schedule.
* Significant progress toward demonopolization of the energy, transport, and
telecommunications sectors.

- 27 -

Strong portfolio performance (with the share of problem projects remaining below 10
percent and disbursement ratios exceeding 20 percent).

72. 
The Low Case. The low case scenario for Mozambique would result if political
instability led to government paralysis or to civil strife, or if Mozambique were to become
entangled in regional conflicts, or if governance problems severely impede the delivery of
services and the continuation of economic reform efforts. Other possible triggers of the low case
include a major crisis in the financial sector; substantial shifts in economic policy towards
reasserting state control over productive activities; or major distortions in price, trade, or
exchange policies that impede the development of markets. Whatever the cause, the low case
would likely be characterized by recession, increasing and ultimately high inflation, decreased
investor confidence, and an extended and pronounced decline in balance of payments support.
This in time would result in real declines in social sector spending and a reversal of gains in
social indicators.

73. 

Triggers for the low case include:

* Significant deviation from poverty-reducing policies outlined in the agreed PRSP
(including reductions in the share of spending allocated to priority poverty-alleviating
activities such as primaiy education and primary health care).
* Significant reversals in economic reform policies, especially related to overall
macroeconomic management, the financial sector, privatization and trade policy, leading
to a more closed and centrally-controlled economic environment.
* Civil strife, war, or governance practices which cause the external development partners
to significantly reduce their level of support for an extended period.
* Significant deterioration in portfolio performance (with problem projects significantly
greater than 10 percent and disbursement ratio significantly less than 20 percent for an
extended period of time).

74. 
In the low case, new IDA lending will be constrained to US$170 million over the CAS
period. Beyond a self-standing emergency operations in health, IDA will proceed only with the
Roads and Bridges project, the Municipal Development project, and a scaled-down Rural Action
project aimed at improving governance and basic service delivery in urban and rural areas. The
Roads and Bridges project would experience delays in achieving effectiveness due to slower than
expected completion of the existing roads project. In the low case, non-lending work would also
be scaled back and reoriented to assess the Government's commitment to its poverty reduction
strategy and to advise the Government on managing the economy. Completion of the proposed
Public Expenditure Review and the PRSP would remain important in this context.

B. Development Partnerships

75. Mozambique receives almost US$600 million in aid each year, making aid coordination a
key concern. The bilateral donors are most active in infrastructure, rural development and
agriculture, health, and education (see Annex B9 and Annex E). Political governance, peace,
social protection and human rights-areas where the Bank is not active-also receive strong
bilateral support. Multilateral activity covers many areas, including political governance. Under
the Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), the UN system is concentrating on
governance, health and education, empowerment and the environment. The European Union has
been active in infrastructure, civil service reform, agriculture, health and education; and the
African Development Bank, besides providing balance of payments support, has been active in
infrastructure, education and the environment. There is also significant NGO involvement in the

- 28 -

social sectors and private sector involvement in infrastructure (e.g. upgrading the N4 road link
between the port of Maputo and South Africa).

76. 
A large part of the Bank's work in Mozambique consists in developing and participating
in development partnerships. Short-term aid coordination is one area of priority. In addition to
the Consultative Group Meetings, which the Bank chairs, there are also monthly meetings of
Heads of Mission and Heads of Development in Maputo, chaired by the UNDP. Mozambique's
external partners look to the Bank for briefings, coordination, economic policy guidance, and
sectoral leadership. Regular consultative meetings are held by the Country Office with the NGO
Working Group, which is being expanded to include academic institutions. Over the longer term,
the Bank will continue to play an important role in coordinating aid in the delivery of support to
Mozamibique's overall and sectoral reform programs. Continued coordination through the
SWAPs and further work on the PRSP will help to consolidate the partnership and enhance
Government leadership and accountability.

77. 
A second area of priority concerns partnership within the Bank Group and with the IMF.
Joint Bank and Fund work on the HIPC Initiative and PFPs has already brought the two
institutions closer together. Ongoing work on the PRSP and the Enhanced HIPC Initiative will
further consolidate this close relationship. Within the Bank Group, the Country Team structure
has encouraged sharing information and improving coordination. IDA and the IFC work together
closely. This CAS is an IDA-IFC product and IDA and IFC are housed jointly in the World Bank
Group's office in Maputo. Improvements in the economy are likely to increase demand for MIGA
guarantees. With the Bank Group's new emphases on governance, innovation, competitiveness,
and knowledge management, there will be an increased role for WBI in delivering the Bank's
strategy. WBI is also expected to play a role in the Bank Group's delivery of policy advice and
training to assist Mozambique in formulating and implementing its Poverty Reduction Strategy.

C. Program Monitoring and Evaluation

78. 
The Bank will monitor its program utilizing the indicators outlined in the program matrix
(see Annex B9). These indicators and targets will be revised and updated to link more directly
with the indicators in the full PRSP once it is completed, including a revision of sectoral targets,
as necessary, to fully account for the impact of the floods. Critical systems for overall program
monitoring and evaluation will be the M&E systems associated with SWAPs as well as several
household surveys to be undertaken regularly by the Government. The Bank, in joint missions
with the Fund, will monitor program implementation and performance under the PRSP and HIPC.
In addition, another OED Country Assistance Review is expected to be undertaken prior to the
next CAS to evaluate the overall program, and Client Surveys will continue to be undertaken to
gauge responsiveness to client needs. The portfolio will be managed closely by the Country
Office with annual portfolio reviews held with Government (see paragraph 30) and the Country
Team will continue to use the ICR process, and OED reviews, as important inputs in improving
the portfolio and its management.

D. Risks and Risk Management

79. Mozambique continues to be a medium-risk high-reward country. The program faces six
major risks over the next few years. First, there is the political risk that the opposition's
dissatisfaction with the 1999 election results and limited participation in government may lead to
political paralysis and possibly civil strife, drawing on dissatisfaction among some groups of civil
society that believe that popular participation in decision-making is unduly limited. Second, the
widespread perception that growth is not sufficiently benefiting most people, or not sufficiently

- 29 -

benefiting Mozambican businesses and workers, could result in protectionist and distortive
regulations on trade, labor, and capital as well as more general backsliding on reform. This
would slow growth and employment creation, increase poverty, and concurrently reduce
Mozambique's external financing prospects, particularly from foreign investment. Third,
HIV/AIDS, if unchecked, could substantially increase poverty and compromise or reverse
Mozambique's development, even in the short term. Fourth, despite efforts to strengthen public
administration, capacity, and governance, gains in these areas may not materialize quickly
enough to improve absorptive capacity and program implementation, particularly where this
concerns assisting private sector initiative. Fifth, Mozambique's economic prospects are
increasingly linked to those of the sub-region, such that adverse economic developments in
neighboring countries, particularly South Africa and Zimbabwe, will dampen prospects for
Mozambique. Sixth, Mozambique is extremely vulnerable to climatic variations, including
drought and floods, that can adversely affect agricultural productivity and growth, water
supplies, health, economic development, and progress towards alleviating poverty.

80. 
The Bank Group recognizes these risks and, where possible, will work to mitigate them.
This CAS aims chiefly to increase the impact of growth throughout the country, and especially
among the poor. With added emphasis on decentralization, IDA will work to ensure that
development processes and institutions are more inclusive, increasing popular participation in the
program. The Bank will support the PRSP process, which will include Government-led
consultations to inform the design of policy while also improving awareness of Government work
on poverty reduction and its achievements. The Bank Group will also improve dissemination of
its analytical work, such as its ongoing growth prospects paper, to raise awareness of its poverty-
reduction activities, the impact of policy choices, and the benefits of strategic thinking on
competitiveness. The Government's National HIV/AIDS Plan is a critical step toward limiting
the spread of the disease, and the Bank will be playing an important role in supporting that
program, including galvanizing increased resources and offering new lending, if necessary, to
step-up the program. The Bank will also help to improve public sector administration and
governance. Where capacity and institutional constraints in strategic areas compromise growth
and poverty reduction, alternative institutional arrangements will be explored (e.g. as occurred in
temporarily contracting customs to the private sector). With regard to the potential for regional
crises, the Country Team is working closely with Country Teams for the rest of Southern Africa
to understand and to support efforts to mitigate regional crises and their spill-over effects.
Mozambique's gradual diversification of trade with other countries in the region and the world,
along with its active participation in regional organizations, will also mitigate this risk. Finally,
the Bank will support Mozambique's efforts at the local, national and regional levels to identify,
reduce and transfer risks associated with hydro-meteorological hazards.

CONCLUSION

81. Mozambique is an extremely poor country which, unlike many other impoverished
countries, has significant and real potential for growth and poverty reduction in the relative near
term. Just as important, its Government has to date shown serious commitment to the objectives
of poverty reduction, manifested by a sound reform program and, most recently, by its interim
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. The country's potential, coupled with its commitment and
programs, are yielding results. Yet there are daunting challenges and risks to be confronted if
Mozambique's potential is to be realized. The Bank has played an important role in supporting
Mozambique's impressive progress over the past decade. Selecting the right development
constraints to address at the right time - in an enviromnent of significant commitment but limited
capacity - has, in large part, been key to the success of the Government and of the Bank in
Mozambique. This CAS proposes that the Bank Group, with some shifts in focus, continue its
strong support to Mozambique over the next three years. Increasing economic opportunities,

- 30 -

enhancing govemance, and improving human capabilities are all part of the long-term agenda for
poverty reduction in Mozambique. With its program under this CAS, the Bank Group proposes
to continue its partnership with the Government and all of its development partners in this
endeavor.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

Peter L. Woicke

By:
Shengman Zhang 

Washington, D.C.
May 8, 2000

- 31 -

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Mozambique at a glance 

5/9'00

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Low-
income 

Mozambique 

Development diamond

1999
Population, mid-year (milNlons) 
GNP per capita (Alias method, US$) 
GNP (Atlas method US$ bilblons) 

17.3 
230 
4.0 

628 
480 
304 

3.515 
520
1.844

Life expectancy

Avera annual growth, 1993-99

Population %)- 
Labor force (%) 
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1993.99) 
Poverty (% of population below natonal poverty line) 
Urban popultion (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 lIve births) 
Child malnutriton (% of children under 5) 
Access to safe water (% of Popu/ation) 
literacy (% of populahion age 15+) 
Gross ptimary enrollment (% ofschool-age poWatIon) 
Male 
Female 

2.2 
2.4 

2.6 
2.6 

1.7 
1.9 

G 
GNP 

Gr-.
Gpnmary

capita 

enrollment

69
38 
47 
134 
41 
24 
60 
71 
79 
60 

33 
51 
91 

31
63
69

Access to safe water

47 
42 
77 
84 
69 

74
32
108 
113 
103 

Mozambique
Low-income grup

_ 

_

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

197t 

1988 
2.1 
15.1 
8 a1. 
-14.1 
-5.8 

199S 
3.9 
20.4 
11.7 
1.7 
0.8 

1999I_
4.2
35.5 
13.4
11.0
12,8

Economic ratios

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Expofts of goods and serviceslGDP 
Gross domestk savings/GDP 
Gross rational savings/GDP 1/ 

.. 

Trade

Current account balance/GDP 11 
Interest payments paid after reschedulin/GDP 21 
Total debt after rescheduling/GDP 
Total debt service after rescheduling/exports 2. 
Present value of debt after
reschedulinglexports 3/ 41 

-31.4 
1.2 
200.7: 
21.6 

-20.5 
1.5 
204.1 
29.0 

-31.7 
1.5 
1022 
28.0

Domestic
Savings 
Si

i 

Investment

538.0 

202.0

Indebtedness

197848 1989-99 

1998 

1999 2000-04

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

-2.2 
-5.0 

5.7 
3.6 
14.2 

12.0 
9.3 
6,5 

9.0 
6.4 
8.3 

75 
5.S 
26.0 

-

Mozambique
Low-income group

-11.5 

____

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1978 

1988 

1998 

1999 

Growth rates of output and investment (%)
100
so0
so.-
40-
20 

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

42.9 
25.4 

34.3 
20.8 
10.5 
44.9 

31.6 
24.1 
12.6 
44.3 

31.7 

0*

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imnports of goods and services 

103.6 
10.5 
37.3 

89.0 
9.3 
30,5 

78.8 
10.2 
37.9 

.20 

94 

9s 

96 
GDI 

97 

99 
GDP
O

99

197848 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth rates of exports and imports (%)

(average annual gnwth)
AgricuRure 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

4.2 

7.0 
22.9 
7.5 

5.4 
12.6 
16.0 

'0
40
20

8.0 

16.4 

5.7 

9.9 

7.9

0

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

-3.6 
-4.1 
2.2 
-5.7 
-3.1 

3.2 
-5.1 
11.5 
2.2 
5.9 

11.8 
32.2 
29.4 
24.2 
11.8 

8.7 
9.3
83.9 
55.3 
8.6

se 

97 

9s 

99

-40

-Exports 

-Imports

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates. GNP per capita Atlas method for 1999 is not official.
1/ Exduding capital official grants.
21 Including private debt.
3/ Excluding private debt.
4/ As percent of three year moving average of exports of goods and non-factor services.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with Rs income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond
vwll be incomplete.

-32 -

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Mozambique

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domestic prices 

1978 

1988 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)

(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

s0
s0

.. 

58.5 

0.6 
3.8 

2.0 
5.2 

.3248.3 

40

Government finance 

201

(%6 of GDP, includes current grants) 
Currentrevenue 

o

.. 
.. 
.. 

15.9 

15.7 

17.6 

94 

95 

98 

97 

98 

99

Current budget balance 
Overall surplusldeficat 

2.3 
-11.0 

4.3 
-6.5 

5.4 
-6.2 

-

GDP deflator -

cPI

1

TRADE

(US$ miions) 

'1978 

1988 

1998 

1999 

Export and Import levels (US$ millions)

Total exports (fob) 

.. 

103 

248 

260 

1 soo
1,400

Cashew 
Prawn 

49 
16 

27 
44 

41 
73 

35 
75 

1.200

Manufactures 

.. 

0 

14 

20 

1,000

Total imports (cif 

658 

868 

1,346 

sW

Food 

.

.. 

32 

39 

40

Fuel and energy 

84 

86 

200 _____|| 

_ 

||| 

||__ 

__

Capital goods 
Export price index (1995=100) 

.

.. 

211 
95 

307 
97

0

93 94 

9s 

06 

97 

9 

599

.
.
.

99 

Import price index (1995=f100) 
Termsof trade (1995=100) 

82 
120 

88 
108 

89 
108 

D Exports 

D Imports

I_

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(USS millions) 
Exportsofgoodsandservices 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 
Netincome 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

1978 

1988 
188 
730 
-542 
-115 
0 
-657 
682 
-25 

1998 
534 
1,075 
-540 
-256 
0 
-796 
858 
-62 

1999 
559 
1,579 
-1,020 
-303 
0 
-1,322 
1,375 
-53 

Current account balance to GDP ratio (%)

.. 
., 
.

0-_
.- 

93 

94 

|9 

06 

97 

98 

99

-10. 
2
2s -2

I 

r 

I

.. 
., 

.. 

*30 _

.35.
40

.. 
.. 

s -

Memo:

Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, localA.S$) 

.. 

190 
625 
669
524.6 11,850.3 12,691.0

33.0 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1978 

1988 

1998 

1999 I/

(USS millions) 

Compositlon of total debt, 1998 (US$ millions)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 1/ 

0 

4,201 

7,947 

4,260

IBRD 

0 

0 

0 

0 

G: 9
_ 

IDA 
Total debt service paid 1/ 
IBRD 

0 
0 
0 

127 
56 
0 

1,338 
155 
0 

702 
156 
0 

1,338

F: 1,975

C: 204

IDA 

0 

5 

12 

16 

,

Composition of net resource flows 
Official grants 
Official creditors 21 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 

D: 556

.. 

377 
121 
-3 
5 

313 
275 
43 
213 

428
191
344
392

0 
0 

.. 
..

Portfolio equity 

E: 3865

World Bank program

Commitments 3/ 
Disbursements 3/ 
Principal repayments 
Netflows 

0 

75 
44 
4 
40 

186 
134 
3 
131 

176 
218 
6 
212

A - I8RD 
B - IDA 

E - Bilateral
D0- Other multilateral F - Private
G - Short-term

0 
0 
0 

C - IMF 

Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
0 

1 
39 

9 
122 

11
201

5/9/00

1/ After rescheduling in Naples terms. Reflects debt forgiveness under original HIPC Initiative.
2/ Excluding IMF and including debt relief on current payments.
3/ Includes the USS 150 million grant under the Economic Management Reform Operation provided as HIPC Initiative interim assistance.

- 33 -

Annex Bi
Page 1 of 1

CAS Lending Scenarios
Summary of Proposed IDA Program, FY2001-2003, by Case

FY 

Low case 

2001 

Municipal Development (US$30m) 

Lending
Base case 

High case

Roads and Bridges (US$80m) 
Roads and Bridges (US$80m)
Municipal Development (US$30m) 
Municipal Development (US$30m)
Natural Resource Management (UJS$1Om) Natural Resource Management (US$10m)
Economic Management and Private Sector -
EMPSO I- (US$100m)
Energy Reform (US$30m)

Rural Action (USS20m) 

2002 

Roads and Bridges (US$SOm) 

Economic Management and Private Sector -
EMPSO 1- (USS100m)
Energy Reform (US$20m) 
Rural Action (US$40m) 

Rural Action (US$70m)

Public Sector and Legal Reform (US$5 5m)
Skills Development (US$SOm)
Health (US$40m)

2003 

Health (US$40m) 

Skills Development (US$SOm) 
Health (US$40m) 
Public Sector and Legal Reform (US$55m)

EMPSO II (US$100nm)
Energy Development (US$60m)

Activity 

2000 to Support to PRSP 
2003 
Enhanced HIPC 
Public Sector Reforn Study 
Environment Critical Pressures 
Public Expenditure Review 
Legal and Judicial Study 
Poverty and Growth Linkages 
Constraints to Private Sector 
HIV/AIDS 
Disaster Mitigation and Management 
Support Global Distance Leaming
Network (WBI) 
Support Schoonet World Links for
Development (WBI) 

Municipal Development Programs and
AFRICITIES pilots (WBI) 
Financial Sector Advice 
Regional Energy and Mega Projects 
Advice
Maputo Corridor Advice 
Private Sector Competitiveness Advice 

Regional Trade 
Enviromental Framework Assessment 
Private Sector Conference TA 
Country Assistance Strategy 

Nonlending

Low case 

Base and high case

yes 
yes 
yes 

yes 

yes 
yes 
yes 

yes 

yes 

yes 
yes 

yes 

yes 

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes

yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes

- 34 -

Annex B2

Page 1 of 1

Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number c c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a d 
Disbursement Ratio (%/.) e 
Potfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Total Supervision Resources ('000 US$) 
Average Supervision ('000 US$/project) 

1997 

18.0 
4.8 
16.7 
12.1 
38.9 
32.1 
19.4 

yes 
2504.1 
139.1 

1998 

1999 

2000

15.0 
5.1 
0.0 
0.0 
6.7 
2.7 
18.5 

13.0 
4.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
22.9 

15.0
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
15.6

yes 
2049.6 
136.6 

yes 
1509.6 
116.1 

yes
1680.0
112.0

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 
17 
974.3 
17.6 
8.8 

Last Five FYs
13
734.8
23.1
11.7

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: investment projects only.

- 35 -

Annex B3
Page 1 of 2

Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed 1BRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Programa

Fiscalyear Project 

Strategic 

Implementation

US$(m) Rewardsb Risks(HIMILb

(HIMIL) 

Rik(HM)b

2001 

2002 

2003 

Roads and Bridges APL 
Municipal Development 
Natural Resource Management 
Total 

Energy Reform 
Economic Management and Private
Sector Operation 
Rural Action 
Total 

Skills Development 
Health SWAP 
Public Sector and Legal Reform 
Total 

TOTAL 

80 
30 
10 
120

20 

100 
40 
160

80 
40 
55 
175

455

H 
H 
M 

H 

H 
H 

H 
H 
H 

M
M
M

M

M
H

M
M
H

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. (H) indicates high; (M), moderate; and (L), low.

- 36 -

IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1997-2000

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

1997 

1998 

123.7 

0.5 

0.0 
2.0 
1.0 
0.0 
97.0 

55.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
45.0 

1999 

11.1 

0.0 
92.0 
6.0 
2.0 
0.0 

2000

3.1

81.0
19.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

100.0 

100.0 

100.0 

100.0

IFC approvals (US$m) 

Sector (%)

Finantial services 
Food and agro-business 
Hotels and tourism 
Infrastructure 
Manufacturing 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other 

Total 

47.0 
0.0 
53.0 
0.0 

45.0 
55.0 
0.0 
0.0 

100.0 

100.0 

40.0 
1.0 
40.0 
1.0 

100.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

100.0 

2.8 
2.0 
42.8 
3.0 

19.0
81.0
0.0
0.0

100.0

0.0
0.0
42.8
3.0

0.0
0.0

0.0

MIGA guarantees approved (US$m) 
Number of guarantees approved 
MIGA outstanding guarantees (US$m) 
Number of guarantees outstanding 

Sector (%)

Agribusiness, Manufacturing and Tourism
Manufacturing 
Tourism 

Total 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 

100.0 
0.0 

100.0 

0.0 
100.0 

100.0 

- 37 -

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

Summary of Nonlending Services

Product 

Completion FY 

Cost (USSOOO) 

Audience' 

Objective

Recent completions

PFP 

FY99 

70 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation

H[PC Completion Point 

FY99 

90 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation

Enhanced HIPC Decision Point 

FY00 

90 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policv orientation

Intenm PRSP Support 

FY00 

70 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation

Flood Emergency./Damage Assessment 

FY00 

75 

Govenfment, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation; problem solving

Underway

Growth Prospects 

FY00 

55 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation; problem solving;
public debate
Policy orientation; public debate

Country Assistance Strategy 

FY00 

230 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Financial Sector Study 

FY00 

157 

Government, Bank 

Policy orientation

Rural Development Strategy 

FY00 

115 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation; problem solving;
public debate

Planned
Fonnal
PRSP Support 

Annual 

340 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation, problem solving,
public debate
Policy orientation; public debate

Enhanced HIPC Completion Point 

FY01 

85 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Public Sector Reform Study 

FY01 

155 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation; public debate

Public Expenditure Review 

FY01 

150 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation; problem solving;
public debate
Policy orientation; problem solving;
public debate
Policy orientation; problem solving;
public debate
Policy orientation; problem solving,
public debate
Policy orientation; problem solving

Environment Critical Pressures 

FY02 

200 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Constraints to Private Sector Development 

FY02 

170 

Govemment, Bank, Donors, Public 

Legal and Judicial Study 

FY02 

150 

Government, Bank, Donors 

Poverty and Growth Linkages 

FY03 

150 

Government, Bank, Donors 

Country Assistance Strategy 

FY03 

230 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation; public debate

Informal (Policv advice and TA)

Private Sector Competitiveness 

Ongoing 

150 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation; problem solving;
public debate
Policy orientation; problem solving;
public debate
Policy orientation; problem solving

Private Sector Conference TA 

Ongoing 

30 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Financial Sector Advice 

Ongoing 

120 

Government, Bank 

Regional Energy and Mega Projects Advice 

Ongoing 

150 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation; problem solving

Maputo Corridor 

Ongoing 

80 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation; problem solving

Regional Trade 

Ongoing 

85 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation, problem solving

Environmental Framework Assessment 

FY01 

90 

Govenmment, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation; problem solving

Disaster Mitigation and Management 

Ongoing 

50 

Govemment, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation; problem solving

Other

HRV/AIDS 

Ongoing 

ID 

Government, Bank, Donors, Public 

Policy orientation; problem solving;
public debate

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemnination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

- 38 -

Annex B5
Page 1 of I

Poverty and Social Development Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region

1970-75 

1980-85 

1992-98 

10.5 
2.2 
8.6 
6.5 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
GDP per capita based on PPP 
Telephone mainlines (per 1,000 people) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS

Illiteracy rate
(96 of population 15 years of age and above)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Gross primary enrollment rate
Total 
Male 
Female 
Repetition rate 
Access to safe water
(% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(%6 under 12 months)
Measles 
OPT 

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Wasted 
Stunting 

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 
HIV-AIDS
Sero-prevalence of adult HIV infection (per 100K) 

42 
41 
44 

168 
281 

498 
382 

., 

.. 

13.5 
2.3 
19.4 
6.5 

.. 
.. 
.. 

250 

.. 

71 
56 
86 

62 

33 

9 
82 
2 

39 
29 

.. 
.. 

44 
43 
46 

133 
223 

468 
361 

.. 

.. 

16.9 
2.1 
38.0 
5.3 

69.4
62.0
71.3

230 
877 
4 

60 
43 
75 

71 
79 
60 
25

24 
44 
12 

70 
61 

6

41

47 

.. 
.. 

134 
201 

400 
354 
1,100

14.5 

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

612.4 
2.2 
33.0 
5.4 

480 
1,566
16

42 
34
50

77 
84 
69 

47 
74
32

58 
53 

51 
49 
52 

91 
147 

432 
383 

7

Low-
income

2,035.6
1.7
31.0
3.1

520

32

108
113
103

74

80
82

63
62
64

69
92

235
208

al Refers to 1999.
1999 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank; African Development Indicators 2000, World Bank; and, Africa Briefings, World Bank.

- 39 -

Annex B6
Page 1 of 3

Mozambique - Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)

Gross domestic product' 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100

Agriculture 

30 

38 

38 

35 

34 

32 

32 

30 

29 

28

Industry 

23 

19 

19 

19 

21 

24 

25 

26 

26 

27

Services 

47 

43 

43 

46 

45 

44 

43 

44 

45 

45

Total Consumption 

114 

102 

102 

98 

98 

89 

90 

91 

88 

87

Gross domestic fixedinvestmient 

20 

23 

19 

19 

20 

35 

35 

22 

19 

20

Governmentiinvestment 

14 

12 

10 

11 

9 

11 

15 

13 

10 

11

Private investment 

6 

11 

9 

8 

11 

25 

20 

9 

9 

9

(includes increase in stocks)

Exports (GNFS)b 

14 

15 

15 

13 

12 

13 

14 

18 

24 

23

Imports (GNFS) 

48 

40 

36 

30 

30 

38 

38 

31 

32 

30

Grossdomesticsavings 

-14 

-2 

-2 

2 

2 

11 

10 

9 

12 

13

Gross national savings 

-7 

-2 

-3 

2 

1 

13 

11 

7 

9 

11

Memorandum items

Grossdomestic product 

2267 

2392 

2842 

3438 

3893 

4169 

4317 

4543 

5024 

5514

(US$ million at cun-ent prices)

GNPpercapita(US$,Atlasmethod) 

140 

140 

160 

180 

210 

230 

250 

250 

260 

280

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)

Grossdomestioproductatmarketprices 

7.5 

4.3 

7.1 

11.3 

12.0 

9.0 

5.4 

7.9 

8.2 

7.4

GrossDomesticlncome 

2.3 

6.7 

6.3 

11.9 

12.9 

14.1 

4.3 

7.5 

7.3 

8.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)

Gross domestic product at market prices 

5.1 

2.0 

4.7 

8.9 

9.5 

6.8 

3.5 

5.5 

5.8 

5.0

Total consumption 

-10.5 

-8.0 

4.3 

6.0 

10.8 

6.5 

0.8 

3.3 

1.3 

3.8

Private consumption 

-10.9 

-4.5 

4.7 

5.9 

9.4 

6.5 

-0.8 

4.7 

2.8 

3.6

(Continued)

- 40 -

Annex B6
Page 2 of 3

Mozambique - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)

Exports (GNFS? 

355 

407 

479 

509 

534 

559 

585 

832 

1202 

1282

Merchandise FOB 

164 

174 

226 

230 

248 

260 

285 

511 

840 

885

Imports (GNFS)b 

1018 

899 

955 

938 

1075 

1579 

1653 

1396 

1590 

1663

Merchandise CIF 

881 

727 

783 

760 

868 

1346 

1317 

1092 

1226 

1299

Resource balance 

-662 

-492 

-475 

-429 

-540 

-1020 

-1068 

-564 

-388 

-381

Net currenttransfers 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

Current account balance after all grants 

-300 

-338 

-422 

-298 

-483 

-895 

-845 

-500 

-387 

-355

Net private foreigndirect 

investment 

35 

45 

73 

64 

213 

392 

104 

80 

101 

122

Long-termloans(net) 

-24 

19 

175 

116 

57 

242 

190 

-86 

-175 

-184

Official 

145 

-29 

100 

49 

17 

-113 

20 

-120 

-132 

-119

Private 

-169 

48 

76 

67 

40 

355 

170 

34 

-43 

-65

Other capital (net, mcil. errors & ommissions and debt 

341 

333 

333 

232 

275 

313 

462 

456 

410 

398

Change in reservesd 

-52 

-60 

-159 

-115 

-62 

-53 

89 

50 

50 

19

Memorandum 

items

Resource balance (% of GDP) 

-29.2 

-20.6 

-16.7 

-12.5 

-13.9 

-24.5 

-24.7 

-12.4 

-7.7 

-6.9

Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)

Merchandise exports (FOB) 

23.4 

-2.9 

31.0 

1.7 

13.0 

2.4 

7.2 

95.2 

73.1 

1.3

Primary 

5.2 

-5.9 

53.5 

-6.9 

1.4 

3.2 

9.4 

2.6 

2.7 

2.7

Manufactures 

-55.5 

43.4 

58.0 

149.0 

-31.2 

35.7 

-2.5 

2.8 

3.0 

3.3

Merchandise imports (CIF) 

3.0 

-25.3 

8.2 

5.7 

19.3 

52.0 

-4.3 

-17.5 

10.7 

4.5

(Continued)

- 41 -

Annex B6
Page 3 of 3

Mozambique - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'

Currentrevenues 

17.8 

15.0 

13.8 

16.0 

15.7 

176 

17.6 

16.0 

15.3 

15.3

Current expenditures 

14.7 

10.3 

9.6 

10.8 

11.4 

12.3 

13.5 

12.1 

10.8 

10.9

Currentaccountsurplus(+)ordeficit() 

3.0 

4.7 

4.2 

5.3 

4.3 

5.4 

4.1 

3.9 

4.5 

4.4

Capital expenditure 

15.8 

14.0 

11.5 

13.2 

10.6 

11.7 

15.6 

12.7 

10.3 

10.4

Foreign financing 

13.7 

10.0 

8.5 

10.8 

8.8 

6.5 

9.9 

7.4 

5.2 

5.5

Monetary indicators

M2/GDP 

23.7 

23.1 

18.6 

18.7 

18.9 

21.6 

21.4 

21.4 

21.4 

21.4

GrowthofM2(%) 

57.6 

54.7 

21.1 

24.4 

17.6 

30.9 

15.4 

13.3 

13.6 

13.6

Price lndices( YR95 =100)

Merchandiseexportpriceindex 

87.6 

95.9 

95.0 

95.0 

90.7 

92.8 

95.0 

87.1 

82.7 

86.1

Merchandiseimportpriceindex 

121.6 

134.3 

133.7 

122.8 

117.7 

120.0 

122.6 

123.2 

125.1 

126.8

Merchandis. terms of trade index 

72.1 

71.4 

71.1 

77.3 

77.1 

77.3 

77.5 

70.7 

66.1 

67.9

Real exchange rate (US$/LCUJ 

52.2 

49.9 

57.3 

62.4 

64.3 

64.3 

66.8 

68.9 

68.4 

67.8

Consumer price index (% change) 

63.1 

54.4 

44.6 

6.4 

0.6 

2.0 

9.5 

5.0 

5.0 

5.0

GDPdeflator(%change) 

59.4 

52.0 

40.9 

11.1 

3.8 

5.2 

10.2 

5.7 

5.0 

5.0

a. GDP at factor cost

b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."

c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.

d. Includes use of IMF resources.

e. Consolidated central govenunent.

f "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$9LCU denotes appreciation.

- 42 -

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Mozambique - Key Exposure Indicators

Debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
of which: Public 

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

Total debt service paid (TDS) (US$m)a 
of which: Public 

8689 

9129 

7731 

7730 

7947 

4260 

4106 

4179 

4174 

4149

6968 

7360 

5885 

5818 

5972 

1928 

1480 

1501 

1527 

1550

156 

117 
117 

4 

162 

138 

70 

254 

334 

-79 

-126 

-158

128 
128 

139 
135 

106 
90 

155 
104 

156 
86 

176 
50 

179 
48 

222 
51 

254.2
54

Debt and debt service indicators a

(%/-)

TDO/XGSb 
of which: PublicTDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
of which: Public TDO/GDP 
TDSXGSb 
of which: Public TDS/XGSb 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IDATDO((US$m) 
IDATDS(US$m) 
IDATDS /PublicDS 

IFC (US$m) c
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity 

2447.1 2243.8 1612.9 1519.6 1487.1 
1962.2 1808.9 1227.8 1143.6 1117.5 
383.3 
381.6 
272.1 
224.8 
204.1 
307.4 
307.6 
207.1 
169.2 
153.4 
33.0 
31.3 
28.9 
20.7 
29.0 
33.0 
31.3 
28.2 
17.6 
20.0 

761.9 
344.9 
102.2 
46.2 
28.0 
15.3 

701.8 
252.9 
95.1 
34.3 
30.1 
9.1 

502.5 
180.5 
92.0 
33.0 
21.5 
5.8 

347.2 323.58
127.0 120.89
83.1 75.241
30.4 28.109
18.4 19.828
4.2 
4.2

714.0 
4.2 
3.6 

890.0 1015.0 1162.0 1338.0 
6.1 
7.3 
9.4 
12.0 
4.8 
5.4 
10.5 
11.5 

702.0 
16.5 
12.7 

865.0 
9.5 
19.0 

990.0 
10.6 
22.0 

1164.0 1285.1
11.5 
14.0
22.6 
25.9

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

0.0 
0.0 

5.1 
0.0 

3.3 
5.0 

7.4 
32.8 

19.4
28.5

a. After rescheduling and HIPC Iniciative relief including debt forgiveness. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt,
non-guaranteed use of IMF credits and shost term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and non-factor services.
c. Refers to disbursements from previous July I to June 30 of year where data is shown. Data for 1997 refers to disbursements from
1992 to June 30, 1997. Data for 2000 refers to disbursements from Julyl,1999 to March 30,2000.

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

Closed
Projects 

17

Board 
Date 
Fiscal 
Year 
1992 
1993 
1993 
1993 
1994 
1994 
1994 
1996 
1998 
1999 
1999 
1999 
2000 
2000 
2000 

ctive Projects 

P001781 Agr. Serv. Rehab. 
P001797 Capacity Building 
P001810 Legal&PublicSectorCapacityBuilding 
P001796 Rural Rehabilitation 
P001804 
2nd. Road and Costal 
P001811 Financial Sector Capacity 
P001780 Gas Engeneering 
P001792 Health Sector Recovery 
P039015 National Water I 
P001799 Agricultural Sector Expenditure Program 
P001786 Education Sector Strategic Program(ESSP) 
P052240 NationalWaterII 
P049874 Enterprise Development 
P042039 Railway and Port Restructuring 
P070432 Flood Emergency Recovery Project(FERP) 
Total 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 
Development 
ImDlementation
Obiectfves 
Progress 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

Oriminal Amount in US$ Millions 

IBRD 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

IDA CanceL Undisb. 
35.0 
12.5 
6.8 
48.6 
0.0 
8.2 
15.5 
3.0 
0.5 
20.0 
0.0 
1.7 
188.0 
0.0 
60.4 
9.0 
0.0 
2.2 
30.0 
0.0 
8.6 
98.7 
0.0 
61.1 
36.0 
0.0 
31.5 
30.0 
0.0 
28.7 
71.0 
0.0 
67.5 
75.0 
0.0 
74.5 
26.0 
0.0 
25.8 
100.0 
0.0 
99.2 
30.0 
0.0 
29.8 
812.8 
15.5 
506.4 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements aI

Orig. Frm Rev'd
18.3 
3.0
9.7 
0.0
3.5 
0.8
1.5 
0.8
55.5 
0.0
2.0 
0.0 
8.6 
0.0
58.9 
0.0
6.1 
0.0
6.8 
0.0
7.1 
0.0
1.4 
0.0
0.0 
0.0
0.0 
0.0
0.0 
0.0
179.3 
4.6

-

- 44 -

Mozambique
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 3/31/00
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

Partic 

Loan 
0.26 
0.18 
1.86 
0 
0 
2.35 
55.00 
10.30 
1.40 
1.00 
0.73 
0.58 
0.24 
0.21 

Equity Quasi 
0 
0 
0 
7.50 
0.30 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
65.00 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

Loan 
0.26 
0.18 
1.86 
0 
0 
2.35 
27.0 
0 
1.40 
1.00 
0.73 
0.30 
0 
0.21 

Equity Quasi 
0 
0 
0 
7.50 
0.30 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
58.50 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

Partic

0
0
0
0
0
0
()
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

FY Apprn Company 
1995 AEFBonar 
1996 AEF CahoraBassa 
1997 Agrimo 
1996/00 BIM 
1998 BIM-INV 
1996 CajuMocita 
1997 MOZAL 
1999 Maragra Sugar 
1992 Polana Hotel 
1997 SEF CPZ 
1997 SEFCTOX 
2000 SEFCaboCaju 
1998 SEF Joao Jamal 
1999 SEFROBEIRA 

Total Portfolio: 

74.1 

7.8 

65.0 

0.0 

35.3 

7.8 

58.5 

0.0

Approvals Pending Commitment

1997 AEFAfristem 
1996 BIM 
1999 SEF CTN 
1999 SEF Extramac 

Loan 

Equity Quasi 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0.6 
10.0 
0.7 
0.4 

Total Pending Commitment: 

11.7 

0 

Partic

0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0
0
0
0

0

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE 

Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)

Annex B9
Page 1 of 12

Development 
Objectives 

Diagnosis 

.____________ 

Government. 
Strategy/Actions 

I 

Selected Bank (underlined) 
and Governmenit

Performance Indicators

Bank Group Instruments 

Other Donors

Bilateral Donors: Austria;
Denmark; France (AFD); Italy;
Netherlands; Norway; Sweden;
UK; USAID

Multilateral Donors: ADB; EC;
UNIDO

* 

SEAtOR,Nt 

IDA 
Lendin: 

AD) THE 
FIANCIAL 
SECTOR 

Private Sector Op. (FY02) 

SMUGTHEN7NA 0* Growth averaged more 
THE PRIuVATE 
than 10% in past 3 years; 
SEC7OR 
inflation down from 48% in 
1996 to low single digits. 
* About 1,200 
companies restructured or 
privatized. 
* 
Sound prospects for 
growth - esp. in agriculture, 
manufacturing, tourism, 
services, energy, mining, 
* 
Sharp increases in FDI 
and more interest expressed * 
Improve institutional and 
by investors. 
regulatory environment for 
* Fiscal sustainability an private sector development. 
issue: economy and budget 
* Develop and implement 
heavily aid dependent- 
regulatory framework enabling 
fiscal revenues low; and 
effective demonopolization in 
debt level remains high. 
key sectors (e.g. transport, 
telecommunications, energy).
* Economy has high 
, 
operating cost due to poor 
* Continue liberalization of 
infrastructure, bureaucratic 
trade regime to stimulate private 
bottlenecks, inadequate 
sector development. 
institutional and regulatory 
frameworks. 
* Demonopolization of 
key sectors needed to lower
costs and improve services. 

.L INCREASING ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY
* Reduce fiscal imbalances 
Poverty headcount index 
by increasing revenues: finish 
reduced to 60% by 2004, from 
customs reform, strengthen 
70% in 1996/97. 
VAT, limit tax and customs 
* Annual real GDP growth of 
exemptions, and improve 
7% to 10% and inflation of 5% to
internal tax administration. 
7%, for the period 2001-2003. 
* Natural Resource (FY01) 
.
Aim government programs 
* 
Fiscal deficit before grants 
Energy Reform (FY02) 
(esp. in infrastructure) at 
within annual limits established 
Public Sector and Legal
improving growth and poverty 
under PRGF arrangement with the Reform project (FY03)
reduction through stimulating 
IMF. 
Portfolio:
private sector development and
service delivery. 
* Reduction in external debt in 
Economic Management
NPV terms to the equivalent of 
Reform Operation (EMRO)
150 percent of exports (at end-
1998 data) by achieving 
Private Enterprise
completion point under Enhanced Development Project (PODE)
HIPC framework. 
* 
Financial Sector Cap. Bldg.
Flood Emergency Recovery
Program (FERP)
Non-Lendine:
PER and Incidence Analysis
0 LgladJdca 
td
Legal and Judicial Study
Poverty and Growth Links
PRSP Support
Enhanced HIPC Initiative
Financial Sector (informal)

* 

* 
* 

* 

* 
* 

* 
* 

* 

* 

* 

.__ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
_ _ __ 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 

_ 

* 

Private Sector
Competitiveness Advice
* Constraints to PSD Study
* Regional Trade (informal)
* Regional Energy and Mega

Projects advice

Performance indicators to be reviewed and revised as necessary following formulation of full PRSP, scheduled for completion in March 2001.

Develo.pme|t 

.

Di nosis 

eied)et 

B k G u n 

e1 

O 

D

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE 

Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)

Annex B9

Page 2 of 12

SJNCtOtR 0 
ENvt.ONMI0wJ 

f f f f 

FIA: 

E  

ffi 

; 

* 

Private financial sector * Maintaining the stability of 
includes 11 banks, a leasing 
the financial system; improving 
company, and 7 other 
financial oversight through 
:financial institutions. 
enhanced and proactive 
* Regulations adopted 
supervision. 
on licensing, capital 
* Assessment of causes of 
adequacy, and exposure 
high intermediation costs with a
limits. 
view to reducing costs. 
0* High intermediation 
* Broadening the financial 
system to increase range of 
costs, including 
inefficiencies in some 
products and services available 
banks and limited 
and lower the cost of capital 
competition for bankable 
through competition. 
credits, contributing to high 
lending rates. 
* Access to credit 
limited outside main cities, 
esp. in rural areas. 
Poor accounting 
standards, contract 
enforcement. 

0 

* 

IFC
Expansion of IFC Project
Finance
* 
Financing and advisory
services for megaprojects
* 
SME financing/advisory
services

* 

a 

FIAS 

advisory 
services on
r
e Equity investments, tertn
resources and technical assistance
to banks
Investments in new non-
bank financial intermediaries,
including microfinance, leasing,
insurance, and housing finance
* Advisory assistance on
regulatory and financial sector
issues

MIGA
* Guarantees for foreign
investors
Investment marketing

assistance 

to CPI

* 

________:______::________________ 

MIGA: 
Strategv: MIGA seeks to strengthen Mozambique 'sprivate sector 
by supporting projects with high development impact and those 
investment intermediaries charged with attractingforeign direct 
investment. 

IFC:
StrateIvF >EC is seeking opportunities across all sectors, with emphasis placed on financing and advisory assistance in
infrastructure; term resources, equity and institution building in the financial sector; support to well-conceived large
scale resource development projects; andfinancing, management, and technical assistance to SMEs. SME support has
been concentrated in the agribusiness and tourism sectors.

Port olio: MIGA 's portfolio consists of three guarantee contracts 
in the manufacturing and tourism sectors with a US$42.8 m Gross 
Exposure, of which MIGA 's Net Exposure is IUS$30.8 m. MIGA is 
also working on a possible U)S$ 75 m power project. 

Portfolio: IFC's Mozambique portfolio is dominated by Mozal Aluminum; with other mainstream investments in the
Polana hlotel, Banco de Investimentos de Mozambique, Maragra Sugar, Caju Mocita, Agrimo; and SME investments
in Bonar Sociedad Pesqueria Ltd., Cahora Bassa Fisheries, Companhia Agro-Pecuaria de Mozambique Lda.,
Companhia de Pescas da Zambezia Lda., Complexi de Xai-Xai, Joao Jamal, Cabo Caiju, and ROBEIRA.

Investment Marketing Services: MIGIM will continue its support of 
the Investment Promotion Center and the World Bank-funded 
technical program over the next three years. 

Pipeline: Projects in development include privatization of the nationai telecommunications company, industrial park
development in Maputo, other investments arising from the development of the three transport corridors, term finance
to the banking sector, equity in leasing and microfinance institutions, and a range of SME investments in agribusiness,
tourism, services and manufacturing.

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE 

Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)

Dvelopment 
Objectives 

Diagnosis 

Goverunent 
Strategy/Actions 

Slected Bank (underlIned) Book Group Xstruetits 
and Government
Performance Indicators

Annex B9
Page 3 of 12

Other Donors

Roads 

DEmoPI 

1Ni~SThtiCflJki? * Network poor but 

improving; many densely 
populated and productive 
areas not connected. 
.* Road management and 
maintenance very weak and 
underfunded. 
* National road 
construction industry weak. 

Railways and Ports 

* Rail and port network 
largest in SSA after South 
Africa; significant potential 
for foreign exchange and 
employment. 
* Railway performance 
1/3 of pre-war level; 
infrastructure damaged. 
.
* CFM over-staffed and 
institutionally weak. 
* Regulatory framework 
inadequate. 
* Main ports and rail
lines under concessioning

agreements. 

IDA 

LendinF 

Lendine: 
* Roads and Bridges (FY01) 
Portfolio: 

Bilateral Donors: Denmark;
~KfW; Kuwait Fund; Norway;
France (CFD); Ireland; Japan;
Portugal; South Africa; Sweden;
Switzerland; UK; USAID

* ROCS II
Non-Lendine: 
* Maputo Corridor (informal 
policy advice) 
PRSP Support

* 

Multilateral Donors: ADB;
BADEA; EC; IFAD; Islamic
Development Bank; OPED;

* 

* 

* 

* 

* Expand links to agricultural * Meet annual targets on 
areas; secure access to ports; 
kilometers under routine and 
upgrade international corridors; 
periodic maintenance (targets to
improve coastal network for 
be determined). 
tourism; improve North-South 
Establish Road Board that is 
transport routes. 
independent of ANE. 
Improve sustainability of 
Financing and allocation 
road rehabilitation. 
functions (under road fund! 
Improve road maintenance. 
separated from manazement of
Increase private sector 
contracts and supervision of
involvement in road 
construction and maintenance.
maintenance. 
* Reduce proportion of
* 
Improve institutional 
impassable roads to 6% in 2003
framework for sustained, 
(from 10% in 1998).
efficient, and transparent road 
* Reduce proportion of roads
management. 
in poor conditions to 26% in 2003
(from 32% in 1998).

* 

Bilateral Donors: France (MCF);
Italy; Spain; USAID

* 

* 

IDA 
Portfolio 
Implement fourfold 
Traffic from the neighboring * Railway and Port
strategy: i) involve private 
countries to exceed 10 million 
Restructuring
sector, through concessioning, 
tons (port) and 7 million tons
leasing equipment, joint ventures (railways) by year 2002.
and BOT arrangements; ii) 
* Concessions for all three 
restructure CFM; iii) strengthen main port and rail systems fully 
Ministry of Transport and 
operationalized by end 2001. 
Communications; iv) provide 
p 
appropriate regulatory 
framework 

* 

IFC
Financing for private
concessionaires
conce 
ssionaires
* Advisory assistance on
privatization/concessioning
* Workshop on international
practice in private provision of
infrastructure

._

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE 
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)

Annex B9

Page 4 of 12

0 

00 .^ ~~Energy 

IDA 

Bilateral Donors: Denmark;

* 

Power grids limited to 

((.i'QNT. cities. 

* 

* Export potential large 
(coal and hydroelectricity). 
....and policy development 
Regulatory reform, 
slow due to weak capacity. 
* Low household access 
to energy. 

* Undertake power sector 
* Desien and implement 
structural and pricing reforms. 
framework for expansion of 
electricity access. including 
regionallv differentiated tariffs 
* Establish autonomous 
licensing and regulatory systems 
and separation of generation. 
for energy investments, incl. 
transmission, and distribution
megaprojects. 
triffs. 
* 
Implement national 
* 
Increase revenues from
investment plan for community- electricity exports (from US$ 36.2 
based biofuel supply 
million in 1998). 
management. 
Inraeacs 
Invest in public and private 
sector capacity-building efforts. 

Increase access to electricity

oeetiiy 

0 

* 

over the period 2000-2003 (from 
5% of households in 1999) 
(Quantitative target to be
established over PRSP process).

Water 

Urban water supply 
poor, of low quality and 
reliability; sanitation and 
drainage cause additional 
problems. 
.: g X * 
Low rural access to 
Lowrurl 
aces 
to 
afe water, and poor 
maintenance. 
* Need for regional 
.. j S ! S! $.5\ S .... water resource 
management. 

* 

Implement National Water 
Policy, including: i) increased 
beneficiary participation; ii) 
decentralized autonomous water
supply and sanitation services; 
iii) integrated water resources 
management; iv) capacity 
building; vi) increased role for 
the private sector. 

........ 

* Urban: Increase access to P 
safe water in maior cities to 50% 
by 2004 (from 44% in 1998): 

* 

Rural: Increase rural access 
to safe water to 40% by 2004 
(fom 12%e inte 198) 40%Sbpport4NDP; 
(from 12% in 1998). 
* 
Wae Rsure
Water Resources
Management: : National Water 
Policy and Water Law updated. 
National Water Resources 
Management Strategv formulated 
with strong stakeholder 
participation, by 2004.

Norway; Sweden; USAID

Multilateral Donor: ADB

Bilateral Donors: AusAID;

Austria; Canada; Denmark;
Finland; France (AFD); Germany;
Italy; KfW ; Netherlands; NDF;
Portugal; Sweden; Switzerland;
USAID

Multilateral Donors: ADB; EC;
UNICEF

* Energy Reform (FY02) 
Prtfolio
* Gas Engineering
Non-Lending

* PRSP Support

IFC
* Financing for private
providers

* Advisory assistance on
privatization

IDA 
Portfolio 
National Water I 
* National Water 11 

Non-Lending

PRSP Support

IFC
* Financing for private
operators
* Advisory assistance on
privatization

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE 

Country Program Matrix 

(FYO1-03)

Annex B9

Page 5 of 12

Development 
Objectives 

Diagnosis 

Governsut 
Strategy/Actions 

Selected Dank (underlined) 
and Government
Perfortnance Indicators 

Bank Group Instruments 

Other Dopors

:

PRiOOlG 

80% of Mozambicans 
RURAL 
live in rural areas, of whom 
DEYBEtoWM&w' 70% are poor. 

* 

* Rural developmcnt central 
to poverty reduction strategy; 
elements include (i) investment 

* Annual percentage increase 
in agricultural GDP. 
* Annual 
rcentage increase 

IDA 
Lendin-: 
Roads and Bridges (FY01) 

Bilateral Donors: AusAID;
Austria; Denmark; Finland;
aNet(AFD); Germany; Ireland

AGRXLTUE 

Agriculture dominates 
in infrastructure; (ii) service 
AD me 
rural economy; only 32% 
delivery, incl. agricultural 
ofra GDP,obut olarg p20otnil 
extension; (iii) establishing good 
of GDP, but large potential; pocy, institutional and 
only15% f aablelan 
polcy,insttutonalandlivestock 
cultivated. 
regulatory frameworks. 
* Cereals and cassava 
* 
Improve effectiveness of 
production exceeds national public service delivery and 
needs, but there are inter- 
regulatory functions through 
regional differences. 
implementing PROAGRI. 
* Half of households 
* 
Implement and enforce new 
market output; of these, 
lad law. 
only 30% of output sold. 
Promote decentralization to
* Constraints to growth 
improve service delivery and 
include: low capitalization; empower rural poor. 
limited access to purchased 
inputs; lack of land market; 
poor rural infrastructure;
limited access to credit, 

* 

in real value of export crops 
i 
* Annual percentage increase 
in smallholders' crop and 
sales. 

Rural Action (FY02) 
0 Eeg 
eom(Y2 
Energy Reform (FY02)
Portfolio:

* 

* Rural Rehabilitation Project 
* Agricultural Services
Rehabilitation Project
* PROAGRI
* ROCS II
National Water Dev. I

Non-Lendint: S
* Rural Development Strategy
Poverty and Growth Links
* Public'Expenditure Review

* 

* 

PRSP Support

IFC
* Investments in large- and
small-scale agribusiness

Portugal; Sweden; Switzerland;
UK; USNID
K SI

Multilateral Donors: ADB;EC;
FAO; IBIS; IFAD; SADC; UNDP

Annex B9

Page 6 of 12

Other o

Bilateral Donors: Denmark;

Finland; Netherlands; Norway;
USAID

Deielopment 

* 

' Diagnosis 
Objectives 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE 
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)
Government 
Selettd Biak (underlind) 
and Govenet
A PerfomneIdctr

StrategylAc~~~~~~tious 

Bank Group nstr umets 

ENS VA NO SOUND 

ENVIRONMJ0WTRL 

* Rich endowment 

largely unexploited. 

* Complete legal framework 

for environmental management 

and elaborate complementary 
regulations, including for waste 
management, environmental 
management, marine pollution. 
Establish environmental 
assessment review system across 
ministries and build capacity to 

implement and enforce, 

* 

* Develop water resource 

managementprogram, 

with a view to disaster 

including 

prevention and mitigation. 

0 

X 

0* Natural resources 
contribute 45% of GDP and 
of exports; important 
70% 
to rural populations. 
0* Rapid growth could 
threaten environment if not 
appropriately managed. 
* 
Interdependence with 

neighboring countries high, 

esp. in water resources. 

* Weak institutional 

capacity to manage natural

resources through policy 
formulation, regulation, and 
enforcement. 

* Regulations adopted by end- 

2000 that apply to the 
environment law (including on 
waste management, 
environmental standards, marine 
pollution, CFC emission, and 
protected areas). 
Environmental assessment 
review system established across

ministries and related capacity- 

* 

building plan under 

Implementation.

i 

IDA and GEF 

Lending- 
R 
A 
in FY02 
* 
ura 
chon (F 
)
* Municipal Dev. (FYOI)
* Natural Resource
Management (FY01)
Portfolio:

TasrnirCnevto

Coastal and Marine

Boiest

* National Water l and II

* 

PROAGRI

* 

Non-Lending:
Environment Critical
Pressures
Environmental Framework
* 

Assessment

I 

PRSP Support

IFC

* 
Extension of World Bank
standards to private sector and

financial 

intermediaries

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE 
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)

Annex B9

Page 7 of 12

Dlevelopment 

Objectives 

Diagnosis 

Government 

Strategy/Actions 

Selected Bank (utnderlined) 

and Government
Performance Indicators *

Bank Group Instruments 

Other Donors

PRoxfM'oU 

* 

Local firms have 

* 

Created new Ministry of 

* Develop and implement 

,"V,VO VA f lox, 
limited ability to compete, Higher Education, Science, and 
(.70.PF.nDVENF&.s esp. internationally. 
Technology 

strategies for vocational, 
technical, and higher level 

IDA 

Lendin2: 

S 

ANPLOD MrNT 

Few local firms are 
EmPLOYMENT competing in markets other 
than most basic products. 

a 

s Develop and implement 
strategies for technical and 
vocational training as well as 
higher education 
* 
Skills shortage is 
* 
Support entrepreneurs with 
constraining employment of matching grant scheme. 
Mozambicans.
* 
Promote interbusiness 
linkages. 
* Build capacity among local 
entrepreneurs in sectoral 
programs: e.g. road construction. 

* Education system and 
curricula not meeting labor 
market needs. 

education (specific indicators to 
be established under PRSP). 
Increase employment and 
job creation (specific indicators to 
be established under PRSP). 

* 

a Municipal Dev. (FY01I) 

Portfolio:

* 

PODE 
* ESSP
* ROCS 11
* Human Resources Cap.
Bldg.

Non-Lendine:
* Constraints to PSD Study
* PRSP Support

Bilateral Donors: AusAID;

Austria; Canada; Finland; France
(MCF) Germany Italy Japan
Netherlands Spain; Sweden;
Switzerland;

Multilateral Donors: EC

* Private Sector
Competitiveness (informal policy
advice)
Support Global Distance
* 
Learning Network (WBI)
* 
Support Schoolnet World
Links for Development (WBI)

IFC

* Advisory and technical
assistance for SMEs via APDF
and AMSCO
* Expansion of SME
investments with local sponsors
* 
Investments in private
education

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE 

Country Program Matrix 

(FY01-03)

Annex B9
Page 8 of 12

Bilateral Donors: Austria;
Canada; Denmark; Finland;
France (MCF); Germany; Ireland;
Italy; Netherlands; Norway;
Portugal; 
Spain; 
Sweden;
Switzerland; UK, USAID.
s B; 
Multilateral Donors: EC; UK;
UNDP; UNICEF

Mltiteral 

D 

______________ 

II. XMPR~~OVING GovERNNCEAND 

* 

EmpoWEMN
Public Service Reform 
Strategy defined by end 2001. 
a Municipal capacity building 
entity established; 50% of 
members and staff trained. 
* New public accounting 
system implemented. 

* 

IE S* 

RlJ,FORMtNG 
Public sector small 
* Develop and implement 
PUBLtCSECWR and centralized, with poorly pulcsco 
eomsrtg. 
paid and poorly qualified 
public sector reform strategy. 
t::::0:t:0000000 
* Complete implementation 
ofpersonnel. 
0* Career and pay system of municipal decentralization 
reformed, administrative 
process in new municipalities 
simplification begun; public and extend status to others. 
* Devolve new powers and 
service training strategy 
launched. 
responsibilities to municipalities, 
* 
SWAPs leading to 
esp. in health and education. 
privatization of service 
* Devolve responsibility for 
delivery and devolution of 
developing and implementing 
decision-making to 
district level development to
autonomous authorities. 
districts. 
0* Decentralization under 
way, ith 
3 ne eleted 
Implement new budget law.
way, with 33 new elected 
municipalities. 
Strengthen accounting,
0* Next stages of Public 
create new law of public assets. 
Sector Reform outlined. 
* Continue custom reforms. 
* Abide by the 25 Principles 
to Combat Corruption in African 
Countries. 
0* Undertake capacity 
building programs throughout 
public sector system. 

* 

IDA 

Lendin2: 
* Municipal Dev. (FY01) 
* Rural Action (FY02) 
PbiSetradLgl 
Refo 
(FY03) 
orm(F 
) 
Econ. Management & 
Private Sector Op. (FY02)
Portfolio:
PROAGRI

* 

* 

* Health Sector Recovery
* ROCSII 
0~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
National Water I and 1I

* 

Legal & Public Sector

Non-Lending:
* Legal and Judicial Study

* Municipal Development
Programs and AFRICITIES pilots
(WBI)
Public Sector Reform Study
PRSP Support

* 

* 

IFC
a AMSCO training on
corporate govemnance and
accounting

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE 
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)
Government 
Selected Bank (underlined) 
Strategy/Actions 
and Goverrnment
Performance Indicators

Bank Group Instruments 

o uiil 

* Develop and launch legal 
* Adopt new Commercial 
sector reform plan. 
Code, Criminal Code, Family 
OpnaCne 
Law, Commercial Register, 
e anTr 
Incorporation Act, Labor Law, 
Studies and Training, 
and Civil Code; and simpler 
* Reform Commercial Code, methods for acquiring visas. 
Commercial Register, and 
* Sector strategy for the legal 
Incorporation Act; establish 
and judicial sectors (including 
legal reform comnmission, focus Ministry of Justice) developed. 
on family law, civil procedures, 
and penal procedures.

* 
Strengthen Administrative
Tribunal and the Inspectorate 
General of Finances. 

* 

IIA 
Lending: 
Public Sector and Legal
Reform (FY03) 
Portfolio: 
Legal and Public Sector
Capacity Building
Financial Sector Capacity
Buling
Building

* 

* 

Non-Lending:

* 
* 

Legal and Judicial Study
PRSP Support

Annex B9
Page 9 of 12

Other Donors

Bilateral Donors: Denmark;
Portugal; USAID

Multilateral Donors: EC;
UTNICEF

Development 
Objectives 

Diagnosis 

RtJUi;OFL4IY * Legal and judicial 
sector outdated, inefficient 
and poorly equipped; laws 
complex and capacity to 
enforce very weak. 
* Most lawyers, judges 
in Maputo; legal help hard 
to obtain elsewhere. 
. Weak legal system a 
.
* Weak 
legal system a 
major obstacle to private 
sector growth. 

* Legal sector slow to 
reform, as sector highly 
fractured, and Ministry
weak.

* Admin. Tribunal,
charged with approving
staffing changes and public
accounts, needs reform.

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE 
Country Program Matrix (FYO1-03)

Annex B9

Page 10 of 12

'ijENPNGA 

* HIV prevalence is 
III WA 14.5% (1,140,000 people) 
Prevalence highest 
* 
along transport corridors; 
and increasing fastest 
among the young. 
Prevalence levels in 
Mozambique likely to rise 
to neighboring countries' 
levels of 20% or above. 

* 

* 

Implement National Plan 
for STD/HIV/AIDS launched in 
1999 for the years 2000-2002, 
guided by National AIDS 
Council. 
* 
Integrate HIV/AIDS 
awareness in all sectors and all 
programs. 

* By 2002, at least 1,600,000 
people with irregular sex partners 
have access to services to reduce 
STD/HIV infection. 
* By 2002, at least 15,000 
living with HIV/AIDS and their 
families with access to services.
* By end 2000. Bank portfolio 
reviewed and retrofitted to 
include HIV/AIDS interventions 

where appropriate. 

IMPR NG 

HJ 0LT Ui 52 

* 

Implement health program 
* Develop and approve a new 
' * Health sector 
indicators continue to be 
focusing on: i) quality of health Health Sector Strategic Plan by 
poor. 
services; ii) sector institutions, 
end 2000. 
.0gU 
.g0 0 * Health service 
ggg 
.
support services and sub- 
By 2003: 
Helhaseimrovied btnational 
health management 
coverage ha mrvd 
u 
ytms 
i)hmnrsucsReduce 
coverage differs widely by 
saytiona huac 
lthmanaresues 
region and is low in rural 
cty. 
* Address health issue in all 
areas. 
* Acute shortage of 
sectors, and increase health 
qualified health service 
sector budget allocation. 
personnel. 

index of eeog-raphic 
inequalitv in the provision of
health care services to below 2.8 
(estimated to be 3.0 in 1998). 
Increase proportion of health 
posts/centers stocked with 
Essential Drugs Program kits to
90 percent (from 88% in 1997).
* 
Increase proportion of health
posts/centers staffed with trained
personnel to 90 percent (from
86% in 1997).

IDA 

Lending 
Include HIV/AIDS 
c 
Ine 
i V/operations
(where appropriate). 
Portfolio: 

Bilateral Donors: AusAID;
Germany; Netherlands; UK
USAID

Multilateral Donors: EC; UNDP;

UNFPA; UNICEF; WHO

* HRSP
* ROCS 11
PODE

* 

Non-Lendin.:

* 

* HIV/AIDS
PRSP Support
IDA
Lending 

* Health SIP (FY03) 
Portfolio: 
HelhScoRcvrywizladUKUAI

IFCOPCUNP 
Investments in private 
.
medical services

Bilateral Donors: Canada;
Denmark; Finland; Germany;
Ireland; Italy; Japan; Netherlands;
Norway; Portugal; Spain;

Multilateral Donors: ADB; EC;
NFA
OPIEC; WFDP; UNFHA

Nvelopment 
Objectives 

Diagtosis 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMB3IQUE 
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)
Government 
Selected Bank (underlined) 
Strategy/Actions 
and Government
Perfornmange Indicators

Bank Group Instruments 

Annex B9
Page 11 of 12

Other Donors

h4PROVINh 
EDucATION 

PRO3'TFCON 

* Enrollment since the 
war doubled; gross 
enrollment at EP I 75%; but 
quality low, due to lack of 
qualified teachers, 
textbooks, instruction 
manuals, and classrooms. 
.* Adult illiteracy high, 
especially in rural areas and 
among women. 
. Low capacity to 
provide seondaryt and 
tertviardeve 
seoduation and 
vocational training. 

* Government has 
several safety net programs 
aimed at vulnerable groups. 
However, with limited 
budget and widespread 
poverty, transfers are small 
and coverage low. 
* Limited sustainability 
and efficacy of existing 
pension schemes. 
* Capacity to anticipate 
hazard events to prevent 
and prepare for disasters 
still weak. 
* Disaster relief system 
focused on aid coordination 
functions adequately. 

* 

* 

Implement ESSP launched By 2003: 
in 1998. Priorities are: i) teacher 
Increase proportion of 
training, pedagogical support, 
students passing key primary and 
and supply of teaching materials; 
lower secondary exams: i! grade 5 
ii) construction and 
from 54% to 75%: ii) grade 7 
rehabilitation of schools, and 
from 37% to 60%: and iii) grade 
initiatives to increase female 
10 from 33% to 55%. 
enrollment; iii) institutional 
* Reduction of the average 
capacity; and iv) strategies for 
repetition rate by half for primary 
and lower secondarv education. 
vocational training and higher 
edctin 
Increase gross enrollment 
ig Create a new Ministry of 
r 
i) ae 
from1to 
Higher Education, Science, and 
ra6%: an i) grade 6-7 from 715% 
Technology. 
to 30%.
* 
Increase in girls' enrollment
and retention rates at primary and 
secondary schools.
* Completion of study on 
social security reform, 
* Complete PRSP which 
defines a social protection 
strategy. 

* Review, as a part of the 
design and implementation of 
the Poverty Reduction Strategy 
Paper, the existing programs in 
order to ensure appropriate 
targeting, eligibility criteria, and 
coverage levels as a step towards 
developing programs for 
marginalized groups curTently 
not covered.
* Develop regulations for
private pension schemes and 
undertake actuarial studies on
the two main national schemes. 
* Place programs to support 
the transition of workers to other 
productive activities, including
through training. 
a Strengthen the 
Govemment 
* 
Strengthen the Government 
agencies responsible for
anticipating hazard events to 
prevent and prepare for disasters. 

IDA 
Lendin: 

Bilateral Donors: AusAID;
Austria; Canada; Denmark;
.
Finland; France (MCF);
Sklls Development (FY03) Germany; Ireland; Italy; Japan;
Portfolio: 
Netherlands; Norway; Portugal;
Spain; Sweden; UK; USAID

* 

Multilateral Donors: ADB; EC;
Islamic Development Bank;
UNDP; UNESCO; UNICEF;
WHO

Uh

Bilateral Donors: Canada;
Germany; Netherlands; Sweden

Multilateral Donors: UNFPA;
UNICEF, WFP

* 

* 

ESSP 
Human Resources Cap.
Bldg. 

ICWFP; 
Investments in private
education (tertiary focus)

IDA 

Portfolio

* Railways and Ports 
(retrenchment component).
(

* 

Flood Emergency Recovery
Project

Non-Lending

* 

PRSP Support (policy advice
on emergency rehabilitation and
social protection).

Pohcy advice and technical
on disaster mitigation
and management.

~~~~~~assistance 

* 
Policy advice on pension
reform through Railway and Ports
Restructuring and EMPSO.

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE 
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)

Annex B9

Page 12 of 12

tE. 00 
:0 00 

PARTN ~~ 

= : 
0.00 * Mozamnbique's short- 
.term external financing gap 

.
.
* Guide and coordinate 
support from development 

* 
Short-tertm external 
financing needs met. 

extemnal aid partners that 
are assisting the national 
development effort. 

reduction and priority 
intermediate objectives through meetings and informal donor 
several processes (including 
g 
PRSP, MTEF, SWAPs, annual 
* Annual review meetings for 
budget, local donor working 
sector programs/SWAPs 
groups, consultative group 
meeting).

* 
Increased needs and 
demands for a national 
dialogue led by 
Government to develop a 
long-term vision and 
strengthened partnerships. 

* Government to lead a 
national consultative process and 
dialogue in developing a PRSP. 

* 
Strengthen partnership 
among the Bank Group and 
with IMF for quality 
service delivery. 

* Development of a full PRSP 
in 2001 based on a national
dialogue and consultative process,
inclusive of all major stakeholders
including extemal partners,
private sector, academia, unions,
joumalists, NGOs, church groups,
etc.

* Maintain strong Country 
Team coordination, dialogue,
brainstorming, and cooperation,
including team members from
WBI, IFC, MIGA and the Bank.
* Maintain strong coordination
with IMF in economic work,
PRSP, and HIPC.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Bank 

Group
* 
Support national 
development dialogue (incl. NGO

All extemal partners

* 

m 

LoRegulraCosultaiveiGrupioureach
sal aid coordination, CU
SPA meetings
Anulmeig
* CT meetings and retreats
* CAS

* 

PRSP Support 

All Partners

WB Group and IMF

- 57-

Annex B1O
Page 1 of 1

CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
performance 

Major issue Country priority 

Bank priority Reconciliation of
country and
Bank priorities

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management

Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development
Education 

Health, nutrtion & population 

Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development

Rural development 

Environment 

Social development 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure

Financial sector 

Private sector 

Energy & mining 

Infrastructure 

Fair 

Good 
Fair 
Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Widespread poverty; High 
regional disparities

Sustain growth High 
Weak capacity High 
Gaps in service Moderate 
access

Poor access and High 
aualitv
Poor access and High 
qualitv
Targeting given Moderate 
widespread poverty

High

High
High
Moderate

High

High

Moderate

High 

High

Rural poverty, 
limaed infra-
structure and

BCcess tn markpts

Weak regulatory Moderate 
and enforcement
caoacitv
Further 
decentralization

Moderate 

Moderate

Moderate

High intermediation Moderate 
costs; banking
supervision

Red tape; market Moderate 
entry (transport;
utilities)
Regulatory 
High 
environment; private
sector entry

Sustainability and High 
institutional
framework (roads)

High 

Ongoing dialogue

Ongoing dialogue

High 

High

High

- 58 -

ANNEX C
Page 1 of 3

The Government's Program, its Poverty Reduction Strategy, and the CAS

This World Bank Country Assistance Strategy has been designed around the Govemment's Five-
Year Program and its emerging poverty reduction strategy.

A. The Five-Year Government Program (2000-2004)

The new Government Program (2000-2004), submitted to the National Assembly in March 2000,
is based on three pillars.

1. The pillar on economic development (increasing economic opportunities) emphasizes the
objectives of poverty eradication and a reduction of regional development asymmetries
through growth. To this end, the Government's program is focused on maintaining a sound
macroeconomic environment, developing the financial sector, and strengthening the capacity
of the national private sector. Particular emphasis is placed in developing agro-industry,
energy, mining, transport and transport corridors, communications and tourism. Technical
and vocational training will aim at increasing employment and improving the capacity, skills,
and productivity of the labor force. The development of infrastructure, particularly in rural
areas, is central to the growth strategy. The environment for private sector development is to
be improved through continued efforts to remove red-tape.

2. The pillar on social development (improving human capabilities) emphasizes improving
health standards in order to improve productivity and living standards. The program places a
special emphasis is on the prevention of HIV/AIDS and malaria. Expanded and improved
education services will aim to reduce illiteracy. The Government's program emphasizes
improving the welfare and capabilities of women, in particular with regard to equal rights and
opportunities, especially in education.

3. The pillar on the organization of the state (improving governance and empowerment) aims to
maintain social and political harmony, protect human rights, and effectively deliver public
services required for the poverty reduction effort. Consolidating law and order and
maintaining national unity are priorities. Strengthening and modernizing state administration,
along with decentralization, are important aspects of a strategy to improve the effectiveness
and responsiveness of the public sector. Developing public sector capacity, particularly at the
local level and in rural areas, will be central to this effort. Reforming public sector processes,
such as control and audit functions, is the focus of a strategy to improve the competence of
the public sector, improve transparency, and combat corruption. The Government program
stresses the need for increased efforts to enhance participation of citizens in economic, social
and political processes and to promote dialogue as a basic methodology of governance.

- 59 -

ANNEX C
Page 2 of 3

B. The Plano de Accao para a Reducao da Pobreza Absoluta (PARPA) and the Interim

Poverty Reduction Strategy

In 1999 the Govemment elaborated an Action Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty (Plano
de Accao para a Reducao da Pobreza Absoluta - PARPA) which served as the basis for its
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (interim PRSP), completed in early 2000. 1, 2 The
Government's PARPA and interim PRSP are a subset of its overall Five Year Program. These
documents outline nine key components of the Govermment's emerging poverty reduction
strategy, which are aligned under the pillars of the Govermment's program.

1. Economic Development (Increasing Economic Opportunities)

> 

> Maintain rapid and sustainable growth, particularly in agriculture, construction, and industry
Increase agricultural productivity in the smallholder sector, particularly in areas with high
agro-ecological potential.
> Develop infrastructure in the rural areas.
> Promote employment in rural and urban areas through vocational training and the promotion
of income generating micro-projects and enterprises, with particular attention to women, the
unemployed and socially excluded young people.
Improve technical and institutional capacity to monitor, analyze and evaluate poverty in order
to improve knowledge of the phenomenon and select appropriate strategies to fight it.

> 

2. Social Development (Improving Human Capabilities)

> Develop human capital through public investment in education, health, and water and
sanitation services.
Protect the most vulnerable groups through social security and assistance programs.

3. Organization of the State (Improving Governance and Empowerment)

> Reduce regional asymmetries by promoting decentralization and empowerment.
> 
Improve the allocation of available resources and external aid.

The Government intends to elaborate its Poverty Reduction Strategy more fully through a broad,
consultative process leading to a full PRSP in March 2001. While under the PARPA the
Governnent has commenced the processes of selecting indicators for monitoring the success of
its poverty reduction strategy, in developing the full PRSP the Government will further refine the
set of monitorable indicators, adjust program targets in light of setbacks due to the February 2000
floods, and formulate .a strategy for the monitoring of these indicators.

1 The Government's interim PRSP consists of the PARPA and a companion document which additionally outlines the
steps to be taken towards the finalization of a full PRSP.

2 The interim PRSP was presented by the Government on occasion of its decision point under the enhanced HIPC
framework. The Government intends to complete a full PRSP by March 2001, when it expects to reach the completion
point under the enhanced HIPC framework.

- 60 -

ANNEX C
Page 3 of 3

C. Link between the CAS and the Government Program and the emerging PRSP

There is a direct link between the Bank's Country Assistance Strategy, the Government's Five-
Year Program, and its emerging Poverty Reduction Strategy as outlined in the PARPA and
interim PRSP (see table below). The CAS program pillars are based on the pillars of the Five-
Year program. Given its over-riding objective of supporting the Government's program to reduce
poverty, the CAS is also closely aligned in supporting the Government's emerging poverty
reduction strategy. In accordance with its mandate, the Bank is not involved in issues of political
governance. It is also not involved directly in supporting the Government's efforts to maintain
peace, ensure public safety, and protect human rights. These are areas where the Bank does not
have a comparative advantage and where other partners are active.

The CAS performance indicators are outlined in the CAS Program Matrix (see Annex B9). The
Bank will support the Govermuent's work to refine the indicators in its emerging PRSP and to
develop a monitoring strategy. CAS performance indicators and targets will be reviewed upon
Government's completion of the full PRSP to reflect refined and revised targets and indicators in
the full PRSP.

Government Program 

Economic Development
(Increasing Economic Opportunities)

* Private sector, financial sector, 
economnic management
. Infrastructure 
* Rural development and agriculture 
* Environmental management 
. Innovation, competitiveness, 
employment

Organization of the State

(Improve Governance and
Empowerment)

. Public sector management 
* Judicial and legal 
 Peace and safety 

Social Development
(Improve Human Capabilities)

* Education 
* Health 
 HIV/AMDS 
. Social Protection 

. Rights 

Government 

Government 
World Bank
Poverty Reduction Country
Strategy 
Assistance

Five-Year Program (I-PRSPlPARPA) 

Strategy

X 

X 
X 
X 
X 

X 
X 
X

X 
X 
X 
X 

X

X 

X 
X 
X 
X 

X 

X 
X 
X 
X 

X

X
X
X
X

X
x

X
X
X
X

- 61 -

ANNEX D
Page 1 oft

Mozambique CAS Consultations

How the CAS consultation process was conducted: The CAS consultations were divided into two
rounds. In the first round, which occurred before national elections in December 1999 and enjoyed
Government participation throughout, representatives of the outgoing Government, the donors, civil society
and the private sector were invited to discuss the situation of Mozambique's people, their aspirations, and
their ideas for realizing those aspirations. In this round, Bank staff were listeners rather than participants.
In the second round, which occurred in March 2000 with the new Government in place, the Bank returned
to the same constituencies to report what it had heard and learned in the first round, and to discuss the
outlines of the draft CAS. Because the consultations straddled national elections, the Bank was able in the
first round to learn from the experience of officials in the outgoing administration, and in the second round
to inform and consult with officials in the new administration about the new CAS.

September 1999: Country Team Retreat on the CAS (Maputo and Washington, D.C.)
November 1999: First "listening" round of consultations (Maputo, Beira, Nampula)
December, 1999: Presidential and parliamentary elections (Mozambique)
December 1999: Distillation of findings of first round (Maputo and Washington)
February 2000: Concept paper and upstream review (Washington)
March 2000: 
Second "feedback" round of consultations (Maputo, Beira and Nampula)
April 2000 
Distillation of findings of second round and finalization of the CAS (Maputo and
Washington)
CAS review by the Executive Directors

June 2000: 

Who was consulted: In the first round, the consultations were held in a series of 12 meetings in Maputo
with several different groups including high-level government officials, mid-level government officials and
project managers, municipal government, local bilateral and multilateral development partners, local and
intemational NGOs, national trade unions, the private sector (separate meetings with the fonnal large-scale
enterprises, formal small-scale enterprises, and informal sector), religious leaders, academics, and
journalists. In the first round, two meetings were held in each of Beira and Nampula, for the private sector
and civil society and for government authorities respectively. The second round of consultations revisited
each of these groups. In addition, separate rural consultations using participatory methods were held in
January 2000 to talk with villagers.

What was learned: In addition to discussing where Mozambique was today and their vision for the
country's future, there was substantial commonality regarding the top issues and priorities that the country
needed to address:

1. Education - More vocational and tertiary education, education to meet market needs; improved quality
of teaching; more schools (improve literacy); gender equity in educational opportunities.
2. Governance and public sector management - Improved capacity of civil service, economic
management, transparency and accountability, and rule of law; further decentralization; less corruption;
increased participation and community development; improved public safety.
3. Agriculture and rural development - Better roads; expanded access to rural credit; improved rural
marketing; developed land market; rural water and electrification; improved agricultural extension;
improved food security; support to livestock, irrigation, and mechanization.
4. Private sector development - Improved govemance: clearer policy environment and enforced
legislation; trained managers and entrepreneurs; reduced red tape; access to cheaper financing; increased
employment for nationals; more industrialization and rural enterprise; growth throughout the country.
5. Infrastructure - More roads; improved rural and urban water supply; increased access to electricity and
telecommunications; developed urban infrastructure; expanded irrigation; specific railway links, bridges,
ports rehabilitated or built.
6. Health - Improved quality of and access to basic health care; prevention and control of malaria and
HIV/AIDS; reduced cost of medicine.

- 62 -

ANNEX E

Page 1 of 4

A Framework for Development Partnership

In Mozambique, there is an emerging consensus regarding the importance of defining the country's
development agenda, increasing government ownership, and fostering strong partnerships among
government, donors, civil society, and the private sector. The CAS process contributed to this consensus
and may initiate a wider Government-led dialogue to forge a common long-term vision and development
framework for Mozambique. Although Mozambique is not a pilot country under the Comprehensive
Development Framework (CDF)', in developing the CAS, a Framework for Development Partnership was
formulated which shares some of these principles and provides a useful way to map the broad array of
ongoing development activities while identifying potential gaps in Mozambique's development strategy.
It can be viewed as both a coordination tool and a process for stimulating discussion about Mozambique's
long-term development strategy.

In developing the framework, the activity areas listed were identified on the basis of priorities articulated
by the Government of Mozambique and among the development partners, including bilateral and
multilateral donors, private sector representatives, NGOs and civil society. The matrix above is the
summary of a more detailed matrix (see following pages) which attempts to capture the specific
commitments and current activities of the Government of Mozambique and its partners. This
information was obtained from the discussions with the Ministry of Planning and Finance, the
development partners, as well as from their various publications. The matrix represents a snapshot of the

existing development agenda and will change as more information is gathered and as priorities,
programs, and circumstances change over time.

Mozambique: 

Current Activities of the Development 

Partnership

Increasing 

Economic 

Opportunity 

Increasing 

Capabilities 

Improving 

Governance

Partner 

3 

a) 
3-Ea 

E 

EaJ8<8 

Acivi 

D 

2 

r- 

1*

g Little Focus a Some 

Focus 

Significant 

Focus 

High Focus

The CDF is a conceptual tool that can help a country identify priorities and strategies for reducing poverty. By
mapping out a holistic set of priorities for reducing poverty, and the activities among development partners, the C'DF
provides a mechanism for encouraging better coordination among development partners.

Annex E
Page 2 of 4

Framework for Development Partnership

I_o " nrriEon 

Ic0 

nl, 

__________hwenaan, 

Cawallt. 

_______ 

_______ 

nnr-nln.a G 

-vrooo

r 0 

) Mnlstry1f 
t150mTianpPort. nergy. 
F,nan-; 
Ind,otOy hmouing publi.work 
and Comme.n 

177oAgntik. 
fdlesis. 

and 3.t6mMbstryof 
E,Mo.-,ent, 
prondnal 

6mnTorrirm hndu, 
and 

3.6m AIDS 
pntin 

I,o 1m L.W and 
nommonco 
national h..Rh 

7.2mnDsaster 
12mL- I 
and 
mnonagntne nolal nd t na d.ton 
protdon 

t78.Omn G 
mneP., 7nAMtle, 
Proiurement, State 
Admin.. F 
_P001,

tribunl 

88m NatIorl M 
e, 
p0I,. Mhninty of Inlenor 

2.6. COo 
.

and oportS

.

s 

AmAilD: 2 7rAW-n 
pro,J1d) 

(NGO 

__ 

A.AD: 
4.40rc Itor 
Dorolotonn 

A 
Awna 

1A2iD: 
t.2n, 
& 

AmAItD 2.25. 
DnOotOFnOnp

Am0AID: 1.6rA Mi. Clemon

ns,4.10, 
ImmoSo0 

MAi.10 1.SmthUb,n1,a Flod Aonnni. 1.5ootR,00 
Fn-,oln 
2, J. Wa 
Wannr(99/02); 0.591. 
So.fd. (UNICEF); 3.4r. RtrS PROAGRt0IAm 
To,to}M.i.Bc0l-ido, 

A-oola 1.6,. M,no-A 
CondiOSd M 
ion (CARE), 
1A.4 Mrn a S& w I 
SndttodnoSy 

400028, 
i 
DeUh3CtiF 

AaoOia 3.20, D.-.&o 
UNICEF. ADC)

4,Anoi0 1.3. Radio M.Vin Wk Wonnn-

-d 

hf u Moaoidl"d Poo 

.

(ECOTEC)

C.n,d. 
3.60, hIono -
notnori n; 2A,010.. 
CaMd6brl' 

CandnA 2.40,T.W0n 
for HI.thoo R,nonna 

C.a0d00 7.60 Soojat Cna,d. 1. I 2,GndooCno 
fntnn SpoFp 13oo &006d001,o (Girt 
Grr w: 1.3, Food 
ChrId - UNICEF); 1000 
Aid (O>iFAM)i 3.8rA tzdus Ed..i3dOtd 
rid
ld-fiWDo d Fond Aid
(W6rld Vi.i6)

7.3.,Donoiiog 1.300
adNot,onat
fo-Lo 

o04oo 
Etnod

UY 
LU 
ui 

Dobhr k 37ooTnlo-W,tr 
pownn rndor 

Dneroork: 48, Ag 
fi Drn 

Dtnwrk: 13.00, 
Diap"-al 
of 
POo0kid,A. Coonoo 
Zoon!tgt.oobrdir

Dtrosdrk: 136H000drb 

D n.. 
: 136m 
Edurra0i6 

D-uimrk: 5.60, 
Prli Fanh 
it 

Dn-mak: 8. O0,IWodo n 

DOnak:n8.7nLOr 
Eltnino; 
1.3m Mi).t
Clan.,

.01_

Fi 
14BWd: 
02.40 Boin Wwrr 
Fidond: 13.8A A, Ed Fi drd 4 OooCooOr t0olaod. 34n ICEP0A 
SAply. 6.6ooN.Ma.MUobnn B0,oa 5.3m A Ed 
fPorNan.a Rosoon 
Coppn Sn rrice 
D,. 
Chi-0olo 

Finlaod. 44.90, M.oin 
1rr016l 3.3onH,ld, 
SDqipoA Sr 

Finland: 12.90 
FnoooooyEd (0SSP) 

(Rd3a1d0: Ito Loon
G(loo CapqoAcy Boldion 

t

Foland: 2.1In, D-,n. 
1.8r6Mrdi. Suppot4.2ro
00,0,,i0g (IFNDP)

FirArrd: 2.10 Dn-oooooy, I.8n Mdi9 Sqpo

Foonon (APD): 
PROPARCO l000 
Min. 
S08, 
2.6m Br-wery 
N-ipdri 
250 
Mowd: 3.7n 

F-non (ADD): 23rA Cllo1a 
F-toarc (A1D): 6.1m 
Il0- n 
O-% 
ii6. 3.6r C
kbokw; 4.50,.06,.
, p 
r 0pW, nqodp.; S.6n Mpoo 
brecdr g 4.0, 9r 
h-,
w0,0 3nsEDM 
-Oonoa,001 40,000U0 3.8mro d
0-adig 6.9w
SidMdManko

_

3

UCBrk;' 

1.5r 

C

MIdNCO,ap-dAk 

F 
n (MCFI:) 2. 10 Maiiom 
Tr6ospa 

F-oe 
30 
F-MEnpon. Cobo D.1g6. 

(MMC):3(M w 

l .

__ 

Frane (4MCF): 2.90, 

F-0 
I.0M 
ln4 

(MCP): 1.5 Moio.;
Awn= rnw

ljnba 

itiuolio In 

noPo-oii d Capital

1nOo-n,0y: 10.4. Wa6 rorrFlD 

Gnnay: 5.90, R,0r1 

G-.My: 

1.9R Trooin 

000,i0ry 4.900 

G3tn y: 3.3m Fr=ily Qnrrr 

2.3. 

Goonwoy: 5.7c 

reowy: 

3.35.

S 

Uer~~~~~.ub srWr46 

Sppgly 

Robb Srdids 

26r 

fr~ r Rp- 

; 3.5. 

PtYiss/t'4uWh 

F.frEd. R.4..ee 

Pdrn 

Ed Sofd.DW 

nuits 

rrd

t D Odo,nno. 3.70, t rdoBoad 

Rw,1rdh 
R 

M- 
n 
,0b 

Vn;rfirrd T....& 

2.10Foi.yEd 

Denonony

R.rd R6.b; 

95 Rorsd Rhbb 

10.3.3 
n3wi-t 

WYrM!l 

h Ss dl 

Iubsu, 

5 sM.'b

S.fW,s7.4m 

S.b-m6s3 

31.9r Gnur. Silo 

Bs 

i... 

rmoe 

:E-dEm 

t000; 80 Sobdation 
N-F.p0.5 
EloiDcaOm 
G-Woo 
11 9n 
-onoyjNnn 
ih. bN..I 
14r
lEd,iDer.fi Mnp-A Pst
Oo.4t 0Ihw 
Pt 
rthrb

MoO1n 

10.4r Esplnooyin,, 
Cr..i.nFond.60S,d1 
Sokde bodooy W0000

Fs.dty3 5.3m
Vno-inoyFroly

nd 

1.0 F.dn R.. 

rM.& 120 11,, 
Bk,4 
1.2 R,hnb 3 
H8,01 Ctolerr, 2.4n 
ll-atd SIP.; I1.50
PROAGRIt:t5

I 
d 30,So._ l 
0hh ood ninng; 40- 
Ed Bskd 

ond: 
r0v 
(IINDP)

1I 6m GoAd
00 D-nooiuioo

ltry: 14.4m B,,0 
Csiddor. 

hidy: 25.Sn B0i,w W 
3Sply, t.S 
oil 
w bah bl-ds 12.6, P,b, 
WoInrSmpply 2.10 Publi 
WoOnrce S- 
P.inb0 8.6m 
MU5lo.--oGb.R.ilony 

, 

IloRy. 72.0,r, 
n D-1 Mopt; 
Ibd R-d D-1, 
, 
.tmPROAG33 

Rt, ld 
21.60 
.00d0 

tooly. 2 2nTeebrict 
Sohool fo Sl 
jtndo0y, 
18.3m kd-HW,d Cm0pIt0 
Marbt, M.m6tO0, 

tly: 3.6nl HOdb h 
0n0bed.20011018 
00j0ip mplrd; 2.3m
1,l08 lofdd hab
S.ofalt, 17.53 S.oi 
H 
_N0M0ne 
dhob 
1.70
Eain 
Hyinn TA;

R dy: 3.7m 
CnmpodiotUEM R 

1L11: 2.Yn no.pnt0_ 
P0b6iiOrgoawtn

_

Itd 

3

at

3.__.hft.iii._ 

__

Annex E

Framework for Development PartnershipPae3o4

I,-:dnd 

24mob 
R.6 

old:7I.Ndd 

JlnJ: 

3.5. 

Ne"rl 

3m 

eq 

l_: 

9.3n 

Nelhd_1W 

3. 

p- &8elz:.2 R 

end2b 

elric.mo

0 
it 

_ 

~~~~Nd.n 

6: 4m. 
AsvifflrhP.s.d M 

CSr 
.. 

Nwm:*7m 
P$ 

Rur Ai 
..

Ndiwy: 
Xh.~fl 

1.6mi 

N9m 
W%i- 

& 

Nonq: 
SR^bl 

9.3m 
.
ieSlc 
1.aie N_FA 

Nmwy:& 
CUPFft 

3.6m 

6 
TAd 

& 4io 

Nenvy.W: 
6.7. Dcrq
CinlAVp ScciebHP

Um 

_W 

h ~ 

z~~~~ 

"lwkyIIi:] 
1.4m 

4.6mF.by Tt 

-

1.i: 

1 
.2mBPn 

i 

Pi:d 

8 8m Boiiy 

Pi:73m6-b:O.mi 2.6.wsPr4i 

I5

.- PW.~~ 

HIbnC-. 

p"" 

N 4 _..p.... emuii2iti iDcirdm

J 

~~~~~~W.-dE2m 

V 

ity, S 

.4 

R. 

Spd icC mPaezmiSn.6 

TC A WD8 

(ipma 

CmI 

Poice H TRiu

;'J"i~~~~.1 

LiB V.H..fthb 

b:I.m

Swedm,: 416.7R T.W. 

Pddri we: 

RSwdo:1.4.PS 
ew;4lobelp;21 

.

.*0 

3.2.:46m8 

Sweden 
i.WJA.Smiv 
-dol 
pmiS-dy 

S.Uw:73 32mPd ti 
mEd,.m 

Swdeo: 2.8manc. 
mi 
l7 
ewiiieXi 

y

12.5m ~ ~ ~ ~ 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~. 

Ro-Ni i 
S 

pl 

i'maW Pk ;S mji; 7mRuni Ro irebsh 3.4m 
Nima 

3~~~~~.9mTfi 
tA 

BAc 

ptNca 

.mD

EerScp.i.. 
Zi8 

Rea;.; 
rss 
EledriS 

32m 
Sm; 7A. IP; 

2.foNi 
dP 

SpW 

m3p-mw 

p. 

.6 

i4Sp..PA.T

ILJ.

Teleewm ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ M-31.o-

Swbs4mRulwrer 
Siw:3SmR 
bvelq 

Swa:3mvl;ciwidSwia71mriy 
tmin4 wor c d~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~S.t. Hcdd i 

wia:SmBt 
i2mScdss 

3wa:3msmd3clinsi 
eve 
rpi22 

wl 
oce 

ImW 
oo 

eosEpow 
e.

ii2mC 

.
S. 
Q~~~~~~~~~~SV 
dn-micdxirT 

mB 

pn_diw ot locid 

sIDirtims; sm 

i 

.

pWb 

ewe 

1 

wlp

US: sm 
_) 

) 
hEr 

' 

'A 

111;:7.7am vb 

UiC:i.56m Vo 

U}C5. 

PSD 

S 

UiC::mpob 

U 

32: Pblm 
p 

.R:.3.4m 

2.ds 

DD. ii i l

USAI: 9 USkD: 27 m 

USi: 

27mw 

RSAiD h12 33m 

Ni-ID 

Sm-h 

VP.%:2.mtel 

JSAIDp 

m 

4.6. 

JUD 

3m

_ 

- h%-.7 - D-roJ 
; pii 

3.9 
Mb

..

Annex E
Page 4 of 4

Framework for Development Partnership

_hii nr......coa 

.

............... 

f 

.. 

........ . .........
... ;,, 
.;:::::.: 
i: i R qi, Cmahlmfrn 

'.o 

Goveo .

EC: 19.4.1B3.Wdnr 
Sypliy 3ES.mEomg-y 
GRi_ Ro- 
SdoWl. 
Z.ob-ii 
25.9. Rheb Bi.ro 
1 
Ro d;5 
R.4 
35.6.Roob 

EC: 3S8 Road 
Rihb; 2lm Moir. 
miswmoojno 

EC: 14.2a Z_be. 
WmnnV.lUy MWO 

EC: 4aS 
Tmor-- 

ppopUo 
s_oOo 9r 

EC 6.3. STD/AIDS E.C: 2.5BHn,id& 
1ic. 
io -nRo 1nR 
ldth Sedor 
o 
4 5m TmimWi
Rbik m1..& 
offiol.I.;

EC: 2.6Nr4i<d 
ReF0Y 

EC: 7AS Jdioiy i 

41 

EC: 28.5. 3mOnoo 
EhlnoEon
12 3.m Mm.piipW EI-Oio
EC: 1.53 Dm oi 

20.. 

i.o

NdaWEN.Wo Ro4 l12.9Im 
L.opotLiR..b,; 
16.8S 
R-md T.lnoomI;S 19.4 n Reb
C. 
.B.oIon. li 
24.6m
MOZAL-ltnr

2S.4. R. HWth
rhb

ADB UA 501 
Ee.-io R.b. 

ADB: UA 83Tele.os, 
klcdrimoiVy, 
-n*r .d 
.o.ioUiA UA 8. 
tY do 

ADB: UA 142. 
C.riw d 
rnbb, no 
Wivt 
r 
mI nolb 
fmit,iy 
ily 
thd, 
flry 
6;&moldli._

ADB: UA 7m B... 
hn.id 

ADH: UA4Ot
Pny 
t-hb.
nihoom

T 
.

Z 

UNDP:U2.lm. nUNDP: 

0.6m AIDS UNDP: Zn 

UNDP: 5.m 

UNDP: 3.Zo l
M.onmm

0

_cmod 

UNDP 66.oGovmce

I- 

UNPPA: Zm 

UNUPPA: 13. 

UNPPA: 2.41 Yo.Wh UNFPA: 1.5. 
1.4m G-ndn

UNFPA: 3m G.ovmn,- m

-jiE 

UNIChP 61C 
On 

7Olicy UNICEP 12.7.n 
M_%~ 
U 
_ 

UNICEF 4.3P.liq;N UNICEF 1102. 
UNICEF C.porirO UNICEF 
iEdirn 
mdlngiw 
d 
S 
y m.d polioy bufldidg 
-dplod 
nnarnmj-imle joRoo 

UNICEF. 3.7. Childrigb. 
rigid nnr 
mca

-ororor,n bild

111 

dnlwpaM mca, 
d 
nio.r.rb 
5pn v diOC, odolooy ad moibmio6 
m 

dwlqp- 
bildom 

for 

dewlqmp 
, B.-,ioo& 
mobiogmmi 
dn
_t 

mp-nooomm

F 

i e~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~nomdmm.oo 

c,,i 

band

-J~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-

13B 

hUl WFP: 23. 

W ae? 3m Di-mom

_WBO: Im 

WHO. 4mbdS._h

Di..Pard 
ad Conrol 

ion..... 

mOc Wd: 100. 
rNE Adjlrr4o;. 
Ficoi. 
ot 

WB: 400mT-apot 100m WB. S5mA& Sedtor 
Wo,m 300 Go. 
p 
rl 

cUB: 5m C- 
mho 

WB: 29mEocnn., 
D- 
m 

hU. SUm 
WB 
ppr 

nt mol lor 

W. 

7

1m Edoc 

WB: 30. R 
3 AOm WBE lmlSW & PoblicUl
30Mu 
,oormg 
Wdio 
m 
a8
dcedpD

c p. Buildiog

Ei 

lFC Fiooiio 
Pn-iov_romnrmiof 
mOOortmm 
1Andfiing ofpi-no 
f1oilii,. ad 
Pojoor, Condmida 
;msaoidmobmtdi3 d-lonmO 
oidobcbo 
idoioioooi- 
Eaoin,mooofono 
ofobiliti.. 
n,icmifina;,o 
lnmiog&hob.ig 

IF

C

IPC: I 
-Eoor.im 
n 
IPC: Eoni 
omomonriol &4 no ad. 
opnio 
irty 
nor 
IFC fio00ond 
prOinos 

fWB 

IPC: 9SU dind 
imonslmmdo minon ryncd 
lech 
iot. WS
-
pminoto imlntmm
nd 
o..
d.nlopmnU SkAfii
DnrnlommnD Fifiloy,
Affi- Mangmno
S-i 
.on Cmo 00oy

IFC FlASmo-i.

ifior 

Ramooono0i.t0

6

i 

trn

io f, 

ad 

o,oomi- 

dim 

Cro,_ 
ot000ff 

AduimA Aid Corn 
AS 
AmoA jo 
Sim..0iool. CmibWdo p_ S_t 
Mio 
-b, io 
), 13TAmo 
(IC."T ddTb 

CCLUSA 

ADPP (Strom 
AJODEMO, A.m.i.oo 
Chil,fr)iM.doo 
mrselAMACO, 
Moi Mor A-.oo A., Mo,. D. APoio .
Einod. of thildroo. 
aidnde, 
AMdEMO

Mdhi-o; 
MONASUG 

Civic Rd A..o. 

GHD (Ho 
Rho ad D-Ipl); 
(A... 
fooH-moRigts)

I DH

i 

M-oebiqoo, 

oli.. 

MEA.AGRICOOP. 
CEMAUDI AMODERL .on 

m.l)oldnlvnt. 
-.

' 

oon doS Child-m 

(A-o Do. Modjoo. do

(A.o. 

iMiooofor-n..m Comra morldmidn. 

US -Ui OXFAM, Mo..), AMI (fi..

Dcv-)PRO RAL, 
PR 

OPMAD, PROLIDE 

Rc ddB0 CFD ASio. Mnd1io
(Ceim.c-F.ilA e 
vimmo) AMODEFA.
ANEMO,APOSRMO,
HoOp AS.. MMs.
Mdo-e Mmd. MSRE,
MONASO, World
Vi.i o

WAKELA. Wold 
Viojon 

bmaEoinmod)

doAroo 

MAP SECTION

K 

-'~~''-.- 

C' 

/ 

TANZANIA

ZCCAOAr$ ~~~~~~~~~~ 

' 

7"''-',"""' 

1~~~~~~~~~~~NANGADB

N ~~~& 

-~~~ 

) 

 

fENA

S 

rr0- 

<'.2r

4 

fA'b 

LJWOCC' 

IedaQoe 

0CMO

I p 

j~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~MCL

\Ncl~~~eAI 'K 

A 

[-.-q 

fAcedo 

N 

DAPRC1A~~SANC;

N I S A~~~~~~~~~~~~~~c3nI 

C3 

-N ' 

I 

0/CIA~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~MC-

MA lAW1 

9' 

' 

.

ot 

lB~

ZAMBIA 

/,-T 

CNA 

-. 33.0 

-CHFUNCEINDM, 

AA 
M.TA~CUA 
BIBA 

IE

0

M'>.L-J CATEU RAI ~ !1cj
OJNA 
E 
A 
-"
2323-NCA F 

v 
\ 

'N 

Cossocotizo ,-" 

~~~ 
\ ~ 
~ ~ ~ 

A 

CHFUNDE~~~ 'q~~r"'"""\ 

>Th ~~~~-0'0'~

MARAVIA 

( 

uiA2S 

N

-----1- K '24(42CC 

 

(cid:143) 

NAMP 

A

3-5: 

16 

A 

o 

,

2

1

N 

L 

2EC"NA 

MUTA 

'iA/ 

14 

I 

' 'K1

'3-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~BANE

angra C BA~ 

MOB/UBCH 

MACAN C

0' 7 > 

\B ~~~~~~~~ 
COSTA ~~~~~~AB3-2CB~~~~~~~ 

a 

2A8'ST

\ 

%~~>" 

/ 

440 MZA 

MB 

IQUE

Z-IMBABWE 

0'CA 

SOFA 

>>-

~t~tdo' 
~ 

J23CAN1.A 

CHANNEL

20' 

* 

/ 

BZ'N-j ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0

7' 

A 

tm/C] I 

Marr 

rocads

VASN-'CN//C<AlIE~ 

Operafional 

j/---> 

-s- ~~~~~~~~~~~~- 
-'- ~~~~~Currently 

non-operational 

21

-HIFLNCAl 'A 

C C./\IN-HAM 

E-Selectecciftes

G~~~~~ZA 

~~~~~ ~ProvincecaIfas
0' ~~~National capitol
~Distrid 

K. 

'~~~"tct'p 

N 

/ 

1 

N 

0'~~~~~~~~~~~~'~~~~ 

bouTidaries

\,-r 

C 

B 

oloon 

-

-

Province 

boundaries-

<7 ~~~,AICF< 

I~~~~nte-rnationatl bondlaries

AFUICA 

V--Al-UTO-

0 

1122 

200 

30

00tAo mop dooM,, imp, on til. port c Tho World BooB Grop. 
jduoroI.R. looltoto of c-y OO-itory; -r -y rodoo-clo

-cY

'-SWAZILANUP 

-N4N,orp-oc ) -ort 6o-drie..

12' 

~~~~~~~ ~~SOUT 

RCA 

Mo 

0'2' 

2

