Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 20301 - BIH
MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE

WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

April 25, 2000

Southeast Europe Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as of March 31, 2000)
Unit of currency: Konvertible Marka (KM), equivalent to 1:1 to Deutsche Mark
I KM=US$0.50

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

BH 
BAC 
CAS 
COM 
EBRD 
EDS 
EIB 
EBPAC 
EU 
FRY 
PYROM 
GDP 
IDA 
IFC 
IMF 
I-PRSP 
KM 
LSMS 
MFTER 
MIGA 
MTEF 
PFSAC 
PRGF 
PRRP 
PRSP 
SAA 
SBA 
SFRY 
SP 

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Business Environment Adjustment Credit
Country Assistance Strategy
Council of Ministers
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Economic Development Strategy
European Investment Bank
Enterprise and Bank Privatization Adjustment Credit
European Union
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Gross Domestic Product
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Konvertible Marka
Living Standards Measurement Survey
Ministry for Foreign Trade and Economic Relations
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
Public Finance Structural Adjustment Credit
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Priority Reconstruction and Recovery Program
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Stabilization and Association Agreement
Stand-by Arrangement
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Stability Pact

FISCAL YEAR

January 1 - December 31

Vice President: Johannes F. Linn
Country Director: Christiaan J. Poortman
Task Team Leaders: Mary Sheehan and Simon Gray

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY ASSSISTANCE STRATEGY
FYOO-02

Table of Contents

E xecutive S um m ary 

........................................................................................................

I. Introduction .

II. Recent Developments .

A. Political Context .

B. Economic Performance 

C. Social Context 
D. The External Environment 

III. Bosnia and Herzegovina's Development Challenges and Priorities 

.

.

.8

..

A. Development Challenges 
B. Economic Development Priorities 

.6

.6

Strengthening Institutions and Governance 
Fostering Private Sector-Led Growth and Employment .
Building Social Sustainability .12
Completing Reconstruction 
.14

IV. Economic Outlook and External Environment 

A. Base Case Economic Scenario 
B. Low Case Scenario .17

.15

V. The FYOO-02 Country Assistance Strategy. 

A. Formulating the Country Assistance Strategy .17
B. Objectives of the FYOO-02 Country Assistance Strategy 
C. Planned FYOO-02 World Bank Group Program .21

.20

Strengthening Institutions and Govemance.. 
Fostering Private Sector Led Growth and Employment 
Building Social Sustainability 
.25

D. IDA Lending Levels and Triggers .26

2

3
5

6

0

15

17

21
23

VI. Country Program Risks and Monitoring 

.29

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without

World Bank authorization.

Tables:

Table 1. Progress Toward Reform in the Real Sector in the SEE Region
Table 2. Key Economic Indicators, 1996-2005
Table 3. Lending Triggers
Table 4. Lending Program and Major AAA Under the Base and Low Cases
Table 5. Key Policy Outcomes to be Achieved Under Base and Low Cases

Charts:

Chart 1. BH: Evolution of GDP
Chart 2. SEE Region: GNP Per Capita, 1998
Chart 3. BH: Donor Commitments and Disbursements, 1996-2004

Boxes:

Box I. The Legacy of War on Everyday Lives
Box 2. Framework for Economic Development in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2000-2004
Box 3. Dayton Governance Arrangements
Box 4. Constraints to Private Investment and Business Development
Box 5. The CAS Participatory Process: A Bosnian Vision of the Future
Box 6. Lessons Learned During FY98-99
Box 7. Working in Partnership Toward Greater Transparency
Box 8. The Balkan Enterprise Facility: Promoting SMEs in the Region

Annexes:

Bosnia and Herzegovina at a Glance
Annex 1. Achievements of the Priority Reconstruction and Recovery Program
Annex 2. Bank Support to Encouraging Participation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Annex 3. Coordination and Partnerships in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Annex B2. Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3. Bank Group Program Summary
Annex B4. Summary of Non-Lending Services
Annex B5. Key Social Indicators
Annex B6. Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7. Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8. Status of Bank Group Operations
Annex B9. CAS Program Matrix
Annex B IO. CAS Summary of Development Priorities

ii

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

WORLD BANK GROUP
COUNTRY ASSSISTANCE STRATEGY
FYOO-02

Executive Summary

Bosnia and Herzegovina is now at a crossroads. Over the next two to three years it must begin to
generate a sustainable growth momentum. Postwar growth of the last four years has been strong -
brought about by a successful reconstruction effort and sound macro performance - but it is not yet
sustainable. And while recovery has brought a generalized increase in incomes, many Bosnians remain
worse off than before the war and unemployment is painfully high. Fragmented postwar governance
continues to make consensus difficult and has been at the root of a slower than hoped for reform effort.
Two external factors will also affect the development outlook in the next two to three years: With
completion of the postwar Priority Reconstruction and Recovery Program (1996-1999) at hand, donors
will now begin to phase down their programs of support. This will require fiscal and external adjustment
as well as other less tangible adjustments over this critical two to three year period. Finally, the recently-
announced Stability Pact for Southeast Europe presents an opportunity for closer integration with
European institutions. Accelerated structural and institutional reforms to bring the country closer to
European standards will be needed to take advantage of this opportunity.

Thus, Bosnia and Herzeogovina faces two specific challenges in the period ahead: First, it must
begin to take ownership of its economic future by assuming increased responsibility for economic
policies and outcomes. This will mean strengthening governance at all levels and reducing dependence
on the international community. Second, it must promote sustainable growth and employment in an
inclusive way that provides increasing incomes and opportunities for all Bosnians. Reforms aimed at
increasing private sector activity, and, in parallel, measures to ensure that growth is inclusive and that
safety nets are in place for those who cannot feel its full benefits are needed.

As a key step in taking increased ownership for economic outcomes, the Bosnian authorities are
now preparing a first Economic Development Strategy (EDS) for the period 2000-2004. The EDS will
be a Bosnian-owned strategy that is intended to replace the donor-led Priority Reconstruction and
Recovery Program as the basis for policy and spending decisions, and serve as a framework to guide
external development assistance. A Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) will build on the EDS
and set out, inter alia, a strategy to ensure growth is sustainable and inclusive, and a plan to overhaul
social protection systems to more effectively meet the needs of the poorest.' In the course of preparing
the CAS, we have discussed with the authorities and other stakeholders the country's development
priorities. There is broad consensus on four main components of the reform agenda the government
needs to tackle over the next several years (set out in greater detail in Section III of the CAS):

Key Medium-Term Challenges

Strengthening governance and public sector management. Strong and accountable institutions and
good governance are pre-conditions to sustained success in other reform areas. There have been
significant achievements over the last CAS period, supported by IDA adjustment lending. But BH's
newly-established institutions, fragmented government structures and competition between BH's three

As a first step in this process, the authorities are currently preparing an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy.

iii

constituent groups mean developing good govemance will be a long-term objective requiring
consistent, well-sequenced efforts. The key medium-term priorities center on enhancing the
transparency of public institutions, and developing and implementing a medium-term fiscal adjustment
strategy in a climate of lower and less concessional donor resources.

F Fostering private sector led-growth. Progress on structural reforms aimed at building a market-
oriented economy has been slower than hoped; privatization in particular has been delayed. Deeper and
more consistent structural reforms are needed for sustainable growth and employment. Growth that
generates substantial employment, particularly in the SME sector, will be a key element of BH's
poverty reduction strategy. The key reform measures needed are a transparent and predictable enabling
environment, accelerated privatization, continued banking sector reform and labor market reforms to
help create productive employment opportunities.

* Building social sustainability. A growth strategy alone is not sufficient to address the needs of the
poorest. Social sustainability implies broadly increasing incomes, but also improved human and social
conditions, and reduced risk and vulnerability. Targeted programs and policies are required to
complement better governance and sustainable, inclusive growth. Together, these factors can also
generate movement towards political reconciliation. Medium-term priorities include improving poverty
and social sector data and capacities, reforming social protection systems, developing education and
health finance and governance, and spurring greater participation and inclusion in an environment
where the legacy of war includes discrimination among ethnic groups.

* Completing reconstruction. Finally, needs remain in housing, community services such as water and
solid waste services, and demining. While the reconstruction effort produced remarkable achievements
- e.g., returning most services to their prewar levels in just four years - addressing the remaining
physical impacts of war in selected sectors is likely to take many more years.

The FYOO-02 Country Assistance Strategy

The FYOO-02 CAS is formed on the basis of consultations with stakeholders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is consistent with, and builds on, the major thrusts of our previous CAS and the lessons
of implementation. Discussions with the many other international partners involved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina's development effort on their plans and programs have also contributed to developing an
appropriate role for the Bank Group, based on our comparative advantage. Finally, the CAS also fits
within the broader framework of the Regional strategy paper for Southeast Europe, developed by the
Bank and the European Union in the context of the Stability Pact. The reform agenda set out in this CAS
is one to which all partners in Bosnia and Herzegovina's development effort will contribute. The World
Bank Group's support (Section V), will continue to be selective. We have been asked by the authorities
as well as by other key partners, to continue the policy reform supportive role we played during the last
CAS, and which few other donors are able to assume. In tandem, we intend to disengage from
reconstruction related activities over this CAS period.

The overarching objective of the World Bank Group's partnership with Bosnia and Herzegovina is
to increase economic opportunity and improve the quality of life for all Bosnians. Poverty reduction is
an overarching, cross-cutting theme. In light of Bosnia and Herzegovina's development priorities, and
the role that the World Bank Group can play in addressing these priorities, the strategic objectives of the
FYOO-02 CAS period will be:

iv

* 

* 

* 

to help strengthen weak andfragmented governance arrangements to build a solid foundation for
broad-based self-sustaining growth and democratic participation;

to help foster sustainable and inclusive private sector-led growth and employment as the most
important means of improving economic opportunity for all Bosnians; and

to help build social sustainability by establishing affordable and equitable social services for all
Bosnians, including a social safety net for the most vulnerable.

In order to continue the policy-reform supportive role consistent with our comparative advantage,
the FYOO-02 CAS proposes continued emphasis on policy reforms. Under a base case of strong macro
performance and good progress in the reform areas set out above, a program of both adjustment and
investment lending in the three main areas outlined is proposed, underpinned by a strong AAA program.
Both the AAA program and policy reform dialogue will contribute to the authorities' EDS and its PRSP.
Reform measures and activities important to reducing poverty in Bosnia and Herzegovina's postwar
context are key elements in each of these areas. In terms of lending, our CAS Progress Report (August
1998) noted that while high postwar growth rates had brought per capita incomes near the IDA
operational cut-off, we expected Bosnia and Herzegovina to be an IDA borrower during the IDA12
period (and that the earliest date creditworthiness for IBRD lending could be achievable was late in this
period). This assessment remains valid. It is clear, though, that the extraordinary level of IDA resources
provided to Bosnia and Herzegovina over the last several years must now decrease to levels consistent
with other IDA recipients. Sufficient resources are nevertheless required in order for the Bank to be able
to continue to carry out its strong policy-reform leadership role in this critical next two to three year
period. Thus an IDA allocation that declines to normal per capita levels by the outset of the next CAS in
FY03 - which could coincide with the timing of creditworthiness - is warranted.

Risks of an internal and external nature during this CAS period remain similar to the key risks
highlighted in the CAS Progress Report. The most serious internal risk relates to continued weak and
fragmented governance in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the implications for the authorities' commitment
to reform. We believe that the lessons learned in the previous CAS have helped us to design a program
that takes into account this risk and mitigates it to the extent possible. The Stability Pact for Southeast
Europe provides a framework for potential increased stability in the Region, helping to reduce the key
external risk of continuing political uncertainty in the Region.

Suggested Topics for Board Discussion

Among the topics for Board discussion could be:

* The development challenges and priorities highlighted for Bosnia and Herzegovina over the next
several years;

* The policy-reform supportive role proposed for the World Bank Group, and the appropriateness of
the mix of planned instruments and activities; and

* The risks identified and the mitigation measures proposed.

v

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

WORLD BANK GROUP COUNTRY ASSSISTANCE STRATEGY
FYOO-02

I. Introduction

1. 
This Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) covers the period FYO0-02. It builds on the strategic priorities
set out in the first full CAS for Bosnia and Herzegovina (BH) covering FY98-99, discussed by the Board of
Directors in August 1997, and the FY99 Progress Report discussed in August 1998. This CAS was prepared on
the basis of consultations with the authorities, donors and a range of stakeholders (para. 42).

2. 
BH's over-riding challenge as it enters the first decade of the 21st century is self-sustainability. This is
the path to a future of greater opportunity for all Bosnians. Four years of devastating war have been followed
by four years of substantial dependence on external technical and financial assistance. While this assistance
brought successful reconstruction and recovery, BH now must begin to stand on its own economic feet. It must
look to the international community not for aid flows but for investment resources, management know-how and
trading partners in a Europe that is expanding in the context of the Stability Pact for Southeast Europe. To do
this, it must commit to deeper, more unified and consistent reforms. With recovery, a tenuous healing process
has also begun, but it needs to be nurtured. Greater voice and participation of Bosnian citizens are needed to
help build social and political consensus, create stronger governance and reduce ethnic divisions. As a step
toward greater self-sustainability, the BH government is preparing its first Economic Development Strategy
which will set out reform measures and priorities for 2000-2004. While strategy formulation is underway, it
has been broadly discussed in BH and there has been a substantial meeting of the minds between the Bank and
the authorities on its key elements (Section III). The next two years will be critical in establishing the policy
reform framework needed to ensure that this Development Strategy brings BH closer to the vision of a stable
and prosperous future for all.

A. Political Context

II. Recent Developments

3. 
BH's political institutions and inter-relationships have slowly matured, but gains are subject to
setbacks. Compared with the starting point of the last CAS, the functioning of new State institutions mandated
by the Dayton Peace Agreement, and the cooperation between BH's two constituent Entities - the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina (the Federation), and the Republika Srpska - have improved over the last two years.
Following country-wide elections in September 1998, the tri-partite State-level Presidency appointed a Council
of Ministers (COM) which has managed government business consistently and reasonably well. Indicative of
government fragility, however, the COM is currently temporarily suspended following a ruling of the
Constitutional Court that its structure is unconstitutional.2 In Republika Sprska, the current Entity government
has brought a pragmatic interest in working with the Federation, which has been reciprocated by the Federation
government. But the current Republika Srpska government is in a care-taker position, with a slim support base.
Moreover, the close economic integration of Republika Srpska with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY)
has made it vulnerable to negative spillover effects from political instability there. In the Federation, internal
difficulties continue between the Bosniak and Croat partners; economic and political ties between Croatia and
the southern part of the Federation have at times undermined the Entity's unity. While other developments
have helped consolidate the country's political framework - among them the long-awaited arbitration of Brcko

IThe preparation of this CAS was delayed by the 1999 Kosovo crisis, and therefore the CAS period covers FYOO-02.
2The Constitutional Court ruled that the configuration of two Co-Chairmen and one Deputy Co-Chair (representing each of the three
constituent groups) was not consistent with the Constitution; this arrangement is likely to be replaced by one Chairman post, to rotate
among the three parties, and the COM is expected to reconvene shortly.

which resolved the last wartime boundary dispute - overall, the political landscape remains highly uncertain.
The ethnic divide remains deep, as witnessed by demonstrations following sentencing of those indicted on war
crimes by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). In recent municipal elections,
while Bosniaks voters shifted overwhelmingly towards a moderate, non-nationalist party, Serb and Croat voters
favored the nationalist parties (despite, for example, recent changes in Croatia where voters have backed a
moderate, pro-reform party). National elections this fall are difficult to predict.

4. 
Cooperation has improved, but pursuit of separate rather than common objectives has delayed
reforms. Underlying BH's governance structure remains the fact that the Dayton Agreement was an
externally-generated compromise that left dissatisfaction on all sides. Compromise and consensus continue to
be difficult. While it is one country, BH is comprised of two separate and distinct Entities - which hold the
lion's share of responsibility for economic management (Box 3) - and of three constituent peoples who often
see their interests as separate rather than joint. Cooperation between the three groups and two Entities has
improved markedly when compared with the outset of the last CAS period. However, on economic matters the
parties frequently pursue separate agendas rather than working toward consensus needed to implement policy
reform. Illegal "parallel" institutions affiliated with these groups have been slow to disband, in particular in the
Federation, and have complicated reform of customs and tax administration, the payment bureaus and public
utilities. Misuse of public funds has been alleged in this context. The Office of the High Representative
(OHR), charged with overseeing civilian implementation of the Dayton accords, has on occasion used the
power delegated to it to impose legislation, albeit sparingly. While this has prevented gridlock from stalling
progress due to lack of agreement among the parties, it also discourages ownership of tough reforms. Weak
and fragmented governance remains the most serious impediment to implementing reforms needed for
sustainable economic growth.

B. Economic Performance

5. 
Strengthened institutions and policies have contributed to macro stability. The authorities embarked
in May 1998 on an ambitious economic reform program, supported by IDA adjustment lending (under the
previous CAS) and an IMF Stand-by Arrangement (SBA) - which may be converted to a Poverty Reduction and
Growth Facility later this year. The objectives of this program have been to create a unified economic space
and a functioning banking system, privatize and restructure enterprises, reform the labor market, reshape the
pension and health systems, implement a simplified customs system, and liberalize the trade regime.
Underlying these reform plans is an ongoing macroeconomic stabilization program based on a currency board
arrangement, accompanied by strict fiscal discipline. In large part, results have been good. There has been
sound macro management and steady, if sometimes slow, progress towards building institutions and policies
needed for economic management. The most successful achievement over the last two years has been full
establishment of BH's Central Bank and launching of its currency -- the Konvertibile Marka (KM), pegged to
the Deutsche Mark. The KM is now well-established and has gained credibility throughout the country. Other
achievements include adoption of a liberal country-wide customs tariff regime, elimination of barriers to the
internal movement of people and goods and substantially increased inter-Entity trade. There has been progress
on pension and health system reform. On the fiscal side, discipline has been maintained - the 1999 budget
deficit for the Federation was held to about 1.3 percent of GDP, and 3.5 percent in Republika Srpska (both
financed by donors) - and credible efforts are underway to improve Entity expenditure management. However,
tax policy lacks stability, harmonization between the Entities has taken time and remains incomplete, and tax
evasion is widespread - all of which contribute to fiscal fragility.

6. 

Spurred by donor-funded reconstruction, growth has remained strong. 

In tandem with good macro

performance, major progress has been made in reconstruction over the last two years. The 1996-1999 Priority
Reconstruction and Recovery Program (PRRP), endorsed by intemational donors and the BH govemment in 1995,
has brought repair of the bulk of war-damaged economic and social infrastructure and has spurred economic
growth. By the end of 2000, it is anticipated that road, telecom, power, water and education services, will be at or
near prewar availability levels, a substantial achievement in just four years (Annex 1). Aid flows and

2

Chart 1. BH: Evolution of GDP level and GDP growth 

GDP US$ billion 

1990 -1999 

GDP growth rate 

15 

10 

5. 

80% 

60% 

0 
20% 

0 

1990 1991 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 

m 

oe i 

macroeconomic stability have together generated
l ha 
fromether 
high
strong growth. Though down from the very high
postwar levels, GDP is estimated to have grown by 10

percent in 1999 (Chart 1)~BH thus appears to have

~~ ~~~~~~0% 

weathered the economic impact of the 1999 Kosovo

conflict (disruption 
of trade, the cost of additional
refugees) better than some of the countries of

Southeast Europe (SEE).4 Growth patterns indicate

1992-1993 GDP not 

.

Source: World Bank estimates 

j 

-

GDP level 

-+- - - GDP growxthlratXIindustry 

that recovery is led by SMEs in the services and light

sectors, likely to be leaders of growth in the
medium term (para. 22).

7. 
But stalled progress on structural reforms means recovery is not yet sustainable. Economic
recovery has been achieved largely on the strength of substantial financial and technical assistance from the
international community. Progress implementing the structural reforms needed to consolidate these
achievements and move towards sustainable growth has been disappointingly slow. At the heart of the problem
lies inconsistent commitment to reform. The process of weighing difficult policy trade-offs and acting on them
is often complicated by BH's fragmented postwar govemance and weak social and political consensus. As a
result, enterprise privatization was delayed and the process has been dominated by ethnic considerations (para.
24). BH's rigid labor laws are proving difficult to amend. Perhaps most seriously, discretionary administrative
intervention in the economy limits private sector development and encourages potential corruption. Little has
been done to improve the poor legislative environment, reduce excessive fiscal burden on enterprises and
eliminate costly administrative barriers that dissuade investors and present occasions for rent-seeking and
discrimination. Slow progress in transition reforms has contributed to a weak private sector response and
high unemployment.

8. 
Finally, while they have narrowed, important economic differences still distinguish the two
Entities. GDP per capita in Republika Srpksa is just 75 percent of the country's average, due to a later start to
donor assistance and recovery and weaker integration with the international economy (e.g., until the end of last
year, continued use of the FRY dinar there meant higher inflation and the erosion of dinar-denominated income
and savings). Differences in Entity incomes mean differing capacities to address poverty (para. 9) and to
manage external debt, which is similar in absolute value in the two Entities (para. 39). Over time, as barriers to
the movement of labor, goods and capital across Entities are removed - reinforcing BH as one economic space
- and as links with the SEE Region, Europe, and the global economy are strengthened, living standards should
converge. Policies should continue to be geared toward accelerating this.

C. Social Context

9. While reconstruction has led to increased incomes, most Bosnians remain worse off than before the
war. Although deprivation was widespread at war's end (Box 1), four years of reconstruction and growth have
brought dramatic increases in income and well-being. Per capita incomes have more than doubled to about
US$1,080, (from US$456 at end-1995). Household surveys provide evidence of increasing per capita
consumption. Basic services such as water, education and health care are now broadly available in most areas
(although with uneven quality and cost-effectiveness). Progress has also been achieved in some of the other
dimensions of human deprivation that affected postwar BH; e.g., improved conditions for return of refugees and
the displaced, notably physical security, has led to increasing numbers of minority returns, (although slow

3 Growth rates reached 69% in 1996, 30% in 1997, 13% in 1998 and 10% in 1999 (down from a projected 16% due to the Kosovo-
crisis). These rates brought GDP from US$1.9 billion (1995) to an estimated US$4.6 billion (1999).
4 Southeast Europe includes Albania, BH, Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and FRY
(comprised of the Republic of Montenegro, and the Republic of Serbia, of which Kosovo is a province).

3

o 

Aib ania 

_1H

Chart 2. SEERegion: GNP per capita..
1998

refugee return remains a key social issue in BH).5 But most
Bosnians remain far worse off than they were before the war 
began. And despite high postwar growth rates, BH remains 
the second-poorest country in the SEE Region on a per capita 
basis (Chart 2). While there are many estimates, there is no 
recent data on poverty 
incidence based on a 
reliable 
comprehensive household 
survey. 
(A Living Standards 
Measurement Survey and Poverty Assessment would be key 
elements of this CAS, and would be important 
inputs to 
development of BH's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (para. 
15).) The best currently available survey data (from 1997) 
suggest that 27 percent of Bosnians 
fall below a relative
poverty line, while 11 percent fall below an extreme poverty line.6
This data also suggest that regional
disparities are high: About half the population of Republika Srpska fell below the poverty line, and substantial
differences existed among the Federation's cantons (Sarajevo and West Herzegovina having the lowest poverty
incidence). The ethnic correlation of these regional disparities (and the differing Entity and regional capacities
to address them) will present politically difficult and potentially divisive policy challenges.

Source: World Bank estimates

3,9(9 

4,001) 5.9)111)

FYR Macedonia-3 

SEEAVERAGE 

uSs. 

1,900 2,((9 

Bulgaria 

Croatia 

i

4 5 0

Romania 

1,230 

,2Ei

.39

,223l

Box 1. The Legacy of War on Everyday Lives
While BH was one of the poorer of SFRY's republics prior to the war, income distribution was relatively even and
there was little abject poverty. With the massive economic contraction brought by war, GDP per capita fell from US$2,429
in 1990 to US$456 in 1995 - bringing deprivation of an all-encompassing nature to most Bosnians. Widespread loss of
jobs was the primary impact on household economic status. But deprivation was not limited to income. Assets - housing,
automobiles, farm equipment, household possessions - were lost or destroyed. Bank deposits were frozen. Basic electricity
and water services were not available. Access to education and health services was interrupted. Official institutions and
programs, such as for social protection, were bankrupted with collapsed government budgets. Among the most significant
impacts, over two million people - nearly half the prewar population - were forced from or chose to leave their homes and
became refugees, either abroad or displaced internally within BH. With these population movements commnunity- and
family-based social networks were also seriously disrupted. Physical security also has become a risk for many, particularly
ethnic minorities in majority areas, given weak law enforcement and remaining tensions.
Four years after the end of the war, the situation has improved dramatically for most Bosnians. In spite of these
gains, however, consultations in the context of the "Voices of the Poor" in 1999 noted that: "...the combined pressure of...

transition and wartime devastation has placed many people on the margins of economic existence. Their current privations
contrast sharply with a relatively comfortable prewar "normal life. "... Participants consistently identified unemployment
as their principal concern... People at all sites described searching for any kind of work and relying on occasional,
informal labor. Many expressed strong desires for regular employment... Lacking employment opportunities 
in the
country, many younger people seek to emigrate... "

10. Unemployment 
is a key determinant of poverty. Registered unemployment reached 37 percent in the
Federation and 36 percent in Republika Srpska in 1998 (and has stagnated).' These rates are among the highest
in the Region, with only Macedonia on the same scale. While a significant share of the registered unemployed
generate some income 
in the informal sector, survey data suggest that households where 
the head 
is
unemployed are three to five times poorer than households where the head is employed. Several other groups
are particularly vulnerable to poverty, including the internally displaced (nearly 40 percent of the poor have one
household member who is displaced). Children and the elderly are more at risk of poverty, as are single female

5 Of a total 1.2 million refugees and 865,000 internally displaced at the end of 1995, some 650,000 had returned to their homes by the
end of 1999, the vast majority to same-ethnic areas. Over 80 percent were to the Federation. Several hundred thousand refugees have
found permanent homes abroad (UNHCR).
6 Due to data limitations, these poverty lines are based on relative adjusted per capita income. The two lines are drawn at 60 percent
("base poverty") and 30 percent ("extreme poverty") of the median of adult-equivalent economies of scale adjusted per capita-income
distribution. Poverty and Inequality in BH (Draft), 2000 (based on 1997 CIET survey data).
7 Figures include workers on "waiting lists," who do not work, however retain a right to be called back to work.

4

(often widowed) heads of households. While there is no urban/rural breakdown available, there has been
marked rural-to-urban migration in the postwar period (and evidence suggests agriculture has declined as a
source of income). These findings are consistent with a 1998 Social Assessment and the 1999 "Voices of the
Poor" consultations (Box 1). BH's social services structures are inadequate to provide for the needs of these
groups. The social safety nets inherited from the Federal Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) remain,
without the public resources to fund them (and with variable capacities between and within the two Entities).
Direct donor support has helped fill the gaps over the last several years. Reconstruction and recovery have
brought generalized improvement in welfare; planning for a more targeted poverty-alleviation strategy that
addresses BH's specific postwar challenges is now needed.

D. The External Environment

11. Declining external support will require well-managed fiscal adjustment. BH faces a major change in
its external environment during the CAS period. Over the last four years a large external financing requirement
has been met by donor resources associated with the PRRP. With the formal end of the PRRP, donor aid flows
will now begin to decline from their exceptionally high level and concessionality to those associated with more
normal development needs. It is estimated that about US$3.5 billion of the over US$5 billion pledged for
reconstruction had been disbursed by end-1999.8 The remainder is expected to be disbursed over the course of
the next two to three years, consistent with the historic pace of converting commitments to expenditures. Thus,
reduced commitments are not expected to translate

US$ billions 

Chart 3. BH: Donor Commitments 
Disbursements 

and 

2.50 
2.00 T 
1.50 

100 -

0.50 

0.00

1996 - 2004 

-

Disbursesents 

= 

= 

_as 

1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 

Source WB/EC Donor database and Bank staff estimates 

into

signifcantly 
reduced spendig 
levels for
another 24 months or so (Chart 3). Nevertheless, it
will be important for the authorities to plan now
for the measures needed to ensure fiscal balance

this shift takes place, including reduced public

spending and enhanced revenues, increased private
investment, and progress toward creditworthiness.
Even with such measures, however, BH will
continue to require additional aid flows to maintain

external payments viability (para. 37).

12. Closer links to Europe offer economic and political opportunity. A second external development that
will have marked impact is enhanced economic and political linkage with Europe through the recently-
announced Stability Pact for SEE. The Stability Pact offers links with European and global institutions as an
external "pull" to help stimulate democratic and market-oriented reforms and reduce the risk of continued
conflict in the SEE countries.9
It is also hoped that the Stability Pact will lead to reduced military spending and
an increased "peace dividend," and that greater stability in the Region will enhance the potential for foreign
investment. Closer integration with the EU and its institutions would be achieved through Stabilization and
Association Agreements (SAAs) that would govern political, economic and trade relations between the
European Union (EU) and the countries of the Region.10 To take advantage of these closer ties, however,
countries of the Region will need to undertake more systematic structural and political reforms, in particular
in four areas: (i) trade (toward integration with the SEE Region and the EU) and private sector development;
(ii) social inclusion to secure a climate for political stability; (iii) improved institutional capacity and
governance; and (iv) development of regional infrastructure to physically integrate the Region. Minimum

8 Preliminary estimate; actual donor reporting of disbursements and expenditures for end-1999 has not been completed.
Major donors have assigned the Bank and the European Commission (EC) responsibility for coordinating economic assistance to the
Region, and the Stability Pact gives the Bank and the EU a special mandate to coordinate a comprehensive regional approach to
development in the Region. The framework for this approach is set out in the report The Road to Stability and Prosperity in South
Eastern Europe: A Regional Strategy Paper, March 2000, The World Bank.
'0 To illustrate, a first SAA with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) is to be negotiated this year, and will include
enhanced regional cooperation leading (after ten years) to a free-trade area between the EU and FYROM, and increasing conformity of
FYROM's legislative framework with that of Europe.

5

conditions for the EU to embark on a Feasibility Study, the first step in this process, are being developed for
BH. These conditions are likely to include trade and private-sector oriented economic measures (reforming the
payments' bureau, establishing a modern treasury, further harmonizing trade policies of the Entities), and
governance- and social inclusion-related measures (improving conditions for refugee return, strengthening the
judiciary, implementing a new property law and a new election law). The Stability Pact provides substantial
opportunity for BH: As a small country with a limited domestic market, BH will be dependent on expanding
exports to sustain growth - in particular to the EU, its main postwar trading partner. Moreover, closer linkage
to Europe is a widely-shared goal in BH that has the potential to be politically unifying.

III. Bosnia and Herzegovina's Development Challenges and Priorities

A. Development Challenges

13. BH is now at a crossroads. Over the next two to three years, BH will pass through a critical phase of its
postwar development, during which it must prepare to stand on its own economically, as donor financial and
technical support decreases. The country faces two critical development challenges in the period ahead:

* The first is to take ownership of its economic future by assuming increased responsibility for economic
policies and outcomes. This will mean strengthening governance at all levels and reducing dependence on
the international community. Proactively consulting with Bosnian citizens on issues that affect their
economic future will be important to improved governance in BH's post-conflict setting.

* The second is to promote sustainable growth and employment that provides increasing incomes and
opportunities for all Bosnians. This will require accelerated reforms aimed at increasing private sector
activity, as well as measures to ensure that growth is inclusive. In parallel, safety nets must be put in place
for those who cannot feel the full benefits of growth. In the near term, reducing unemployment will be key
to reducing poverty and enhancing opportunity.

Addressing these two development challenges - and consistently pursuing the policy reforms they require - will
be critical to ensuring that BH can stand on its own feet as the international community steps back. Meeting
these challenges will also help to bring about long-term reconciliation by ensuring all members of Bosnian
society have a stake in the economic future. Finally, meeting these challenges will help build the vision of a
prosperous and stable country increasingly integrated into Europe - a vision embodied in the Dayton
Agreement and increasingly shared by many in BH.

B. Economic Development Priorities

14. A first Bosnian Economic Development Strategy. As a key step in taking increased ownership for
economic outcomes, the Bosnian authorities are now preparing an Economic Development Strategy (EDS) for
the period 2000-2004 which will be presented to a first Consultative Group (CG) meeting later this year. The
EDS will be a Bosnian-owned strategy that is intended to replace the PRRP as the strategic basis for policy and
spending decisions in BH, and to serve as a framework to guide external development assistance. (Annual CG
meetings will replace Donor Conferences of the past four years; para. 46). A team comprised of representatives
from the two Entities and coordinated by the State is spearheading the EDS, which is being prepared in a
participatory manner, and will be broadly consistent with the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF).
The EDS builds on strategy formulation initiatives underway in the context of a Medium Term Expenditure
Framework (MTEF) exercise supported by the Bank and other donors (para. 21). It also builds on work
underway in the context of the Feasibility Study for closer association with EU institutions. Development of
country performance indicators (to measure both outcomes/impacts and intermediate inputs/outputs) in the
context of overall development goals will be a key component of the EDS. An initial Framework Paper
prepared by the authorities sets out key challenges (Box 2).

6

Box 2. Framework for Economic Development in Bosnia and Herzegovina - 2000-2004
A draft framework paper prepared by the authorities sets out seven key development priorities for BH over the
course of the next several years: "
* Fiscal management. Stable public finances will be important in the context of decreasing aid flows. Better planning
and budgeting of public expenditures, and increased accountability of government for expenditures at all levels are
needed. Debt management and enhanced creditworthiness are key objectives.
* Fighting poverty. Unemployment is the key determinant of poverty. Labor market reforms are needed, along with
reduction of payroll and other taxes, adult education and retraining, and equitable social protection programs. The
government has committed, with donor assistance, to developing reliable poverty and social sector statistics and to
preparing a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy.
* Development of a market-oriented private economy. The core reforms identified are appropriate legal, fiscal and
regulatory arrangements, labor force flexibility, creation of a single economic space in the country, completion of
privatization of SMEs, and progress on large enterprise privatization.
Institution building. Institutions need to be strengthened throughout the public sector, and the confidence of citizens in
a government that will protect their rights and property must be built.
* Completion of reconstruction. Significant challenges remain in reconstruction, including housing, demining, and
environmental protection, and local infrastructure.
* Access to WTO and European integration. Enhanced trade with Europe, the biggest potential market for BH goods
and services, is emphasized; the Stability Pact is seen as a key path to that objective. Reaching a Stabilization and
Association Agreement is a priority, along with joining the WTO.
* Fighting corruption and the gray economy. The impact of corruption on private investment and fiscal revenues is
recognized; refonn of both institutions and policies are needed to reduce corruption and shift activity from the informal
into the formal economy.

* 

15. Making poverty reduction central to the development strategy. Building on the EDS, and integrally
linked to it, the government of BH has also undertaken to develop a comprehensive Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP) that addresses the complex human and social deprivation many Bosnians 
face. 
(With the
constraints of poor data, a full PRSP is being possible only in 2002 once basic surveys have been conducted; in
the meantime, an Interim-PRSP 
is being prepared on the basis of currently-available 
information.) The
overarching objective of the Bosnian authorities, following the economic devastation caused by four years of
war, is spurring growth and reducing painfully high unemployment. GDP has recovered to only half of the
prewar level in four years. Recovering sustainable growth - and the macroeconomic stability and structural
reforms needed to achieve this - will be the most important element in a poverty reduction strategy. Given'the
high correlation between poverty and unemployment, growth that generates significant employment will be
critical to an inclusive growth strategy. Labor legislation reforms to improve labor market flexibility and
reduce the cost to firms of hiring workers will be key. Administrative and legal changes in the business
environment to increase enterprise activity - especially the SMEs that are likely in the near term to lead growth
and job creation - will be important. Policy harmonization (tax and customs) reforms in the Entities to create
one economic space will also help ensure more even and inclusive growth across the country, given wide
regional income disparities. However a growth strategy alone is not sufficient. The PRSP will need to address
not only increased opportunity (including employment and incomes, but also affordable and quality education
and health services). 
It must address greater empowerment and voice (less discrimination, stronger, more
accountable and pro-poor institutions and greater public dissemination of information), and enhanced physical
security (well-targeted safety nets and more effective policing). Providing advice and technical assistance to
the team developing the EDS and the I-PRSP/PRSP (the two are being prepared by the same core team to
ensure full complementarity) will be a priority, and a significant portion of the AAA planned under the FY00-
02 CAS will help lay the analytical and statistical groundwork for these two important efforts. Among the

I IGlobal Framework for Economic Development and Social Protection in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2000-2004, March 2000, BH
Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations.

7

Bank's challenges in BH will continue to be expanding the discussion of development objectives beyond the
postwar focus on growth and employment towards a broader definition of poverty reduction.

16. During the course of CAS preparation, the Bank and the government have discussed and agreed in broad
terms on four priorities areas that form the key components of the EDS. Each of these will also have a critical
role in increasing opportunity and reducing poverty: (i) strengthening governance; (ii) fostering private sector
led growth; (iii) building social sustainability; and (iv) completing reconstruction.

Strengthening Institutions and Governance12

17. Stronger institutions and governance will be needed to achieve BH's development objectives. The
pace of institutional change is often slow, even in countries with strong public sectors and cohesive political
environments. 
In BH, newly-established institutions, fragmented government structures and "ethnic
competition," mean developing good governance will be a long-term objective. But this work is nevertheless
critical, since strong and accountable institutions and good governance are pre-conditions to sustained success
in other reform areas - e.g., transparent and efficient public finance management provides a foundation for
sustainable growth; responsive, representative local institutions play an essential role in promoting social
inclusion and reducing poverty; and more mature political institutions will be required for gradual integration
with European institutions. While good governance entails a range of issues, the key medium-term priorities in
BH, given its post-conflict context and current development challenges, center on: (i) enhancing the
transparency of public institutions; and (ii) developing and implementing a medium-term fiscal adjustment
strategy that (a) sets clear rules for intergovernmentalfinance; (b) enhances revenue mobilization, and (c)
ensures reduced and more efficient public spending. Moreover, while technical capacity is high in many
sectors in BH, the country's new institutional structures mean that capacity building is a critical cross-cutting
theme to which most donors, including the Bank, have contributed in one way or another over the last four
years (e.g., setting up and strengthening debt and budget management units, bank supervision agencies, and a
range of other sectoral institutions). Continued technical assistance for capacity building is a long-term
development need. Governance challenges also include stimulating greater private sector activity by creating
an appropriate business enabling environment (para. 23) and ensuring greater public dissemination of
information (e.g., on economic policy trade-offs and social service standards) to ensure institutional
accountability (para. 32).

18. 
Increased transparency. The war gravely eroded the integrity of government institutions and the rule of
law. Corruption not only dampens growth but has also been shown to affect the poor disproportionately. Recent
surveys have shown that BH has one of the lowest rankings in the SEE Region (already low compared with Central
Europe and other regions) on transparency-related indicators. Over the past four years, Bank-supported projects
(in particular, two Public Finance Structural Adjustment Credits (PFSAC I; FY98 and II; FY99)) have helped build
accountability into the use of both domestically-generated and donor-provided public funds, through increased
audit capabilities, strengthened expenditure and debt management, and accountable public procurement review,
among other initiatives. Specific precautions were put in place for Bank-funded operations from the outset of our
involvement (para. 43). Other donors have supported improved customs monitoring, reform of the payments
bureaus, and other initiatives. However, a comprehensive program of institutional and policy reforms is needed to
promote transparency and accountability in public sector management. This will require both "upstream" reforms
(such as more realistic, open and consultative medium-term budget planning), as well as credible "downstream"
controls (such as an effective Treasury, independent and capable Supreme Audit Institutions, effective internal
audit procedures and expansion of the procurement functions to cover all government and donor expenditures).
Strengthened judiciary and rule of law is an important element of transparent institutions. The primary focus to
date has been establishment of the Constitutional Court and strengthening of the State prosecutor's office.

12 Governance here is referred to broadly to include "the role and performance of government in relation to a country's economic, social

and political institutions." Reforming Public Institutions and Strengthening Governance, A World Bank Strategy (Discussion Draft),

Dec. 30, 1999.

8

However a wider judicial reform agenda remains, including new systems for the appointment of judges and the
separate budgeting of the court system, along with legal reforms needed for private sector development, including
arbitration, competition and insurance. These efforts have been spearheaded by OHR and the EU.

19. 
Better rules for intergovernmental finance. The Dayton Agreement provides for differences in intra-
Entity fiscal arrangements (Box 3). Allocating local public-expenditure responsibilities and revenues between the
levels of government in an efficient and equitable manner is a key policy issue, particularly in the Federation.
Among the most pressing issues is developing mechanisms to effectively finance and deliver services with
geographic spillovers, such as higher education and health, especially in poorer regions. The legacy of conflict
exacerbates the need and the challenges involved, since dealing with equity consideration among regions remains
difficult due to the low political tolerance for cross-subsidies among ethnic groups. Nevertheless, addressing these
issues will be critical to a poverty reduction strategy. Revenue allocation between the local governments,
including through re-defining revenue attribution rules and preventing tax exemptions, is also important.

Box 3. Dayton Governance Arrangements
The Dayton Agreement sought to ensure maximum autonomy to BH's two Entities. The Entities have exclusive
responsibility in their territories for defense, internal affairs, economic and social sector policies, resettlement and
reconstruction, justice, tax and customs administration. They have ownership of customs duties and excise taxes. The State
government has a restricted role, responsible for foreign affairs, customs policy, monetary managmenet, external debt and
inter-Entity infrastructure. It has no independent source of revenue and depends on transfers from the Entities.
The Entities have vastly different structures. Republika Srpska remains highly centralized, with minimal local
service functions and revenues delegated to its 51 municipalities. The Federation's structure was intended to allow greater
local control over service levels, given the need to accommodate the two Federation partners; thus, all responsibilities not
explicitly assigned to the Entity (including education, housing, public services and social transfers) are devolved to its ten
cantons, and each canton is authorized to further delegate responsibilities to the 81 municipalities. (Brcko, with three
municipalities, was recently designated a separate district.) Cantons have sales, income and property taxes, as well as local
user fees. Many cantons and municipalities are far from being able to assume these responsibilities. Decisions are yet to be
made regarding the joint provision of services to ensure efficiency, and intergovernmental transfers to support equity- and
efficiency-enhancing arrangements.

20. 
Improved revenue mobilization. The past two years have seen progress in simplifying and harmonizing
tax policy and strengthening tax administration under the PFSAC program and the SBA. Nevertheless, to
increase revenues while creating an environment conducive to private investment, greater effort is needed.
Strengthened fiscal capacity will be critical to the credibility and, hence, sustainability of the structural reform
process and robustness of the supply response. Tax rates should be further reduced as the high tax burden
discourages compliance and is a disincentive to private investment. To ensure budget revenues are not
jeopardized, these reductions should be phased to correspond to broadening of the tax base and increases in
private sector activity. For example, to protect payroll contributions to pension, health and unemployment
insurance, the payroll tax base needs to be broadened and enforcement rules strengthened. Further tax reforms
- particularly of sales and excise taxes - should be deepened over the next two years to begin to align BH's tax
system with European norms. Ongoing efforts to rationalize and modernize tax and customs administrative
structures should be accelerated. Other public revenue instruments are also important, such as utility user
charges. In many sectors efforts are underway (supported by ongoing Bank operations) to review and revise
tariff levels and structures to ensure progressive covering of economic costs.

21. Reduced and more efficient public spending. With the reconstruction effort coming to a close, the need for
large public investments (public expenditures in the 1996-1999 period averaged over 65 percent of GDP) will
decline sharply and public spending plans should reflect this. A large portion of this decrease will come about
naturally as a consequence of the decline in capital investment as the reconstruction program winds down.
However, cuts in recurrent expenditure levels will also be needed. In many cases these will be politically difficult.
For example, military spending - 9 percent of budgeted spending in Republika Sprska and 12 percent in the
Federation (5-6 percent of Entity GDP) - will need to be cut through demobilization of soldiers, for which Dayton

9

and subsequent international agreements set targets. Entitlements for veterans and war invalids and their families
(4 percent of Entity GDP) will need to be targeted to the truly needy (para. 29). Reform to streamline and reduce
BH's large and complex postwar civil service is also needed, requiring establishment of merit-based hiring and
better definition of functional responsibilities. Within a reduced overall spending envelope, expenditures must
then be reoriented towards high priorities such as social assistance, operating costs for social services, and
maintenance for those portions of newly-rehabilitated infrastructure that will remain publicly-managed (e.g., the
road network). Work is currently underway in the context of a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework exercise
supported by IDA (under PFSAC II) to effectively ensure aggregate fiscal discipline within a coherent
macroeconomic framework, and improve strategic resource allocation and efficient resource use. The MTEF aims
to develop capacity to manage expenditures consistent with resource constraints and sector policies. This work
should be expanded, and will be a key tool in preparing the EDS as well as the PRSP.

Fostering Private Sector-Led Growth and Employment

22. Deeper and more consistent structural reforms are needed for sustainable growth and employment.
The pace of structural reform in BH has lagged behind that of the other countries of the SEE Region - a region
which is already lagging its Central European neighbors (Table 1). The impact of conflict and the associated
political risk and uncertainty have contributed in part to this slow performance.13 But a more aggressive reform
effort over the next several years is essential to sustainable growth. Growth that generates employment will be
a key element of BH's poverty reduction strategy. Growth in the coming years is likely to come from a
combination of private sector led efficiency gains (e.g., recovery of underutilized capacity and allocation towards
goods in which BH has a comparative advantage) and output expansion via start-ups and new investment. It is
likely that much activity in the near tenn will come from the SME sector. As in many more-developed economies,
BH's SME sector is likely to be the source of fastest employment growth (as well as a catalyst of innovation and
entrepreneurship), making SME growth important to poverty reduction. The key reform measures needed to
ensure this private sector-led response are: (i) promotion of new private activity through a transparent and
predictable enabling environment; (ii) transformation of outmoded socially-owned productive capacities into
operations that can stand on their own feet in open markets through privatization (or liquidation of non-viable
activities); (iii) reform of a dysfunctional and de-capitalized banking sector to ensure that productive activity can
operate in efficient financial markets; and (iv) reform of labor markets to promote mobility and create
employment opportunities in the formal sector.

Table 1. Progress Toward Reform in the Real Sector in the SEE Regiona
Priv. Share 
Enterprise 
Competition 
Privatization 
Of 1998 GDP 
Reform Index 
Policy Index 
Index 
2.0 
2.0 
3.0 

75 

57 
60 
55 

2.3 
2.7 
2.0 

2.0 
2.0 
1.0 

3.0 
3.7 
3.5 

Banking
Index
2.0

2.0
2.3
1.7

Albania 

BH35.7h2.23
Bulgaria 
Croatia 
FYROM 

60 

3.0 

2.0

Romania 
SEE Avg.592293121
CEE Avg.b 
70 
2.9 
3.0 
4.0 
3.2
a. Indexes developed by EBRD; rankings range from I to 4+, with I lowest and 4+ highest (i.e., a standard that would not be out of place in
an industrialized market economy); EBRD Transition Report, 1999. b. Countries include: Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovak
Republic, Slovenia. Source: World Bank staff estimates; EBRD Transition Report, 1999.

2.0 

2.0 

23. Enabling environment for business. The cost to private firms of doing business in BH is high (Box 4).
The country is still dominated by a bureaucracy geared to the old socialist system, with some informal remnants

13 In fact, BH's private sector share of GDP in 1998 was roughly comparable to that of the other SEE countries after the first five years
of transition - which may be a more appropriate benchmark, given BH's four lost years of war.

10

of ad hoc wartime arrangements. Costly administrative barriers create opportunities for rent-seeking and are
particularly onerous for SMEs. While many of the laws needed for a well-functioning private sector have been
promulgated (e.g., laws on privatization of enterprises and banks, amendments to the corporate and accounting
codes, laws on securities), others critical to business development have not, including a revised labor law, and
laws on restitution and bankruptcy (in Republika Srpska). Ownership rights remain unclear, contract law is
difficult to enforce, and the courts are slow and inefficient. Tax rates on business are high and the tax system is
complex. Development of a private banking sector has been hampered by government payment bureaus which
had, until recently, a monopoly on all domestic non-cash transactions. While there is a new liberal foreign
investment law (technical advice provided by FIAS), the above factors, combined with perceptions of political
risk, have dissuaded foreign investors from entering Bosnian markets. Administrative measures to simplify
business registration, passage of key laws, modification of the fiscal regime to lower the tax on labor,
strengthening the judiciary and measures to combat corruption are all priorities to stimulate growth and
employment.

.

Box 4. Constraints to Private Investment and Business Development
Administrative Constraints
 A complex 14 step business registration process takes months to complete.
* Business laws and regulations are biased against small businesses as they often have significant and cumbersome
paperwork requirements for minor but regular business activities.
Inconsistent and contradictory business regulations are difficult to follow and expose businesses to fees for unavoidably
breaking laws, regulations, and codes, encouraging corruption.
 Opaque business laws and regulations discourage foreign and domestic business development.
Legal and Judicial Constraints
* The court system is viewed as slow and inefficient (simple civil suits can take as much as 12 months to resolve).
. Court decisions are not based on precedent, and there is skepticism regarding fairness of decisions.
 High taxes on civil suits discourage bringing claims to court.
 Unclear ownership rights (land, public/private ownership structure) discourage business investment.
Fiscal Constraints
. Complicated tax structures, including unpredictable retroactive taxes, discourage compliance.
* Many tax laws are biased against new and small businesses in favor large state-owned companies.
* High levels of taxation cuts into retums on investment leaving little incentive to report accurately.

24. Accelerating privatization. The Entities have both passed legislation and embarked on comprehensive
programs to privatize all publicly owned enterprises and banks, the first phase of which is supported by an IDA-
funded Enterprise and Bank Privatization Credit (EBPAC; FY99), and technical assistance from other donors
(e.g., for establishing privatization and bank supervision agencies). The EBPAC aimed to start privatization of
BH's SMEs (there are about 270 in the Federation and 150 in Republika Srpska) and to prepare for bank and
large scale enterprise privatization. Further support was planned under subsequent operations. While the
difficulties and risks of privatization had been flagged in the last CAS, lack of agreement among the constituent
groups (e.g., regarding establishment of privatization agencies and distribution of vouchers), and other issues
(e.g., the difficulty of determining asset ownership with complex refugee claims) delayed the start of
privatization longer than hoped. Sale of SMEs began recently, however, in both Entities. In the Federation,
nearly one-third of SMEs have now been privatized. Whereas progress on transactions in Republika Srpska has
been slower, with less than ten percent privatized, preparatory activities are well advanced. Preparations for
sale of BH's large enterprises - of which about 100 (half in each Entity) are considered strategically important
- is just beginning and only a handful have been sold to date."4 Foreign participation is encouraged, given the
need for new capital, technology, and marketing skills. Willingness to disengage from the productive sectors is
an obvious sign of commitment to private sector-led growth and progress toward benchmarks set under the
EBPAC will be a touchstone for gauging overall commitment to reforms (para. 54). The challenge, now that
privatization has begun, is accelerating the pace. In parallel, it will be important to ensure adequate safety nets

14 There are about 2,400 large scale enterprises in total, some 1,400 in the Federation and 1,000 in Republika Srpksa

11

to backstop the adjustment process. Privatization of the telecom and energy utilities (starting with
commercialization and corporatization measures and revising sector legislation to encourage competition) is
also important to reducing the fiscal burden of the public sector and improving service quality. Finally, for
those sectors which have low productivity and for which demand will decrease - e.g., portions of the coal mines
- plans for restructuring should be considered.

25. Reforming the banking sector. Most of BH's 20 majority publicly-owned banks are weak, with non-
performing assets and an extremely low level of deposits. Its 37 private banks tend to be undercapitalized and
inexperienced. However, there has been positive movement in banking sector reform. Under the program
supported by the EBPAC, new Entity bank supervision agencies have been established and a major reform of
the payment bureaus is underway (their monopoly over transactions has been abolished, with functions being
gradually transferred to a modern treasury and the banking system). Privatization of banks has begun: In the
Federation privatization plans for four of the nine publicly-owned banks have been approved (efforts have been
underway for some time to privatize the development bank, and a divestiture plan for the largest bank has yet to
be agreed, since negotiation with foreign creditors has delayed a decision on the bank's solvency). In
Republika Srpska, four of the eleven state banks have submitted privatization plans. All banks operate on the
basis of permanent licenses and meet increased capital requirements. The banking sector has been contracting
through mergers and liquidations, and this healthy process is expected to continue as minimum capital
requirements are increased and privatization continues. Benchmarks on bank divestiture will also be an
important determinant of commitment to reforms (para. 54).

26. Reforming labor markets. Sustainable growth depends on the economy's ability to reallocate resources,
including labor, away from low-productivity activities into higher value-added sectors. Labor market flexibility
is also essential to mobility of workers. Increasing employment will be a key element of a poverty reduction
strategy. At present, the environment for creation of productive employment is not encouraging. Tax rates on
labor are high (the cumulative rate on gross income is up to 55 percent), discouraging hiring of new workers
and increasing incentives for informality. Labor legislation in both Entities enshrines centralized control of
labor relations, reinforcing rigidities in the labor market and creating onerous costs and hurdles which are felt
disproportionately by SMEs. The Entities are currently reviewing policies for wage setting, benefits, hiring and
firing, and severance with a view to amending existing legislation, in the context of technical assistance from
the Bank and a planned Social Sector Adjustment Credit (SOSAC). Improving employment services and job
counseling; redesigning BH's currently unaffordable unemployment insurance program; and retraining services
for skills needed in a market economy will be important as large scale privatization begins. Finally, revising
labor legislation and its implementation to prevent discrimination will also be an important social issue on
which the Bank, the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and others are working.

Building Social Sustainability

27. Targeted programs and policies are required to complement stronger institutions and sustainable
growth. Providing all Bosnians a stake in the country's economic future will be key to BH's development into
a stable, peaceful and prosperous society and to poverty reduction. Social sustainability implies not only
broadly increasing incomes, but also improved human and social conditions, and reduced risk and vulnerability.
Together, these factors can also generate movement towards political reconciliation and prevention of future
conflict. In BH's post-conflict situation of dramatically reduced economic activity and incomes, sustainable
growth is a pre-condition for effective poverty reduction. But growth alone cannot bridge the gap in living
standards. Specifically designed and targeted interventions will be needed to ensure access to social services
and a minimum social safety net for the poorest. Medium term priorities include: (i) improving poverty and
social sector information and building statistics management capacity; (ii) reforming social protection
programs to balance resources with needs and ensure minimum assistance for the neediest; (iii) further
developing education and health services, their institutional frameworks and disseminating information on
quality and effectiveness; and (iv) promoting greater participation and inclusion to improve access and
opportunity on a more equal basis and to strengthen accountability and governance.

12

28. Poverty information and capacity building. Data on living standards in BH were not collected during
the war. Immediately following the war, it was impractical to develop an adequate baseline of information on
poverty and human development due to large scale population movements, rapidly changing income and
consumption patterns and weak institutional capacity. However, now that initial returns have taken place and
high postwar growth has slowed to more normal levels, a comprehensive data collection effort is needed.
Reliable poverty information will be key to developing targeted programs and appropriate policies for social
protection and poverty reduction. It will be an essential basis on which to develop the EDS and the full PRSP,
and will also facilitate establishment of poverty reduction and human development goals and monitoring
indicators, including measuring the relative impact of growth. At the same time, it will be important to build
the capacity of the State and Entity statistics agencies to develop and manage this data and to ensure closer
involvement of line ministries so that improved data informs policy development.

29. Social protection (pensions, veterans' benefits and social assistance). BH's postwar social protection
system has not yet adjusted from socialist structures, and includes unaffordable benefit programs. At the same
time, however, there are challenges that are peculiar to BH's postwar setting. For example, social protection,
like other public services, remains institutionally fragmented (de facto separate pension and health insurance
funds for BH's three constituent groups). Budgeted social protection spending is dominated by pensions and
entitlement-based benefits for war veterans - part of the wider issue of high military-related expenditures in
postwar BH. The small amount of social assistance that is publicly provided covers mainly those who cannot
work because of health conditions. These funds are distributed unevenly due to fragmented financing
mechanisms and varying priority given by local administrations. Priorities in the medium term include: (i)
development of an equitable and fiscally-viable social protection strategy prepared on the basis of
comprehensive poverty information; this will require politically difficult prioritization in order to improve the
poverty alleviation impact of transfer spending; (ii) pension reform to adjust both contribution and benefit
levels to ensure sustainability, while increasing minimum pensions to ensure at least subsistence payments for
the neediest pensioners (these reforms have begun under PFSAC II); (iii) reform of veterans' benefits programs
by cutting overall spending and improving targeting (politically difficult, given the fact that 55 percent of
households include an ex-soldier); and (iv) reform of social assistance cash transfer programs, by rationalizing
complex benefit structures, overhauling financing mechanisms, and improving targeting (alleviating the vicious
circle of areas of low financial capacity and high poverty).

30. Education. Physical reconstruction has restored basic service levels, so that enrollment rates are
consistent with those in the Region (Annex B5). Reforms are now needed to improve governance and
management, refocus spending on improved quality, and reform the secondary and higher education systems to
make them more responsive to the demands of an emerging market economy (emphasizing broad, flexible skills
and increasing consistency with European standards). Establishment of well-defined and standardized student
performance information country-wide is critical to ensuring the responsiveness of the education system.
Building capacity to use qualitative indicators to justify policy development and resource allocation decisions
will also be important. This focus on qualitative performance information should also help shift the debate over
education in BH from ethnic politics to education system performance in the context of increasing integration
with Europe.

31. Health. Progress has been made over the last two years in passing new health insurance laws which aim
at universal access to a basic package of health care, equal access to services and efficient financing and
delivery. However, these laws are not yet fully operational and current health insurance funds in both Entities
need reform. Postwar decentralization resulted in an unreasonably low level of risk pooling for health
insurance funds. As a consequence, BH-wide, a large share of GDP (over 12 percent, higher than most other
countries in the region) is spent on health care. More than one third of these expenditures are covered "out of
pocket," by private citizens (disproportionately from the poor, who identify the cost of health care as a key
concern). Institutional reforms to enhance risk pooling, build capacity and increase use of modern health

13

management methods are needed. Strengthening data collection and achieving greater community involvement
will also be important to improve monitoring, policy-making and equity of service provision.

32. 
Inclusion and participation. One of the greatest casualties of war was the weakening of bonds of trust
between individuals and social groups. Developing a culture of tolerance and inclusion will be important to re-
establishing that trust. Today, exclusion is most likely to affect those who are living in areas where they are in
the ethnic minority - often the poorest. Discrimination (e.g., over hiring, access to services, or studying in a
dominant curriculum and language) and even physical violence exacerbate exclusion. Fostering participation
and inclusion is important to reducing gaps in wellbeing. Enhancing consultation mechanisms with groups that
represent the interests of the poor (e.g., community associations, labor unions, religious groups) is key to a
successful poverty reduction strategy. Social exclusion does not affect ethnic groups only; women also risk
exclusion and discrimination. Gender concerns revolve largely around the economic and social exclusion of
displaced women, employment for single female-headed households, and the legacy of a painful heritage of
war-time rape. A number of international and local NGOs are providing programs geared towards the needs of
these women, who are often among the poor. Programs include microcredit, employment assistance, day care
and psychological counseling, among others. 
International and local NGOs have had active programs
supporting many other disadvantaged groups which have also provided effective vehicles for participation. The
Bank has catalyzed participatory efforts in partnership with several of these NGOs, particularly around key
economic policy issues. For example, working groups drawn from local communities and NGOs, with relevant
expertise, have developed draft laws governing non-governmental organizations and a framework of laws for
micro-credit, credit and savings institutions. A social policy task force including practitioners, academics,
policy makers and politicians is leading the dialogue on social protection reform (Annex 2). Among efforts
needed are strengthening local government accountability to the public, encouraging continued community-
based participation in social services, infrastructure and other areas, and generating dialogue on economic
policy issues.

Completing Reconstruction

33. Although the reconstruction effort overall has been highly successful, reconstruction needs will
remain for some time to come. Among the most critical areas in the medium-term will be:

H Housing. Significant progress has been made under programs funded by donors and through self-help.
However, the damage was vast; more than two-thirds of war-affected housing had not yet been repaired by
end-1998. Integrated programs that support rebuilding of housing and restoration of local services (targeted
largely at returnees), supported by the EU, UNHCR and others and implemented in large part through
NGOs, are likely to continue to be important. In addition to the continuing need for postwar reconstruction,
the legal issues of establishing housing rights will need to be addressed systematically (AAA undertaken
with support from the Bank's Post-Conflict Fund has reviewed needs for development of an efficient
housing market).
* Other Community Services. While community facilities have been restored in many urban areas and in
much of the Federation through donor support (including Bank-supported emergency reconstruction
projects), many people continue to receive services that are of poor quality and with limited availability.
Coverage of rural areas is less advanced, as has been progress in Republika Srpska more generally, due to
the later start of reconstruction there. Local services likely to be most sorely needed are water supply and
waste collection. Finally, while overall environmental concerns are not as serious as before the war
because of reduced economic activity (in particular BH's predominant prewar heavy industry), there are
important environmental issues at the local level, in particular in regard to waste disposal. Moreover, there
is a need to identify current and future potential environmental concerns which may arise with more
sustainable private sector activity.
* Demining. Much has been accomplished in clearing, surveying, marking and mine awareness, through the
efforts of many donors (including a Bank-funded project). However, experience of other post conflict

14

countries in Southeast Asia and Central America indicate that the challenges of demining are likely to
remain with the country for some years to come. The major challenge is to begin to substitute local
resources for donor assistance. The benefits of mine clearance are often very local, and local governments
should gradually contribute financially to clearance costs. 
If properly handled, such a strategy could
reinforce ownership while improving incentives for proper definition of priorities and increasing the
pressure for transparency.

IV. Economic Outlook and External Environment

34. BH's medium-term outlook is framed by its advantages and disadvantages. The experience of other
transition countries over the past decade - and experience from countries emerging from conflict -
demonstrates the difficulty of the challenges BH faces. The country has some advantages and disadvantages as
it confronts these challenges. Advantages that were not available to most other countries at the start of their
transition include substantial modernization of economic infrastructure through the PRRP - notably, the power,
transport and telecommunications networks. Investment needs in the coming years have been reduced without
contributing substantially to increasing the country's debt burden, since most funding has been on a grant (or
highly concessional) basis. Macroeconomic stability has been maintained, along with a strong growth
momentum. Price distortions appear relatively modest, and much of the inefficient prewar heavy industry is
already dormant or was destroyed during the war. On the other hand, BH has disadvantages which are likely to
make for an unusually difficult transition - e.g., the large number of refugees and displaced, demobilized
soldiers, and young adults with incomplete education; the political and social constraints to labor mobility;
internal and regional security issues; and the continuing task of strengthening governance and establishing the
rule of law in a postwar context. While many of these issues are also confronted by other countries in the SEE
Region, BH has perhaps among the most daunting mix of such challenges. These factors point to the urgency
of resolute and timely reforms to bring rapid transition and rising living standards for all Bosnians, as well as
the importance of a continued strong partnership with the international community.

A. Base Case Economic Scenario

35. Under a scenario of strong policy reform, sustainable growth is achievable in the medium term.
Simulations based on the assumption of continued strong macroeconomic management and good performance
in the outlined policy reform areas indicate that GDP growth would recover to 15 percent this year, and average
8 percent during 2001-2005 - a rate more normally associated with open and dynamic economies (Table 2,
Annex B6). Per capita income could exceed US$2,000 by 2005, and living standards should reach close to the
SEE Region's average. If this growth path is maintained, BH should be able to restore its pre-war level of GDP
during the latter half of the decade.

36. Economic growth and employment prospects depend on the buoyancy and efficiency of private
investment. Simulations assume that private investment increases steadily in the coming years, fueled by
privatization and improvements in the business enabling environment, including reforms of financial, tax, and
regulatory systems and the labor market. Banking sector reforms will ensure that private savings increase from
their previous low levels - albeit slowly - and are channeled into credit for private enterprise and help increase
the attractiveness of BH as a site for foreign investment. Tax and regulatory reforms will create incentives for
more efficient investment and production decisions. Labor market reforms will build flexibility into the
restructuring process and promote productive employment that will increase opportunities for BH's poorest.
However, given the impact of large scale privatization which will begin during the CAS period, the high
unemployment rate is likely to decline only slowly in the next several years. Following the initial adjustment
period - and once labor market reforms and improvements in the fiscal and business environment are made -
the unemployment rate should decline more consistently over the medium term. This highlights the importance
of putting in place a sustainable social safety net in the near term.

15

Table 2: Key Economic Indicators, 1996 - 2005
Estimated 
Projected
1996 
1999* 2000 

1997 

1998 

2001 

2002 

2005

National Accounts
GDP (US$ million) 
Real GDP growth (%) 
PerCapitaGDP(US$) 
Investment (% of GDP) 
Consumption (% of GDP) 
Gross Domestic Savings (% of GDP) 
Public Sector Balances
Expenditures (% of GDP) 
o/w Public Investment 
Revenues (% of GDP) 
Deficit (-) (% of GDP) 
o/w Extemal Financing (% of GDP) 
Balance of Payments
Trade Balance (US$ million) 
Exports(US$million) 
Imports (US$ million) 
Current Account Balance (US$ million) 
As%ofGDP 
Change in Reserves (increase=-, US$ million) 

2741 
69 
658 
42 
117 
-17 

65 
24 
37 
-28 
28 

3518 
30 
838 
41 
104 
-4 

51 
24 
28 
-23 
23 

4054 
13 
959 
38 
99 
1 

53 
20 
33 
-21 
21 

4594 
10 
1081 
33 
91 
9 

49 
16 
32 
-17 
17 

5441 
15 
1274 
32 
88 
12 

45 
13 
32 
-13 
13 

6389 
14 
1448 
32 
85 
15 

44 
11 
32 
-12 
12 

7239 
10 
1678 
28 
83 
17 

9244
5
2110
25
78
22

41 
8 
32 
-9 
9 

35
4
31
-4
4

-1546 
336 
1882 
-748 
-27 
-243 

-1758 
575 
2333 
-1060 
-30 
-91 

-1756 
817 
2573 
-1098 
-27 
-85 

-1430 
970 
2399 
-763 
-17 
-489 

-1464 
1150 
2622 
-882 
-16 
-8 

-1521 
1410 
2931 
-916 
-14 
-50 

-1353 
1671 
3024 
-689 
-10 
-75 

-1095
2244
3339
-355
-4
-69

* Note: 1999 GDP growth of 10% (vs. forecast 16%) due to temporary effects of Spring 1999 Kosovo crisis.

Source: Official data, Bank and IMF staff estimates.

37. As aid flows decline there will be a sizable adjustment in the external current account. Donors have
funded large current account deficits associated with imports needed for reconstruction. Simulations assume
much of the needed adjustment will come from a decrease in imports as reconstruction-related needs continue
to decrease. This process has already begun, with the current account deficit contained at 17 percent of GDP in
1999 (compared with 27 percent in 1998), reflecting the decline in the pace of reconstruction imports and the
gradual recovery of exports. However, reforms designed to increase investment efficiency will also be needed
to offset the reduction in the overall investment level. Recurrent expenditures are expected to increase
modestly in absolute terms in line with the need to strengthen social safety nets and provide for the operation
and maintenance of new investments. Careful expenditure management and enhanced revenue performance
will be critical to ensuring both medium-term fiscal sustainability and external payments viability. Financing
requirements will consist mostly of reconstruction costs and debt service obligations during the CAS period.
Inflows of the remaining funds from the PRRP will meet a large share of BH's external financing needs in
2000-2002. However, commitment of new, albeit reduced, donor assistance will be critical to maintaining
external liquidity during the CAS period. The annual external financing requirement in 2000-2002 is estimated
at about US$800-900 million. After taking into account anticipated donor assistance, an estimated additional
US$350 million would be required during the period.

38. Export performance will be increasingly important to both output expansion and external balance.
Exports have increased very rapidly, nearly tripling from the very low postwar level in 1996. Continued strong
export growth in the coming years will depend on further re-orientation of trade towards larger and more stable
markets, including those of other countries in the SEE Region, and, in particular, Europe. BH has applied to
join the World Trade Organization (WTO) and this objective should be a priority. Moreover, preparing to take
early advantage of an SAA with the EU in the context of the Stability Pact will also be critical. Foreign direct
investment will be important in providing valuable linkages to these markets. Re-orientation towards products
more in line with BH's comparative advantage is also needed, implying diversification of exports towards
higher value-added and human capital-intensive products. The speed of re-orientation will depend on the pace
of privatization and restructuring. Containing labor costs through labor market reforms will be important to
maintaining competitiveness in light of the KM's exchange rate peg to the DM.

16

39. The debt situation has improved, however, creditworthiness remains several years away. Debt
rescheduling agreements in the last three years have brought about a significant reduction in BH's external debt,
making for relatively comfortable debt ratios. Total debt now reaches 68 percent of GDP and debt service is 8
percent of exports (Annex B7), though there is a marked difference between the Entities (debt service consumes
8 percent of budgeted expenditures in the Federation and 11 percent in Republika Srpska). Debt management
has also improved over the last two years, with technical assistance from the Bank and others. With the
establishment in 1998 of a financing mechanism for the State budget, whereby the Entities contribute in fixed
proportions on a regular basis, debt repayment performance has significantly improved. While debt service is
expected to increase starting in 2002 (reflecting increased principal repayments to international financial
institutions), under the base case scenario outlined above debt service ratios will remain healthy with continued
export growth and enhanced revenue performance. Our CAS Progress Report (August 1998) indicated that
creditworthiness was delayed and would likely be achievable only by the end of the FYOO-02 period. Our
review of creditworthiness based on current circumstances indicates that there remains substantial fiscal and
export fragility, linked in large part to the slower than hoped pace of structural reform. This indicates that
while BH is on the path to creditworthiness, it remains some years away. During the next two to three years it
is critical for BH to improve the environment for private investment activity and make adjustments in its
expenditure management policies to strengthen debt-carrying capacity. Inflows of the remaining funds from the
PRRP and commitments of new donor assistance will be important to maintaining external liquidity during this
period. However, as aid-flows and concessional financing diminish, alternative sources of external finance will
be needed, and creditworthiness must be an explicit objective of the EDS. We will continue to assess progress
towards creditworthiness (and IDA graduation, para. 53) annually, including a Creditworthiness Review (FY01)
to re-evaluate BH's debt profile and vulnerability.

B. Low-Case Scenario

40. Weak reform effort and external political risks. A low case scenario is developed on the basis of the
risk of weak internal cooperation that delays reform performance (para. 59), the primary risk to both the
country's development objectives and to the IDA program. In such a scenario, fiscal and private sector reforms
would be delayed, further increasing fiscal fragility and weakening the private sector supply response. Donor
financial support could also be expected to erode, further dampening growth and employment prospects and
straining social sustainability. With the current recovery itself fragile, such reversal would put at risk many
who have been able to climb out of poverty over the last several years. This sort of low case scenario could be
short-lived (less than a year) -- since both domestic social pressure and international donor pressure
(coordinated by OHR) would be likely to bring about a correction of domestic policies. However, a cycle of
weak reforms followed by corrections could be repeated over time. In such a case, the growth momentum in the
country would be expected to falter and deteriorate more substantially, with still positive but lower annual
growth rates averaging 5 percent during 2000-2005. Restoration of the prewar level of GDP would be
prolonged, as the process of transition to a market economy with a vibrant private sector would be substantially
delayed. Ability to comfortably service debt, as well as to address poverty reduction challenges, would be
reduced. A low-case scenario driven largely by external political events (e.g., deteriorating circumstances in
FRY) could have similar outcomes - or could worsen an internally-driven low case. Such scenarios would be
more difficult to mitigate. The Stability Pact is aimed at initiatives designed to help manage such risks in the
Region (para. 59).

V. The FYOO-02 Country Assistance Strategy

A. Formulating the Country Assistance Strategy

41. The FYOO-02 CAS has been formulated on the basis of consultations with stakeholders in BH (para. 42).
It evolves out of, and is with consistent with, the broad thrusts of our previous CAS and builds on analytical
work and the lessons of implementation (para. 43). Discussions with other international partners on their plans

17

and programs have also contributed to developing an appropriately selective role for the Bank Group (para. 45).
Finally, the CAS also fits within the broader framework of the SEE Regional strategy paper.

42. Consultations with civil society. In addition to working closely with the government on defining the
priorities for its Economic Development Strategy and Bank support during the FYOO-02 CAS period,
consultations over the last year included a series of meetings, workshops and roundtables with representatives
of academia, the media, trade organizations, the private sector, local non-governmental and community groups,
and others. A client survey providing feedback on the Bank's activities was also conducted. A key conclusion
which emerged was the importance placed on a shared vision for the future (Box 5). Many Bosnians feel they
are not consulted about their needs or their future - by their politicians, by the international community, by their
local governments. There is a view that more input at the local level is needed to begin to establish social
consensus in the aftermath of conflict.

Box 5. The CAS Participatory Process: A Bosnian Vision of the Future

* Europe. Most Bosnians believe BH's future lies with Europe, and find closer integration with Europe highly
motivating. There is concern, however, that despite the Stability Pact, the path to a future linked to Europe has not yet
been clearly thought through by BH's policy-makers.
* Good governance. Governance structures need consolidation and public institutions must function in a predictable,
transparent and efficient way. Many echoed one participant's remark that "institutions are legally defined but they do
not function." There is strong desire for capable, professional government.
* Private initiative. Many believe in a role for the private sector in a prosperous future and feel frustration regarding
"red tape," lack of credit and delayed privatization. (However, others long for the security of socially-owned
enterprises, and there is lack of understanding on the workings of a modern market economy.)
* Social protection. An adequate social safety net is seen as key to an equitable future, and there is an awareness of the
vulnerability left by the war and the unsustainability of dependence on foreign assistance. (But the distinction between
entitlement programs of the past and a needs-based approach is not always made.)
* Assuming responsibility. There is a growing awareness of the need to take hold of the future. (However, it is not
clear that there is understanding of the institutional capacity, leadership and challenges that this entails.)

43. 
The FY98-99 CAS and lessons learned. Following the broad sectoral focus of reconstruction and
recovery of the Bank's immediate postwar assistance to BH, the FY98-99 CAS aimed to help BH shift from
reconstruction toward recovery and sustainable growth. Specific objectives were: (i) strengthening the
institutions of macroeconomic management; (ii) supporting transition to a market economy; and (iii) deepening
the sustainability of reconstruction. Two adjustment programs formed the cornerstone of the program. The
first supported public finance reform (through two Public Finance Adjustment Credits (PFSAC I; FY98 and II;
FY99)), aimed at building the monetary, fiscal and trade policy institutions of economic management. The
second supported transition-oriented structural reforms (through an Enterprise and Bank Privatization
Adjustment Credit (EBPAC; FY99)), aimed at privatization of enterprises and banks and modernization of
banking. As noted (Section III), progress in achieving the objectives of the public finance reform program
supported by the Bank and others has been substantial; progress under the private sector development program
has been slower. Efforts to deepen the sustainability of reconstruction and recovery - through investment
operations in education, health, energy, transport and other sectors - have been largely successful, contributing
to increased cost recovery and sector institution building. While poverty reduction was not the explicit
objective of the last CAS, Bank support to reconstruction has contributed to a significant generalized increase
in economic activity that has helped raise incomes; and specific employment generation and micro- and SME
credit line projects helped to create jobs. Mobilizing and coordinating donor support was also an important
element of the last CAS, and substantial donor funds were raised (including to co-fund IDA-supported projects,
Annex 3). A key element of project implementation has been ensuring sound procurement and financial
management arrangements in a country with the weak governance framework of BH. Among the lessons
learned has been the importance of arrangements designed to protect Bank funds, including Procurement
Monitoring and Audit Units (PMAUs) in each Entity, tasked with reviewing all procurement under Bank-

18

funded projects, as well as financial management systems and training for implementation agency staff. Project
implementation, OED evaluations, QAG reviews and external input have all provided lessons which we have
built into the design of this CAS (Box 6).

Box 6. Lessons Learned during FY98-99
* The importance of ownership. Project and policy implementation has been most effective in BH in those areas where
program priorities have been established jointly with the authorities. Involvement of local stakeholders, including the
private sector, local communities and NGOs, has improved the efficiency and likely future sustainability of projects
(e.g., NGO partnerships in implementation of-the LIP microcredit project).

* Consistent effort is needed to unlock policy actions. The experience of working on tough policy reforms in an

environment where consensus (whether between Federation partners, between the Entities or among the three
constituent groups on State matters) is difficult to achieve has also produced lessons. We have found that many of the
most significant reforms (e.g., design and issuing of the new currency, establishment of a financing mechanism for the
State) took far longer than hoped to initiate. But once the hurdle of agreement was passed, implementation has gone
relatively smoothly.

* 

Institution-building also requires long-term commitment. Reviews of both policy-based operations (e.g., ICR for

PFSAC I) and investment operations (e.g., OED review of the Education II and Demining projects) have demonstrated
that institutional reforms have been time-consuming, and require long-term commitment. Adequate and well-designed
technical assistance is essential to ensuring progress on institution building elements of policy reform.

* Policy conditionality has been effective, but must be well sequenced. An independent report by the European

Stability Initiative (ESI), a think-tank operating in the SEE Region, concluded that Bank and IMF conditionality in the
area of economic management had been "used to good effect." However, in a situation of fragile governance, policy
conditions must be well-designed and sequenced. A recent QAG review of the Bank-supported Enterprise and Bank
Privatization Credit concluded that the project timetable was ambitious given BH's political complexities; a one-
tranche first operation followed by a longer duration and more ambitious second project was an alternative approach.
This lesson is being incorporated into the design of the Social Sector Adjustment Credit (SOSAC).

44. Portfolio implementation. During the last CAS period, portfolio implementation continued to be quite
strong - with performance indicators substantially higher than Bank-wide averages (Annex B2). Most ICRs,
OED and QAG reviews have rated projects satisfactory or better in achieving their development objectives.
There has been a slight downward trend in performance over the course of the last three years as the portfolio
has matured. This trend reflects delays in various project implementation steps and in achievement of agreed
targets due primarily to the shift from emergency to more complex policy-based operations. Recent
decentralization of financial management and procurement functions to the field, proactive supervision and
policy dialogue, planned participatory analytical work and an enhanced focus on institutions and governance in
this CAS period, are all tools that will help to mitigate the risk of further slippage in portfolio performance as
policy objectives continue to become more ambitious.

45. Donor partnerships have evolved toward more well defined roles. There is an active international
presence in BH, reflected in the successful full funding of the US$5.1 billion PRRP during the four year period
1996-1999. These very engaged partnerships involve many dozens of players with presence across a wide
range of sectors - although a dozen donors have provided more that 80 percent of the total funding (Annex 3).
At the outset of reconstruction, most donors, including the Bank, funded programs across a range of sectors
given the substantial needs. Increasingly, however, donors have become much more selective, sharpening their
focus on the basis of comparative advantage. Examples include macroeconomic policy (IMF), return of
refugees (EU and UNHCR), modernization of infrastructure (EU, EBRD, EIB, bilaterals), working directly with
the private sector (EBRD, IFC, bilaterals), and community-based development (EU and bilaterals). Over the
past two years the Bank has played a leadership role in the economic policy and structural reform areas. The
authorities and donors have turned to the Bank (in partnership with the IMF) to continue to take the lead in
these areas.

19

46. Donor coordination should now shift increasingly to BH. The primary vehicles for donor
coordination in the past have been donor conferences - convened jointly by the Bank and the EU - sectoral task
forces and the Economic Task Force, chaired by the OHR in Sarajevo. These forums have been generally
effective means for coordinating donor programs and policy responses, in the overall context of the PRRP.
With the development of a Bosnian Economic Development Strategy as a framework for donor assistance in the
period 2000-2004, the Bosnian authorities should begin to assume a greater role in aid coordination.
Consultative Group meetings should now replace donor conferences, and the emphasis will be more on
discussion, review and monitoring of development strategies, objectives and outcomes.

B. Objectives of the FYOO-02 Country Assistance Strategy

47. A selective role for the Bank Group. The agenda set out in Section III is one to which all partners in
BH's development effort will contribute. Consistent with the shift away from broad sectoral coverage in the
last CAS, the World Bank Group's support under the FYOO-02 CAS will continue to be selective. A reduced
budget envelope means that selectivity has even greater importance in this CAS period. We have been asked by
the authorities as well as by other key partners, to continue in the policy reform supportive role we played
during the last CAS, and which very few others can assume. Through our policy-advice role we can be helpful
in supporting BH's move to greater economic self-sufficiency, and in expanding the emphasis on postwar
growth by seeking to ensure it is inclusive, and by broadening the concept of poverty. While we will continue
to support the institution building and private sector reforms fundamental to our last CAS, in FYOO-02 we have
fine-tuned the core policy agenda by adding a focus on poverty reduction and social sustainability. In tandem,
we intend to disengage over this CAS period from support to reconstruction. During the CAS period we expect
to continue to play an aid coordination role, though in a reduced way. Both the policy reform and aid
coordination roles are consistent with the broader mandate given to the Bank by the international community in
the SEE Region in the context of the Stability Pact. During this CAS period we will continue to refrain from
entering areas where we see others are taking a lead role; e.g., support for refugee return. While clearly need
remains - and many of these activities contribute to poverty reduction - we will leave such support to partners
who are already engaged, and whose comparative advantage is better matched to handle them, especially with
grant funding.

48. The overarching objective of the World Bank Group's partnership with BH is to increase economic
opportunity and improve the quality of life for all Bosnians. In light of BH's development priorities, and the
role that the World Bank Group can play in addressing these priorities, the strategic development objectives of
the FYOO-02 CAS period will be (Annex B9):

* 

* 

* 

to help strengthen BH's weak and fragmented governance arrangements by building accountable
institutions as a solid foundation for broad-based self-sustaining growth and democratic
participation;

to help foster sustainable and inclusive private sector-led growth and employment as the most
important means of improving economic opportunity for all Bosnians; and

to help build social sustainability by establishing affordable and equitable social services for all
Bosnians, including social safety nets for the most vulnerable.

49. Poverty reduction is a cross-cutting and overarching theme of this CAS. Among the vehicles during
the CAS period to help reduce poverty will be bringing a targeted poverty reduction focus to the development
of BH's EDS, in part through the PRSP. Over the CAS period we will also prioritize efforts designed to
support growth that spurs employment (especially in SMEs) and that reduces barriers to intra-Entity activity.
Labor reforms, an improved business enabling environment, promotion of SMEs and tax harmonization are all
important vehicles to achieve this. We will also assist in building more accountable and transparent

20

institutions, help improve poverty and social sector information, strengthen governance and financing of social
services and help build financially sustainable pension systems. Developing an equitable and affordable social
protection strategy will be important to ensuring the needs of the poorest are met, especially in the context of
continued privatization. Finally, the CAS would prioritize increased participation and inclusion to help
strengthen social sustainability.

C. The Planned FYOO-02 World Bank Group Program

Strengthening Institutions and Governance

50. Over the next two to three years the authorities will need to continue to build and strengthen the
institutions and policies of good governance at State, Entity and local level. Planning for fiscal adjustment will
be an important element of this challenge. During the CAS period, the specific aims of Bank Group support
will be: (i) assistance in developing and implementing an Anti-Corruption Strategy; (ii) substantially
completing tax harmonization and reform; (iii) enhancing public expenditure efficiency and management,
including a start to civil service reform; and (iv) strengthening and further defining the responsibilities of local
governments. The PFSAC program would continue to be the key policy reform instrument in this area
during the CAS period. Activities supported by the Bank Group during FYOO-02 aimed at achieving these
goals would include (Annex B3, B4):15

 

Transparent governance. In the wake of criticism about alleged corruption in the use of domestic public
revenues, the authorities have requested Bank assistance to carry out a comprehensive anti-corruption
program. AAA supporting an Anti-Corruption Diagnosis and Strategy (FYOO-01) is now underway based
on a survey to determine the scale, scope and depth of corruption in public institutions. The survey will lead
to development, jointly with other donors, of a time-bound Action Plan to reform financial controls, civil
service, the judiciary, competition policy, regulatory systems and other areas (Box 7). Because of the wide-
ranging scope of this work, and the strong partnerships with the authorities and other donors, this will be a
primary AAA task. Several key reform measures are already supported under the ongoing PFSAC II
(including establishment of Treasuries and Supreme Audit Agencies, which will be considered a trigger for
base case lending (para. 54).) The diagnostic work will also help to define the information base and develop
a program of future policy reforms to be supported by a planned PFSAC III (FY02). A Financial
Management Assessment (FY01) would focus in particular on strengthening financial management of
agencies responsible for implementing Bank-funded projects.

* Tax and revenue policy reform and improvements. Second tranche conditions under the PFSAC II related
to tax policy include agreement on harmonization of the locus of tax collection to reduce losses through tax
evasion and remove impediments to free flow of goods between the Entities; establishment of
administrative co-ordination between the Entity tax administrations; and rationalization of the sales taxes
rates and exemption policy in both Entities in a harmonized manner. With completion of these measures,
tax policy harmonization and reform would have been largely completed. A start to gradual reduction of
payroll taxes would also be initiated under the planned PFSAC III. A Regional Trade Facilitation project
(FY01), designed to support improved customs infrastructure and administration at border posts in BH (and
throughout the SEE Region), would help boost the efficiency of revenue collection, and would be
complemented by efforts of other donors to support establishment of a border patrol service.

* Public expenditure efficiency. Building on the work begun under the Medium Term Expenditure
Framework (MTEF) exercise, a second Public Expenditure Review (FY01) will help identify a sustainable

15Donors 

contributing to building governance and institutions include the IMF, the European Union, the OHR, several UN agencies,
and a number of bilateral aid agencies which provided technical assistance and other support. The Public Finance Adjustment Credits
(PFSAC l; FY98 and PFSAC II; FY99) have provided a framework for coordination of donor programs and policies in this area.
Implementation of the PFSAC II and preparation of a planned PFSAC III are expected to continue to allow IDA to play this role.

21

level of public spending, and will be a key element in ensuring a sound fiscal adjustment strategy. The PER
will have a special focus on social services and will identify the spending cuts and choices needed to
maintain adequate levels of service delivery in the face of declining donor flows. It would also identify the
level of external assistance that BH would need for continued growth and development. The PER would
provide the policy underpinnings for reforms in civil administration, addressing fiscal and policy
accountability issues both at the local level and for the combined public sector. Policy recommendations of
the PER will be included in the reform program to be supported by the planned PFSAC III. Other
operations that would contribute to the overall objective of increased public expenditure efficiency will be a
Labor Force Redeployment project (FY00) that aims to assist demobilized soldiers in the context of Dayton
military reductions; a Transport III project (FY01) focused on road maintenance institutions and cost
recovery instruments to reduce the burden of transport maintenance on public finances; and a Mostar Water
project (FY00) which would improve operational efficiency of water services (and promote collaboration
between the two Federation partners).

Box 7. Working in Partnership Towards Greater Transparency
Building on a strategy developed by OHR and Transparency International, the Anti-Corruption Diagnosis and Strategy
will start with detailed surveys administered to public officials, enterprise managers and ordinary people to identify institutions
most at risk and priorities for reform. This participatory approach should help facilitate expansion of the scale, scope and depth
of public sector reform, particularly in the areas of financial control, civil service, legal/judicial and regulatory systems and
competition policy. Building on considerable work already underway by various international financial institutions and
partners (the Bank, IMF, the US, the EU, EBRD, OHR, OSCE and others), and consistent with the SEE Regional Stability
Pact Anti-Corruption Initiative (SPAI), several priorities have been defined:

* Establishing Border Control and Strengthening Customs Administration. Evasion of custom duties and taxes due to
smuggling through uncontrolled borders and illegal sale of goods denies resources to the Entity budgets. Building on

EU-CAFAO success in strengthening customs administration, the legislative and institutional framework for border
police and more effective customs administration need to be established.
* Reform of Payments Bureau. Lack of fiscal and financial transparency in public sector operations is fostered by
payment bureaus that have combined a wide range of functions (tax collection, accounting and treasury services,
banking and information processing). A comprehensive reform program will dismantle the payments bureau system by

transferring its individual functions to public or private sector institutions where such functions are normally
undertaken.
* Greater Accountability in Public Expenditure Management. The reform program supported by the Bank (PFSAC 11)
and others includes: introduction of independent external audit institutions and effective Treasury functions at State and
Entity levels, and more realistic and consultative budget planning consistent with macroeconomic and sectoral policies
and integrating externally provided resources, through a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) exercise.
* Greater Transparency in the Operations of Publicly-Owned Enterprises and Utilities. Lack of transparency in

financial operations of publicly-owned companies raises concerns about their privileged market position supported by
influential interest groups. One of the major concerns is that the financial operations of these companies (e.g.,
electricity, telecommunications and banks) are being manipulated to transfer funds for non-business purposes.

Promotion of competition, transparent privatization and introduction of better administrative and accounting practices
are key actions being supported by a variety of donors, including the Bank.

* Reforming intergovernmental finance and strengthening local governments. The appropriateness of
current revenue and expenditure assignments would be reviewed through a Local Government Finance
Study (FY01), which would make specific recommendations for reforms regarding inter-regional equity
issues which could then be supported under the planned PFSAC III. The study would be designed to
include a focus on informal institutional and human capital issues. A planned community-driven Municipal
Services project to provide infrastructure and other services in rural areas (FY02) would also help
strengthen local government capacity. An Environment Infrastructure project (FY02) would address the
problem of waste management by assisting municipalities in managing solid waste disposal, which
deteriorated significantly after the war.

22

Fostering Private Sector-Led Growth and Employment

51. Over the next two to three years, BH must ensure sustainable growth and employment by fostering the
conditions for private sector investment in an increasingly open and transparent market economy that is
preparing itself for gradual integration with European institutions. IFC, MIGA, FIAS and the Bank have
worked closely to ensure the Bank Group's private sector development strategy reflects synergies among, and
builds on the comparative advantages of, the respective institutions. Specific objectives of Bank Group support
during the CAS period will be: (i) improving the business enabling environment; (ii) completion of small-scale
privatization and a significant start to divestiture of large scale firms and banks; (iii) promoting development of
SMEs; (iv) reform of labor market legislation; and (v) continued reform and promotion of strategic foreign
investors in the banking sector, along with completion of payment bureau reform. The ongoing Enterprise and
Bank Privatization Adjustment Credit (FY99), a planned Business Environment Adjustment Credit (FYO1)
and a planned Privatization Technical Assistance Credit (FYOI) would be key instruments during the CAS
period. Activities supported by the Bank Group during FYOO-02 will include (Annex B3, B4): 16

* Enabling environment. A study aimed at identifying the specific administrative barriers to foreign and
domestic private investment, and developing a time-bound Action Plan for reform of business legislation
and policies will be conducted by FIAS in collaboration with a local counterpart team (FY01). The process
of designing an Action Plan and identifying priorities would be conducted in consultation with various
stakeholders at State and Entity level, as well as the business community and donors. A planned Business
Environment Adjustment Credit (BAC; FY01) will support recommended reforms under the Action Plan
and would be likely to include, among other measures, simplifying the business registration process,
reducing the tax burden for businesses and rendering the tax system fair and transparent; and strengthening
the court system and enforceability of laws and regulations. Recommendations would be consistent with
the framework developed under the Investment Compact for the SEE Region. The Action Plan is expected
to serve as a platform for a coordinated, coherent effort to improve the business enabling environment, with
partnership among the authorities, the business community and key donors, including EBRD and several
bilaterals. The work of the Balkan Enterprise Facility (BEF) on identifying and reducing barriers specific
to SMEs will also be incorporated (Box 8), as will input from MIGA which is playing an active role in
facilitating foreign investment. Because of the importance of this effort to BH's overall development
objectives, the partnerships with others and within the Bank Group, this would be one of the main AAA
tasks of the CAS period. In addition, ongoing efforts provide political risk guarantee instruments (e.g., an
IDA-funded Enterprise Export Facility and a MIGA guarantee facility with EU funding).

- Privatization. Progress towards SME privatization and preparation of bank and large-scale divestiture has
been supported through the ongoing Enterprise and Bank Privatization Adjustment Credit (EBPAC; FY99).
During the CAS period, satisfactory progress on privatization will be considered a key test of willingness to
reform, and is included as a trigger for base case lending (para. 54). Specific lending operations to support
a more aggressive pace for transferring ownership to the private sector would include a Technical
Assistance Credit for Accelerated Privatization (TACAP; FY01) to support intemational experts to work
with the privatization agencies to sell an agreed list of large scale enterprises in a transparent and
accountable fashion to strategic investors. The aim would be to divest from state ownership some 100 large
scale firms in the Federation and 30 firms in Republika Srpska during the CAS period. A privatization
eduction/awareness effort would also be included, and this operation would be closely coordinated with
privatization technical assistance provided by other donors. Review of severance policies under the
privatization program would also be undertaken, and linked to reforms to be supported under the planned
SOSAC II (para. 52). The planned BAC, to be prepared in parallel, would support completion of SME

16 There are a number of donors who are also contributing to private sector development, including the IMF, the European Union,
EBRD, and a number of bilateral aid agencies which provided technical assistance and other support. These efforts are broadly
coordinated through a private sector development task force in Sarajevo, and the Bank-supported Enterprise and Bank Privatization
Adjustment Credit (EBPSAC; FY99) has provided a framework for coordination of technical assistance and policy advice.

23

privatization, among other measures (above). It is expected that preparation work for a second Enterprise
and Bank Privatization Adjustment Credit (EBPAC II), supporting continuation of large-scale privatization,
would begin during this CAS period (but not be delivered until FY03). The reform program supported by
the Bank aims also at privatizing the power and telecommunication utility companies. Satisfactory
electricity and telecommunication laws, setting the stage for appropriate regulatory environments and cost-
based tariffs, will be supported under a planned Power III (FY00), and under EBRD's support to reforms in
the telecommunication sector. In parallel, the Bank intends to advise the Entity governments on attracting
strategic investors to these sectors under the TACAP.

* SMEs. A Balkan Enterprise Facility (BEF; FY00), based in Sarajevo, will help private SMEs structure and

implement investments, train and upgrade SME management and provide them with technical assistance,

under a new IFC program being piloted in BH and Vietnam (Box 8). Previous donor-funded credit lines for
privately-owned SMEs, onlent through the domestic banking system, have been efficiently used and, given
continuing need, could be supported on a limited scale through a planned Second Enterprise Credit Line
(FY00) in Republika Srpska while banking sector reforms are underway (see below). IFC will continue to
focus on investments in sectors where BH has a comparative advantage (including forestry, under an
ongoing Wood Agency Line). Successful direct IFC investment in recently privatized companies has
spurred new investments to modernize the pharmaceutical and meat processing industries; hotel projects are
also being explored. IFC has completed a survey of light industry and food-processing, and has identified
potential projects in these sectors. Fostering private sector activity in agriculture would be among elements
supported under a planned Agriculture II project (FY02).

Box 8. The Balkan Enterprise Facility: Promoting SMEs in the Region
The Balkan Enterprise Facility (BEF) aims to assist in the development of the private sector in the SEE Region. The
private sector in many of the countries of the Region is predominantly comprised of small and medium size enterprises
(SMEs), which are expected to be the driving force for sustainable income and employment growth in the Region. While it
will be important to ensure adequate SME financing products and vehicles, equally important will be removing constraints
in the overall business environment, building managerial and technical skills, and providing access to knowledge and
information. The BEF has several core and closely complementary programs aimed at addressing these constraints in a
coordinated manner. The BEF's objectives are to provide:
.
Support for private sector companies to structure and implement investment projects, and support for financial agencies
to monitor and supervise private sector loans and investments;
* Assistance and advice to address continuing constraints in the business enabling environment;
.
Training and education programs aimed at upgrading the management and professional skills of personnel in
companies, financial agencies and domestic consultant organizations; and
Inputs to generate, collect, analyze and disseminate information and knowledge relevant to the private sector.

* 

* Labor market reform. Dialogue during FY00 has focused on reform of Entity labor legislation to provide

greater flexibility, reduce costly obligations to firms and ease discretionary government controls. Reform
of labor market legislation would be supported under a first Social Sector Adjustment Credit, with an
accompanying technical assistance credit (SOSAC I; FY00). A labor market study (FY01) is underway and

will look at the trade-offs 
in labor market policy needed in order to generate productive employment
opportunities, 
including encouraging part-time work which may help address the specific employment
needs of single female heads of household. We would continue to work closely with ILO and other donor
partners on ensuring sound labor standards.

* Banking. Completion of payments bureau reforms (supported under the ongoing EBPAC, in collaboration
with the IMF) is a key priority linked to increased transparency and building the confidence of investors.
is an important objective. 
IFC is
Improved banking supervision, also supported under the EBPAC, 
attempting to attract international banking partners to BH and to introduce modem banking practices. The
BEF will provide support for financial agencies 
to monitor and supervise private sector 
loans and

24

investments. In the context of a planned CEM (FY02), an enterprise and bank survey would evaluate the
financial health of medium and large scale enterprises and banks.

Building Social Sustainability

52. Over the next several years the objective will be to develop the analytical basis for a full poverty
reduction strategy, and improve the sustainability, effectiveness and equity of social services and social safety
nets. The objectives of Bank Group support during the CAS period will be helping to: (i) improve poverty
information to better understand the nature, extent and characteristics of poverty (and building local
institutional capacity to manage this information); (ii) establish the framework for a more equitable social
protection system within a tight overall fiscal spending envelope; (iii) reorient social services more broadly to
the needs of a market economy; (iv) develop strategies and policies to promote inclusion, through improved
dissemination of public information, community-based activities and strengthening BH's growing local NGO
sector; and (v) begin an assessment of environmental issues. A planned program of Social Sector Adjustment
Credits would be the key policy-based instruments for achieving these objectives. Activities supported by the
Bank Group during FYOO-02 would include (Annex B3, B4):17

* Poverty information, capacity building and strategy. As a key first step in building poverty data, a Living
Standards Measurement Survey (FY01) has been launched - supported under the Education III project
(FY00). On the basis of this work, a Poverty Assessment (FY02) is planned, which will also include an
assessment of the social dimensions of poverty. The Poverty Assessment will help to provide the analytical
tools and capacity required for the preparation of BH's first full PRSP.'8 Because of the importance of this
effort to BH's development objectives, the partnerships and participatory nature of the work, this will be
a key AAA task during the CAS period. Collection of data and qualitative information will examine
regional disparities and will also target the specific status and needs of women in BH's post-conflict
environment as well as children and youth. The status of the internally displaced would be another focus;
emphasis would also be placed on gathering data on urban and rural poverty. In parallel, a small IDF grant
(FY00) aims at helping to strengthen the capacity of the Statistics Institutes more generally.

* Social protection. A planned first Social Sector Adjustment Credit (SOSAC; FY00) is the first step in
supporting a comprehensive program of reform in the social sectors. It would aim in the first instance to
develop clear social protection strategies for each Entity, and support enhance,' apacity to generate social
sector statistics, in addition to ensuring that benefits for retrenched worker-, reflect available resources
through its primary emphasis on reform of Entity labor legislation (para. 51). The SOSAC would be
designed to have a small accompanying technical assistance credit to support implementation of institution-
building policy reforms. The Public Expenditure Review (FY01) would have a special focus on social
protection issues, and would help further refine policy options related to social protection spending choices.
This would provide an important baseline for monitoring the relative importance of different transfer
programs over the CAS period. Policy measures would be supported under a planned follow-up SOSAC II
(FY02), which would support implementation of social protection strategies through reforms to the overall
structure of cash transfer programs, improved financing mechanisms for social assistance, and overhauling
other transfer programs such as veterans' benefits, disability programs and unemployment insurance.
Reform of the Entity pension systems is supported under the ongoing public finance program. A small
Social Insurance Technical Assistance Credit (FY01) would support investments needed to develop
information systems, train pension fund staff in improved management of pension systems and ensure

17 Donors contributing to poverty-alleviation programs and policies include the IMF, the European Union, several UN agencies, and a
number of bilateral aid agencies which have provided both direct social assistance and technical assistance to the Entity governments. A
social protection task force in Sarajevo includes representatives of involved donor agencies and the Entity governments and has provided
a vehicle for coordination of assistance and policies.
Is A Poverty and Inequality Note (FYOO) based on existing data will help inform the I-PRSP, which is currently being developed by an
interdisciplinary team in BH.

25

public dissemination of information to improve accountability. (The project would support a similar
component in health care.)

* Education. Governance and finance reforms, and selected capacity-building/vocational education initiatives
will be pursued through an Education III project (FY00). A shared-Entity Standards and Assessment
Agency has recently been approved, as part of project preparations, representing significant political
acceptance of the need to reduce ethnically-driven politicization of education and focus attention on
European compatibility and integration. The project will also support a similar Coordinating Board to
focus on mutual accreditation and improved management in higher education, as well as shared information
systems for all education levels. A Global Distance Learning Center in Sarajevo (FY01), with WBI
support, is also planned, as is a Global Development Gateway project (FY01), which aims to offer a variety
of stakeholders access to the global knowledge network, including online training and other resources.

* Health. Building on substantial progress over the last two years in passing new health insurance laws, a
planned Social Insurance Technical Assistance Credit (FY01) would provide investment support for health
insurance to be able to respond to new demands created by postwar decentralization. It will also support
building capacity and creating transparent and informed decision making, as well as public dissemination of
health care information to improve accountability of the health care sector. (The project would support
similar efforts in pension reform.)

* 

Inclusion. Promoting voice and inclusion will be important to beginning to restore civic and social ties so
badly damaged during the war, and developing sound relationships between state, market and civil society.
Supporting community-focused activities, such as small infrastructure or microcredit projects is an
important way in which the Bank can support this objective. During the FYOO-02 CAS, a planned Local
Initiatives II (microcredit) project (FYOI) and a Municipal Services project (FY02) would follow up on
ongoing microcredit and local and municipal development operations. As part of this support, we will help
strengthen and make more sustainable the framework in which the NGO sector operates. More generally,
we intend to assist the government in developing mechanisms for consulting with stakeholders in a more
systematic way, through consultative AAA activities (e.g., the LSMS/Poverty Assessment, the
Anticorruption Diagnosis, the FIAS study of administrative barriers and others). Capitalizing on
information technology is further way in which the Bank can help build social inclusion. The planned SEE
region Gateway and Global Distance Learning Facilities based in BH will help support this objective.
Mainstreaming of participation to the extent feasible in BH is likely to help de-politicize many issues and
may provide a framework for moving forward on reform (e.g. in education, the focus on developing
European standards and student assessment information has helped re-focus public attention away from
ethnic politics). A small IDF grant to pilot reconciliation activities (FY01) is also planned. These efforts
would be consistent with the ongoing SEE Social Development Initiative which aims to support social
cohesion and stability throughout the Region. In terms of gender, the ongoing LIP (microcredit) project has
targeted women clients, and the LIP II may be structured with the same focus - though generally we believe
that many other partners are providing support targeted at the specific post-war needs of women in BH
(para. 32).

* Environment. An Environmental Action Plan, supported by an IDF grant (FY01), will identify and
prioritize environmental issues facing BH - which have not to date received the attention needed due to the
urgency of postwar reconstruction - as well as prepare recommendations for key investment needs to
address the identified issues. The EAP will enable the Bank to assist BH in meeting regional and global
environmental objectives, and will help ensure mainstreaming of environmental concerns into sector
projects. The EAP may identify opportunities for the Global Environment Facility (GEF) funded projects.

26

D. IDA Lending Levels and Triggers

53. 
IDA availability will diminish to more normal levels. At the time of the last CAS, the Board endorsed
an additional IDA authorization of US$120 million for BH, beyond the US$400 million authorized at the time
of membership. These exceptional IDA amounts have been justified on the basis of BH's extraordinary post-
conflict circumstances, continued strong macroeconomic performance, good progress on reconstruction and
demonstrated ability to absorb these resources, and the fact that achieving creditworthiness has taken longer
than originally anticipated (para. 39). These exceptional resources have helped complete a highly successful
reconstruction effort and given critical impetus to the program of institutional and structural reforms needed to
achieve sustainable and inclusive growth. In our Progress Report (August 1998), we noted that although BH
was approaching the IDA per-capita threshold, we expected the country to continue to be an IDA borrower
during the IDA12 period. However, it is clear that extraordinary IDA levels cannot be sustained. BH's IDA
allocation must be brought down to a performance-based level which is consistent with other IDA borrowers,
with per capita lending within range of other IDA recipients. Nevertheless, as BH shifts from completing
donor-led reconstruction to a sustained policy reform effort in the context of its own development strategy,
sufficient IDA resources are required for the Bank to continue to effectively and credibly play the policy
reform-supportive role that both the authorities and donors look to it to provide. Thus, a gradual phasing down
over the course of this CAS period, reaching normal levels at the outset of the next CAS in FY03, is warranted.
The overall IDA envelope for the three-year CAS period is up to US$300 million under the higher range of the
base case.

54. Proposed triggers for lending. Triggers for a base case IDA program, corresponding to the base
(expected) case scenario set out in Section III (paras. 35-39), would include benchmarks regarding macro
performance, progress on structural reforms, and program implementation (Table 3). Because of the
importance of demonstrating increased commitment to reforms, minimum base case conditions have been set
to include: (i) remaining on track with the IMF-supported program; (ii) making satisfactory progress on
privatization reforms (under the ongoing EBPAC); and (iii) making satisfactory progress on governance
reforms (under PFSAC II). In particular, satisfactory progress regarding the pace of both bank and enterprise
privatization will be considered tests of the authorities' commitment to the broader program of structural
reforms. Satisfactory progress establishing and putting into operation modem Treasuries and Supreme Audit
Institutions would also be triggers to gauge commitment on govemance-related reforms. Ensuring satisfactory
performance in both these areas would be a pre-condition for the base case, and for any adjustment lending
during the period.

55. The lending program continues the strong policy focus. During CAS discussions, the lending
program was reviewed with the authorities and would include the following (Annex B3):19

* Adjustment lending. It is proposed that up to about 50 percent of IDA resources over the period be
deployed as adjustment lending in support of the three main policy reform priorities outlined. Specific
operations would include a first, and planned second, Social Sector Adjustment Credit (para. 52), the
Business Environment Adjustment Credit (para. 51), and a third Public Finance Adjustment Credit (para.
50). Building on lessons in previous adjustment credits - which, among others, have indicated the
importance of adequate technical assistance and capacity building to ensure that policy objectives are
implemented - small technical assistance credits would likely be associated with some or all of the
proposed adjustment credits.

* 

Investment lending. Operations would be supported based on the extent to which project objectives focus
on institution-building and strengthening of govemance, promoting private sector development, direct
poverty alleviation and participation, and/or are important from a SEE Regional perspective.

19 Credits would continue to be made through the State and passed on to the Entities through subsidiary credit agreements.

27

Project-SpecificTriggers e 

Table 3. Lendin Triggers
Minimum Base Case 
Conditions

FOR LOW RANGE OF BASE CASE: 
Minimum base case conditions, plus: 
* 
SOSAC I (FY00): Satisfactory labor legislation amendments 
approved by Parliament, draft social protection strategies, and 
progress beginning social statistics reform. 
* BAC (FY01): Implementation of FIAS Action Plan (e.g., 
bankruptcy legislation, simplifying business registration and 
licensing) and completion of SME privatization. 
FOR HIGH RANGE OF BASE CASE: 
Low range base case conditions, and satisfactory progress on 
enterprise (both large and SME) and bank privatization, plus: 
* 
SOSAC 11 (FY01): Closing of SOSAC 1, with passage and 
implementation of satisfactory labor legislation. Satisfactory 
performance on social statistics reform implementation; ongoing 
implementation of social protection expenditure policy 
framework. 
PFSAC Ill (FY02): Completion of conditions under PFSAC II. 
Agreement on plan and timetable for civil service reform and 
payroll 
tax 
reductions; additional measures 
supporting 

* 

* Satisfactory project 
implementation (no significant 
deterioration) 
* Satisfactory performance under 
SBA/PRGF 
* Satisfactory performance under 
the privatization program, (i.e., 
in the Federation, good progress 
toward divestiture of 50% of 
SMEs (about 150) and five 
banks; and in RS, good progress 
toward divestiture of 30% of 
SMEs (about 50) and three 
banks)
* Satisfactory performance under
the public finance reform
program (i.e., establishment of
Treasuries; and Supreme Audit
Agencies)

transparency 

in public expenditure management.

i Low Case

* Macroeconomic
policy and
performance
slippage (e.g.,
slippage from
SBA/PRGF)
Extended delays
in meeting
privatization and
public finance
reform program
conditions set out in
the base case.

* 

56. Proposed lending under the base case. 
IDA's lending response would depend on the government's
policy reform commitment. Under the base case, lending could range from about US$165 million (lower range)
to about US$300 million (higher range) in support of up to about five operations per year. Amounts within
these ranges would be linked to the pace of progress toward reforms. At the lower range of the base case our
program would support about twelve or thirteen investment projects over three years (or about four operations
per year), plus up to two adjustment operations addressing social sector reforms and reform of the business
enabling environment (Table 4). In the higher range of the base case, we would support these operations plus
an additional two adjustment operations, 
in support of further development of the social safety net and
expanded public finance management reforms. The number of operations would depend on the ability of the
authorities to meet policy reform conditionality for individual adjustment operations. 
In light of the importance
of sustainable growth and employment to the overall objective of poverty reduction, conditionality under each
of the proposed adjustment operations would include reform measures important to stimulating private sector
led growth.

Table 4. Lending and Major AAA Under Base and Low Cases
Base Case

Lending 

Higher Range 
Base case lower range plus: 

Adiustment Lending: 
Social Sector Adjustment Credit 
(SOSAC) II 
Public Finance Adjustment 
Credit (PFSAC) IIl 

Low Case

Lower Range 
Low case plus:
Investment Lending: 
Investment Lending:2 0
RS Line of Credit II, Privatization Power III, Education 111, Mostar
TA 
Water, Emergency Labor
Adiustment Lending: 
Redeployment, Trade Facilitation,
Social Sector Adjustment 
Local Initiatives 11, Pension/Health
(SOSAC) I 
TA, Environmental Infrastructure,
Business Environment 
Municipal Services, Agriculture 111,
Adjustment Credit (BAC) 
Transport III

Major AAA 

Base case lower range plus: 
Local Government Finance 
Study 

Low case plus: 
FIAS Barriers Study 
Public Expenditure Review 

TA for EDS and I-PRSP/PRSP
LSMS and Poverty Assessment
Anti-Corruption Diagnosis /Strategy

Country Economic Memorandum 

Environmental 

Action Plan

20 Subject to minor modification, depending on evolving priorities. Five investment operations are planned for FY00.

28

57. Proposed lending under the low case. On the other hand, poorer performance consistent with the low
case in Section III (para. 40) would be likely to trigger slippage from the IMF-supported program and/or from
the conditionality under the EPBAC and PFSAC II. In this case, we would support a smaller sub-set of the
proposed investment operations only (about three operations per year) focusing on poverty reduction,
institution-building, strengthening of governance and participation, reaching about US$150 million over three
years.

58. Monitoring of key reforms. While lending triggers will serve as key monitoring indicators during the
CAS period, we will also monitor overall policy outcomes in the three key reform areas (Table 5). Key policy
outcomes to be achieved during the course of the FYOO-02 period, with the support of the IDA lending and
AAA program, are defined with greater specificity for measures supported by ongoing projects; analytical work
remains to be done and will enhance specificity for measure supported under planned operations.

Table 5. Key Reforms to be Achieved Under Base and Low Cases
Base Case

Private Sector Led Completion of SME 
Growth 

Governance/ 
Institution 
Building 

Social 
Sustainability 

Higher Range 

Base Case Lower Range plus: 

Start to civil service reform 
Reduction of payroll tax 
Continued implementation of 
Anti-Corruption Action Plan 
Continued reform of tax 
administration and public 
expenditure management

privatization 
Progress on large scale 
privatization (100 enterprises 
in Fed., 30 in RS) 
Continued implementation of 
FIAS Action Plan
Implementation of social 
protection expenditure 
framework 

Lower Range 

Low Case

Low Case plus: 

Development of EDS and 1-
PRSP/PRSP, plus:
Completion of tax policy harmonization 
Medium Term Expenditure
Establishment of Audit Agencies and 
Framework
Treasuries 
Sectoral capacity building
Implementation of Anti-Corruption Action 
Public utility cost recovery
Plan: (e.g. improved customs border control, Demobilization targets
reform of payment bureaus)

Progress on SME privatization (50% in Fed., 
30% in RS) 
Implementation of FIAS Action Plan (e.g. 
legislation on bankruptcy, reform of business
registering processes)
Progress on divestiture of State banks

Increased transparency in
public utilities (energy sector
law and regulations)

Reform of labor legislation 
Development of social protection policy 
framework 
Continued improvement of social sector 
statistics and capacity 
Reform of health insurance and 
reorganziation of pension system

Improvement of poverty data
and management capacity
Education governance and
finance reforms
Pension and health care
statistics management

VI. Country Program Risks and Monitoring

59. Risks. There are two primary risks during this CAS period, one related to internal circumstances and the
second to external developments. The internal risk factors are likely to pose the most critical risk to recovery
during the CAS period.

Internal risks: willingness and ability to move forward on the reform agenda. Fragmented governance
and the tendency of the parties to work towards independent objectives has stymied progress in the past,
and is the key risk to both the country's development agenda as well as the Bank's FYOO-02 program.
Experience of the past four years indicates that months of gridlock were followed by periods of more
resolute progress once an important bottleneck had been resolved. This sort of scenario seems the most
likely for the coming CAS period. Fall elections remain an unknown which could have an important impact
on the pace of policy reform (e.g., more nationalist leaning parties, in particular in Republika Srpska, would
result in less productive cooperation between the Entities and in State-wide institutions. This could result
in policy slippages in key areas, including slow-down of the privatization program, slippages on

29

harmonization of Entity tax policies, delays in improving the private sector enabling environment, and/or
lack of progress on streamlining public spending. All of these delays would affect the pace of recovery,
and the effectiveness of poverty reduction measures. Slow progress on reforms also, in turn, affects donor
willingness to support BH's continued economic development. The Bank's strategy is designed to mitigate
these risks through a graduated lending response which sets defined triggers for both the lower and higher
ranges of the base case. The preparation of the EDS, the PRSP and other key participatory AAA vehicles
will also help mitigate this risk by enhancing dialogue and ownership of key reforms.

* External risks: instability in the SEE Region dampens the supply response. The major external
downside risk is the potential impact of continuing regional political insecurity, particularly related to
internal political developments in FRY. If the political situation in FRY does not change (or if it
deteriorates), the perception of risk may affect private sector activity. With any substantial worsening of
regional political uncertainty (e.g., further conflict in the Region), domestic policy reform measures might
not be sufficient to offset this political risk and avoid jeopardizing foreign private investment and the
sustainability of the supply response. We consider this risk somewhat reduced at this stage, since the
Stability Pact framework has created a potentially more stable context for regional development. On the
other hand, a change within FRY towards more market-oriented government and greater political stability
would in fact have an enormous upside in terms of the potential for growth and development - both in the
Region and for BH specifically - stemming from reduced political risk, greater attractiveness of the Region
for private investment, and FRY's potential to be an engine of growth and a market for BH's goods.

60. Monitoring. The poor quality of data (in particular poverty and social data) hinders establishment of
meaningful country performance indicators at this stage. As part of the EDS and the PRSP, country
performance goals and indicators will be developed as better data becomes available through various initiatives
to strengthen baseline statistics and data gathering and management capacity. In parallel, we will seek to
develop a framework for evaluating Bank performance in relation to the primary CAS objectives by monitoring
a core group of policy outcomes (Table 5 and Annex B9). We have also retrofitted ongoing investment
operations with performance monitoring indicators, and intend to develop a scorecard for use during the CAS
period. A CAS Update will be prepared in FY01. In addition, we have undertaken a client survey, and will
continue to use survey tools to periodically evaluate performance from the clients' perspective, and make
adjustments as needed in our assistance program. We will continue to closely monitor portfolio performance
indicators for IDA-funded projects, through CPPRs, QAG reviews, OED evaluations and other external
reviews. Finally, we will continue to seek feedback from a broad range of stakeholders within civil society,
including the groups with which we have discussed this CAS over the last year, to gauge how well we are doing
and make any needed mid-course corrections.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

by Sven Sandstrom
Managing Director

30

Washington, DC
April 25, 2000
Attachments

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Summary of the Achievements of the 1996-1999 Priority Reconstruction
and Recovery Program'

Annex I

Objectives: The 1996-1999 Priority Reconstruction and Recovery Program (PRRP), was prepared as
a collaborative effort by the Bank, the IMF, the EBRD and others, in close collaboration with the
authorities, as a coherent framework for postwar donor support (similar to the Comprehensive
Development Framework (CDF)). Setting out an external financing requirement of $5.1 billion,2 the
program was designed to reconstruct war-damaged physical assets, jump-start economic recovery, and
begin policy reforms needed for sustainable growth. It was clear that rebuilding BH's inefficient
heavy industry-based economic structure was not desirable. The objective was to restore prewar
service availability levels, and regain prewar GDP by taking reforms needed for a market based
economy.

Main Achievements: Four years after the start of the program, the funding has been fully pledged,
and an estimated US$3.5 billion has been spent on achieving a great deal in a short time.

* Reconstruction (58 percent offunding): Repair of network infrastructure is well advanced, and
community and social services in urban areas have been largely rebuilt. Over 90 percent of the
main road network is in fair to good condition, power generation has returned to nearly 80 percent
the prewar level, water supply reaches nearly 90 percent of the prewar level, and telecom line
penetration is higher than in many neighboring countries. Education and health facilities have
been largely rebuilt and supplies and equipment provided. However due to the severity of the
damage, significant needs remain in housing, solid waste, and demining.

* Economic Recovery (18 percent offunding). To catalyze economic activity immediately after the
war to provide employment and incomes while more medium-term reform measures were being
taken, lines of credit for working capital extended to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
and entrepreneurs boosted activity of private service and light industry enterprises, political risk
insurance helped attract private foreign capital, temporary and permanent employment programs
helped provide incomes and agricultural production has recovered for the major food crops.

-

Institution-Building and Support to Government (16 percent of funding, of which half in direct
budget support). Programs were successful in supporting strengthening new State and Entity
institutions and framing macro and structural policy reform measures, rebuilding government
buildings, and providing support for social programs. Implementation of reforms aimed at
transition to a market economy have been slower, however.

* 

"Peace Implementation "(8 percent offunding). Support for an independent media, transparent
elections, human rights and increased local security have been essential to facilitating an
environment where physical reconstruction could take place effectively.

A full assessment of reconstruction program achievements can be found in Bosnia and Herzegovina: Review of the Priority

Reconstruction Program and LookingAhead Towards Sustainable Economic Development, May 1999.

2 Estimates of destruction of productive capacity range from four to ten or more times this amount.

Annex 2

Bank Support to Encouraging Participation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

1. 
Nurturing social reconstruction following war's end has been perhaps a more daunting task than
the challenge of physical reconstruction. Sponsoring dialogue within and between the three constituent
groups, focused on community- and state-building, has been and remains a critical element of the thirty
operations supported by the Bank over the past four years. These efforts contribute over time to greater
institutional and social sustainability, and build capacity for reconciliation. To the extent that
stakeholders include the poor, these effort also contribute to poverty reduction objectives.

2. 
Assisting a variety of stakeholders find their own voice has also been an important part of this
process. A first mechanism the Bank has employed to support participation has been a small grants
program launched in 1998. A number of NGO programs, conferences and roundtables have been
assisted. These include, for example, a counseling program for entrepreneurial women, a conference for
the elderly, an investment forum in Tuzla, a public campaign on the role of local NGO's, a training
program to support the needs of blind people in the Republika Srpska and assistance in formulating a
national environment action plan.

3. 
A second mechanisms has been the establishment of working groups has often facilitated the
consultative process, with and between NGO's and community groups, in the advancement of targeted
actions or reforms. Notable among these was a working group comprising NGO's and community groups
operating over the 1998-99 period which resulted in the development of draft laws to govern non-
governmental organizations and foundations within the country. It is expected that these laws will be
presented to both State and Entity parliaments. Another working group operating over a similar period,
comprising NGO stakeholders and local and international legal experts, led to a matrix of
recommendations in the development of the legal framework underpinning micro-credit organizations,
credit and savings associations and savings banks. Recently legislation governing micro-credit
organizations has been adopted by the parliament in the Federation BH (House of People). Following a
1997 conference co-chaired by the EC and the Bank on the social challenges facing the country, a social
policy task force co-chaired by the assistant ministers responsible for social assistance, of both Entities
with broad membership drawn from NGO's (local and international), academia, practitioners and policy
makers, was established to manage the ongoing dialogue on social sector reforms.

4. 
A third mechanism for increasing participation are vehicles for receiving client feedback. It is
important for the Bank to listen and as required provide input and feedback to various stakeholder
organizations, through representation or observer status on the consultative bodies of such groups.
Notable participation to date is on the NGO Council, the Coordination Group on Economic and Social
Rights, (part of the Human Rights Task Force, headed by the OHR) and the Coalition for Equal
Opportunities for Disabled people.

5. 
The Bank has a wide variety of international and local partners in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
complexity of participation in the process of nation building will need continued sensitive management,
particularly in helping the authorities develop their interim and full Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(PRSP) over the CAS period, if Bank assistance is to be properly targeted, playing to our strengths and
ensuring a clear understanding of client needs. In laying the foundations for a systematic process of
consultation and participation in the PRSP, as well as for the range of other AAA work planned, a
stakeholder analysis and pilot consultation with a number of different community groups (both urban and
rural) is currently being considered by the inter-Entity coordination team tasked to oversee the
development of the I-PRSP. This will then form the basis of a more comprehensive consultation and
monitoring mechanism with key stakeholders.

Coordination and Partnerships in Bosnia and Herzegovina'

Annex 3

There is an active international presence in BH, and very engaged partnerships involve many
dozens of players across a wide range of sectors (pages 2-3). Many of these multilateral, NGO and
bilateral partners were active in BH even before the war ended. In addition to the OHR and the other
international agencies set up to oversee the effective civilian implementation of the Dayton Agreement,
there are some 20 or more multilateral development agencies (including the range of UN agencies and
affiliated organizations, EBRD, the EIB, and the IMF, among others), and over 40 bilateral donors (page
4). An extensive network of several hundred local and international NGOs has also been very active in
implementing projects and providing services, particularly humanitarian support and social services. The
private sector is also becoming an increasingly important - though still smaller than needed - partner in
development initiatives.

Immediately following the end of the war, the international community endorsed a Three- to Four-
Year Priority Reconstruction and Recovery Program (PRRP), prepared by the Bank, the IMF, the EBRD
and others in close partnership with the Bosnian authorities, as a framework for postwar reconstruction.
The PRRP served as an umbrella for overall donor activities. Between end-1995 and end-1998, some
US$4.5 billion in donor funding was committed for reconstruction and recovery activities in over a dozen
sectors (page 5). Twelve donors provided 82 percent of this funding (Table), more than 40 percent from
European donors. Donor support has been highly concessional, with about three-quarters of aid provided
as grant, and nearly all of the rest on concessional loan terms.

1996-1998n2
Multilateral Institutions 
US$ M Percentage 

EC 

WB 
EBRD 
IMF 

Bilaterals 

Bilaterals 

JaSa5286 

1027 

23Mn 

613 

97 

81 

758 

285 

129 

114 

-106 

106 
93 
3,700 

8061 
4,506 

14% 
2% 
2% 

1 7o 

1 

6% 

3% 

3% 
2i 

2% 

2% 
82% 

18% 
100%

Netherlands 

Switzerland 
Italy 

Norwany 

Gerdany 
Sweden 
Subtotal 

Others 
TOTAL 

Donor coordination arrangements for the PRRP included
annual donor conferences co-chaired by the European Union
(EU) and the Bank, designed to gather pledges for the agreed
PRRP. The Bank and the European Commission (EC), with the
authorities and in consultation with donors and others, issued
regular reports monitoring progress on the implementation of
programs and projects. The Bank and EC also annually updated
the PRRP to reflect changing needs. Sector task forces were
established to coordinate donor assistance in specific sectors,
and periodic sectoral technical meetings were also called, often
chaired by the Bank and the EC (e.g., in the power and

transport, health and education sectors).

As part of its aid coordination and resource mobilization
role, the Bank has mobilized over US$1.5 billion to co-fund
IDA-supported projects (total IDA and IDA-like resources of
US$698 million as of end-1999, or a ratio of about 2 to 1).3
Over US$300 of this total has been channeled through some
100-plus Trust Funds established with and managed by the

Bank.

Substantial information on donor partnership has been provided in periodic reports prepared by the Bank and the EC, most
recently: Bosnia and Herzegovina: Review of the Priority Reconstruction Program and Looking Ahead Towards Sustainable
Economic Development, May, 1999.

2Following 

billion.

the May 1999 Donor Conference, total pledges and commitments exceeded the total program requirement of US$5.1

3Includes 

US$150 million in special resources from the World Bank Trust Fund for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Annex 3

EnStitey 

Municipaity 

Entoty 

Entity, Canton, Municipality 

Entity, Canton 

Entity, Canton 

Mniity 

Entity Muncipality 

State. Entity. Canton, Munccpality

EU, OHR 

EU, IDA 

EU, IDA, IsDB 

EU, IDA 

EU, IDA, IsDB, IFAD, 

EBRD, EU, IDA 

EBRD, EU, IDA

Govemment
~R5 State
" EStCnton 
Municipality

nMultilateral 

IMP, IDA 

Institutions' 

.F

IMF, IDA, EU 

Institutions 
Bilateral 

a 

I 

Civl S 

yBaet 

erCivil Society 

rrp 

US 

us 

Bilateral 
us 
US 

Lis 
US 

~~~~~~~Netherlands. 

Austria, Canada, Ireland, Italy, 
Norway, Sweden, 
Switeerland, Turkey, US, UK 
U, 
Sweden 

Austria, Finland, Germany, Austria, Canada. Finland, AustpaGnNerany Italy Genmany, Netherlands, Finld, France, Germy, 
Malaysia, Netherlands, Ge 
Netherlands, 
Gemnyaehelnp,Fnand. 
FrwanciGemn, 
Mlyital,
Italy, Maasa 
ehrad,Grmany, 
Italy, Japan, 
No",SuiAaiu,Turkey, 
UK, Austria, 
Jpn 
uat 
aasa
Noray, Saudi Aehraband, Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, 
owy 
ad 
rba 
aaaFac,Jpn 
France, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Spain,
N
oray Sui 
raiaArabia,s,SadiArbi,Canada, 
Norway, SaudiUS 
Spain, Switzerland, US 
Spain, Switzerland, US 
Sweden, Switzerlad, 
Italy, Norway, Switzerland, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, US

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Japan, 

Italy,

Turkey, US 

us

Food Aid, Care Intemnational,

.. 
.Mercy iniernational/ USA Islamic 
Relief Worldwide, Action Contre, Education, Care 
Is Faim, Catholic Relief Services, International, Citizens 
Initiative, Catholic Relief 
La Benevolencija, Edinburgh 
Direct Aid, Children Services, Red
.,.aDiret DAid,Childrkn Sarvies, 
h 
e 
d Services, International 
Denmark, Save the 
Rescue Committee, Refugee 
Children Fund (USA), Children mn Trust Ireland, Mercy Corps 
A Crisis, Terre des A ommes, 
Europe/Scottish European 
Associazione Ainici dei Bambini. Aid, Norwegian Refugee 
Save the Children (UK), Women's Council, Wortd Vision 
BiServices, Malteser Hilfsdienst, 
International. 

Bite 
BOSFAM, WoSPnO 
Intern 
Norwegian People's Aid, Antics

lnternational Rescue 
Committee, Mercy 

lCorps/Scottish European 

A id 

Swedish Rescue Services Agency,
Saudi High Commission Relief for
BH, Catholic Relief Services,
American Refugee Committee,
Danish Refugee Council, Mercy
Corps Europe/ Scottish Europe Aid,
Norwegian Peoples Aid, SOS
Kinderdorf International, Lutheran
World Federation, Norwegian
Refugee Council, Intemnational
Rescue Committee, World Vision

International, Management Group.

i Private Sector 

FDI in Forestry 

FDt in telecom

Note: Reflects activities to date, and planned activities. IDA shown in bold reflects planned IDA support during the FYOO-02 CAS period.
The Office of the High Representative, because of its role in implementing the civilian aspects of the Dayton Agreement, is involved in every sector shown in one way or another.

Fostroninental and Cultural 
4utr Water and Sewrage 

Winanetal 
Utbatt Stiategy (Honastig) 

S.tem 
(Banking) 

Ptriva otegy 
Sfittot 
of 
Developatent 

Fla 
nI.andmin 
pmem 
nmic 
iei

Fearns ce 

E 

eiO 
mplymt 

' 

Refugos, dnsptacd personns

*Pioft 

sItytledi 

Rn 
f t 

qecvery 
Pro rtnu - Kt ParIte mot$a

Entity 
Municipality 

Entity 
Municipality 

Entity 
Mamncipality 

Entity 

Entity 
Canton 

State 
Entity 

State 
Entity 
Cauton 
Munici 

Etty 
Canton 
Muncipality 

pality 

State
Ent.ty
Canton
Canty
Manicipality

IDA, IsDB, UNESCO 

EU, IDA 

IDA, EU, UNHCR 

IDA, EU, IFC 

EBRD, IDA, IFC 

EU, IDA 

EU, OSCE 

IDA, EU, UNHCR 

EU, UNHCR

Annex 3

astria Egypt, France. 
Austria, Canada, Finland,
' Austria, Eg/ypt, Frnce, 
France, Germany, Italy, 
.Germny Greece, Italy, Kuwait, Kuwait, Malaysia 
a Lunemboueg, Malaysia, 
Neitherlands 

Arabia, Sweden, 
Araia, Seden, KU 

Switzerland, UK, US_ 

Switzerland,Turkey, UK 

____ 
____ ___ ____ ___ 
___ 

Geany, No-ay, Sweden 
SadiNetherlands, 
Germany.,Nomy 

g 

Aga Khan Trast, High Saudi 
C Commission, Islamic, 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization, SOROS, Danish Refugee Council 
. Swedish Cultural Heritage 
without Borders, World 
Monument Fund, 

Community Development. Care 
International, Helsinki Citizens 
Assembly, Independent Bureau for 
Humanitariam Issues, Biser -
International Women's Initiative, 
Catholic Relief Services, International 
Rescue Committee, Norwegian People's 
Aid, BOSPO - Tuzla, BOSFAM - Tuzla 
, TALDI - Tuzia, Malteser Hilfsdienst. 
Shelter/ Housing, International 
Management Group, Swedish Rescue 
Services Agency, Catholic Relief 
Services, Danish Refugee Council, 
Norwegian People's Aid. International 
Rescue Committee, Mercy Corps 
Europe, Scottish European Aid, World 
Vision Intematnonal .

Germany. 

US 

Germany, Italy, 
Canada, Denmark, 
Austria, Canada, Denmark,
Kurait, 
Italy, Japan, 
Germamy, Ireland, Japan, 
Netherlands. Saadi Netherlands, Norway, Malaysia, Netherlands, Spain,
Arabia, Turkey, US Sweden, US 
Switzerland, UK, US

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

various 

varous

Mine Awareness 
orwegian Peoples 
Aid, International 
Committee of Red 
Cross 

Democratization
Helsinki Citizens Assembly,
Circle 99 (Association of
Independent Intellectuals),
Human Rights Office, 
Repatriation/Return
Intemational Crisis Group, 
Income Generation 
Care International, Independent
Citizens Forum -Tuzia, 
Care International, International 
Bureau for Humamitarian Issues,
National Democratic Institute Catholic Migration Commission, 
Helsinki Citizen Assembly,
for Intemnational Affairs, 
Catholic Relief Services, Norwegian International Catholic Migration
Human Rights Citizens 
Peoples Aid, Intenational Rescue 
Commission, American Refugee
Initiative, Helsinki Citizens 
Committee, Mercy Corps, Europe/ Committee, Save the Children
Assembly Independent Bureau Scottish Europe Aid, World Vision Fund (UK), Danish Refugee
for Humanitarian Issues, 
International, BOSPO Tuzla, Lok 
Council, Mercy Corps
Citizens Forum Tuzla, Human Sarajevo, La Benevolencija 
Europe/Scottish European Aid,
Rights Watch, Helsinki 
World Vision International.
Committee for Human Rights
Citizens Voime, Biser -
Intemational Women's
Initiative.

Housing privatization 

Private bamks 

Enterprise 
privatization, 
FDI enterprises 

Development of local 
private sector 
demining capacity.

Development of private
sector.SMEs

Note: Reflects activities to date, and planned activities. IDA shown in bold reflects planned IDA support dunng the FYOO-02 CAS period.
Sectors related specifically to post conflict challenges.

Annex 3

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
PRIORITY RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY PROGRAM"'

Program Funding Requirements, Amounts Committed, Under Implementation and Disbursed by Program Objective and Sector

(as of Dec. 31,1998, in US$ million)

I 
Firm
1996-98 Firm Commitmentsl Commitments 
_,- 
58% j 
as % of 
1996- 
 share 1 
98 
Requirements 

Priority 
Reconstruction -
Program 
Network Infrastructure 
Requirements 

Amount Under
Implementation as 1 
% of Total 
, 
Requirements 

Amount Disbursed
as % of
Requirements

73% 

1,961 

59% 

_____________~I 

US9 million 

Amount Under 
Implementation 

Amount 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
_ _ _ _ 
_ _ _ 
_ _ _ 

_ 

_ _ 

_ _ _ 

_ _ _ 

_ _ _ _ 

_ _ _ 

_ _ _ 

_ _ _ _ 

_ 

_ 

_ _ _ 

_ _ _ _ 

_ _ 

_ _ _ 

_ __US 

$_ 

_ 

m illio n_ 

_ _ _ 

D i s u r sdr2 
1,524 

R e q i r e e n t

Sector 

_ 

_Disbursed_ 
_ 

1. Physical Reconstruction 

3,310 

1 

2,431 

58%_ 

73% 

1 961 

59% 

_ 

46%

Network Infrastructure 
Transport 
Telecommuhications 
Electric Power & Coal 
Community Revival f
Water and Sanitation 
District Heat and Gas 
Housing 
Landmine Clearing 
Social Sectors 
Health 
Education 

;

542 
134 
623 

368 
78 
513 

9%' 
2% I 
12% ' 

68% 
59% 
82% 

287 
41 
337 

53% 
30% 
54% 

189 
26 
288 

35%
19%
46%

@ 

350 
166 
710 
170 

213 
99 
667 
78 

5% l 
2% Y 
16% 
' 
2% 
,-
5%, 

61% 
59% 
94% 
46% 

181 
87 
635 
57 

52% 
52% 
89% 

120 
75 
503 
43 

34%
45%
71%
25%

' 
l 

' 

D33 

340 
275 

1 

221 
192 

65% 
70% 

168 
168 

49% 
61% 

136 
144 

40%
52%

1 

5% _ 

.

~ 

~ ~ 

___I__._l

2. Economic Re-start 
Industry & Finance 
Agriculture 
Employment Generation 

1,078 
593 
260 
225 

j 
1 

740 
403 
15% 
146 

18% 
10% ' 

69% 
68% 
74% 
65% 

613 
363 
117 
133 

57% 
61% 
45% 
59% 

552 
335 
101 
116 

51%
57%
39%
51%

.

~~~~~~_ 

_ 

_Y 

., 

_60/ 

131

T 

3%j 

3. Transition: Fiscal 
Support\Gov't 
Institution Building3' 
Social Protection 

712 

, 

685 

16%I 
I l

96% 

641 

90% 

498 

70%

Inst. Bldg. 

485 
485 

~~12.. 

373..

... 
..
... 

12%... 

445 
158 
37 

.

373
125 125

163 

4%. 
I% 

... 

Transition TA 

37 

... 

31 

..

TOTAL 
Peace Implementation 

5,100 
n.a. 

1 

3,856 
320 

92%1 
8%: 

76% 
n.a 

3,215 
265 

63% 
n.a. 

1 

2,574 
217 

50%
n.a.

1 

GRAND TOTAL 

5,100 

! 

4,176 

100%1 

82% 

3,479 

68% 

2,791 

5S

_~~~~ 

_

" Twelve multilateral and nearly 50 bilateral donors have contributed to this program.
v Includes an estimated total of US$39 million in advances for future payments to suppliers, for a total of US$2,752 million expended. Funds expended as a percentage of total requirements are 54%.
3' Includes US$240 million fiscal support.
- Financial estimates have been revised for some sectors to reflect improved knowledge of the current situation. Therefore, original funding requirements are no longer deemed applicable.
t
Sunca. Not a 
Bolsiaable 
Source: ECNvB Bosnia and Herzegovina Donor Database.

Bosnia and Herzegovina at a gla-nce 

4/24/00

Bosnia Eu,rope & 
Lower- 
anid 
Central mIddle-
A.sia lwioie 

_

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Heregovina 

Development diamond'

Population, mid-year (milions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, V$$) 
GNP (Atlas method, US$ billion.5). 
Average annual growth, 1992.98
Population (%) 
Labor force 
Most recent estimate (latest year availtable, 1992-6 
Poverty (% of population) belown,ation el poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (%/ of children under 5) 
Access to safe water (% of population) 
Illiteracy (%/ of population age 1.5+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age populationy 
Male 

4,2 
92a 
319 

47 
eLife 
2A190 
1,710
1,039~ 1.557

expectancy

- 1, 

0.1 
O% 
0 

1,1
$ 5 

.

GNP 
per 
ait 

Gross
nolmn

Iprimary

.

.

.

42 
71 
13 

88 
69 
23 

Ss

68
38

.. 

Access to safe water

., 

75
14. 
1loBoni 
105 

..

4 
100 
101 

-

osi

and Hlerzegovina
Lower-middle-income group

., 

Female 

99 

100. 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TREN4DS 

___

Economic ratios'

GDP (US$ billions)35 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 
Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debttGDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value* of debtlGOP 
Present value of debt/exports 

41
380Trd
3-37Trd
I'll
10:9
-27A1 Domestic
aig 

41.4 
285s 
4.2 
11.3 

.-

.

.

.. O.-30. 

I. 
.A 

.

.

Investment

-. 

1100 
38.0 

74.0:
10.0
60,0
179,0

.. 

.. 

Indebtedness

1978-8 1988-98 

1997 

1998 1"99802

(average annual growth)
GOP 
GNP per capita 

2-95 
281 

1l,0 
12.1 

95 
11.5 

-Bosnia 
and Herzegovina
Lower-middle-income group

Exports of goods and services 

.

53.3 

33.7 

17.0 

__________________

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY 
(% of GDP) 

_______________

~ ~~~~1978 

1988 

1997 

1998 

Growth of Investment and GDP(%

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 

.

.. 

17.0 
27.0 
56. 

15.8 
27.8 
564 

80.

.

.. 

so0-

2

0 

Private consumption 
General government consumption 

.

... 

.. 

-20 -

93 

94 

95 

99 

97 

98

.. 

.

GDI 

--- GDP

Imports of goods and services 

.

.

74.1 

70.6 

________________

(average anual 
growth)1978-88 

1968898 

1997 

1998 

Growth of exports and imports (%)

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing. 

.

..

200
0

.. 

....

... 

.

Services 
Private consumption 
General government consumption 

.0

5

..

Gross domestic investment 

.

.. 

3.7 

.3.5 

93 

94 
90 
Esports 

99 

97 

98

Imports of goods and services 

.

.. 

15.2 

7.8 

lf-Imports

Gross national product 

.

.. 

31.8 

17.5 

____________________

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimates.
'The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond
will be incomplete.
*After debt rescheduling in 1998.

Bosnia and Herzegovina

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestc prices 

1978 

1988 

1997 

1998 

Inflation (%)

(% change) 

20

Consumer prices (KMI Federation) 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

14.0 

5.0 

10

Implicit GDP deflator 

.. 

.. 

0

-10- 
-10
-20

93 

9 4 

SS 

6s97 

98

Government finance 
(% of GDP, lncludes curnt grants) 

Current revenue 

.. 
.

.. 

27.8 

32.6 

-30 

~-z'GDP deflator

Current budget balance 

1.3 

-0.6 

.CPI 

(KM, Federation)

Overall surplus/deficit 

* 

23.0 

20.7

TRADE

1978 

1988 

1997 

1998 

Export and import levels (USS mill.)

(USS millions)

Total exports (fob) 

.. 

.. 

575 

817 

2,000

Commodity I 
Commodty 2 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 

2,500
200

..
..

2,333 

2,573 

1500
1 0r0

.. 

Capidal goods 

r o 

9

Export price index (1995=100) 

.. 
.. 

93 

94 

..

Import price index (1995=100) 

.. 
..

.. 

.. 

e Exports 

R Imports

Terms of trade (1995=100) 

.. 

_.._..

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1978 

1988 

1997 

1998 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

(USS ofilions)

Imports of goods and services 

.. 

.. 

21606 

2,864 

o .

Resource balance 

-1,604 

-1,498

Net income 
Nel current transfers 
Current account balance 
Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 
Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ nillions) 

28 
772 
-1,060 
1,151 
-91 

11 
510 
-1,098 
1,014 
85 

1
-20

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

-25

-30
-35

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

80 

175

Conversion rate (DEC, local KM/US$) 

1.73 

1.76

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1978 

1988 

1997 

1998

(USS millions) 

Composition of 1998 debt (US$ mill.)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

2,981 

2,981
596
437 

566 
292 

G .

A: 596

Total debt service 

385 

131

IBRO 

.. 

.. 

36 

35 

F: 400

IDA 
Composition of net resource flows 
Off'icial grants 

2 

2

B: 437

.

.. 

996 

917 

B 3

Ofricial creditors 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

126 

181

Private creditors & others 

-107 

-75 

C:77

Foreign direct investment 
Porifolio equity 

0 
0 

100
0 

E: 1,124 

70

World Bank program (1BRD & IDA)

Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Netl Iows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 

0 

77 
65 
o 0 

100 
135 
0 

A - IBRD 

E - Bilateral

.. 
.

.. 

B - IDA 
C - IMF 

D - Other multilateral F - Private
G - Short-term

.

.. 

65 

135 

__1

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

38 
27 

38
97

Including extemal financed public projects.
Development Economics 

4124/00

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

FY97 

FY98 

FY99 

Annex B2

FY00

15
1.85
0.00
0.00
13.33
14.05
19.66

18 
1.36 
0.00 
0.00 
11.11 
7.78 
50.06 

Yes 
1,089.0 
60.5 

Planned
1420.4 1/
94.7

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment
Numberof Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

11 
0.83 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
429.37 

Yes 
0.0 
0.0 

16 
1.13 
0.00 
0.00 
6.25 
2.78 
104.66 

Yes 
2,390.8 
149.4 

Last Five FYs
3
57.88
0
0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.

" Total supervision resource amount for FY00 is shown in direct cost only.

Annex B3

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Indicative IDA Lending Program

Proposed IDA Higher Range Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year 
2000 

2001 

2002 

Project 
Adjustment Lending
First Social Sector Adjustment Credit
(SOSAC I) 
Investment Lending
Power 1I1 
Education III 
Mostar Water 
Emergency Labor Redeployment 
RS Line of Credit II 

Total FY00 

Adjustment Lending
Business Environment Adjustment
Credit (BAC) 
Investment Lending
Trade Facilitation 
Privatization TA 
Local Initiatives II 
Transport III 

Total FY01 

Adjustment Lending
Second Social Sector Adjustment Credit
(SOSAC II) 
Third Public Finance Adjustment Credit
(PFSAC 1II) 
Investment Lending
Pension/Health TA 
Environmental Infrastructure 
Municipal Services 
Agriculture 11 

Total FY02 
Grand Total FYOO-02 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards 
b (HIMIL) 

Implementation b
Risks (HIMIL)

30.0 

30.0 
11.0 
12.0 
25.0 
6.0 
114.0

40.0 

12.0 
10.0 
10.0 
15.0 
87.0

30.0 

35.0 

5.0 
9.0 
10.0 
10.0 
99.0
300.0

H 

H 
H 
H 
H 
H 

H 

H 
H 
H 
M 

H 

H 

H 
M 
M 
M 

H

M
L
M
M
L

H

M
H
L
L

H

M

M
L
L
M

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H),
moderate (M), or low (L).

Bosnia and Herzegovina - IFC and MIGA Program
FY97-2001

1997 

1998 

(planned)
1999 
2000 

Annex B3

2001

IFC approvals (US$m)1

7.70 

18.11 

7.84 

0 

2.3

Sector (%)

CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMS 
FINANCIAL SERVICES 
FOOD & AGRO-BUSINESS 
INDUST &,CONSUMER SVCS 
MANUFACTURING 
TIMBER, PULP & PAPER 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity 
Other 

Total 

34 

66

loo 

66 
34 

0

100 

12 

88
100 

100 

100 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 
Guarantees Pending Approval 

0.000 

0.000 

0.000

34
3
31
32 

100

100 

0 

100

62
3
34

99 

0

26.5

In addition, the Balkan Enterprise Facility has been approved and is expected to lead to
additional investments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Summary of Nonlending Services

Annex B4

Product' 

Completion FY Cost (US$000) 

Audiencea 

Obiectiveb

Recent completions
Reconstruction Assessment 
FYOO-02 CAS 
Labor Legislation TA 
Oil Import Review 
Poverty and Income Vulnerability Note 

Underway
IDF Grant - Statistics 
Anti-Corruption Diagnosis and Strategy 
Economic Development Strategy TA 
Household Survey (LSMS) TA 
Labor Market Study and TA 
FIAS Barriers to investment study2
IDF - Environmental Action Plan 

Planned
Local Government Finance Study 
IDF Grant - Reconciliation 
Public Expenditure Review 
Financial Management Assesment 
Creditworthiness Review 
CAS Progress Report 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Poverty Assessment 
FY03-04 CAS 

FY99 
FY00 
FY00 
FY00 
FY00 

FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 

FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 

83.2 
75 
28.8 
30 
20 

G, D, B, PD 
G, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, B 

KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

30 
100 
50 
170 
150 
65 
60 

65 
20 
150 
40 
20 
40 
250 
200 
80 

G, PD 
G, D, PD 
G, D, PD 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 

G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B 
KG, PD, PS 
G, D, B 
G, D, B 
G, D, B, PD 
G, D, B, PD 

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD

1 Many of these activities contribute to support the preparation of the I-PRSP (FY01) and full PRSP (FY02).
2. This is a FIAS-sponsored study (and additional funding will be provided by other donors).
a. Government, Donor, Bank, Public Dissemination.
b. Knowledge Generation, Public Debate, Problem-Solving.

Bosnia and Herzegovina Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionlincome group

Annex B5

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-98 

Europe & 
Central Asia 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Federation (in KM terms) 
Republika Srpska (in DM/KM terms) a/ 
Food price index (1995=1 00) 

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure b/

Health (% of GDP) 

Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) cl 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total 
Male 
Female 

Access to safe water

(% of population)
Total d/ 
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)

Total 
Male 

Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 

Under 5 (per thousand live births) 

Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

4.0 
1.4 
31.3 
2.6 

4.3 
1.1 
37.6 
2.0 

4.2 
-0.4 
42.2 
1.6 

920 

90 
125 

7.1 

6.6 
8.2 

100 
100 
100 

90

85 
79 

73 
71 

76 

13 

.. 

165 
93 

.. 
..

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

67 
65 

70 

51 

.. 

182 
130 

..

..
..

.. 

.. 

-

85 

71 
68 

73 

27 

.. 

181 
108 

474.7 
0.1 
66.2 
1.6 

2,200 

155 
155 

4.0 

5.1 
8.8

100 
100 
99 

91 
89 

69 
65 

74 

22 

26 

283 
120 

2000 World Development Indicators CO-ROM, World Bank

a/ Until mid-1998 prices were observed in YUD and converted into DM/KM at exchange rates in the parallel marketin the Belgrade,
as reported by the NBFRY through end- 1998..
b/ Including canton govemment expenditure in Federation. Excluding municipal government expenditures in both Entities, as well
as donor financed social sector programs.
c/ Excluding government spending on housing assistance.
d/ Large capacity of the country's water supply was damaged during the war and has been restored largely to pre-war levels through
reconstruction efforts since 1994.

Lower-
middle-
income

886.5
0.9
57.7
2.5

1,740

131
131

3.0

4.9

94
95
93

89
89

68
65

72

35

44

244
137

Annex B6

Bosnia and Herzegovina - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
1995 

Estimate 
1998 

Projected
2001 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 

1994 

1996 

1997 

1999 

2000 

2002 

2005

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100

Agriculture 

36 

25 

21 

17 

16 

.. 

..

Industry 

26 

27 

26 

28 

29

Services 

38 

48 

54 

55 

55 

..

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic investment (+ increase in stocks) 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 

131 
20 
12 
4 
15 

117 
42 
35 
20 
22 

104 
41 
36 
20 
21 

99 
38 
33 
16 
22 

91 
33 
29 
14 
20 

88 
32 
28 
11 
21 

85 
32 
29 
11 
21 

83 
28 
25 
8 
20 

78
25
23
6
19

.. 
.. 
.. 

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

15 
87 

20 
71 

24 
83 

28 
74 

34 
71 

34 
58 

34 
53 

34 
51 

35 
46 

36
40

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

.. 

-31 
10 

-17 
15 

-4 
11 

1 
11 

9 
17 

12 
16 

15 
18 

17 
18 

22
21

.. 

Memorandum 

items

Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 

1254 

1889 

2734 

3518 

4054 

4594 

5441 

6389 

7239 

9244

640 

820 

920 

990 

1200 

1430 

1610 

2040

.. 

20.8 

69.2 

29.5 

13.0 

10.0 

15.0 

14.0 

10.0 

5.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)

Gross domestic product at market prices 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

66.9 

28.2 

12.1 

9.5 

14.4 

13.4 

9.5 

4.5

Total consumption 

49.7 

13.9 

6.4 

0.2 

10.6 

9.6 

7.4 

2.3

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

194 
91 
1085 
894 
-891 
879 
-177 

381 
152 
1334 
1082 
-953 
1002 
-193 

658 
336 
2278 
1882 
-1620 
1094 
94 

1002 
575 
2606 
2333 
-1604 
772 
-486 

1367 
817 
2864 
2573 
-1498 
510 
-372 

1560 
970 
2661 
2399 
-1101 
417 
-228 

1835 
1156 
2899 
2622 
-1064 
265 
-522 

2179 
1410 
3239 
2932 
-1060 
232 
-531 

2533 
1671 
3332 
3024 
-799 
197 
-439 

3357
2244
3664
3339
-307
34
-285

( Including official current & capital transfers)

Current account balance, inc current transfers 
Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
o/w: Multelateral & PC creditorsC 

-177 
0 
-258 
-119 

-193 
0 
-271 
-144 

-748 
0 
514 
628 

-1060 
0 
19 
126 

-1098 
100 
106 
181 

-763 
60 
181 
255 

-882 
125 
267 
340 

-916 
175 
227 
281 

-689 
200 
158 
200 

-355
200
28
70

Other capital (net, inc. errors & ommissions) 
Change in reserves d(-indicates increase) 

433 
2 

595 
-131 

-365 
-243 

558 

80 
85 

475 

138 
-8 

178 
-50 

156 
-75 

126
-69

-91 

-489 

Memorandum 

items

Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR87 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-71.1 

-50.4 

-59.3 

-45.6 

-36.9 

-24.0 

-19.5 

-16.6 

-11.0 

-3.3

.. 

.. 

158.4 
80.1 

72.3 
24.8 

39.3 
8.1 

15.3 
-9.5 

15.7 
6.1 

18.4 
8.5 

15.0 
0.2 

5.6
1.4

(Continued)

Bosnia and Herzegovina - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 

1994 

Actual 
1995 

1996 

1997 

Estimate 
1998 

1999 

2000 

Projected
2001 

2002 

2005

Annex B6

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices) 9
Total expenditure 
Current revenues h.. 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

Extra-budeteryexpenditure' 
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2(%) 

.. 

29.0 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

65.2 
37.3 
41.1 
-3.9 
24.1 
28.0 

50.8 
27.8 
26.5 
1.3 
24.3 
23.0 

53.3 
32.6 
33.2 
-0.6 
20.1 
20.7 

48.8 
32.0 
33.1 
-1.1 
15.7 
16.8 

45.1 
31.6 
32.5 
-0.9 
12.6 
13.5 

43.9 
32.1 
32.9 
-0.8 
11.0 
11.9 

41.3 
32.2 
32.8 
-0.7 
8.5 
9.1 

34.8
31.0
31.1
-0.1
3.8
3.9

11.1 

11.5 

11.5 

12.9 

12.4 

11.1 

10.2 

9.3

17.9 

14.6 
8.5 

18.8 
95.9 

19.3 
52.3 

21.7 
31.3 

27.6 
37.4 

25.6 
10.2

-

Consumer price index (% change)

Federation (in KM tenms) 

Republika Sirpska (DM/KM-based 
index) k 

-4 
21 

-25 
17 

14 
-7 

5 
2 

0 
13 

3 
3 

3 
3 

3 
3 

3
3

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Accrual base.
f. Includes debt rescheduling & relief.
g. Consolidated central govemment.
h. Includes official current grants, which are of small amounts.
i. Social funds in the Federation.
J. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." Anjncrease in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.
k. Until mid-1998 prices were observed in YUD and converted into DM using the parallel market exchange rate.

Annex B7

Table 2: Bosnia and Herzegovina - Key Exposure indicators

Projected
2002 
2003 

Indicator 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2004 

2005

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed(TDO)(USSm)' 

3518 

3884 

3879 

2981 

3101 

3348 

3629 

3819 

3954 

4063 

4137

Netdisbursements(USSmn)Y' 

231 

135 

213 

220 

275 

307 

207 

153 

122 

63

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)' 

513 

573 

385 

131 

124 

135 

113 

148 

177 

173 

150

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGS' 
TDO/GDP 
TDSIXGS 
Concessional/TDO 

923 
186 
135 

590 
142 
87 

387 
110 
38 

218 
74 
10 

199 
68 
8 

182 
62 
7 

167 
57 
5 

151 
53 
6 

140 
50 
6 

131 
48 
6 

123
45
4

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

LBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%)' 
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$S)d 
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 

14 
22 
19 
623 
0.5 

2 
3 
2 
596 
0.5 

9 
10 
3 
596 
0.5 

27 
32 
3 
596 

27 
51 
2 
596 

26 
50 
2 
596 

36 
54 
2 
590 

40 
66 
2 
570 

33 
65 
2 
557 

33 
56 
2 
550 

38
46
2
546

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

IDA exposure indicators (%)
IDA DS/public DS 
IDA DS/XGS 
IDATDO (USSm)d 

0 
0 
234 

1 
0 
292 

2 
0 
437 

2 
0 
465 

3 
0 
661 

5 
0 
769 

4 
0 
879 

4 
0 
953 

4 
0 
991 

5
0
1018

-

IFC (US$mn)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity' 

15 
0 

15 
0 

8 
3 

IS 
3 

17
4

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, nse of IMF credits and net short-term capital. After debt rescheduling.

b "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers remittances.

d. Iicludes present value of guarantees.
Source: Official data and staff estimates.

Annex B8

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 2/29/00
(In US Dollars Millions)

IFC Held 

IFC Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1997/99 
Bosnia Micro 
1985 
Energoinvest 
1997 
Enterprise Fund 
1998 
SEF Akova 
1999 
SEF Bosnalijek 
1999 
SEF Kopex 
1998 
SEF Lignosper 
1999 
SEF Lijanovici 
1997 
Sarajevska 
1977 
TKA Cazin 
1998 
Wood Agency-AL 
1999 
Wood Inga 
1999 
Wood Konjuh 
1999 
Wood Kozara 
1999 
Wood Podgradci 
1999 
Wood Vrbas 

Loan 
0.00 
7.92 
0.00 
1.91 
0.00 
2.10 
2.08 
2.26 
3.24 
3.34 
4.48 
1.58 
2.26 
1.58 
1.13 
1.58 

Equity Quasi Partic Loan 
0.85 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0,00 
0.00 
0.00 
7.92 
1.80 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.91 
0.00 
2.23 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.10 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.81 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.26 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
3.24 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
3.34 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.32 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.01 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.33 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.93 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.32 

Equity Quasi Partic
0.85 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.39 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
2.23 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00
0.00 
0.00 
0.00

Total Portfolio: 

35.46 

2.65 

2.23 

0.00 

27.49 

1.24 

2.23 

0.00

CAS Annex B8 - Bosnia and Herzegovina

Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

Closed 4
Projects

Board 
Date 

Fiscal 

Year Active Projects 

1997 

1997 
1997 

1998 

1998 
1998 
1998 
1998 
1998 
1999 
1999 
1999 
1999 
1999 
1999 

P045310 

P044522 
P045311 

P045313 

P045483 
P050892 
P045134 
P048462 
P045484 
P044523 
P059763 
P062936 
P048461 
P056192 
P055432 

EMG PUB WORKS & EMPL 

ESSEN. HOSPITAL SERV 
LOCAL INITIATIVES 

EDUCATION RECONSTR. 

ELEC. POWER II 
EM PILOT CREDIT (RS) 
FORESTRY 
RECON ASST-REPUBLIKA 
TRANSPORT RECON. II 
BASIC HEALTH 
CULT. HERITAGE PILOT 
ENT EXP FACIL (BEEF) 
ENTER & BANKING PRIV 
LOCAL DEVELOPMENT 
PFSAC II 

TOTAL PORTFOLIO 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating bI 

Original Amount in USS Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements al

DvlpetIpeetto

DeveloDment 

Obiectives 
S 

S 
S 

S 
S 

HS 

S 

S 

S 

S 
S 

S 

S 

S 
S 

ImPlementation 

Progress

S 

S 

S 
S 
S 

HS 

S 

S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

IBRD 

IDA 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Rev'd

0 

0 
0 

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

10 

15 
7 

11 

25 
5 
7 
17 
39 
10 
4 
12 
50 
15 
72 

0 

0 
0 

0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0.61 

1.34 
0.13 

1.11 

23.04 
0.31 
6.2 
2.34 
3.62 
9.37 
3.88 
10.11 
25.33 
14.25 
43.66 

0.79 

2.19 
0.4 

1.52 

22.59 
0.26 
2.7 
1.58 
4.11 
0.47 
2.27 
3.54 
-0.44 
-0.07 
68.76 

0

0
0

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

299 

144.69

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
CAS COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX (HIGHER RANGE BASE CASE)
Overarching objective: Increase economic opportunity and improve quality of life for all Bosnians

Annex B9
Page l of3

Diagnosis 

Development Objective 

Strategy/Action 

Performance Benchmarks' 

Bank Group 
Instruments 

Key Activities of
Partners

Strengthen weak and fragmented governance to build a solid foundation for inclusive growth and participation
Overall. Progress since war's end in Build good govemance by 
Prepare a medium-term Economic Development Strategy (EDS), CPI: 
strengthening of institutions 
increasing capacity, credibility in broad consultation with stakeholders (including NGOs, local 
(especially public finance) has 
and accountability of public 
govemments, and other groups), that includes specific goals, 
contributed to stable macro 
institutions and maintaining action plan and monitoring indicators to strengthen public 
performance and strong growth, but 
fiscal balance, especially in 
institutions, improve govemance and maintain fiscal balance. 
govemance and institutions remain 
light of decreasing donor 
weak and fragmented and 
flows. 
accountability and participation are

TA for EDS (FYOO-02) EU Feasibility Study
Completion of Economic Development TA for I-PRSP (FY01) "Road Map"
Strategy (by mid 2000;) maintain 
and PRSP (FY02) 
OHR Strategy
linkage to PRSP process. 
exercises
Present EDS to Consultative Group
Meeting (2000)
* Complete PRSP (by 15 Q 200 1)

* 

* 

low.

Transparency. The war eroded the 
Improve transparency and 
* Develop anti-corruption strategy and action plan 
integrity of public institutions and the accountability of public sector * 
Establish border control and strengthen customs 
rule of law; weak new institutions and reform, especially financial 
* Reform payment bureaus 
political environment fragmented by control, legal and regulatory * 
Strengthen public audit agencies, establish Treasuries 
ethnic divisions leaves space for 
systems 
* 
Strengthen courts and judiciary reform 
corruption and rent-seeking. 
* 
Increase transparency of public enterprises (especially 
power and telecom) 

* 

* BSI: Complete anti-corruption diagnosis Anti-Corruption 
OHR Anti-Corruption
and develop action plan with 
Diagnosis & Strategy Strategy
stakeholders and donors 
(FYO-01) 
IMF SBA/PRGF
EU (judiciary) EU
BSI: Successful completion of payment TTFSE (FY0 1) 
bureau reform (by end 2000) 
PFSAC It (SPN) 
CAFAO (customs),
* CPI1 Reduced extemal corruption and 
PFSAC IIt (FY02) 
EBRD (telecom),
rule of law indicators (TI index, EBRD Power III (FY00) 
OSCE (party reform),

indexes) 

IJS and others various

Public finance management. Public Continued improvcment of 
* 
investment levels unsustainably high, public finance management * 
expenditures poorly targeted and 
revenue collection remains fragile; 
especially important in light of 
diminishing donor flows which will 
require careful fiscal management to 
maintain macro stability. 

* 

Local governments. Local 
Reform intergovernmental 
govemments lack capacity and clear 
finance and strengthening local 
rules for inter-govemmental finance govemments 

* 

* 

.

initiatives

CPI: Establishment of Supreme Audit 
Agencies and Treasuries
CPI/BSI: 
PER (FY01) 
IMF SBA/PRGF
* Declining public investment as a share PFSAC 11 (SPN) 
US (tax TA)
of GDP 
PFSAC III (FY02), 
Japan (support for
* Revenue collections vs. targets 
TTFSE (FY00), 
MTEF)
* Balanced budgets 
Emergency Pilot Labor EU CAFAO (customs)
* Demobilization targets (consistent with Redeployment (FY00)
Dayton and subsequent agreements)

Reduce and streamline public investment 
Improve domestic revenue effort and performance by 
completion of tax harmonization and reform to broaden tax 
base and reduce overall tax burden, reform tax 
administration 
Streamline recurrent expenditures (reduce military 
spending and spending on entitlement programs; increase 
spending on maintenance, social sectors and social
protection)
'Develop mechanisms to finance services with geographic CPI/BSI: 
Local Govemment 
spillovers (e.g., health and higher education) 
* Number of public hearings. 
Finance Study (FY01 ) 
Build local govemment capacity and increase 
Implementation of recommendations of NEAP (FY01)
accountability by disclosure of public information and 
Local Govemment Finance Study 
LIP (SNP)
holding of public hearings/meetings.Build cnvironmental * 
Local environmcntal legislation and 
Public Works (SPN)
management capacity (esp. water and wastes) at local 
enforcement levels, quality of water and Mostar Waster (FY00)

Various donors
(Annex 2)

* 

government level, 

________________________ 

wastes services 

Environ. Infra. (FY02)

Capacity building. Many sectoral Strengthen (and help create, as * Develop State and Entity level institutions where needed CPI/BSI: 
Ongoing operations Various donors
institutions are still weak and 
needed) sectoral institutions 
on efficiency grounds or for European integration (e.g., 
Project-specific institutional capacity building Education III (FY00) 
(Annex 2)
fragmented with inadequate capacity 
cducation assessment agency; electric power dispatch center) monitoring indicators (ongoing and planned Mostar Water (FY00)
or policy-making abilities. 
Strengthen existing sectoral institutions at local and Entity projects) 
Power (FY00)
level (e.g., sectoral ministries, pension and health insurance 
Transport III (FY02)
:funds) 
Pens/Health TA (FY02)

.. ___________________________ 

____________________ _ 

* 

Includes both country performance indicators (CPI) and Bank Group self-evaluation indicators (BSI). In the context of the Economic Development Strategy process specific country performance
indicators will be identified and monitored.

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
CAS COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX (HIGHER RANGE BASE CASE)
Overarching objective: Increase economic opportunity and improve quality of lifefor all Bosnians

Annex B9

Page 2 of 3

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Action 

| Development Objective 

Bank Group 
Instruments 
Foster sustainable and inclusive private sector led growth and employment as the most important means of increasing opportunity
CPI: Completion of Economic 
TA for EDS (FYO0-02) EU "Road Map"
Overall. Growth is now generated Make growth sustainable by 
To address overall need to stimulate sustainable growth, prepare * 
by reconstruction and demand for generating a private-sector supply a medium-term Economic Development Strategy (EDS), in 
Development Strategy (EDS) by mid 
TA for l-PRSP (FY01) OHR Strategy
2000; maintain linkage to PRSP process. and PRSP (FY02) 
exercises
broad consultation with stakeholders (including the private 
services from international 
response 
Present EDS to 2000 Consultative 
CEM (FY02)
community and remains half the 
sector), that sets out a pro-poor inclusive growth strategy. This 
should include specific goals, an action plan, and monitoring 
Group Meeting.
prewar level. Need to encourage 
indicators and includes identification of potential future sources
sustainable private sector supply 
response to recover growth and 
of growth and competitiveness.
generate employment

Performance Benchmarks' 

Key Activities of
Partners

* 

* 

* 

Foster private sector activity 
through improved business 
enabling environment 

Enabling environment and 
SMEs. Significant constraints to 
SME activity include 
administrative barriers, complex 
and onerous fiscal regime and 
weak judiciary and rule of law, as 
well as lack of access to credit 
(weak banking sector) and onerous 
labor legislation. 

FIAS: Barriers to 
EBRD, IMF, OHR,
Identify and eliminate administrative barriers to domestic CPI/BSI: 
Preparation of Action Plan to reduce 
Investment Study 
US, Germany, Italy,
and foreign investment. 
others, EU funding of
Promulgate business legislation (on bankruptcy, restitution, 
administrative barriers, and 
(FYO-01) 
implementation through 
Labor Markets TA and MIGA facility
property rights, competition, etc.) 
Stimulate SME growth (and improvements in banking 
regulatory/administrative reforms and 
Study (FYOO-01)
BAC (FY01)
sector) by continuing donor funded lines of credit to 
legislation (e.g., bankruptcy and 
competition), and other measures. 
BEF (FY00)
private SMEs as interim until banking sector can 
Credit availability, SME firms' growth SOSAC I (FY00)
intermediate credit. 
Improve and increase access to non-commercial risk 
rates, SME contribution to GDP 
MIGA: Guarantee
insurance 
* Amount of risk insurance available vs Facility (SPN)
demand, level of trade flows facilitated, BEEF (SPN)
e peciall exporspecially___xports_
Complete SME privatization 
CPIBSil: 
EBPAC I (SPN) 
Privatization and banking. 
Accelerate enterprise and bank 
BAC (FY01), 
Enterprise and bank privatization privatization and banking sector * Accelerate preparation activities for large scale enterprise * Number of companies 
privatized/liquidated (270 SMEs in 
Power III (FY00) 
launched, however process has 
reform 
and bank privatization/liquidation 
Seek foreign investment in banking sector 
Federation, 148 in RS; 100 large scale in TACAP (FY01) 
been slower than hoped due to 
Agriculture II (FY02)
* Continue corporatization measures in utilities (including 
Federation, 30 in RS). 
disagreements among the parties 
* Number of banks privatized/liquidated IFC: Wood Agency
coal mine restructuring in power sector), establish 
(5 in Federation, 3 in RS), satisfactory Line (SPN)
regulatory arrangements, begin plans for privatization 
Foster increased private sector productive activity in 
resolution of PBS and FIB. 
IFC: Possible Light
Industry Agency Line
agriculture and housing 
Energy laws and regulatory agenc(ies) 

EU, EBRD, US
(privatization TA,
banking TA, sector
reform)

_______ 

_______ 

_______ 

_______ 

______ 

______ 

____ 

______ 

______ 

______ 

______ 

______ 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Labor markets. Rigid labor 
Reform labor markets to be more * 
legislation and prevents labor 
responsive to the needs of a 
flexibility and hinders firms from market economy 

freely hiring and firing. 

Reform labor legislation to increase labor mobility 

_ 

.

_

Telecom law and regulatory agenc(ies).

* 
Labor Markets TA and OHR, ILO and others
CPI/BSI: 
Revised labor legislation in Federation, Study (FYOO-01)
new labor legislation in RS. 
SOSAC I (FY00)

* 

1 Includes both country performance indicators (CPI) and Bank Group self-evaluation indicators (BSI). In the context of the Economic Development Strategy process specific country
performance indicators will be identified and monitored.

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
CAS COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX (HIGHER RANGE BASE CASE)

Overarching objective: Increase economic opportunity and improve quality of lifefor all Bosnians

Annex B9
Page 3 of 3

Diagnosis 

Development Objective 

I ._ _ 

* 

Strategy/Action 

Performance Benchmarks' 

* 

Bank Group 
Instruments 

Key Activities of
Partners

Build social sustainability by establishing affordable and equitable social services and safety nets

Overall. Postwar growth brought Alleviating poverty and reducing To address need to increase benefits of growth more broadly, 
gains, but GDP per capita leaves vulnerability, through designing prepare a medium-term Economic Development Strategy (EDS), 
RH among poorest countries in 
pro-poor growth strategies 
in broad consultation with stakeholders (including NGOs, labor 
Europe. Nearly one third of 
unions, the unemployed and the displaced), that incorporates the 
population poor. Key 
social protection strategy currently underway. 
detemninants: employment status, 
region, and education level. 
is high. Intemally-
displaced are particularly at risk.

Inequality 

* CPI: Completion of Economic 
TA for EDS (FYOO-02) EU "Road Map"
Development Strategy (EDS) by mid TA for I-PRSP (FY01) OHR Strategy
2000; maintain linkage to PRSP 
and PRSP (FY02) 
exercises
process. Present EDS to 2000 
CEM (FY02)
Consultative Group Meeting. 
LSMS (FY01)
Poverty Assessment
(FY02)

* 

* 

* 

* 

Data. Poverty-related and social 
Improve poverty information and * Build poverty data baseline through households surveys CPI/BSI: 
sector data is scarce and data 
build capacity to manage 
Improve poverty information management capacity of 
Completion of LSMS 
collection capacity is weak. 
information 
statistics agencies
Safety nets. Public social safety Affordable and equitable social 
Reorient public spending on social protection toward the CPI.BSI: 
PER (FY01) 
net expenditures focus on 
protection programs 
neediest (by reducing military spending, reduce and 
* Development and implemementation SOSAC I (FY00) 
entitlement programs, rather 
streamline veterans' benefits and disabled programs). 
of social protection strategies 
SOSAC 11 (FY02)
support to neediest. Overall social 
Continue pension and health insurance reforms. 
Social protection expenditures share of PFSAC It (SPN)
spending ineffectively targeted to 
budget spending, decreasing rates of PFSAC III (FY02)
provide adequate protection. 
entitlement spending, increasing rates. Health/Pensions (FY02)
Donor funds have filled the breach, 
for spending on needs-based programs
however, are scaiing down. 
* Dayton targets for military reductions
Pension and health insurance 
(measured in budget spending on
reform are underway, but 
military salaries).
incomplete.
Social services. BH's social 
Strengthened human capital 
services have over-sized capacity through improved govemance 
and provide outdated services and and financing of social services to * 
are not oriented to more flexible 
improve access and quality 
needs of a market economy. 
Informal payments lead to well-off 
having better services, poor lack 
adequate services. 

CPI/BSI: 
Education 11 (SPN) 
* Availability of student leaming 
Education RII (FY00) 
assessment and spending information Basic Health (SPN),
Increased non-salary spending 
Health/Pensions (FY02)
Functioning of student assessment 
SOSAC I (FY00),
agency 
SOSAC II (FY02)
* Availability of health care cost
inforination

* 
* 

* 

Continue govemance and finance reforms in health care 
and education. 
Increase availability of vocational/adult education in skills 
needed in a market economy, especially to develop 
entrepreneurs/managers. 
* Upgrade teacher skills and improve testing methodologies 
Establish BH-wide student assessment agency 
* Develop public health strategy 

* 

UNDP, Italy and
others

Various donors
(Annex 3)

Various donors
(Annex 3)

____ ____ ____ ____ ____ 
____ 
____ 
____ 

____ 

____ 

____ 

____ 

____ 

____ 

____ 

____ 

____ 

Declining_out of pocket health_costs 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

* 

* 

Participation. Weak "culture of 
Increase vehicles for 
participation," exacerbated by de participation and build 
facto and dejure ethnic 
participatory instruments 

discrimination. 

Environment. Pollution from 
Assess current issues in post 
heavy industry lower than prewar, conflict environment 
but little environmental analysis 
.

Incorporate participatory approaches more systematically * 
into donor-funded projects and AAA work. 

* 

.
Review local issues, e.g., solid waste management, water 
* Anticipate environmental issues that may arise with 
privatization and newly-increased industrial activity 

BSI: Number of projects with 
MDP (SNP) 
participatory tools, regular dialogue Municipal Services 
with NGO groups. 
(FY02)
IFC microcredit bank
BSI: Completion of EAP and review EAP (FY01) 
with stakeholders 
Mostar Water (FY00) 
* CPI: Incorporation of 
Environmental

* 

Various donors
(Annex 3)

EU, various bilaterals
(Annex 3)

Includes both country performance indicators (CPI) and Bank Group self-evaluation indicators (BSI). In the context of the Economic Development Strategy process specific country
performance indicators will be identified and monitored.

Network Area 
PREM
* Poverty Policies 

* Economic Policies 

* Public Sector 

* Gender 

HDD
* Education 

* Health 
* Social Protection 

ESSD
* Rural Development 
* Environment 
* Social Development 

FPS
* Financial Sector 

* Private Sector 

* Energy 

* 

Infrastructure 

CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex B 10

Performance Major Issue 

Country Pr. 

Bank Pr 

Reconciliation /Bank

Poor 

Good 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 
Poor 

Fair 
Fair 
Poor 

Poor 

Fair 

Good 

Good 

High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 

Unemployment 
War-related vulnerability 
Poor-quality statistics 
Fiscal adjustment w/reduced 
donor flows
Expenditure management 
High 
Domestic revenue mobilization High 
Governance/Anti-Corruption High 
War's impact on women 
Low 

Education standards 
Education finance 
Health finance 
Veterans benefits reform 
Affordable pensions benefits 
Social protection strategy 

Medium 
High 
Medium 
Medium 
High 
High 

Marketing/distribution channels Medium 
Solid waste, sewerage 
Medium 
Refugees and displaced 
High 

High
High 
High 
High

High
High
High 
Medium 

High 
High
Medium
High 
High
High 

Medium
Medium 
Low 

Weak participation 
/Discrimination labor

Medium 

High 

Banking supervision 
Medium 
Payments bureau reform 
High 
Medium 
Private participation in banks 
High 
Enabling environment 
Continue privatization program High 
Labor law 
Medium 
Cost recovery 
Medium 
Sector Regulatory framework Medium 
Medium 
Cost recovery 
Rebuilding housing 
Medium 

Municipal services 
Demining 

Medium 
High 

Medium
High
Medium
High
High 
High 
Medium
Medium
Medium
Low 

Medium
Low 

Dialogue (I-PRSP-PRSP)
Dialogue (I-PRSP/PRSP)

_

Other partners active

_(NGOs, UN)

Dialogue (Education III)

Dialogue (SOSAC I)

_

_
Other partners active (EU,
UNHCR)
Dialogue (SOSAC 1)

_
Dialogue (SOSAC I)

Other partners active (EU,
UNHCR)

Other partners active (UN)

MAP SECTION

IBRD 28578R

l6 

ZToZogreb 
To Zagreb 

18' 

To Osijek

TO Zagb 

D~U

CROATIA 

To Vinkovci

To Osijek

=V 

j

BOSNA ANoD 

To4BelgN 

___adeb_ 

_o

As 
_~- ?s 
eg 

m thitq 

s 

i 

w] 
e 

i: 

J 

e 

w 

t 

i 

s- 

- ~ 

@ 

CZECHSS 

2OE 

yO 

-O

jN..' ~~~~~~4' 

Pnik 

Sor 

t>) ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~e{4ek ms\ 
s}e 

r..\-%:S3X 

{ 

K qc 

/ 

rjTo

-R)t 

.r -

INENTOA 

BOUNARIE 

e\ 

aed 

I\L 

UGAL 

430oQ 

<e 

; 

S 

=44- 

~~~~~~~~~~~~eprRfhW 

, 

YGOSAVI 

403

D 

< 

Lo: 

\ 

| 

1 

0

Adriatic~~~~~~~~~ 

~~~~~~~ iSeaD 

d 

f: 

-:::eD 

: 

-

GRE 

Aqeee ,<

S .

; 

>e 

l TUR50K75

.

-

: 

-

z 

-

-: 

: 

.

; 0 

4< 

e 

KILOMETERS~~~~~~~~~~~~CTOER 

99

0. 

f 0 
X '-f 
f -0' X0';X 
t-;, 
.

DM

BOSNIA: 
AN-D$-HEtZEGOV:iNAf 

:: -:X- : -

-; 0 Y 

1.

~~~i4 

CRO TI 

o EDfIS 

-

:0.SOEI 

s 

C 

RMNI 

-

s MTONAL 

: ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0 

; A t , ROt MDFDRP __' -

-|- N g1t ~~~~K U00:00ol' 

01 6 r X < 3 X X-4

