Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 21285-BUR

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

BURKINA FASO

November 3, 2000

Country Department for Burkina Faso
AFC15
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Currency Unit = CPA Franc (CFAF)
US$1 = 782 CFAF (October 25, 2000)

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

Metric System

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR

January I - Decemnber 31

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

AAA 
AflDB 
APL 
ARTEL 
BCEAO 
CAE 
CAS 
CET 
CFAA 
CFAF 
COGES 
CPI 
CPIA 
CPPR 
DAC 
ECOWAS 
EMRSO 
EU 
FIAS 
FTA 
GDP 
GEF 
GEPRENAF 
HIPC 
HIV/AIDS 
ICR 
IDA 
IDG 
IFC 
IMF 

INSD 

MIGA 
MTEF 
NGO 
ODA 
OECD 
OED 
OHADA 
ONEA 
PASECT 
PER 
PFP 

PNGT 

PNDRD 
PROF 
PRONAGEN 
PRSC 
PRSP 
PSM 
PSAC 
RPTES 
SAC 
SILEM 
SOFITEX 
SPA 
SWAP 
UN 
WAEMU 

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African Developnent Bank
Adaptable Program Lending
Agence de Regulation des Telecommunications
Banque Centrale des Etars de I'Afrique de l'Ouest
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Conmnon External Tariff
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
CFA Franc
Comites de Gestion
Consumer Price Index
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Development Assistance Commnittee (OECD)
Economic Conmiission for West Africaa States
Economnic Managenment Reform Support Operation
European Union
Foreign Investmnt Advisory Services
Free Trade Area
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Gestion Participative des Ressources Naturelles et de la Faune
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
Human hlinunodeficiency VirusAcquired Imenunodeficiency Syndrome
LIplenentation Conpletion Report
International Developrent Association
International Developrment Goals
Intemational Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Institut National de Statistiques et Demographie
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
Non-Governmental Organization
Official Developmnent Assistance
Organization for Economnic Cooperation and Developmnent
Operations Evaluation Department (World Bank)
Organisation pour I'Harmonisation du Droit des Affaires en Afrique
Office National de l'Eau
Projet dtAjustenrent Sectoriel des Transports
Public Expenditure Review 
Poticy Framework Paper

-

Programme National de Gestion des Te,roirs

Programme National de Developpement Rural D&centrafisi
Poverty Reduction & Growth Facility
Progranme National de Gestion de l'Ecoasteme Naturel
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Public Sector Management
Programnutic Strctural Adjustrent Credit
Regional Programn for the Traditional Energy Sector
Structural Adjustment Credit
Sahel Integrated Low Land Ecosystem Managerment
Societe des Fibres Textiles du Burkina Faso
Special Program for Africa
Sector Wide Approach
United Nations
West African Economic & Monetary Union

Vice-President 
Country Director 
Sector Manager 
Task Team Leader 

Callisto Madavo
Hasan Tuluy
Charles Humphreys
Celestin Monga

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR BURKINA FASO

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page No.
(i)

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

INTRODUCTION 

I. 

POLICY FRAMEWORK 
A. BURKINA PASO'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND THE GOVERNMENT'S PRSP 
B. MEDIUM-TERM MACROECONOMIC FRAMEWORK 

II. BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 
A. PROGRESS UNDER LAST CAS AND LESSONS LEARNED 
B. CAS RATIONALE AND STRATEGIC APPROACH 
C 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM 
D. VEHICLES FOR BANK ASSISTANCE, ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS AND CONTINGENCIES 

m. KEY ISSUES IN IMPLEMENTING THE CAS 
MONITORING OF OUTCOMES 
COLLABORATION WITH OTHER DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS 

IV. RISKS 

1

1

1
3

7

7
8
10
16

23

23
24

25

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without

World Bank authorization.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR BURKINA FASO

TABLE OF CONTENTS (cont'd)

TEXT TABLES
* Table 1: Selected Indicators
* Table 2: Scenario of Moderate Growth - Selected Indicators, 1999-2005
* Table 3: High Growth Scenario - Selected Indicators, 1999-2005
* Table 4: Base Case Assistance Program, FY 2001-2003
• 
Table 5: Triggers and Main Assumptions for Lending Program Composition
* Table 6: Proposed Core Benchmarks during CAS Period

BOX TABLES
* Box 1: OED Country Assistance Evaluation
* Box 2: Client Feedback Survey
• Box 3: Bank Group Portfolio (FY01)
* Box 4: Inprovements in Governance and Fight Against Corruption
* Box 5: Rationale for PRSC in Burkina Faso

ATTACHMENTS
* 1. Constraints to Growth and Poverty Reduction
* 2. Burkina Faso's Poverty Profile
* 3. Key Structural Reforms Implemented under Previous CAS
* 4. Econometric Model for Macroeconomic Simulations
5. CAS Formulation: A Participatory Process
6. Burkina Faso's Gender Profile
7 7. Collaboration with Development Partners
-
8. Performance Monitoring Framework
-
9. Combating HIV/AIDS
* 10. Core Labor Standards

i 

-

ANNEXES
* A2: Burkina Faso at a Glance
* B 1: CAS Matrix 2000-2003
* B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
* B3: Bank Group Program Summary: IDA
* B3: IFC and MIGA Program
* B4: Sunmmary of Nonlending Services
B5: Social Indicators
* B6: Key Economic Indicators
B7: Key Exposure Indicators
* B8: Status of Bank-Group Operations
* B8: Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio

MAP IBRD 28673

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR BURKINA FASO

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. Burkina Faso is a poor landlocked country with a limited resource base, high vulnerability to
external shocks, and acute social needs. With a population of nearly 12 million growing at about 2.8
percent per annum, Burkina Faso's real GNP per capita was US$230 in 1999. Given its narrow tax
base and structural Government budget deficit, the country has traditionally benefited from
substantial external aid flows (official development assistance received represented about 13 percent
of GDP over the last five years). Burkina Faso established a good track record on prudent
macroeconomic management and structural reforms during the last CAS period (FY97-00).
However, the country has been unable to attract levels of foreign direct investment necessary to
increase employment and incomes, owing to poor economic infrastructure and high transaction and
input costs, low labor productivity and a large social deficit, the limited size of the modern economy,
and several important institutional weaknesses.
2. Objectives. Despite Burkina Faso's average GDP growth of 5.7 percent during 1996-99, 45
percent of the population remains poor and more than two-fifths live in extreme poverty.The central
objective of the CAS is to support the Government's efforts as described in the PRSP to achieve
sustained high growth rates, to reduce the high incidence of poverty, and to improve the nutrition,
health, and education of the rural population, which constitutes the largest group among the poor.
Specifically, the CAS seeks to help the Government reduce the poverty headcount ratio by at least 2
percentage points per year during 2000-2003.
3. Approach. While building on the positive development outcomes achieved over the last four
years, this CAS
* 
incorporates the results of intensive analytical work and discussions with the Burkinabe
authorities on the causes of poverty and the challenges of higher, sustainable growth.
focuses on the areas critical for the poor (education, health, water supply, rural development)
and on increasing their access to basic public services.
* addresses key cross-cutting issues of capacity building, gender, decentralization, and the
environment.
recommends a progressive shift from project support towards program support to further the
strategic, efficient, and equitable use of public resources, regardless of source.
* acknowledges that efficient use of IDA administrative resources implies high sectoral selectivity.
4. 
Proposed program. The CAS will focus on (i) supporting policies and programs aimed at
improving the supply side of the economy to allow for sustained, broad-based and export-oriented
growth; (ii) improving public finance management to ensure that Government revenues are
mobilized without distorting the modern sector of the economy, and (iii) ensuring that the allocative
process and the effectiveness of public spending will place special emphasis on social services. With
respect to the latter, the CAS will contribute to closing the social deficit by supporting ten-year
programs in education and health as well as efforts to aggressively fight HIWV/AIDS.
The proposed base case lending level of $400-420 million for 11 operations (compared to
-5. 
$205-260 million and 8 operations under the previous CAS) assumes: (i) continued maintenance of

* 

* 

i

good macroeconomic environment; (ii) satisfactory implementation of the reform program in the key
poverty reducing sectors presented in the PRSP; (iii) enhanced external and internal competitiveness
through concrete actions to liberalize utilities and reduce input and factor costs as outlined in the
PRSP; (iv) improved transparency and accountability in public finance management as outlined in
the PRSP; and (v) continued satisfactory portfolio performance. The high case lending would be
triggered by: (i) major improvements in public finance management, including the implementation of
institutional reforns and budgetary procedures that will make the system more efficient and budget
management more expeditious, reliable, transparent, consistent, and accountable; (ii) swift
implementation of the private sector development strategy, including completion of the utilities
reform program; and (iii) increase in the absorptive capacity for public funds, as demonstrated by the
speed and level of implementation of priority public expenditure programs. Triggers for low-case
lending would include failure to effectively implement the reform agenda outlined in the PRSP and
maintain macroeconomic stability, and sustained decline in portfolio performance.
6. CAS Risks. The implementation of the Bank's proposed assistance strategy faces three types
of risks: (i) deterioration of the external environment; (ii) weak institutional capacity; and (iii)
political risks. In our assessment, these risks are manageable. The Bank will take all necessary steps
described in the CAS to mitigate them.
7. 
The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:
* Are the scale and composition of the proposed program appropriate responses to Burkina
Faso's development needs and do they reflect the Bank's comparative advantage?
Is the proposed set of core benchmarks for monitoring and evaluating the implementation
of the CAS adequate?

* 

ii

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR BURKINA FASO

INTRODUCTION
1. 
The Government of Burkina Faso has been implementing since 1991 a wide range of
economic reforms under a series of stabilization and structural adjustment programs supported by the
Bank, the IMF and other donors. In 1995, it issued a Letter of Intent for Sustainable Human
Development Policy, which laid down its vision of the country for 1995-2005. The vision consists of
transforning Burkina Faso from one of the poorest countries in Sub-Saharan Africa into a middle-
income one with a dynamic private sector open to the world economy. However, the authorities now
recognize that, in spite of its stabilization record, Burkina Faso will not be able to reduce poverty and
meet the 2015 International Development Goals (IDG), unless the country accelerates the pace of
reforms to liberalize and open up the economy. The recently completed Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP - IDA/Sec/M2000-313) discussed at the Board on June 30, 2000 presents the agenda for
a new, more ambitious course of action that would lead to higher growth rates and substantial
poverty reduction.
2. 
The last CAS was discussed by the Board in
June 1996 (15740-BUR). This CAS is designed as the 
Bank business plan for FY01-03 to support Burkina 
Faso's PRSP. Thus, this CAS: (i) reflects the results of 
intensive analytical work and discussions with the 
Population (million): 
Burkinabe authorities on the causes of poverty and 
Population Growth(%): 
the challenges of higher, sustainable growth; (ii) GDP ($ billion): 
focuses o the.areascriticalforthepoor(education, 
health, water, rural development) and on increasing 
Fiscal DeficiVGDP(%): 
their access to basic public services; (iii) addresses 
Inflation (CPI)(%): 
the key cross-cutting issues of capacity building, Export Growth (%) 
gender, and the environment; and (iv) recommends a % of Population living below $1/day: 45%
progressive shift 
from project support 
towards 

focuses on the areas critical for the poor (education, 

Average Average Estimate
(199294) (1995-97) (1999)

GNP per capita ($): 
GDP Growth (%): 

Table 1: Selected Indicators

10.6 
2.8 
2.4 
230 

-12.3
-1.1
-16.2

9.8 
2.8 
2.6 
220 

3.7 

11.6
2.8
2.8
230

5.8

-7.7 
0.4 
0.3 

4.9 

-7.9 
4.6 
7.5 

in orderto 
furthr 

to futher 

the stategic,Fenmale Literacy Rate: 

Litercy Rate: 
Gross Primary Enrollment: 

the strategic, 

19%
9%

41%
34%

105 per 1000

6.4%

program 

support 

in order 

efficient, and equitable use of all public resources, Ferrle Prirary Enrollment: 
whatever 
their source. 
The CAS 
incorporates 
Infant Mortality: 
quantitative, 
outcome- 
and 
results-oriented 
benchmarks to better monitor and fine-tune the Prevalence of {IIV/AIDS: 
assistance program and its effectiveness.

Life Expectancy at Bith (y33%

I. 

POLICY FRAMEWORK

A. BURKINA FASO'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND THE GOVERNMENT'S PRSP

3. 
A Strong Analytical Base. Recently, considerable analysis has been undertaken and open
debate has occurred over Burkina Faso's growth prospects. In 1999, the Government commissioned

a comprehensive analysis of competitiveness and long-term sources of growth in the country. The
findings served as the basis of a workshop in Ouagadougou in May 1999 with the participation of the
Government, the Bank, donors, the private sector, and civil society. A special Cabinet meeting was
later convened by the Head of State. The study Burkina Faso: Competitivite et Croissance
Economique-Orientations, Strategies et Actions was completed in early 2000, and identified four
major constraints to growth (see Attachment 1): (i) a depleted social and human capital base, low
labor productivity, and high unemployment; (ii) weak physical infrastructure, high input costs, anda
small modem private sector; (iii) severely constrained institutional capacity; and (iv) a relatively
closed economy, exporting only small amounts of raw material and labor.
4. 
The PRSP is based on a solid understanding of the nature and locus of poverty in Burkina
Faso. In 1996 and 2000, the Government issued two poverty profiles drawing from the results of
Priority Surveys conducted in 1994 and 1998. Burkina Faso is one of the few francophone West
African countries that have produced comparable surveys to analyze poverty trends over a five-year
period. The availability of these data has allowed poverty outcomes to be measured and the
relationship between poverty and key determinants-geography, family composition, gender, and
occupation-to be better understood.
5. 
Poverty Profile. The survey findings indicate that poverty is a widespread phenomenon in
Burkina Faso, and that 45.3 percent of the population (see Table 1) currently lives below the absolute
poverty line of approximately CFAF 72,690 per year (compared to 44.5 percent in 1994 with a
poverty line of CFAF 41,099)1. Poverty is particularly prevalent in rural areas, although its incidence
in urban areas increased by five points from 1994 to 1998, reaching 16 percent in 1998 (see
Attachment 2).
6. 
The participatory surveys of the perceptions of the poor regarding poverty reveal that the
situation differs depending on where the respondents live. The key factors for the urban poor are, in
order of importance, climate-related hazards, low purchasing power, old age, and large family size.
Poor people in rural areas, however, attribute their situation mainly to lack of economic
opportunities, physical handicaps, and social decay. The regional analysis of poverty shows that the
poverty map in Burkina Faso changed between 1994 and 1998. Although the incidence of poverty
decreased significantly (by nearly eight percentage points) in the southern, southeastern, and northern
agro-climatic regions, the south-central region experienced an increase of four percentage points. The
analysis of poverty among socioeconomic groups (based on source of income) shows that the
incidence of poverty is increasing for all groups except cash crop farmers and inactive persons. It is
highest among food crop farmers, who account for most of the population living in poverty.
7. 
Main Pillars of the PRSP and Staff Assessment. The PRSP acknowledges that sustainable
poverty reduction requires not only rapid growth, but growth that offers increased access to economic
opportunity by the poor and growth that is environmentally sound. It also depends on good
governance that ensures transparency and the fair distribution of the benefits of growth. The PRSP
outlines and prioritizes the Government's poverty reduction strategy that aims to intervene in four
areas: (i) accelerating broad-based growth; (ii) ensuring that the poor have access to basic social
services; (iii) expanding opportunities for employment and income-generating activities for the poor;
and (iv) promoting good governance. In each area, the document describes the specific actions that
the Govermnent intends to take over the medium term to overcome the severe constraints. The

1The poverty line per year and per capita, based on household expenditures, was estimated at CFAF 41,099 (equivalent to
US$74) in 1994 and updated to CFAF 72,690 (equivalent to US$123) in 1998. In real terms, these two amounts of money allow
the acquisition of the same basket of goods. The sizeable increase in the poverty line is due to the CFA franc devaluation in early
- 1994, which has made the basic basket of goods more expensive (the 1994 poverty line was determined on the basis of 1993
costs).

2

action plan focuses on three priority sectors-education, health, and rural development-where
public interventions traditionally have had the highest payoff in terns of fostering economic growth,
increasing employment opportunities, and raising the Burkinabe standard of living.
8. 
The Government's core objectives for 2005 can be summarized as follows:
* 
to raise GDP per capita, at a minimum, by 3 percent annually;
* 
to reduce the headcount poverty index from 45.3 percent to less than 35 percent;
* 
to raise the literacy rate from 19 to 40 percent;
* 
to increase life expectancy to 57 years.
9. 
The Government's poverty reduction strategy is appropriate to Burkina Faso's current
circumstances and provides a sound basis on which to elaborate the Bank's assistance strategy. It
candidly identifies the causes of poverty, and correctly focuses on key sectoral strategies that would
have the highest impact on poverty alleviation. The relationship between poverty and geography,
family composition, gender, occupation and other key determinants are well understood. The action
plan focuses on three priority sectors: health, education, and rural development. This emphasis is
consistent with the finding of the competitiveness study that human capital and rural productivity are
key constraints to growth. The monitoring and evaluation system put in place by the Government is
appropriate. The costing of the PRSP action plan is considered reliable because it draws upon the
long-term strategies under finalization in priority sectors and on the preliminary work done, in
cooperation with Bank staff, on the 2001-2003 medium-term expenditure framework. New spending
priorities are consistent with Burkina Faso's limited implementation capacity and with non-
inflationary finance. The PRSP considers the scope for reallocation of spending, increasing its
efficiency and raising new revenue in a non-distortionary manner, as well as scope for more extemal
assistance. The use of HIPC resources is clearly presented.
10. While the poverty reduction strategy as the whole is considered sound, there are some elements
of concem to staff, which are the topic of ongoing dialogue with the authorities: (i) the PRSP projects
real GDP growth rates of over 7 percent a year in 2001-03, which would be unprecedented-the
Burkinabe authorities acknowledge that they would have to implement swiftly an ambitious reform
agenda to reach that goal; (ii) the PRSP contains limited analysis of why public service quality is
low, unit costs high and outcomes disappointing-the Government recognizes this weakness and has
just completed a series of PER studies in the social sectors and expects to use the findings to address
these questions; and (iii) the need to ensure systematic consultation directly with the poor. This is to
be completed through the preparation of a participatory poverty assessment, with technical assistance
from the Bank in 2001. The Government plans to update the PRSP annually to take into account the
lessons learned from the implementation of policies adopted, the findings of complementary studies
carried out by various institutions to gain a better grasp of the poverty phenomenon, and the evolving
resource framework.

B. MEDIUM-TERM MACROECONOMIC FRAMEWORK

Economic Performance under the Previous CAS
11. Between 1996 and 1999, real GDP grew on average by 5.7 percent annually despite a
significant deterioration in the terms of trade over the period. The relatively strong growth
performance is attributable to the competitiveness gains following the 1994 CFA franc devaluation,
to the large public investment program, and to the financial and structural policies aimed at
consolidating the market orientation of the economy and maintaining macroeconomic stability.
Activity in the manufacturing sector, in particular the cotton ginning industry, was boosted in the
1996-98 period by a strong increase in cotton production from 150,000 tons in 1995/96 to 338,000

3

tons in 1997/98. In 1998/99, cotton production declined to 284,500 tons in response to unfavorable
environmental conditions and remained broadly stable in 1999/2000. Despite a sharp decline in
international prices in 1999, the ginning and marketing company (SOFITEX) was able to avoid
losses by improving quality and reducing costs. Reflecting strong public investment (which averaged
almost 14 percent of GDP in 1996-99), the construction and public work sectors also supported
growth throughout the period, together with services, which grew on average by 6 percent annually.
Inflation on an annual basis, as measured by the GDP deflator, declined from 6 percent in 1996 to
2 percent on average, between 1997 and 1999.
12. Govermment revenue rose during the last CAS period from 12.3 percent of GDP (1996) to
13.5 percent of GDP (1999) despite losses caused by the reduction of external tariff rates associated
with the introduction of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) common
external tariff (CET). For all three years, the current primary balance exceeded the PRGF targets, and
efforts were made to redirect spending to social sectors. The level of public capital spending, mainly
externally financed, hovered between 12 and 16 percent of GDP over the period.
13. After declining between 1996 and 1997, the external current account deficit, excluding
grants, rose in 1998 and 1999 by 1.5 percentage points of GDP to 16 percent of GDP, due to an
increase in imports in 1998 (the result of a rise in spending through the capital budget and private
investment) and lower-than-expected cotton exports in 1999. This slightly higher deficit was
financed by foreign reserves, without resorting to external arrears. Structural reforms undertaken
in 1996-2000 are summarized inAttachment 3. Implementation of these reforms has not,however,
led to any significant change in the structure of Burkina Faso's economy, which is still dependent on
few primary product exports.
14. 
Sources of Growth. The key factors in building the growth momentum during the 1994-
99 period were the January 1994 devaluation, the public investment ratio, averaging 14 percent
of GDP in 1996-99, and the sound macroeconomic policies and structural reforms under
successive adjustment programs, which improved the environment for private sector activities.
Recent studies indicate that in order for Burkina Faso to achieve its PRSP goals, the Govemment
would need to continue to liberalize the economy, improve external competitiveness, and
develop the country's economic and social infrastructure.
15. The agricultural sector, which contributes about 31 percent of GDP at current prices, was the
main source of growth. It grew by 3.1 percent in 1999 in real terms (5.5 percent in 1998). Following
a record increase of 17 percent in crop year 1998-99, the cereals output increased further by 1.6
percent in 1999 to reach 2.7 million tons. Growth in the primary sector was due to a combination of
factors, including structural reforms and changes in sectoral policies that helped raise farrners'
income and improved profitability-especially in the cotton sector. Livestock, numbering about 20
million heads of cattle, forestry and fishing continued to grow at a broadly stable rate. There is scope
to increase production substantially in cotton and cereals, provided that farmers acquire essential
tools and have access to financing. There is also scope to expand significantly production and exports
of fruits and vegetables, including mangos, sesame, and sheanuts.
16. Cotton will remain Burkina Faso's main export commodity in the medium tern. Cotton
exports, after a very rapid growth in 1995-98 when they more than doubled, reflecting improved
incentives to producers, are projected to expand at a more moderate pace of 6 percent per year in
1999-2004. Export growth potential is present for fruits, vegetables, and products that can be used
by the pharmaceutical industry. There is also a potential for development of the exports of hides,
skins and leather, as well as of gold and other minerals. Gold exports are projected to increase
substantially, owing to the intense explorations currently under way. The growth in export volume is
predicated however on some price recovery. There should be scope for developing textiles and light

4

manufacturing directed to satisfy regional demand provided Burkina Faso improves its
competitiveness. Non traditional exports are projected to grow rapidly from a low base.

Linkages between Growth, Consumption, and Poverty
17. Burkina Faso's strong economic performance over the last six years has not translated into
increased welfare and poverty reduction. Poverty incidence, as measured by the headcount index,
has not been reduced during 1994-98 (45.3 percent in 1998, compared to 44.5 percent in 1994). Two
important macro links between poverty, as measured by consumption-based welfare and income per
capita, need to be considered. First, because inequalityis high in Burkina Faso, there are important
distributional differences among income and socioeconomic groups. Also, little correlation exists
between aggregate consumption indicators and consumption in the three lowest income quintiles-
the poorest provinces. According to studies by the INSD, the 1994 devaluation and the subsequent
structural reforms have raised living standards for cotton producers, especially in the South-West, but
may have increased urban poverty.
18. 
Second, cross-sectional analyses indicate that, on average, increased consumption per capita
of 1 percent is associated with a decline in the poverty headcount ratio of about 1 percent. This
suggests that policies that lead to an increase in aggregate consumption are likely to lead to a decline
in the poverty headcount ratio. In Burkina Faso, the link between aggregate output per capita and
consumption per capita is complex. Therefore, the reform program under consideration will reflect
analyses of (i) the determinants of aggregate consumption; (ii) the welfare effects of reforms; (iii) the
impact of changes in relative prices, terms of trade, and domestic absorption of foreign financing;
and (iv) the nature of savings and public expenditure policies in a country with high inequality in
income distribution. The next stage of analysis will look at sector specific income distribution and
the impact of different growth patterns on improving living standards.
Modeling Growth Scenarios
19. An econometric model was built in close collaboration with the Government's economic
team to design an appropriate mix of fiscal, monetary, and public investment policies that would
bring the economy to a higher growth path while maintaining an adequate level of consumption.
20. 
Scenario of Moderate Growth. On the basis of the assumptions provided in Attachment 4,
simulation results indicate that real GDP growth could average 4.5 percent per annum over the period
2000-05, while the GDP deflator will stabilize below the WAEMU target at about 2.4 percent on
average. At the annual real GDP growth rate of about 4.5 percent and given the current
elasticity of poverty reduction with respect to mean income (about 1.5), Burkina Faso's poverty
will decrease only by 16 percent (about 7 percentage points) and the country will not meet the
2015 ODA-OECD targets.2 Also, this scenario carries with it a significant downside risk. Because
cotton remains the main export crop, the Burkinabe economy will remain vulnerable to climatic and
terms of trade shocks. In the case of a serious adverse external shock, real GDP growth rate may fall
below the population growth rate, which could fuel poverty and worsen domestic and external
imbalances.

2With its population growing at 2.8 percent a year, a real GDP growth rate of 4.5 imnplies an increase in GDP per capita of 1.7
percent. Assuming an elasticity of poverty with respect to income of 1.5, this would translate into a reduction of 2.6 percent per
year of the headcount index, that is 1.2 points from the current 45.3 percent.

5

Table 2: Scenario of moderate growth: Selected Indicators, 1999-2005

Real GDP growth rate (annualpercentage 

change) 

Population growth rate (annual percentage change) 

Real GDP per capita (annual percentage change) 
Poverty elasticity in Burkina Faso with respect to mean income 
Expected reduction in headcount ratio (% per year) 
Poverty headeount ratio 
GDP deflator (annualpercentage 
change) 
Fiscal deficit (in percentage of GDP, excluding grants) 
Current account deficit (in percentage of GDP, excl grants) 

19991(6cttial) 

5.8 
2.8 
3.0 

1,5 

45.3 
I4.4 

-1213 
-165 

2001 
4.9 
2.8 

2.1 

1.5 
3.1 
42.5 
1.5 

-12 
-12 

2003 
4.9 
2.8 

2.1 

1.5 
3.1 
40.0 
2.3 

-12 

-11 

2005
4.3
2.8

1.5

1.5
2.2
38.2
2.4
-12
-12

21. 

Rationale 

for a High Growth Scenario. 

The PRSP 

acknowledges 

that achieving 

the

Government's poverty reduction objectives will require a new policy framnework. Keeping in mind

that the Government's 

revenue capacity 

remains very low (and unlikely 

to change 

in the near future),

donors would be called upon to maintain high aid flows to Burkina Faso (provided 

that 

the

authorities keep their commitment to reform). To achieve higher growth rates over the medium-
term-a GDP growth rate of 7 percent a year-the Burkinabe authorities recognize that they must
implement an aggressive structural reform program to remove constraints to private sector
development and to accelerate the pace of Burkina Faso's integration into the regional and world
economy. This will include diversifying the economy; investing in human resources; reducing the
high costs of electricity, telecommunications and transport; improving the taxation system; and
deepening financial intermediation.

22. 
In this bold scenario, and on the basis of assumptions provided in Attachment 4, simulation
results indicate that real GDP growth could rise steadily over the period 2000-2005 to reach 7.7
percent, while the GDP deflator is contained at about 2.6 percent. With a poverty elasticity of
about 1.5, the poverty headcount ratio would be reduced by about 30 percent (15 points).
Stronger export performance may also lead to a significant improvement in the overall deficit and the
current account balance (excluding grants) between 1999 and 2005, as shown in Table 3 below.

Table 3: High Growth Scenario: Selected Indicators, 1999-2005

Real GDP growth rate (annual percentage change) 
Population growth rate (annual percentage change) 
Real GDP per capita (annual percentage change) 
Poverty elasticity 
in Burkina Faso with respect to mean income 
Expected reduction in headcount ratio (% per year) 
Poverty headeount 
ratio 
GDP deflator (annual percentage change) 
Fiscal deficit (in percentage of GDP, excluding grants) 
Current account deficit (in percentage of GDP, excl. grants) 

: 199W(actual) I 
5.8 
: 

2.8-7 
3.07 

L1.5l 

1 

4S.3: 

-1.4 
-12.3 
16 

2001 
6.3 
2.8 
3.5 
1.5 
5.2 
40.5 
1.5 
-12 

-11 

2003 
7.6 
2.8 
4.8 
1.5 
7.2 
34.7 
2.4 

-10 
-10 

1 

2005
7.7
2.8
4.9
1.5
7.3
29.6
2.6
-10.0
-9.0

6

II. BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
PROGRESS UNDER LAST CAS AND LESSONS LEARNED

A. 

*participation 

e Privatization, 

BoxE1: OED Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE)
program in Burkina Faso.

In 1999 OED comnpleted a Country Assistance Evaluation of IDA's

discussed by the Board on July 11, 1996 

. While the focus of IDA's program over the past decade was
deemed generally appropriate, the overall outcome was rated
marginally satisfactory despite somne iniportant successes,
and key parastatals, reorientation of primary education
system, strengthening of capacity to build and mnaintain urban
infrastructure, and of agricultural services, and the extent of
beneficiary participation.
Support of structural adjustment with closely integrated
projects in key sectors was found broadly relevant, but too
ambitious given institutional capacity and political instability,
slow process 
in reaching consensus around private
in the economy.
civil service reform, and trade and price
liberalization were judged to be partial successes Little
progress was noted however in private sector development,
rationalization of the pubLic investment program,
decentralization of public health services and in support to dry
land agriculture.
Coordination arnong Burkina Faso's main donors was judged
inadequate and a framework for integrating extemal assistance
was absent which weakened the policy impact of the country
dialogue.
These fndings have been shared with the authorities and the
lessons taken into account in preparing this CAS.

23. 
Progress towards Objectives in
Previous CAS. The last CAS which was 
discussd by 
th Board n July 1, 1996 
(R96-140) supported three objectives: 
maintaining a 
stable macroeconomic 
environment, providing social services to 
the poor and creating sustainable income, 
employment, and growth opportunities. 
Progress was made under the first objective 
as noted in paras 1 1-13. Data indicate a poor 
record in the second objective: despite 
important economic achievements, and 
although much has been done to promote 
essential basic social services, Burkina Faso 
still suffers from a large social deficit. In 
reference to the third objective, some 
progress was made in liberalizing and 
opening up the economy. However, the 
population has grown faster than the 
economy's capacity to generate additional 
income. In addition, growth opportunities 
are still hampered by low labor productivity, 
now further threatened by HIV/AIDS, high 
input and factor costs, weak organizational
and institutional settings for efficient social
service delivery, and poor donor coordination.
24. What Worked Well. The Bank's adjustment operations-a one tranche Economic
Management Reform Credit in FY99, followed by a one tranche SAC III in FYOO-worked well to
improve Burkina Faso's public finance management and resource mobilization. The last three Public
Expenditure Reviews (PERs) were successful and a medium-term expenditure framework is
currently in place. The Public Institutional Development Credit (closed in FY00) supported the
computerization and on-line management of public finance (including Treasury) and the civil service.
Reforms under the Transport Adjustment Credit (closed in FY00) have led to the successful
implementation of road maintenance with regular budget allocations. Two urban operations-Urban
II (closed in FY97) and Urban Environment (under supervision) increased private sector participation
and domestic resource mobilization. The Education IV Credit (closed in FY99), and the Post-Primary
Education Credit (under supervision) contributed to the strengthening of institutions and
infrastructure to promote quality and access, most notably in primary education. Progress was also
made in liberalizing the telecommunications sector, with the issuance of two new cellular licenses
and the creation of a regulatory agency (ARTEL). Privatization of Air Burkina is well advanced.
25. What Worked Less Well. Implementation of the privatization program under the Private
Sector Assistance Credit (closed in FY00) moved slower than anticipated as the process focussed on
transactions rather than on an articulation of a strategic context. However, the situation turned around
in the last year of implementation, during which the project supported the preparation and
dissemination of a major study on competitiveness and economic growth in Burkina Faso.

.

.

7

units recently noted long delays 

in processing of no-

26. What Did Not Work Well. In several sectors,
the Bank and the Government came to no agreement 
Box 2: Client Feedback Survey
on the content and pace of reforms. For example, A survey was conducted in December 1997 and

reforms to liberalize trade and prices of cereals, provided lessons that can help the Bank strengthen its
relationship with the Governrnent and other donors.

livestock, and cash crops (e.g., cotton) have still not The survey noted that Bank staff need to reach out and
been agreed upon. The 
second Agriculture 
Adjustment credit was cancelled during preparation 

listen more. Feedback also suggests that Bank staff
need to be mnore proactive in detecting and resolving
imnplementation issues. The survey confirmed strong
(March 98) due to continued disagreement with Bank-Government relations, especially at senior
Government levels. During CPPR preparation, project

Government on the reform agenda. Rationalization of 

Govemiment on the reform agenda. Rationalization of 

imnplementation, poor planning of Bank missions, and
too heavy reliance on consultants with 
limited
experience.

the public investment program, too, was incomplete objections, high level of Bank staff rotation at
largely due to weak donor coordination. Utilities and Headquarters which has negative effect on project
air transport costs have not been reduced; the 
economic benefits of slower population growth and 
the challenge of AIDS were not sufficiently
emphasized in the dialogue with the Government.
27. 
Portfolio Management. Gross IDA disbursements fell
below planned levels in the late 1990s because of the failure to 
reach agreement on sectoral reforms in agriculture and in response 
to weak implementation capacity. As of November 1, 2000, there Number of Projects 
were seven active projects in the Bank's portfolio in Burkina Faso, 
totaling $186 million, of which $87 million was undisbursed, 
significantly lower than the 15 projects totaling US$372 million in 
FY97. While a number of projects closed in the latter part of the 
1996-2000 CAS period, emphasis was placed on building the 
analytical base, with economic and sector work undertaken in 
education, health, decentralization, public 
finance and 
infrastructure. Portfolio performance over the last several years 

Sectoral Composition (%)
Agriculture 
Health 
Education 
Mining 
Urban 
MIGA Outstanding (US$m) 
IDA Undisbursed (US$m) 
IFC Exposure (US$m) 
IFC Number of Projects 

Box 3: Bank Group
Portfolio (FY01)
11AConmitmnents (UJS$m) 186
7

25
30
14
11
20
87
0
2.05
3

has been mixed, but generally satisfactory. At the time of the 

__I

second CPPR (May 1998), there were four problem projects in the portfolio and one at present
(Private Irrigation). The disbursement ratio has been steady over the years at about 20 percent. The
proactivity index was low (50 percent in FY98, 33 percent in FY99) but has improved and is
currently at 100 percent. The realism index is at 100%.
28. 
Future Portfolio Actions. The following actions were discussed during the March 2000
CPPR to further improve portfolio management, to be implemented during the upcoming CAS
period:
* 

improve the pace of disbursements by moving conditions of effectiveness to conditions of
negotiations during project preparation;
resolve the issue of repeated delays in transfer of funds by BCEAO and all commercial
banks; and
improve the rate of timely submission of audit reports.

* 

* 

B. 

CAS RATIONALE AND STRATEGIC APPROACH

29. Objectives. The thrust of the Bank's future program is to assist Burkina Faso in implementing
its Poverty Reduction Strategy. The overriding objective will be to support the Government's efforts
to achieve sustained high growth rates, to reduce the high incidence of income poverty, and to
improve the nutrition, health, and education of rural population-poorest segment of the population.
Specifically, the CAS seeks to help the Government reduce the poverty headcount ratio by at

8

least 2 percentage points per year during 2000-2003. To achieve this goal, the CAS will focus on
the four objectives of the PRSP as noted in paragraph 7. There is no substantial divergence between
the Bank's and the Government's development agendas, priorities, and policies.
30. Selectivity and Flexibility. Bank intervention in support of the PRSP is intended to be
selective and complementary of activities supported by other donors. In line with the OED findings
and recommendations, we have developed a strategy with two key prongs: bringing resources closer
to the beneficiaries, where they are most likely to be productively used; and collective donor action
to reduce mismanagement and inefficiencies. To these ends, the Bank will support: (i) greater
participation of local stakeholders in program and project design and implementation; (ii) closer
cooperation among donors to link improved governance and donor lending levels.
31. The Bank will work closely with other donors to ensure consistency in the country policy
dialogue, and a division of labor in lending and nonlending services. For example in education, the
Bank is taking the lead in the reform effort and in basic education, while some bilateral agencies are
focusing more on physical rehabilitation of schools and secondary education; in health, the Bank is
taking the lead in advising the Government on the preparation of the ten-year reform plan, with other
development agencies complementing these efforts through physical investments and specific
thematic programs. In transport, the Bank is not contemplating new operations in main road network
development, but will support maintenance and rural roads development. On judicial reform, the
Bank will work in parallel with others donors to help the Government finalize its action plan but the
EU will take the lead in supporting the implementation phase. The priorities for the Bank's assistance
program vis-a-vis other donors have been determined through our country dialogue with the
Government, nonlending services, and intensive consultations with all development partners during
the preparation of the PRSP and the CAS (see Attachment 5).
32. Linking Gender and Poverty Reduction. In Burkina Faso, as in most African economies,
women play substantial economic roles (see Attachment 6). The implications for the CAS are as follows:
Gmender should be considered an issue of economic growth and efficiency, not just a problem
of equity, and not just limited to the social sectors. Gender-based asset inequality directly
limits growth and poverty reduction. Men and women experience poverty differently, and
different aspects of poverty (inequality, vulnerability, isolation, powerlessness) have gender

dimensions.

* Investments in the household economy have substantial pay-offs in increased efficiency and
growth in the market economy, and will also contribute to improving the health and
education status of the poor: (i) labor-saving technology relating especially to food
processing is likely to have a greater immediate impact in raising the productivity and
reducing the time burdens of women; (ii) domestic energy (fuelwood) is of great importance;
(iii) transport interventions need to reflect the different needs of men and women, so as to
improve women's access to transport services (including intermediate means of transport)
commensurate with their load-carrying responsibilities.
* Compared with men, women operate under severe time constraints, which limit their options
and flexibility to respond to changing economic opportunities.
33. Of particular concern are the different HlV prevalence rates for young men and women aged
15 to 24 in Burkina Faso, respectively, 3.33 and 7.51 percent. In terms of access to productive
resources, there remain key differences in earned income, in access to fmancial services, land, and
agricultural services. Despite women's important role in agriculture, only around 15 percent of
extension agents are female. Available data also indicate that the participation of men and women in
public life and institutions, and in decision-making processes, are highly uneven.

9

34. Ensuring Environmental Protection. The PRSP has identified sustainable management of
natural resources as a major principle for combating poverty. This is based on the fact that
deforestation, land degradation, and to a lesser extent urban air pollution (mainly due to emissions by
motorized transportation) are currently having a high economic and social cost. In particular,
deforestation and land degradation not only constitute serious environmental problems, but are also a
major constraint to sustained agricultural growth. The loss of biodiversity regarded valuable and
threatened on a global basis is also a concern addressed by the Bank in Burkina Faso as part of its
mandate as a GEF implementation agency.
35. 
Since low agricultural yields, food insecurity, and poverty both ultimately lead to and result
from environmental degradation, the PRSP emphasizes agricultural intensification and modernization
as an effective approach to protecting Burkina Faso's natural resource base, and expanding
employment and income-generating activities for the majority of the poor. A number of appropriate
agricultural technological packages have been identified to this end. Bank assistance will help
achieve a widespread adoption of these technologies, and strengthen the capacity of the country to
deal with any adverse impacts that could result from intensifying agricultural production.

C. 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

36. 
The following section summarizes areas of emphasis for the Bank Group country program
for FY01-03. The detailed presentation of lending and non-lending programs can be found in the
CAS matrix in Annex B 1.
37. The program was prepared in close collaboration with the Burkinabe authorities and takes into
account activities of other development partners (see Attachment 7). Many of the specific activities
build upon Bank's previous work in Burkina Faso and represent areas in which the Government has
particularly sought Bank expertise, and where the Bank can play a catalytic role in bringing technical
know-how and mobilizing assistance from other donors. While the program represents proposed
commitments and assistance for the period FY01-03, its actions are designed to be supportive of
long-term programs (e.g., ten-year programs in education, health and community based rural
development).

Focus and Composition of Bank Assistance
38. Supporting the PRSP agenda will involve selective actions and programs on each of the four
fronts defined by the Government (para 7).

SUPPORTING THE ACCELERATED GROWTHSTRATEGYAND CLOSER INTEGRATIONINTO
THE REGIONAL ECONOMY

39. 
Closer integration into the West African economy and the world economy can only be
attained through improving Burkina Faso's competitiveness. As a member of the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), Burkina Faso's recent macroeconomic stability is
attributable to the macroeconomic convergence policy, which the Union and its Central Bank
(BCEAO) have engineered over the past decade.3 Burkina Faso is also a member of the Economic
Community of the West African States (ECOWAS), which has taken steps toward the
implementation of a free trade area (FTA) for sixteen West African countries.

3Since 1996, the Union has accelerated the pace of economic integration, introducing a comwon external tariff (CET) in January
2000, and adopting a set of macroeconomic convergence criteria for member countries.

10

40. 
These developments constitute challenges and opportunities for Burkina Faso. As a small,
poor, and landlocked country with tiny and fragmented markets, the country would improve its
competitiveness through deeper involvement in the regional integration process. Implementation of a
sound sub-regional strategy would help Burkina Faso accelerate its reform program, providing for
joint commitment and consistency, scale and competition, and therefore, a higher policy multiplier
effect. On the other hand, there is a risk that protectionist common policies within WAEMU or
ECOWAS could reduce the sub-region's competitiveness in the global economy. This would lead to
the concentration of industrial activities in the coastal countries (Cote d'Ivoire, Senegal) and make
Burkina Faso and other smaller Sahelian countries captive markets.
41. As part of its ambitious plan to move Burkina Faso toward a 21st century service-export
economy, the Government aims to decrease the mean tariff toward the lower end (O to 10 percent)
range, and is considering reducing taxes on corporate income (from 35 percent to 20 percent), and
eliminating import taxes on selected high-technology items-telecommunication and computers. The
reform program adopted by the Burkinabe authorities combines national market liberalization and
sub-regional market integration to develop a dynamic infrastructure service and human resource
sector within limited public resources for large investments. (i) In air transport, Burkina Faso would
benefit from regional market liberalization and unification, thanks to scale and competition effects. It
would also benefit from reduced access costs and from attracting ground services, especially for
freight, through market liberalization and using tax policy to lower airport fees and ground service
costs. This would increase the country's chances of becoming a sub-regional hub. (ii) In energy,
Burkina Faso has devoted considerable effort to improving interconnections with its neighbors,
especially Ghana and Cote d'Ivoire. Its participation in the West-Africa Power-Pool would ensure a
stable and cost-effective energy supply for the country. Current disparities in energy costs-CFAF
102 per kwh in Burkina Faso versus CFA 40 in CMte d'Ivoire-indicate that Burkina Faso would
benefit from an integrated sub-regional energy market. (iii) In telecoimnunications, national market
liberalization and sub-regional integration, including technical standardization, frequency
management, regulatory systems, and establishment rights would all benefit the sector. Burkina Faso
is accelerating its privatization and liberalization programs and is working with WAEMIU and
ECOWAS toward telecom market integration. (iv) With regard to human and social capital
development, Burkina Faso will design and implement its education and health policies (especially
the fight against AIDS and the provision of specialized services) at the regional level. Labor market
issues, including core labor standards call for continued Government's attention (see Attachment 10).
42. 
Regional integration will have transitional costs that will increase the Government's
financing requirements in the short run, especially given the lower taxes on imports and the need to
increase spending in education, health, and basic infrastructures. As only a small portion of these
costs are likely to be met through intra-WAEMU fiscal transfers, greater assistance will be needed
from the donor community. The Bank's support to Burkina Faso to benefit from greater regional
integration would take two forms: (i) assisting the Government to improve the enabling macro-policy
environment with more ambitious growth and poverty reduction targets; and (ii) supporting the
private sector development program.
43. 
Improvements to the enabling macro-policy environment will be supported through the
analytical work to update the PRSP, public expenditure reviews, various policy notes on key issues
(labor market dynamics, monetary and fiscal policies in the WAEMU context), and the finalization

4 As an illustration, the CET irnplies a lower mean tariff level than what currently prevails in Burkina Faso which would suggest
some degree of net trade creation. Yet, in light of the type of bold move needed to improve visibility and to close the
comnpetitiveness gap, the CET appears still high by international standards. Moreover, the introduction of the taxe degressive de
protection, means that tariff rates mnay rise to the upper end (15-30 percent) rather than the lower (0-10 percent) range, penalizing
landlocked, resource poor countries such as Burkina Faso with small industrial production.

11

of important strategy papers-private sector development strategy, financial sector review, long-term
plans for education and health, energy and transport sector strategy notes. Through analytical work
on a regional assistance strategy, the Bank will also provide policy advice to help Burkina Faso meet
the challenges and opportunities of deeper regional integration.
44. 
To support the private sector and financial development strategy, the Bank will emphasize
the need for Burkina Faso to open up to new opportunities, domestically, regionally and globally, and
to encourage private initiative to explore growth prospects in agriculture, mining and services, in
particular by improving the business environment. The macroeconomic framework and objectives
will have to reflect the paradigm shift and take into consideration the requirements for a bold private
sector development strategy. Bank assistance will facilitate:
* 
liberalization 
in 
critical sectors-air 
transport/handling services, power and
telecommunications, introduction of competition in the cotton subsector, further
retrenchment of public sector from agriculture and livestock productive activities-to create
a unified subregional market and to secure cost reductions, economies of scale, and enhanced
competition,
* a divestiture program for telecommunications, power and petroleum distribution companies,
airport storage facilities, slaughterhouses, farm equipment manufacturing and distribution,
agricultural and livestock input supply systems;
legal reform, tax reform, reduction of transaction costs, harnonization to WAEMIU standards
of import/export duties on agricultural and livestock inputs and products;
the development of alternative transport corridors and improvement in financial services to
handle foreign exchange transactions.
45. The Bank will also support enterprise capacity building at the SMEand micro-enterprise level,
with activities such as advisory services to agri-business, development of market information
systems, promotion of joint ventures for agro-processing, and improvement of quality control
systems.

* 

* 

SUPPORTING ACCESS OF THE POOR TO BASIC SOCIAL SER VICES.

46. A crucial objective of the strategy is to support a more ambitious social sector reforrn to
prepare Burkina Faso's labor force for the challenge of regional integration and increased
competitiveness of its outward-oriented economy. To improve the quality and equitable access of
social services, emphasis must be placed on improving managerial and implementation capacity, and
increasing expenditure efficiency. The Bank plans to support primary health care for the neediest,
basic education, and access to potable water. Support for access to primary health care will be
attained through Bank involvement in a ten-year sector development program that will define actions
to address existing problems. Specific strategies will include actions in three areas:

* public expenditure will be targeted to cost-effective interventions addressing the health

problems of the poor and vulnerable. Rural areas with the worst coverage and quality of basic
primary health care services will receive priority for public investments and a larger share of
current expenditure, including the wage expenditure.

* 

the Bank will help improve the efficiency of service delivery through the following: review of

the organizational structure of the Ministry of Health; review of its pricing policies in an
effort to reduce the cost or render free of charge essential and preventive services to increase
access and utilization of these services by the poor; availability of essential drugs will be
improved to 90 percent or more; and continued monitoring of the availability and
affordability of drugs to the poor and vulnerable is to be instituted.

12

* partnerships will be built with local service providers, and accountability to the poor will be
reinforced. The capacities of decentralized managers and service providers, and of
community management committees (COGES), will be strengthened, with a view to enable
them to establish effective dialogue and partnerships, and provide ongoing monitoring and
evaluation of performance. This is key to making public service providers more accountable
to the communities they serve and to providing communities with the information they need
to participate effectively in planning and budgeting of local-level health activity. A
contractual approach to health service provision will also be developed, in an effort to
encourage local partners in health care (NGOs, communities, private sector, and academia) to
target their activities to underserved areas.
47. Bank support for education is designed to help raise enrollment and completion rates, as well
as learning outcomes and literacy rates, while maintaining a reasonable pace of expansion at
postprimary levels where the emphasis will be on improving the adequacy of learning outcomes for
the labor market. For primary education, the Bank will help implement quality cost-effective
programs that attain desired learning outcomes at affordable prices to the poor. Key levers to support
these objectives include lowering the cost of education to the poor and girls, controlling expenditure
at other levels of education, cutting the unit cost of education, and reducing repetition.

48. With respect to other levels of education, Bank assistance will serve three goals simultaneously
within financial constraints: (a) to provide a chance for qualified primary school graduates to move
on to higher levels of education; (b) to create a pool of candidates from which selection for higher
education and recruitment of primary school teachers can be made; and (c) to supply workers with
sufficient education to fill mid-level jobs in the modem economy.

SUPPORTING OPPORTUNITIES FOR EMPLOYMENT AND 
ACTIVITIES FOR THE POOR.

INCOME-GENERATING

49. Rural development of Burkina Faso is an important pillar to help expand economic
opportunities for the poor. Recent evidence from many developing countries suggests that the
sectoral composition of growth matters in terms of the impact on the incomes of the poor, given
estimates of elasticities of poverty reduction with respect to growth-a 1 percent increase in the
contribution of agriculture to GDP can yield a 1.6 percent increase in the incomes of the poor above
the GDP increase in industry or services, which increases incomes of the poor by 1.2 percent and 0.8
percent respectively.
50. 
These differences are related to the linkages of agricultural growth on small-scale non-
agricultural sector of the rural economy5 Rural household incomes in Burkina Faso are highly
diversified-the average rural household derives about 39 percent of its income from cropping, 13
percent from livestock production, and the remaining 38 percent from non-agricultural activities.
Agricultural growth arising from reduced transaction costs (rural infrastructure) and increased factor
productivity (improved technology, health, education) reduces poverty more through indirect than
direct processes. In addition to increasing employment and lowering food prices6,-both of which
have an immediate poverty impact -
increased farm incomes stimulate demand for goods and

5These linkages come from rural households spending their expanding income on locally produced non-tradable goods and
services. In Burkina Faso, household-level data indicate that 45 percent of any increase in rural household incomes is spent on
farm non-tradables (e.g. dairy products, millet) and 22 percent on non-farm non-tradables (e.g. locally processed foods, services,
locally manufactured items). Growth multipliers for Burkina Faso indicate that for each dollar of income generated in the
agricultural tradable sector $1.88 of additional income will be generated in the local non-tradable sector due to linkages.
6 The average and marginal budget shares for basic staples in rural Burkinabe households are 60 percent and 53 percent,
respectively.

13

services in the large, employment intensive, rural and market-town based small-scale enterprise
sector.
51. 
Judiciously chosen public investment will be needed to overcome these constraints.
Specifically, public expenditure on rural infrastructure, technology generation, and institutional
development/reform will be necessary for rural and agricultural growth to accelerate. Decentralized
decision making and econornic empowerment of beneficiary communities is expected to improve the
choice, relevance, cost effectiveness, and maintenance of rural infrastructure. In addition, to meet the
demands of the local population, the deconcentration of sectoral ministries (and engaging in
public/private partnerships where appropriate) will improve the delivery mechanisms of public goods
and services and make them more demand-responsive.
52. 
The CAS will support this vision of sustainable agricultural growth and rural development.
The main priorities are as follows: (i) support measures to open the economy and improve access to
markets (both domestic and export) for agricultural products, farmers, and agro-enterprises
(including investments in rural infrastructure); (ii) increase the productivity of rural assets (labor and
land) through health, education, water, and the conservation and renewal of natural resources; (iii)
support the rural decentralization process by transferring responsibilities and resources to those
directly concerned by the development process and pursue the institutional reform necessary to
refocus the role of the State; and (iv) initiate regional interventions centered on currently under-
exploited regions and aiming at removing constraints that are specific to the Central Plateau region.

SUPPORTING GOOD GOVERIVANCEAND INSTITUTIONAL REFORM

Box 4: Improvements in Governance and Fight against Corruption

* 

* 

.

Burkina Faso has made efforts over the past five years to improve governance and reduce corruption:
.
Burkina Faso has a unified budget system and a computerized expenditure management system (Circuit de la depense), which make
it possible to track the States accounting and financial transactions (some ministries are currently decentralizing this facility).
In 1998, the Government launched a systematic review of public expenditure by a national team of experts under the supervision of an
interministerial committee.
The 1999 and 2000 budget guidelines were significantly improved: in conformity with the HIPC social targets, the share of actual
public expenditure for health and education in the budget has increased; a shift to performance budgeting was made for six key
ministries (Health, Finance, Interior, Defense, Basic Education, and Secondary/Technical education), with outcome indicators to
monitor efficiency, and increased accountability for line managers.
* A Medium-term Expenditure Framework for 2001-2003 was prepared and presented to Parliament in October 2000 with the 2001
budget bill. The introduction of a medium-term framework was discussed both at the local and central level. The discussion has
enhanced the capacity of the Government to formulate the annual budget within a dynamic perspective of medium-term objectives
and strategies.
Major improvements were observed in public procurement procedures, such as the periodic publication of bids received in public
tenders.
Trade liberalization and tariff reform have also reduced rents and increased revenues from customs administration.
The privatization program has removed a large source of rents and patronage from the public sector. The restructuring of the
financial sector and related reforms have greatly reduced the role of Government in credit allocation decisions (delinquent
borrowers are prohibited from obtaining new bank loans and from bidding on public procurement contracts and privatization. The
Government has also carried out a major overhaul of its business laws by adopting new business laws under the OHADA treaty.
In 1999 and for the first time in over a decade, budget execution reports laws (lois de reglements) for fiscal years 1993 and 1994 were
enacted by the National Assembly, the Government is committed to completing reports for the 1995-98 period by March 2001.
* An independent Supreme Audit Court was created in 2000. It will be given a larger role in the preparation of audited budget laws.
* An audit of military expenditures for fiscal year 1999 is currently being completed and will be transmitted to the Supreme Audit
Institution and to Parliament.

* 
* 

• 

53. Results from surveys carried out by Transparency International also indicate that Burkina Faso
is considered one of the less corrupt countries in West Africa. The Government has made progress in
improving governance and reducing corruption (see Box 4 above). Nevertheless, corruption continues
to be perceived as a problem, undermining the effectiveness of public expenditure and the framework
for negotiations between private sector operators and the Government.

14

54. The PRSP presents four guiding principles to improve governance: (i) adopting a more
comprehensive approach to public finance management to ensure that public funds from all sources
are managed according to a clear set of consistent and transparent rules, and in conformity with
internationally accepted good practices; (ii) reducing Government intervention and discretion in
economic activity; (iii) making the Government more accountable by increasing participation of
electoral bodies, civil society groups and the private sector in policy design, policy implementation,
and monitoring; and (iv) ensuring a more efficient use of public revenues by focusing public policy
evaluation on results on the ground. Following these principles, the strategy developed by the
Burkinabe authorities includes actions in the following areas:
Increasing awareness of the economic andpolitical costs of corruption. The national plan of
55. 
good governance adopted in 1998 seeks to correct distortions in public administration by promoting
such values as meticulousness, probity, and transparency in public affairs and among businessmen, and
by intensifying the struggle against practices at odds with the general interest, especially corruption,
nepotism, and patronage. A national anti-corruption network is currently being set up for comments
and proposals regarding possible solutions.
56. Strengthening the judicial system. The judicial system still faces a number of issues: (i)
insufficient number of judges and courts (most courts are concentrated in Ouagadougou and Bobo-
Dioulasso); (ii) the slowness of decision making (long delays before judgements are rendered) and
publication of decisions; (iii) lack of accountability and impartiality of judges; (iv) lack of
equipment; and (v) lack of knowledge of the general public (including business people) of their rights
and obligations. In addition, administrative procedures are very cumbersome for enterprise creation
and contribute to high transaction costs.
57. Based on the recommendations of the National Forum on Justice held in October 1998, the
Ministry of Justice has prepared a judicial reform strategy and national action plan covering the period
2000-04. The plan was approved by the Council of Ministers on April 12, 2000. Its objectives are: (i)
to strengthen the institutional status of the judiciary by carrying out institutional reforms and measures;
and (ii) to increase and strengthen judicial system infrastructure and the human, material, and financial
resources at its disposal. Geared to these objectives, the plan proposes 11 action programs with an
overall budget of CFAF 24 billion. The European Union has taken the lead in supporting these
reforms. The Bank, however, will continue to work with both the Government and other donors to
help implement the agenda.
Improvingpublic administration andpublicfinance management. With respect to reform of
58. 
public administration in Burkina Faso, a restructuring process has been going on since 1992. The
ministry responsible for the civil service has initiated systematic and forward-looking talks with several
representatives of civil society and key players in the public administration in order to lay the
foundations for a comprehensive reform. National conferences on the comprehensive reform of the
civil service provided an opportunity to discuss and enrich draft texts that were subsequently adopted
by the National Assembly. Essentially, they comprise laws establishing the forms of intervention and a
distribution of spheres of competence between the State and other stakeholders in Burkina Faso's
development; the legal framework governing employment in the civil service and government officials;
and rules governing the creation, organization, and management of government bodies. To them should
be added the decree on rules for drawing up public sector program and progress reports in the public
administration and the decree ordering generalized use of manuals of procedures and performance
charts in all branches of the civil service.

7For examnple, to create a company in Burkina Faso, a small entrepreneur would have to go through numerous steps and pay
duties of up to 20 percent of its capital before he can even start activities.

15

59. The authorities have greatly improved their budgeting and expenditure practices over the past
five years. But despite recent improvements in revenue collection, Burkina Faso continues to be
faced with an inadequate tax structure. Fiscal revenue is highly dependent on a relatively high level
of tariffs, which discriminates against exports and undermines the efficiency in the allocation of
public resources. In the context of the implementation of the WAEMU's common external tariff, the
Government has designed a reform program which includes: adopting measures aimed at shifting
fiscal resource away from trade taxes and strengthening tax administration by broadening the tax
base through curtailing tax and customs duty exemptions (in accordance with evolving WAEMU
policy, in particular the envisaged regional harmonization of the investment code); reducing
excessive regulation of private entities and adoption of preferential schemes; and strengthening tax
administration through the computerization of all custom revenue collection offices.
60. Fostering decentralization. Convinced that a well-thought-out decentralization process, carried
out in a pragmatic and discerning manner, enhances democracy inasmuch as it supports local initiatives
and grassroots control by locally elected leaders, the Government has set in motion a process that began
with the adoption in 1998 of written guidelines for decentralization (textes dorientation en matiere de
decentralisation), which are currently being implemented Acceleration of the process requires: (i)
continuation of the decentralization policy with the same pragmatism and graduality that have
characterized it so far in order to allow the communities to organize themselves in a way that will allow
them to respond to local expectations; (ii) adequate fnancing provisions designed to provide the
communities with the means they need to be able to fulfill, from now on, the tasks that have been
devolved to them, so that the retrenchment of the State does not bring with it a deterioration in
indispensable basic social services (above all in education and health); (iii) training of regional
representatives to prepare them for the management and supervision roles conferred on them by
decentralization; (iv) implementation of an efficient and impartial local administration, responsive to
the needs of the population; (v) efforts to achieve citizen participation through civil society
organizations in local development, not only in the formulation of objectives and choice of means but
also in execution and supervision of actions undertaken; (vi) the practice of decentralized, local
cooperation, while respecting national development priorities; (vii) adoption of an official text to solve
any anomalies resulting from the geographical remapping of administrative borders, while maintaining
a sufficient degree of decentralization of services to make interventions more effective, improve
citizens' access to public services, and install genuine grassroots government; and (viii) adoption of an
official text allowing true decentralization of management of the State's human, material, and financial
resources, by granting new powers to officials responsible for operations.
D. VEHICLES FOR BANK ASSISTANCE, ALTERNATIVE SCENARIOS AND
CONTINGENCIES

61. 
To support the operational objectives of the PRSP, the Bank envisages aprogram and related
country budget allocation which will: (i) give priority to supervision of ongoing projects; (ii)
acknowledge the important role of donors; (iii) consolidate lending operations into fewer, but broader
resource transfer mechanisms that are more closely integrated with the Government's own budgetary
allocation and execution processes; and (iv) include a share of nonlending services to foster a robust
analytical base for consensus and partnership building.
62. 
To refocus its assistance prograrn with a consistent emphasis on rapid growth with poverty
reduction, the Bank Group strategy will focus attention on: (i) key social sectors where there are
viable long-termn strategies, or where they can be developed; (ii) longer-term economic reforms to
improve competitiveness and reduce business costs; (iii) improving public resource management in
the country; and (iv) adapting Bank programs to the sub-regional framework and potentials. In terms
of instruments, there will be a continuation of analytical and advisory activities, as knowledge is the

16

critical input for progress in the substantive areas presented in the PRSP. The Bank will also support
public spending increasingly through consolidated lending operations-results-driven programmatic
credits, with separate projects for capacity building and infrastructure investments directly targeted to
poverty alleviation and private sector development and where active institutional strengthening is
required for improved service delivery.
63. Three lending scenarios are envisaged: base, high, and low cases. The base case
lending/nonlending program is in the order of $400-420 million over FY01-03 (see Table 4). The
base case is consistent with the present IDA allocation. Under the high case scenario, the Bank could
increase lending to around $450-500 million over the three years, about 50 percent of which could be
in the form of fast-disbursing credits in key sectors (see para 80). Under the low case scenario,
lending would be limited to social sectors and rural development.

CAS Base case Assistance Program FY01-03
64. The base case scenario would be contingent on: (i) continued maintenance of good
macroeconomic performance; (ii) satisfactory implementation of the reform program in the key
poverty reducing sectors presented in the PRSP; (iii) enhanced external and internal competitiveness
through concrete actions to liberalize utilities and reduce input and factor costs, as outlined in the
PRSP; (iv) improved transparency and accountability in public finance management, as outlined in
the PRSP; and (v) continued satisfactory portfolio performance.

SUPPORTING THE ACCELERATED GROWTH STRATEGY AND CLOSER
INTEGRATION INTO THE REGIONAL ECONOMY
65. 
The Bank will help Burkina Faso consolidate recent gains in macroeconomic management
and move beyond stabilization to deeper structural reforms and sustained economic growth. A
poverty reduction support credit (PRSC) will be prepared in FY01, focusing on reforms to
improve public finance management and the competitiveness of the economy, and to facilitate the
country's integration into the regional and world economy. Should there be a continued need for
fiscal adjustment and balance of payment support, the Bank could prepare another PRSC in FY03 to
further support programs in key sectors where sectoral strategies and action plans are being defined
as part of the implementation of the Government's poverty reduction strategy.
66. A technical assistance credit for Private Sector Development (Competitiveness and
Enterprise Development project) will be prepared in FY02 to provide support in the
implementation of the residual privatization program; improve the quality, access, and cost of
telecommunications; promote the development of a strong indigenous private sector in Burkina Faso
through a streamlined business environment and well-targeted financial and non-financial services to
small and medium-size enterprises.
67. 
The Bank will support the Government efforts to improve quality and costs of infrastructure,
notably in water, urban, energy and transport sectors. In the water sector, the Bank will support the
preparation of the Ouagadougou Water Supply project (FY01) aimed at improving the living
conditions of the population in the capital city by increasing, in the long run, the quantity and quality
of potable water available and strengthening the management of the utility company (ONEA) by
increasing autonomy and improving accounting, long-term planning and efficiency of operation and
maintenance.
68. 
The Bank has been very successful in urban development, and the CAE suggested that the
future program take into account the lessons learned. Under the ongoing Urban Environment
operation the Bank will continue to support improvement of urban living conditions through priority
urban works, participation of the urban population in urban services development and support to

17

Government's decentralization program. Supplemental financing for this project could be proposed
in FY02.
69. 
In the energy sector, the Bank will assist the Government, through the preparation of a
sector reform operation (FY02), aimed at introducing private sector participation to improve the
efficiency of the provision of electricity services and the supply of hydrocarbon products to the
economy, and increasing access to infrastructure services, especially to rural communities. This
operation will include a capacity development component to strengthen management of the
traditional energy sub-sector, capitalizing on ongoing work of the RPTES Program funded by
Dutch, Danish, and Norwegian grants.
70. 
For a landlocked country like Burkina Faso, the efficiency of the transport system is
critical to economic development and growth. Under the PASECT (closed in FY00) the Bank
provided assistance for a large reform program, which included restructuring of national shippers
council, public sector disengagement from road maintenance execution activities, liberalization of
urban transport services, privatization of the national air transport company (ongoing) and
concessioning of railway operations. The Government's strategy in the transport sector is to (i)
increase public investment efficiency, (ii) improve road transport productivity, and (iii) strengthen
management and policy implementation capacity of the public sector to ensure adequate knowledge
and monitoring of sector performance. Given alternative sources of financing for this sector, the
Bank is currently not considering additional lending for transport projects except for rural roads.
71. With Bank support, the Government has developed a program to build capacity and provide
an attractive climate for investment in themining sector. The ongoing Mining Sector Capacity
Building and Environmental Project provides assistance to strengthen and deepen the regulatory
and fiscal reforms, build capacity in public and private sector agencies, complete geological and
environmental databases and assist in the artisanal and small scale mining sector.
SUPPORTING ACCESS OF THE POOR TO BASIC SOCIAL SER VICES.
72. 
In education, the new proposed Basic Education APL (FY02) will address issues such as
the slow increase in primary enrollment and the unsatisfactory improvements in the quality of
education, as well as inequality between boys' and girls' enrollments, and rural and urban areas, and
teacher recruitment in local communities. Under the ongoing Post-Primary Education project, the
Bank is supporting increased access to secondary education, increased enrollment of girls, and
improved quality of post primary education.
73. 
In health, our analysis of the allocation and utilization of HIPC funds will provide an
assessment on the need for increased IDA funding in the sector and a new Health SIP may be
needed (FY03). The Bank would support the Govermment's ten-year health strategy (currently under
preparation) to address issues of poor health and nutrition status, of rapid population growth and
AIDS in Burkina Faso. An HIV/AIDS Disaster Response operation is being prepared in FY01 in
support of the Government multi-sectoral 2001-05 HFV/AIDS medium-term strategic plan. The two
ongoing projects, the Health and Nutrition operation and the Population and AIDS Control
operation, are currently scheduled to close in FY01.
SUPPORTING OPPORTUNITIES FOR EMPLOYMENT AND INCOME-GENERATING
ACTIVITIES FOR THE POOR.
74. 
In the rural sector, the Government's long-term vision is one of participatory and
representative local governments and institutions planning and managing their own development
programs and mobilizing the necessary resources through increased local revenues and Government
fiscal transfers. The Bank's main instrument is a Community-Based Rural Development APL
which is being presented to the Board with this CAS and which would support Burkina Faso's

18

National Program for Decentralized Rural Development (PNDRD) to: (i) strengthen the capacity of
villages and local governments to prioritize, plan, implement, and maintain community-based
investments; (ii) provide decentralized funding for demand-driven and community-managed rural
infrastructure and services; and (iii) support the ongoing decentralization process. The PNDRD
intends to reach all rural communities and implement a harmonized, multi-donor funded,
decentralized rural development framework. It will be implemented over a 15-year period, consisting
of three 5-year phases. Each phase will be designed flexibly to adapt to the country's decentralization
choices, the pace of institutional reforms, and the need to harmonize approaches of various donors.
To enhance the impact of the Community-Based Rural Development APL on the national and global
environment, two GEF 15-year operations will also be prepared: PRONAGEN APL (FY01 Natural
Ecosystem Management Program; a follow up to the pilot GEPRENAF) and SILEM APL (FY02
Integrated Ecosystem Management Program). The Bank will also support strengthening of rural
infrastructure through a proposed Rural Roads Project in FY03.
75. 
The portfolio of ongoing operations includes the Agricultural Services II operation in
support of producers' organizations and the national program for agricultural research and extension.
During the upcoming mid-term review (November 2000), the project will be restructured to: (i)
improve the efficiency of services, by implementing progressively demand-driven mechanisms, and
(ii) provide the framework for more rapid, sustainable, broad-based and export-oriented growth in the
agriculture and livestock sectors. Under the ongoing Private Irrigation operation, the Bank
supports strengthening of cost-effective systems to deliver demand-driven services for private
irrigation. The ongoing GEPRENAF operation (Pilot Community-Based Natural Resources and
Wildlife Management) introduces a new approach to biodiversity conservation that aims to find a
common solution to both development and conservation concerns, by involving local communities in
the sustainable management and profitable exploitation of natural resources.
76. Nonlending activities in the rural sector will focus on three priorities: (i) support
implementation of the rural development strategy currently being adopted by the Government, and
improve the sector knowledge base, as recommended by OED; (ii) improve the efficiency of public
spending in the sector, through a full PER; and (iii) improve the quality of statistical data,
particularly through support (in the form of advice and capacity building) for poverty monitoring and
follow-up of PRSP implementation.

19

Box 5: Rationale for PRSCs in Burkina Faso

Recent PER studies and other analytical work carried out in the framework of the 2001-2003 MTEF indicate that full
imnplementation of sectoral strategies already adopted or currently being finalized in priority sectors (education, health, rural
development) will require major improvements in public sector management. The CAE noted that Bank projects in Burkina
Faso, while quite comprehensive in coverage and broadly consistent with one another, have too often been conceived
independently, with little explicit analysis of potential trade-offs among themr In order to address the country's weak
institutional capacity and to ensure sustainability of the reform program, "DA should focus chiefly on reforming
govemance, particularly as it affects the environment for private sector development and the allocation of public resources."
In the context of the four PRSP pillars-accelerating broad-based growth; ensuring that the poor have access to basic social
services; expanding opportunities for employment and income-generating activities for the poor; and promoting good
governance-, Bank Group's assistance will address cross-sectoral and public management issues. To be effective and to
ensure better involvement of sectoral ministries and all key stakeholders in the dialogue, the shift from project lending
towards program lending presented in paras. 77-79 will imply a gradual change in lending instruments. We envisage two
Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) over the period FY 2001-2003.
The PRSC instrument would be consistent with the PSAC framework for progranmmatic adjustment lending*. It would
provide an adequate framework for comprehensive public finance reforms that require simultaneous actions at the level of
the Ministry of Economy and Finance, and at the level of line ministries. Its flexibility would also provide a more effective
mechanism to address sector-wide issues that cannot be dealt with traditional, stand alone investment projects. The PRSC
would also facilitate the dialogue on the Government's overall use of public resources, regardless of their sources. Finally, by
focusing directly on the four main pillars of the PRSP, the PRSC would help strengthen donor coordination and Government
ownership of the reform progratn
While improvements are necessary to strengthen capacity in public fnancial management, public procurement, budget
reporting, public disclosure, auditing, and accountability, the Government has made substantial progress in budget
management over the past years (see Box 4). One lesson from the recent ICR for the Economic Management Reform Support
Operation is that a broader instrument like the PRSC can itself be particularly effective in supporting the policy reforms and
institutional changes needed to improve fiduciary management.

* PRSC will be prepared within the PSAC framework as discussed in the Programmnatic and Emergency Adjustment
Lending: World Bank Guidelines (R98-249), October 2, 1998 and Operational Memorandum Guidelines for Programmatic
Adjustment Loans/Credits, February 11, 2000. See also Supporting Country Development: World Bank Role and Instruments
in Low-and Middle Income Countries (DC/2000-19), September 8, 2000.

SUPPORTING GOOD GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL REFORM.

77. The Bank has supported efforts to improve governance in Burkina Faso through several
operations (PID, SAC I, EMRSO, SAC III). Nevertheless, further reflection and additional steps are
needed to ensure greater effectiveness and transparency in the management of public affairs. This was
confirmed by studies recently conducted in connection with the public expenditure review, which
underscored the importance of continuing work on problems related to budget execution capacity,
above all in the social sectors. Moreover, given the intention to move toward a program support
system, both a priori and a posteriori control mechanisms need to be strengthened. A country financial
accountability assessment (CFAA) will be started in FYO1 and support for these activities could be
provided under a Public Sector Management operation in FY03.

78. 
The dialogue that would underpin the shift from project lending to program support would be
essential to increase the country's absorptive capacity and would provide a more effective way to
build management capacity in the public service. By relying on Government systems, the Bank
would necessarily focus attention on strengthening these, rather than setting up parallel structures
that bypass national systems that divert scarce talent to handle donor procedures and reporting.
Finally, it would help improve donor coordination as other donors are prepared to join this approach,
such as the EU, the AfDB, and several others.
79. The Bank would be assessing and supporting strengthening Government's capability in three
areas: (i) budget formulation to help assure that the process of formulating and arbitrating budgets is

20

as transparent and open as possible, with the expectation that this will lead to budgets that are more
focused on poverty and development; (ii) budget implementation, including the capacity to track
expenditures and to produce the financial information needed for internal audits and the monitoring
and evaluation information needed to assess budgetary outcomes and impact; and (iii) external
auditing, especially the capability and independence of the supreme audit authority to enhance its
ability to carry out both fiancial and performance audits. The Bank intends to devote substantial
resources to help strengthen Government performance in these areas and to monitor improvement.
Beyond conditions dealing with managing public resources, others would include a sound macro-
fiscal framework (no accumulation of arrears) and sectoral policies that are favorable to private
investment.

Table 4: Base Case Assistance Program, FY 2001-2003

2002 

FY 2003

FY 2001-F. 

--An:Alytical Work 

--

_-_-_-_--_--_-_- 

_--

* 

Support for PRSP Monitor (*) 
* TA for PER (*) 
* Economic Monitoring 
* Technical assistance to the 
National Statistics Institute 
(INSD) 
* CPPR 
* Client Feedback Survey

* 

TA for PER (*)
* Vocational training strategy
* Technical assistance to the
National Statistics Institute
(INSD)
* CAS Progress Report
* Economic Monitoring

* CAS
* 
Support for PRSP Monitor. (*) 
* HIPC Follow up 
* TA for PER (*) 
* 
Public Service Quality 
Assessment 
* Economic monitoring 
* 
Technical assistance to the 
National Statistics Institute 
(INSD)
* 
Poverty Database
* 
IDF Gender/Legal Reform
* 
Support to EU Initiative
* Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (*)

Lending (in millions of US$)

* Community-based RD $67 (*) 
* Basic Education $30 (*) 
* Ouagadougou Water Supply $70 * Energy $20 
* 
PRSC (1) $60 
* Competitiveness and Enterprise 
* AIDS Disaster Response (*) $20 
Development $25
*__ Urban environment suppl. $20
(*) Indicates Bank operations/non-lending that would be maintained in the low case scenario

* 
Public Sector Mgt $10
* Rural roads $40 (*)
PRSC (2) $60

* 

High Case Lending Scenario
80. A high case lending scenario could be envisaged if Burkina Faso accelerates and deepens
reforms relative to targets set in the PRSP, with a focus on increasing transparency and
accountability in policy implementation, and on managing external risks more effectively. The high
case scenario assumes that the Burkinabe authorities are able to implement the new economic
paradigm described in para. 21 swiftly and to a significant extent. This would provide the basis for
increased private investment, and put Burkina Faso on a higher export-led path. It also assumes that
the authorities have demonstrated through more efficient and effective use of public funds that
domestic absorptive capacity for higher lending is in place. This would set the framework for faster
poverty reduction and improvements in social indicators. Triggers for high case lending would be (in
addition to the base case assumptions): (i) major improvements in public finance management,
including the implementation of institutional reforms and budgetary procedures that make the system
more efficient and budget management more expeditious, reliable, transparent, consistent, and

21

accountable; (ii) swift implementation of the private sector development strategy, including
completion of the utilities reform program; and (iii) increase in the absorptive capacity for public
funds, as demonstrated by the speed and level of implementation of priority public expenditure
programs. Under this scenario, the Bank could increase lending to around $450-500 million over
FY01-03, about 50 percent of which could be in the form of fast-disbursing loans to support the
Government reform program in key sectors (human development, private sector and finance,
transport, energy).
Low Case Scenario
81. Failure to implement the reform program outlined in the PRSP, to maintain macroeconomic
stability, and sustained decline in portfolio performance, would trigger a low case lending scenario.
In this case, lending would be limited to support health, the fight against HITV/AIDS, education
programs, the community-based development program and rural roads. There would be no
adjustment lending. Policy dialogue and a limited nonlending program would continue (see Table 4).

Table 5: Triggers and Main Assumptions for Lending Program Composition

Low Case Triggers 
- Failure to implement effectively 
the reform agenda outlined in the 
PRSP and maintain 
macroeconomic stability; 

- Sustained decline in portfolio 
performance 

Base Case Assumptions 
- Continued maintenance of good 
macroeconomic environment
satisfactory to the Bank; 

- Satisfactory implementahon of the 
reform program in the key poverty 
reducing sectors presented In the 
PRSP; 
- Enhanced extemal and intemal 
competitiveness through actions to 
liberalize utilities and reduce input 
and factor costs as outlined in the 
PRSP; 
- Improved transparency and 
accountability in public finance 
management as outlined in the 
PRSP; 
-Continued satisfactory portfolio

performance.

Lending would be liniited to social Lending: $400-420 million 
sectors and rural development. No 
Focus on the education and health 
adjustment lending. Continued 
sectors, and actions to stimulate
policy dialogue and limited 
equity-based growth.

nonlending.

High Case Triggers
- All Base case assumptions, plus:

- Major improvements in public finance
m nanagement, including implementation
of institutional reforns and budgetary
procedures that will make budget
management more efficient, expeditious,
reliable, transparent, consistent, and
accountable;
- Swift implementation of the private
sector development strategy, including
completion of the utilities reform
program;
- Increase in the absorptive capacity for
public funds as demonstrated by the
speed and level of implementation of
priority public expenditure programs.

Lending: $450-500 rmillion, about 50
percent fast-disbursing.

Due Diligence Nonlending Services
82. 
In close collaboration with the Burkinabe authorities, IDA has gathered over the past three
years enough due diligence information and knowledge to improve the dialogue on the reform
program. IDA has relied on a combination of annual Policy Framnework papers (PFP), a second
priority survey and two poverty profiles, public expenditure reviews, sectoral policy notes, and
infornal papers on specific issues. IDA has also helped the Burkinabe authorities carry out a
substantial amount of analytical work in key sectors (education, health, rural development, energy,
transport, and private sector development). With IDA support, the Government has also carried out a
comprehensive economic study on long-term sources of growth and competitiveness in Burkina
Faso. The study has served as the basis for the preparation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper

22

and has helped move forward the policy dialogue on the competitiveness of the economy and private
sector development. A Country Procurement Assessment was completed in 2000.
83. Due diligence AAA will provide a thorough understanding of the country's development
problems, of the analytical framework for designing and evaluating macroeconomic and sectoral
strategies, and of the need for and availability of extemal financing. It will also help coordinate donor
projects and harmonize IDA, Government and IMF perspectives, and generate public discussion of
Burkina Faso's development options, with the aim of creating public support for the ambitious
reform agenda ahead. It is expected that authorities will take the lead in carrying out these activities.
The agenda includes a participatory poverty assessment (PPA), public expenditure reviews,
fiduciary/institutional assessments for public finance accountability, and economic policy notes to
provide an economy-wide view of the main challenges facing the country. The AAA program also
includes studies on public finance management, including taxation; on macroeconomic performance
and poverty alleviation; and on private sector participation in infrastructure. The Bank is proposing
to use due diligence analytical and advisory activities (AAA) more intensively than in the past few
years to provide a solid basis for policy dialogue and enhance the design of operations. The Bank
program will include such activities as support to PRSP monitoring; technical assistance to PER
processes, assistance to INSD; capacity building for economic monitoring. Other activities to be
financed include a country financial accountability assessment (FY01), a public service quality
assessment (FY01), and a vocational training strategy (FY03).
Role of MIGA and IFC
84. Due to the limited size of the formal sector (only 80 enterprises employing more than 50 staff,
including state enterprises), there has been relatively little private investment and consequently little
activity by IFC (one small scale mining project and two financial sector investment projects totaling
$2 million) and MIGA in the past. FIAS is currently assisting the Government in streamlining
registration procedures to improve the business climate and make the country more competitive.
lFC's role is expected to be limited in the near term, due to low demand, but could expand
substantially in the context of the implementation of the new development agenda, especially in the
infrastructure privatization area.

III. KEY ISSUES IN IMPLEMENTING THE CAS
MONITORING OF OUTCOMES

85. One of the key features in the CAS is the framework for monitoring: (i) country performance,
to determine whether the conditions for the base case still exist, or whether there is justification for a
change in the size or composition of the proposed assistance program (see Table 6, below); and (ii)
Bank performance in delivering on the CAS objectives.

86. 

Country performance. Since 1997, Burkina Faso has been testing a new approach to

development aid conditionality. This approach, known as the reformulated conditionality test and
designed in the framework of the SPA, is geared mainly toward enhancing Government ownership of
the policy identification, monitoring, and evaluation process; and toward enhancing the effectiveness
of aid by monitoring programs on the basis of measurable and previously established performance
indicators. The idea is for all donors and lenders to reach consensus on a series of performance
indicators for Government activities in key sectors. Those indicators are then used as the basis for
decisions regarding disbursement of financial assistance-preferably in the form of program support.

Table 4 and Annex B4 list AAA activities funded under BB administrative resources, whereas Annex B 1 also includes AAA
activities funded under Bank projects, and/or Trust Funds.

23

87. For each major policy domain and in addition to monitoring indicators from the SPA test, the
Bank has, with the authorities, key stakeholders and donors, elaborated a detailed monitoring
framework, based on agreed-upon indicators (see Attachment 8). These indicators are drawn from the
PRSP. The main monitoring instruments would be the reviews of the structural reform program,
carried out every six months with the IMF, and the public expenditure reviews, together with selected
economic and sector work, and household surveys. Country portfolio performance reviews (CPPRs)
will continue to be carried out every two years, and will be led by the Resident Mission. A CAS
progress report will be prepared and discussed with the authorities in FY03.

Table 6: Proposed Core Benchmarks9 during CAS Period

1. Poverty headcount ratio (*) 
2. Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 

- Rural 

1999 
45-3 
105 

1 13 

- Urban 
67 
4. Primary enrollrnent rate (percent) 
41 
5. Gross primary enrollment rate for girls/total enrollment 
:336 
(percent) 
: 
(S) Number of persons below the poverty line as a percent of total population.

2003
40
85-80

100-95

55-50
53
50

_____

COLLABORATION WITH OTHER DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS

88. Burkina Faso enjoys broad donor support. A large number of bilateral and multilateral aid
agencies and a significant number of local and international NGOs are active in the country.
External aid flows are estimated to represent 13 percent of GDP (about the same as Government
revenue), and some 90 percent of the public investment program is externally financed.
89. 
IDA partnership with the IMF has deepened over the last four years with joint work on HIPC,
PERs, and the PRSP. The effectiveness of the Bank/Fund relationship has been critical, because in
the absence of clearly defined strategies in some sectors and with the limited capacity of the
Cooperation Directorate,10 overall aid coordination has been very uneven in recent years.
Inconsistencies among donors have often led to intensive discussions and inefficiencies. Since 1999,
the Government has shown an increased interest in fostering synergies among donor activities. It is
now more determined to strengthen its aid management capacity and has started to adjust aid
coordination mechanisms and practices, beginning with the formulation of an operational framework
(sector strategies, public expenditure programs, harmonized project implementation arrangements)
for activities supported by different donors in several sectors (education, health, community-based
rural development).
90. The ambitious nature of Burkina Faso's development and poverty reduction strategy highlights
the need for selectivity and greater use of complementarities among donors. The Bank will work
closely with the Government and other donors to avoid duplication while helping build the country's
limited institutional capacity. The challenge for the Bank will be to build on existing cooperative
relationships and to focus on areas of its comparative advantage. During CAS preparation
information was collected by donor and sector on donors' assistance, as well as projected

9 In setting benchmarks during CAS Period and monitoring indicators (see Attachment 8), we draw on the experience of Burkina
Faso's pilot initiative on Reformulated Conditionality, under which the authorities and donors have agreed on specified outcomes
as the measure of progress under adjustment operations. The targets set by the authorities reflect the OECD/DAC International
Development Goals, although the target dates for universal enrollment in primary education and for eliminating gender disparity
in education have been adapted in line with the low base from which Burkina starts and its limnited implementation capacity.
to During FY00 CAS preparation, difficulties in gathering basic data and producing a summnary matrix of the nature and volume
of aid from the various donors highlighted the administration's limited institutional capacity to manage foreign assistance on the
basis of a properly informed decision-rnaking process.

24

commitments. Attachment 7 provides overall amounts&. The difficulty in carrying out this task
suggests that both coordination and tracking of aid will require capacity building on the part of
Government and simplification of procedures on the part of donors.
91. Consultation with the 1MF has been excellent and should continue to be so, with joint-missions
twice a year as the main vehicle for macroeconomic policy dialogue with the Government. Greater
efforts will be made to assure close coordination with the EU. In the coming years, consultation will
be intensified and efforts will be made to harmonize policy advice, project design, and procedures
among development partners (e.g., for the Basic Education Project now under preparation). A closer
working relationship will also be sought with bilateral assistance agencies, given their increasingly
heavy involvement in Burkina Faso. The Bank will strengthen the dialogue with all other
development partners, including the UN agencies, the private sector, and representatives of civil
society. Resident mission staffing policy will aim at having Bank experts more involved in sector and
issues-oriented working groups in the field.
92. Another critical element in this effort will be to develop adequate mechanisms to monitor and
evaluate the impact of external assistance. In this context, the Bank will have to take the appropriate
steps to provide even greater support to the Government in the area of donor coordination. But
ultimately, the key to success will be the Government's own coordination and rationalization of
foreign aid.

IV. RISKS
93. 
Implementation of the Bank's proposed assistance strategy faces three types of risks: (i)
deterioration of the external environment; (ii) weak institutional capacity; and (iii) political risks and
diplomatic tensions.
94. External Environment. Given the heavy reliance of Burkina Faso's economy on cotton,
gold, and livestock exports, the greatest concern of Burkinabe policymakers is the depression of
regional as well as global demand, which would slow export growth and delay implementation of the
poverty reduction strategy. The PRSP sets a target of 7 percent real GDP growth, on average, for
2001-2003. The PRSP acknowledges that Burkina Faso's poverty reduction strategy is ambitious,
and that success will substantially depend on external factors (demand for cotton, world prices, the
dollar/CFAF exchange rate). The medium-term balance of payment projections for Burkina Faso,
which will strongly influence the country's rate of economic growth, are subject to substantial
uncertainties regarding export volumes and prices for cotton and gold.
95. Weak Institutional Capacity. The medium-term reforrn agenda presented in the PRSP,
especially in the social sectors, constitutes a weighty program for the next three years. Its
implementation will require full commitment from the authorities and significant mobilization of
civil society groups. Given the scope of the action plan to be undertaken-and in light of past
difficulties in reaching some targets in the education and health sectors--there is a risk that the reform
program could falter because of pressures from vested interests and persistent institutional
weaknesses. Moreover, there is a risk that even if reforms are fully implemented, there will be a long
delay in supply response and direct investments.
96. 
Political Risks. Burkina Faso has enjoyed political stability under the leadership of President
Blaise Compaore. The country has moved steadily toward political pluralism and has now organized
several multiparty elections: presidential (1991 and 1998), parliamentary (1992 and 1997), and
municipal (1995 and 2000). However, there have been signs of social instability and opposition
since the assassination of a popular journalist in December 1998. To address the crisis, President

Detailed informnation by donor and sector is available at Direction Generale de la Coop&ation.

25

Compaore has promised some major political changes over the coming months. So far, the
Government has continued efforts to deepen economic and social reforms. Should a coalition
Government be instituted in early 2001, there is a risk that the reform momentum could slow and
that, in a worst case scenario, some reforms could be halted. Another risk would be a fall in external
aid flows resulting from the perception on the part of some donors that Burkina Faso has governance
and human rights problems and that it plays a role in regional conflicts. It should also be noted that
political tensions in neighboring countries, and in particular C6te d'Ivoire, could have implications
for the cross-border movement of migrant labor and the associated transfer of private international
remittances, which up to now have added significantly to Burkina Faso's national disposable income.
97. 
In our assessment, these risks are significant but manageable. The Bank will take a number
of steps to mitigate them. On the economic front, the Bank, together with other donors, is closely
monitoring economic developments in Burkina Faso. Management of downside risks in the
macroeconomic framework is a central element in the Bank's policy dialogue. The above-mentioned
monitoring framework has been developed for that purpose. The Bank's exposure is low and Burkina
Faso has consistently serviced its debt. On the institutional front, the risks are mitigated by the
Government's commitment to decentralization and to ensuring full participation of all key segments
of Burkinabe society in the implementation and monitoring process. Bank Group programs under
consideration for the medium term will mainstream grassroots and women's participation in policy
design and evaluation. On the political front, even if there is a change in Government, the
probability of the worse case scenario-overall backtracking of the reform program-is considered
moderate because there is growing awareness across Burkina Faso's political spectrum that without
considerable foreign investment, the country will be unable to resist the challenges and grasp the
benefits of deeper regional integration and achieve sustainable growth. Diplomatic tensions between
Burkina and neighboring countries are mitigated by the Government's commitment to comply with
UN resolutions about conflicts in the region.
98. On balance, therefore, there is a strong justification to assist Burkina Faso in the challenging
times ahead. The base case program presented in the CAS, focusing on lending in priority sectors,
has been designed to meet the client's needs while minimizing potential risks.

Attachments

Washington, D.C.
November 3, 2000

James D. Wolfensohn
President
By Shengman Zhang

26

Attachment 1

Constraints to Growth and Poverty Reduction

In order to meet the challenging objectives of reducing poverty and increasing per capita income
in rural areas where most of the population live, the Burkinabe authorities have identified four
major constraints on the economy which they intend to tackle:

(i) Large social deficit, low labor productivity, and high unemployment. Burkina Faso's
population density is already the highest in the Sahel (40 inhabitants per km) and contributes to
the high incidence of poverty. At the same time, dependency ratios are high. With close to half
the population being under the age of 15, rapid population growth (2.8 percent) is not likely to
diminish over the near term. Such high population growth rates will put a strain on extremely
limited water resources. Water management is also a critical health issue as much of the
population has no access to clean drinking water. Moreover, Burkina Faso also continues to have
among the lowest gross primary school enrollment rates in sub-Saharan Africa: 44 percent for
boys and 34 percent for girls. Similarly, the health status of the population is poor with life
expectancy at birth reaching only 54 years, and AIDS prevalence is estimated to be about 6
percent. According to various growth accounting studies, Burkina Faso's labor productivity is one
of the lowest in West Africa. And estimates of the unemployment rates across the 45 provinces of
the country are high-about 20 percent in Ouagadougou, the capital city.

(ii) Poor economic infrastructure, high input costs, and limited size of the modem private sector.
Competition for new export markets is especially dependent on access to and adequate supply of
reliable and competitively priced infrastructure services. Yet, the relatively poor quality and high
costs of infrastructure in Burkina-including power, transport, telecommunication, and water-
reduces the likelihood that private entrepreneurs, domestic and foreign, will increase their
investment in response to policy reforms. Furthermore, the size of the modem private sector is
limited. Burkina has a large informal sector of some 90,000 micro-enterprises that contributes 32
percent of GDP and accounts for 70 percent of non-agricultural employment. The informal sector
contributes more than 50 percent of value added in certain industries. The formal sector that
contributes 40 percent of GDP only employs 2 percent of the workforce. It comprises a rather
large number of very small enterprises (about 6,300 enterprises accounting for 25 percent of
GDP) and only 80 enterprises-including 
the 37 public enterprises-with more than 50
employees. More disturbing is the low public confidence in the equity and efficiency of the tax
system: tax rates are high on the small modem sector, as illustrated by the importance of tax
exemptions and tax evasion.

(iii) Institutional capacity. Burkina Faso's public institutions are weak, especially in the
implementation of the rule of law. Besides a major legal and judicial reform, the government
needs to strengthen its capacity for revenue mobilization, and to ensure that public resources are
allocated and spent in the most efficient and social equity oriented way.

(iv) A relatively closed economy exporting labor. In spite of the strong export performance,
particularly since the devaluation, the export rate remained the lowest in the region (11 percent of
GDP on average between 1994 and 1999) which partially explains Burkina Faso's structural
current account deficit (-16 percent of GDP in 1999). For the past decades, an important fraction
of Burkina Faso's workforce has migrated to coastal neighboring countries-especially Cote
d'Ivoire-to seize low wage job opportunities, a trend which also contributed to lower domestic
labor productivity.

27

Attachment 2

Burkina Faso's Poverty Profile

Poverty incidence increased slightly from 44.5 percent to 45.3 percent'2 during 1994-1998. Data
used for this poverty assessment come from two national surveys on household living standards
carried out in 1994 and 1998.'3 Depth of poverty (P1, defined as the percentage by which
consumption remains below the one corresponding to the poverty line) remained broadly stable
during the period, at 14 percent, which suggests that a large part of the poor population is close to
the poverty line. Larger households of over ten people tend to be poorer. Poverty incidence
increased in urban areas by more than 5 percentage points to 16 percent in 1998. In rural areas,
poverty incidence decreased slightly, by less that 1 percent.

However, poverty in Burkina Faso is still predomninately rural, accounting for 94.5 percent of
national poverty. The incidence of regional poverty varies widely. The cotton-growing western
region has the lowest incidence at 41 percent, and the center-north part of the country has the
highest incidence. The poor in the remoter areas lack access and information about markets. The
geographical pattern of poverty is changing as a result of the reduction of poverty in the south,
southeast, and north, and the significant increase in the south-central region. Other research
illustrates large differences in equity patterns within regions, and across provinces. Evidently,
certain types of local-level institutions are associated with lower inequality across villages. This
means that in the future the same level of growth could significantly accelerate poverty reduction
for these groups of villages.

Poverty Incidence (P0) and Poverty Depth (11) by Regions, 1994 and 1998'
(In percent)

Regions
South Central 

North Central 

Southeast 

North 

South 
West 

Urban 
Rural 

National 

1994 
P0 

51.4 

61.2 

54.4 

50.1 

45.1 
40.1 

10.4 
51.1 

44.5 

P1 

14.6 

20.9 

18.7 

18.7 

14.0 
11.9 

2.5 
16.1 

13.9 

1998
PO 

55.5 

61.2 

47.8 

42.3 

37.3 
40.8 

15.9 
50.7 

45.3 

P1

19.7

18.2

12.2

9.5

12.0
12.0

4.0
15.8

13.9

Source: Burkinab6 authorities' Priority Survey I and Priority Survey II

' Povertv incidence is measured as the head count index PO (the percentage of a group below the poverty line);Pl
represents the depth of poverty defined as the percentage by which consumption remains below the one conresponding to
the poverty line.

Poverty increased for public and private wage earners, craftsmen, and merchants, and for other
employment. Between 1994 and 1998, poverty incidence decreased by 8 percentage points to
42 percent for cash crop farmers, but increased by 2 percentage points to 53 percent in 1998 for
food crop farmners. It is likely that the CFA franc devaluation benefited some farmers, especially
cotton farmers, but had a negative impact on the purchasing power of wage earners.

12 The method used to measure poverty was identical, and, therefore, it is possible to compare most of the
data. However, the comparability of expenditure aggregates is weakened because the data were collected
during two different periods of the year. In addition, other poverty estimates using different methodologies,
and based on 1992 and 1998 demographic and health survey (DHS) data, show a slight decrease in poverty.
13 The household living standards were carried out in 1994 and 1998 based on a sample of about 8,500
households distributed across ten regions. The data are analyzed in the Burkina Faso poverty profile,

finalized in May 2000.

28

Burkina Faso: Poverty Incidence by Economic Occupation,
1994 and 1998
(In percent)

Economnic occupations 

Public wage eamers 

Privatewageeamers 
Craftsmen and merchants 
Other emnployment 
Cash crop farners 
Foodcropfarmers 
Unemployed 

1994 

P0 

2.2 

6.7 
9.8 
19.5 
50.1 
51.5 
41.5 

Co 

0.2 

0.4 
1.4 
0.3 
11.8 
78.9 
7.1 

1998

P0 

5.9 

11.1 
12.7 
29.3 
42.4 
53.4 
38.7 

CO

0.5

0.7
1.6
0.4
15.7
77.1
4.0

Total 
44.5 
Source: Priority Survey I and Priority Survey II.
' Poverty incidence is measured as the head count indexP0 (the percentage of a group below the poverty
line). The contribution of each group to the total number of people below the poverty line is captared by the
index CO.

100.0 

45.3 

100.0

The most vulnerable groups are children, women, unemployed, and the elderly. There are 100
women for every 95 men on the absolute poverty threshold. HIV/AIDS is also creating a new
group of dependent poor and increasing the stress on traditional networks of support.

29

Key Structural Reforms Implemented under Previous CAS

Attachment 3

Status

Policy Measures 
Fiscal reforms
Introduce WAEMU's product classification 
Done in April 1999
Eliminate special intervention tax and introduce WAEMU's CET, lowering maximum Done. Rate reduced to 20 percent in January 2000
tariff rate from 37 percent to 25 percent
Eliminate special VAT payment procedures for importers of raw materials and for Done
enterprises registered under the investment code
Eliminate all remaining exemptions on public contracts and enhance monitoring of Done in June 1999
taxation for foreign-financed projects
Complete computerization of tax revenue collection, enhance monitoring of large Done in 1999
enterprises, and improve recovery from defaulters
Introduce a withholding tax at source on imports and purchases from wholesalers and Done in January 2000
producers
Introduce a withholding tax at source on payment for services 
Reduce the business profit tax from 40 percent to 35 percent 
Computerize wage and public investment expenditure 
Conduct review of public investment 
Haxmonize the budgetary system within the WAEMU framework 
Civil service reform
Approve and implement law on civil service end- 1998 
Approve and implement master plan for institutional reforms and modemization of
public administration including:
Introduction of merit-based promotion system 
Done in January 1999
Larger recourse to contractual staff 
Ongoing since 1999
Approve law on decentralization and deconcentration 
Done in December 1998. Implementation ongoing
Introduce a single personnel file, encompassing those of the Ministries of Finance Done in March 2000
and of the Civil Service
Financial sector reform
Complete restructuration of the postal checking system and savings fund (CCP- Done in June 2000.
CNE), with separation of accounts from treasury and compensation between
treasury and the national postal office (Sonapost).
Strengthen the network of savings and loans cooperatives 

Done in January 2000
Done in 2000
Ongoing
Conducted in 1998-99
Done

Approved in April 1998, and entered into force end-1998

Yearly audit of main savings and loans network since 1998:
unit responsible for enforcing PARMEC law strengthened.
1/
On the basis of new OHADA acts and the regulations of the banking commission, Done in 1997-99
strengthen rules applying to bank collateral, bank reserves, and effective capital
Business environment, legal and regulatory framework
Simplify business law in context of OHADA 
1997-2000, ongoing
Increase recruitment of magistrates and computerize courts and tribunals 
1997-2000, ongoing
Strengthen one-stop window (CPE) for private enterprises and streamline regulation Done in November 1997
by October 1997
Public enterprises and privatization
Strengthen institutional framework for privatization, so as to speed up process 
Complete ongoing privatization of 41 enterprises
Privatize 21 enterprises 
Put up for sale or liquidate by Dec. 1997 8 entelprises 
Put remaining 12 enterprises up for sale by March 1998 
Review the strategy for the remaining enterprises in govemment portfolio 
Select four new companies for privatization in 1998 
In telecommunications,
grant two cellular phone licenses, and 
operationalize regulatory agency 
Approve privatization and liberalization of energy sector 
Agricultural policy
Phase out activities of state rice import company 
Adopt new agreement on producer price and profit-sharing mechanism for cotton 
Adopt plan to open up the capital of SOFITEX to cotton producers and others 

Done in 1997-99
Done in March 1998
30 percent 
of 
shares 
acquired 
by 
interprofessional agreement signed in 1999
Complete reorganization of agricultural services of Ministry of Agriculture 
Done in December 1998
1/ The PARMEC law was adopted in 1994, in the context of the WAEMU, regulating savings and loan cooperatives and their networks.

Done
Done
Done with some delays
Done
Done

Done in April 2000
Done in March 2000
Done

producers;

Done

30

Attachment 4

An Econometric Model for Macroeconomic Simulations

1. 
The model was built in close collaboration with the Burkinabe authorities. It is designed
for policy simulation in the context of a small dependent economy facing short and long-term
constraints to GDP growth. First, effective demand constitutes an important constraint on GDP
growth. In addition, a significant part of the Burkinabe economy is informal and an equally large
proportion of rural output -
food products -
is non-marketed. Second, foreign exchange
availability is a major constraint to growth. This is because Burkina Faso is a natural resource
poor agrarian country, particularly vulnerable to climatic shocks, which makes the economy very
dependent on imports, especially foods, durable consumer goods, oil products as well as capital
goods. Given that export propensity is very low (11 percent of GDP in 1999), the country is also
dependent on workers' remittances and foreign aid. Finally, Burkina Faso is a member of the
WAEMU. The fixed exchange rate system implies tight monetary policy, especially credit policy.
This constitutes a third constraint on short-term output growth. As a result, in the short run, real
income growth is constrained by foreign exchange availability and domestic credit.

2. 
These constraints affect the various components of aggregate demand. Specifically,
consumption depends on disposable income, real credit to the private sector and import capacity
because of food and durable consumer goods. Likewise, total investment depends on potential
output as well as import capacity since most capital goods are imported. Public consumption, net
transfer to the private sector and public investment are policy variables that are set according to
growth and distribution objectives as explained later. Imports depend on income and on the
country's relative competitiveness indicated by the real exchange rate, while exports are driven
by competitiveness as well as potential output. In the long run, output is determined according to
an endogenous growth model. Capacity depends on physical capital, human capital and total
factor productivity growth. The price level is determined via cost-push factors (import and
primary factor costs) and short-term demand pressure related to capacity utilization rate.

3. 
On the financial side, the model describes flows of funds for four economic agents, namely
the private sector, the government, the monetary sector and the foreign sector. The public sector
comprises the central government as well as the local administrations. The monetary sector
comprises the central bank and deposit money banks and the private sector the rest of the
economy (households and non-monetary financial institutions). The money market is described
via supply and demand activities. The demand for money depends on real income and expected
inflation. Policy targets on gross foreign reserves, bank credit to the private sector and to the
government are specified, so that changes in net foreign liabilities clear the money market. As to
the government sector, public consumption and investment are set as policy targets as indicated
above. Meanwhile, Government revenue is derived from taxes and exogenously specified levels
of grants. The variation in foreign loans to the public sector ensures the financing of the public
sector resource gap. With a fixed nominal exchange rate, a target on gross foreign reserve of the
Central Bank and all other foreign financing items pre-determined, balance of payments closure
may require some short term borrowing, which is considered short term public liability.

Scenario of Moderate Growth.

4. 
This scenario assumes the continuation of current adjustment policies in the context of low
level worldwide inflation and moderate international interest rates (5 percent). We assume a
moderate increase in export prices while import prices will remain stable around the inflation rate
of OECD countries-as a whole there is a 2 percent improvement in the terms of trade over the
projection period. We assume a slight depreciation of the exchange rate (2.5 percent) consistent
with a strong dollar and low inflation in the zone. We assume that the BCEAO will adopt a
cautious monetary policy to maintain inflation within the WAEMU's convergence target.

31

Attachment 4

Domestic credit is projected to expand by 2 percent above the inflation rate. We project an
increase in net foreign assets aiming at maintaining gross foreign reserves at a minimum of 8
months of imports. Workers' remittances are expected to increase by 10 percent over the period
2000-03 and partly offset the deterioration of the current account balance. This trend is in line
with sub-regional GDP growth. We assume the deepening of financial intermediation and a
favorable environment which will create investment opportunities and attract external savings.

5. 
Fiscal policy remains prudent with direct and indirect tax rate of respectively 3 and 5
percent of GDP. By contrast, we have adjusted indirect tax import rates to take into consideration
the implementation of the custom unions in WAEMU countries as of January 2000. We used as a
benchmark the average import tariff in the zone estimated at 12 percent given product
classification and the new CET structure. We project a steady increase of capital expenditure of 5
percent so that the government can continue its effort to improve basic infrastructure and human
capital. Simultaneously, public consumption will rise by about 2 percent following additional
recruitment in priority social sectors and extra recurrent costs generated by the increased volume
of public investment.

6. 
Simulation results indicate that in this scenario, real GDP growth will average 4.5 percent
per annum over the projection period (2000-2005). The inflation rate will stabilize slightly below
the WAEMU target at around 2.4 percent. There will be a slight improvement of external and
internal balances. At this annual rate of 4.5 percent of real GDP growth and given the
current elasticity of poverty reduction with respect to mean income (about 1.5), the poverty
headcount index will only decrease by about 1.5 points per year, which would not allow
Burkina Faso to achieve the OECD 2015 development goals.

High Growth Scenario.

7. 
Reducing poverty in Burkina Faso will require a more ambitious development scenario.
The PRSP presents such a high growth scenario, with a target for the average annual real GDP
growth rate in 2000-03 of 7.4 percent. To reach this target, the government of Burkina Faso plans
to implement a two-pronged strategy: (i) a more flexible macroeconomic framework; and (ii) a
structural reform program aiming at opening-up the economy to regional and world markets and
to significantly reducing input and transaction costs.

8. 
A more flexible macroeconomic framework: The government has articulated the country's
poverty reduction strategy and a comprehensive action plan that identifies priority sectoral
policies to be pursued in support of poverty reduction, including in the areas of education and
health. The first step should be afull costing of the envisaged poverty reduction strategy, both
with regard to public spending requirements and to changes in the tax system. The second step
would involve taking into consideration the scope for financing budgetary expenditure through
net domestic borrowing in light of the need to maintain macroeconomic stability as prescribed by
the WAEMU and BCEAO. The third step would be to assess thescope for externalfinancing be
it in the form of grants, net external borrowing, or debt relief. After having carried out the
assessment of the external and internal resources, policy makers could then determine whether the
desired poverty reduction strategy can be financed in a manner consistent with the country's
growth and stability objectives.

9. 
The model is a useful tool to conduct this iterative process. Policy targets on government
spending (public consumnption and investment as defined in the PRSP) and policy targets on gross
foreign reserves, bank credit to the private sector and to the government (as dictated by the
WAEMU and BCEAO rules) are specified. The model calculates the changes in net foreign
liabilities necessary to clear the money market and the public sector resource gap. Given the fixed

32

Attachment 4

norninal exchange rate, a target on gross foreign reserve of the Central Bank and all other foreign
financing items pre-determined, the balance of payments closure may require some short term
borrowing. If there remains an imbalance between expenditure and expected financing that
jeopardizes the country's macroeconomic growth and stability objective as stipulated in the
WAEMU treaty, one option would be to ascertain the extent to which the additional external
financing may be available. If the desired poverty reduction program cannot be reconciled with
the country's economic stability and growth objectives, then policy makers will need to
reconsider the various parameters specified initially specified.

10. 
Implementing a Bold Structural Reform Agenda. The second pillar of the strategy is to
remove all constraints to private sector development and accelerate the pace of Burkina Faso's
integration into the regional and world economy. This includes diversifying the economy to
establish a strong foundation for sustained growth in view of the vulnerability of the country to
external shocks; investing in human resources: This will imply a boost in both current and
capital expenditures over the horizon 2005;bringing down gradually the high costs of electricity,
telecommunications, and transport; improving taxation of the informal sector, reducing corporate
income tax and tightening of the exemptions under the investment code; deepening financial
intermediation and increasing access to microfinance savings and loan institutions, especially for
the poorest and for women. These reforms would lower transaction and input costs, enhance the
competitiveness of the economy, attract foreign direct investment, increase exports, and stimulate
private sector development. Such growth-enhancing and poverty-reducing policy agenda boosts
private sector and partners' confidence. We assume an increase in foreign direct investment and
portfolio investment growth over the projection period. Foreign transfers to the private sector will
also improve. Foreign donors will also support the government strategy by providing additional
current and capital grants. We project a slight CFA depreciation with respect to the dollar (as in
the scenario of moderate growth) and an improvement in the terms of trade over the projection
period.

11. Following the increase in public human capital expenditures and stronger private sector
activity after the reduction in factor costs, corporate income tax, and increased productivityreal
GDP growth rises steadily over the medium-term to reach 7.7 percent in 2005 and inflation
is contained at about 2.6 percent, (slightly below the WAEMU target of 3 percent). With a
poverty elasticity of about 1.5, the poverty headcount ratio would be reduced by about 30
percent (15 points).

33

CAS Formulation: A Participatory Process

Attachment 5

In the process of CAS preparation and formnulation, we have organized throughout 1999 and early 2000
consultations with Burkinabe officials, academic experts, private businessmen, local UN agency heads,
multilateral and bilateral program directors, and the representatives of many NGOs and community groups.
To initiate the process, we held a Country team retreat in Washington in January 1999, opened to other
donors working in Burkina Faso, and to two senior officials representing the Government. In the summer of
1999, we held workshops in Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso, and Tenkodogo to consult with representatives
of the administration in the country side and civil society groups. We invited interested groups and
individuals to advise the Bank on identification of development priorities and formulation of its assistance
strategy for Burkina Faso. The agenda, participation, and conduct of the meetings were left to organizers.
Written talking points, notes and other background material for these meetings were prepared by the
Government. Finally, in September 2000, a French version of the draft of the CAS was shared with the
burkinab6 authorities and the donors. Their views and recommendations were fully taken into consideration
in the final version of the document.

The meetings held throughout the preparation process of the CAS varied somewhat in quality, but the
response was uniformly positive, the discussions were often lively but always constructive, and some ideas
merging from these brainstorming sessions have been incorporated into this new CAS. While the discussion
of priorities and suggestions for future Bank action in Burkina Faso tended to reflect the specific interests of
each social group, there were some points in common. These have included an understanding of the need to
improve the competitiveness of the Burkinabe economy through major reforms of the utilities (electricity,
water, telecommunications), and to redefine the role of the state and to limit public expenditures to sectors
where market failure cannot be corrected otherwise. High priority was given to reducing the human capital
deficit-with particular emphasis on raising the health and education levels in the rural areas-and 
to
improving governance through better public finance management, greater decentralization of decision-
making and of control over program execution, and increased account ability of all Government officials.

The process emnphasized the need to maintain flexibility in the implementation of the Bank program. During
the various workshops organized in 1999, the joint Bank-Government teams agreed on strategic priorities
and adopted three criteria to be used for defining the medium-term Bank program: (i) impact of the strategy
on the overall growth and poverty reduction objective; (ii) institutional viability and degree of ownership;
and (iii) comparative advantage of the Bank. It was agreed that these criteria would serve as guiding
principles to design Bank assistance and to make adjustments to the program if circumstances change during
the CAS implementation period.

The CAS preparation process had clear benefits. Government officials and Bank staff were encouraged by
the participants' awareness of the need for a faster pace of reforms. The discussions also revealed major
information gaps and therefore, the need for well thought through communication strategies for privatization
programs and public administration reform, for example. It has been agreed with Government that this CAS
process should contribute to the information/comnnunication effort through further dissemination activities.
The approved CAS document will be widely distributed and discussed in the country (all development
stakeholders, local and international media, political parties, Economic and Social Council, economic
commission of the National Assembly). Finally, these CAS discussions have shown that therelationship
between the Government and the Bank has gained in confidence over the past three years.

34

Burkina Faso's Gender Profile

Attachment 6

Indicator 

I 
1. HUMAN CAPITAL ASSETS

Female 

Male

54
45
105

6.44

350,000
320,000

3.33

150,000

41.8

24.8
46.7
65
77
71

53
<50
86
>94
93

92

90

90
27

Health

Life Expectancy at Birth 
Crude Birth Rate (per 1,000 people) 
Infant Mortality Rate (per 1,000 live births) 
Maternal Mortality 
Fertility Rate (women aged 15-49) 
Prevalence of Female Genital Cutting (FGC) (%) 
HIV/Aids
Adult HIV Prevalence (% of population aged 15-49) 
HIV Prevalence Rate in Young People (Age 15-24) High 
Estimate (%)
Adults (15-49) Living with HIV/AIDS 
Total Number of People Cuwfently Infected 
AIDS Orphans (Cumulative) 
Women Attending Antenatal Clinics (% infected) 
Female Sex Workers; Male SDT patients (% infected) 

Education

Adult Literacy Rate (15+) 
Gross Primary Enrollnent Rate (% of age group) 
Share of Secondary Enrollments (%) 
Share of Tertiary Enrollments (%) 
Progression to Grade 5 (% of cohort) 

2. ECONOMIC ASSETS

Adult Labor Force (%) 
Agricultural Labor Force (%) 
Administrative & Managerial Labor Force (%) 
Land Ownership (%) 
Household Headship, Rural (%) Total 

484
6.8
66

7.51 

180,000 

7.4
58.2 

12.9 
34 
35 
23 
68 

47 
>50 
14 
<6 
7 

3. SOCIAL CAPITAL ASSETS
Representation in Parliament, 1999 (%) 
Representation in Cabinet 1999 
Representation in Local Government (%) 
Mean Age at first marriage (years) 

8 

10 

10 

17 

Sources: PRSP, Demographic and Health Survey 1999, LTNAIDS, UNDP, vauious studies.

35

Collaboration with Development Partners

Attachment 7

During CAS preparation information was collected by donor and sector on past transfers, as well as
projected conmmitments14 . The difficulty in gathering basic data and producing a summary matrix of the
nature and volume of aid from the various donors highlighted the administration's limited institutional
capacity to manage foreign assistance on the basis of a properly informed decision-making process. It
suggested that both coordination and tracking of aid will require capacity building on the part of Government
and simplification of procedures on the part of donors. A critical element in this effort will be to develop
adequate mechanisms to monitor and evaluate the impact of external assistance. For details, see donor
activities in Annex B 1.

Donors (excluding IDA)
Total disbursements (1996-98) and Projected Commitments (1999-2002)
($ million)

Sector 

Rural Dev/ Educatlon Health 
Environ 

Transporti 
Infrastructure 

Energy 

Water 

Instit 
Dvlpt

Other 

Total

1996-1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 

207.7 
62.1 
63.7 
49.2 
38.4 

63.3 
14.1 
23.2 
21.9 
21.1 

66.1 
14.9 
14.7 
10.6 
10.0 

135.7 
30.2 
30.6 
45.7 
30.2 

58.1 
15.3 
11.8 
21.6 
14.2 

82.4 
69.9 
55.1 
24.8 
33.0 

175.1 
42.3 
27.4 
29.8 
35.8 

40.4 
10.2 
10.3 
6.4 
6.1 

828.9
258.9
236.8
210.0
188.8

4 Detailed information by donor and sector is available at Direction Generale de la Cooperation.

36

Performance Monitoring Frameworkl5

Attachment 8

Policy Domain 
1. Macroeconomic 
Framework and 
Poverty Reduction 

Key Monitoring Indicators 
* Real GDP growth 
* Real exchange rate 
* Number of people below the 

Monitoring Instruments
* Review of the structural reforn program every
six months
Review of public expenditure management

* 

poverty line 

* 
* 

every year
Poverty profiles every two years
* Publication of the Annuaire scolairre every
year;
Public expenditure review in 2000 and 2002
Incidence analyses every two years
* Annual Surveys

* Gross enrohnent rate for girls/total 
enrolment rate 
* Gross enrolrent rate in he least 
privileged rural areas 
* Average cost per child in primary 
school
* Vaccination coverage ratio (in %) 
* Consolidated yearly reports by the MOH on
-
BCG 
vaccination rates and staffing for each calendar
-
DTCP3 
year, to be audited and valdated by INSD
- Measles 
* Public expenditure review in 2000 and 2002
* 
-Yellow fever 
* 
Incidence analyses every two years
* Essential drugs breakdown rate (%) * 
Independent audit of CAMEO records on drug
stocks every year
* Dissemination by March 31, 2001, to all
district authorities, and organization of
workshops with local authorities and civil
society
* Annual surveys
* Annual survey of decentralized units on the
status of allotted budget execution

2. Education 

3. Health 

4. Governance 

* Cornpletion of year-end budget 
execution reports (lois de 
reglement) and transmission to the 
Supreme Audit Court (Cour des 
Comptes) and to Parliament. 
* Share of budget effectively 
reaching the most decentralized 
departments.
* Half-yearly opinion polls:
- of users of government services
(Health education);
-of economic agents on government
tendors (procurement procedures,
settlement delays)

Private Sector 
Development 

* Public enterprise divestiture 
* Number of new ventures 
* Foreign direct investtnent 

* Monitoring of the agreed program
* Annual Reports from various sources
Surveys

* 

15 The following table of monitoring indicators draws upon the PRSP indicators adopted in the framework of the SPA
pilot initiative on Reformulated Conditionality.

37

Combating HIV/AIDS

Attachment 9

Burkina Faso has the second highest HIV/AIDS infection rates in West Africa. The International Partnership
for Action Against AIDS has identified Burkina Faso as one of the priority countries in the Africa region.
With an overall HIV prevalence rate of 6.4 percent, the country is in the generalized phase of the epidemic.
HIV infection rates amongst high-risk groups are dramnatically higher: TB patients: 34 percent; STD clinic
patients: 23 percent; cormmercial sex
workers: 35 percent. The age groups 
most affected are adults in their most 
productive years and young girls (13-

Cumulative Number of Reported AIDS
Cases, 1986-99

24). The main mode of transmission is 

heterosexual intercourse with perinatal 
transmission on the rise. Geographic 

areas characterized by heavy internal 

and external migratory flows are 
disproportionately affected, to 
the 

extent 

that 

there 

is 

a 

heavy 

concentration of 
individuals and 
changes in sexual behavior. As can be 

seen 

from 

the 

exhibit 

above 

the 

20000

16000

14000
12000

8000

6000 l

4000

0

, 

~ 

'99 ,pll l

~ 

~ 

cumulative number of reported AIDS 
cases has increased rapidly over the _
past decade, reaching about 18,000 in 1999. These AIDS cases are believed to represent only a fraction of
the actual cases.

Year

The government of Burkina Faso realizes the gravity of the HIV/AIDS epidemic and has been proactive in
implementing a series of national plans. Since the emergence of the first AIDS cases in 1986 there has been
a growing political conmiitment, an intensification of the scope and range of interventions, and a substantial
growth in the level of financial resources being channeled for the HIV/AIDS program. The government's
own contribution rose from only US 10,000 during the first phase to close to US$2.5 million during the most
recent plan. The IDA-funded Population and AIDS Control Project has provided one of the key sources of
funding for the 1996-2000 HIV/AIDS Plan. The recently prepared 2001-2005 HlV/AIDS Multi-sectoral
Plan emphasizes the need for strengthening partnerships, promoting participatory approaches, and
empowering decentralized authorities to take a lead in the fight against this disease. The plan provides a
sound basis for future Bank assistance.

IDA has adopted the following strategies for providing support to the government in the fight against this
devastating pandemic: (i) mainstreaming HIV/AIDS activities into all areas of IDA assistance, with a
particular focus in the short-term on retrofitting on-going operations; (ii) continuing our policy dialogue with
Burkinabe authorities to ensure that HIPC funds are targeted for critical HIV/AIDS activities; (iii) ensuring
that funds from the on-going Population and AIDS Control Project are effectively used for priority
interventions; and (iv) preparing a fast track HIV/AIDS Disaster Response Project. With regard to the latter,
Bank management has expressed a strong commitmnent to supporting authorities in their effort to access the
US$500 million Multi-Country HIV/AIDS Program for the Africa region (MAP) in an effort to scale up their
national program. The HIV/AIDS Disaster Response operation would be used as the main vehicle for
channeling funds for the multi-sectoral and community driven fight against HIV/AIDS. In addition, the
Bank is supporting the Ministry of Health in undertaking a sector-wide approach for financing priority
activities covered in its 10-year health sector development program, including priority HIV/AIDS activities.

38

Core Labor Standards

Attachment 10

The 1962 Labor Code has been amended several times during the past decade, most recently in 1996. Under
this legislation, workers, including civil servants, traditionally have enjoyed a legal right of association,
which is recognized under the Constitution-essential workers, such as police, may not join unions. There
are four major labor confederations and twelve autonomous trade unions linked together by a national
confederal committee. They represent a wide ideological spectrum. Labor unions may affiliate freely with
intemational trade unions. The National Confederation of Burkinabe Workers (CNTB) is affiliated with the
Brussels-based World Confederation of Labor.

Unions have the right to bargain for wages and other benefits, both directly and with employers and with
industry associations. These negotiations are governed by minimums on wages and other benefits contained
in the Interprofessional Collective Convention and the Commercial Sector Collective Convention, which are
established with Government participation. If no agreement is reached, employees may exercise their right to
strike. Either labor or management may refer an impasse in negotiations to labor tribunals. Appeals may be
pursued through the Court of Appeal to the Supreme Court, whose decision is binding on both parties.
Collective bargaining is extensive in the modern wage sector, but it encompasses only a small percentage of
workers.

The law prohibits forced labor and there are no reports of its use. The Labor Code sets the minimum age for
employment at 14 years, the average age for completion of basic primary school. However, the Ministry of
Employment, Labor, and Social Security, which oversees labor standards, lacks the means to enforce this
provision adequately, even in the small wage sector. Children commonly work with their parents in family
subsistence farms in rural areas or in small businesses and the informal sector in urban areas. The Labor
Code mandates a minimum monthly wage, a standard workweek of 40 hours for nondomestic workers and
60 hours for household workers. The minimum monthly wage in the formal sector, about $45 (CFAF
27,089), does not apply to subsistence agriculture, which employs over 80 percent of the population. The law
establishes safety and health standards at the workplace. However, the Government's Labor Inspector Corps
does not have sufficient resources to fulfill its duties adequately.

39

Annex A2

Burkina Faso at a glance 

1113/00

Sub-
Burkina Saharan 
Faso 
Africa 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Low-
Income 

Development diamond

1999
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNP (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

11.6 
230 
2.7 

642 
500 
321 

2,417 
410
988

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1993,99

Population (%f) 
Labor force (%) 

2.8 
21 

2.6 
2.6 

1.9
2.3 

GNP 
per 
capita 

Gross
primary
enrollment

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 199349) 
Poverty (Y. of population below nationalpoverty line) 
Urban populabtion (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% ofschool-age population) 
Male 
Female 

45.3
17 
54 
105 
33 
78 
81 
41 
46.7 
34.7 

34 
50 
92 
32 
43 
39 
78 
85 
71 

31
60
77
43 
64
39
96 
102 
86

Access to safe water

-Burkina 
Faso
Low-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

Economic ratios*

GDP (USS billions) 
Gross domestic investmentUGDP 
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

1.5 

2.4 

2.6 
29.6 
14.0 
12.7 
19.6 

2.6
27.8 
13.0
9.8
15.2

Trade

9.3 
-3.1 

10.3 
7.1 

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest paymentsWGDP 
Total debWGDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debtWGDP
Present value of debt/exports 

-14.5 
0.2 
54.7 
16.6 

-16.0 

Domestic 
Savings 

0.3 
19.0 
3.2 

0.7 
30.4 
9.7 

Investment

59.9
23.3

276.0 

279.0

Indebtedness

197949 1989-99 

1998 

1999 1999403

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

3.8 
1.0 
1.2 

6.2 
3.4 
44.7 

5.8 
2.9 
-16.2 

5.8 
2.4 
6.3

-

Burkina Faso
Low-income group

-2.1 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

GrowthofinvestmentandGDPlI)
so
4
20
0

(% of GDP) 
Agricuiture 
Industty 
Manufacturing2 
Services 

34.2 
22.8 

31.8 
23.9 

32.0 
27.8 

31.3 
28.3 

0 

43.0 

44.3 

40.1 

40.4

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

90.9 
12.2 
30.9 

78.9 
14.0 
24.9 

73.0 
14.3 
30.9 

76.7 
13.6 
29.4

o40

GDt 

e GDP

197949 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and imports (%)

(average annual growth)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

3.6 
4.1 
2.3 
4.5 

3.3 
3.5 

5.5 
10.9 

3.1 
10.8 

so 

40..

20. i 

_.

3.5 

4.1 

6.7

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

2.9 
7.0 

3.3 
2.8 
5.9 
2.6 

64 
8.2 
23.5 
32.1 
6.3 

7.6 
-1.3
-5.8 
-5.7 
5.8

i0 

95 

98 

8

-

2.8 

Exports 

olmports

3.8 

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared wih its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

40

Annex A2

Burkina Faso

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

InfiltIon (%)
30

Domestic prIc s 
(% change) 

25 

A

Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

-0.3 

1.0 

-1.1 
-1i4 

20

3.2 

Is

Government fnance
(% of GDP, excluding current grants) 

0
-4 

Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplusldefick 

10.0 
-1.0 
-

13.1 
4.0 
-10.0 

15 0 
5 2 
-12.0

94 

95 

9f 

97 

98 

99

-GDP 

deflator 

0 CPI

TRADE

(US$ millions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and Import levels (USS mill)

Total exports (fob) 
Cotton 
Meat 
Manufactures 
Total imports (ci') 

325 
206 
46 

255 
136 
48 

700

Bo0

5s0
400

639 

600 

30*

Food 

.

.. 

143 74 200d JJ

Fuel end energy 
Capital goods 
Export price index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 

72 
196 

102 
221 

100
0

.. 

.. 

98 
104 
95 

101 
105 
97

93 

94 

95 

9 

97 
90 
UImports

99

a Exports 

Termnsoftrade(1995=100) 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

Exports of goods and services 

174 

244 

364 

292 

o 1 

101 

1111

Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

491 
-316 

587 
-343 

803 
-439 

760 
-467

-2

Net income 
Net current transfers 

N/A 
83 

N/A 
140 

-12 
190 

-13
155 

-10

Current account balance 

N/A 

N/A 

-261 

-326 

-12

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

227 
33 

310 
15 

1
-18

N/A 

NIA 

Memo: 

_ 

_

Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 

.. 

266 
319.0 

373 
585.2 

407
560.6

Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$) 

212.7 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(UJS$ millions)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

295 
0 
65 

717 
0
255 

1,358 

1,452 

Composffion of 1998 debt (US$ mill.)

710 

753

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

9 
0 
0 

39 
0
3 

74

10 

11 

D:648

Composiion of net resoume flows 
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

B: 710

137 
49 
13 
2 
0 

116 
79
3
0 
0 

240 

13

0
0

Word Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Prindpal repayments 
Netflows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

14 
19 
0 
19 
0 
19 

63 
25 
1 
24 
2 
22 

15 
58 
11 
47 
5 
42 

30
63 
6 

A-IBRD 
B - IDA 

E-Bilateral
D - Other muftilateral F - Private

57

5
52

Deveiopment Economics 

11/3100

41

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003

Diagnosis and Development 

objectives of the PRSP 

Government's Strategy/Actions 1 Selecd Bank and Government 

J efrmneIndicators 

jand 

Bank Group Instruments 

Timing

Activities of Other Donors

Budgetary slupport and support to
balance ofpayments (European Union,
Denmiark, Switzerland, Netherlands)

1.1 Maintain a Stable Macroeconoxmic 
Framnework 

4j- 

1.2 Increase the Competitiveness of 
the Econom 
and Reduce Factor Costs 

tQ 

0oNjctive 1: Aeceiate 

JRqilty-Baed Growth

-Consolidate 

-Maintenance 

recent gains in 
of a stable 
macroeconosnic management and move macroeconomice environment, that will 
beyond stabilization 
to deeper 
ensure a sustained growth and a 
structural reforms and sustained 
sustanable 
fiscal and external position,
economic growth. 
as evidenced by continued strong 
NON-LENDING
perforsnance under a program 
- Capacity building for economfic
supported by an arrangement under dhe monitoring (miacro modeling and
PRGF 
forecasting techniques) (FYOI-02-03)
-Technical assistance to the National
Statistics Institute (INSD) (FYOI-02-
03)

- Focus on reforTms to improve the 
comipetitiveness of the economy and to 
facilitate the country's integration 
into 
the regional and world economny 

- PRSC-1 (FY01) 

- PRSC2 (FY03) 

LENDING 

- Satisfactory assessment by Bank staff 
of the authorities' annual reports on 
imiplementation of the PRSP

(i) lower the unit labor cost by
adjusting the minimum wage and 
LENDING
reducing the welfare costs home by 
- Competitiveness and Enterprise
fornal sector enterprises; 
Developmient (FY02)
ji 2:ji: :T: i E ii ESi:i: 
i iii ii f HiS)iS 
ii: g iS:E:: 7r i i:: ii iS Eig::fi:i:i: 
: ::::E iE i: ,E F Rii i ::: i iEiCEgi 
if E- .................................................................................... 
E i: L7 i ::: i: fiii77hRiLiFiSi 
i:i:iT:: ::::7:: ii:Ri L iL: :::
(ii) increase the efficiency ofpusblic
investment by acting on the
recommendations of the study on
reform of the Public Investment
Progra 
(PIP);

0t;;lf 0|$ 
\QXji00i :$j);0X;;Q}29 t:0W83 Qi:000$t 
j 0 j 0 )\;; 
0000 j00lllX0)$9));000t0juij ; 
|)t}0X) :XQ 

j);Q;; 0Q0|9000|;lllllti 

.* w t 

e ive1 

ll} ). 

T 0 tI-.

e 

t 

e 

(iii) accelerate development of financial
markets;

(iv) trade liberalization;

(v) privatize existing state interests;

(vi) strengthen the Governmnents
regulatory capacity;

(vii) liberalize the cotton rector and 
encourage new entrants

I-

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)

Diagnosbis and Devel P 
Objectives of the PRSP 

Goverunent's Strategy/Actions 

Seletemane 
andiaovere 
Performnance Indicators 

Rank Group Instruments 
and Timing

1.3 Support to Improve the Growth 

Potential of Specific Productive Sectors 

Agriculture/Livestock 

Increase in the volume and value of 

(i) Create a legal framework conducive non-traditional agricultural exports 
to the emergence of professional 
agricultural organizations 
(ii) Support these organizations in 
setting up an effective charnber of 
agriculture; 
(iii) Train organization members 
(iteracy, management, rural trades) to 
improve their productivity; 
(iv) Create a framework designed to 
spur private investment in the 
agricultural sector, 
(v) Improve marketing channels for 
inputs and agricultural products in
order to boost the competitiveness of 
sectors with a high potential for 

growth;

(vi) Set up a regulatory fraznework
favoring contract agriculture.

Water
Improving the living conditions of the 
population in the capital city by 
increasing, in the long run, the quantity
and quality of potable water available
in capital city and strengthening the
utility company (ONEA)

Urban 
Provision of priority uwban 
infrastructure and services in urban 
centers and secondary cities 

PORTFOLIO 

- Agricultural Services II
- Private Irrigation 
LENDING 
- Conmunity-based Rural 
Development (FY01) 
NON LENDING
- Support to implementation of Rural 
Development Strategy 
- Full PER (FY0 1)
- Support for poverty monitoring and 
follow up of PRSP implemenitation 
(FY0I-02-03)

LENDING
- Ouagadougou Water Supply (FY01)

PORTFOLIO
- Urban Environment
LENDING
- Usban Environment supplemental
(FY02)

Activities of Other Donors

Statistical surveys (Netherlands);

- Food Security (Germany);
. Community Development (Denmark;
Genmany; AFDB; BOAD, Belgium and
IFAD; IDB; OPEC Fund);

- Water & Soil Conservation, Forestry
(IFAD);

- Strengthening of animal health
Serdces (Eupean Development

Sanitary control (EDF);

- Gounna Livestock Development
Project (BADEA)

XD

tP4

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)

Diagosmband Development 
Dibgectivs 
othPRPPerformance 

overnmesit's Strategy/Actions 

Indicators 

and Timing
IActivities 

of Other Donors

4- 

Nbning 
Strengthen and deepen the regulatory 
and fiscal reforms, build capacity in 
public and private sector agencies,
complete geological and environmental
databases.
Energy
Introduce private sector participaton 
to 
improve the efficiency of the provision 
of electricity and rural telephony 
services and the supply of hydrocarbon 
products to the economy, increasing 
access to universal infrastructure
services.
Transport/Infrastructure
(i) Increase public investment 
efficiency, (ii) improve road transport 
productivity and distribution
mechanisms, (iii) strengthen
management and policy
implementation capacity of the public
sector to ensure adequate knowledge
and monitoring of sector performance.
Industry
(i) Simplify the official procedures for 
investing and establishing an enterprise 
(ii) Revise the tax system 
(iii) Create an infornation and
documentation center to facilitate the
gathering, processing, and
dissemination of economic and
business information
(iv) Make private sector support
programs more effec6ive
(v) Reinforce judicial mechanisms to
help comnbat fraud
(vi) Consolidate the legal framework
for business by creating and
strengthening commercial tribunals.
Tourism
(i) Develop "Sea-Sahel" tourist circuits
(ii) Develop specialized tours ( e.g.
nature treks or hunting tours in the
Paina, Arly, orNahouri 
reserves) 
f iS i iff S: ~~~Objetb'.2 
iiC Guaidrant:E::::ditE0(E:iteeiiii 
i:tha0:::titL 
::E.:yS :T VS 
tes 

: 7 7 77 7 7 : r 7 E 7 .r 7 7 7 r 7 t 

j 

: 

::: 

dA; 

PORTFOLIO
- Mining Sector Capacity Building and
Environment

PORTFOLIO
- RPTES Program
LENDING
- Energy Sector Reform Operation
(FY02)

NON LENDING
- Full PER (FY01)

LENDING
- Competitiveness and Enterpeise
Development (FY02)

_

: 

t: 

77 

: 

r 

E

? 

: 

? 
es 

tlsl'oo bam............................. 

itt Baste;-i- 
L::Socia\Wll 
i 
li)Serv4ices !
:e:: 

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)

Government's Strategy/Actions 

Selected Bank and Government 
Performance Indicators 

I 

Bank Group Instruments 
and Timing

- Progress towards PRSP's quantitative 
objectives for 

PORTFOLIO 
- Post Primary 

Diagnosis and Development 
Objectives of the PRSP 

2.1 Promote access ofthe poor to 
education 

Ln 

2.2 Promote Access of the Poor to 
Health Services 

(i) Increase education's share of public 
expenditures and ensure the 
decentralized hiring of primary school
teachers 
(ii) Implement institutional 
refonns 
within the MEBA and increase 
funds in 
efficiency in the use ofpublic 
education 
(iii) Identify specific steps to benefit 
the poorest and most vulnerable groups 
(iv) Establish permanent literacy and 
traininig centers or non-formal basic 
educational centers; and implement 
projects directed at women 
(v) Incorporate literacy training in a 
wider set of activities and services (such 
as health, education, credit, and 
extension services) 
(vi) Achieve abetter balance between 
various levels of the education system 
to lay the foundation for needs of
future workforce 

(i) Grant top priority to the health 
problems of the poorest segments of the 
population (e.g. expansion of 
vaccination program, promotion of 
women and child health, combating 
tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS, optimize 
the use of human resources in rural 
areas) 
(ii) Make essential health care 
affordable (e.g. ensure availability of 
essential medications and vaccines in 
the CSPS, lower the cost of 
preventative medicines, develop local 
solidarity mechanisms by establishing a
legal frarnework for mutual health 
insurance mechanisms) 
(iii) Support the participation of users
and communities in the development 
and management of health care 
activities (e.g. develop community- 
based strategies, strengthen the powers

of local management 

committees) 

* 

* 

* 

Gross enrollment rate for 
girls/total enrollment 

Gross enrollment rate in the least 
privileged rural areas 

First-year enrollment rate (CP1) 

- girls 
ruareas
-20 poorest provinces 

* 

Literacy rate

- Women 
- Percentage of literate women in 
the 20 poorest provinces 

* 

Average cost per childin primary

school
Progress towards PRSP's quantitative 
indicators: 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Vaccination coverage ratio (in %)
- BCG 
- DTCP3 
- Measles 
-Yellow fever 

Rate of use of health facilities:
number of new contacts per 
person and per year in first level 
health centers (CSPS, CMA)

Essential drugs breakdown rate
(%)

Cost ofmedical 
interventions in 
first level health centers 

LENDING
- Basic Education (FY02) 
- Community-Based Rural 
Development (FY01)

NON LENDING 
- Vocational training strategy (FY03) 

PORTFOLIO 
- Health and Nutrition 
-Population and Aids 

LENDING 
- Aids Response (FY0 1)
- Community-Based Rural 
Development (FY0 1) 

Activities of Other Donors

- Improving quality of education
(Canada)

- School meals (Cathwel-CRS)

- Non formal education (UNICEF;
Netherlands)

- Secondary School Infrastructures
(AFDB)
- Training of technical secondary
teachers (Austria)

- Support to Ouagadougou University
(Belgium; Netherlands; France)

- Construction ofclassrooms 
and
lodging for teachers, ENEP (AFDB;
OPEC Fund; UNICEF; Netherlands;
IDB; Belgium)

- Family Planning and fight against
STD-AIDS (US-AID, Germany; WHO;
UN-AIDS)

- Promotion of essential generic drugs
(Netherlands; Germany; France)

- Targeted budgetary support
(European Union and Netherlands

- Rural Water (Denmark, Germany,
Netherlands; UNICEF

.

.

_

P
to

X

BURKINA FASO: COUTNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)

Diagnosis and Development 
Objectives of the PILSP 

Government's Strategy/Actions 

Selected Bank and Government 
Performance 
Indicators 

Bank Group Instruments 
and Timiing

Activities of Other Donors

2.3 Promote Access of the Poor to 
Water 

(i) Boost access to drinking water by 
developing 3,000 modern water points, 

- Progress towards PRSP's quantitative 
objectives foT Drinking Wat.er supply 

LENDING
- Comimunity-Based Rural
Developmient (FY0 1)

infissstnucture and in mnanaging the
facilities,

(iii) Establishing a legal and regulatory
frameworkc covering all administrative
levels and including principles to govern
administratiou of the sector (ganting of
usage perminits, used water discharge
permnits, mates, standards, etc.).

Objective 3: EPMandOpruiiarEpomnnd 

dIncme Generitlonfar. 

the Poor

41 

3.1 Reduce the vulnerability, of 
agricultural activities 
C71 

(i) Soil fertility nmanagement 

~~~~~~~~(ii) 

Promote the development of small- 
scale agricultural water
supply/irrigation systema 

(iii) Enhance land tenure security 

(i) Increased adoption of soil 
fertility/water conservation technologies 

PORTFOLIO 
- GEPRENAF (GEF) 
- Private Inigation 

Fight against Desertification, Soil
Erosion (European Union; Switzerland;
Netherlands)

LENDING
- Community-Based Rural
Development (FY01)
- Sahel Lowland Ecosystemn
ManaLgement (GEF)
Aquifer Initiative (GEF)
(GEF)

-PRONAGEN 

-Shallow 

3.2 Intensify' and modernize 
agricultr 

(i) Improve research and its linkages 
with extension 

(i) Farm mnechanization rate 

(ii) Imiprove access to equipment and 
inAputs 

2000 
35%65%/

2010

(iii) Support for producer's 
organizations and conmwodity 
associations

(ii) Increase in miillet/sorghum yields 

PORTFOLIO

-Agricultural 

-Private 

Services II
Irrigation

LENDING
- Community-Biased Rural
Development (FY01)

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)

Diagnosis and Development 
objectives of the PRSP 

Government's Strategy/Actions 

Selected Bank and Government 
Performance Indicators 

Bank Group Instruments 
and Timing

Activities of Other Donors

3.3 Increase and diversify rural income 

3.4 Open up Rural Areas 

(i) Expand the geographic reach of the 
decentralized financial system 
(ii) Increase the monetarization of farm 
output
(iii) Increase the competitiveness of
cash crops
(iv) Promote income-generating
activities
- Rural roads 
- Rural electrification 

(i) Increase in coverage of DISS 

LENDING
- Community-Based Rural
Development (FY01)

LENDING
- Community-Based Rural
Development (FY01)
- Rural Roads (FY03)

4.1 Democratic Govemance 

(i) Continue implementation of the
National Plan of Good Govemance

(ii) Continue implementation of the
National Decentralization Policy;

Objective 41 Promote Good Governance

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)

Diag nosis and Development 

Objectives of the PRSP 

Cvenen'StagyAtos 

Goverment's Strategy/Actions 

Selected Bank and Government 

Performance Indicators 

Bank Group Instruments 

and Timing 

Atvte 

fOhrDnr

Activities of Other Donors

Share of budget effectively reaching 
LENDING 
the most decentralized departments. 
- Community-Based Rural 
Annual survey of decentralized units on Development (FY01 ) 
the status of allotted budget execution

Decentralization (Belgium; Canada;
Netherlands; Switzerland; European
Union; France

4.2 Local Governance 

4- 
Co 

(i) Provide adequate financing 
provisions to emerging communities; 

(ii) Preparc regional representatives for 
the management, supervision, and
leadership roles conferred on them by
decentralization;

(iii) inmplement an efficient and
impartial local administration,
responsive to the needs of the

population;

(iv) Make efforts to achieve citizen
participation through involving civil
society organizations in all aspects of
local development (planning, decision-
making, execution, and monitoring)

(v) Adopt an official text to solve any
anomalies resulting from the
geographic re-mapping of
administrative borders while
maintaining a sufficient degree of
decentralization of services to make
interventions more effective, improve
citizens' access to public services, and
install genuine grass-roots government;

(vi) Adopt an official text allowing true
decentralization of management of the
State's hunian, material, and financial
resources, by granting new powers to
officials responsible for operations

WI-

BURKINA FASO: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX 2000-2003 (continued)

Diagnosis and Development 
Objectives of the PRSP 

4.3 Economic Govemance 

Government's Strateg/Actions 

Seletrmank andiaorn 
Performance Indicators 

Bank Group L 
and Timing

Activities of Other Donors

(i) Strengthening the management and Half-yeazly opinion polls: 
monitoring mechanisms of public 
finances 

LENDING
- Competitiveness and Enterprise
- of users of govemnment services Development (FY02)
- Public Sector Managenent (FY03)
(Health education); 

(ii) Carry out a review of public
expenditure in all sectors 

(iii) Enact the budget accounts law (loi 
de reglements) by the National 
Assembly and create an independent
Audit Office 

(iv) Improve coordination of aid and 
focus on harmonization. 

-of economic agents on 
government tendors 
(procurement procedures, 
settlement delays)

Gap between unit prices of a certin
number of products obtained by publc
bidding and those obtained by the
private sector

(v) Increase the national capacity to 
elaborate strategies and prepare budget 

Timely coVpletion and release of
budget execution reports

NON-LENDING
- Public service quality assessment
(FY0 1)

estimates

(vi) Promote such values as
meticulousness, integrity, and
transparency in public affairs and among
businessmen.

(vii) Intensify the struggle against
practices at odds with the public interest,
especiatly corruption, nepotism, and
patronage

(viii) Setup a national anti-corruption
network for comments and proposed
solutions

X

Annex B2

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

CAS Annex B2 - Burkina Faso

As Of Date 11/0312000

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

12 
4.4 
25 
19.7 
25 
19.7 
19.8 

11 
4.5 
27.3 
22.2 
36.4 
35.3 
21 

YES 
$2,189 
$156 

NO 
$1,466 
$104 

7 
4.1 
14.3 
2.8 
14.3 
2.8 
28.7 

YES 
$880 
$97 

7
4.4
14.3
2.8
14.3
2.8
9.2

NO
$981
$81

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
35 
7
557.5 
150.5
31.4 
14.3
23.4 
2.7

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Perfommance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

50

CAS Annex B3- Bank Group Program Summary 

Burkina Faso

As Of Data 1110112000

Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 

Implementation
Risks b

Annex B3

2001 

2002 

2003 

COMMUNITY-BASED RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
HIVIAIDS Disaster Response Project 
OUAGADOUGOU WATER SUPPLY PROJECT 
PRSC (1) 
Sub-Total 

67.0 
20.0 
70.0 
60.0 
217.0

BASIC EDUC SECTOR 
30.0 
COMPETITIVENESS & ENTERPRISE DEVELOPM 25.0 
ENERGY 
20.0 
URBAN ENVIRONMENT SUPPLEMENTAL 
20.0 
Sub-Total 
95.0

PUBLIC SECTOR MANAGEMENT 
RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE 
PRSC (2) 
Sub-Total 

TOTAL 

10.0 
40.0 
60.0 
110.0

422.0

H 
H 
H 
H 

H 

H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 

H

H
L
L

M
M
M
L

M
L
L

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M),
or low (L).

Template created on 11/3/00. 

51

Annex B3

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Burkina Faso

Burkina Faso - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1998-2001

IFC approvals (US$m) 

Sector (%)

FINANCIAL SERVICES 
MINING & METALS 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total 

1998 1999 2000 2001

0.30 1.50

100

100

100 100 

0 

0

66
34

100 

0 0 0 0

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0.00 0.00

52

Annex B4

CAS Annex B4 - Nonlending Services 

Burkina Faso

Product 

As Of Date 1110312000

Compl. Cost 
FY 
($'000)

this FY

Audiencea Objectiveb

Underway

CAS 1/ 
FY01 
Poverty Database 
FY01 
Public Service Quality Assessment 
FY01 
IDF Gender/Legal Reform 
FY01 
TA for PER 2/ 
FY01 
HIPC Follow up 
FY01 
Support to EU Initiative 
FY01 
Econ.Monitoring/Gen.EconWork 3/ FY01 
Support for PRSP Monitoring 
FY01 
Country Fin. Account. Assessment 
FY01 

Planned

CPPR 
Client Feedback Survey 
TA for PER 2/ 
Econ.Monitoring/Gen.Econ Work 3/ 
Support for PRSP Monitoring 
TA to INSD 

CAS Progress Report 
TA to INSD 
Vocational Training Strategy 
TA for PER 2/ 
Econ.Monitoring/Gen.Econ Work 3/ 

FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 
FY02 

FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 
FY03 

65 
20 
81 
13 
70 
45 
20 
50 
50 
30 

50 
20 
115 
80 
50 
20 

50 
20 
40 
115 
110 

Bank 
Knowledge Generation
Bank, Gvt 
knowledge Generation
Bank, Gvt 
Problem-solving, Knowledge Generation
Bank, Gvt 
knowledge Generation
Bank, Gvt 
Problem-solving, Knowledge Generation
Bank 
knowledge Generation
Bank, Gvt, donors Problem-solving, Knowledge Generation
Bank 
knowledge Generation
Bank, Gvt 
knowledge Generation
Bank 
Knowledge Generation

Bank, Gvt 
Problem-solving, Knowledge Generation
Problem-solving
Bank, Gvt 
Bank, Gvt 
Problem-sharing, Knowledge Generation
Bank, Gvt 
Knowledge Generation
Bank, Gvt, donors Knowledge Generation
Bank, Gvt 
Knowledge Generation

Bank 
Bank, Gvt 
Bank, Gvt 
Bank, Gvt 
Bank, Gvt 

Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation
Problem-solving, Knowledge Generation
Knowledge Generation

a. Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
1/ Total completion cost for CAS: $295k
2/ Includes support to National PER Committee, and dissemination
3/ includes TA for capacity building and informal background policy work

53

Annex B5

Burkina Faso Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionlincome group

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

627 3 
2.2 
33.3 
5.4 

Low-
income

3,5364
1.4
30.5
3.1

510 
128 

520
136

1.5 
4.1 

58 
53 

50 

92 
151 

432 
383 

1.3
3.2

86
89
82

80
82

63

68
92

235
208

1970-75 

1980-85 

1993-99 

7 9 
2.5 
11.4 
7.5 

.. 

180 
76 
92 

2.0 
0.8

23 
29 
17 

35 
50
26

38 
2 

.

45 

117 
242 

467 
362 

11.6 
2.8 
17.5 
6.8 

45.3

15.9

0. 7

230 
114 
115

48.2
5.5
55.0

2.7 
2.8 

32 
39 
25 

78

68 
70 
33

54 

105 
210 

547 
484 

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY

(% of populabon)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate

(% of age group)

Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to safe water

(% of populabion)

Total 
Urban 

Rural 

Immunization rate

(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutriton (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth

(years)

Total 
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)

2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

6.2 
1.9 
6.3 
7.0 

.. 

140 

.. 

0.6 

10 
12 
7 

.
.
.

41 

137 
278 

526 
407 

54

Annex B6

Burkina Faso - Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Groasdomedicproducta 
Agriculture 
Industry 

100 
34 
26 
40 

100 
35 
25 

100 
32 
27 

100 
32 
28 

100 
31 
28 
40 

100 
30 
30 
40 

100 
30 
31 

100
29
32

Services 

40 

41 

40 

40 

39

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investnent 
Govemment investment 
Private investment 
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports(GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

91 
23 
10 
14 

91 
26 
12 
15 

89 
28 
14 
13 

87 
30 
14 
16 

90 
28 
16 
12 

88 
29 
14 
14 

87 
28 
14 
14 

87
27
13
14

13 
28 

11 
29 

11 
28 

14 
31 

13 
29 

11 
28 

11 
26 

11
25

Gross domestic avings 
Gross national savingsc 

9 
18 

9 
17 

11 
17 

13 
20 

10 
15 

12 
18 

13 
19 

13
19

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(USS million at current prices)
GNP per capita (USS, Atlas method) 

2355 

2536 

2387 

2599 

2584 

2685 

2980 

3245

220 

240 

230 

230 

230 

250 

250 

260

Real annual growth rates (%/, calculated from 1985 prices)
Grossdomesticproductatmarketprices 
Gross Domestic Incomc 

4.0 
4.7 

6.0 
4.7 

4.8 
4.7 

6.2 
7.8 

5.8 
3.7 

5.7 
4.9 

6.6 
7.2 

6.6
6.9

Real annual per capita growth rates (%., calculated from 1985 prices)
1.1 
Grossdomesticproductatmarketprices 
Total consumption 
0.2 
Private consumption 
2.5 

3.1 
-0.4 
-04 

1.9 
1.0 
1.0 

3.3 
3.7 
3.5 

2.9 
3.6 
4.7 

2.8 
0.6 
0.4 

3.7 
1.7 
2.1 

3.7
2.8
2.9

Balance of Payments (USS millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Cufrent account balance 

306 
237 
666 
485 
-361 
239 
-31 

276 
233 
724 
562 
-448 
205 
-91 

267 
229 
661 
511 
-394 
164 
-104 

364 
325 
803 
639 
-439 
190 
-117 

292 
255 
760 
600 
-467 
155 
-135 

292 
253 
745 
595 
-453 
190 
-101 

340 
296 
783 
625 
-444 
194 
-90 

368
322
819
653
-451
207
-82

Netprivateforcigndirectinvestment 
Long-tenn loans (nct) 
Official 
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions) 
Change inreservesd 

20 

16 

11 

-13 

13 

17 

19 

21

.. 

.. 

..

83 

73 

78 

.. 

..

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

-143 

4 

35 

33 

15 

-5 

-27 

-32

Memorandwn items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 

-15.3 

-17.7 

-16.5 

-16.9 

-18.1 

-16.9 

-14.9 

-13.9

(Continued)

55

Burkina Faso - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Annex B6

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues 
Currentexpenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth 
total credit growth (%/o)

Real intaest rates
Consumerpriceindex 
(%change) 
GDPdeflator(%change) 

13.1 
11.4 
1.7 
9.7 

25.5 
23.7 
-97.6 

14.4 
10.4 
4.0 
10.9 

25.0 
8.2 
74.0 

13.8 
10.1 
3.7 
13.1 

26.7 
14.2 
64.8 

13.1 
10.4 
4.0 
125 

24.8 
1.7 
87.4 

15.0 
11.3 
5.2 
16.0 

25.3 
6.5 
37.1 

14.4 
11.0 
4.9 
14.3 

24.9 
6.3
58.7 

14.8
10.5
5.3
12.8

14.5 
10.6 
5.0 
13.6 

-

82.6 

83.1

7.8 
9.8 

6.1 
4.2 

-0.1 
2.2 

1.0 
3.1 

-1.1 
-1.4 

1.5 
1.3 

2.0 
2.1 

2.0
2.3

a. GDP atfactor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods sad nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of 1vi resources.
e. Consolidated central govermnment
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increasc in USS/LCU denotes appreciation.

56

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Burkina Faso - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator 

Actual 
1996 
1997 

1995 

Estimate 
1999 

2000 

Projected
2001 
2002 

1998 

2003

1267 

1294 

1297 

1358 

1452 

1533 

1533 

1533

124 

48 

81 

49 

69 

50 

63 

54 

126

61 

74 

74 

74

296.6 
53.8 
11.3 
78.9 

312.5 
51.0 
11.7 
83.9 

476.9 
53.4 
18.7 
83.0 

373.0 
52.2 
14.9 
83.6 

497.0 
56.2 
20.9 
82.2 

524.7 
57.1 
25.2 

..

451.5 
51.4 
21.7 

417.0
47.2
20.0

0.0 
77.0 

0.0 
0 

0.0 
84.6 

0.0 
0 

0.0 
82.0 

0.0 
0 

0.0 
84.0 

0.0 
0 

0.0
79.7

0.0
0

.. 

608 

.. 

636 

.. 

690 

.. 

710 

..

..

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)'

Net disbursements (US$m)f 

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)'

Debt and debt service indicators

(%/6)

TDOIXGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
ConcessionallTDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 

DS (%)

IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)

Share of IBRD portfolio 

(e) 

IDA TDO (US$m)d 

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity kc

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of 1MF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defmed as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IM, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

57

Blain of Blank ~OeW 
Oparallma (Operalanas Paddisa)
Am Og OshitriMSIS

CA* Amxm m. 

_Brina Fr.

OmWdPro* 44

PrajactID 

Project "ame 

P000296 
P000287 
P000283 
P0003D8 
P000304 
P05088S 
P000297 

A SERVICES 
I 
HEALTHNUTRTION 
8NMNW CAPACITY BULL 
POPULATKIOtAJDS CONT 
POST4PRIMARY EDUC. 
PRIVATE IRRIGATION 
URN ENV 

s 
a 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 

LanRLl,. 

Supurviasin Ratng bi 
ab-y 

IMI*t* 

oleofiln 

Fisca Year 

ORD 

Odtdnia Ariiouna In UrnS nih 
ss",a 

IDA 

OtANT 

S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 

196 
1994 
1997 
1994 
1997 
1999 
1995 

SubTlht 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

41.3 
29.2 
21.4 
26.3 
26 
5.2 
37 

1186.4 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

pecind and Dda
WubuswAinfmd

.^ itQ 
Cacalle. 
-bdab. 

OrI* Frim Itmed

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0f 

0 

.

28.7 
4.5 
15.6 
4.8 
ISA 
3.8 
12.7 

14.5 
4.8 
7.4 
5.4 
9.3 
1.1 
12.2 

66.1 

54. 

8.6
2.4
0
0
0
0
12.2

23.2

L*WCrsdib Saunuy b UISD

UaiW.i 

5 

9 

4,J5151 

4743,4g

0.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~U

a Inlanded dlsbtunmsns to date n*Ns actual disab[nmre s lo dala p4rct*d at aUMlhal.

Annex B8

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Burkina Faso

Burkina Faso
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 8131/00
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1999 AEF FasoMine 
1997 Ecobank-Burkina 
1998 SGBB 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
1 
0.4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
0 
0.25 
0 
0 
0 
0.25 
0 
0
0 
0.38 
0 
0 
0 
0.38 
0 
0

Total Portfolio: 

1 

1.03 

0 

0 

0 

0.63 

0 

0

Approvals Pending Commitment

Loan Equity Quasi Partic

59

I

MAP SECTION

BURKINA FASO 

M A L I 

AA 

A_ 

.4 

t 

(

NATIONAL CAPITAL 
CAPITALE D'ETAT 
RIVERS 

' 

' 

INA 

L 

IGR

BU 

, 

',,oRKINA 

FASdoo;,JI

)'

RIVIERES 

OUDALAN 
G(-'A-

? 

GUINEA 

r--E-

-

_ 

-

-PROVINCE 

BOUNDARIES 

.-

LIMITES DES PROVINCES 
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES 
FRONTIERES 
INTERNATIONALES 

* 

DIVoOI R 

j 

COTE 

'GH 

'1 j

_ 

_ -

.--- 

I 

,-'' 

-ERIA) 

( 

,L

D 

I 

GOJ'f

-14' 
50 

~~~~~~~ 

~ 

~~~~~~~01 

0Dori 

14' 

0 

100 

150 

200 

0 

GoquM'

________________ 

OqU1SENO 

ArLANuc OCrEAN

KILOMETERS / KILOMETRES 

YATEN GA'9 

, 

I

-- 0 

7- 

N

( t, 

SOEJROU \° 

h 

:9 S 

(5 4 

z 

,^ 

f 

YAGHA

C- 

?--~ 

0 

X 

4

S 

< 

(SANMATENGA 
oK'O 

( 

.

( 

NIGER

T- 

~ 

GNAGNA 

G orO 4 bi 

-<

M A L I 

.KOSS 

PASSORE 

i>

~* 

1 

0 

-2 f-t 

AYAA / 

?- 

G 

KOMONDJAR1 

%I..

-

-O 

<osoulso'5-- 

, 

(

IJ 

.\ 

\,,f 

__S/}9 

y ~~~-- 

>-",OUOAG)k~06uU 

Q -NIn~ 

;> j g $ g* m 

, 

Rth 

Sjj 

1 

% 

\ 

\- 

6Fd-N'oSO 

j 

