d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No.: 20708

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

BELIZE

August 2, 2000

Caribbean Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This Document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its content may not otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Currency Unit: Belize Dollar (BZ$)
US$1.00 - BZ$2.00 (Fixed)
FISCAL YEAR: APRIL 1 TO MARCH 31
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES: Metric System

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

Association of National Development Agencies
African Caribbean and Pacific Countries
Belize Electricity Limited
Belize Education Sector Improvement Program
Belize Fiscal Year
Balance of Payments
Belize Telephone Limited
Caribbean Community
Country Assistance Strategy
Caribbean Development Bank
Commonwealth Development Corporation
Common External Tariff
Caribbean Group for Cooperation in Economic Development
Council of Voluntary Social Services
Department for International Development
Debt Outstanding and Disbursed
European Union
Free Trade Agreement of the Americas
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environmental Facility
Gross National Product
Inter-American Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Financial Institution
Mesoamerican Biological Corridor
Ministry of Education
Medium-Term Economic Strategy
North American Free Trade Agreement
National Environmental Action Plan
Non-Governmental Organization
Non-Lending Services
National Poverty Elimination Strategy and Action Plan
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Project Execution Unit
People's United Party
Quality Assurance Group
Social Investment Fund
Technical Assistance
United Democratic Party
United Nations Development Program
Water and Sanitation Authority
World Trade Organization

ANDA 
ACP 
BEL 
BESIP 
BFY 
BOP 
BTL 
CARICOM 
CAS 
CDB 
CDC 
CET 
CGCED 
CVSS 
DFID 
DOD 
EU 
FTAA 
GDP 
GEF 
GNP 
IDB 
IDF 
IFAD 
IFI 
MBC 
MOE 
MTES 
NAFTA 
NEAP 
NGO 
NLS 
NPESAP 
OECD 
PEU 
PUP 
QAG 
SIF 
TA 
UDP 
UNDP 
WASA 
WTO 

Vice President 
Country Director 
Task Team 

David de Ferranti
Orsalia Kalantzopoulos
Raj Nallari, Marco Scuriatti, Claudio Visconti and Caroline Becquart

B3ELIZE 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR OFFICLAL USE ONLY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................... 

I. SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL CONTEXT .................................... 

* POVERTY AND SOCIAL ISSUES ..................... 
........................... 
* ECONOMIC ISSUES ............................................................... 
* FINANCIAL SECTOR ISSUES .
...................................................... 
* ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES ...................... 
, 
* POLITICAL SITUATION AND GOVERNANCE ISSUES ........................ 

II. MACROECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT ........... 

III. GOVERNMENT'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA FOCUSED ON POVERTY
REDUCTION ......... 

A. ENHANCING ECONOMIC GROWTH ............................................ 
B. IMPROVING ACCESS TO AND QUALITY OF SOCIAL SERVICES ....... 
C. MODERNIZING THE STATE AND IMPROVING GOVERNANCE .......... 
D. IMPLEMENTING POLICIES FOR ENVIRONMENTALLY SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT .............................................................. 

IV. WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR BELIZE FYOI-05 ........ 

A. PROGRESS TOWARDS OBJECTIVES OF THE CAS OF NOVEMBER 1993 
B. SELECTIVITIY AND SEQUENCING OF BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE ...... 

* SELECTIVITY ......................................................... 
e BANK'S PROPOSED ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ............ 
................... 
* THE BANK GROUP'S ROLE WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF OVERALL
EFFORTS OF DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS ..................................... 
* TRIGGERS ......................................................... 
* BASE CASE LENDING SCENARIO ................................................ 
* LOW CASE LENDING SCENARIO ................................................. 
* 
INSTRUMENTS FOR LENDING AND NON-LENDING SERVICES ......... 
* 
IFC ......................................................... 
* MIGA ......................................................... 

i

1

1
3
4
4
4

5

7

8
9
11

12

13

13
15

15
16

18
19
20
20
20
20
21

C. PERFORMANCE INDICATORS ....................................................... 
D. CREDITWORTHINESS AND MANAGING PROGRAM RISKS ........ 

21
.......... 22

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS ............................................................. 

24

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR BELIZE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
Belize is the only anglophone country in Central America. It is small and ethnically diverse, with
a sparsely distributed population of 240,000, and is nestled between the Mexican Yucatan peninsula and
Guatemala. In spite of a substantial influx of poor people migrating from strife-tom Central American
countries during the late 1980s to mid 1990s, substantial progress in the social conditions has been
achieved in Belize. Nevertheless, Belize continues to be faced with major development challenges, in
part due to its small size. Based on a 1996 survey, it was estimated that about 33% of the population
remained below the poverty line, most of which lived in the southern rural districts of Toledo and Cayo.
The CGovernment estimates that the poverty situation has changed little during 1996-99. The poor are
comprised mostly of indigenous Mayans, refugees and migrant agricultural workers from neighboring
Central American countries, as well as small farmners and manufacturing workers.

ii. 
Since the last Bank CAS of November1993, economic growth has declined from an average of
over 9% a year during 1987-92 to around 3% during 1993-98. Coupled with rising annual population
growth, per capita incomes have thus remained stagnant and unemployment has risen. The underlying
factors for this economic slowdown are an expansive fiscal policy which was compensated for by a tight
monetary policy that has kept domestic interest rates high, and eroded the international competitiveness
due to rising costs of labor, electricity and water. The central government savings (current revenue less
current expenditure) declined from 2.7% of GDP in March 1994 to 0.6% of GDP in March 2000. The
overall public sector deficits increased over the years and were largely financed by external borrowing,
often on commercial termns, or by privatization proceeds. External debt of the public sector has increased
rapidly in recent years. In addition, the constraints of a small economy, such as small production
volurnes, erosion of preferential market arrangements and limited economic diversification, susceptibility
to natural disasters, oligopolistic structure in several markets, limited human resource and administrative
capacity, and the high cost of public services have compounded the difficulties.

iii. 
In the midst of these difficulties, the Peoples United Party (PUP) came to power in August 1998
with an overwhelming parliamentary majority on an ambitious platform of economic growth, social
development and poverty reduction. After almost a two-year, nation-wide consultations with the civic

society, the Government recently formulated a Five-year National Poverty Elimination Strategy and

Action Plan (NPESAP) with support from the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) and the UK
Departnent for International Development (DFID). This CAS for the period 2001-2005, which builds on
the NPESAP, was initiated in June 1999 and has been prepared following extensive consultations with the
Government, key NGOs, private sector groups, and multilateral and bilateral agencies based in Belize.

iv. 

The overarching goal of the Government's development agenda is to reduce povertyfrom about

33% in 1999 to 28% by 2004. As a first step in its commitment, the Government with DFID assistance
plans to prepare a poverty update in late-2000. The following are the four main pillars of the
Government's poverty reduction strategy:

Enhancing economic growth. The gradual erosion of preferential market arrangements is projected to
reduce real GDP growth by about 1-2% per year. The economy has responded, albeit to a limited extent,
through diversification in tourism, financial services, garment manufacturing and shrimp farming. There
is now a broad consensus in the country that sustaining a real GDP growth of 5% per year (per capita
private consumption growth of about 3%) requires prudent macroeconomic management, in particular
sustainable fiscal policy, trade liberalization, broadening the economic base, accelerating land titling and
improving the regulatory framework in critical sectors that is conducive for private sector participation.

In this context, the Bank will be assisting the Government by providing policy advice based on frequent
reviews of public expenditures, including the prioritization of the public sector investment program;

-11-

Improving Access to and Quality of Social Services. The rural population, particularly in the poorer
districts of Toledo, Cayo and Stann Creek, has limited access to basic education, health services, safe
water, sanitation, land and housing, and essential transport and telecommunication services. The
Government strongly believes in the need for a multi-pronged approach to the problem, based on
investment in education, health, land development and housing for the low-income groups, along with a
facilitation of micro credits, and reform of safety net programs to improve their efficiency and
effectiveness in terms of cost, outreach and targeting. The Bank's involvement in Primary Education and
the Social Investment Fund has been critical in supporting Government policy in these areas. Follow-up
operations in education and social protection along with a review of the social safety nets are envisaged in
this CAS;

Modernizing the State and Improving Governance. Over time, the public sector has become large with
deteriorating systems of financial control and accountability and falling standards of quality of public
services. The Government has embarked on an ambitious program of political reform and is encouraging
more voice for diverse groups to ensure better targeting and effectiveness of social and economic
investments and prevent corruption, money laundering and drug trafficking. In order to attract and retain
qualified personnel, the Government has initiated the reform of the civil service and is strengthening
public institutions, including decentralization to local agencies and communities. While the laws and
mechanisms to deal with these problems are in place, there is a need for greater monitoring and
enforcement capacity within the Govermment. The Bank has planned a Procurement and Financial
Management Review in FY03 to provide needed advice in this area, which could be advanced in timing
should the Governrment accelerate the pace of public sector reforms; and

Environmentally Sustainable Development. The main sources of growth in Belize - tourism, sugar,
bananas, citrus, forestry and aquaculture - are based on natural resources. Using the natural capital in a
sustainable manner is therefore critical. As detailed in the 1996 National Environmental Action Plan
(NEAP), the poor are affected by inadequate land and waste management, water pollution, and natural
disasters. Protection of historical sites in Belize is crucial for preserving the cultural heritage and the
livelihood of the Mayans. As painfully reconfirmed by Hurricane Mitch in late 1998, natural disaster
management is imperative because Belize lies in the hurricane belt and much of the coastal land is below
sea level, thus prone to frequent flooding. The Bank is committed to financing critical road and drainage
works which will enable small farmners to access the regional markets and reduce flooding in six rural
areas through the proposed Roads and Municipal Drainage Project.

v. 
The Bank's Assistance Strategy. Against this background, the Bank will seek close
coordination and burden sharing within the overall efforts of the development community to maximize its
value added and utilize its global knowledge. Since the last CAS, the Bank has had limited success in
influencing successive governments in following a consistently prudent fiscal policy. Consequently, the
Bank has identified a smaller program with emphasis on non-lending services, in particular to clarify its
understanding of the difficult issues ahead of project preparation and to generate open discussion of such
issues. Bank projects would be small, ranging between US$7-13 million per project, and well-focused to
minimize risks. Further, the Bank will manage and mitigate these risks by monitoring, together with the
IMF, the fiscal situation, helping strengthen project execution capacity, and maintaining an intensified
portfolio monitoring effort.

vi. 
The three triggers for the Base Case Lending Scenario are: [a] satisfactory implementation of the
Bank-financed projects as measured by realism and proactivity indices (para. 58); and [b] improvement in
the macroeconomic management (by generating central government savings of at least 3% of GDP on a
consistent basis and containing the ratio of external debt service to government revenues at no higher than

-iii-

25%); and [c] move towards a regular monitoring of poverty and social conditions and increase the net
enrollment rates in primary and secondary schools. Should the Government fail to comply with [a] or [b]
or [c] as mentioned above, the Bank will move to a zero lending scenario by halting the preparation of
pipeline projects until there is a demonstrable improvement in complying with the triggers. In such a
scenario, the Bank would continue to engage the Government through non-lending activities and donor
coordination.

vii. 
Risks. Belize is a stable democracy. While the incumbent Government has an overwhelming
majority in the Parliament and broad support in the local Town Boards, it faces three main risks over the
medium term relating to external economic and natural shocks, macroeconomic management, and
implementation capacity. First, although to a large extent Belize has successfully absorbed the erosion in
preferential trade arrangements of its main agricultural exports since the late 1980s, it is likely to
experience low growth or even a recession during this decade if there is further erosion in the said
arrangements as well as a slowdown in the highly competitive tourism and garment industries due to
further appreciation of the real exchange rate. Fortunately, Belize has good relationships with the
European Union, the CDB and the IDB, and with bilateral donors, in particular the UK, Canada, the USA,
and Taiwan, China, which stand ready to provide assistance during this economic transition and some of
them have large programs, spread over several areas -- highways and roads, land and agricultural
development, water and sewerage, power development, basic needs, hurricane reconstruction, disaster
preparedness, environment. Second, fiscal performance may not improve or may even worsen, which
could lead to higher external borrowing and difficulties in the availability of foreign exchange and
coutnterpart funds for projects. The large current account deficit in the balance of payments, low foreign
exchange reserves holding, and recent commercial borrowings by the Government coupled with financial
sector vulnerabilities pose additional risks. Third, Belize has limited human resources capacity and the
recently initiated changes in the civil service have to be well managed by the Government so as to
maintain its capacity to implement policies and projects.

viii. 
Issues for Executive Directors' Discussion. Given the above mentioned risks, are the Bank's
triggers on fiscal deficits and project implementation identified in Section IV adequate for the lending
scenarios?

* Does the resulting lending program and non-lending services for the next five years represent the
most appropriate role the Bank can perform to support the Governrnent's development efforts?

* The Government would like to ensure the continuity of the Bank's support. Do the Bank instruments
and program as spelled out in the CAS provide for flexibility in the Bank's response to a changing
environment and the associated risks?

-1-

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR BELIZE

1. 
Belize is an English-speaking country situated in Central America, bordered on the north by
Mexico, in the south and west by Guatemala, and on the east by the Caribbean Sea. Its area is about
23,000 sq. km., and population density is estimated at 10.4 persons per sq. km. About 22% of the total
population of 240,000 live in Belize City, which is the largest business center in Belize. Belmopan, the
capital of the country, is about 50 krn away from Belize City and has a population of about 7,000. This
CAS points out that since 1981, successive governments have pursued reasonably sound economic and
social policies that improved the standard of living of the majority of the Belizeans (section I). To
sustain economic and social progress in the face of rapidly changing external environment, Belize has to
now improve its international competitiveness in traditional exports and accelerate economic
diversification (Section ID). The Government's development agenda for the next five years is focused on
poverty reduction (Section III) and is supported by the Bank Group's assistance strategy (Section IV).

1. 

SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL CONTEXT

2. 
Poverty and Social Issues. Consecutive years of economic growth since early 1980s coincided
with improvements in the living standards for a large part of the population. Life expectancy at birth
increased from 67 in 1981 to 75 in 1996, and infant mortality decreased from 35 per 1,000 births in
1981 to 26 per 1,000 births in 1996. Other social indicators, such as the literacy rate, primary and
secondary school enrollment ratios, access to safe water, and immunization rates also indicate progress
during the last two decades.

Box 1: Diversity and Inequity in Belize
The ethnically diverse and sparsely distributed population presents an enormous challenge for the
delivery of social services. Since 1980, an estimated 50,000 Central Americans (mostly
Guatemalans, Salvadorans and Nicaraguans) have fled civil strife in their own countries and
imnmigrated to Belize. In addition, an estimated 18,000 relatively wealthy persons, have
immigrated to rural Belize from Taiwan, China. The result today is a multiethnic multilingual
population, which is 48% Mestizo, 27% Creole, 11% Maya, 5% Garifuna, 2% East Indian, and 6%
other (Asian, White and other groups). About 44% of the population is 14 years or younger.
While English is the official language, it is no longer the first language of the majority of the
population. An estimated 70% of children begin school with no knowledge of English and only
35°h move from primary to secondary school; these children are at high risk of repeating a grade
or dropping out of school, and hence of perpetuating poverty and inequity. The challenge for
Belize is to develop a responsive educational system that can deal with these problems.

3. 
However, as economic growth declined from an average of 9% a year during 1987-92 to 3% a
year during 1993-98, unemployment increased from 9% in 1993 to 14.3% in 1998. With an annual
population growth of almost 3%, per capita incomes have remained stagnant in recent years. As such,
according to the 1996 Poverty Assessment, about 33% of the total population is poor, and 13%
extremely poor. The Government estimates that the poverty situation and profile has changed little by
end-1999. Poverty is concentrated primarily in Southern Belize, especially in the districts of Cayo and
Toledo (Table 1). Ethnically, poverty is most prevalent among the indigenous Mayans and the
agricultural immigrants from the Central American countries. Most of the poor depend on agriculture

-2-

and fishing for their livelihood, except in the Belize District, where the poor depend on construction and
informal trading activities. Most immigrant farm workers earn substantially lower wages than non-
immigrants and live in much worse conditions. For the lowest expenditure quintile for the country as a
whole, about 49% of employment was provided by the agriculture and fishing sectors. The Maya
constitute 11% of the national population but comprise 27.6% of the poorest quintile. Malnutrition
among Mayan children is 45% compared to 6% among all Belizean children.

4. 
The overall incidence of poverty in rural areas such as Cayo and Toledo is in the range of 41-
58%, compared to about 25% in urban areas. About 99% of the urban population have access to safe
water compared with 74% in rural Toledo and 82% in rural Cayo (Table 1). While 59% of the urban
population have access to adequate sanitation facilities, only 22% of the rural population have such
access. Poverty is widely prevalent among clearly identifiable economic groups who live in rural areas
-- Mayan Indians, small farmers and agricultural workers, most of whom recently migrated from
neighboring countries. Corn and beans as well as a few vegetables are important crops for these groups.
The poor live in large households and have fewer income-earners than the non-poor. To a large extent,
the Mayans and the recent immigrants from Central America have not been able to benefit from the
economic growth experienced by Belize during 1987-92.

Table 1: Selected Poverty and Social Indicators in Key Districts, 1996

National 

Categories 
Poverty Estimates (%)
Poor Households 
25.3 
Poor Individuals 
33.0 
Extremely Poor Households 
9.6 
Extremely Poor Individuals 
13.4 
Infant Mortality * 
26.0 
Child Mortality under 5 years old* 
31.1 
Access to Safe Water (%/o of pop.) 
75.2 
Electricity Coverage (for lighting) (% of pop) 
76.1 
Highest Level of Education Attained by Heads of Households

Primary and Lower (%) 

l 

l 

Secondary (/0) 
* per 1, 000 live births
Note: Nationalpoverty line is BZ$1,287per annum (less that US$2 per day) for an adult, an amount
sufficient only for the procurement offood, shelter, clothing and basic necessities. Extremely poor
individuals are defined as those who live on resources valued at less than BZ$7S51 (less than US$1 per
day) for an adult, an amount sufficient only for basic subsistence.

15.8| 

26.2 

76.31 

93.3 

76.3 

13.0 

Belize District 
(Urban) 

Cayo 
(Rural) 

Toledo
(Rural)

18.6 
24.5 
4.9 
6.5 
29.4 
32.8 
99.0 
90.9 

33.5 
41.0 
15.9 
19.7 
17.9 
20.6 
81.8 
75.8 

47.6
57.6
40.2
47.2
30.1
49.5
74.0
34.1

88.5

7.7

Source: 1996 Poverty Assessment by CDB; Government of Belize - Social Indicators, 1999

5 .
A host of social indicators also point to the severity of poverty in the rural areas. The poorest
quintile has less access to education and training, making it more difficult to escape poverty. Further,
the poor are more likely to be afflicted with ailments because they depend on untreated water from
rivers and streams. Factors contributing to poverty in rural Belize include the skewed distribution of
land, the lack of access to credit because of inadequate collateral as land titling is insecure, and hence
low productivity.

6. 
Growing unemployment, particularly among the youth due to high dropout rates at an early
age is creating another pocket of poverty in and around Belize City. Unemployment has
contributed to greater drug use, criminality, and teen pregnancy, as well as a higher risk of
HIV/AIDS. These are critical problems that are common in most Caribbean countries. Although
school enrollment for girls is higher than that for boys, this does not translate into gains for women,
who earn less and are less likely to be employed than men - the female unemployment rate is 21%,

-3-

compared to 10% for men. While the male labor participation has remained at about 79% over the
years, the female participation in the labor force has been steadily increasing (now 40%/O), and more
are gainfully employed each year. Women tend to be employed in education and health services,
trading, hotels and restaurants, public administration and other services.

7. 
Economic Issues. Belize is a small, open economy, with exports of goods and services
accouniting for 59% of GDP in 1999. Merchandise exports are comprised of sugar, bananas, citrus
and small manufacturing. After rapid growth in the 1980s and early 1990s, tourism now accounts
for over 20% of GDP and is the major foreign exchange earning sector. The departure of the British
defense force in 1994, whose presence generated 4% of GDP, and a slowdown in tourism had a
negative impact on the growth rate. The mix of expansionary fiscal policy compensated by a very
tight monetary policy, lower prices for sugar and bananas in the preferential markets, and a
depreciating Mexican Peso, which made Mexico relatively more competitive in tourism, are
underlying factors for this lower growth rate. An appreciating real exchange rate as a result of rapid
increase in wage rates and input costs has also contributed to a slowdown in export growth. Despite
the recent reduction in the CARICOM tariff rate from 25% to 20%, the level of tariffs is still high
and thLe quantitative restrictions on 26 items makes the trade system restrictive. The Government is
aware of the inconsistency between its commitment to maintain the exchange rate peg at BZ$2 per
US dollar to limit inflation, and the expansive fiscal policy. As a result, external position continues
to remain weak and the central bank continues to ration foreign exchange.

I _::"I___._--
1993 199 

6.. 

3 

2 .

8. 
The Government is now trying to stimulate
growth, through high levels of public investment, in
particular in essential infrastructure and housing for the 
relatively poor. To encourage private sector activity, 
the Government has replaced the 15% VAT with an 8% 
sales itax, and reduced the rates applied to business and 
personal income taxes. Output in 1999 grew by 6.2% 
after growth of 1.5% in 1998. The Government is of 
the view that expansion of economic activity has 
enabled the tax revenues to be stable. Inflation has 
remained low at 1% per year in line with imported 
inflation. However, central government savings 
(current revenue less current expenditure) declined 
from 2.7% of GDP in 1996/97 to 0.6% of GDP in 
1999/2000 (Table 2). The overall public sector deficit
is estimated at 5.4% of GDP by end-March 2000. 
However, if the proceeds from the sale of the electricity 
company and the securitization of housing are taken 
into account, the overall fiscal situation would show a
small surplus. Reflecting lower national savings, the 
current account deficit of the balance of payments 
widened to about 8% of GDP in 1999 (6% of GDP in 
1998) due to a surge in import volume. External public 
debt, although at around 50% of GDP, remains 
manageable, with debt service representing about 1 1% 
of exports of goods and non-factor services and about 
23% of Government current revenues. Debt relief from 
the UK and Taiwan, China during the past few years
has helped Belize to meet all of its repayment
obligations on schedule and has increased its foreign exchange reserves.

l0

25

20'

0 

35

30

A 

10.

96 _ / 
140$
93 ._I_I____*_ 

11

R

1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999

IREER 
Figure 1: Selected Macro Indicators

--- RejIjnterestRate 

Growth and Inflation

6

4

2

5 

1996 1997 1998 1999

i' GDPg.owth CPlinfi

Investment and Saving

1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999

I_ D-G NSD

Real Exchange and Interest Rate

-4-

In addition, in January 1999, Belize secured from Moody's a (sovereign) rating of Ba I for long-term
government bonds, Ba2 for long-term foreign currency bonds and Ba3 for deposits denominated in
foreign currency. In light of the large current account deficit in the balance of payments, low foreign
exchange reserves position, and short termn borrowing in recent years, the Government has been advised
by the Bank and other agencies to refrain from commercial borrowing.

9. 
Financial Sector Issues. The high interest rates and the increasing land values are attracting
some capital inflows. While non-performing loans accounted for only 3% of total loans in late-1999,
the Central Bank is limited by the number of trained technical personnel to do its regulatory and
supervisory work but is currently taking steps to address this limitation through technical assistance for
training. The export services firms, credit union, building societies, and insurance companies and other
financial intermediaries are not adequately regulated or monitored. Financial conglomerates have cross-
ownership of financial, industrial and commercial enterprises. A small, open economy such as Belize is
vulnerable to volatile capital inflows, money laundering, and mismatch in its assets and liabilities. The
recent OECD report on harmful taxation has categorized some Caribbean countries, including Belize, as
a tax haven. The Central Bank is actively seeking assistance from. external agencies in strengthening its
capacity to manage all aspects of the financial sector but this would require sustained efforts over time.

10. 
Environmental Issues. Belize is known for its extensive tropical forests, pristine coral reefs,
sand beaches in various Cayes, and Mayan ruins in several locations. Although Belize has managed to
preserve its environmental capital to a greater extent than its neighbors, it still faces some serious
environmental problems that adversely affect the poor and growth prospects. These include: (i)
inappropriate land use and deforestation; (ii) inadequate sanitation and waste disposal facilities; (iii)
contamination and degradation of water resources; and (iv) inadequate disaster management capability.
Although about 60% of Belize's territory is still under closed cover forest, it is estimated that a high
percentage of land cultivated by small or subsistence farmers is ecologically fragile, lying in hilly
topography. Inadequate water supply and sanitation facilities, especially in rural areas, are the primary
causes of the incidence of malaria, gastrointestinal and other diseases, which involve significant social
costs to the poor. Although the main threats to the coral reef are effluents from sugar and citrus
processing, and runoff from fertilizers and pesticides, inadequate sanitation in coastal areas and
untreated sewage from urban centers are also impacting ocean nutrients and the coral reefs. In addition,
Belize is prone to severe flooding and erosion from high tides and hurricanes.

11. 
Political Situation and Governance Issues. Belize gained political independence from the
United Kingdom in 1981 and became a representative democracy and an independent member of the
British Commonwealth. Belize has a framework of checks and balances. Belize has a two-party
democracy, an independent judiciary, an Auditor General, an Attorney General, and elections once
every five years. In addition, a free and independent media and the reasonably well-educated citizenry
all point to a progressive country. The two political parties--the incumbent People's United Party (PUP)
and the United Democratic Party (UDP) - have alternated in power but pursued similar economic
development policies over the years. During the last elections in August 1998, the PUP, under the
leadership of Mr. Said Musa, won a landslide victory over the UDP. In March 2000, the PUP won 7 of
the 8 Town Board seats thereby consolidating its position at the local level. The PUP enjoys popular
support at the national and local levels and is well poised to implement a strong reforn program.

12. 
Belize, like other small states, has limited institutional capacity but a high demand for provision
of a range of public goods and services. Its private sector is also small but faced with global pressures
to compete in exports. There is a continuous need for training and capacity building in both, the public
and private sectors, and for public-private collaboration. The Political Reform Commission, which was
forned in January 1999, submitted a report to the Government in early 2000 outlining the need for
reforns to strengthen the legislature, the judiciary, and the local governments to achieve "a greater
democracy." The Government has begun to implement reforms, such as the introduction of direct

-5-

elections for local governments, the delegation of authority to local governments, the introduction of
referenda for matters of national importance, the appointment of a Contractor-General and an
Ombudsman, and the establishment of an Integrity Commission.

13. 
There are several areas where reforms are still needed to strengthen the public sector and
achieve better governance. First, the system of public accounting and accountability is weak. There are
substantial delays in the auditing of government accounts, and transparency in public policy needs to be
enhanced. Second, as in other small states with open borders and limited enforcement capacity, Belize
is susceptible to pressures of bribery, money laundering and trans-shipment of drugs. In addition, the
existence of 26 quantitative restrictions and discretionary tax-and-duty exemptions increases the
likelihood of rent-seeking behavior. Several Government officials do acknowledge that there are signs
of increase in activities in each of these areas but that the Government does not have the skilled
manpowver to monitor, investigate, collect evidence and enforce the laws that been enacted to prevent
corruption, money laundering and drug trafficking. Third, senior civil servants are not under the purview
of the FPublic Service Commission rules, thus the top layer of civil servants are not independent in
providing technical advice and are vulnerable to political pressures. Also, in containing wages and
reforming the civil service, the Government needs to ensure that its capacity to implement policies and
projects is maintained.

-I. MACROECONOMIC PROSPECTS AND EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT

14. 
Belize has true growth potential and should be able to further broaden its economic base. Its
relative strengths are the abundance of land, forest, and water resources and its location to the large
markets of Mexico and the USA. Other advantages include a niche market for a multifaceted
tourism sector, and agribusiness. The Government, therefore, aims to integrate Belize further into the
world economy and to expand its trade and investment opportunities through new agreements. The
country is continuing to expand its trading horizons by negotiating bilateral trade agreements with
several countries such as Mexico, Spain, Cuba, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Nicaragua, El Salvador, and
Honduras. It is also seeking membership in the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas (FTAA) which
is, at the moment, targeted to be concluded by the year 2005. Furthermore, within the EU context, and
in collaboration with other African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries, CARICOM is negotiating a
new Lome Convention and a free-trade agreement with the Andean countries. Belize has also
concluded investment promotion treaties, such as double taxation treaties, with the UK and CARICOM
countries in recent years. Foreign direct investment has been overwhelmingly concentrated in banking,
resort t-ourism, and land development. The 5% of GDP capital account surplus that currently exists is
mainly due to private capital inflows associated with private investment in the citrus industry and
foreign borrowing by domestic commercial banks.

15. 
However, Belize is subject to several external risks arising from the uncertainty in
preferential trade arrangements for its major exports to the EU and the USA (Box 2). Since the late-
1980s, real prices for banana and sugar exports to the preferential markets have declined sharply.
Notwithstanding this, Belize has been able to satisfactorily improve land productivity in traditional
agriculture and diversify its economic base.

-6-

Box 2: Need to Improve Competitiveness in Traditional Exports and Diversify into New Exports

Belize faces competitive pressures for all its exports. The preferential prices for bananas, sugar and
citrus could continue to decline during this decade. If this occurs, real GDP could decline by about 1-
2% per year, foreign exchange earnings drop by as much as 6% per year and additional 500 people each
year (0.5% increase in head count each year) could fall into poverty, unless Belize is able to quickly
restructure its agricultural operations, reduce its unit costs, and accelerate the pace of economic
diversification.

The banana sub-sector contributes about 5% of GDP, 6,000 jobs (7% of the labor force), and 16% of
foreign exchange earnings. The EU quota of 55,000 tons provides an economic rent of US$15 million
per year. However, the industry faces high labor costs (25% of production cost) and low yields (650
boxes per acre compared to 1,000 boxes per acre in other Central American countries). In light of
recent rulings against the EU Banana Import Regime by the WTO panel, the Banana Import Association
of Belize is restructuring banana production, with assistance from the EU.

Sugar contributes about 8% of GDP, 5,000 jobs in Corozal and Orange Walk, and 20% of foreign
exchange earnings. The EU quota is 50,000 tons, while the US quota is 15,000 tons. Faced with
uncertainty about the future of the preferential arrangements, the Government is working with the Sugar
Industry Association in improving productivity and modernizing the sugar refinery.

Citrus, mostly orange and grapefruit, is produced primarily for the US market and yields about 11% of
foreign exchange earnings. It is cultivated in Stann Creek Valley close to processing facilities in
Pomona and Alta Vista. Recent acquisition of the citrus processing plants by the Commonwealth
Development Corporation (CDC) is expected to invigorate the performance of the citrus industry.

Tourism, which is a highly competitive industry, accounts for about 20% of GDP. To accelerate
tourism expansion, the Government with the private sector recently established a National Council to
develop historic Mayan ruins and eco-tourism resorts, and improve price competitiveness and service
quality of hotel properties.

Encouraged by the rapid growth in shrimp farming, the Government is facilitating expansion in other
agribusiness relating to fruit and processing. The small garment industry is encouraged through fiscal
exemptions in free zones. To stimulate other services, the Government recently announced the
formation of a public-private sector Committee to develop informatics, ship registry, and insurance
services. Further, the Government needs to improve its competitiveness by eliminating the quantitative
restrictions, tightening the fiscal policy, including containing wage growth in the public sector, and
reducing costs of key services such as electricity, water and telephone services.

16. 
The macroeconomic projections underpinning this CAS assumes a gradual reduction in the
preferential prices of major commodities, a gradual improvement in the Government's savings and a
restoration of the competitive real exchange rate. Under these conditions, and with the implementation
of the development agenda outlined below, real GDP could continue to grow at about 5% per year
(Table 2). The growth impetus is projected to be coming from traditional agriculture, tourism and
related construction, financial services, non-traditional exports such as fish, shrimp, papayas, ginger,
fruits, rice, beans, edible oils, spices, nuts and vegetables. External public debt would stabilize at
around 50% of GDP while debt-service to government current revenues would be less than 25% and the
debt service ratio would be about 11% of exports of goods and non-factor services. This could result in
a gradual increase in for'eign exchange reserves to about 3 months of imports and goods and services,
and improve the external current account balance.

-7-

Table 2: Selected Economic Indicators, 1996-2004

9 

.0 

I 

199 

2 

i

200! 

2002 

-0.6 
1.4 
-2.0 
6.8 

19.3 
18.2 

-1.1 
1.8 

0.4 
3.2 
-2.0 
13.2 

23.7 
20.2 

-3.5 
2.7 

6.4 
2.0 

-0.6 
1.7 

1.8 
1.5 
7.7 
-1.8 

23.0 
16.9 

-6.2 
2.4 

-0.8 
2.1 

1.8 
6.2 
5.0 
8.7 

24.2 
16.2 

-8.0 
0.6 

3.7 
6.0 
5.2 
6.9 

23.8 
16.1 

-7.7 
2.1 

-1.0 
2.6 

2.5 
2.8 

2.7 
5.0 
0.4 
7.5 

23.8 
16.2 

-7.6 
2.5 

0.4 
2.7 

2.6 
5.0 
2.7 
9.2 

2.5 
5.0 
2.7 
4.0 

23.0 
17.1 

23.1 
17.4 

-5.0 
3.0 

-5.7 
3.0 

2.5
5.0
2.4
3.5

23.7
18.1

-5.6
3.0

0.2 
2.8 

0.3 
2.9 

0.5
3.0

Real growth rates (% per year)
GDP (mp) per capita 
GDP at factor cost 
Private Consumption per capita 
Exports (Merchandise fob) 
Shares of GDP (%)
GrossDomesticinvestment 
Gross national saving 

BOP Current Account Balance 
Central CGovernment Savingsl/ 

Other

Inflation (CPI eop %) 
GrossReservesinmonthsof 
imports

1/ Current Revenue minus Current Expenditure.
Source: Government of Belize and Bank Staff Estimates.

1II. GOVERNMENT'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA FOCUSED ON POVERTY REDUCTION

17. 
The PUP Government came into office in August 1998 on an ambitious platform. Its election
manifesto included the generation of 15,000 new jobs over five years to reduce unemployment,
lowering of taxes for business expansion, building of 10,000 new homes over five years primarily for
low income families, educational and health sector reform, the empowerment of women for social
development, and political reform for greater decentralization of power and accountability within the
Government. Once in office, the Government endorsed the still ongoing nationwide consultations
convened to outline a national strategy for poverty elimination. The five-year National Poverty
Elimination Strategy and Action Plan (NPESAP) was approved by the Cabinet in August 1999, and
forms the basis for this CAS. At the same time, the central objectives of major donors' assistance
programs have converged to focus on poverty reduction. The Government estimates that poverty at end-
1999 is about 33% and intends to reduce poverty from 33% in 1999 to 28% by 2004. The Government
has recognized that, as a first step, poverty monitoring needs to be strengthened. Since the 1996 Poverty
Assessrnent is the only available benchmark study, the Government has sought DFID's assistance in a
follow-up poverty survey, which is expected to be completed by early 2001. It is also strengthening its
data base on social indicators with external assistance. Further, the Government has recently established
a Social Development Committee, which involves NGO participation, to improve data collection and
analysis as well as policy suggestions.

Figure 2: The Four Elements of a Development Agenda focusing on Poverty Reduction

-8-

Enhancing Economic Growth 

* 
* 

Improving Fiscal Management
Strengthening Financial Sector 
Supervision 
* Enabling Framework for Private Sector 
Participation 

Improving Access to and Quality of
Social Services

* 
* 
* 
* 

Increasing Educational Attainment
Improving Access to Healthcare
Targeting Safety Nets for the Poor
Improving Land Titling, Housing and
Essential Infrastructure in Rural Areas

Modernizing the State and Improving 
Governance 

* 

Transparent, Efficient and Results-
Oriented Financial and Personnel 
Management 
* Effective Anti-Corruption, Money 
Laundering and Drug Trafficking
Measures
* Decentralization of Services provision

Implementing Policies for
Environmentally Sustainable
Development

* 
Land4 Forestry and Waste Management
* 
Tourism Expansion
* Natural Disaster Management

A. Enhancing Economic Growth

18. 
Improving Fiscal Management. Over the years, excessive government spending, in particular
on wages, and increase in tax and duty exemptions led to a steady decline in public savings. Since
taking office in August 1998, the Government has pursued an aggressive public sector investment
program focused on stimulating economic activity through provision of essential infrastructure and
building houses for the relatively poorer segments of the population. To strengthen the fiscal position,
the Government has embarked on an ambitious privatization program, and is re-designing its investment
program by establishing clear development priorities. In addition, to generate Government savings of
3% of GDP on a consistent basis, the Government is resolved to contain public sector wage bill, broaden
the tax base by reducing discretionary exemptions, and improve tax and customs administration. The
ongoing Financial Management Development Project, supported by the DFID, is expected to provide a
foundation for better coordination between planning and budgeting functions, and lead to effective
implementation of the necessary fiscal reforms.

19. 
Strengthening Financial Sector Supervision. Under the Banks and Financial Institutions Act of
1996, the Central Bank began to improve banking supervision. However, the favorable environment
created by this Act led to rapid expansion in other financial institutions such as insurance companies,
credit unions and building societies. With IDB and possibly IMF support, the Government intends to
strengthen the supervisory capacity and prudential reporting norms but this will require sustained efforts
over time. Reforms are to be tackled along three lines: (a) introducing necessary legislation to regulate
activities not covered by the existing legal framework (i.e., building societies and insurance companies)
and strengthening supervision at all levels; (b) paying particular attention to the detection of money
laundering schemes; and (c) encouraging more financial discipline through increased competition with
the planned entry of a new bank. In addition, the Governrment facilitated the opening of a privately

-9-

managed Small Farmers and Business Bank to provide greater access to credit for small producers and
the self-employed.

20. 
Enabling Framework for Private Sector Participation. The private sector faces a number of
constraints which include high domestic lending rates, foreign exchange shortages, cumbersome
investment approval process involving ministerial discretion for duty exemptions, expensive and
inadequate electricity, water and telecommunication services, and inadequate land tenure and lack of
land titling. In addition, the requirements for high severance payments, stringent regulations for hiring
and firiing, the lack of flexibility in working hours, the inability to secure work permits for foreign
skilled workers, and the seasonal nature of activities in various sectors hamper labor market productivity
and limit the supply of skilled labor.

21. 
The Government has embarked on a multi-pronged strategy aimed at: (i) supporting private
sector participation and development, such as helping promote investments and exports; (ii) providing
large infrastructure (e.g., roads, ports) while enabling the local governments and communities to deal
with srnaller infrastructure (e.g., maintenance of schools and interior roads, waste management in
Cayes); (iii) strengthening regulatory frameworks in critical sectors that are to have private participation
(e.g, power, solid waste management, water and sanitation, airport and seaport services). The Public
Utilities Commission (PUC) Act was passed in August 1999, and the PUC will regulate the supply of
the three public utilities - electricity, telecommunications and water and sewage; and (iv) enhancing
private sector participation in the provision of public services and infrastructure maintenance, including
through concession arrangements and contracting out services.

22. 
Apart from reducing the CET, the Government is committed to a gradual phase-out of the 26
outstanding quantitative restrictions. The lack of land zoning and slow pace of land titling is
constraining agricultural production. Undefined land rights are a major limitation to the productive use
of land particularly in producing non-traditional exports such as acquaculture, papayas, ginger, fruits,
rice, beans, edible oil production, spices, nuts and vegetables. To compete in the international economy
(Box 2 above), the Government developed a five-year strategy under which it is: (i) currently improving
the drainage and. irrigation facilities, rehabilitating plantations, enhancing quality control, and improving
environmental management in the banana sub-sector with the support of the EU; (ii) working with the
private Sugar Industry Association (SIA) in restructuring the industry, including the sugar refinery; and
(iii) embarking on a land reform program, with IDB and IFAD support, to complete a national policy of
land use and accelerate the pace of land reform and titling over the next three years.

B. Improving Access to and Quality of Social Services

23. 
Increasing Educational Attainment. Although public spending on education is comparatively
high in Belize (5.8% of GDP), the Government is aware of the significant problems of equity, quality,
and access at all levels, which affect the poor and the indigenous most severely. This is illustrated by a
net enrolment of 85% for the 5-12 year age group and 35% for the 13-16 year age group. Only 38% of
the 5-14 year age group complete primary education in the minimum of eight years. The low enrollment
at secondary level is mainly due to the lack of access. Belize's population is multilingual. While
English is the official language of instruction in schools, in most households children use Spanish,
Creole, Maya, Garifuna or one of the various other languages. This poses additional difficulties for
children in the primary education cycle.

24. 
The Government is planning to have pedagogic support mechanisms in place in primary school
to assist non-English speakers, while developing a medium term strategy to enable the education system
to cope better with the problems of multi-lingualism. A solution would be to move the education system
towards a policy of bi-lingualism in English and Spanish. School financing is inequitable, as both
primary and secondary schools in poor areas receive a lower budget allocation per student, hence are

-10-

likely to have less qualified teachers and inferior facilities and materials. Secondary schools are forced
to limit admission because of a shortage of space (coverage is low at 34%) and low achievement levels.
Education reform is one of the highest priorities of the Government which, with support from the Bank
and DFID, is preparing the six-year Belize Education Sector Improvement Program (BESIP). This
jointly prepared project will assist the Government to address urgent equity and quality problems at
primary and secondary education levels, and the development of a longer term education sector strategy.
During 2001-2004, the first phase of the project aims to: (i) increase pre-school coverage; (ii) provide
support for achieving universal coverage of primary education; (iii) continue the primary education
curriculum reform initiated under the previous Bank project; (iv) increase access to and quality of
secondary education; (v) start implementation of school finance reform to make public education
finance sustainable and equitable; (vi) strengthen the Ministry of Education's administration; and (vii)
improve teacher training and education research. The Government plans to provide training for youth
and adults, which should involve the private sector in order to ensure that labor market demands shape
the content of programs. The Government also plans to provide access to post-secondary and adult
education for poorer communities.

25. 
Improving Access to Healthcare. Health expenditure in Belize, primarily public expenditure, is
high (7.1% of GDP), and the overall health conditions compare favorably with other Latin American
countries. However, the poor, in particular the young children and women of reproductive age, are at
the highest health risk. Access to and quality of health care for the poor are inadequate. The public
sector has had difficulty delivering services to a relatively small and dispersed population. Patients tend
to bypass the ill-equipped government health units in favor of the few hospitals and the private sector,
where the health standards are variable. The Government is currently preparing a Health Sector Reform
Program, with the assistance of the IDB, which over the next three years will: (i) strengthen the
organizational capacity of the public sector to plan, deliver and procure high quality and high value
services; (ii) rationalize and improve the coverage and quality of services provided by the public and
private sectors; and (iii) achieve an equitable and sustainable system of sector financing, by setting up a
national health insurance scheme as the prime source of funding for personal health care services. The
EU is supporting the upgrade of the Karl Heusner Memorial Hospital. Health sector reform should have
a major positive impact on the poor, as it would raise the quality of care available to them and alleviate
the problems of accessibility through transportation support.

26. 
Targeting Social Safety Nets to the Poor. A large proportion of the poor people live in remote
rural areas, with little access to safety nets. Provision of social infrastructure, including small water
systems in poor communities is occurring through the CDB's Basic Needs Trust Fund (BNTF), the
Bank's Social Investment Fund (SIF), and the DFID's Provision of Basic Needs. DFID also supports a
text book scheme and refurbishment of schools in poorer areas. A small social assistance program of
cash transfers to the elderly, the disabled and the destitute is in place. Remittances from relatives who
have emigrated abroad also constitute an important informal safety net. Although these sources of
support for the poor are helpful, the overall safety net is inadequate for the large proportion of the
population that is poor in Belize. As noted in the Government's NPESAP, actions are urgently required
to review and rationalize the safety net programs in order to improve efficiency and effectiveness in
terms of cost, outreach and targeting. Plans to modify the pension and social security system are being
considered by the Government. A recent actuarial review indicated that in the absence of major changes
in contribution rates and benefits, expenditure would exceed revenue within 10-15 years.

27. 
Improving Land Titling, Housing and Essential Infrastructure in RuralAreas. Land rights
and titles need to be clearly defined to facilitate access to credit and empower the poor. However, the
ancestral land claims of the indigenous people complicate the situation as multiple leases are issued for
the same plot of land. With the IDB supported Land Administration project, the Government,
recognizing the link between land tenure and equity, is keen to: (i) clear the backlog of unsurveyed
leases: (ii) unify the land titling system; (iii) improve the land registry system; and (iv) initiate a land

-11-

adjudication system for granting secure land tenure. It is formulating a comprehensive national land use
program, covering agriculture, tourism, and forestry, through a recently established Land Advisory
Committee.

28. 
The poor live in dwellings with wooden walls and, in the South, with thatched roofing and
earthen floors. Housing stock, particularly in the poorer districts of Toledo and Cayo, has not kept pace
with the influx of immigrants. As many people live in temporary shelters, over a five year period, the
Government intends to provide about 10,000 low-income houses for the poor with support from the
German Government (financed through Deutsche Bank) and Taiwan, China. Already in 1999, the
Ministry of Housing, Social Security Board and the Development Finance Corporation have funded
some 2,393 houses. The Government bundles the mortgages to the Social Security Board which in turn
securitizes and sells them to the financial markets. This could lead to a stream of income for the
Government and transfers the credit risk to building societies and mortgage institutions. However, the
Government is aware that, in the past, mortgages with the public sector involvement have had higher
delinquency rates.

29. 
Poverty is higher in the relatively under-developed Southern Belize region. About 58% of the
people in Toledo and 41% of the population in Cayo are poor (Table 1). Stann Creek district is the other
poorer area in rural South. The Government (with funding from the IDB) is currently preparing a
Regional Development Plan focused on improving conditions in these districts as a follow-up project to
the Environmental and Social Technical Assistance project, which was supported by IDB and DFID. It
will enhance the intended social and economic benefits of the Southern Highway project, and mitigate
any potential negative social, economic and environmental consequences of the highway upgrading.
The project focuses on improving and modernizing regional infrastructure, and developing human
resources through increased education and training. The plan emphasizes a more efficient and effective
use of natural resources, particularly land resources, and enhanced agricultural performance in domestic
food and export crops. CIDA's Indigenous People's Park Co-management Project in Punta Gorda,
Toledo, also supports poverty reduction in this region. In addition, the Bank's proposed Roads and
Municipal Drainage projects completes the road network linking the urban and rural areas, and would
reduce flooding in six rural areas, including Benque and Punta Gorda in Southern Belize.

C. Modernizing the State and Improving Governance

30. 
Belize like other small states has limited institutional capacity but a higher demand for
provision of a range of public goods and services, including central government functions, tax and
customs administration, regulatory activities, provision of education, health and social services, judicial
services, foreign relations and security arrangements. Belize also has large unmet demands in
infrastructure. Costs of infrastructure are high compared to other countries because of the broad
dispersion of the population, the geography (terrain and several Cayes) and the need for imported inputs.
The limited institutional capacity of the public sector is stretched thin across several activities. The
domestic private sector is also small and weak. In order to overcome the disadvantages of a small state,
the Government feels that there is a continuous need for training and capacity building in both public
and private sectors, public-private collaboration and regional cooperation. In addition, the Government
is cognizant that better governance impinges upon the stability and efficiency of domestic and foreign
investments, facilitates equitable access to public services to all segments of the population, and
empowers the diverse civic groups. The Government has initiated actions to develop processes and
institutions that will improve the accountability of public management and enhance institutional
capacity to deliver essential services that are of quality, timely and cost-effective. The following are
critical areas of reform in the short to medium-term.

-12-

31. 

Transparent and Efficient Financial and Personnel Management. Central government

employees now number about 7,000 persons (8% of the total labor force), reduced from the previous
level of about 9,000 persons during 1994-95. Overstaffing is still common in most ministries, especially
at the clerical levels while there is a shortage of specialized, technical and managerial personnel. The
total wage and salary expenditures have increased from 33% of the total expenditure during 1994-95 to
40% in 1999/2000. The Cabinet has recently approved a policy for the reform of the public service and
the establishment of a Department of Management Services that will spearhead the reform process,
including greater autonomy to Executive Officers in each Ministry/Department, rationalization of
functions, and the establishment of a human resource development committee. The Government has
recently begun to implement a series of measures under the DFID supported project. The next
important steps in realizing the full benefits of the new system are training of public officers and
completion of the audits of public accounts in 2000.

32. 

Effective Anti-Corruption, Money Laundering and Drug Trafficking Measures. The

Government does not have the skilled manpower and the resources to effectively monitor,
investigate, collect evidence and enforce the laws pertaining to these problems. In the past, in
partnership with the USA, efforts have been made at combating drug trafficking in the country. In
the area of money laundering, as well as bribery and corruption, the Organization of Economic Co-
Operation and Development (OECD) is supporting efforts to combat such activities. With the
support of the international community and through ongoing regional cooperation Belize should
continue to strengthen its legal and institutional frameworks and enforcement capacity in each of these
areas.

33. 

Decentralization of Services Provision. As a part of political reform, the Government has

advocated the decentralization of political authority to towns and rural communities by enacting the
Town Council Act and the Village Councils Act, both in 1999. With regard to fiscal decentralization,
the Government is taking a cautious and evolving approach which will gradually foster local
government capability. The Government invites civic participation in committees it establishes. With
DFID support, the Government is focusing on strengthening the civil society organizations. New
legislation governing NGOs was drafted by the NGO community, led by the umbrella group,
Association of National Development Agencies (ANDA).

D. Implementing Policies for Environmentally Sustainable Development

34. 

Land, Forestry and Waste Management. The 1996 National Environmental Action Plan

(NEAP) detailed that population pressures, rapid increase in tourism, increased use of pesticides in
agriculture, subsistence farming and fishing by the increased number of poor, lack of land titling
and frequent flooding were leading to: (i) inappropriate land use and deforestation; (ii) increased
need for sanitation and waste disposal facilities; and (iii) contamination and degradation of water
resources. Water pollution, inadequate solid and liquid waste management impact
disproportionately upon the poor. The Government is currently updating the environmental
legislation while strengthening the implementation capacity in environmental units in key ministries
with external assistance. The Government intends to: (i) raise user charges to adequate levels to
finance environment-related activities; (ii) decentralize and involve local communities and NGOs in
the design, implementation, and monitoring of regulations and collection of environmental fees; (iii)
facilitate land zoning by preparing broad environmental guidelines which will include the use of
market-based instruments and the sale of land at market prices; (iv) provide technical assistance and
extension services to Mayan communities to improve the productivity of their land and to safeguard
the environment; and (v) undertake investments with cost recovery for providing potable water and
sanitation facilities to rural areas, with a focus on flexibility in cost recovery for poorer households.

-13-
The NEAP proposed a restructuring and a reallocation of financial and human resources across
environment-related Ministries and departments, and eventually a clear delimitation of
responsibilities for each Ministry and Department.

35. 
Tourism Expansion. Tourism, which accounts for 20% of GDP, has been rapidly growing
during the past two decades and has contributed to coastal zone deforestation. In 1998, the Government
requested a private firm to prepare a tourism strategy. After consultations with the private sector, the
Government is committed to addressing problems involving water pollution, coastal zone degradation,
and inadequate solid waste disposal. At present, private tourism developers in several keys are trying to
minimize the adverse impact by servicing their own developments. Also, in order to address the
depletion of natural species in Belize, the Government has developed a National Biodiversity Strategy
and Action Plan and is now seeking funds for implementation.

36. Natural Disaster Management. Belize is in the hurricane belt and much of the coastal land is
below sea level and therefore prone to frequent flooding, particularly in the poorer areas. Despite large
investments in drainage systems, flooding remains a problem due to a lack of funds for maintenance of
drainage systems. Hurricane Mitch of October 1998 did not cause much damage to Belize, but it did
expose the weaknesses in the country's system of disaster prevention and preparedness. The IDB is
assisting the Government to strengthen the capacity of the National Emergency Management
Organization and rehabilitate hurricane shelters in critical locations, while the Bank has committed to
financing critical drainage works in six municipalities to reduce flooding and the impact of flooding,
with the Roads and Municipal Drainage Project.

IV. WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR BELIZE, FY01-05

37. 
The development agenda discussed above provides a framework to advance the short to
medium-term objectives articulated by the Government and the civic society. Within this framework,
the Bank, in close collaboration with the Government and other development partners, will seek to
identify appropriate interventions, taking into consideration the fiscal situation and the reform effort of
the Government, and will build on the lessons learned in Belize over the years.

A. Progress Towards Objectives of the CAS of November 1993

38. 
The 1993 CAS had identified five priorities for Bank intervention: (i) improvements in the
macroeconomic framework, which were to be achieved through the implementation of
recommendations of the Bank-supported Medium Term Economic Strategy Paper (MTESP) and Public
Expenditure Review (PER); (ii) improvements in the public sector's planning capacity and the
development of basic infrastructure and related regulatory frameworks, which were to be advanced with
the Belize City Infrastructure Project and the ongoing Second Power Development Project; (iii) human
resource development and poverty alleviation, which were to be addressed through the Primary
Education Development Project and the Social Investment Fund Project; (iv) environmental
preservation, which was to be advanced through implementation of the recommendations of the Bank-
assisted National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP); and (v) donor coordination within the context of
a Public Sector Investment Program, which was to be strengthened through close coordination with the
IMF on the macroeconomic framework and with the financial support of the European Union, the IDB,
the CDB, the UK DFID, and CIDA on the lending program.

39. What Worked Well... The three smaller projects (out of four projects) since the last CAS have
worked satisfactorily. The Second Power Development Project was successful in introducing a
regulatory framework with a tariff-setting mechanism and ensure a higher level of reliability and lower
cost of power supply resulting from the interconnection with the Mexican power grid. The Primary

-14-

Education Development Project has achieved substantial improvements in the delivery and cost
recovery mechanism of basic education and has served as a vehicle for identifying the details of the
education reform strategy. The ongoing Social Investment Fund project is well targeted and achieving
significant results on the ground in poorer communities through small infrastructure subprojects. The
Government has requested that the Bank remain engaged in education and the social safety nets through
the preparation of new projects for each in FY01 -05.

40. What Worked Less Well... A larger, more complex project with objectives too broad for its
work program components, namely the Belize City Infrastructure Project (BCIP), presented problems in
both implementation and in meeting project objectives. The project's overall outcome was rated
marginally satisfactory because the physical works under the project were of good quality but the
project had limited success in ensuring the availability of funding for regular operation and maintenance
from the Belize City Council.

41. 
The Bank was unable to effectively influence macroeconomic management. During the decade
of the 1990s, the Bank worked together with successive Governments to prepare two separate
adjustment programs, the first focused on private sector development and the second on public sector
adjustment. However, on two separate occasions, despite the advanced stage of preparation of the
adjustment program, the then governments were unwilling to agree on the reform packages. This was
due to the politically difficult conditionalities involving a reduction in the size of the civil service, a
containment of wage increases, and a reduction in the public investment program, and the lack of
political will. However, the ongoing DFID-assisted Financial Management Development Project does
include part of the reforms recommended by the Bank. As such, the revenue and expenditure
monitoring appears to be improving. In 1998, the Bank prepared a Review of the Tax and Duty
Exemptions, and the Government has been reducing discretionary exemptions, albeit at a slower pace, in
line with the study's recommendation.

42. 
IBRD moved from a portfolio of four projects during 1995-98 to one project now (SIF
approved in 1997 for US$7 million) under implementation with an undisbursed amount of US$3.7
million. Overall, as indicated in Table 3 below, the performance of the portfolio has been satisfactory.
Annual disbursement ratios for the past 4 years have been high and problem projects have been few and
short-lived (i.e. less than 12 months).

Table 3: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance, FY96-FYOO

No. of Projects under Implementation 
Commitments (US$ mil) 
Average Implementation period (years) 
Percent of Problem Projects 
[by number] 
Realism Index 
Disbursement Ratio (%) 
Source: IBRD.

1996 
4 
46 
4.3 
0 

N/A 
21 

1997 
4 
46 
3.1 
0 

N/A 
37 

1998 
3 
33 
4 
67 
[2 projects]
100% 
48 

1999 

1 

7 
2.3 
0 

2000
1
7
2.8
0

100% 
36 

100%
5

43. 
Summary of Lessons from Recent Performance. Lessons learned since the 1993 CAS and the
project implementation have helped shape this CAS:

* Full Government commitment is necessary for a program to succeed. Particularly in the area of
reform programs including macroeconomic and fiscal management areas, the Bank in collaboration
with the IMF should consider a deeper engagement with the Government. To ascertain
Government's commitment, active policy dialogue and tighter donor coordination regarding the
objective and measures of a reform are necessary;

-15-
* Elecause institutional capacity amongst the Ministries and project implementation units is limited,
projects must be simple, clearly defined, and geared to achieve clear and targeted policy objectives,
and well defined institutional strengthening components, including clear procedures, need to be
integrated into all new projects; the presence of well trained staff throughout implementation can
help in the early detection of, and swift action to correct, design weaknesses and adapt to changing
circumstances. For example, SIF project implementation improved greatly after its initial difficulties
in retaining high quality PEU staff had been overcome through dialogue with the Government;

* Strengthening the financial management of projects is crucial. The SIF project is presently a
successful LACI pilot project with disbursements made based on quarterly Project Management
Reports. By replicating this experience, new lending projects will have a better prospect for sound
financial management, in spite of the limited availability of accounting professionals in Belize;

* 

Incorporating the active participation of all stakeholders including municipalities, local governments
and relevant Ministries from the earliest stage of the project is critical to assure sustainability of
those institutions responsible for the operations and maintenance of physical works - this would
avoid the shortcomings experienced in the Belize City Infrastructure Project.

* Since the Bank's program remains small and selective, donor coordination is critical to effectively
achieve Government's policy objectives. The Bank will continue to encourage the Government to
take the lead in organizing donor coordination and civic society participation meetings at least twice
a year and provide support as requested.

44. 
CAS Consultations. This CAS was prepared in consultation with the Government, civil society,
and development partners. The Government's NPESAP is a sound poverty reduction strategy for Belize
and the first of its kind in the Caribbean region. It was prepared after nation wide consultations. In
addition, the DFID prepared an assistance strategy after significant consultations with the civic groups.
Before preparing this CAS and given the close working relationship between the Bank and the DFID,
the Bank staff sought and reviewed the minutes of the consultations that DFID had with the civic groups
and took into consideration the concerns of the representatives of the civic society. The Bank staff then
consulted with the Government and selective members of the private sector and NGOs. This CAS
builds on the NPESAP and took into consideration the DFID assistance strategy. Further, an earlier
version of the CAS was shared with the Government as well as development partners, and comments
were received from the Government, the CDB, the IDB, the EU, DFID and CIDA. Through this process,
a general agreement has emerged on the development agenda (detailed in the annexed Country Program
Matrix) and the four areas focused on poverty reduction (see Figure 2).

B. Selectivity and Sequencing of Bank Group Assistance

45. 
Selectivity. Given the tight fiscal situation, the extensive assistance provided by other
development partners with substantial knowledge of the country and the region, such as the CDB, the
IDB, the EU, and the DFID, and in view of the country's limited implementation capacity, the Bank has
followed and continues to follow a selective and disciplined approach despite eagerness of the
Government for several projects from the Bank. As such, the Bank will be only involved in basic
education and social protection programs, while providing technical advice and support in
updating poverty surveys and strengthening regulatory frameworks in power and water sectors.
The Bank will not be involved in financing operations in agriculture, tourism, water and
sanitation, health, judicial reform, public sector reform or financial sector reform.

46. 
The principles underlying the Bank's program include: (1) no more than 3 projects under
simultaneous implementation in any given fiscal year for the next five years; (2) with each new project
averaging about US$10 million per project in new commitments; translating to a total lending program

-16-

of 3 projects totaling about US$30 million; and (3) a maximum of one major piece of formal economic
and sector work per year. These principles have been discussed with the Government and could change
if the conditions so warrant. Under a Base Case Scenario (Table 4), the Bank will maintain a small
program focused on the poverty reduction objective. The principle of selectivity that will be followed
in order to remain cautious (within prudential limits) for both lending and non-lending services include:

* Focus on poverty reduction through investment in education and facilitating economic
diversification because of concerns about the erosion of preferential arrangements and its adverse
impact on poverty. Examples of this primary focus are the proposed Education Sector Improvement
Project (in FY02) and a social protection project (in FY05) after review of expenditures on social
sectors and safety nets, and the proposed Roads and Municipal Drainage project, which is geared to
complete the road network and supports disaster mitigation efforts in six, relatively poor, rural areas.
The Bank will be actively involved with the Government and the civic society and gauge their
readiness to undertake the necessary sectoral reforms before embarking on new projects.

* Knowledge and experience-based comparative advantage as in the Roads and Municipal

Drainage project, the proposed Education project and the proposed non-lending service on
strengthening the regulatory framework in the water and sanitation sector while fostering private
sector participation. These tasks build on achievements and experience gained in previous Bank
projects, such as the Belize City Infrastructure project and the Primary Education project.

* Complementarity with other donors projects, such as the ongoing SIF Project that is cofinanced
by EU; and the proposed Education Sector Improvement project will be cofinanced by DFID. In the
event of an external shock arising due to erosion of preferential prices for main exports or due to a
natural disaster, the Bank will review the PSIP and collaborate with other agencies in putting
together an adequate financing package.

47. 
Bank's Proposed Assistance Program. Based on the above selectivity criteria and as detailed in
Table 4 and the Country Program Matrix for the period FY2001 -FY2005 (Annex B 1) the thrust of Bank
activities will be focused on supporting poverty reduction efforts. The Bank intends to be fully
supportive of the country's goal of poverty reduction through private sector-led economic diversification
and growth, and improved access to and quality of basic services, the two (of the four) critical pillars of
the Government's development agenda.

-17-

Table 4: Current Stock and Proposed Base Case Scenario for the Lending Program, FYOi-05
FY01- 
FY02 
FY03 
FY04 I 
FY05

Belizean Political Cycle 

In 

=

w 

Proposed Base Case Lending Scenario

Sustaining Economic Growth

Critical Infrastructure 

Roads and
Municipal 
Drainage Project 

.

.

._-_. 

Increasing Access to Basic Services
.................... 
.............................................................. 
...................... 
.............................. 
......... ............ 
................. 
.......... cto 
Education
Improvement 
Project

Ed ucation 

.....................................

............ 

..........-

Social Investment 

OngokJgSF 

-_._

.

.

n...................- 

Social
Protection
Project

Modernizing the State

Implementing Environmental Policies 

Drainage
component
Of the Roads

_________________________________ Project above

New Projects 
New Projects Commitments (US$ mill.) 
Projects in Portfolio 
Total Commitments (US$ mill.) 

1 
13 
2 
20 

1 
10 
3 
30 

0 
0 
2 
23 

0 
0 
2 
23 

1
7
3
30

Proposed Non-Lending Services

Sustaining Economic Growth 
SuEstaining Economic Growth 

Just in time 
Just in time 

PSIP-MTES 
Review 

Just in time PSIP-MTES Just in time
ESW 
Review 
ESW

Increasing the Poor's Access to Basic 
Services 

Modernizing the State and Improving 
Governance 

Ongoing IDF -
IndigenousReiwf
People; 
Support for 
poverty update
(with DFID) 

_

Review Portfolio
Regulatory Procurement
water sector 
and Financial
Management

ReSocial
Safety Nets

Implementing Environmental Policies for Ongoing GEF
Sustainable Development
Total Cost US$ '000 
World Bank fiscal Year

120 

80 

80 

120 

50

48. 

Support for direct poverty reduction is to be provided by Bank projects as follows:

(i) Ongoing Social Investment Fund, which provides targeted subprojects to poor communities. If this
project continues to achieve satisfactory ratings, the Bank proposes to review the social safety nets (in
FY04) and consider a Social Protection Project (in FY05). Lessons from the implementation of the
Poverty Reduction Fund in St. Lucia; in particular those related to assistance to those affected by agro-
restructuring will help in the design of a social protection project for Belize;

(ii) The proposed Belize Education Sector Improvement Project (FY02), will be based on the
experience and knowledge gained from the Primary Education Development project. Given the interest

-18-

of the Government and the DFID in such a project, the Bank is comrnitted to long-term involvement in
this sector, provided the Government is resolved to implement far-reaching educational reforms. This
project is likely to focus on school finance reform, improved access, equity and quality at primary and
secondary levels, improved sectoral management, and introduction of bilingual education;

(iii) Proposed assistance to Government in monitoring the poverty situation (FYO1) and reviewing social
safety nets (FY04);

(iv) Improving Basic Infrastructure and Strengthening Regulatory Frameworks. Building on the

experience of past Bank projects in the sector (two road maintenance projects and the BCIP), the Bank
has prepared the proposed Roads and Municipal Drainage project. This project will upgrade the
condition of the Burrell Boom Road, and link the rural western region with the northern region and
complete the road network. In addition, this project will help strengthen the institutional capacity of the
relevant Ministries. The Bank would also provide NLS to strengthen the regulatory framework for the
water and sanitation sector (FY02); and

(v) Safeguarding the Environment and Indigenous Culture to facilitate Tourism Expansion. The

support of the Bank and other donors to the 1996 Environmental Report and the 1996 NEAP have been
complemented by the GEF-supported Meso-American Biological Corridor (MBC) project and the
Northern Belize Biological Corridors (NBBC) project which are currently under implementation. The
aim of these projects is to secure long term conservation of bio-diversity of global importance in the
Mayan lowlands by maintaining ecological linkages between protected areas across northern Belize. In
addition, an IDF for capacity-building for indigenous peoples has recently been approved. The project
will also rehabilitate/construct drainage infrastructure in six municipalities, where the population is
relatively poor, to reduce possible flooding as observed during Hurricane Mitch in late 1998. As part of
its regional effort, the Bank has recently studied the insurance market for natural disasters in the
Caribbean Region and is exploring possible preparation of a Caribbean Re-insurance Facility to support,
inter alia, catastrophic insurance as a mechanism for disaster mitigation.

49. 

The Bank Group's Role within the Context of the Overall Efforts of Development Partners.

The CDB, IDB, DFID and EU have the largest assistance programs to Belize and their programs are
facilitated by country offices in Belize. The CDB currently has an ongoing lending program of five
project totaling US$52 million, of which US$38 million are undisbursed. The IDB has five ongoing
projects totaling US$44 million, of which US$37 million are undisbursed. In addition, DFID has a
lending program of US$21 million, and the EU of US$19 million (Table 5 summarizes the assistance
programs of major donors). A key aspect of the Bank Group's strategy will be to continue developing
complementarities with other agencies involved in Belize within the context of a well-articulated Public
Sector Investment Program. This will involve close coordination with the IMF on the macroeconomic
framework, and with the major donors on their lending programs. Examples of coordination with
donors include the SIF Project that is co-financed by the EU, the recently closed Power Development
Project that was financed in parallel by the CDB, and the Belize Education Sector Improvement
Program (BESIP) which is jointly prepared with DFID. The Bank will continue to coordinate with other
donors. Table 5 summarizes the main areas of activities of external agencies in Belize, and identifies
the areas in which the Bank is playing or could play a role during the period of this CAS.

50. 
In addition to the country program, the Bank will continue to organize regional policy platforms
such as the biennial CGCED and the Small States Initiative, in which Belize is an active participant. As
chair of the CGCED, the Bank works closely with the Governments and development partners involved
in the Caribbean economic development agenda in focusing on developmental challenges faced by the
Caribbean region. During the 1990s, the Bank, the IDB, and major bilateral agencies collaborated in the
preparation and discussion of common regional issues, such as trade liberalization, impact of erosion of

-19-

EU preferential trade arrangements in bananas and sugar, implications of NAFTA on the region's
exports, issues pertaining to public sector modernization, private sector development, financial sector
development, labor market, and tourism, and a regional environmental action plan. The CGCED
regional agenda for the June 2000 meeting in Washington DC, which was developed in close
cooperation with client countries and external agencies, focused on a 20-year Vision for the Caribbean,
and discussed issues relating to improving education, enhancing governance, tourism-environment
prospects as well as risk diversification and disaster management. Since mid-1990s, representatives
from the private sector and civic groups involved in poverty and environment issues also participate in
the CGCED discussions.

Table 5: Bank Group's Role in the Context of the Overall Donor Effort in Belize

__ Area of Intervention 

Financier/Advisor

Enhancing 
Sustainable 
Economic
Growth 

Increasing ces 

Poor's Ac-cess 

Modernizing 

the States and 

Goveiance 

Improving Fiscal Management 

Financial Sector Strengthening 
Improving Framework for private sector 
Participation
Trade and Agricultural Reform 

Regulatory Frameworks- power and water 
Highway Construction 

Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance 

Improving Educational Attainment 

Improving Access to Health Services 
Targeting Social Safety Nets for the Poor 
Land distribution and basic infrastructure 

Social Investment Fund 
Housing for the Poor 

Establishing Poverty Monitoring System 

Transparent and Efficient Financial and 

Personnel Management 

Ati-Corpion, Money Laundering and

Drug Trafficking 

Decentralization - support to communities 
Protecting Bio-diversity: 
Forestry Management 
Land-use Management 

Environmentally Coastal Zone Management 
Sustainable 
Sustainable Tourism 
Development Waste and Sewage Management 
Enhancing Participation of Local 

Communities 

and NGOs

Emergency Preparedness 

IMF

DFID/CDB

IDB/DFID

IDB/EU

IBRD
IDB/EU/Taiwan, China/
Kuwait/DFID
CDB/EU

DFID/IBRD

CDB/EU/PAHO/IDB
IBRD
IDB/DFID

.

EU/IBRD
Taiwan, China/CDB

DFID/IBRD

DFID

DFID

DFID

USA/DFID
GEFAUNDP
DFID
IDB

EU
EU/IDB
UNDP
UNDP/DFID/CIDA

IDB/CDB

World Bank Presence is indicated in Bold.
Acronyms indicate the agencies that are present in the areas represented by each row.
Source: Programs of External Agencies.

51. 
Triggers. Given the Bank's current assessment of Belize's macroeconomic position, political
context, and implementation capacity, decisions on Bank financial assistance over this CAS period will
depend critically on triggers associated with: (a) satisfactory implementation of Bank projects as
measured by realism and proactivity indices (see para. 58); and (b) following a prudent macroeconomic
policy, in particular, increase central government savings from the 0.6% of GDP now to at least 3% of

-20-

GDP per year (through reduction in tax exemptions and improving tax administration) and contain the
external debt service to governrment current revenues at no higher than 25% in each year over the CAS
period; and (c) satisfactory implementation of the overall reform program, in particular move towards a
regular monitoring of the poverty and social indicators and increase net enrollment rates in primary and
secondary schools (Table 6 below). The government savings has been identified as one of the triggers
to ensure improvement in fiscal management and the availability of counterpart funding for the projects,
while monitoring the external debt service to revenues ratio will help contain commercial borrowing by

the Government. Together with the IMF staff, the Bank staff will monitor the macroeconomic and
financial sector situation.

52. 

Base Case Lending Scenario. Assuming performance under the aforementioned three triggers

remains on track over the five years of the CAS period, under the Base Case Scenario, the Bank will
maintain a small program focused on the inter-related objectives of poverty reduction and economic
diversification and consisting of: (1) preparation of no more than 3 projects over the next five years,
averaging about US$ 10 million per project in new commitments; translating to a total lending portfolio
of 3 projects for a total of about US$30 million; and (3) one piece of economic and sector work per year.

53. 
Low Case Scenario. Should the Governrment fail to satisfy triggers (a) or (b) or (c) mentioned
above, the Bank would consider shifting to the zero lending by halting further preparation of pipeline
projects until there is a demonstrable improvement in complying with the triggers. In such a scenario,
the Bank would continue to engage the Government through non-lending activities and coordinate with
the IMF and other external partners in moving the Governrment towards prudent policies and achieving
its development objectives.

54. 
Instruments for Lending and Non-Lending Services. The Bank's administrative budget for
Belize, as with other small states, is very limited. It is therefore critical for the Bank and the
Government to work together to optimally use the Bank Group's small lending and non-lending
program to maximize the development impact to reduce poverty. One operation which the Government
has selected for preparation is a single currency loan for the proposed Roads and Municipal Drainage
project. Following this, the Government is keen to secure a possible investment loan in FY02 in the
form of the proposed Belize Education Sector Improvement Project (BESIP). The Government would
like a follow-up project for social investmnent but this would depend upon further review of the social
safety nets and social sector spending (in FY04).

55. With respect to non-lending services, the Bank would: (i) support the Government in the regular
monitoring of poverty; (ii) review public expenditures on regular basis, in close collaboration with the
CDB; (iii) provide relevant technical assistance through all new lending operations to strengthen the
institutional capacity to both design and implement projects/sector strategies; (iv) prepare just in time
policy notes on social sector spending or review the social safety nets should the Government so
request; (vi) collaborate with GEF in natural resource/bio-diversity related activities; (v) seek IDF
resources for capacity building (e.g. ongoing institutional strengthening of indigenous people); and (vi)
consider piloting Bank's new financial products, in particular a possible sugar price risk management
insurance for small farmers in the sugar sub-sector.

56. 
IFC. IFC's portfolio consists of two projects. One investment is in the Belize Electric
Company Ltd. ("Becol"), a hydroelectric power generator; it was approved in FY93, for US$ 10 million
plus equity of US$ 5.0 million. Becol is one of Belize's largest electricity producers with an installed
capacity of 25 megawatts (the country's total estimated installed capacity is 65 megawatts). The other
investment is a loan to a shrimp farm and associated distribution company; it was approved in FY98 for
up to US$ 6 million. The project is expected to double production and provide valuable foreign
exchange earnings to the country as well as diversify agricultural production away from the traditional
sugar, bananas and citrus. IFC recently approved an up to US$ 10.0 million investment in another

-21-

shrimp farm and is currently evaluating a third. Given the small size of the economy, the relatively slow
pace of reform and the active participation of other multilateral and bilateral agencies as well as the
Commonwealth Development Corporation, it is expected that IFC's activity will continue to be limited.
As reforms occur, IFC will respond to opportunities to support viable projects, particularly in export-
oriented sectors like agribusiness and tourism.

57. MIGA. Belize became a full member of MIGA on June 29, 1992. MIGA has no active projects
in Belize. MIGA's guarantee program is ready to support projects in sectors where foreign private
financing is potentially feasible or needed.

Table 6: Proposed CAS Benchmarks, 1999-04

Key Country Development Indicators:
Poverty Headcount Ratio (% estimates at end-year) 

Indicators to be Monitored by the Bank: 
Primary School Net Enrollment (% at end-year) 
Secondary School (12-16 years) Net Enrollment (% at end-year) 

1999 2002 2004

33 

85 

34 
34 

30 

90 
42 
42 

28

95
5
50

Leading Progress Indicators: Since tracking the poverty headcount ratio may involve some time lag, the
Government and the Bank staff would monitor the following macro indicators on an annual basis. These
indicators will help in the timely assessment of the poverty situation.

1. Unemployment Rate, which is currently 12.3% of the labor force, and should be declining in each of the
five years of the CAS period;

2. Per Capita Private Consumption Growth should be about 3% per year in each of the five years of the CAS
period

C. Performance Indicators

58. 
The achievement of the CAS objectives will be measured through Country Development
Indicators and the Bank Program Performance Indicators over the next five years (Table 6).

Country Development Indicators

* Macroeconomic indicators related to poverty: Data on the population below the poverty line is only

available for 1996. The DFID has been working with the Ministry of Economic Development in
strengthening its capacity to update the Poverty Assessment in 2000 and beyond (once every 3
years). The Government needs in particular to take advantage of the next poverty survey that is
planned for this year and establish systematic and consistent poverty monitoring and evaluation
tools. Once the Government puts in place these tools, the progress indicators mentioned above will
be complemented by a more complete set of social indicators. The Government, in the meantime,
would monitor on a yearly basis (i) the growth rate of per capita private consumption; and (ii) the
unemployment rate, as two leading indicators for poverty reduction.

* Social indicators related with poverty: The Government is keen to measure progress in reducing
poverty not only directly by the poverty updates but also indirectly through the monitoring of four

social indicators, data on which are available on an annual basis with a 3-6 months lag. These

-22-

include: (i) primary school net enrollment rate; (ii) secondary school net enrollment rate; (iii) infant
mortality rate; and (iv) access to safe water. For its part, the Bank will work with the Government
and monitor only indicators (i) and (ii) above, pertaining to primary and secondary school
enrollment rates, while supervising Bank-financed projects, in particular the Belize Education Sector
Improvement (BESIP) and the SIF projects.

Bank Program Performance Indicators

* Portfolio Management: The small size of the Bank program lends itself to focused monitoring. In
accordance with new portfolio monitoring practices, close attention will be paid to Realism and Pro-
activity indices as well as the Quality Assurance Group's (QAG) "at risk" flags, which draw special
attention to project specific financial management and procurement problems, including availability
of counterparts funds and slow disbursements. Given the country situation, supervision budgets for
Belize are in line with Bank averages. As such, in the event projects become a "potential problem"
(i.e., possessing three or more QAG flags), the Bank will have to increase the supervision budgets
and increase its intensity to mitigate risks.

* Project Effectiveness: Key success indicators for the each of the projects in the portfolio during the
next five years will be monitored.

* 

Increase in Educational Access. In particular, under the proposed BESIP project, performance
indicators include: (i) primary school net enrollment rate to be increased from 85% now to at least
95% by end-2004; and (ii) secondary school net enrollment rate to be increased from 34% now to at
least 50% by end-2004.

59. 
The Bank will strengthen its self-evaluation through more frequent review of country
portfolio performance and assessment of the progress in poverty reduction and social development
that is proposed in this CAS.

D. Creditworthiness and Managing Program Risks

60. 
Creditworthiness. Although Belize has been able to obtain investment grade from Moody and
access to intemational capital markets, further borrowing from foreign commercial banks may restrict
external funding or even impose a reversal in the rating. The Bank's exposure in Belize remains
modest. Moreover, current IBRD debt outstanding and disbursed (DOD) in Belize is only US$40.6
million and accounts for 11% of the total DOD of the country. The Government intends to implement
the development agenda outlined in the NPESAP over the short to medium term, and is committed to
avoid short to medium term borrowing as in the past. Under this strategy, the Government would
contain its debt service on public sector external debt to government current revenues at no higher than
25% and the debt-service ratio at around 11% of exports of goods and non-factor services (Table 7). At
a minimum, the set of policies identified by the Government in its agenda, if implemented would allow
for a gradual increase in gross foreign reserves to 3 months of imports of goods and services, and
improve the external current account deficit. With a rapidly growing population, despite a cap on new
immigration by the Government, a real GDP growth rate of about 4-5% a year would be required to
reduce poverty. The IBRD exposure remains manageable with debt service to IBRD at 16-18% of total
public debt service and 2% of the country's total exports.

Table 7: Exposure Indicators, 1996-2004

-23-

(guideine Oe low indettedoess) 

Overall Indebtedness

Debt Service/Govt. Current Revenues 
DebtService/XGS" 
DOD / GDP mp 
DOD/XGS" 
Shorttermdebt/DOD 
Short term debt / GDP mp 
Short term debt/GrossReserves 

IBRD Exposure

196 

19 

9 

19 

00 

20*1 

20 

ob00 200w

24.2 
12.9 
45.5 
92.9 
12.3 
5.6 
72.0 

22.3 
11.6 
70.1 
133.3 
40.8 
28.6 
379.3 

24.9 
12.5 
50.0 
100.2 
16.6 
8.3 
146.8 

22.5 
10.9 
49.4 
101.2 
15.5 
7.7 
85.0 

23.8 
11.4 
46.9 
97.0 
15.1 
7.1 
66.5 

24.6 
11.5 
46.7 
94.6 
14.3 
6.7 
61.7 

23.1 
10.6 
46.5 
91.9 
13.6 
6.3 
53.5 

22.4 
10.1 
46.5 
91.9 
12.8 
5.9 
46.0 

20.4
9.4
46.2
92.0
12.1
5.6
40.1

IBRD DS / Public DS 
Pref creditorDS/publicDS 
IBRD DS / XGS " 
1/ Exports of Goods and Services.
Note: There was a significant increase in short to medium term debt borrowing in 1997 (from US$ 35.4 Million in 1996 to US$ 185.3 Million in
1997). This increase had an impact on the overall 1997-99 indebtedness ratios.
Source: World Bank Staff estimates.

11.3 
28.9 
1.4 

12.7 
29.7 
1.3 

12.8 
30.9 
1.5 

17.0 
46.0 
1.9 

17.4 
49.0 
1.9 

16.8
54.1
1.7

16.8 
40.3 
2.0 

17.9 
41.1 
2.2 

15.9 
38.6 
1.9 

61. Managing Risks. Belize is a stable democracy. The incumbent Government has an
overwhelming majority in the Parliament and broad support in the local Town Boards. It is therefore
uniquely poised to implement a strong reform program. However, Belize faces three main risks over the
medium term pertaining to external shocks, macroeconomic management and local implementation
capacity . First, Belize is a small economy, vulnerable to economic shocks, such as the erosion of the
preferential prices for its major exports, and natural disasters. To a large extent, Belize has successfully
absorbed the sharp decline in sugar and banana prices since the late-i 980s. However, it is likely to
experience low-growth during this decade because of further decline in real prices in sugar, bananas,
citrus, tnd a slowdown in the highly-competitive tourism and garment industries. This would decrease
per capita incomes and make it difficult to achieve the objective of poverty reduction. Fortunately,
Belize has good relationships with the European Union, the UK, Canada, USA and Taiwan, China as
well as with multilateral development banks such as the IDB and the CDB. As such, external support
during the economic transition and possible natural disasters is likely to somewhat mitigate their adverse
impact. Second, fiscal performance may not improve or may even worsen, which could lead to higher
external borrowing and difficulties in the availability of foreign exchange and counterpart funds for
projects. The large current account deficit in the balance of payments, low foreign exchange reserves
holding, and recent commercial borrowings by the Government coupled with financial sector
vulnerabilities pose additional risks. Third, Belize has limited human resources capacity and the
recently initiated changes in the civil service have to be well managed by he Government so as to
maintain its capacity to implement policies and projects. Taking these risks into account, the Bank has
identified a smaller program than the previous CAS with emphasis on non-lending services, in particular

to clarify our joint understanding of the difficult issues ahead for project preparation and to generate
open discussion of such issues. Bank projects would be small and well-focused to minimize risks.
Further, the Bank will manage and mitigate these risks by quarterly monitoring the fiscal situation,
designing projects that strengthen the execution capacity, maintaining its intensified portfolio
management effort, and stepping up donor coordination.

-24-

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

62. 
The Bank Group proposes a pragmatic work program that would help the Government move
towards poverty reduction at a time of transitional difficulties faced by Belize on account of the gradual
erosion of the preferential market access for its major commodity exports; provide financial support for
education, basic infrastructure, and social protection; and sharpen the macroeconomic and portfolio
management. This approach would provide valuable and timely assistance to Belize without
overburdening its debt servicing or implementation capacity while ensuring prudent management of the
economic and implementation risks facing the country in the medium to long term. At the same time,
the Bank Group is aware of the extreme vulnerability of the small states to external events and stands
ready to re-assess its program, should the macroeconomic and portfolio management conditions so
warrant it.

August 2, 2000
Washington D.C.

By:

Sven Sandstrom

James D. Wolfensohn
President

BELIZE
Country Assistance Strategy

ANNEXES

Annex A. 
Annex Al. 
Annex B 1. 
Annex B2. 
Annex B3. 
Annex B4. 
Annex B5. 
Annex B6. 
Annex B7. 
Annex B8. 
Annex B9. 
Annex B10. 

Belize at a Glance
Country Program Matrix, FY01 -FY05
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Programn
Summary of Non-lending Services
Belize Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Status of Bank Group Operations
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Summary of Development Priorities

Belize at a glance 

8/4/00

Latin Lower-
America middle-
Belize & Carib. 
income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Development diamond*

1998
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, USS) 
GNP (Atlas method, US$ billions) 
Average annual growth, 1993-99
Population (%) 
Labor force (%) 
Mosi recent estimate (latest year avallable, i993-9 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to safe water(% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population) 
Male 

0.24 
2,610 
0.61 

502 
3,860 
1,933 

88B 
1,740
1,541

Life expectancy

2.7 
3.8 

1.6 
2.3 

1.1 
1.5 

G 
GNP 
per 
capita 

G
pGross
enrollment

, 

\ 

D 

|primary

47 
75 
26 
6 
75 

75 
70 
31 
8 
75 
12 
113 

58
68
35
14 
71
14
102 
105 

Access to safe water

.. 

121 
123 

Bele
Lower-middle-income group

.. 

Female 

119 

.. 

99

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

Economic ratios,

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
GrossdomesticsavingslGDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 
Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
TotaW debt/GDP 
Totaldebtservice/exports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debWexports

0.15 

0.36 

0.68 

0.73

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

30.3 
59.7 
20.9 
25.1 
-5.0 
1.7 
39.9 
8.5 

23.0 
49.9 
15.9 
16.9 
-6.2 
2.2 
50.0 
12.3 

24.2 
48.8
14.5
16.2
-8.0 
2.3 
49.4
10.7

Trade

.. 

Domestic 
Savings 

I
Investment

0.4 
47.2 

.. 
..

Indebtedness

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 1999-03

(average annual growth)
GDP at market prices 
GNP percapita 

3.9 
1.0 

4.1 
1.1 

4.5 
1.1 

4.5 
2.0 

5.2 
2.9 

Belize
Lower-middle-income group

Exports of goods and services 

6.8 

2.1 

-0.9 

6.9 

4.8

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of Investment and GDP I%)

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 

40

30.8 
21.9 
15.1 

20.4 
26.5 
16.4 

17.8 
24.0 
14.2 

17.7
23.9 
14.2 

20
a

Services 
Private consumption 

47.3 

53.1 

58.2 

58.3 

-20- 

9 

97 

98 

99

.. 
.. 
.. 

63.9 

64.2 

68.0 

-40 -

General government consumpton 
Imports of goods and services 

15.2 
69.1 

19.9 
57.2 

17.5 
58.5 

-GDl 
_ 
.

C-GDP

(average annual growth) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 
Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Grossdomesticinvestment 
Imports of goods and services 

1979-89 1989-99 
2.2 
6.1 
3.9 
3.1 
3.2 
3.4 
4.1 
2.8 
0.0 
4.1 
0.9 
8.1 
6.6 
0.2 
2.2 
1.7 

1998 
-1.5 
-1.1 
-2.9 
4.0 
9.5 
4.6 
1.6 
4.8 

1999 
4.5 
4.5 
4.5 
5.1
8.0 
-0.7 
12.0 
11.5 

Growth of exports and Imports I%)
20

15

1C

-9 
-10
-1S

97 Oa 99

Exports -- *-Imports

Gross national product 

3.7 

3.9 

3.8 

4.6

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
' The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Belize

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)

Domestic pHices

(% change) 

15 -

Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 
Govemment flnance 
(% of GDP, includes cuffent grants) 
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 

-0.8 
-0.3 

3.6 
355 5

10

3.6 

2.0 

o 

Y 

s 

96 

9 

99

27:1 
5.9 
-6. 1 

25 9 
5 1 
-2.7

s 

GOP deflator 

O CPI

Overall surplus/deficit 

.. 

.. 

TRADE
(US$ millions) 
Total exports (fob) 
Commodity 1 
Commodity 2 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cf) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 
Export price index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

11979 1989 
94 

1998 
194 
45 
25 
22 
327 
58 
18 
84 
92 
101 
91 

1999 
208 
41 
27 
22 
367 
57 
29 
83 
91
101 
91 

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)

400
350
300
250

200 -u 

100
50
o

93 

94 

ss 

g, 

97 

98 

99

.. 

* Exports 

*Imports

I

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(UJS$ millions) 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 
Net income 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 
Memo;
Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locabUS$) 

1979 

1989 
193 
227 
-35 
-11 
28 
-18 
30 
-11 

1998 
338 
386 
-48 
-29 
36 
-42 
28 
13 

1999 
357 
427 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

0

n* 

-71 

2

-31 
43 
-58 
86
-28 

-4

l*l 

l

7

4 

no

.

.. 

.. 

66

2.0 

2.0 

2.0 

2.0

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 
Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 
Composition of net resource flows 
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 
World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net tlows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

Composltlon of 1999 debt (US$ mill.)

72 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 

145 
14 
a 
18 
1 
0 

338 
41 
0 
46 
5 
0 

361
44
0 
42
7
0

G: 56 

A 44

F- 7: 

D 86

15 
10 
1 
0 
0 

4 
14 
-1 
19
0 

7_

5 
7 

3
3

E: 99

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
5 
1 
5 
1 
4 

0 
4 
3 
1 
2 
-1 

0 
6 
4 
2
3
-2

A - IBRD 
B - IDA 

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

D - Other multilateral 

c - IMF 

Development Economics 

8/4/00

ANNEX Al 

BELIZE CAS: Country Program Matrix, FYOl-FY05 

I of 7

Diagnosis 

Five-Year General 

Development 

Country Actions and Benchmarks 

World Bank Group

Strategic Directions 

I 
Over-arching objective: Red ce poverty from 33, of population in 1999 to 28% by 2004

** Bank Group Benchmarks 

Partners 

. Develop poverty monitoring 

. CDB-DFID Poverty * Institutionalize capacity for 

I 

of the population 
lived system to facilitate targeting Assessment 

in 1999, 33 

The Government estimates that 
l 
below the poverty line 

the poorest 

poverty monitoring 
in 2000 

** Poverty update in 2001 and 
2003 
Poverty to be reduced to 30% by 2002,

Instruments

FY01-05 NLS:

Proposed support to the

Government in poverty
monitoring (with CDB)

and 28% by 2004
1. Enhancing Economic Growth

Fiscal Management
. Expensive public 
investment program and 
high level of tax and duty 
exemptions have resulted 
in fiscal deficits, putting a strain 
on nominal exchange rate 
and necessitated additional 
borrowing 

Streamline PSIP and 
DFID Financial 
strengthen tax administration Management Project 
to generate adequate fiscal 
surpluses on a consistent 
basis 

IMF article IV 
consultations 

Improve planning and budgeting Commonwealth 
functions and debt management Debt Initiative 

VAT replaced by 8% sales tax in 1999 

* Reduce discretionary exemptions
in 2000 and beyond 
* Central Govt savings of 3% of GDP 
each year 
** Extemal debt service/Government
current revenues not to be higher than 
25% each year 

Completed NLS Review of
Incentive Regime

. NLS Yearly Review of Macro
and PSIP (with CDB) - Joint
missions with IMF

NLS Support for MTESPs
and possible PER update
in FY02

Financial Sector
. Need to undertake a 
comprehensive assessment 
of the financial system 
. Differential reserve requirements 
(RR) for banks and non-banks 
is distortionary 
. Need to generate higher level 
of savings and investment 
. Lending rates are relatively 

high at 16-18% per year 

Upgrade regulatory and 
supervisory systems for 
banks and non-banks, and 
train Central Bank inspectors 
. Ensure consolidated supervision . IMF
of large conglomerates 
IDB TA 
. Review of RR of all 
financial institutions 

. Govemment-wide program budgeting by 2001

. Improve Government revenue, expenditure
and debt management

.Appropriate 

training in the new budget system

The Banks and Financial Institutions Act was 
FY01 - NLS - IBRD New
enacted in 1996 
Financial Products to help
. Revise Legislation to include building 
manage assets & liabilities of
societies, insurance companies in 2000-2001 Central Bank

. Strengthen supervision focused on
money laundering activities, 2000-2004
. Facilitate entry of a new bank by 2001
Develop a framework for micro credits

I by 2002

ANNEX Al 

BELIZE CAS: Country Program Matrix, FYOI-FY05 

2 of 7

Diagnosis 

F~~~ive-Yea Ieea 

teeopmntCourt#* 

Actions andBnhaksWrdBn 

Group*

Framework for Private
Sector Participation

Monopolistic pricing in utilities 

Continue ongoing 
privatization of utilities, seaport, 
and airport activities, and by con-
tracting out public services, road
maintenance, project
management, and auditing

. Strengthen/establish 
regulatory IDB 
frameworks in telecommunication, CDB 
power, water and sanitation, 
DFID 
ports, waste management

** Invite private sector In water and 
sanitaton, invest in basic infrastructure 

FY00 Lending: Roads and
Municipal Drainage Project

Strengthen Public Utilities Commission 
Strengthen regulatory frameworks 
Sale of BEL shares; Telecom shares by 2000 

FY01: NLS regulatory
framework in water and
sanitation

. Uncertainty in preferential 
markets and decline in real 
prices for bananas, sugar 
garment exports 

Work with private sector 
in restructuring banana and 
sugar production to be 
intemationally competitive
in a post-Lome environment

EU, CDB-IFAD 
Projects 

Improve irrigation techniques in banana (ongoing . FY04: Social Protection
Project
Restructure sugar refinery in Libertaad (ongoing)

. Lack of land zoning and slow 
pace of land titling is 
constraining agricultural 
production 

. Encourage self-employment 
IDB Land Project 
through land tenure security, 
IDB Trade 
better credit facilities to farmers, Promotion Project 
formulation of Land 
I iDB private sector 
Policy and Utilization 
Investment 

. Tourism expansion needs to be 
continued 

Implement draft national 
policy for tourism with 
private sector collaboration

IDB-CDB
Tourism Project

. Economic diversification needs to 
be accelerated 

. Facilitate production of 
textiles, shrimps, fishing, 

food processing

. EU Trade Regime
Promotion Project

Clear backlog of unsurveyed leases by 2001
SelVllease public lands, unify the land titling
system, improve the land registry system, and
initiate a land adjudication system by 2000-2004
. Land Advisory Committee established
in 1999

ANNEX Al 

BELIZE CAS: Country Program Matrix, FYOl-FY05 

3 of 7

Development 

Partners 

Country Actions and Benchmarks 

Bank Group Benchmarks 

World Bank Group

Instruments

Diagnosis 

Five-Year General 

.__________________________ Strategic Direttions 

Continue to strengthen

framework for banking,
information services;
investment approval process
needs to be overhauled and
sped up and strategies devised
to attract foreign investment

. Trade needs to be further 
liberalized 

Education

. Access to and quality of 
services to the poor is low 

. As population is multilingual, 
repetition and drop-out rates 
among non-English speakers 
is very high 

. Secondary school coverage 
is 34% 

. School financing is inequitable
as poor areas receive a lower 
budget allocation per student 

. Vocational education and 
training system is ineffective 

Eliminate distortions and 
integrate in Central America 

I regional trade and CARICOM 

CARICOM 

Eliminate 26 QRs
Reduce Common External Tariff to 20% in 2000,

2. Improving Access and Quality of Services

_

Educational reform to identify Belize National 
mechanisms to deal with 
Trust Fund 
language issue 

IDB Secondary 
Increase coverage at all levels, Education Project
especially for poor students, and 
in rural and marginal areas 

. DFID Education 
Sector Improvement
Improve quality and relevance and Primary Educa- 
of learning and effectiveness of 
tion Projects 
teaching 

FY02: Education Sector
Improvement Project

Increase preschool coverage 

* Increase net enrollment in
primary school to 95% by 2004

* Increase net enrollment in
secondary school to 50% by 2004

Increase In proportion of
secondary school graduates from
disadvantage families

. Strengthen institutional Mgmt 

. Reform public financing of 
education to make it more 
equitable and cost-efficient 

. DFID Education 
Sector Strategy
. CDB 
UNICEF

Private sector would be 
. Commonwealth 
Involved in vocational education Debt Relief

Continue curriculum reform

Implement school finance reform

Improve teacher training
. Employment training for youth and adults
2000-2004

ANNEX Al 

BELIZE CAS: Country Program Matrix, FYO1-FY05 

4 of 7

Health

. Low quality of services by 
public health units and hospitals 
. High maternal and pernatal 
mortality 

. Strengthen capacity of Public 
. IDB Health Sector 
Sector to deliver health services Reform 
. Improve coverage and quality 
. WHO-PAHO/ 
of services for the poor 
UNICEF School 
. Develop an equitable and 
feeding Programs 
sustainable system of sector 
EU Nutrient Project 
financing 
Commonwealth 

Formulate a National Health Reform 
Program by 2001 
. Strengthen the organizational capacity of the
public sector to plan and deliver high quality
services, 2001-2005
. Achieve an equitable and sustainable system
of financing by setting up a National Insurance

. PSIP reviews to focus on
sector allocation

________________________ 

Housing
Lack of housing finance 

. Improve access to housing 
finance for the poor 

Debt Relief 

Scheme by 2004

** Increase In access by the poor to
health services (benchmarks to be
established with IDB)
* Reduction in perinatal and inant
mortality rates (benchmarks to be
established under IDB program)
UNAIDS, CARICOM, Formulate strategy to identify and 

WHO-PAHO 

contain the number HIV-AIDS victims 

Taiwan, China 
. CDB 
. Germany 
. Private agencies: 
DFC, Habitat for 
Humanity 

Work with private sector to complete 10,000 
new houses by 2004 
. Allocation of public land for use as collateral,
2001-2005
. Facilitate community-based approaches to
financing

. Exploring feasibility of including self-employed 
in NIS 
. Review of pension and Social Security by 2002 

. Civic organizations 
. CDB BNTF 
. DFID Provision of 
Basic Needs 
. IMF Soc. Security 
System Review 

Possible Regional Project

on HIV-AIDS

PSIP reviews to focus on
appropriate sector allocation

. FY03: Review of Social
Safety Nets
. Ongoing Social Investment
Fund
. Social Protection projection
in FY04

Strengthen Safety Nets 

. Overall safety net inadequate 
. Improve efficiency and 
effectiveness in terms of cost, 
outreach and targeting 

. Southem Belize characterized 
by high levels of poverty 
and unemployment 

. Improve regional infrastructure . IDB ESTAP 
and develop human resources 
. IDB-DFID Southem 
through increased education 
Regional Dev. Plan
and training
. Training for effective use of

land resources in the region 

.

. Finalize Regional Development Plan and
implement the IDB projects, 2000-2004

Strengthen Revenue, Tax 
. DFID: Financial 
. Improvement 
in budgeting, revenue, and debt
and Customs Administrations Management Dvpt management
(Budget Management)
Revenue
Administration

Introduce a system of executive . UNDP: Public 
agencies with performance 
Service Reform 
benchmarks and some degree 
of autonomy 
. Reduced role for Govt in 
utilities and health sector 

. Strengthening of 
Ministry of Rural 
Development

Cabinet decision on public service reform plan in
early 2000
. Establish a reform unit in 2000
. Rationalize functions and introduce a CEO
in each Ministry, 2000

Transparent and Efficient 
Financial and Personnel 
Management 

. Need to reform Public Service 
for effective delivery of services 

. Weak capacity to enforce laws 
pertaining to corruption, 
money laundering and drug 

trafficking 

ANNEX Al 

BELIZE CAS: Country Program Matrix, FYOI-FY05 

5 of 7

Diagnosis 

Five-Year General 
Strategic Directions 

Development | 
Country Actions and Benchmarks 
Partners J 
**Bank Group Benchmarks 
3. Modernizing the State and Improving Governance

World Bank Group
Instruments

Create mechanisms to minimize . U.S. Govt 
opportunities for corruption, 
. UK Govt 
money laundering and drug 
trafficking 
. Contractor general appointed to
oversee tendering and bidding 
. Ombudsman to investigate 
abuse by public officials 
. Better definition of initial 
corruption base

. Lack of popular partiapation 
in decision-making 

. Lack of transparency and 
accountability 
in Govemment 
activities 

. Improve accountability and 
transparency 
in public resource 
management 
. Reduce opportunities for 
corruption 

Prevention of Corruption Act, Money 
NLS Financial Management
Laundering Act, and Misuse of Drugs Act passed Assessment under Bank
in the 1990s 
Projects
. Complete audits of public accounts by mid-2000

. Develop an action plan to engage civic society
by 2002
. Strengthen enforcement capacity with extemal
support, 2001-2005

. Political Reform Committee established In 1999
. Referendum Act for "matters of national
importance' in 1999
. Establish a framework for community
participation and strengthen the financial and
technical capacity of local govemments,
2000-2004

ANNEX Al 

BELIZE CAS: Country Program Matrix, FYOl-FY05 

6 of 7

^00 Diagnosis 

- Fiear General 

Development-Country 

Actions and Benchmarks 

World,Bank Group

4. Environmentally Sustainable Development

Deforestation, due to rapid 
expansion of agriculture 

. Ensure participation of local 
NGOs and CBOs 

Implement NEAP recommen- . IDB Southern 
dations 
Regional Dvpt and 
Tourism Dvpt Plans
IDB Environmental Decentralize and involve local commnunities GEF small grant programs
and Social Technical and NGOs in projects and fee collection,
Assistance Project 2000-2004
. IDB Southern
Highway 

Raise user charges in environment-related
activities, 2000-2004

. Formulate and implement a 
land zoning system and CZM 

Facilitate land zoning

Provide technical assistance to Mayan 

communities to improve their land productivity 

and protect historical sites

Ongoing IDF for capacity

building of indigenous people

. Inadequate sanitation and 
waste disposal facilities 
. Contamination and 
degradation of water resources 

. Further expansion of tourism 
is constrained by inadequate 
infrastructure - problems 
include water pollution, coastal 
zone degradation, deforestation 
and inadequate waste disposal

Depletion of natural species

. Belize is in the hurricane belt 
and the coastal land is below 
sea level 

. Implement Tropical Forestry 
Action Plan 

DFID TFAP 
.UNDP/GEF: 
Protection and
regeneration of the
environment

. IDB Solid Waste 
Management Plan 

. Collaborate with the Private 
Sector in addressing these 
problems 

Seeking extemal 
assistance to 
implement bio- 
diversity plan 

Identify clear responsibilities 
for each
environment related MinistrylDept, 2000-2001

Invest in potable water and sanitation
in rural areas, with focus on rural poor, 2000-2004
** Increase in access to safe water (GOB
In the process of identHfying benchmarks)
. Establish Solid Waste Management Authority
by 2000
. With private sector Govemment 
prepared a Tourism Action Plan, 2001-2004 
Developed a national bio-diversity plan 
Increase in visitor arrivals and foreign 
exchange earnings from tourism 

Ongoing GEF:
Meso-American Biological
Corridor projects and
Northem Belize Biological
Corridor projects

. Reduce vulnerabilities by 
IDB Hurricane and 
. Strengthen the Emergency 
improving Disaster Management Disaster Prepared- Management Organization and 
and Emergency Preparedness ness 
rehabilitate hurricane shelters, 1999-2001
. IDB Support for 
Reduce potential flooding in six 
NEMO 
rural areas by Implementing 
drainage works, 2000-2004 

. FY01: Lending Roads and
Municipal Drainage Project

FY01 NLS ongoing regional
Studies on Catastrophic
Reinsurance and Risk

.____________________________________ Management

ANNEX Al 

BELIZE CAS: Country Program Matrix, FYOl-FY05 

7 of 7

Diagnoss 

DIagnosis 

Five-Year General 

Strategic Directions 

I 

Development 
Partners 

Regional Agenda

Country Actions and Benchmarks 
Bank Group Benchmarks 

World Bank Group
Instruments

The region had identified 
Education, Governance, and 
Tourism-environment 
issues as 
priorities for the next 3 years 

Enhance human development EU, IDB, CDB, 
Improve Governance to deal UNDP, UK, DFID, 
with crime and violence, and 
CIDA, and 
. Protect environment to 
several other 
bilateral and
improve tourism 
multilateral agendies * Caribbean countries to reach a 
competitiveness 

consensus and prepare action plans 

after the 2000 June CGCED meetings 

Hurricane related disasters 
are common to the Caribbean. 

Strengthen Disaster Prepared- 
ness

FYOIO - NLS Ongoing
regional reports on Small
States, Caribbean Vision
2020, Risk- Management

CGCED meetings in June

2000, June 2002, and

June 2004

FY02: Possible Caribbean

Reinsurance Facility

Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

CAS Annex B1 -

Portfolio Assessment

Indicator 
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number I c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number 8 d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

Portfolio Management

CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000

4 
3.1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
37 

No 
120 
30 

3 
4.0 
67 
72 
67 
72 
48 

No 
122.4 
40.8 

1 
2.3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
36 

No 
26.7 
26.7 

1
2.8
0
0
0
0
5

No
57
57

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
5 
2
41.8 
23.4
20.0 
50.0
8.2 
14.7

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.

CAS Annex B2 - Bank Group Program Summary 

Belize

Proposed IBRDIIDA Base-Case Lending Program '

Fiscal year 

Project 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(HiMiL) 

Implementation b
Risks (HIWML)

2001 

2002 

2004 

ROADS AND MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE PROJECT 13.0 

BELIZE EDUCATION SECTOR 
IMPROVEMENT F 8.0 

SOCIAL INVESTMENT FUND 

Total, FY 2000-2004 

7.0 

28.0

M 

H 

H 

M

M

L

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L).

Template created on 8/4100.

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Belize

Belize - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1997-2000

IFC approvals (US$m) 

Sector (%)

FOOD & AGRO-BUSINESS 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total 

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

1997 1998 1999 2000

5.50 

10.00

100 

100 

100

100

100 

100

100 

100

Annex B4

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services -

Product 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) 

Audience" 

Objectiveb

Recent compleftons
Review of the Tax and Duty Exemptions 
Macro Update - PSIP Review 

FY98 
FY99 

40,000 
25,000 

Govemment 
Gov./Donors 

Problem-Solving
Prob.Solving/
Public Debate

Underway
Capacity Building & Institutional Dev
Strengthening of Indigenous People 

Proposed
Regulatory Framework for Water
and Sanitation 
Yearly Review of PSIP (with CDB) 
Support for MTES Paper 
Just-in-Time NLS (Topics 
to be determined on demand) 
CPPR/CPAR 

FY00 

IDF 

Gov.Donors 

Problem Solving

FY02 
FYOO-04 
FY02 

FYOO-04 
FY03 

30,000 
10,000 
20,000 

100,000 
50,000 

Govemment 
Govemment 
Govemment 

Problem Solving
Problem Solving
Prob. Solving/
Public Debate
Gov/Pub Diss. Knowledge Gen
Govemment 
Problem Solving

a. Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

CAS Annex B5 - Belize

Belize Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/lncome group

1970-75 

1980-85 

1992-98 

Latin America & Lower-middl-

Caribbean 

Income

POPULATION

Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY
(% of population)

National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNP per capita (USS) 
Consumerprice index (1990=100) 

Food price index (1990=100)

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 

Education (% of GNP) 

Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 

Male 
Female 

Access to safe water
(% of population)
Total 

Urban 

Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth

(years)

Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)

Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

1999 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, Word Bank

0.1 
1.4 
50.2 
6.4 

0.2 
2.6 
48.5 
5.4 

0.2 
2.7 
4.65 
3.7 

502 
1.6 
75 
2.7 

886
1.1
58
2.2

870 

1,180 
80 

2,610 
122 

3,860 
123 

1,740
116

3.8 

59 
57 
61 

77 

4.7 
2.1 

87 
89
85 

67 
99 
38 

49 
59 

B 

71 
70 
73 

35 
70 

7.1 

5.8 

,, 

85 

83

75 
99 
69 

98 
86 

6 

75 
73 
76 

26 
31 

170 
90 
12

2.8 

3.7 
7.4

91 

75 
83
36

93 
82 

8 

70 
68 
73 

31 
41 

2.6

5.1

99

71

93
93

17

68,
67
71

35
44

189 

116 

200
142

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Belize - Key Economic Indicators

Estimate 
1998 

Projected
2001 
2002 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product' 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1999 

2000 

2003

100 
20.3 
26.3 
53.3 

100 
20.8 
25.6 
53.5 

100 
19.6 
25.6 
54.8 

100 
17.8 
24.0 
58.2 

100 
17.7 
23.9 
58.3 

100 
17.7 
23.8 
58.5 

100 
17.8 
23.9 
58.3 

100 
17.5 
23.7 
58.8 

100
17.5
23.6
58.9

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

83.6 
20.6 
7.9 
12.1 

82.6 
18.8 
6.6 
12.8 

81.2 
23.3 
10.6 
13.0 

84.1 
22.6 
12.2 
10.8 

85.5 
23.8 
11.1 
13.1 

86.0 
23.5 
9.2 
14.6 

84.5 
23.8 
7.6 
16.1 

83.5 
23.0 
7.1 
15.9 

83.0
23.1
7.4
15.7

49.8 
53.4 

49.0 
50.9 

52.6 
57.0 

49.9 
57.2 

48.8 
58.5 

48.3 
58.2 

49.3 
57.6 

50.6 
57.1 

50.6
56.7

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

16.4 
18.4 

17.4 
18.2 

18.8 
20.2 

15.9 
17.0 

14.5 
16.2 

14.0 
16.1 

15.5 
16.2 

16.5 
17.1 

17.0
17.4

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

592.0 

630.9 

648.6 

675.7 

730.5 

789.2 

836.9 

887.5 

941.2

2650 

2700 

2670 

2610 

2730 

3113 

3211 

3260 

3388

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1984 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
3.3% 
Gross Domestic Income 
3.3% 

2.0% 
2.00/o 
Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1984 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
0.5% 
-0.6% 
Total consumption 
5.3% 
-1.8% 
Private consumption 
0.9% 
-2.0% 
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

3.6% 
3.6% 

4.5% 
4.5% 

4.5% 
4.4% 

6.0% 
5.5% 

5.0% 
5.5% 

5.0% 
5.6% 

5.0%
5.5%

0.4% 
-1.8% 
-2.0% 

1.8% 
6.3% 
7.7% 

1.8% 
3.1% 
5.0% 

3.7% 
3.8% 
5.2% 

2.7% 
1.6% 
0.4% 

2.6% 
2.1% 
2.0% 

2.5%
2.7%
2.7%

295 
164 
316 
238 
-22 
33 
-10 

309 
171 
321 
232 
-12 
29 
-7 

341 
200 
373 
281 
-32 
32 
-23 

338 
194 
386 
294 
-48 
36 
-42 

357 
208 
427 
330 
-71 
43 
-58 

382 
226 
459 
356 
-77 
49 
-61 

413 
250 
482 
375 
-69 
41 
-63 

449 
280 
506 
395 
-57 
42 
-52 

476
300
533
417
-57
42
-53

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 

12 
7 
9 
-2 

17 
33 
27 
6 

8 
23 
21 
3 

14 
11 
5 
6 

25 
23 
11 
12 

15 
11 
17 
-6 

23 
19 
31 
-12 

25 
22 
32 
-10 

28
23
34
-11

Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions) 

-5 

-22 

-9 

4 

38 

53 

27 

18 

19

Change in reservesd 

-3 

-21 

0 

13 

-28 

-18 

-7 

-14 

-17

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR84 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-3.6 

-1.9 

-4.9 

-7.2 

-9.7 

-9.8 

-8.3 

-6.4 

-6.1

0.4 
0.4 
0.4 
-8.5 

6.8 
6.8 
6.8 
-4.5 

13.2 
13.2 
13.2 
10.4 

-1.8 
-1.8 
-1.8 
1.6 

8.7 
9.5 
-0.6 
13.1 

6.9 
6.8 
0.4 
4.9 

7.5 
7.9 
0.6 
3.4 

8.2 
8.7 
0.7 
3.4 

4.0
2.9
0.6
3.8

Belize - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator 

1995 

1996 

1997 

Estimate 
1998 

1999 

2000 

Projected
2001 
2002 

2003

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
25.7 
Current expenditures 
21.5 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (.) 
4.2 
Capital expenditure 
7.8 
Foreign financing 
0.2 

26.1 
21.8 
4.4 
8.2 
6.6 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 
Privatesectorcreditgrowthl 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR84 =100)
Merchandise exportprice index 
Merchandise importprice index 
Merchandise terms oftrade index 
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f 

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

27.4 
20.5 
6.9 
12.0 
3.8 

53.8 
8.4 
94.8 

27.1 
21.3 
5.9 
13.3 
3.3 

57.0 
10.4 
67.1 

25.9 
20.8 
5.1 
11.2 
3.0 

58.7 
11.2 
69.7 

25.2 
19.7 
5.5 
9.4 
1.6 

58.9 
8.5 
58.6 

24.6 
19.9 
4.7 
8.1 
2.7 

58.9 
6.0 
90.1 

24.9 
20.4 
4.5 
7.5 
3.0 

58.9 
6.0 
81.9 

25.1
20.6
4.5
7.6
2.9

58.9
6.0
78.1

51.5 
15.3 
65.8 

51.0 
5.5 
-373.2 

110.2 
112.3 
98.1 
100.0 

107.5 
114.4 
94.0 
105.3 

110.9 
125.7 
88.2 
108.6 

109.5 
129.4 
84.6 
108.3 

108.0 
128.3 
84.2 
104.1 

109.7 
132.1 
83.1 
104.6 

113.2 
134.5 
84.2 
106.2 

117.1 
136.9 
85.5 
107.9 

120.4
139.2
86.5
109.4

3.9 
10.4 

6.4 
4.5 

-0.6 
-0.8 

-0.8 
-0.3 

3.6 
3.5 

2.5 
1.9 

0.4 
1.0 

0.2 
1.0 

0.3
1.0

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated Non-Financial Public Sector
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Page 3 of 3

Belize - Key Exposure Indicators

Estimate 
1998 

Projected
2001 
2002 

Indicator 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1999 

2000 

2003

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

261 

287 

455 

338 

362 

373 

391 

412 

437

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

5 

33 

23 

12 

21 

10 

18 

.21 

23

Total debt service (TDS) 

38 

40 

40 

46 

43 

47 

51 

51 

53

(US$m'a

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO,XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 

82.2 
44.0 
11.9 

87.3 
45.5 
12.9 

122.6 
70.1 
11.6 

91.2 
50.0 
12.5 

92.4 
49.6 
10.9 

89.3 
47.2 
11.4 

87.6 
46.7 
11.5 

85.4 
46.5 
10.6 

85.6
46.4
10.1

Concessional/TDO 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

31.1 

32.4 

33.2 

33.7 

33.4

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/publicDS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 

12.7 
32.3 

11.3 
28.8 

12.6 
29.6 

12.8 
30.8 

16.8 
40.3 

17.9 
41.1 

15.9 
38.6 

17.0 
46.0 

17.4
49.0

DS (%4.)

IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRI) TDO (US$m)c 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)c 

1.4 
30 

1.4 
33 

1.3 
40 

1.5 
41 

2.0 
44 

2.2 
46 

1.9 
52 

1.9 
57 

1.9
58

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0
0 

0

IFC (US$m)

Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity/d 

.. 

.. 

.. 

5.5 

.. 

10

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

MIGA

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
terrn capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Includes present value of guarantees.
d. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

CAS Annex B8 - Belize

Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

Closed 19

Projects

Board 
Date 
Fiscal 
Year Active Projects 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating bI 
DvlpetIpeetto
ObIective 

Proress 

1997 P039292 SOCIAL INVEST. FUND 

S 

S 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements'1

IBRD 

7 

IDA 

Cancel. Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Rev'd

0 

0 

3.75 

3.25 

0

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

CAS Annex B9 (IFC) for Belize

Belize
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 6/30/00
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1993 BECOL 
1998 Nova/Ambergris 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0 
5.5 
0 
0 
5.5 
0 
0 
0
5.5 
0 
0 
0 
5.5 
0 
0 
0

Total Portfolio: 

11 

0 

0 

0 

11 

0 

0 

0

Approvals Pending Commitment

Loan Equity Quasi Partic

2000 BAL 

10.0

CAS Annex B10 - Belize

CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
performance 

Major Issues 

Country Bank priority c Reconciliation of
priority C 
country and
Bank priorities d

Poverty Reduction & Economic Management

Poverty reduction 

Economic policy 

Public sector 

Gender 
Human Development Department
Education 

Health, nutrition & population 

Social protection 

Poor 

Poor 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable Development

Rural development 
Environment 

Social development 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 

Private sector 

Energy & mining 

Infrastructure 

Poor 
Fair 

Fair 

Poor 

Fair 

Good 

Fair 

Rural Poverty 
(especially Mayans and new 
immigrants in Toledo and Cayo 
Districts)
Fiscal Management 
Export Sector Restructuring 
& Diversification
Regulatory Framework for 
Utilities. Civil Service Reform
Equal Opportunity for Women 

Quality, Equity & Sustainable 
Financing
Health Reform (including National 
Health Insurance) 
Review of Social Safety Nets for the 
Poorest

Southern Regional Development 
Land Use Management 
Water Pollution
Capacity Building for Indigenous 
People 

Strengthening Supervision and 
Enhancing Competition 
Diversification for Growth 
Fostering Potential Industries 
Land Use 
Management/Environment
Maintenance & Rehabilitation 
Private Participation 
Reduction of charges

H 

M 

M 

M 

H 

H 

H 

H 
H 

H 

M 

H 
M 
M 

H 
M 

IMF assistance
to be agreed
upon

Policy dialogue
to be initiated

Strong IDB
Involvement

Bank IDF
Grant

IMF T/A under
construction

H 

H 

H

M

H

M 

H

H
H

H 

H 

H
M
M

H
M

a. Use "excellent," 'good," 'fair," or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, 'female secondary completion;" for environment,
"urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use 'low," 'moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

IBRD 28036

Choo~~~~~~~~~lo

89°00 

es88"3;0sol{ 

tJ0:-:.-.

18'30 

zCo; 

S.S 

M E X I C O 

Che-

M 
E 

E ~~~~~ 
I ~~~~~ 

potlc~cc 
g 
Lo.w-11I 

!L-y

M 

X 
C O 0 

I 

82xE 

} 

: 
Fro

-::

Son V ctojr 

-::

Doagto 

6 

/* 

P<rogtesso

// 
COROZAL
DISTRICT 

o 

i 

.

-f- 

C A RI/B 

fA N 

SEA 

=

Son Anton 

-

rSe 

/

Cotehito 

\ e° 

-

/

7 

u 

(RneRdgf 

< 

tf 

0 

\eR

Ne"t. ~ 

~ 

~ 
~~~~~Son 

I Necs'od 

Feipe 

Moskoll 
Chicago 

OR ANEWALK 

r C 

-

DISTRICT

Do 

-. c, BoonE 

/

17i'3__90 

Piy 

t.. 

Oronge 

DI STR 

C, 

-

L-h-,nue

vv.1k~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~S

~~~\C~~~~A0 

R.cn' 

A 'R 

'- 

irX''-i'0 

''

* ( ZSan 

ignoa/s

HBencauel 

leseX 

Pomono 

\ 

.

.

- 1S1 

:- -

P-na 

L I1 Z, E -- 0- P

177°0 

C A YO D iS TR I CT 

J 

Alko 

Is 

t 

ln 

.a 

.|: 

ie' 

C R E E K _>°i 

: 

= 8; -

j 

i- X } 

Other Roods

._ 

Kendoo1~ ,5 

t 

- j 

/ 

-

Natipnal Copitol

j 

g ~~~~~~~~D 

I S T R I C T }e--0-*,,<< 

itttt,i-t 

< 

D~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0 

fistricf caplitals
Towns:and Villoges

* 

/ :-.:--: 0 

I- 

_ 

_ 

-

o 

h 

t 

t4 

S 

.

.A 

Mayon Ruins

District Boundaries

{ 
3, 

-

vR . \ wiT .F;. -

- .-. -. -.wb -

* International Boundories

j *" 

Medino Bank 

2 

1 

-

f 

:-: 

K{tOMEThRS 

9 

2 

3 

0 

5

TOLEDO Hlgote DISTRICT 

*Son Antonio 

Bi Foi 

USAN 

' 

OCA

t_tiLA, C_Ayj 

St. t on ~ ~ 

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 8 HNUAS 

Cnboo 
RI. 0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~T

O

C,u A TE M AL A 

? ~ $ 

AAO 

jcoAs

69'00 

gNDURA

MAY 1996

