d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICLAL USE ONLY

Report No. 21301-MAL

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF MALDIVES

November 15, 2000

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENT

US$1.00 = Rufiyaa (Rf) 11.77

GOVERNMENT'S FISCAL YEAR

JANUARY 1- DECEMBER 31

ADB 
CAE 
CAS 
CDF 
CEM 
CFAA 
CPI 
CPIA 
ETP 
GDP 
GEF 
GNP 
HIV/AIDS 
HNP 
IDA 
IDF 
IFAD 
IFC 
ILO 
IMF 
NGO 
OED 
PEMEB 
PER 
PRSP 
Rf 
SAARC 
SAFTA 
SOE 
TA 
UN 
UNDP 
VPAS 
WBI 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Asian Development Bank
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Comprehensive Development Framework
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Consumer Price Index
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Education and Training Projects
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Gross National Product
Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Inmmunodeficiency Syndrome
Health, Nutrition and Population
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Finance Corporation
International Labor Organization
International Monetary Fund
Non-governmental Organization
Operations Evaluation Department
Public Enterprise Monitoring and Evaluation Board
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Rufiyaa
South Asia Association for Regional Cooperation
South Asia Free Trade Area
State-owned Enterprise
Technical Assistance
United Nations
United Nations Development Program
Vulnerability and Poverty Assessment Study
World Bank Institute

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-
-

The last Country Assistance Strategy for Maldives was discussed on April 4, 1995

Vice President 
Country Director 
Task Leader 

THE WORLD BANK
Ms. Mieko Nishimizu, SARVP
Mr. Fakhruddin Ahmed, SACMV
Mr. Tercan Baysan, SASPR

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MALDIVES

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. DEVELOPMENT CONTEXT ...............................................................1I
A. THE COUNTRY CONTEXT ................................................................
1
B. RECENT POLITICAL, SOCIAL, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS .............1

II. MALDIVES' DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND CHALLENGES ........... 
.............5
A. THE COUNTRY'S DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND THE VISION ............5
B. PROGRESS TOWARDS THESE OBJECTIVES ....................................................6
C. KEY DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND PRIORITIES .............. 
...................7
8
Protecting the Environment ................................................................
Strengthening Macroeconomic Framework and
Public Expenditure Management ................................................................8
Strengthening Human Development ................................................................ 9
Improving Business Environment ............................................................... 10
Key Sectoral Issues and Priorities ................................................. 
10

III. EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND PROSPECTS ..................................................... 11
Conductive External Environment and Good Economic Prospects ................. 11

IV. DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIP AND DONOR COORDINATION ..................... 12

V. THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ..................................................... 12
A. LESSONS OF PAST IDA SUPPORT ............................................................. 
12
B. PREPARATIONS FOR THE BANK'S NEW COUNTRY STRATEGY .............. 14
C. PROPOSED STRATEGY AND ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ................................ 14
15
Strategic Choice ............................................................. 

VI. MONITORING AND EVALUATION ............................................................. 

VII. RISKS ....... 

.

17

17

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the

performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

CHARTS

Chart 1 
Chart 2 
Chart 3 
Chart 4 

TABLES

Table I 
Table 2 
Table 3 
Table 4 

BOXES

Box I 

Growth in GDP and Rate of Inflation (CPI) ............................................. 
4
External Current Account/Budget Deficit (% of GDP) ......................................4
Gross Official Reserves .............................................
5
Exports and Imports (% of GDP) .......................................................................5

Income Poverty .......................
3
Total and Social Budget Expenditures, Government Revenues .........................6
Infant Mortality Rate and Life Expectancy ............................................. 
7
Proposed CAS Core Benchmarks ............. 
............................... 
17

Bank Assistance to the Maldives: An OED Evaluation ................................... 14

ATTACHMENTS

Attachment 1 Development Partners - Assistance Programs, 2000 -2004

ANNEXES

Annex A2 
Maldives at a Glance
Annex B2 
Maldives - Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3 Maldives - Bank Group Program Summary and IFC and MIGA Program
Annex B4 
Summary of Non-lending Services
Annex B5 
Maldives - Social Indicators
Annex B6 
Maldives - Macro Economic Indicators
Annex B7 
Maldives - Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8 
Operations Portfolio - Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex B9 
Maldives - Country Program Matrix (FY01 -04)
Annex BlO Maldives - CAS Summary of Development Priorities

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MALDIVES

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. 
During the last two decades, the Maldives has made significant economic and social progress. In
that period, sound economic management and strong donor support enabled the country to grow at 9
percent, achieve a three-fold increase in per capita income, and to make strides in social development,
particularly education of girls. Nevertheless, there is substantial incidence of income poverty, especially in
the outer islands. So, continued strong economic performance is required and further improvements in the
living standards of the poor, particularly in the outer atolls, remain a major development challenge for the
Maldives. In meeting this challenge, the Maldives needs to overcome important structural constraints: the
high cost of infrastructure and social services in a country where population is dispersed over 198 inhabited
islands; a narrow production and export base; vulnerabilities to external and internal shocks; limited
institutional capacity; and a very narrow and vulnerable budgetary revenue base.

2. 
On the basis of these structural constraints, the Government asked the donor community to
recognize the Maldives as a "special case" at the Sixth Round Table Meeting in Geneva in May 1999, and
received unanimous support for continued concessional assistance. Prior to this, in June 1998, the Bank's
Board had approved the extension of Maldives' IDA eligibility under the "small island economy
exception" from the IDA cut-off.

3. 
Continued strong donor support is a reflection of Maldives' reputation as a good development
performer and effective user of donor assistance. The Government is already practicing the principles of a
comprehensive development framework--effectively managing the country's consensus-based, broad
development agenda as well as donor coordination. The Government will prepare, with help from IDA and
other key donors, Maldives' poverty reduction strategy.

4. 
As one of Maldives' major development partners, IDA has supported Maldives' development
efforts since 1979 through economic work as well as selective, sector-specific projects, first in fisheries to
help boost production and exports, and, since the early 1990s, in the education and training to improve
access and quality, particularly in the outer atolls. The Bank's expertise and funding of priority social
services are valued highly by the Government, the private sector, the civil society, and other donors, as
indicated by the findings of a recent "client survey".

5. 
Against this background, the Government has recently requested expanded IDA support. The
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) proposes expanded knowledge transfer through analytical and advisory
activities, technical assistance for institutional capacity building, and a three-year lending program of about
$15-20 million, which would move gradually from a project-based approach to programmatic one. IDA's
analytical services and lending program complement that of other donors, with a view to strengthening the
anti-poverty focus of Maldives' development.

ISSUES FOR BOARD DISCUSSION
In its discussion, the Board may wish to consider the appropriateness of:
6. 

* 

the CAS to the Maldives' situation, especially the emphasis on knowledge transfer and capacity
building; and
* a shift in lending from the sector-specific project approach to a programmatic one.

MEMORANDUM OF TIE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MALDIVES

I. DEVELOPMENT CONTEXT

A. The Country Context
I .
The Republic of Maldives consists of about 1200 small, low-lying coral islands in the Indian
Ocean, including the 198 now inhabited by about 280,000 people and another 84 developed as resort
islands. Populations of the inhabited islands vary significantly, ranging from less than 150 to around
70,000 in MaIe, the capital island. Maldives has no known mineral resources and agricultural potential is
limited to about 10 percent of its total land size of less than 300 sq kilometers. Tourism and commercial
fisheries, the leading sectors of the economy, rely on the country's precious marine resources. Both
sectors, accounting for 30 percent of GDP, are vulnerable to external shocks as well as to ecological
damage. Due to smallness, remoteness and dispersion of its population and land mass, Maldives is unable
to benefit from scale economies and faces constraints to the mobility of its people and goods. Most
consumer and capital goods and intermediate inputs are imported.
2. 
These structural constraints also underscore two important concerns facing the Government: (i)
the high unit costs of infrastructure and social services; and (ii) creating income opportunities in the outer
atolls. Not surprisingly, as in other small and dispersed island economies, the budgetary expenditures are
substantial (50 percent of GDP). Public expenditure management therefore assumes an even more central
role in the Maldives to raise the living standards of over 40 percent of its population who are trying to live
on only $1.27 per person per day. Bilateral grants and concessional multilateral loans (about 8 percent of
GDP) constitute an important source of finance. Strong aid coordination and effective partnerships are
therefore important in Maldives' development process.

B. Recent Political, Social, and Economic Developments
3. 
Political setting. Maldives is a republic, with a democratic system of government, organized
around a presidential model. There are no organized political parties, and candidates for elective offices
contest as independents. The Peoples Majlis (the Parliament) has 50 members serving five-year terms.
Two members from each atoll and two from Male' are directly elected through universal suffrage, and 8
members are appointed by the President. The President is elected for a term of 5 years, through a national
referendum of yes/no votes on the candidate nominated by the Majlis. The administration of the atolls is
carried out by the Atoll Chiefs who are appointed by the President, and the island chiefs are appointed by
the Ministry of Atoll Administration.
4. 
In October 1998, President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom was reelected for his fifth term of office.
The political stability brought considerable predictability in the economic policy and institutional
environment, with changes taking place selectively and gradually. There is a strong commitment to
maintaining the society's traditional values and the well functioning formal and informal institutions,
which provide practical--formal and informal--checks and balances for effective governance in the public
sector. A strong sense of community and strong social capital are important strengths in the outer atolls,
and the Government is increasingly tapping this strength by promoting community-based solutions to
meet the development needs of the atolls. At the same time, there is a concerted effort by the
Government to address the important issue of limited institutional capacity faced in most Ministries and
Departments.

5. 
Human development. Along with robust economic growth, Maldives' social indicators have
shown significant improvements. Since 1977, life expectancy at birth increased by 16 years and reached
62 years in 1997. Infant mortality was reduced significantly from 121 per thousand to 27, while the crude
death rate fell from 17 per thousand to 5 per thousand by 1997. In education, primary school enrollment
increased from 38 percent in 1982 to 98 percent of the age group. And with the contribution of non-
formal adult literacy programs, Maldives achieved a literacy rate in excess of 96 percent. Maldives' very
high population growth rate also fell from over 3 percent per annum in the 1980s to about 2.8 percent by
mid- 1990s, though the latter is still very high (Annex B5).

6. 
Observers agree that Maldivian women are among the most emancipated in South Asia and in the
Islamic world. There is no institutional discrimination along gender lines in access to education and
health services and for jobs in the public sector. School enrollment rates for girls and boys are almost the
same and very high, so are the adult literacy rates. Women are employed in the Government and in
manufacturing, and they account for 70 percent of active persons in agriculture.

7. 
Economic growth and income poverty. Sustained strong economic growth has raised
Maldives' per capita income to around $1200, but average income levels are lower in the outer atolls.
Due to the highly dispersed nature of inhabited islands and significant differences in the growth rates of
principal economic activities, average growth of per capita income levels of the communities in the outer
atolls appear to have been lower than in Male and nearby atolls. This is not surprising. Male is the
country's dynamic commercial/financial center, with a well developed sea port and the country's only
international airport next to it. Naturally, most of the operating tourist resort islands have so far been
developed in the atolls around Male. As such, Male and nearby atolls have benefited more from the direct
as well as indirect spill-over effects of faster growth in tourism, trade, construction, transportation, and
other services.

8. 
About 75 percent of the population live in the atolls outside Male, and most of the atolls have
islands with small populations--many islands are inhabited by populations of less than 200 people.
Principal sources of livelihood are fishing and subsistence agriculture, which currently account for about
17 percent of GDP, down from 24 percent in 1990 due to their slower growth. These two sectors have
grown at an annual average real rate of about 3 percent in the last decade, only marginally above the
population growth rate. In contrast, tourism has grown three times faster. Incomes in the outer atolls are
augmented to some extent with remittances sent by family members working on the resort islands, in the
construction and service sectors, and as seamen in merchant ships--this source of additional income is
reportedly equivalent to about 2.5 percent of GDP.

9. 
There is still considerable income poverty with high incidence in the outer atolls. The findings
of a recent benchmark Vulnerability and Poverty Assessment study (VPAS; 1999)'--based on a 1997/98
survey which covered all the inhabited islands--indicate that income poverty exists everywhere in the
Maldives, though with higher incidence in the atolls. Twenty two percent of Maldives' population falls
below the (lower) income poverty line of Rfl 0 per person per day (about $0.85), while the incidence of
income poverty jumps to 43 percent of the entire population when the higher income poverty line of Rfl 5
per person per day ($1.27) is taken. In the outer atolls the incidence of income poverty for both income
poverty lines is found to be 2 1/2 times that of Male (Table 1).2

1 

Republic of Maldives: Vulnerability and Poverty Assessment, Ministry of Planning and National Development and
United Nations Development Programme, 1999. Also, detailed information and assessments on the economy as well as on the
key development challenges of the Maldives are available in the recently completed CEM entitled: Maldives-Country Economic

Memorandum: Policiesfor Sustaining Economic Growth, April 19, 1999, Rep. No. 18340-MAL.

2 While the latter per capita/per day income poverty figures are not PPP-adjusted for international comparison, they could
nevertheless be treated as comparable with the $1/day figure that is the base for international comparisons. This is because
Maldives' economy is very open and, except for fish, almost everything is imported.

2

Table 1: Maldives: Income Poverty

Percent of population Below Poverty Line

(Rf 15) \a 

(Rf 10) \a

National 
43 
22
Male 
20 
10
Atolls 
50 
26
\a Poverty lines: Rufiyaa per person/day; Rf 1 1.77=US$1

10. Maldives' economic and social statistics are weak, and there are no regular household
expenditure/income surveys that would allow definitive assessments. With only one household survey
(the VPAS), it is not possible to examine the past trends in income distribution and changes in Maldives'
poverty situation over time. Therefore, it is also difficult to ascertain with certainty how the people in
different locations and income groups have fared in sharing the benefits of Maldives' sustained strong
economic growth in recent times.
11. 
Other dimensions of poverty and the key factors behind regional disparities. Maldives'
structural constraints and the resulting high cost of infrastructure and social services, which rises even
more markedly for the outer atolls, severely limit the range of economic activities that the island
communities could engage in. These significant barriers restrain economic growth and social
development in the outer atolls, tending to increase their vulnerabilities. Government efforts aimed at
reducing income poverty and regional disparities through the use ofpublic expenditure programs face
rising costs, thus limiting the impact of a given amount offinancial resources. To a certain extent, this
may also explain why there are significant differences in favor of Male in both the supply and quality of
the existing social and infrastructure services, thus worsening the disparity in the living standards between
Male and the atolls. Not surprisingly the findings of the VPAS show that the communities in the atolls
are about 4 times more vulnerable than those of Male.

12. 
Generally the larger islands have the most satisfactory social services. Such islands account for
40 percent of the population. In the areas of education and health, the results of the VPAS establish that
the existing disadvantages in access to such services are closely correlated with the small size of
population on the islands. About 15 percent of the atoll population reportedly has to travel more than two
hours by boat to reach the nearest health center or hospital. Despite the Government's efforts to provide
safe drinking water to everyone, more than half of the island population has less than 4 liters of potable
water per person per day--the current national target, which is still low by international standards. Access
to adequate sanitation is even lower. The disparities in health, water and sanitation are reflected in lower
life expectancy rates in the outer atolls than in Mal--60 and 68 years, respectively.

13. 
The inter-island transportation services for the population are very infrequent, expensive and
problematic. More than half of all islands have difficulties in access due to problems with harbors,
absence of jetties, impassable shallow waters and impenetrable reefs. While significant progress has been
made in the electrification of the atolls, about 28 percent of the atolls' population reportedly has
electricity for 6 hours or less each day. This, as emphasized by the island communities themselves during
the CAS consultations, restricts their income earning activities.

14. Malnutrition appears as a serious problem. There is a very high incidence of stunted growth
among children, with much higher incidence in the atolls. The evidence provided by the VPAS survey
indicates that in the atolls 43 percent of children in the 1-5 age group suffer from stunted growth (low
height-for-age); this indicator is 16 percent for Male and 36 percent for the country. A combination of
factors explains Maldives' high malnutrition incidence, particularly in the atolls: the dietary habits with
restricted range of foods; lack of awareness about nutritious diets; limited supply of locally grown
vegetables and fruits (due to the rudimentary nature of farming) and the high cost of imported fruits and
vegetables.

3

15. 
Lookingforward, the key challenge for the Government is to facilitate further and sustainable
improvements in the living standards of the population, particularly in the outer atolls where living
standards are the lowest. This requires strengthening programs aimed at reducing regional disparities in
access to social and infrastructure services, and supporting sustained and broad-based economic growth
and human development.

16. 
Recent economic performance. Since the late 1970s, helped by its rich marine resources,
tourism, and good economic management, the Maldives has achieved an annual average GDP growth rate
of over 9 percent. Its per capita real income rose more than threefold. In the 1990s, moderation of the
growth of fisheries reduced the annual GDP growth rate somewhat, though it still remained strong in the
6 to 9 percent range. Tourism--mainly from Europe--registered 9 percent annual average growth (and
double-digit growth in five out of ten years) during the last decade and acted as a catalyst for activity in
construction, transportation, trade and banking. Overall, the private sector has become increasingly more
dynamic, competent and capable of expanding further in an economy rendered very open by the islands'
total dependence on imports and pronounced export orientation. The public sector has also made
improvements. The budget deficit, for instance, declined from over 17 percent of GDP in 1993 to around
3 percent by 1998, a period during which the external current account deficit also dropped from 25 to 7
percent of GDP. Rising net private capital inflows and official development assistance enabled build up
of foreign exchange reserves to four and half months of imports cover instead of two in 1993.
Additionally, inflation rates fell from the high teens to low single-digit levels (Charts 1-4; Annex B6).

17. 
In 1999, economic growth continued to be strong at 8.5 percent, and inflation was moderate at 3
percent. However, some fiscal slippage took place as a result of expenditure overruns associated with the
purchase of cost guard vessels, infrastructure expenditures linked to the recent expansion in tourism, and
unbudgeted 35 percent increase in public sector wages/salaries--effective from September 1999 (and the
first increase for public servants since the early 1990s). The budget deficit rose from 2.8 percent in 1998
to over 4 percent. At the same time, the high import content of these additional expenditures, rising oil
prices, the fall in the international tuna prices, and larger imports associated with the development of new
resorts led to a more than doubling of the external current account deficit to over 15 percent of GDP. The
overall external deficit, however, was much smaller due to significant private capital inflows. To ensure
continued macroeconomic stability, the Government is determined to maintain fiscal discipline, with
emphasis on expenditure restraint and fiscal consolidation to strengthen the macroeconomic framework
(see Part II below for details). With respect to future external balances, tourism revenues are expected to
grow as the additional capacity is increasingly utilized, while the growth of import demand for
construction material moderates with the completion of 14 new resorts. These developments and the
possible reductions in international oil prices should enable the country to meet the repayments becoming
due on the foreign loans contracted for financing the development of these new resorts.

in GDP and Rate of 1 
Chart 1: Growth 
Inflation 
(CPI) 

U 2 5 

.0 

| 

RealGDP 

growth 

Rate ofkiflation 

(CP 

|.0

2 00 

15.0 

10.0 

0.0 

-5.0 

\.0

j 5.0 
5 
.0 

,. 

IV 

Chart 2: External Current
Account/Budget Deficit (% of GDP)

-

ExtemaiCAB

15.0

10.0 

0.00-

-

-10.0

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~15.0
~~~~~~~~~~~~2 

0.0

-25.0 

3 0.0

0

eV2 v3 5n C p V2 e2 52 V2 en o2 

le 

le 

le 

1s 

l se 

s 9 

se

4

Chart 3: Gross official reserves 

______________(% 

Reserves 
of imports 

as months 

5.0 

4.5 

4.0 

| 3.5 

0 3.0 5 

2.5 

2.0 

1.5

1.0 

Chart 4: Exports andlmports

of GDP)

Export of Goods

130.0 

110.0 

11

&90.0 
.

$ 

:

_*-IK 

--

)K -

)K 

)K90 

ImportofGoods

d

70.0 

K.50.0

30.0

10.0

18. Maldives' strong economic performance and improvements in social indicators are a tribute to
good economic management. While ensuring macroeconomic stability and considerable certainty in the
policy environment, the Government has adopted a pragmatic approach to the role of the state in
economic activity and in the provision of social/infrastructure services. The Government has shown
flexibility and determination in responding to short-term destabilizing shocks with difficult fiscal and
monetary adjustment decisions (as occurred in the early 1990s), while also gradually liberalizing the
economy and paving the way for a growing and maturing private sector. Indeed, by following sound
economic management, pursuing an open, export-oriented growth strategy, and a liberal labor market
access policy that allows expatriate workers to fill important skill gaps, the Maldives has performed better
than most island economies in exploiting its marine resources, human resource base, and in using foreign
aid effectively.

19. 
In the 1990s, donor support provided relatively significant amounts of resources, enabling the
Maldives to undertake some priority development programs that would not have been feasible with the
available Government tax and non-tax resources (Table 2). Bilateral grants and concessional loans
averaged about 10 percent of GDP in the early 1990s and around 8 percent of GDP annually in recent
years. These funds supported 20 percent of public expenditures in the priority areas, but there has been
occasional recourse to monetization of the budget deficit and to costly borrowing from foreign
commercial sources. While tax reforms are being considered to broaden the very narrow tax base and
thus reduce vulnerability, these will take time to produce results and they are not expected to increase the
already quite high tax-to-GDP ratio significantly (Table 2). And borrowing at commercial rates from the
international financial markets to finance Maldives' development needs, even it were possible beyond the
recent modest levels, would be very costly, and risky, for the Maldives at this stage of its development.
Borrowing too heavily from the Maldives Monetary Authority would crowd out credit to the private
sector if macroeconomic stability is to be maintained. These factors highlight that, in the medium-term,
to pursue sustained growth and reductions in poverty and regional disparities, the Maldives will need
continued concessional donor assistance.

II. 

MALDIVES' DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND CHALLENGES

A. The Country's Development Objectives and the Vision

20. 
In managing Maldives' economic and social development, the Government has been practicing
the principles that underpin a comprehensive development framework (CDF). First, the Government has
adopted a holistic and longer-term view of development. In pursuing the nation's development goals, the
Government has emphasized both the human development and infrastructure needs as well the
macroeconomic stability and market reform challenges of the country. Second, internal consultations
have been used as a key vehicle for determining the country's own vision of development objectives and
needs. Third, the Government has mobilized internal and external partnerships in formulating,
prioritizing, and implementing the country's development programs. As indicated in the sections below,
5

while there are many donors in the Maldives, the Government has managed donor coordination directly
and has been able to streamline and strategically use donor support. The Government intends to follow
this holistic and inclusive approach in the future, and has recently initiated nationwide community
consultations on the development needs with a view to reformulating the country's long-term
development vision and strategic priorities. The results will be used for determining the country's
medium-term development programs and priorities in the forthcoming Sixth National Development Plan
and feed into the formulation of Maldives' Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). The Government
has started the work on the PRSP, which is expected to be completed in 2001.

21. 
For the long-term, improving the living standards, especially in the outer atolls, by sustaining its
impressive economic and social advances well into the future remains Maldives' key development
objective. As the country strives to achieve these objectives, the Government's Fifth National
Development Plan (1997-2000) and its articulation of a national vision describe the Maldives of the year
2020 as a country firmly established on a sustainable development path, with:

* much improved living standards, and reduced disparities between Male and the outer atolls; a
smaller number of inhabited islands, facilitating economies of scale in the provision of social and
infrastructure services; and much reduced population growth rate;

* a robust economy, based on sustainable use of marine resources and driven by a larger and more
diversified tourism and fisheries sectors, expanded agricultural activities, and more skilled and
motivated work force;

* 

the planned South and North growth centers well established, providing alternatives to the capital
city Male as important centers of settlement and economic opportunities;

* higher quality and expanded education/health services; and

* a decentralized administration, and a well-developed legal/regulatory and judicial system.
22. 
In pursuing the national development goals, it is also the intention of the Government to make
more effective use of information technology and distance learning opportunities to bring information to
the isolated islands and link them within the country and with the outside world.

B. Progress Towards These Objectives

23. 
The Government is addressing regional disparities. Regional disparities in incomes and
economic opportunities are well recognized by the Government, and are addressed through the
development programs targeting the atolls. Such efforts will help improve the standards of living in the
outer atolls by creating opportunities for employment and income earning activities, and thus play a
critical role in reducing poverty in the outer atolls. In parallel with this increasing focus on the atolls, the
size of social expenditures increased from 17.5 percent of GDP in 1990 to 21.4 percent in 1999 (Table 2),
with many programs in education, health care, and community development directed to the atolls.
Similarly, the atolls are benefiting from some infrastructure programs, including rural electrification,
potable water, and transport. Indeed, the improving trends in the infant mortality rates and life
expectancy in the atolls in tandem with the national trends reflect the positive impacts of these efforts
(Table 3).

Table 2: 

Total Government 
Expenditures 

Spending on 
Social Services \a 

l 

Government Revenues
(excluding grants)
Tax Non-tax

[Total 

In percent of GDP
1990 
51.5 
17.5 
32.7 
20.6 
1995 
53.5 
16.5 
37.7 
20.0 
1999 
51.0 
21.4 
39.7 
20.3 
\a: Education, health, social security/welfare, and community programs.

12.1
17.7
19.4

6

TABLE 3: 

INFANT MORTALITY RATE (IMR) 
(per 1000 live births)

LIFE EXPECTANCY AT BIRTH

Maldives 
121 
88 
72 
27\c

1985 Census 
1990 Census 
1995 Census 
VRS (1997/98)\a 
VPAS (1997/98)\b 
Female 

Male 
95 
73 
55 

Atolls 
127 
91 
76 

Maldives 
50 
56 
60 

62 
64 

Male 
55 
60 
64 

68 
69 

Atolls
49
56
59

60

62

Male 
61 
67 
59
\a Vital Registration System (1997/98), Min. Of Health. \b Vulnerability and Poverty Assessment Study (1999).
\cThis is the nuoted official IMR figcnre- given hy the VRS The VPAS gives an IMR of 62-

24. 
Gradual progress in structural reforms. In recent years some reforms have been introduced to
strengthen the institutional and economic policy environment. The Government has long recognized the
importance of protecting the environment and has just formulated the (second) National Environmental
Action Plan, enacted an Environmental Protection Law, prepared several disaster preparedness and
mitigation programs, and conducted public awareness campaigns. There is no direct evidence of
corruption in the Maldives. Nevertheless, an Anti-Corruption Board was established in 1991 with a
mandate to investigate any complaint about corrupt practices in the public sector. Although the latter
board's investigations are not made public, there is no indication of a serious corruption problem in the
public sector. A Public Enterprise Monitoring and Evaluation Board (PEMEB) was established in 1994
with a mandate to provide oversight of the operations of SOEs and develop reform strategies for them.
More recently, the Government has launched programs to strengthen the institutional capacity of the
Audit Office and to improve the judicial system. To ensure that women continue to play an important role
in Maldives' economic life and fully participate in the development process, the Government is taking
steps to: increase girls' access to education; promote income generating activities through targeted micro-
credit schemes (supported by IFAD); establish gender balance in the atoll and island development
committees; increase the number of women in senior positions in the Government; and promote the same
in the private sector.

25. 
In recent years, the Peoples Majlis has enacted a number of commercial laws, including the Law
of Contract, the Negotiable Instruments Law, and the Companies Act, and amended the tourism law to
extend the 21-year resort lease period to 24 years. A draft labor law, which covers the core labor
standards, was recently prepared with the help of ILO and is waiting the review of the Law Commission.
These laws and amendments in the existing ones have constituted an important beginning towards
establishing a commercial legal base which is crucial for the development of efficient markets and for
fostering growth in private sector activity.

C. Key Development Challenges and Priorities3

26. 
While many of Maldives' development objectives are achievable, and recent reform measures
will contribute to this effort, it is also recognized that the Maldives still needs to tackle a formidable set of
development challenges on a broad front to achieve sustained economic growth and poverty reduction.

3 The 1999 CEM provides a detailed assessment of Maldives' development challenges.

7

27. 

These challenges include:

* protecting the islands' fragile environment;

* 

* 

* 

strengthening macroeconomic framework and public sector management;

strengthening human development;

improving the business environment; and

* addressing key sectoral issues/priorities in tourism, fisheries, land-use and urban development.

28. 
Stronger and better-focussed government effort is now necessary to tackle these development
challenges. Building on the successes that the Maldives has scored in recent years, the Government, in
partnership with civil society and the donor community, could lead this effort. In particular, actions that
further stimulate private initiative can also enable a streamlined government to set and better execute its
priority responsibilities. Strengthened public sector management will become increasingly critical to
support strong economic growth, to ensure that this growth is broad-based, and that public sector
expenditure programs serve towards reducing poverty and vulnerabilities in the Maldives, particularly in
the outer atolls. These programs, with an increasing emphasis on decentralized community-based
components, can play an important catalytic role in empowering local populations and promoting targeted
poverty-alleviation programs in support of improved local infrastructure and income-generating activities.

Protecting the Environment

29. 
Protecting the environment. Maldives has been following ajudicious policy to protect its
environmental resources. However, much still remains to be done, in environmental management
generally and coastal zone management in particular to protect Maldives' fragile and invaluable coral
reefs and coasts. These are under increasing stress from larger volumes of untreated sewage and solid
waste disposal. Rapid population growth is bringing depletion of water resources in general and the
supply of clean water in particular. There is indication that over-fishing of several reef fisheries is
reducing marine diversity, while the growing demand for land for housing is shrinking vegetation cover.
There is also long-term vulnerability to dangers of global climate change and sea level rise. Technical
assistance is needed to establish an effective policy/institutional framework to protect Maldives'
invaluable natural assets. Specifically, improvements in institutional capacity in environmental
monitoring and enforcement are needed. Strengthening of the atoll administrations as well as island
communities will facilitate effective decentralized management of natural resources. Further
improvements in policies are needed to protect corals and coastal zones, while also improving access to
alternative construction materials to stop coral/sand mining. It is particularly critical to reform the
provision of environmental infrastructure to meet the challenge of delivery of necessary water and
sanitation services to the island communities. In fisheries, there is the need to develop and implement a
community-based "reef fisheries resources management regime", together with appropriate mechanisms
for managing "access rights" to fisheries and reef resources.

Strengthening Macroeconomic Framework and Public Expenditure Management

30. 
Strengthening the macroeconomic framework. To sustain Maldives' strong economic
performance and social advances, and maintain fiscal discipline well into the future, there is a need to
further strengthen the macroeconomic framework by reforming the tax system. At present, customs
duties and a fixed rate ($6 per day/per room/per person) tourism tax make up the tax system. Early
actions to develop simple income and indirect tax systems would be prudent to reduce the vulnerability
arising from heavy reliance on customs and tourism revenues. This would also cushion the Maldives, a
member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), from potential revenue
losses and adverse "trade diversion" effects when the South Asia Free Trade Area (SAFTA) is
established.

8

31. 
Strengthening public expenditure management. There is scope for enhancing the
Government's development effectiveness as a central provider of social and infrastructure services. This
requires institutional capacity building in public expenditure management. A basic prerequisite in this
area is to improve the public accounts system and develop an accessible information base on public
finances. Also important are actions in several areas, including: the updating of the sectoral strategies in
light of the findings of the Vulnerability and Poverty Assessment study; adoption of a medium-term,
rolling public sector expenditure framework that is formulated around a "core program" of priority
development expenditures; and the strengthening of budgetary processes.

32. With respect to the state-owned enterprises (SOEs), the medium/long-term objective should be to
privatize some SOEs that have no natural monopoly or public good aspects--for example, State Trading
Organization (STO), Maldives Transport and Contracting Company (MTCC), and Maldives Industrial
Fisheries Company (MIFCO). In this regard, an early introduction of a domestic tax system will be
particularly important to reduce the Government 's heavy reliance on SOEs as a source of (non-tax)
revenue and to pave the way for privatization. In the meantime, the performance of the SOEs could be
improved by: ending of the existing monopoly privileges of some SOEs in commercial activities; hiving
off some activities that could be left to the private sector; discontinuing government interference in the
economic/financial decisions of SOEs; and ensuring that SOEs regularly service their debts to the
Government and pay rent for the use of state land.

33. 
Promoting broad-based growth. One of the key development challenges facing the
Government is to reduce regional disparities in living standards by facilitating increased access to social
and infrastructure services and economic opportunities in the outer atolls. Stronger focus on atoll/island
development is needed. At present, some elements of an atoll/island development strategy are being
developed. The North/South growth centers which are being developed by the Government with donor
assistance are expected to help in providing better social/infrastructure services, facilitate population
consolidation, create economic opportunities and thus help in the achievement of more broad-based
growth. In the long-term, these growth nodes should facilitate the development of new tourism areas and
wider spillover effects for the outer atolls. Greater community involvement, building on the strong sense
of community and capacity building at the local decision making level, will contribute to effective
implementation in social and infrastructure services and in economic diversification.

34. 
Improving Governance. "Good governance" is one of the key development objectives
highlighted by the latest National Development Plan, which defines governance objectives as: the
establishment of a modem public administration; a comprehensive and transparent set of laws; and an
impartial and competent judiciary. As highlighted by the Bank's recently completed Country Financial
Accountability Assessment (CFAA) report,fiurther assistance in institutional capacity building is needed
to help the Government cope with increasingly more complex economic policy and public sector
expenditure management decisions and develop a good public accounting system. Skill shortages are a
serious constraint to the modernization of the public sector and to the continued strengthening of the
private sector. Continued support will also be needed to help further strengthen the judicial system.

Stren2thenins! Human Development

35. 
The Maldives has achieved commendable progress in human development since the 1970s.
However, a backlog of issues remains, requiring continued Govemment effort and donor support. A
growing need to enhance quality and access, especially in the atolls, and to contain rising expenditure
pressures mark the state of education. There is a serious shortage of skilled Maldivians, and the
economy's growing need for qualified workers and professionals is being met by expatriate workers. At
the same time, the number of more educated (with ten years of schooling) but untrained young men and
women is increasing, and will continue to increase given the youthful age structure of the population (47
percent below 15 years of age). Enhanced capacity and quality of Maldives' seven post-secondary
technical training institutes would provide opportunities for more youth to gain skills that are in demand.

9

This would also help reduce Maldives' need for expatriate workers. The need for overseas university
training will continue.

36. 
High maternal mortality rates, nutrition gaps and the increasing importance of non-
communicable diseases as causes of death and morbidity characterize the health sector. A population
growth rate that still continues to be very high (2.8 percent) drives mounting pressures on social and
infrastructure services and the environment. Accordingly, continued efforts are needed to strengthen the
existing human development strategies and programs. Those efforts need to emphasize quality and
priority setting. Renewed effort is needed to focus on allocating resources more rigorously to high
impact, cost-effective interventions where the private sector is unable to participate, including: more
resources to counseling and advice for birth spacing and family planning; promoting nutrition programs;
further strengthening preventive programs against such diseases as HIV/AIDS; and to developing a
smaller number of better-trained and better paid government health workers. Promoting better water and
sanitation facilities will also have direct and indirect health benefits.

Improvins Business Environment

37. While there has been progress in improving the policy/institutional environment and
infrastructure to promote the development of the private sector, the Government recognizes that the
existing institutions should be modernized and new ones should be established as the economy matures
and becomes increasingly more complex and integrated with the rest of the world. In particular, there is
an increasing need for a well functioning commercial legal/judicial system and an efficient and modern
public administration. The Government has enacted some new laws and amended the existing ones to
improve their usefulness (see para. 25). However, much remains to be done in this area, including the
enactment of other needed legislation, such as a land act, a new mortgage law, a bankruptcy act, and a
legislation for the recovery of debt.
38. 
A sound, efficient and diversifiedfinancial sector is critical to the development of the private
sector and to sustaining economic growth in the Maldives. The country's banking system is inadequate to
meet the growing financial needs of the economy. Little innovation can be expected from the current four
banks (three owned by public banks in the neighboring countries and one state-owned Maldives Bank),
which have little incentive to improve performance and introduce new financial instruments to better
serve the needs of the productive sector and of the poor. The three foreign banks have weak corporate
governance structures in their home countries, which are characterized by inadequate regulatory,
supervisory and disclosure systems. To address this issue, the Bank has recommended that reputable
international banks from countries with strong regulatory, supervisory and disclosure standards be invited
to operate in the country. This approach should be complemented by developing an effective system for
delivering financial services to the poor, notably by strengthening the existing microfinance operations,
especially those in the outer atolls.
Key Sectoral Issues and Priorities
39. 
Tourism will continue to be the leading sector of the economy, and it could support sustained
economic growth and employment generation throughout the country given its rich potential and good
prospects in tourism. However, to ensure this sector's sustainable growth, it is important that the policy
environment remains conducive and competitive. Accelerating efforts aimed at strengthening of the
domestic financial markets and the development of non-bank financial intermediation (e.g., leasing) will
be important for providing long-term financing to the sector. On the policy side, further extension of the
lease period is worth considering. This will give a longer-term time horizon to investors, promote better
maintenance practices and longer-term strategies for market and product development.
40. 
The fisheries sector is considered a strategic sector, given that it has been the principal source of
livelihood to the vast majority of the Maldives' atolls population, providing incomes and employment to
over one quarter of the local labor force, much of their nutrition, and also contributing to the country's
foreign exchange earnings. There is some potential for further expansion in tuna catches, and reef
fisheries could become an important source of income/employment if managed in a sustainable manner.
10

However, there are some key policy and institutional constraints that need to be addressed, including: the
removal of the state's monopoly over production and export of canned tuna and frozen fish; the
elimination of distortionary, administratively fixed tuna procurement pricing policy; the development and
implementation of a community-based "reef fisheries resources management regime" and of an
appropriate "access right" regime for the tuna fisheries.
Addressing land-tenure, housing and urban development issues would require going beyond the
41. 
heavily subsidized social housing programs and sizeable land reclamation projects. Finding a long-lasting
solution to the problem requires measures aimed at addressing Maldives' basic deficiencies in the land
tenure system pertaining to titles, transfer, the legal/regulatory framework and land development.

III. 

EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND PROSPECTS

Conducive External Environment and Good Economic Prospects
42. 
Despite its vulnerability to external shocks, Maldives' economy has been performing remarkably
well. This healthy momentum could well continue in the first years of the new century, even strengthened
if the actions discussed above are taken to promote further development of the private sector. World oil
prices are expected to moderate, and the short-term oil price-related adverse impact on the economic
growth rate of the G-7 countries is projected to be less than half of a percentage point in 2001, with no
impact in 2002. The negative short-term-growth impact in the Euro Area is projected to be even smaller.
Expected robust economic growth and price stability in the G-7 countries promise medium-term benefits
for the Maldives that could grow even more with economic recovery in Japan and more widely in Asia.
43. With sustained sound macroeconomic management and fiscal consolidation, the additional 25
percent capacity from the 14 new resorts, further improvements in the policy environment for tourism and
fisheries, and related expansion in construction and other service activities, the economy could sustain 7
percent or higher growth with stable prices, sustainable fiscal and external balances, and a comfortable
(and needed) level offoreign exchange reserves. This is a highly likely medium-term scenario for the
Maldives (Annex B6). Downside risks of temporarily falling tuna prices (as experienced recently) or
tourist arrivals exist. In the event of such setbacks, the strong reserve position and appropriate exchange
rate adjustments should provide cushion for meeting the resulting balance of payments impacts, while
expenditure restraint might become necessary to adjust to the resulting fall in budgetary revenues. A
prolonged, depressed tourism activity would slow down economic growth and adversely affect the
balance of payments, budget, and employment. However, such a scenario does not appear likely in the
medium-term, given the generally positive global economic outlook, particularly in the European Union,
and the continuing diversification in tourism products and markets.
44. 
The medium-term projections described above assume that private capital inflows (mainly to the
tourism sector) will slow down somewhat following the completion of 14 new resorts--falling below the
1999 levels when it reached 11 percent of GDP, then stabilizing around 5-6 percent. Using the
information provided by the Government and the key donors regarding their future assistance programs,
these base case projections also assume a level of net medium- and long-term concessional donor lending
that is comparable in (current) US dollar terms to those achieved in recent years and a slow and gradual
decline in official grants.
45. 
As noted earlier, prospects for such levels of concessional assistance are strong. At the Sixth
Round Table Meeting for the Maldives, held in Geneva on May 11, 1999, there was unanimous
agreement on the part of the multilateral and bilateral development partners that the Maldives should be
accorded "special consideration" and continued treatment as a "special case", in view of the
vulnerabilities, and economic, structural and institutional constraints facing the country. There were also
strong expressions of commitment to continue supporting Maldives' development agenda.

11

46. 
Although Maldives' per capita income (of around $1,200 in 1999) is above the operational IDA
cut-off, its IDA eligibility was extended in June 1998 under the "small island economy exception"
provided for in the IDA 11 replenishment and it remains eligible for this exception under IDA 12. This
decision reflects Maldives' cited structural constraints.

IV. DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIP AND DONOR COORDINATION

47. 
In recent years, official development assistance to the Maldives has averaged about $28 million
annually. This assistance--about evenly split between grants and concessional loans--has been critical for
Maldives' development efforts. Attachment I summarizes the assistance programs of the country's main
development partners. The World Bank Group, the Asian Development Bank, and the United Nations
Agencies are the major multilateral donors, and Japan is the principal bilateral donor. The Islamic
Development Bank and the Kuwait Fund are providing support on a case-by-case basis as projects are
submitted by the Government. Australia has a rolling medium-term assistance program. There are
several other bilateral and multilateral donors, mostly with small and sporadic contributions. As noted
earlier, the Government is managing donor coordination directly. Overall coordination is supported by
the UNDP through the Round Table Meetings (RTM), organized every 4-5 years.

48. 
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is the other major multilateral donor, with a lending
program that has focused on infrastructure (power, transportation), post-secondary education, and a
technical assistance program directed to capacity building in the monetary authority, the audit office, and
the Statistics Division. In the medium-term (over the period 2001-2003), the ADB is planning to
continue its support in post-secondary education and infrastructure (including rural electrification), while
shifting its focus towards regional development. The UN agencies have supported the Maldives since the
mid-1970s in the areas of human and atoll/island development. Over the next several years, the UNDP's
assistance program will continue to promote income earning activities in the outer atolls, provide support
for capacity building in managing the development process at the atoll and island levels, and also help the
Government in the areas of environmental protection and the preservation of bio-diversity, with support
from GEF. Japan, the most important grant-aid bilateral donor, will continue supporting infrastructure
projects in the key areas such as outer islands electrification and infrastructure to protect large settlements
against natural disasters (e.g., seawalls).

V. 

THE BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. Lessons of Past IDA Support

49. 
The Bank's involvement in the Maldives has been limited and selective. From 1979 to the
present, the assistance program included seven IDA projects totaling about $65 million, four full CEMs,
one economic update, and an IDF grant to support capacity building for public enterprise monitoring and
reform. IDA's lending has so far focussed on the leading economic activities and related infrastructure,
as well as human resource development. The First, Second, and the Third Fisheries Projects--the third
closed in December 1997--contributed to increased fish production, exports, and the incomes of
fishermen in the outer atolls. IDA has supported the development of tourism through the MaIl Airport
Upgrading Project (US$7.5 million), which closed in 1994. The project addressed a critical infrastructure
bottleneck for further private investment in the tourism sector and assisted in the development of the
Airport Authority's management capability.

50. 
IDA has also supported human resource development in recent years. The FY89 Education and
Training Project ($8.2 million) helped in the expansion and improvement of secondary education, by
broadening access in the outer atolls, improving the planning and management capacity in the Ministry of
Education and providing overseas scholarships for critical skills training. The Second Education and
Training Project ($13.4 million), which closed in June 2000, built upon the improvements made under the
first project while striving towards quality enhancements.

12

51. 
Under the previous CAS of February 1995, IDA's strategy focused on: (i) sustaining strong
economic growth to raise incomes and further reduce poverty in the outer atolls; (ii) broadening access to
social services and improving quality; (iii) supporting private sector development; and (iv) strengthening
institutional capacity. The 1995 CAS called for one project every three or four years in support of these
development priorities. In line with these objectives, the Third Education and Training Project ($17.6
million), approved by the Board in March, 2000 and now under implementation, aims at: further
increasing secondary school access in the atolls; expanding the in-country teacher training capacity and
other skill training facilities; support updating/printing of primary and secondary curriculum and
educational materials; support the overseas post-secondary training scholarship program; and assist the
Ministry of Education with the strengthening of education planning and financing.

52. 
Portfolio management. The current portfolio includes one project--the Third Education and
Training Project cited above. Project implementation in the Maldives has been good, despite limited
government capacity. In particular, the Education and Training Projects (ETP) have been implemented
very well. The Second ETP met or exceeded all its objectives, and disbursements were in line with
appraisal estimates.
53. 
Analytical/advisory activities. Bank's economic work has provided periodic assessment of the
economy's performance and of the key development issues and challenges. The findings of various Bank
reports informed the Government, the Bank, civil society, and the other donors about these key issues,
providing cross-country lessons and options to address Maldives' development challenges. Sound
analysis, country examples, and policy dialogue have been instrumental in developing government
ownership for some of the recommendations made in the latest CEM, several of which--including some
pertaining to tourism, fisheries, land-tenure/property rights, and the business environment--are being
implemented.

Lessons. On the whole, IDA's support has been satisfactory in reaching the stated objectives, and
54. 
particularly successful in the education and skills training area. A Country Assistance Evaluation
prepared by OED in June 1999 reported that of the five projects completed then, all were rated
satisfactory upon completion. Three of four projects rated for sustainability were considered likely to be
sustainable and three of four were considered to have had a substantial institutional development impact.
Borrower and Bank performance were satisfactory for each project, with Bank performance in the Third
Fisheries Project rated unsatisfactory because of inadequate attention to structural issues in the fisheries
sector. In several respects the effectiveness of IDA's support could have been enhanced. These elements,
some of which were also highlighted in the OED's report (Box 1), are incorporated in this proposed
strategy. They include:

* 

increased analytical and advisory work, with a combination of more frequent, issue-specific, short
policy notes, and somewhat spaced out, more comprehensive, diagnostic economic work;
stronger coordination and collaboration with other donors;
* 
* more support for institutional capacity building;
* emphasis on the protection of Maldives' fragile environment; and
* carrying out a benchmark public expenditure review (to be followed subsequently by focussed
PER updates), and assessing the institutional capacity needs in public expenditure management.

13

Box 1: Bank Assistance to the Maldives: An OED Evaluation

In June 1999, the Operations Evaluations Department prepared a Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) of IDA's involvement
in the Maldives since the country became a member of the World Bank in 1978. The CAE stated that IDA played a positive,
albeit limited, role in the Maldives. It noted that the Bank made a significant contribution to manpower development through
two education projects and supported growth in tourism by helping upgrade the airport in Maid. And that the Bank's economic
reporns provided a valuable periodic extemal overview of the economy. The CAE also highlighted that in fisheries, although
three Bank projects helped modemize the fishing fleet and strengthen public sector capacity in collecting, processing, and
exporting fish, the Bank should have done more to help liberalize fisheries rather than strengthening the public sector presence.
The CAE also reported that IDA should have placed more emphasis on two key areas: (i) the protection of Maldives' fragile
environment, and (ii) private sector development.

.

The CAE recommended that the Bank, in collaboration with other donors, help the Govemment:
.
phase the public sector out of direct commercial activities, while strengthening the govemment's capacity to monitor
and regulate private activity;
establish an efficient targeted safety net to replace the current public sector involvement in commercial activities to
meet social transfer objectives;
prepare a public expenditure review to help improve revenues and expenditures as part of a strategy to deal with the
eventual phase-out of concessional extemal financing; and
integrate environmental policies into all aspects of economic development in the Maldives.

.

.

This CAS concurs with the above recommendations and incorporates these into the design of the CAS to enhance the relevance
and sustainability of IDA's support to the Maldives.

B. Preparations for the Bank's New Country Strategy

55. 
In view of the significant remaining development needs, the Bank responded to the Government's
recent request for expanded IDA assistance and stronger policy dialogue by indicating that the
formulation of IDA's future assistance would be done within the context of a new CAS. As an initial
step, after a five-year interval in economic work, an Economic Memorandum (CEM) was prepared in
1999. The CEM has facilitated some diagnostic work, deepened and broadened the policy dialogue
beyond education and fisheries, and helped in assessing some of the key development challenges/issues
and in identifying options for addressing these.

56. 
To determine the key elements of the Bank's assistance program, its strategic focus, as well as the
appropriate instruments, a consultative approach has been followed. Consultations were held with the
Government, the private sector, domestic and foreign NGOs, the UN agencies based in Male, and other
multilateral and bilateral agencies. A Bank team visited some islands in the North and in the South and
spent time with the island communities to learn about their specific issues and priority needs. The team
returned with the knowledge of their strong community organizations and the feedback that quality
education, health services, electricity, transportation, and environmental infrastructure (water and
sanitation) are high on their agenda, and that there are pressing needs in nutrition and population areas.

C. Proposed Strategy and Assistance Program

57. 
The Bank's proposed strategy for the Maldives for FY2001-FY2004 has been formulated taking
account of: (i) the country's development objectives/strategy and its request for IDA's support in
institutional strengthening and policy assessment; (ii) the consultations with the island communities, the
private sector, NGOs, and the donors that are active in the Maldives; (iii) the diagnostic work carried out
for the latest CEM; (iv) the results of a recently completed "client survey", which stress more frequent
contacts and analytical/advisory activities; and (v) the findings of the benchmark Vulnerability and
Poverty Assessment study (see Footnote 1, p. 2). It also reflects the Bank's comparative advantage and
complementarity with other donors.

58. 
The overarching objective of the Bank's strategy in the Maldives is the reduction of poverty and
regional disparities in access to social and infrastructure services. To advance this objective, the
strategy, in partnership with other donors, aims at supporting: (i) sustainable economic growth; (ii)

14

improvements in public sector management, including institutional capacity; and (iii) human
development.

Strategic Choice

59. 
The Bank supports the Government's national development objectives and strategy. It is a
product of in-country consultations, and addresses the development needs of the island communities. It is
comprehensive in its coverage of the key structural and social areas of development, with a focus on
sustaining broad-based growth and raising the standard of living, particularly in the outer atolls. The
strategy is being supported by a large number of donors. And the Bank will closely coordinate with the
key donors (the ADB, the UNDP, and Japan), so that our analyticaladvisory services and lending
program will complement other donors', strengthening the poverty focus of Maldives' development.

60. 
Up to now, the Bank has followed a selective, sector-specific, project-by-project approach to
lending and prepared one economic report every four-five years. For the future, the Bank has made a
strategic choice to increase the frequency and scope of our non-lending activities, with emphasis on
institutional capacity building and knowledge transfer, and gradually switch to a "programmatic
approach" in lending, to which the Government has agreed. The Bank considers that the Maldives'
development efforts would be supported more effectively by moving away from the sector specific,
project-by-project lending to a broad-based support by adopting program lending. The latter will place
IDA lending within a more comprehensive framework and thus facilitate emphasis on all the critical
dimensions of poverty reduction. That relevant framework will be provided by Maldives' Poverty
Reduction Strategy, which the Government will prepare with support from, among others, the ADB and
the Bank. This strategy, which considers public expenditures as a key instrument of economic policy and
of the development process in the Maldives, will enable a better alignment of the Bank's assistance
program with Maldives' key development priorities and with the roles of other donors. Accordingly, the
CAS instruments include: quick-turnaround policy notes for advice/dialogue and for inforrning the
Government about global experiences and best practices; one comprehensive economic report every 3-4
years; technical assistance for institutional capacity building; and lending, supported by close partnerships
and consultations with the major donors. Annex B9 summarizes the key elements of the CAS program in
matrix form.

61. 
IDA's selectivity in knowledge transfer and lending will be based on the Bank's comparative
advantage and track record in the Maldives. In the medium-term, IDA's analytical/advisory activities will
support efforts aimed at capacity building in selective sectors, strengthening public expenditure
management, and the development of Maldives' poverty reduction strategy. This focus will be
complementary to the ADB's planned poverty assessment work and capacity building in public sector
accounts and auditing. In lending, IDA's medium-term emphasis will be on human development, leaving
the other key areas, such as social and physical infrastructure (particularly in the two growth centers), to
the ADB and Japan.

62. 
Analytical and advisory activities. As noted earlier, the Maldives will benefit from the
increased frequency and range of our analytical and advisory services. Occasional policy notes are
desirable in that these would facilitate more regular interaction with the Government on current economic
policy matters and enable the Bank to respond to the Government's request 's for policy advice and best
practice examples from around the world. The Bank is planning to rely more on technical assistance,
supported by IDF grants, particularly for institutional capacity building in the Government.

63. 
A fisheries sector report will soon be completed. It assesses the sector's key constraints and
policy/regulatory and institutional issues, and makes specific recommendations to address these. The
findings and recommendations will be used in mapping out a long-term development strategy for
Maldives' fisheries sector. The latest CEM already provided an assessment of the tourism sector with
specific recommendations. Responding to a request, the Bank is currently helping the Government in the
development of an appropriate legal/regulatory framework for efficient land and housing markets.
15

64. 
Public expenditure review (PER) and other supportfor the programmatic approach. In FY01,
the Bank is planning to assist the Government in the preparation of a full PER, which has never been done
for the Maldives. This comprehensive, benchmark PER will serve several purposes. First, it will facilitate
an assessment of inter and intra-sectoral as well as geographic allocations of public expenditures,
focusing on their poverty orientation, rationale, prioritization, and quality. Second, it will help identify
under-funded areas that are critical for poverty reduction and facilitate more effective donor coordination.
Third, the findings of the PER will also serve as basis for determining the level of future IDA lending.
Finally, the PER work itself will serve as a capacity building exercise for the key ministries. Drawing on
the PER's findings with respect to the institutional aspects of budgetary processes as well as on the
findings of the recent CFAA, the Bank plans to support institutional capacity building in public
expenditure management through technical assistance (TA). In addition, the support for the formulation
of Maldives' Poverty Reduction Strategy, Bank's planned Country Procurement Assessment Report
(CPAR), as well as ADB's TA programs that are aimed at strengthening the Auditor General's Office and
the public accounts system will help prepare the Government for the adoption of a programmatic
approach.

65. 
IDA's TA activity would also include support to the Government in the development of an
appropriate legal/regulatory and institutional framework for efficient land-use, housing market
development, and urban development. We intend to continue facilitating the participation of Maldivians
from the Government as well as from the non-government sectors in the training workshops and seminars
organized by the World Bank Institute (WBI). We will also explore possibilities for supporting the
Maldives in the use of information technology and distance learning with the involvement of the WBI.

66. 
Lending. To help the Government prepare for the programmatic approach, it is proposed that we
gradually move away from the sector-specific, project approach to program lending. For this to happen,
sufficient time needs to be given to the Government to gain further institutional capacity in public
expenditure management with the help of the above cited programs. Accordingly, during this CAS period
(FYO1-FY04), the Bank envisages a project with IDA assistance of around $15-20 million in FY03, with
the sector focus (education or health/nutrition/population) to be determined on the basis of the Maldives'
PRSP and the findings of the forthcoming PER. This program will be based on a sector approach,
underpinned by an analysis of the development needs of the sector, particularly in the outer atolls, and the
role of other donors. The preparation of this operation will depend on continued satisfactory
macroeconomic management.

67. 
The proposed programmatic approach will be linked to the benchmark PER and its annual
updates, which will also serve as instruments of public policy. Bank's support and its level will be
dependent on the consistency of public expenditures with Maldives' development objectives of reducing
poverty and regional disparities and the support of other donors. Preparations for the program lending
support could start in FY03. The envisaged lending support would consist of a series of loans/annual
disbursements, each supporting the annual slice of a high impact, medium-term Government development
program that is also supported by a sound macroeconomic framework.

68. 
IFC and MIGA. The IFC committed its first loan in the Maldives in 1996 to support the
expansion of an existing resort in the South Arn Atoll. In the medium-term, IFC's strategy is to: (i)
support the modernization and expansion of tourism related projects, including the infrastructure and
support services; (ii) promote a deeper financial sector with more product diversification; and (iii) support
initiatives aimed at privatization and viable diversification of economic activities. In line with these areas
of focus, IFC is planning to expand its activities in the Maldives. To this end, it is considering
involvement in other resort expansion projects, and exploring opportunities in the resort air-transfers. IFC
is also supporting an initiative aimed at establishing a leasing company in the Maldives. (The Maldives is
not a member of MIGA).

69. 
Collaboration with the IMF. The Maldives is on an annual consultation cycle with the IMF.
The Bank and the IMF cooperate closely within the context of these consultations. The last Article IV
16

Consultation report was discussed by the IMF Board in November 2000. The International Monetary
Fund (IMF) has also extended technical assistance on monetary, fiscal, and exchange rate issues.

VI. MONITORING AND EVALUATION

70. With regard to macroeconomic monitoring and updating, IDA will coordinate with the IMF. For
the future, poverty/social monitoring will be another critical activity. The Bank plans to coordinate with
the Government and the UNDP to facilitate regularly repeated poverty/vulnerability surveys, building on
the baseline survey carried out for the recent Vulnerability and Poverty Assessment study. These follow-
up (smaller) surveys would permit monitoring of changes in poverty status and service delivery in the
atolls, and facilitate monitoring of poverty impacts of public expenditure programs and of "outcomes" of
our country assistance programs. The results will be useful for the Government, will support donor
coordination, inform our dialogue, and can be used to adjust assistance programs.

71. 
Over the next four years, the effectiveness of IDA's assistance to the Maldives will be monitored
and evaluated. The Bank has had a good track record of achievement in Maldives thus far. While IDA's
project assistance in sector specific development will be limited to human development, the Bank will
assist the Government to improve institutional capacity in public expenditure management through a
PER, continued policy dialogue, and technical assistance. The government will monitor overall economic
targets, and through collaboration with other development partners, the Bank will support the monitoring
process. In line with its focus--knowledge transfer through technical and advisory activities, and lending
for human development--the following indicators will be used to monitor the progress of the CAS.

Table 4: Proposed CAS Core Benchmarks

Country Performance 

2000 

Economic Growth Rate 
Transition rate from basic to 
secondary schools
Girls gross enrollment ratio in lower 
secondary schools
General Malnutrition (weight-for- 

age) \a

7.6% 
30% 

51% 

Years

2004/05

7.0% or higher
50%

71%

45% (in 1997/98) 

30% (by 2006)

\a This form of malnutrition refers to "weight-for-age", which is different from stunting as given by "height-for-age".

The Bank is planning to monitor CAS progress by conducting another client survey closer to the end of
the CAS period to seek grassroots evaluation of the perception of our assistance in the Maldives. In
addition to the overall targets, the portfolio performance will be monitored to ensure that the Bank
maintains one hundred percent realism and pro-activity targets and zero percent problem projects.

VII. RISKS

72. 

In the Maldives, the principal medium-term risk is external shocks, particularly in the form of

falling tuna prices and tourist arrivals. The key short-term cushion is an adequate reserve level, which the
Maldives has increased to a satisfactory amount in recent years. In addition, the Maldives could expect
continued concessional assistance at sufficiently high levels. In the long-term, these external risks will
remain, though product and market diversification both in tourism and fisheries would enhance Maldives'
structural cushion.

73. 
Internally, the limited institutional capacity presents a potential risk for the implementation of
IDA's program. However, IDA's emphasis on supporting capacity building in the public sector, together
with the complementary help by the other key donors, should help mitigate this risk. There is political

stability in the country, and the issues pertaining to regional disparities, particularly in the outer atolls,

17

would be addressed as the development programs are increasingly directed towards reducing these
disparities and supporting broad-based growth. The Government has increased social sector spending as
part of its development agenda. This will help manage internal risks as well.

James D. Wolfenshon
President

By:
Zhang Shengman

Washington DC
November 15, 2000

18

Development Partners-Assistance Programs, 2000-2004

Attachment I

Protecting the 
Environment 

Macroeconomic 
Framework and Public
Sector Management

Key Development Challenges

Human Development 

Infrastructure 

Business Environment 

Other Sectoral Issues

* 

AAA: Policy advice and 
dialogue 

* TA for the establishment of 
a leasing company 

* TA for the
establishment of an
appropriate legal and
regulatory framework
for promoting efficient
use of land and the
dcvelopment of
land/housing markets.
* Supporting growth in
tourism

* Support for the 
strengthening of 
legal/judicial environ. 

* 

Infomnation technology
development
* TA

Donors 

IDA 

IFC 

ADB 

Commitments 
(2000-2004) 

* Proposed lending of 
$32.6 million. $17.6 
mil. already committed 
for Education. 
* Support after FY03 to be 
determined by outcome 
of PER, PRSP, and role 
of other donors. 
* Possible lines of credit 
to established resorts for 
expansion

* Commitments:$21 
million over 3 years 
(2001-03) for projects 
* TA support 

IMF 

Japan 

IDB 

Kuwait 
Fund 

utN 
Agencies 

Policy advice on 
macroeconomic policy, 
management 
Grants for infrastructure. 
about $9.5 million 
annually 
Likely concessional project 
loans: $15 million over 3-4 
years
Likely concessional project 
loans: $15 million over 3-4 
years 
Grant-based development 
support 

AusAid 

Grants-based support for 
human development and 
environmental protection

____________ 

Denmark Grants for infrastructure: 
/Danida 
about $13 million for 4- 

______ 

__ 5years 

* Third Education 
and Training 
Project - $17.6 mil. 
* FY03 Project in 
Human 
Development - $15 
million. 
* Distance leaming 

* TA: Capacity building * 
for. public accounts 
system, good 
govemance 

Information 
technology 
development 
* Post-secondary 
education 
development
* TA

* Outer islands 
electrification 
* Regional development 
(North and South
Growth Centers)

Advice on fiscal,
monetary, and exchange
rate policies

* Environmental 
infrastructure: water- 
breaks/seawalls

* Human resource 
development 

* Outer islands
electrification

* 

Institute of Health 
Science Project

* Regional development

* Airport upgrading
* Regional port
development

* Capacity building for 
the management of 
development--at 
national and 
atoll/island levels 

* Management of 
coastal resources 
(UNDP) 
* Institutional/policy 
framework for 
environmental 
protection (UNDP) 
* Protected Areas 
System Project 

* Strengthening post- 
secondary training 
institutes (UNDP) 
* Health/nutrition/po
pulation programs
(UNFPA, UNICEF.
WHO)
* Tertiary Education
scholarships

* Outer atolls health

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~promotion 

project

* Fuah Mulaku Hlarbor 
Development Project.

* Promotion of income-
generating activities
(IJNDP)

* Ice plants (fisheries)

__I

Annex A2
Page I of 2

Maldives at a glance

Low=r-
South middle.

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Maldives 

Asia 

Income 

Development diamond'

1999

Population, mid-year (millions) 

0.28 

1,329 

2,094 

Life expectancy

GNP per capita (Atlas method, USS) 
GNP (Atlas method, USS billions) 
Average annual growth, 1993-99
Population (%) 
Labor force (%) 

1195- 
0-37 

440 
581 

1,200
2,513

2.8 
2.6 

1.9 
2.3 

1.1
1.2 

GNP 
per 
capita 

Gross
primary
enrollment

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1993-99) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to improved water source (% of populabon) 
Illiteracy (%6 of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population) 
Male 

43
28 
62 
27 
45 
96 
4 
98 

28 
62 
75 
51 
77 
46 
100 
110 

43
69
33
15 
86
16
114 
114 

Access to safe water

Maldives
Lower-middle-income group

., 

Female 

90 

116 

..

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENOS
1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

|

IEconomic ratlos-

GDP (USS billions) 

.. 

0.13 

0.38 

0.39 

|

Gross domestic investment/GDP 

-

Trade
Ta

Exports of goods and services/GDP 

.

349 

.

Gross domestic savings/GOP 
Gross national savings/GDP 
Current account balancelGDP 
Interest paymentslGDP 
Total debtVGDP 
Totaldebtservicelexports 
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

1. 16.4
12.9
8.3 
1.0 
52.6 
6.3 

., 

.
.. 
.. 

-6.8 
0.8 
49.7 
3.1 

-15.3
0.9 
51.6 
3.3

DomesticInvestment
Savings 

1.4 

Indebtedness

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 1999-03

(average annual growth)
GOP 
GNP per capita 

.. 
.. 

7.8 

9.1 

8.5 

7 3 

Maldives

6.1 

6,2 

5.0 

Lower-middle-income group

Exports of goods and services 

._._._._..

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)

(% of real GDP) 

19

Agriculture &Fisheries 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

17.6 
18.1 
6.4 
64.5 

17.4 
18.0 
6.6 
64.5 

s 

O

a

4

2

Private consumption 

.. 
.. 
.. 

53.4 

9. 4 

9s 

go 

97 

go 

99

General government consumption 

30.3 
88.9 

.GD1 

_GDP

Imports of goods and services 

.

..

197949 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and irnports (%)

(average annual growth)

Agriculture & Fisheries 
Industry 
Manufacturng 
Services 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

3.7 

6.2 
15.3 
9.2 
8.3 

7.5 I 2

11.7 
9.4 

8.4
10.5
8.9

8.8 

Private consumption 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 

a

94 

ss 

9s 97 9s 

99

Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

-

Exports 

-

mports

9.2 

9.8 

9.0 L

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.
Adjusted for remittance outflows

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Maldives

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)

Domestic prices

(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

20

27.8 

7.2 
10.7 

-1.4 
2.0 

3.0 
-4.0 

15
10

Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 

s

-s 
-10

4 

95 

97 

9

Current revenue 
Currentbudgetbalance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

51.9 
27.6 
-3.3 

43.5 
10.2 
-2.8 

46.8 
12.9 
-4.2

GDPdeflator 

0 CPI

TRADE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Export and import levels (USS mill)

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob) 
Marines 
Garments 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

64 
35 
10 

96 
56 
18 

92 
39 
25 

450,

400

1.300

25- 200 

*

113 

354 

402 

' 200 

l 

l 

_ 

150 03 

4 

90 

6 

79 

0

.. 

9 

50

0 

.. 

.. 

il 

0

Export price index (1995=100)
Import prce index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

.. 
.. 

Exports 

P Imports

.. 

..

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions) 
iSTS 
iggg 

'1998 

1999 

Current account balance to GDP I%)

(USS millions)

Exports of goods and non factor services 

42 

150 

425 

442 

0,

Imports of goods and non-factor services 
Resource balance 

47 
-5 

140 
10 

410 
15 

460 
-18 l

-

Net factor income 
Net current transfers 

-2 

-13 
13 

-28 
-12 

-28
-14 

-15

Current account balance 

11 

-26 

-60 

-20

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

-8 
-2 

46 
-20 

68 
-9 

-25

0 

-30

Memo:

Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, localJUS$) 

..

7.5 

9.0 

11.8 

11.8

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

I Campostlon of 1999 debt (US$ miII.)

13 
0 
0 

67 
0 
8 

188 
0 
44 

203
0
46 

G 27 

4

Total debt service 
IBRD 

1 
0 

10 
0 

14 
0 

15 
0

IDA 

0.0 

0.1 

0.4 

0.5 

F: 30

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity 

1 
3 
0 

16 
-1 
-4 

26 
9
7 

1 2

E: 27

0 

0 

0 

0 

D 73

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

A - IBRD 
3 - IDA 

E - Bilateral
D - Other multilateral F - Private
G - Short-term

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

1 0 
0.0 
1.0 
0.1 
0.9 

3.9 
0.1 
3.8 
0.3 
3.5 

3.2 
0.2 
3.0
0.3
2.7

C -IMF 

Development Economics 

11/15/00

CAS Annex B2 - Maldives
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As Of Date 10/1712000

Anmex B2
Page I of I

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment

Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

Portfolio Management

CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$'000) \h 
Average Supervision (US$'000/project) 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

1 
3.2 
0 
0 

0 

0 
39.3 

No 
98.3 
32.8 

1 
4.2 
0 
0 

0 

0 
74.3 

No 
82.8 
41.4 

1 
0.3 
0 
0 

0 

0 
91.2 

No 
56.7 
28.3 

1
0.6
0
0
0
0
13.6

No
64.2
35.6

Memorandum Item 
Proj. Eval. by OED by Number \g 
Proj. Eval. by OED by Amt. (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt. 

Since FY80 Last Five FYs

4 
30.7 
0 
0 

3
25.7
0
0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (ARPP) (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
f. Includes $28,000 for an ICR completion.
g. Independent OED evaluations.
h. Includes supervision costs on projects not included in ARPP project count in Line 1 above.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, and
supervision, which include all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Maldives

Maldives - IFC and MIGA Program, FY98-01

Category 

IFC approvals (US$m) a 

Sector (%)

Hotels & Tourism 

TOTAL 

Investment instrument (%)
Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity b 
Other 

TOTAL 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 
MIGA commitments (US$m) 

1998 

0.00 

0.00 

100.00 

100.00 

100.00 
0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

100.00 

0.00 
0.00 

Past
1999 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

2000 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

2001

0.00

0.00

0.00

100.00 

100.00 

100.00

0.00 
0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 
0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00
0.00

0.00

0.00

100.00 

100.00 

100.00

0.00 
0.00 

0.00 
0.00 

0.00
0.00

aExcludes AEF projects.
bIncludes quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B3 - Bank Group Program Summary - Maldives

As Of Date 10/17/2000
Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a

FY 

Implementation ProjeCtb 

US$(M) Strategic Rewards bImplementation 
(HIMIL) 
Risks (HIMIL)

b

2003 

Human Development 

15.0 

H 

L

Subtotal 

15.0

Total, FY 2001 - 2004 

15.0

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Maldives
As Of Date 10/1712000

Product 

Completion FY Cost (US$000) 

Audience a 

Objective

Recent completions
Technical Assistance (Grant Supported) 

Country Economic Memorandum 

Country Client Survey 

Underway
Fisheries Assessment Study 

Country Assistance Strategy 

FY98 

FY99 

FY00 

FYOI 

FYOI 

Country Financial Accountability Assessment FYOI 

Planned
Public Expenditure Review 

FYO1 

Land-Use/Housing Sector Reform 

FYO1/02 

PRSP Support 

Public Expenditure Management 

Policy Note(s) 

FY02 

FY02 

FY02 

Country Procurement Assessment Report 

FY03 

Economic Report 

Policy Note 

PER Update 

Policy Note(s) 

FY03 

FY03 

FY04 

FY04 

243 

147 

15 

40 

130 

25 

148 

25 

100 

35 

75 

35 

100 

50 

70 

75 

a. Government, Donor, Bank, Public dissemination.
b. KG = Knowledge generation, PD = Public debate, PS = Problem-solving.

Govt./Bank/Donor 

Govt./Public/Bank 

KG/PS

KG/PS

Govt./Public/Bank /Donor 

KG

Govt./Public/Bank /Donor 

KG/PS

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor 

KG/PS

Govt./Public/Bank /Donor 

KG/PS

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor 

KG/PS

Govt./ Donor/Bank 

KG/PS

Govt./Public/Bank /Donor 

KG/PS/PD

Govt./Bank/Donor 

KG/PS/PD

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor 

KG/PS

Govt./Bank/Donor 

KG/PS

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor 

KG/PS

Govt./Public/Bank/Donor 

KG/PS

Govt./Public/Bank /Donor 

KG/PS

Govt./Public/Bank /Donor 

KG/PS

Annex B5
Page I of I

Maldives Social Indicators

Latest Single Year 

Same regionlincome group

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 

Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNP per capita (US$)--1999 
Consumerpnceindex(1995=100) 

Food price index (1995=100)

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male
Female
Access to safe water

(% of population)
Total 

Urban 
Rural 

Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)-general mal. 
Life expectancy at birth

(years)
Total 

Male 
Female 

Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59) 

Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 

Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 

1977 

1998 

0.14 
3.2 

.. 
.. 

0.3 
2.8 

.. 
.. 

South Lower-middle-
Asia 
income

1,281.3 
1.5 

27.0 
3.5 

2,282.9
0.9

42.4
2.2

.. 
.. 

1,195 
112 

380 
117 

1,230
116

.. 
.. 
.. 

5.1 
9.7 
1.4

27 

98 

7 

.. 
.

96 

.
.

45 

62 

.. 
.. 

27 
39 
96

.. 
.. 

229

47 

.. 
.. 

121 

.. 

82 

.. 
.. 

0.8 
3.0 

81 

84
80

81 
87 
53 

62 

62 
63 

77 
100 

219 
212 

2.6
5.1

99

78

93
93
17

69

67
71

36
44

200
142

Annex B6
Page I of 1

Maldives: Macro Economic Indicators

Actuals 

...................... Projections .

1993 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 
1998 
1999 
Annual percentage change
8.5 
9.1 
9.1 
7.6 
-1.4 
3 0 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004

Real GDP growth 
Consumer prices 

6.2 
201 

6.6 
3 4 

7 2 
5 5 

7 9 
6 2 

7.6 
3 0 

7 6 
3.0 

7.0 
3 0 

7.0 
3.0 

7.0
3.0

Percent of GDP

Central government budget (percent of GDP)
Revenue and grants 
Expenditure & net lending 
Overall balance (excluding grants) 
Overall balance 

386 
55.9 
-23.8 
-17.4 

41 0 
48.4 
-13.2 
-7.4 

44.1 
53.5 
-15.6 
-9.4 

44.2 
47.9 
-10.6 
-3.8 

45 7 
47.8 
-6.3 
-2.0 

43 5 
46 2 
-6.5 
-2.8 

46.8 
51.0 
-7.5 
-4.2 

46.0 
49.8 
-7.2 
-3.9 

45.4 
48.9 
-6.5 
-3.5 

45.2 
47.8 
-5.2 
-2.6 

451 
47 0 
4.3 
-1.9 

44.6
46.5
-4.0
-1.9

Financing 
Foreign, net 
Domestic, net 

17.4 
1.6 
15.8 

7 4 
3.6 
3.8 

9.4 
9.3 
0.1 

3.8 
4.6 
-0.8 

2.0 
4.3 
-2.3 

2.8 
2.9 
-0.1 

4.2 
0.9 
3.3 

3.9 
2.6 
1.3 

3.5 
2.1 
1.4 

2.6 
2.1 
0.5 

1.9 
1 5 
0.4 

1.9
1.5
0.4

Twelve-month percent change at year-end

Money and credit
Total domestic credit 
Credit to the private sector (excluding public
enterprise) 
Broad money 
Velocity (ratio of GDP to broad money) 

51 5 

14.1 

63 

-24 

8.8 

18.6 

8.0 

11.3 

12.2 

10.8 

9.4 

8.1

55.2 
36.3 
2.3 

30.1 
24.2 
2.2 

26.4 
15.6 
2.1 

9.5 
26.0 
1.9 

38.9 
23.1 
1.7 

257 
228 
1 6 

4.0 
3.6 
1.6

4.6 
2.7 

19.8 
14.0 

187 
12.3 

15.7 
11.3 

13.2
9.4

In million US$

Balance of payments (million US$)
Exports, f o.b. 
Imports, fo.b 
Trade balance 
Current account 
(In percent of GDP) 
Overall balance 
Reserves (end of year)
Gross official reserves 
(In months of imports) 

52 7 
-177.8 
-125.1 
-53.8 
-24.8% 
-15 9 

75 4 
-195.1 
-119.6 
-11.1 
-4.6% 
8.1 

85.0 
-235 8 
-150.8 
-18 2 
-6.7% 
15 3 

79.9 
-265.5 
-185.6 
-7.4 
-2.5% 
43.7 

92.5 
-307.0 
-214.4 
-36.5 
-10.8% 
27.4 

95.6 
-311.5 
-215.9 
-25.6 
-6 8% 
29.1 

88.6 
-354.1 
-265 5 
-60.0 
-15.3% 
-7.3 

88.2 
-372.0 
-283.8 
-57.4 
-13.2% 
-16.1 

90.7 
-386.8 
-296.2 
42.8 
-8.9% 
-2.7 

96.8 
-413.9 
-317.1 
-38.6 
-7.3% 
7.7 

103.4 
-447.0 
-343.7 
-38.1 
-6.5% 
5.8 

110.5
-482.8
-372.3
-37.4
-5.8%
7.1

26.5 
1.8 

32.0 
2.0 

49.3 
2.5 

77.6 
3.5 

99.7 
3.9 

119.9 
46 

128.5 
4.4 

124.4 
4.0 

121.7 
3.8 

129.4 
3.8 

135.2 
3.6 

142.3
3.5

Total external debt (end ofyear stock) 
(In percent ofGDP) 
Debt service (percent of exports of goods and
nonfactor services) 

130.7 
60.2 

142.0 
590 

172.2 
63.4 

177.2 
58.8 

169.1 
49.9 

187.7 
49.8 

202.8 
51.6 

236.6 
54.3 

261.7 
54.2 

290.5 
54.6 

317.0 
54.1 

344.0
53.2

3.9 

3.5 

3.4 

3.2 

6.9 

3.2 

3.4 

3 7 

4.0 

4.1 

4.1 

4.1

Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (millions ofrufiyaa) 
Nominal GDP (millions of USS) 

2,380 
217.3 

2,790 
240.8 

3,195 
271.5 

3,550 
301.6 

3,990 
339.0 

4,440 
377.2 

4,625 
392.9 

5,125 
435.4 

5,680 
482.6 

6,260 
531.8 

6,899 
586.2 

7,603
646.0

Includes re-e.xports
Source: Data provided by the Maldivian authorities, and IMF staff estrnsates andprojection

Annex B7
Page I of 1

Maldives - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 
1995 

Estimate 
1998 

Projected
2000 
2001 

Indicator 

1994 

1996 

1997 

1999 

2002

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

142 

172 

177 

169 

188 

203 

237 

262 

291

Net disbursements (USSm)a 

8 

25 

17 

13 

15 

6 

11 

14 

11

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)a

10 

11 

12 

28 

14 

15 

18 

20 

23

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

51.3 
59.0 
3.4 
79.6 

53.4 
63.4 
3.3 
81.6 

47.3 
58.8 
3.1 
81.3 

41.2 
49.9 
6.8 
84.4 

43.3 
49.8 
3.1 
79.6 

44.9 
51.6 
3.3 

49.0 
54.3 
3.6 

50.4 
54.3 
3.9 

51.6
54.7
4.1

..

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/publicDS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 

0 
23.7 

0 
22.6 

0 
23.3 

0 
10.0 

0 
22.9 

0 

0 

0 

0

..

DS (%)

IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)c 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)c 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

0 
32 

0 
36.1 

0 
37.3 

0 
39.0 

0 
44.1 

0 
45.6 

0 
44.6 

0 
46.9 

0
48.5

IFC (US$m)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity /d 

0 
0 

0 
0 

6.0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0
0

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Includes present value of guarantees.
d. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Page 1 of2

CAS Annex B8 - Maldives
Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
As Of Date 1011712000

Closed Projects = 6

Active Proiects 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating bl 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/

Project ID Project Name 

Development 

Obiectives 

Implementation Fiscal Year 

Progiress

P055944 

III EDUC & TRAIN. 

S 

S 

2000 

IBRD 

0 

IDA 

17.6 

GE Cancel. Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Rev'd

0 

0 

14.4 

-2.3 

0

Total Disbursed (IBRD and IDA): 
of which has been repaid: 
Total now held by IBRD and IDA: 
Amount sold: 
of which repaid: 
Total Undisbursed: 

Active Loans 
2.3 
0.0 
17.6 
0.0 
0.0 
14.2 

Closed Loans 
46.7 
1.2 
43.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

Total
49.0
1.2
61.1
0.0
0.0
14.2

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Maldives

Maldives
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 8/31/00
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1996 Villa Shipping 

Total Portfolio: 

Loan 
3.6 

3.6 

Equity 
0 

Quasi 
0 

Partic 
0 

0 

0 

0 

Loan 
3.6 

3.6 

Equity 
0 

Quasi 
0 

Partic
0

0 

0 

0

Approvals Pending Commitment

Loan 
0 

Equity 
0 

Quasi 
0 

Partic
0

Maldives-Country 

Program 

Matrix 

(FYOI-FY04)

Diagnosis 

Overall Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

Bank Group's assistance 

Other donors

Coral reefs and coasts are under 
increasing stress from coral/sand 
mining, coastal erosion, increasing 
volume of untreated sewage and solid 
waste disposal. 

I. Protecting 
Develop community-based solutions for 
effective coastal resource management; 
address water-sewerage and solid waste 
disposal problems of the islands: 
strengthen institutional capacity to
monitor and enforce environmental
guidelines.

the Environment
* Access to environmentally sound sanitation 
and safe drinking water increased 
Improved solid waste disposal. 

* 

* AAA: policy dialogue 
* AAA: Fisheries Sector 
Development Assessment Study
(to be finalized in FY01 )

UNDP, GEF.
AusAid

Development 

Objectives_

Protecting Maldives' 
invaluable 
environment, 
particularly coral reefs 
and coasts, which are 
the fragile basis of the 
country's success as a 
vacation resort and the
home of the marine life
that supports its

fisheies. 

Annex B9
Page I of 3

Strengthen public 
sector management and 
goverimance to enhance * 
development impact of 
public sector 
expenditure programs, 
and facilitate further 
private sector 
development. 

* 

* 

IL. Strengthening Macroeconomic 
Framework 
and Public Sector Management
* Narrow tax base; vulnerability 
* Develop and implemnent a simple, 
* 
Introduce a three-year rolling public 
to revenue falls. 
basic tax system to broaden the tax 
expenditure program within the context of a 
Institutional capacity limitatiois 
base beyond customs duties and the 
medium-term budgetary framework, 
in the development and 
tourism tax. 
preferably formulated as a well-prioritized 
implementation of sectoral 
Strengthen the institutional capacity 
and futly funded '-core" expenditure 
development programs, and in 
of the key ministries to formulate 
program. 
expenditure management. 
sectoral strategies and to prepare 
* Develop medium and long-term strategies 
State-owned enterprises (SOEs) 
(identify, appraise, and prioritize) 
for the key sectors and formulate consistent, * 
dominate many commercial 
expenditure programs in line with 
high impact sectoral public expeniditure 
activities, some benefiting from 
the national development priorities, 
programs. 
monopolistic privileges and 
(in view of the scarcity of qualified 
* Develop well prioritized public expenditure 
others showing 
staff with expertise, it might be 
programs that are consistent with sectoral 
strategies and with the objective of reducing 
inefficiencies/losses, thus 
prudent to develop a central 
burdening the economy and the 
"projects development unit"). 
poverty and regional disparities; reverse the 
budget. 
Eliminate SOE monopolies in 
upward trend ii the general services outlays 
comniercial activities, and gradually 
to restraint the growth of low priority
withdraw SOE involvement from 
current expenditures and allocate sufficient
activities that can be left to the 
resources for social sector and infrastructure
private sector. 
recurrent expenditures.
Strengthen the public accounts
system. 
* Continue efforts aimed at 
institutional capacity building at the 
key agencies such as the Audit 
Office, Maldives Monetary 
Authority, the Statistics Section of 
the Ministry of Planning and 
National Development. 

* 

* 

* 

* 

Increased emphasis on atolls/islands 
development to reduce poverty and 
disparities in access to social services and 
infrastructure in the outer atolls; 
strengthened micro-credit programs for 
incomc generating activities. 
Improvements in socialleconomic indicators

* 

Promote broadly- 
shared growth: reduce 
income poverty and 
regional disparities in 
access to social and 
physical infrastructure 

* Higher incidence of income 
poverty and disparities in access to 
social services and infrastructure in 
the outer atolls. 

ADB, IMF.
UNDP)

* AAA: Public Expenditure 
Review (PER) 
* AAAA: support the Govemment.
in coordination with ADB, in the
preparation of Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper
(PRSP)
TA (IDF supported): technical
assistance for strengthening
institutional capacity in public
expenditure managemenit.
* AAA Fisheries Sector
Development Assessment Study
* AAA: policy dialogue in
collaboration with IMF.

Support the Government, jointly
with UTNDP and other donors, in
carrying out regular (smaller)
household surveys, using the
1997/98 survey as a benchmark,
with a view to using the
information for poverty 
monitoring and public 
expenditure impact assessment. 

ADB, IDB,
UNDP, IFAD,
Japait, Kuwait
Fund

* 

LEN: Program lending to be
initiated in FY04

Diagnosis 

Overall Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

Bank Group's assistance 

Other donors

Annex B9
Page 2 of 3

(e.g., per capita average incomes, access to
secondary education; reduction malnutrition
among children aged 1-5).

Development 
Objectives
by pursuing broad- 
based growth through 
intensified efforts 
aimed at atoll/island
development.

III. Strengthenin Human Development

By 2005 increase transition from primary to 
secondary school from 30% to 50%; 
provide access to secondary school in 4 
additional atolls; double enrolment at lower 
secondary and triple enrollment at upper 
secondary school; increase supply of
trained/skilled manpower through in-
country and intemational programs.

* AAA: policy dialogue. 

* 

LEN: Third Education and 
Training Project (approved by
the Board on March 16, 2000).

ADB, IDB,
AusAid, DFID
(UK)

* Universalize primary education by 
2000; expand access to lower and 
upper secondary level education; 
enhance the relevance of education; 
increase the supply of skilled 
manpower; continue supporting 
tertiary level education/training 
abroad through the scholarship 
program; enhance teacher training;
improve curriculum and assessment
practices; strengthen the post-
secondary training/vocational
institutes.

Improve access, particularly for 
people living in the atolls, to high 
quality, publicly provided basic 
health care services, including 
interventions aimed at reducing the 
burden of communicable diseases, 
decreasing malnutrition, and 
providing complete reproductive 
health services (including family 
planning). 

a 

* 

* 

A. Education. Improve * 
the quality of and 
access to education, 
particularly in the outer 
atolls; enhance skill 
levels of Maldivians. 

Low quality and limited access 
to secondary school, particularly 
in the outer atolls; inadequate 
resources for education in the 
atolls/islands; high cost of 
education services; low leaming 
attainment and achievement 
levels; low curricular relevance 
and inadequate assessment 
practices. 

B. Health nutrition 

and povulation. 

Improve the coverage, 
quality, effectiveness, 
efficiency, and 
sustainability of health, 
nutrition and 
population services. 

* A high under 5 mortality rate for 
a country with its level of 
development; stubbomly high 
fertility rates due to low 
contraceptive prevalence; and 
high levels of malnutrition 
among children. 

Improve environment 
for private sector 
development; promote 
the development of 
small and medium 
enterprises. 

Deepen and strengthen 
the financial sector. 

* 

Institutional, policy-induced 
weaknesses in the business 
environment. 

* A banking sector that is 
inadequate for meeting the 
growing financial needs of the 
economy. 

* 

* 

* 

* 

AAA: policy dialogue. 
* AAA: a benchmark PER, and 
annual PER updates. 

* 

LEN: a stand-alone project in
FY03 to be followed by program
lending.

UNDP, WHO,
UNICEF,
UNFPA,
AusAID

By 2006 reduce under 5 mortality rates to 
25 per 1.000 live births: increase modem 
contraception prevalence rate to 40%; and 
reduce severe malnutrition rate (weight for
age) from 45% to 30%/6. 
By 2006 increase immunization and 
prcnatal care coverage to 90% overall, and 
at least 85% in the atolls; introduce new
vaccines and ensure that 80% of children
live in areas with active nutrition programs;
access to, and knowledge of, modem
contraceptive methods become universal.

IV. Improving Business Environment

Improve the commercial 
legal/regulatory environment and 
strengthen the judicial system; 
reform the SOE sector. 

Foster the development of private 
banks; develop sources of long-term
financing; encourage income earning
activities and the development of
small enterprises.

* Attract intemationally reputable private 
banks; promote good accounting and 
auditing practices. 
Remove the monopoly privileges of SOEs; 
establish a regulatory agency. 
Strengthen micro-finance schemes. 

* 

* 

* 

* AAA: policy dialogue/policy 
notes.
IFC: ongoing advisory
consultations for the
establishment of a leasing
company.

ADB, IMF

Development 
Objectives

Ensure sustainable 
growth of tourism and 
fisheries. 

Diagnosis 

Overall Strategy/Actions 

Progress Indicators 

Bank Group's assistance 

Other donors

Annex B9
Page 3 of 3

V. Key Sectoral Issues and Priorities

* 

Scope for enhancing the private 
sector's participation in the 
formulation of tourism sector 
development strategy. 
* 
Limited iong-term finance. 
* MIFCO's (fisheries sector SOE) 
monopoly over processing and 
export of canned and frozen fish 
is a constraint on the pace of 
private sector expansion and 
diversification in the sector. 
* Over-fishing of some recf 
fisheries.

* 

* Develop conditions and suitable 
institutions for long-term finance. 
Remove MIFCO's monopolies and 
improve its efficiency and financial 
performance, while accepting the 
privatization of its commercial 
activities as a strategic objective. 
* Remove distortionary 
(administratively fixed) tuna
procurement pricing policy.
* Develop a suitable fisheries resource
management regime(FRMR).

* 

* 
Increased private sector activity in fisheries. * AAA: Policy dialogue 
* Gradual introduction of a broad FRMR and 
* 
IFC: ongoing advisory 
of a community-based reef fisheries 
consultations for the
establishment of a leasing
management policy. 
company; lending to resort
developers.
* AAA: Fisheries Sector
Development Assessment Study

Elimination of MIFCO's monopoly over 
processing and export of canned and frozen 
tuna 

ADB, IMF,
UNDP

Develop an efficient 
land tenure system, 
housing 
market/delivery, 
housing finance, and 
an urban development 
policy; clarify property 
and access rights. 

* Absence of clearly defined 
property/access rights in the case 
of land; severe housing problem 
in Male and on a few other 
islands. 

* 

Establish a legal/regulatory 
framework for the development of 
an efficient land tenure system, with 
a view to promoting efficient use of 
land and the development of housing 
and housing finance markets. 

* 

TA-- technical assistance for:
developing appropriate
legal/regulatory framework for
land use and housing;
strengthening institutional
capacity in the public sector to
deal with the housing/urban
development issues and develop
shelter strategy.

Annex B IO
Page 1 of I

Maldives - CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
performance a 

Major issue' 

Country 

Bank 

priorityC 

priorityc 

Reconciliation
of country and
Bank priorities d

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

Good 
Fair 
Fair 
Good 

Good 
Fair 
Poor 

Fair 
Good 
Fair 

Outer Atolls poverty 
SOE 
Resource Mobilization 
Income earning opportunities 

Quality access in the Atolls 
Malnutrition, high population 
Inadequate social security system 

Access to social and infra. services 
Swage and solid waste disposal 
Higher cost of social services 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Poor 
Private sector 
Good 

Energy & mining 

Infrastructure 

--- 

Good 

Rudimentary financial sector 
Business environment 

--- 

Expanding infrastructure costly 

H 
M 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 

H 
M 
H 

H 
H 

-----

M 

H 
H 
H 
H 

H 
H 
L 

H 
H 
H 

H 
H 

L 

--
--
--
--

--
--

Other donors cover

--

Ongoing dialogue

--

--
--

Other donor cover

a. Use "excellent," "good," 'fair," or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;' for education, "female secondary completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use 'low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

