Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ReportNo.: 

20158 BHU

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

TO THE

EXECIUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

FOR

BHUTAN

FEBRUARY 22, 2000

Bhutan Country Unit
South Asia Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Currency Unit 
US$1 

= 

Bhutan Ngultrum (Nu)
= Nu 43.40 (February 22, 2000)

FISCAL YEAR (FY)

July I -June 30

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

- Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
-
Foreign Direct Investment
- Gross Domestic Product
- Global Environment Fund
- Gross National Product
- Human Immune Virus
-
Intemational Finance Corporation
-
International Monetary Fund
-
Special Drawing Rights
- United Nations Development Program
- United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
- United Nations Children's Fund

AIDS 
FDI 
GDP 
GEF 
GNP 
HIV 
IFC 

IMF 

SDR 
UNDP 
UJNHCR 
UNICEF 

Vice President 
Country Director 
Team Leader 

Mieko Nishimizu
John W. Wall
Peter Nicholas

BHUTAN
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Table of Contents

Page No.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..........................................

A. POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL CONTEXT ..........................................

1

Dedicated, Professional Political Leadership .....................................................................l
Rapid, Resource-led Growth ....................................................................
2
Benign External Environment .....................................................................
2
Strong Social Development, but Rising Challenges .....................................................................3

B. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND KEY CHALLENGES ............................5

Resource-based Growth .....................................................................
5
Heavy Reliance on Foreign Assistance .....................................................................
6
Sound Public Expenditure Management .....................................................................
6
Dutch Disease, the Private Sector, and Employment .....................................................................6
N'eed for Trade Diversification .................................................................... 
7
Continuing Importance of Agriculture and Rural Development ....................................................8

C. BIIUTAN'S VISION FOR SOCIAL TRANSFORMATION.............................................8

Economic Reforms for Private Sector-led Growth ................................................................. 10
Strengthening Infrastructure ................................................................. 
11
Defining a Future for Agriculture and Forests .................................................................. 
11
Balancing Development: Human Development, the Environment, and Culture ........... 
............... 12

D. IDA's ROLE IN BHUTAN'S DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK............................... 

Past IDA Support .................................................................... 
IDA's Assistance Strategy ..................................................................... 

13

13
14

E. BIHUTAN'S DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIPS ..................................................... ........... 18

TABLES

Table 1: Bhutan: Development Indicators ..................................................................... 
4
Table 2: Proposed IDA Analytical and Advisory Assistance and Lending to Bhutan, FYOO-02 ...... 14
Table 3: Bhutan's Selected Development Priorities to be Assisted by IDA ...................................... 16
Table 4: Bhutan's Comprehensive Framework for Ongoing Development Assistance .................... 19

BOXES

Box 1: Bhutan's Vision of Inclusion ...................................................
3
Box 2: Bhutan: Hydroelectric Power Projects ........... 
........................................
S5
Box 3: Bhutan 2020 Vision ...................................................
9
Box 4: Bhutan 2020 and the Comprehensive Development Framework ......................................... 15

FIGURES

Figure 1: Bhutan: Trends in Sectoral Shares of GDP ....................................................

2

ANNEXES

Annex Al 
Annex BI 
Annex B2 
Annex B3 
Annex B4 
Annex B5 
Annex B6 
Annex B7 
Annex B8 
Annex B9 

Bhutan's Development Priorities
Bhutan at a Glance
Bhutan: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bhutan: Bank Group Program Summary, FY2000-2002
Bhutan: Summary of Nonlending Services
Bhutan: Social Indicators
Bhutan: Key Economic Indicators
Bhutan: Key Exposure Indicators
Status of Bank Group Operations in Bhutan
Bhutan: CAS Summary of Development Priorities

MAP No. IBRD 30467

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION'S

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR BHUTAN

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

IDA'S MISSION

1. 
ID)A 's mission is to help Bhutan manage its considerable natural, institutional, cultural,
and envitonmental assets in ways that can translate economic growth into rapid and inclusive
social transformation and improvements in living standards. This is consistent with Bhutan's

distinctive vision of its long-term development as it enters the new millennium. This is also a
highly selective mission, in order to fit IDA's continuing role as one of Bhutan's smallest
foreign aid donors. IDA's comparative advantage-in 
transferring knowledge and ideas to
Bhutan rather than finance-is consistent with our small role in Bhutan, and complements
Bhutan's development framework for donor coordination. Emphasizing IDA's comparative
advantage in analytical and advisory work-as opposed to lending-also makes sense in terms
of gradually filling IDA's information and knowledge gaps resulting from our very limited past
involvemient in Bhutan. The government fully supports IDA's mission.

DEVELO]PMENT CHALLENGES

2. 
This mission is set against Bhutan's unique characteristics: a small Himalayan nation of
about 760,000 people with a 1998 GNP per capita of US $480; close political and trade
relationships with India going back 40 years; large, environmentally benign hydropower assets
that are fueling rapid GDP growth through electricity exports and energy-intensive industries
such as cement, calcium carbide, and forestry; a comprehensive, well-articulated national vision
for development that emphasizes the preservation of Bhutan's cultural and environmental
heritage and rising investments in its people; girls accounting for 45 percent of primary school
students and social indicators that are improving rapidly; fiscal prudence and a strong balance of
payments position; sound public institutions; a participatory style of governance; and a
committed administration.

3. 
But it is also set against Bhutan's difficult terrain and still weak infrastructure, which puts
more than half its population at least half a day's walk from the nearest motor road; the heavy
reliance on foreign aid and a dominant, single-commodity export; a shallow financial sector that
does not yet fully support private sector development; the difficulty of creating private sector
employment opportunities, both in rural Bhutan, where much of the population lives, and in
rapidly growing cities, where increasingly educated Bhutanese are entering the labor force; the
highest population growth rate in South Asia; social tensions arising out of the presence of a
Nepali-speaking minority in the south; and economic data deficiencies that may be constraining
policy design even though the policymaking process remains highly participatory.

BHUTAN'S DISTINCTIVE VISION OF DEVELOPMENT

4. 
Bhutan has adopted a balanced approach to development, seeking to calibrate
development goals to its ability and readiness to absorb change without creating social alienation
or excessive economic inequality. Human development, a living culture and heritage, balanced
and equitable development, good governance, and environmental conservation remain the

cornerstones of its recently articulated development vision.1 This vision reflects the notion of
development as social transformation and, in its conception, implementation, and management of
donor partnerships, precedes and is fully consistent with the Comprehensive Development
Framework. The government has articulated desirable long-term outcomes and detailed
milestones to measure progress in each development area (Annex Al). The government is
emphasizing its development and poverty reduction strategy of larger investments in the social
sectors, a better enabling environment for private sector development, diversification of exports
and of the productive base, and improvements in rural infrastructure. The regular and extensive
field visits by officials at all levels, combined with the small population size (fewer than 100,000
households), means that the government has a sophisticated and detailed knowledge of
conditions and needs across the whole country.

BHUTAN'S DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIPS

5. 
Bhutan differs from most other aid-dependent countries in that the government has a very
strong sense of vision and development priorities-and of the comparative advantage of various
donors-and deternines on this basis where technical and financial assistance is most needed,
and which donor can best provide it. The admirably small size of the government means,
however, that donor missions can impose a high cost on scarce government officials' time.
Bhutan therefore prefers to limit the number of donors overall, and in any particular sector, in
order to keep coordination costs low. This approach is fully consistent with the approach
espoused by the Comprehensive Development Framework. India is the largest donor. Other
important donors include Austria, Denmark, Japan, Netherlands, Switzerland, ADB, European
Union, UNDP, and UNICEF. In forestry and education, IDA and Switzerland have been acting
effectively as a single donor. The Government, U7NDP, and IDA jointly chair the donor Round
Table Meetings, the last one in Geneva in 1997. UNDP holds sector-oriented coordination
meetings frequently among donors resident in Thimphu, with participation from the non-resident
multilateral institutions, as possible.

IDA's ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

6. 
IDA's strategic goal is to assist Bhutan-in ways that are driven by Bhutan and in full
partnership with other donors-in 
realizing its development vision. Bhutan' s favorable medium-
term growth prospects and its comfortable macroeconomic balances, based on its natural
resource endowments and substantial grant and concessional aid inflows, create ideal conditions
for concerted action to meet its development challenges. Its development vision provides a well-
articulated agenda for action that is fully owned by Bhutan.

7. 
The last country assistance strategy was discussed with the Board in July 1993 and
emphasized a limited and highly selective role for IDA focusing on economic policy advice,
natural resource management, and primary education. Bhutan has drawn relatively little on IDA
financing in the past, preferring to use grant aid from bilateral donors and the UN before using
multilateral assistance. This selective role will continue, but will build much more strategically
on IDA's comparative advantage in Bhutan in transferring knowledge and ideas rather than
finance. As a result of our limited past involvement, there are a number of gaps in our
knowledge base in areas such as poverty analysis and public expenditures-the new emphasis on
working with the government on analytical and advisory services will help fill these gaps over
the next few years and lead to shared learning valuable both to Bhutan and IDA.

' Bhutan 2020: A Vision for Peace, Prosperity, and Happiness, Royal Government of Bhutan, Thimphu: 1999.

-

iii -

8. 
In line with this comparative advantage in Bhutan, the locus of IDA's assistance will
therefore increasingly be to place its knowledge resources at the disposal of the government
without t-ying them to IDA credits. The government has already requested such knowledge-
based consultations on macroeconomic policy, a financial sector strategy, long-term health and
education strategies, and accounting and auditing standards. IDA expects to assist with the
generation and analysis of poverty data. Other areas in which IDA may assist with knowledge
transfers include private sector development, foreign direct investment, trade and investment
reform, public expenditures, employment analysis, school curriculums, rural road capacity
development, and policy frameworks for economic and sector development. The government is
interested in greater harmonization of donor support and in discussing the merits of more
program-oriented funding and has asked for IDA's help in thinking through the issues.

9. 
IDA's limited role in providing financial support for Bhutan's development is likely to
continue, with IDA lending only modest amounts under special circumstances when other donors
cannot put together a timely package of knowledge, practical expertise, and financing as
requested by the government. In line with the previous CAS, past lending has focused on
primary education and forestry. As part of our ongoing dialogue, and following the two
infrastructure projects accompanying this country assistance strategy, IDA will explore with the
government options for financing high-priority projects in social and physical infrastructure and
forestry that have a high payoff for improving the living standards of the poor and for private
sector development. Such financing could take the form of standard project credits or sector
program credits. Given Bhutan' s strong record of governance and implementation, economy-
wide program credits have also been discussed with the government, to be provided if economic
conditionis merit such support, and based on prior public expenditure and poverty analysis.

RISKS

10. 
Bhutan faces two kinds of development risks. First, is the vulnerability arising out of its
external environment-the heavy reliance on power exports to India and financial support from
India, and, in general, on foreign aid. Relations with India continue to be principled and reflect
the long-standing partnership between the two countries, with no emerging problems that would
suggest increased vulnerability. The development effectiveness of foreign aid in Bhutan
suggests that it will continue to receive aid flows, but Bhutan's large and growing foreign
exchange reserves could lead some donors to reallocate aid flows at the margin to other
countries. The government's long-term goal is to reduce its reliance on foreign aid.
Macroeconomic stability is not itself likely to be much of an issue over the medium term because
of the past history of fiscal prudence, a strong balance of payments position with very little debt,
and the nominal anchor provided by the currency peg with the Indian rupee.

11. 
Second, and more important, Bhutan faces the risk of rising social and political tensions
from rapid population and economic growth, particularly if economic growth does not yield
universal increases in levels of living. What happens to growth will remain a function of how
well Bhutan strikes the balance between growth and concerns about the environment and
maintaining the integrity of its historical heritage and cultural values. Much will depend on the
way Bhutan manages the conversion of economic growth into social transformation, including
meaningful employment opportunities for its people. In doing so it will have to manage
expectations associated with a 6-7 percent GDP growth rate. In particular, unrest in the south
related to Nepali-speaking minorities has attracted considerable attention. The government is

-

iv 

-

attempting to negotiate a just settlement to the refugee issue together with the Nepalese
government. In the east, the incursion into Bhutan of rebels opposing the Indian government in
Assam poses risks, but the government is working with the Government of India to contain such
incursions.

ISSUES FOR BOARD DISCUSSION

12. 
In its discussions, the Board may wish to consider the following:
* 
IDA' s recognition of Bhutan' s unique characteristics and its distinctive vision for its
development, which seeks to improve the lives and living standards of its citizens in holistic
ways without compromising its cultural identity and its environmental heritage.
* 
IDA's willingness-within a Comprehensive Development Framework and recognizing
that IDA is among the smallest donors but also has unique comparative advantages-to support
Bhutan first and foremost through knowledge transfers, then through financial assistance as
needed. Such a knowledge-intensive strategy will also lead to learning that will fill IDA's
information gaps on Bhutan.
* 
IDA's continuing support to Bhutan in building its social and physical infrastructure as
ways of converting its rapid economic growth into inclusive social transformation.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION'S
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR BHUTAN

1. 
Ehutan is a landlocked Himalayan country with a 1998 population of about 760,000,
wedged between the world's two most populous countries, India and China. With altitudes
varying ifrom 1 00 to 7,000 meters (within a south-to-north distance of less than 1 00 kilometers),
Bhutan has almost every micro climate of the world and much rugged terrain. Its 1998 per capita
GNP was US$480. Bhutan has many factors in its favor. Rich in natural resources, including
large, environmentally benign hydropower assets, it has a ready market for electricity and
resource-based exports to India. Its public administration of dedicated professionals, headed on
a rotating basis by a member of the Cabinet, has a clear vision for Bhutan's future based on
extensive consultations with the people and elected representatives at all levels of society. Few
Bhutanese are hungry, landless, or homeless, although there have been no comprehensive living
standards surveys to provide accurate assessments of rural and urban poverty and changes over
time. There is relatively little gender discrimination-girls make up almost half of primary
school children, women constitute a substantial proportion of new civil servants, and inheritance
is matrilineal in many areas. Bhutan was one of the first countries to start protecting its
enviromnent and culture; over 70 percent of the country is under forest cover, and tourism is
limited t.o sustainable levels.

2. 
13ut despite impressive development gains over the past 30 years, Bhutan faces the many
development problems of a low-income country. Its fundamental challenge is to translate rapid
economic growth into inclusive social transformation and improvements in the living standards
of its people, and to do so without compromising its cultural identity and environmental heritage,
to which it attaches great value. Perhaps as much as half the population lives in remote areas
without access roads, electricity, piped water, or telephones, and far from schools, health clinics,
markets, and public transportation. Eighty-five percent of the population is rural, and agriculture
accounts for 38 percent of GDP. It has a nascent modem private sector and a still-shallow
financial sector. It will take time for the private sector to lead growth and generate substantial
employment. Though the government relies on highly participatory modes of policymaking at
all levels of society, development and economic statistics are limited and not always reliable.

A. POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL CONTEXT

Dedicated, Professional Political Leadership

3. 
As part of a decade long process of political transformation, Bhutan introduced far-
reaching political changes in 1998, when the entire cabinet was asked to resign and a new six-
member cabinet was selected from among high-achieving civil servants. T he King is no longer
the head of government, a post now held on a rotating basis by a Cabinet member. Cabinet

-2-

members were approved by secret ballot by Bhutan's elected body, the National Assembly. New
Cabinet elections are to be held every five years, and the Assembly is elected every three years.

4. 
Bhutan's government is dedicated, professional, and honest. Decision-making and
budget authority have been increasingly decentralized. Civil servants are well paid relative to
their counterparts in the private sector-recent pay increases have largely corrected the slippage
of past years. The increasing use of private sector bidders on government contracts has led to
some minor corruption, to which the government has responded rapidly by strengthening the
Audit Authority. The governnent has also rededicated itself to preventing misuse of public
funds, with officials held accountable for actions that might go unremarked in many other
countries.

Rapid, Resource-led Growth

5. 
Bhutan's development has been rapid. Until the 1950s, Bhutan isolated itself from the
rest of the world, and its dispersed rural population depended on subsistence agriculture. Once it
opened to the outside world in the 1 960s, Bhutan embarked on a far-reaching development
strategy that has been articulated in eight Five-Year Plans. Bhutan has developed a physical
infrastructure of roads,
power supply,

telecommunications, and 

water supply that now 

serves a rapidly increasing 

share of the population. 
At the same time the 
government has 
developed a social
infrastructure of education 
and health services that, 
despite the difficult terrain 
and scattered population, 
has greatly improved 
access.

Figure 1: Bhutan: Trends in SectDral Shares of GOP

100.0 

.

- ------ 

-

-

-

.

..

20.0 -,,,,,, 

0.0 .,

,,

-

Services

0I Oter lndusby

9 Agriculture

1980 
1985 
Source: Naional Accounts Stfislics.

1987 

1998

6. 
Agriculture continues to account for the largest share of GDP (38 percent in 1998, Figure
1). Hydropower (11 percent of GDP) and foreign aid (23 percent of GDP) are important
elements in Bhutan's small economy (1998 GDP of US$428 million). Its average GDP growth
rate of almost 7 percent a year since 1985 has been propelled by the 370 MW Chukha
hydropower project, which has boosted GDP growth directly through power exports to India and
by facilitating energy-intensive industries such as cement, ferro-alloys, and calcium carbide.

Benign External Environment

7. 
The Bhutanese economy is closely linked to India. The Indian rupee circulates in Bhutan
as legal tender. Bhutan's free access to the vast Indian market (India's GDP is almost a thousand
times larger than Bhutan's) and almost unlimited demand for hydropower have boosted Bhutan's

-3-

exports. Bhutan's large trade deficit with India has been financed by Indian grant aid. India has
also financed Bhutan's major hydropower projects and some of its large industrial investments.
Beside ][ndia, other donors have also been generous in giving aid to Bhutan. Between 1993 and
1998 Bhutan annually received an average of about US$80 million in disbursements of
concessional assistance. Of this 85 percent was grant aid, with extermal borrowings limited by the
government' s policy of first using grants. The highly favorable terms of its aid, combined with
efficient, cost-effective, and transparent use, has enabled Bhutan to limit its external debt. Its
1998 ratio of debt service to exports was under 7 percent.

Strong Social Development, but Rising Challenges

8. 
Poverty and Social Indicators. While few Bhutanese are hungry or homeless, the
governnent is deeply concerned about the presence of seasonal hunger, food insecurity, and
exclusion of groups living in remote and marginal areas (see Box 1). Even though policymakers
themselves engage in an unusually high degree of consultation starting at the village level,
Bhutan does not have good poverty statistics that could better inform policy choices on poverty
programas. It needs to carry out a living standards survey to provide a firmn basis for analyzing
living standards and income distribution in both urban and remote areas, with periodic and
selective poverty monitoring thereafter. While there are no direct measures of poverty incidence,
social iindicators themselves reveal an impressive advance (even allowing for data deficiencies in
earlier years). Mortality and education indicators are relatively good, especially given Bhutan's
scattered and remote population, and life expectancy at birth is substantially above the South
Asian aLverage (Table 1). The provision of more rural access roads is part of the government's
poverty reduction strategy. The government is also working on targeted programs for eastern
Bhutan, where soils tend to be poorer and population densities higher.

Box 1: Bhutan's Vision of Inclusion

In May 1999, the Royal Government produced a comprehensive statement of Bhutan's future as it enters the
next millennium, Bhutan 2020: 4 Vision for Peace, Prosperity and Happiness. On inclusion, Bhutan 2020 notes:

Although the vast majority of our population have benefited in very tangible ways from the process of social
and economic development, the benefits have not been shared equally. This is an inevitable consequence of
modernization in a country in which the population is so scattered, the terrain so severe, and infrastructure still
incomplete. Despite the rapid expansion of the road network, more than half of our population lives more than half
a day's walk from the nearest motor road, while in more isolated and remote areas communities are still dependent
on trails, muletracks and ropeways for communication....

.In these remote and isolated areas lives are still characterized by vulnerability and uncertainty and by the sheer
drudgery of toil from dawn to dusk in order to satisfy daily survival needs. Food shortage of some three months,
coinciding with planting seasons, are not uncommon in a few dzongkhags (districts), while in isolated pockets
within them food insecurity is more severe and malnutrition widespread. Although free basic education and health
care are today reaching these pockets of disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, the need to contribute to the
construction and maintenance of buildings, the cost of travel, contributions to school welfare funds, the cost of
school uniforms and so forth, while modest, are sufficient to place the services beyond the reach of the poorest
farmers and their families.... Ensuring that disadvantaged and vulnerable groups are able to benefit more fully
from the process of social and economic development is a challenge that must be met in the years ahead.

Sotirce: Bhutan 2020: A Vision ofPeace, Prosperity, and Happiness, Royal Government of Bhutan, May 1999.

-4-

9. 
Within South Asia itself, Bhutan is still catching up with most other countries. In the
mid-1970s, Bhutan's social indicators were the lowest of any country in South Asia. Now, 25
years later, they are roughly comparable to the regional averages, with the exception of its higher
fertility and population growth rates. Globally, UNDP ranked Bhutan 145th among 174 countries
in 1997 on its Human Development Index.

10. With the continuation of the right policies and expenditure priorities, and given the
country's resources and capacity, Bhutan should be able to raise social indicators substantially.
However, Bhutan's rapid population growth rate-estimated on average at 2.9 percent a year for
1995-2000 and higher than in India, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka-makes 
the improvement in
social indicators a challenge. Finding employment for its young and increasingly educated labor
force is also a challenge. The government is correctly determined not to become the employer of
first and last resort. The modem private sector is not developed enough to absorb the rapidly
growing labor force. This is a challenge for which there is no easy solution, given the difficulty
of finding labor-using private sector activities that can compete with Indian goods.

Total population (million) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of total) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

_,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ............... 
. .,_... 
.. ..................... 
......... .. ... ... ................. 
------------------ 

....... 

.... 

__ ... _ _ , .... 

... ........... 

........... 
........................... 
... ... ...... ..................... 
............... 
.
.............. ........... ...... . ............... 
....... ..

Table 1: Bhutan: Development Indicators
.i970s 
1998 1/ South Asia Low-income
0.44 
0.76 
1305 
3515
1.4. 
2.9. 
1.8. 
1.7
3.5 
15 
27.0 
31.0
5.8 
3.5- 
46etnyatbrh 66s 
142 
712 
7.7i 
3.8
2 
35 
72: 
1,755 
3,440
9,750- 29,700:
150 
1760
1, 8801 9,314

........................... ..... .. ............................................

~~~~~~~~............. 

..... 
. ................. 
.. ..... ............... .... .... ......

100 

....... 
................... 

108

... .. ............ 
.............. 

51 

3.2

........... 
.. ......... 

54': 

77 

68

.. ............. 

62 

69

~ 

63

... 

. ..... 

..................... 

... ......................................... 

..... 

.. 

........ 

...... 

.. 

............ 

.

_ 

........... 

..................... 

.. ..

.. 

Life 

_ _ .

. _ .................... 

Infant mortality (per 1,000 ive births) 
Maternal mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
dult iteracy rate 
Gross primary school enrollment (%) 
Roads (kin) 

(oO2 

..........

__ 

__ 

_. 

._ 

... 

_ 

. .

.. 

.

.

.

Electricity connections 

. . . . . _ _ 
_._. _ . _ .

_. 

Rural water supply schemes 
Telephones 
Source: Royal Government of Bhutan & World Bank.
1/ When not available, most recent data shown. Pop. based on 1990 Census of 600,110. Data for
S. Asia and low-income countries are most recent available.

11. 
Ethnic Unrest and Threats to Social Stability. The government is working to create a
fair society in which all nationals can benefit equally from the fruits of Bhutan's development.
But Bhutan, like most multi-ethnic societies, has experienced social tension. In the 1980s
concern arose about the ambitions of some among the Nepali-speaking minority inside Bhutan
(mainly in southern Bhutan, where the majority of Nepali speakers live) and activists outside
Bhutan. The government began enforcing its citizenship laws and moved to solidify national
cultural convergence. Unrest emerged in the south in the late 1 980s, and the ensuing violence
led to refugee camps springing up in Nepal. While some of the refugees are former inhabitants
of Bhutan (illegal immigrants or not), some are said to be Nepalese who had never resided in
Bhutan. The government has been actively seeking solutions through discussions with the
Government of Nepal and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and is working
with Amnesty International. A more recent threat is the incursions into eastern Bhutan of Bodos
and members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (insurgents opposing the Indian

-5-

governmnent in Assam). These insurgents are using the dense forests in the area as safe havens.
The government is working with the Government of India to contain this threat to Bhutan's
stability.

B. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND KEY CHALLENGES

Resource-based Growth

12. 
Real GDP grew by about 6 percent in 1998-99, boosted by investments in hydropower
and by power exports. Three medium- to large-scale hydroelectric projects are under
construction, including the 1,020 MW Tala project (Box 2). These projects, all run-of-the-river,
are environmentally and socially benign, requiring no large storage reservoirs. Bhutan's medium-
tern economic prospects are good, with a major economic boost expected in 2004 when Tala
comes on-stream, and with smaller jumps expected in 2001 and 2002 when the 45 MW Kurichu
and 60 MW Basochu projects come on-stream. These projects will raise the proportion of power
in GDP to about 30 percent from its current 11 percent. India is reforming its power sector and
moving to a more market-oriented approach. This is likely to lead to greater price differentials
depending on when and with what reliability electricity is supplied. Over the long run, Bhutan's
export power tariffs will need to be competitive with those of other Indian suppliers, while still
continuing to provide adequate royalties for the use of its water resources and for servicing debt.

Box 2: Bhutan: Hydroelectric Power Projects

* Chu[kha. The largest power project commissioned so far, Chukha was completed in 1988 with an installed
capacity of 336 MW, subsequently increased in 1997 to 370 MW. The project cost of US$255 million was
financed by the Indian government through concessionary loans (40 percent) and grants (60 percent). Eighty-
four percent of Chukha's cumulative generation since commissioning had been exported to India as of
Febiruary 1999, with a corresponding revenue from sale of power of $170 million. According to the initial
agreement between Bhutan and India, electricity tariffs were to be revised every four years, but these have
been reviewed more frequently in view of escalating maintenance costs since the tariff was first set at 1.9 US
cents (Nu 0.27) per kWh in 1988. The last tariff was set in June 1999 at 3.5 US cents (Nu 1.5) per kWh.

.

Basochu. Construction of the Basochu project started in 1998 and is expected be completed by the end of
2001. The combined peak capacity of Basochu will be 60.8 MW. The generated capacity will meet domestic
demand of 11 districts in the west-central region of Bhutan. The project cost, estimated at US $37 million, is
being financed by concessionary loans and grants provided by the Austrian government.

* Kuirichu. Construction of the 45 MW Kurichu project began in 1995 with an estimated cost of US$89
million. It is expected to be fully commissioned by September 2001. The project is financed by the Indian
government on a 60 percent grant and 40 percent concessional loan basis. Additional financing for a fourth
generating unit to increase the installed capacity to 60 MW is being considered by the Indian government.
The installed capacity of the project will meet the domestic demand of the eastern region of Bhutan. The
project is also expected to provide power to the Dungsum Cement Project in eastern Bhutan.

.

Tala. Construction of the 1020 MW Tala project began in 1998 and will be the largest power plant when it is
completed in 2004. Tala, estimated to cost about US$727 million, is being financed by the Indian
government on a 60 percent grant and 40 percent concessionary loan basis. The generated capacity will be
mainly exported to India under a power purchase agreement signed in 1996.

-6-

Heavy Reliance on Foreign Assistance

13. 
Foreign assistance, mostly in the form of grant aid, is likely to continue at present rates at
least over the medium term. Rupee debt is expected to increase over the next few years from
borrowings for the Tala and Kurichu power projects. The 50 percent increase in the power
export tariff to India in 1999 should, however, more than compensate for the increased debt
service. There are many signs of the impact of these large inflows of resources: a high domestic
saving rate (38 percent of GDP), high foreign exchange reserves, budget surpluses, and a high
proportion of domestic financial assets in the form of foreign assets (80 percent foreign, of which
80 percent are in hard currency).

Sound Public Expenditure Management

14. 
Bhutan has a strong record of public expenditure management. The overall budget (after
grants and concessional credits) has always been close to balance, with just a small surplus or
deficit. Bhutan's attention to quality and development effectiveness has meant year-on-year
slippages in capital expenditures, with actual capital expenditures tending to undershoot annual
budgets, but coming in close to plan over the entire five-year plan period. Recurrent expenditures
have tended in aggregate to be slightly above plan and budget, with health expenditures having
proportionately the largest overrun. But conservative forecasting of revenues has avoided
sustained budget deficits. It has also allowed the government to ensure that recurrent
expenditures are domestically financed, which is crucial for ensuring the sustainability of the
development program-the government has always closely considered the recurrent cost
implications of new capital expenditures to make sure that they can be financed without recourse
to excessive deficit financing. The government recently raised domestic power prices and
introduced user charges for domestic water and school materials. It is considering establishing a
personal income tax. Over the longer run, Bhutan needs to diversify its revenue base.

Dutch Disease, the Private Sector, and Employment

15. 
Bhutan's economy is both blessed and burdened by the richness of its natural resources
and the large volume of donor aid it attracts. The large inflow of foreign aid and of foreign
resources produced not by the competitiveness of domestic production and diversified exports
but by hydroelectric power exports that are large relative to the total economy, has created a
peculiar strain of "Dutch disease." And because Bhutan's exchange rate is pegged at parity to
the Indian rupee, the exchange rate does not work as a mechanism for lowering the prices of
tradables relative to nontradables. Instead, the real exchange rate appreciates, making imports
more attractive and exports less attractive. This has undermined the domestic competitiveness of
non-power exports and discouraged them. The effect is also seen in the high wages of Bhutanese
farm and unskilled workers (several times the wages of similar workers in India) and low labor
absorption (and therefore employment).

16. 
This Dutch disease syndrome is limiting the development of a diversified, employment-
intensive economy and may become a more serious concern when the massive Tala hydropower
project comes on-stream in the next decade. These forces have been dampened somewhat by

-7-

Bhutan's high savings rate, rising investment in basic social and physical infrastructure, and a
lean but effective government. But the population growth rate is high, and the modem sector is
still small. Together with the rapid rise in education levels, this suggests that finding employment
opportunities for an expanding and increasingly educated labor force will be a serious problem.

17. 
There is no easy cure for Bhutan's Dutch disease-like problem. One approach is to invest
the inflows in cost-reducing infrastructure (roads, communication networks), as some countries
did to albsorb the sudden increase in oil income in the 1980s. Another is to invest surplus
resources abroad to create a sustainable income flow, as some countries in the Middle East did in
the 1980s. Besides investing in social and physical infrastructure, Bhutan's approach is to focus
on strengtheniing the enabling environment for its still-nascent private sector. The government is
gradually reducing its own role in commercially viable areas of the economy, privatizing many
public sector corporations and encouraging the private sector to compete in areas that were
previously the reserve of the public sector.

18. 
In this effort, Bhutan needs to avoid the common mistake of other resource-rich countries,
which was to subsidize the domestic production of manufactured items that are inherently
noncomripetitive internationally. Bhutan seems to be heeding this caution and has a long-term
goal of creating high knowledge-content service industries (advanced medical care, high quality
education, financial and banking services, medicinal drugs) that can serve nearby international
markets and sustain high salaries. This strategy will require very high and sustained investments
in health and education. Bhutan is already investing public resources in basic physical and social
infrastructure (roads, communications, basic health and education) and focusing on high
technology (digital telecommunications system, Internet and intranet services, computerization of
information flows, and higher education abroad for technical and engineering students).

Need for Trade Diversification

19. 
India, with which Bhutan has a free trade agreement, accounts for 85 percent of Bhutan's
external trade. Bhutan also has transit agreements with India for trade with Bangladesh and the
rest of the world. Most of that trade goes through Calcutta port, 600 miles away. The potential
for export through Bangladesh is being explored. Major shifts in the pattern of trade are unlikely
in the next few years. Bhutan's trade regime continues to favor exports to India. In addition,
transport costs, domestic human and capital resource constraints, and a nascent private and
financial sector limit the scope of major third-country export industries.

20. 
Recently, tariffs on third-country imports have been reduced from a maximum of 100
percent to 30 percent and in some cases to zero. Further reductions are constrained by concerns
over re-exports to India, which also led to the imposition in 1997 of the Bhutan sales tax on all
third-country imports. Quantitative restrictions and other forms of non-tariff barriers are being
significantly reduced. Import licensing procedures for third-country goods have been
streamlined to allow for greater diversity and competition in meeting the demand for consumer
and capital good imports. Imports from third countries are likely to rise faster than exports as a
consequence of this liberalization and of rising incomes. High levels of mostly hard-currency
foreign assistance more than cover the current account deficit with third countries, but if
assistance levels decline the need for export diversification will grow more urgent.

-8-

Continuing Importance of Agriculture and Rural Development

21. 
Bhutan is a mountainous country with limited arable land (8 percent of area) and a large
number of terrains, micro climates, and soil types. With 85 percent of the population in rural
areas, 3 8 percent of GDP in agricultural production, and poor transport facilities, rural
development is a daunting but crucial goal for the government.

22. 
Bhutan is well-positioned relative to the Indian plains and has the climates to produce
agricultural products in India's off seasons. Bhutan also has free and ready export access to the
huge Indian market, the only country in the world with this advantage. With its climate,
remoteness, and high wage labor, Bhutan's clear comparative advantage in the future lies in high
value crops and high technology agriculture to supply the Bhutanese and Indian markets, and
possibly beyond. For the present, however, there is little optior but to continue the low input-low
output agriculture currently practiced. Scattered rural communities, very difficult and high-cost
transport, and traditional farming practices force the production of cereals and dairy products for
home consumption and local sale. Both crop and livestock agriculture have low yields, with
little fertilizer use on fields and low efficiency animals. There are also some policy obstacles to
change, including the law banning conversion of paddy fields to other production.

23. 
Despite the obstacles, there has already been some movement away from these low
productivity practices. Some farmers have already seen the profits from producing potatoes for
domestic and Indian markets. These could well be followed with off-season supplies of other
basics-tomatoes, ginger, onions, cabbage, and a wide range of other horticulture crops. Bhutan
could also increase farm incomes even further with the use of greenhouse technology that
maximizes returns to land and labor and access to niche markets.

24. Meeting this challenge of rural development rests on the achievement of an
interconnected rural sector in which communities are well-served with roads, electricity, schools,
health facilities, trucks, banks and good government. Bhutan needs to increase basic investment
in public physical and social infrastructure to channel the benefits of its foreign inflows to its
poorer and more remote communities and households.

C. BHUTAN' S VISION FOR SOCIAL TRANSFORMATION

25. 
In May 1999, the government produced a seminal and comprehensive vision statement of
Bhutan's future as it enters the next millennium, Bhutan 2020: A Vision for Peace, Prosperity
and Happiness. This 20-year vision is remarkable both for its candor and for the clarity with
which it analyzes and makes choices on Bhutan's distinctive path of development. Annex Al
shows the concrete milestones under the five topics put forward by Bhutan 2020 as contributing
to increasing Bhutan's "Gross National Happiness" (Box 3). Bhutan's desire to lead
development with this strong vision sets the context for IDA's country assistance strategy and is
therefore discussed in some detail here.

-9-

Box 3: Bhutan 2020

Bhutan recently articulated a clear vision and set of values in Bhutan 2020: A Visionfor Peace, Prosperity and

Happiness. Vision 2020 seeks a "cautious interpretation of modernisation." It puts human happiness, not
economic growth, at the center of the nation's vision and values for development:

"Our guiding principles for the future development of our nation and for the safeguarding of our
sovereignty and security as a nation-state must be complemented by a single unifying concept
of development, ...the distinctively Bhutanese concept of Gross National Happiness .... The
concept places the individual at the center of all development efforts and it recognizes that the
individual has material, spiritual and emotional needs. It asserts that development cannot and
should not be defined exclusively in material terms. ... The concept of Gross National
Happiness must be translated into objectives that are able to give direction to the Kingdom's
long-term development."

Bhutan 2020 articulates five development objectives:

* Human Development, to enable all Bhutanese to achieve their full potential as human beings. It
stresses the need to provide expanded choices and opportunities consistent with the greater self-
reliance of the nation and of individuals, families, and communities.
* Cultural Development, to promote awareness of Bhutan's rich cultural heritage and its role in
meeting spiritual and emotional needs, maintaining a distinctive identity, and cushioning some of the
negative effects of modernization.
* Balanced and Equitable Development, to ensure that the benefits of modernization are shared
equitably by different income groups and regions and in ways that promote social harnony,
stability, and unity and contribute to the development of a just and compassionate society.
Institutional Development, to develop institutions, human resources, and governance systems that
allow Bhutan to reduce its dependence on aid, to manage an increasingly complex system of
development, and to enlarge opportunities for all people to participate in decisionmaking.
* Environmentally Sustainable Development, to see that development embodies the principle of
environmental sustainability and protects Bhutan's globally significant biodiversity and natural
environment.

* 

The Vision is explicit that, in achieving these objectives, Bhutan will have to:

'... take the good with the bad. We have opened the doors to [a globalizing world] and we are
no longer able to close them, even if we wanted to. ... The challenge is to find and strike the

right balance ... to maximize gains while minimizing ... disruptive impacts. This will be an

immensely difficult task, but we are not without tangible assets. Our beliefs and values, so
deeply rooted in the perceptions and behavior of our people, provide us with the prisms through
which we will continue to interpret the world and to distinguish between positive and negative
forces of change."

26. 

The essential development challenge for Bhutan is to convert its rapid economic growth

into effective social transformation, while maintaining its cultural identity and traditions of
equality and dealing with an inadequate supply of jobs for the growing, high-wage labor force.
Bhutan 2020 sees the private sector-including knowledge-intensive industries-as 
the driving
force behind employment growth. Bhutan is working to improve the business environment by
reforming the financial sector, reducing trade and investment barriers, and keeping the
govenunent compact and efficient. This is a vision for the long term, however. For the shorter
term, given the conditions of human and physical development, and the large portion of the

-10-

population still dependent on agriculture, this sector will have to absorb the bulk of the rapidly
growing labor force.

Economic Reforms for Private Sector-led Growth

27. 
Private Sector Development. A strong private sector is crucial to the balanced growth
of the economy. The government is committed to reducing, as rapidly as feasible, its role in the
productive economy and focusing on the provision of basic infrastructure and social services.
Majority ownership and management in seven public sector enterprises (constituting 25 percent
of manufacturing/non-government services) have been transferred to the private sector, and other
public enterprises have been corporatized. The government has privatized bus services and
corporatized postal services. The only non-performing public enterprise has been liquidated
after the failure of an initial attempt to revitalize it through privatization. There are plans to
privatize some agricultural services, to contract out much power construction and road
maintenance, and to encourage private sector participation in education and health. However,
the limited absorptive capacity of the local market for equity constrains progress on these
initiatives.

28. 
The government is also taking a number of steps to improve the enabling environment for
private sector investment, including:

* 

Introduction of a transparent framework for direct foreign investment to replace the current
restrictive case-by-case approach;
* 
Issuance of more work permits to expatriate labor;
* Establishment of a transparent set of rules and regulations governing trade and payments
with countries other than India;
 
Provision of foreign exchange for all bona fide external current account transactions;
* A more active role for the Royal Monetary Authority in using market-based instruments to
improve liquidity management;
Improvements in the legal framework for loan recovery and settlement of financial disputes.

 

29. 
The Financial Sector. There is considerable excess liquidity in the banking system, most
of it sitting in non-interest bearing accounts with the Royal Monetary Authority. This has
undermined the profitability of Bhutan's four main financial institutions, which are prohibited
from investing abroad (except in short-term instruments of the Reserve Bank of India). Part of
the problem has been a boom and bust cycle, with overly enthusiastic lending for enterprises,
especially in the tourism sector, that proved not to be viable. The response was a significantly
more conservative lending strategy and a sharp reduction in new lending. The imbalance
between liquidity and productive lending opportunities will likely continue until Bhutan can
break through into much higher value-added economic activities involving the private sector.

30. 
The government has started to liberalize the financial sector. The competitiveness of the
banking system was improved significantly with the conversion of the Unit Trust of Bhutan into
a fully fledged commercial bank (in which Citibank has an equity stake) and with the
liberalization of interest rates on loans and large deposits. (This has not changed the interest rate
structure in practice, however. Deposit rates range from 5 to 11 percent and lending rates from
13 to 16 percent.) The government is also tightening regulation of the financial sector, in

-11-

response to the threat of a rapid increase in the number of nonperforming loans. All financial
institutions are required to maintain a capital-adequacy ratio above 6 percent, to provision for
nonperforming loans, and to maintain a minimum liquidity ratio. The Royal Monetary Authority
conducts on-site inspections of financial institutions at least every six months. Clear bankruptcy
procedures have been established, and banks now have the right to seize personal property when
loans are in default. A Loan Recovery Committee has reduced the nonperforming loans of
financial institutions. A computerized stock exchange has been established to encourage equity
investments. The Royal Monetary Authority plans to conduct a detailed study of the financial
sector and to draft a comprehensive strategy.

Strengthening Infrastructure

31. 
Aside from the massive investment in the Tala hydopower project and the two other
smaller hydropower projects, the government's infrastructure priorities are urban planning and
dev.elopment-Bhutan's major towns are growing rapidly-and road maintenance and
improvement. Urban development programs are being prepared for Bhutan's rapidly growing
cities, including new urban housing sites. The emphasis for roads is on increasing private
participation in maintenance and construction, shortening road connections, making road design
and construction more environmentally safe, and expanding the country's still incomplete
infrastructure, especially to remote areas.

Deifining a Future for Agriculture and Forests

32. Agriculture has traditionally been the principal source of income for most Bhutanese
famnilies and is still the largest area of private sector production. Approximately 85 percent of
the population is engaged in farming or forestry, which account for 3 8 percent of GDP.

33. Under the Eighth Plan (1997-2002) the government is moving away from its unsuccessful
emphasis on large capital investments toward a program framework approach. Agricultural
activities will be managed under six discrete programs: development of farm systems, crop and
livestock production, forest management, horticulture exports, planning and management, and
training. Bhutan is diversifying into new export crops and emphasizing domestic production of
nontraditional crops such as potatoes. Community involvement and cost-sharing are increasing,
especially for irrigation. Irrigation schemes for cash crops will be fully financed by the farming
communities, with the government providing only technical advice.

34. 
The government's role in forestry is fundamentally different from its role in much of the
rest of the rural economy, where production is in private hands. Almost all forests are state-
owned. The government sees itself as the custodian of an asset of national significance for
maintaining sustainable rural livelihoods and of global significance for biodiversity protection.
Forest cover has increased from 60 to 70 percent over the last 20 years-despite heavy subsidies
on forest products-because of strict enforcement of controls on encroachment on forest lands
and other damaging practices.

35. 
Fearing a reversal of this trend, and in the interests of economic efficiency, the
government is reducing its heavy subsidies on wood for urban and industrial users. Rural users,
however, will retain free access to restricted quantities of wood, in line with the government's
policy of containing rural to urban migration, and to prevent an upsurge in uncontrolled and

-12-

environmentally damaging illegal felling. The government has recently banned exports of round
wood and timber in an attempt to increase domestic supply.

Balancing Development: Human Development, the Environment, and Culture

36. 
Education. Bhutan introduced modern secular education in 1961. Since then, it has
made enormous progress in building a public primary and secondary education system and, to a
more limited extent, in providing selective tertiary schooling. Primary enrollment, which has
been increasing at an annual rate of 8 percent in recent years, is now over 70 percent. Bhutan
has also emphasized the quality of learning outcomes while raising enrollments. English is the
medium of instruction in schools and serves to unify Bhutan' s multiple linguistic groups.

37. 
The government will devote its efforts to achieving universal primary education by early
next century and to expanding secondary education to meet rapidly growing demand. The
majority of students will continue to receive tertiary education abroad, principally in India.
Bhutan has also been gradually increasing the capacity of its own degree granting institutions,
where it is cost effective to do so, and is actively developing its strategy for higher education in
line with its longer term objectives for growth and development.

38. Health. The introduction of modem health services in the 1960s has probably done more
than any other program to enhance the quality of life in Bhutan. The country has made
remarkable progress in establishing a four-tier health delivery system that is able to deliver
health services effectively to its people. There is very little private provision of health services
outside of urban areas, since the public provision of health services is effective and health clinics
are well stocked and managed (average annual public health expenditures were $18 per capita in
1997, slightly above the South Asian average of US$16).

39. 
Bhutan's high population growth rate, estimated to be about 2.9 percent a year, remains a
matter of concern. Reducing the population growth rate is a top priority, and the Eighth Plan has
a strong focus on reproductive health and family planning. The government also plans to
consolidate and strengthen health infrastructure; improve staffing and service quality, including
greater attention to traditional medicine and mental health; and increase access to health care in
remote areas. The government has also been conducting a wide-ranging public information
campaign on HIV/AIDS prevention. HIV/AIDS prevention will remain high on the government's
agenda, including attention to capacity building for an effective national public health program
and intensified health promotion interventions targeting vulnerable groups and border areas in
the south. For the sector as a whole, capital investments will focus on upgrading basic health
units and improving the health delivery system. The Eighth Plan calls for a 50 percent increase
in the number of doctors, a 47 percent increase in the number of basic health workers, and a 40
percent increase in the number of technicians. Some degree of cost-recovery is under active
consideration, both to raise revenues and to control the excess demand that a free good generates.

40. 
Environment and Culture. Bhutan has been well ahead of much of the world in
recognizing the importance of environmental protection. It also places a high value on
maintaining its cultural identity, emphasizing its living culture rather than a culture preserved
only in museums. The strength of its commnitment-and its willingness to sacrifice short-term
gains in growth to achieve it-is shown by the 1 0-percentage point increase in forest cover in the
last 20 years and by the control of tourism using a substantial tourist fee. Bhutan's commitment

-13-

to the environment is embodied in its Trust Fund for Environmental Conservation, established
with support from the Global Environment Facility and other donors. Income from the Trust
Fund is used to support the commitment to preserving 23 percent of the land area as wildlife
parks and sanctuaries and 60 percent of the land under forest cover. A similar Trust Fund is
being established for maintaining its cultural heritage, and the government is soliciting donor
support.

D. IDA's ROLE IN BHUTAN's DEVELOPMENT

41. 
Bhutan has drawn relatively little on the World Bank Group. IDA is almost the smallest
donor in Bhutan in terms of resource transfers. IDA commitments over the past 10 years through
fiscal 1999 have been only $19 million, with disbursements of $12 million. In the past five years
IDA has provided only 1 to 2 percent of total aid disbursements. This follows from Bhutan's
external aid policy of limiting the number of donors overall and in any sector and of drawing on
bilateral grant aid first, followed by UN agencies for technical assistance, and only then turning
to international financial institutions. The policy is part of an effort to reduce the transaction
costs of dealing with donors. Bhutan is not a member of IFC or MIGA.

Past IDA Support

42. 
IDA has been assisting Bhutan very selectively since the early 1980s, initially with
support for institution building and calcium carbide production. The last CAS was discussed
with the Board in July 1993 and emphasized economic policy advice, education, and forestry.
During the early 1990s, Bhutan made good use of IDA's expertise in primary education and
forestry and in preparing an economic report and a Power Development Master Plan. IDA has
also managed a Global Environment Fund grant and supervised a GEF trust fund for national
forest protection. For the most part IDA has provided such support only when other donors could
not put together a timely combination of knowledge, expertise, and financing as requested by the
government. Bhutan's management of these projects overall has been superior, with good impact
and relatively few implementation problems.

43. 
OED has reviewed Bhutan five projects since 1991. All five were rated satisfactory.
Three were rated as having a substantial impact, and the other two a modest impact. None of
the projects was judged unlikely to be sustainable, but for three sustainability was judged to be
uncertain. Borrower performance was judged satisfactory in all five, and IDA performance
likewise, with the exception of the supervision of the second forestry project. IDA's past
involvement has led to a few lessons. What appears to have worked well is project impact. An
important lesson in project design and implementation is the need to work closely with the
government in assessing the availability of technical and managerial staff for project work and
supervision. Finally, the experience suggests a larger role for knowledge transfer independently
of project lending.

44. 
In 1997, Bhutan requested IDA to support the adoption of new approaches to rural access
roads and small town infrastructure. This has led to the projects that accompany this CAS. This
request also led to a deeper dialogue between IDA and the government on Bhutan's development
strategy and framework. This country assistance strategy is an outcome of this dialogue.

-14-

IDA's Assistance Strategy

45. 
IDA's strategic goal is to assist Bhutan-in ways that are driven by Bhutan and in
partnership with other donors-in 
realizing its development vision of translating rapid economic
growth into social transformation and poverty reduction. IDA's strategy is set against Bhutan's
favorable medium-term growth prospects, its comfortable macroeconomic balances, and
considerable exports and aid inflows. The strategy is also set against a development vision that
reflects a well-articulated, nationally owned development framework. Bhutan is unusual in
South Asia in that its public administration is strong, corruption is low, and basic institutions
(schools, health posts, district offices, road maintenance) work well to produce quality outcomes.
These conditions give shape to IDA's comparative advantage in Bhutan in providing high-
quality global knowledge and practical expertise. The Bank has fixed costs in preparing and
processing IDA projects, and given the availability of substantial alternative assistance to
Bhutan, using scarce IDA resources for knowledge assistance over lending preparation will be
more cost-effective. Accordingly, IDA 's country assistance strategy will emphasize knowledge
transfersfirst, then lending.

46. Knowledge Transfer. IDA will increasingly place its global knowledge resources at the
disposal of the government without tying them to IDA credits. The government has asked for
regular consultations, without lending, on aspects of its long-term health and education
strategies. It has also asked for help on macroeconomic aspects of development policy, which
would build on IDA's routine participation in IMF Article IV consultations. Discussions have
begun with the Royal Monetary Authority on a detailed study of the financial sector to help
develop a financial sector strategy. Bhutan lacks a solid analytical basis for measuring rural and
urban poverty, which would be useful to inform and accelerate its development strategy of
inclusive social transformation. IDA will urge the govemrnent to carry out a baseline living
standards survey, and will be prepared to provide technical staff or other assistance for this
important purpose. Possible program lending would need to be preceded by a public expenditure
review, and IDA will offer assistance in this area. Bhutan has requested assistance for the
development of accounting and auditing standards and skills. These tasks will involve open-
ended assistance, either through the ongoing dialogue or through special tasks that may or may
not involve specific studies (Table 2). IDA is working with the government to broaden the
training of government officials, including greater access to World Bank Institute courses and
inviting promising Bhutanese civil servants to Washington for intermships of up to nine months.

Table 2: Proposed IDA Analytical and Advisory Assistance and Lending to Bhutan, FY00-02
. Lending
Education II

Health Operational Planning 

. AAA Starts' 

Ongoing 

FY00 

FY01 

FY02 

,-- 

Forestry 

. Post-Secondary Education Strategy 

Country Assistance Strategy 
Financial Sector Strategy
S Poverty Analysis
_ Public Expenditure Analysis ___ 

~~~'' 
~ F~'~ ~~----~~-'~-'~-~-~~~~---~~ 

- Forestry IlIl

------.-.
r . ----..-- 

...... .................. _.___...... __ 
_- 
.__._

.

Urban Development

Rural Access Roads

.

~

_

1/ FY00 includes ongoing activities begun in FY00. AAA assistance is seen as open-ended in that it
will respond to the needs of the govemment as and when needed, and will therefore continue while it
is justified in terms of the knowledge transfer needs of the government.

-15-

47. 
Other areas for a knowledge-intensive role for IDA include issues relating to school
curriculums, long-term health finance, rural road capacity development, options for employment
generation, policy frameworks for economic and sector development, and Bhutan's deficiencies
in economic data (Table 3; Annex Al). Such a knowledge-based partnership would involve
prcividing Bhutan with access to the Bank's global knowledge and expertise with the help of
visiting IDA missions, World Bank Institute courses (including distance learning), and technical
assistance through IDA-supported projects.

48.. Donor Coordination. The government is interested in greater harmonization of donor
support and in discussing the merits of a more program-oriented approach. The Comprehensive
Development Framework, which Bhutan' s development vision and implementation have
anticipated, provides a natural foundation for this (Box 4). As part of its effort to help the
government enhance the efficiency and development impact of donor assistance, IDA will seek
to build stronger partnerships with Bhutan and other donors on this foundation.

Box 4: Bhutan 2020 and the Comprehensive Development Framework

Bhutan's development practices have anticipated the Comprehensive Development Framework. The
emphasis on development as social transformation, the need for ownership of the development strategy,
and the emphasis on participation, inclusiveness, and a well-defned framework for donor partnerships are
all themes that resonate with Bhutan 2020.

* 

Each pillar of the Comprehensive Development Framework is reflected in current practice in Bhutan or in
Bhutan 2020:
* Good governance. The government has a long-standing reputation for honesty and professionalism.
Training is a key focus. Large numbers of civil servants at all levels are studying abroad in highly
regarded programs. Decentralization is increasing transparency, voice, and information flow, with
development decisions increasingly made at the geog (community) and dzongkhag (district) levels. A
greater role for the elected National Assembly and Cabinet is enhancing these crucial values at the
central level.
* Market fundamentals. The government is modemizing the legal system to meet the needs of a market
economy and finalizing a digital GPS-based land survey and titling system. A stringent new
bankruptcy law and a high-level committee have boosted enforcement of foreclosures. Competition
has been introduced in the banking system, and a new private commercial bank, with Citibank equity
involvement, will compete with the government-owned commercial bank.
Inclusion. Bhutan is making a concerted effort to increase access to education and health care. Girls
now constitute over 45 percent of primary school students. Infant and maternal mortality rates have
dropped sharply. Health clinics are well equipped, with dedicated and well-trained staff committed to
both preventive and curative medicine. Bhutan has a long-established school for the blind, and
accommodation for the deaf is now also being made in the school system. After an initial overreaction
in the 1980s to ethnic tensions, the government is working to create a society in which all nationals
benefit equally from development.
* Communications and transport. The government continues to improve its road, trail, and ropeway
network, with an emphasis on maintenance-increasingly 
through the private sector-and 
improved
access to remote areas. A communications network now covers all 20 dzongkhags. In rural
development Bhutan is diversifying into new export crops.
* Environmental and human sustainabiity. Bhutan is making substantial contributions to the global
environment through reforestation and biodiversity protection and the export of hydropower to India.
Forests cover over 70 percent of the land area-over a quarter of the land area is dedicated in
perpetuity as national parks and nature reserves-and 
there is a growing movement toward community
forestry. The government is also focusing on solar power and mini- and micro-hydels. In addition, the
government is at the forefront of cultural preservation worldwide. Tourism is limited to sustainable
levels, and school textbooks are geared to local values.

Source: Bhutan 2020: A Vision of Peace, Prosperity, and Happiness, Royal Government of Bhutan, May 1999.

Table 3: BHUTAN'S SELECTED DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES TO BE ASSISTED BY IDA

Bhutan's Development Vision and 

Long-term Outcomes

IDA Inputs

B Blanced& uitabie eeent 
Ensure 
that the benefits of development are shared equitably among all income groups and regions
so astopr 
o...... 
t,n 
..................
.iya
1. Urbanization

f::

Timely responses to rapid urbanization so 
as to minimize negative effects. 

* 

Rural Access and Secondary Towns
Credits (FY00)

.

.

* 

Focus on rural development.
Further commercialize 
agriculture.
Establish at most four regional growth
centers (as focal points for social
infrastructure & services as well as for
govt services) after assessing 
their
environmental 
impact
* Priority Area: Eastem Bhutan.
* Expand existing centers
Improve urban desin & planning.

Further develop institutions, human resources & a system of govemance 
to promote self-reliance

.........
.ses 

.........

.

Round Table meetng.
Economic/Budget 
advice in the context
of the consultations 
requested by RGoB
on macroeconomic, 
financial, education
& health issues.
* Advice on accounting & audit standards

Bhutan's Development Vision and 
Long-term Outcomes 

NR E LPENT777 

_ 

_ 

IDA Inputs 

7 77777 

.

e_ 

A. 

Maximizing Gross National Happiness 

Broader support available 
in future 
through regular consultations and 
limited project, sector program, or 
ecnomy-wide program 
ledin. 
Maximize happiness of all Bhutanese 
to enable them to achieve 
their full& innate potental. 
I. Education 
.
Achieve universal enrolment as soon as 
possible. 
Continually 
improve 
the quality & 
relevance of education. 
Improve access to educaton. 
Develop private schools. 

Support 
through Second Education 
Credit for basic education 
* RGoB request for regular consultations 
(without 
lending) on post-secondary 
education strategy. 
* Dialogue on school curriculum, 
secondary and post secondary 
education planning*. 

. ... . ... .... . .. . , 

7a 

.
.

.

.

-

.

....................................................................................... 
... ....... ......

* Provide primary health care services 
for 

.

all. 

RGoB request for regular consultations 

(without lending) on long-term health 

.

.

..
.t e 

a n 
oi i 

strategies. 
Dialogue on long-term health financing. 

Improve quality of health care. 
Introduce 
innovatve methods of financing .
health care (e.g. user fees for services on 
an 'abififto pa bai) 
3. Economic Growth and Developnent 
the momentum of development * RGoB request for consultations on 
. Maintain 
.
Diversify 
the economy so as to promote 
macroeconomic & financial 
issues. 
self reliance. 
* Poverty data and analysis. 
generate productive employment 
* Public expenditure 
review. 

.a.g 
... )a,, 
.s ,...................... 
.,,,,,,, ... .....................
,., 
,..., 
, 
...
...
.................................. 
........................................ 
............. 
.......................

.

4. Private Sector 

.

Continue to create an enabling * Non-lending 
support 
to financial sector. 
for the pnvate sector. 
environment 

.........................................................................................................

.Ensure 

pr vat 

tr 

.

.m 
.o .h 
n ' 

.e 

n 

; 

5. Transport, Communications and 
Information 

.

Further development of physical 
infrastructure guided by detailed 
assessment of environmental & social 
impact assessment while maintaining 
friendly & constructive 
relations with 
neighboring countries. 
a) Surtace transport. Improve public 
transport system. 
* Develop dry ports at strategic 
locations on the border with India.
b) Civil aviation.
* 
Improve 
intemational air services.
c) Telecommunications.
* Expand services 
to rural population.
Prioritv: Prepare & activate an Information
Technology 
(IT) strateg

.

-16-

& par cipar 
p 
1. Resource 

c.s..

L 

Mobilization 

&

Developnent Financing
* Reduce reliance on extemal assistance 
in 
the long-term.* 
* Explore new sources of revenues & levy 
user fees for social services on an 'ability 
to pay' basis. 
.
Revenues 
* Private Schools
Health
Improve the nation's tax base.'s_tax_base.

* 

So 

t

sustainability&presere 
1. Forest Regeneration & Biodiversity

.

Forest protedion & regeneration 
remains .
a priontv in the future but with more 
sensitivity 
to maintaining biodiversity. .
a Make full inventory of biodiversity 
resource 
base 

the nation's response 
to challenges ahead embody theprinciplesof environmental
the natural environment.

Bhutan Trust Fund (focus on national
parks & biodiversity)
Third Forestry Credit in support of
environmentally 
sustainable 
forest
development and use

Note: Shows only those priorities for which IDA anticipates providing
either
knowledge or financial assistance.

Source: Excerpted from Annex Al.

-17-
49. 
Lending. Based on the government and IDA's joint assessment of Bhutan's needs for
development assistance, lending is likely to be at very modest levels and under very special
circumstances. This is a continuation of our past approach, under which lending to Bhutan has
been a small fraction of its nominal performance-based annual IDA allocation of SDR 10
million. The current program does not propose additional credits during FYOO-02 (see Table 2):
such credits would be triggered by specific government requests for IDA assistance, usually
when an appropriate blend of funding and expert advice is not available from other donors.
When provided, IDA credits will remain focused on the priority poverty-reducing areas of
human development and infrastructure. In addition to standard project lending and sector
program lending, several factors make Bhutan a potentially good candidate for alternative
economy-wide program lending, including its comprehensive development vision, well-specified
performance benchmarks, strong public institutions, and careful public expenditure stance.

50. 
Project lending would follow IDA's long-standing project partnerships in education and
forestry. IDA has been supporting Bhutan's secondary education vision through two credits co-
financed with the Swiss Development Corporation, and is well positioned to assist in developing
a tertiary education model. Sector-based program lending would build on the blend of project
and sector program lending embedded in the two projects that accompany this CAS, including
the future possibility of time-slice financing based on comprehensive donor coordination.
Economy-wide program lending-against the general effectiveness of development assistance in
Bhutan-is also a possibility under discussion with the government, provided that economic
conditions (including a drop in foreign aid or export earnings) require such support. A review of
public expenditures, a baseline poverty assessment, macroeconomic monitoring in collaboration
with the IMF, and a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper would need to precede such lending. The
government is considering the pros and cons of such support.

51. 
To ensure that lending remains demand-driven, IDA has been in dialogue with the
government on these options, discussing the merits and costs of each approach and its fit with
Bhutan's development vision. This dialogue is very mindful of Bhutan's constraints in
absorbing the external resources already available and its desire to modernize with "deliberate
speed" to avoid the social, cultural, and environmental costs of overly rapid growth. But it is
also mindful of the high payoff in social transformation from additional investments in basic
social and physical infrastructure. While focusing strategically on knowledge transfers, IDA will
continue to explore knowledge-intensive and innovative opportunities for financing such high-
value added investments in social and physical infrastructure. The projects accompanying this
CAS are two examples of such opportunities.

52. Development Outcomes. IDA's strategy of knowledge transfers and limited lending
must be and is an integral part of the comprehensive development frarmework derived from the
government's vision, as enunciated in its Bhutan 2020. The performance indicators for IDA's
strategy are therefore also derived from the milestones the government has set for itself, as
described in Annex Al. These milestones are of course not specific to IDA's limited assistance,
but in each case represent the interaction of donor assistance derived from the development
fiamework and Bhutan's implementation of such assistance. The government has set these
milestones after extensive consultations. Regular and extensive field visits by officials at all
levels, combined with the small population (fewer than 100,000 households), mean that the
government has a sophisticated and detailed knowledge of conditions and needs across the whole
of Bhutan. As such, the government's milestones represent a blend of realistic targets over the
nmedium term-by which IDA would measure its performance-and stretch goals in the short

-18-

run that indicate the clear direction the government wishes to pursue (and which may sometimes
be quite attainable given Bhutan's small population.)

53. Consultations. IDA has engaged in numerous consultations with all levels of Bhutanese
society throughout the preparation of this assistance strategy. Discussions with government and
civil society in Thimphu and in rural areas were held by teams covering education, forestry,
urban development, infrastructure, and social development, with two extensive field visits by
Bank anthropologists, including to the South, to learn about and discuss the social and ethnic
aspects of Bhutan's development. Bhutan 2020 and the Eighth Five-Year Plan are founded on
exhaustive, open, and highly participatory consultations at all levels of society, including the
chimis (elected members of the National Assembly) and gups (elected village leaders, who are an
integral part of each dzongkhag's local government).

E. BHUTAN' S DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIPS

54. Bhutan differs from most other aid-dependent countries in that the government has a
strong vision and a strong sense of development priorities-and of the comparative advantages
of various donors-and deternines on this basis where technical and financial assistance is most
needed and which donor can best provide it. The admirably small government means that donor
missions can impose a high cost in scarce government officials' time. The government has been
exceptionally proactive in managing donor assistance, fitting aid into a well-defined framework,
rather than allowing donors to drive its development programs (Table 4). The government has
actively encouraged very close liaison between donors and facilitated this objective by limiting
the number of donors, both overall and within each sector. In forestry and education, for
example, IDA and Switzerland have effectively been operating as a single donor. This well
thought-out framework has also emphasized partnerships with relatively small donors, with the
exception of India, which has remained Bhutan's major development partner over the past 40
years. Other important partners include Austria, Denmark, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands,
Switzerland, the Asian Development Bank, the European Commission, UNDP, and UNICEF.
Among other important initiatives, UNDP has organized the donor Round Table Meetings,
chaired jointly by the government, UNDP, and IDA.

55. 
The congruence between Bhutan's vision and the approach suggested by the
Comprehensive Development Framework provides unique opportunities for strengthening the
partnerships between the government and the donor community, including IDA. There is
already a strong foundation on which to build. Bhutan 2020 includes detailed and quantified
milestones or benchmarks for all the government's priority areas, from population, health, and
education to decentralization and participation (Annex Al). The government is working to
establish harmonized procedures, including for procurement and disbursement.

56. UNDP has pioneered the concept of a sustainable development partnership with the
government and has assisted it in bringing coherence to donor activities, partly through its
substantial assistance for strengthening government planning and program management
capacities. The Netherlands is supporting an innovative environment partnership with Bhutan,
Costa Rica, and Benin. Sector-by-sector aid coordination meetings are held among the donors
resident in Thimphu, with participation from the nonresident donors (Japan, the Asian
Development Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and IDA), when possible.

Dev. Partner 

Governance 

Education 

Health 

Forestry 

Environment 

Rural Dev't 

Roads 

Urban Dev 

Power 

Telecomm

Table 4: Bhutan's Comprehensive Framework of Ongoing Development Assistance

-19-

Bhutan Trust Fund 

Basochu

Decentralization, 
Strengthen Royal 
Audit Authority, Tax 
Administration 
Assistance

Integrated Primary 
Health 
Care, Essental 
Drugs & Safe Water

Land use & Environ. 
Planning 
Bhutan Trust Fund

Agro-industries 

Thimphu &
Phuntsholing

Tech. & Vocational Upgrading Health Conserv. & 
Posts 
Sust. 
Education 

management___________ 

Teacher Salaries, Malatia Eradication 
School Construction 

Promotion of cash
crops

Paro Rural Dev. 

Construction & 
maintenance 
Paro roads and bndges | 

___ 

____

Netherlands 

Decentralization 

Norway 

Switzerland 

Strengthen Royal Audit Primary/secondary 
Teacher training 
Authority 
(with IDA) 

EU______________ Finance 

Strengthen Min. of 

Tech. & Vocational 

Education 

Biodiversity, Bhutan 
Trust Fund 

Bhutan Trust Fund 

Sustainable 
Use, 
Protection & 
mgt. Of forest 

Forest 

development 

Round Table, Econ. & Prim. & Lower Sec. Consultatons on 
Sustainable GEF supervision of 
Bhutan Trust Fund 
Budget Advice 
Teacher Training 
long-term health Use, 
finance and 
Protection & 
infectious disease Mgt. Of 
Forests 

Bhutan Trust Fund

Tala, Kunchu, Radio
Bunakha 
transmission
Micro-hydels Microwave

Tel. Network

Cash Crops, 
Rural roads 
Horticulture Develop., management
Zhemghang
Rural Dev.

_______ ___ 

__ 

______ 

Solar Power

Rural_Dev

Promotion of Cash Bridges & Trails
Crops, Livestock
Dev., Natural
Resource Training
Center
Irrigation Support 

Highway maintenance Town 
planning 

Development 

Livestock/Agri. Ext.
Service

Support RGoB Prog. of Secondary 
improving rural access, Towns 
initially in Zhemghang,
Trashigang,
Trashiyangtse &
Lhuentse

Rural

Electrification

Telecomm
corporatization

Austria

Denmark 

Germany 

India 

Japan 

ADB 

EU 

GEF 

IDA 

UNDP 

UNICEF 

WFP 
WHO 

WWF 

Round Table, Planning 
& Budgeting, Aid 
Coord., Priv. Sector
Dev., Modemization of

Legal System

__Bhutan 

Prim. & Lower Sec. 
Immunization, MCH,
Teacher Trng., Prim. Family Planning

__Educ, Adult Literacy

School Meals 

Disease Prevention,

Human Res. Dev.-

National Parks & 
Biodiversity 

Promotion of Cash
Crops

Food-For-Work

Trust Fund

-20-

F. RISKS

57. Bhutan faces two kinds of development risk. First, it is subject to vulnerability arising
from its external environment-the heavy reliance of the economy on power exports to India and
on financial support from India and foreign aid in general. The relationship with India continues
to be one of principled partnership, with no emerging political problems that would suggest
increased vulnerability. The development effectiveness of aid in Bhutan suggests that the
country will continue to receive substantial aid flows, but Bhutan's growing foreign exchange
reserves could lead some donors to reallocate aid flows to other countries and create some
uncertainty about the size of future aid flows. The government's long-term goal is to reduce its
reliance on foreign aid. Macroeconomic stability and creditworthiness are not themselves likely
to be of concern over the medium term because of Bhutan's history of fiscal prudence, its strong
balance of payments position with very little debt (all concessional), and the nominal anchor
provided by the currency peg to the Indian rupee.

58. 
Second, and perhaps much more important, Bhutan faces the risk of rising social and
political tensions from rapid population and economic growth, particularly if growth does not
yield universal improvements in living standards. GDP and employment growth will remain a
function of how well Bhutan strikes a balance between economic growth and strong national
concerns about preserving its environment and maintaining its culture. These issues of long-term
social and political vulnerability-of how to match the gains from 6-7 percent GDP growth to
rising expectations of welfare improvements and expanding employment opportunities-are thus
of greater concern. More immediately, unrest in the south related to Nepali-speaking minorities
has attracted considerable attention. The government is attempting to negotiate a just settlement
of the refugee issue together with the Nepalese government. In the east, the incursion into
Bhutan of rebels opposing the Indian government in Assam poses risks, but the government is
working with the Indian government to contain such incursions.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

February 22, 2000 

By Shengman Zhang

;Gs 

:4061 0.20 

RGoB 
'R 

i 

~ DesIredL LogTriPerform 

BHUTAN's Development Priorities

RGGQD

Annex Al
Page 1 of 9

00A1InusLeOnr

Central Devel- Maximizing Gross 
opment Concept National Happiness. 

Broader support available in the future,
through regular consultations and limited
project, sector program, or economy-wide
program lending.

Past Iniuts: IDA has supported the vision and
values via technical assistance, 
traditional
project lending in forestry, education and
calcium carbide production.

A. Human 
Maximize happiness of all Existing policy instruments -
Development Bhutanese 
to enable them Royal Decree of Population, 1995
to achieve their full & 
Health Trust Fund launched.
Health Sector Master Plan launched.
innate potential. 
Youth Welfare Trust Fund launched.
Hydropower Dev. Master Plan (1990-2010).
Horticulture Master Plan.
Master Plan for Cottage, Small and Medium Industries.
Telecommunications Master Plan
Postal Services Master Plan
Reduce pop. growth rate to 
(a) 2.08% per annum by 2002 
(b) 1.63% per annum by 2007
(c) 1.31% per annum by 2012
Reduce av. # of children per woman from 5 to 2 by 2012.
Implement proposed National Population Policy.

._____._____ 
.___ 
1. Population 
Reduce population 
growth. 

Promote smaller family 
size nationally. 
Introduce pop. educ. &
awareness programs for
all adolescents & adults.
Achieve universal enrol- Achieve 
ment as soon as possible. (a) universal Primary School enrolment by 2002. 
(b) full enrolment at Jr. High School (Class 8) by 2007. 
(c) full enrolment at High School (Class 10) by 2012. 
Full Bhutanization of 
(a) primary school curriculum is largely completed. 
(b) secondary school curricula by 2007. 
Introduce operational distance education program by 

Continually 
improve the 
quality & relevance of 

2. Education 

UNICEF
UNFPA

RGoB request for regular consultations 
Primary and lower
(without lending) on post secondary education secondary education &
strategy. 
teacher training
Dialogue on school curriculum, secondary & 
IDA
post secondary education planning. 
Switzerland
UNICEF (also adult
literacy)

Education II ($13.2 mill.) March 1998 
(ongoing)

BHUTAN's Development Priorities

education. 

2007. 
Achieve the full adult literacy rate for all developing 
countries by 2017. 
Improve access to educa- Establish a National University by 2007. 
tion. 
Establish Doethang Engineering College by 2002.
Implement proposed Education Sector Master Plan. 

Develop private schools. 

Past Inputs: Primary Education ($4.2 mill.) 
April 1988 
(Primary, lower secondary & teacher training).

3. Health 

4. Economic 
Growth and 
Development 

Provide primary health 
care services for all. 

Improve quality of health 
care. 

Increase life expectancy 
to current av. for all developed RGoB request for regular consultations 
countries by 2012. (i.e. 77 years). 
(without lending) on long-term health 
Achieve current av. of doctor/pop. for all developing 
strategies. 
countries by 2007. (1.2 per 1000 persons).
telemedicine by 2002. 
Introduce operational 
By 2007, reduce to curr. av. for all developing countries 
(a) Infant Mortality Rate (from 71 to 60).
(b) Maternal Mortality Rate (from 3.8 to 1.8 per 100,000 
live births). 
(c) Under-5 Mortality Rate (from 96.9 to 84).
Introduce innovative 
methods of financing 
Introduce operational system of private health care by
health care (e.g. user fees 2007.
for services on an 'ability 
(d) HIV prevalence below 1% of adult population.
to pay basis).
Maintain the momentum of 
development 

Dialogue on long-term health financing. 

Install 2,000 MW of hydropower by 2012. 
Install 3,000 MW of hydropower by 2017 
Increase value of horticultural exports 200% by 2007 & 
300% by 2012. 
Diversify the economy so 
Increase share in GDP of
as to 
(a) manufacturing 
to 30% by 2012. 
(i) reduce vulnerabilities. (b) tourism to 25% by 2017 
(ii) promote self reliance. Achieve a three-fold increase in real income of farmers by
2012.
Increase revenues from tourism 100% by 2012 & 150% by

RGoB request for consultations on 
macroeconomic & financial issues. 
Poverty data and analysis.
Public expenditure review. 

Past Inputs: 
Calcium Carbide ($9 mill.) May 1985.

Annex Al
Page 2 of 9

India (teacher salaries &
school construction)

WFP (School Meals)

ADB/Germany
(technical & vocational
education)

UNICEF/WHO/
Denmark (primary
health care)

India (malaria eradica-
tion)

Germany (upgrading
health services)

India/Austria
(hydropower)

Japan (micro-hydals)

ADB (economic advice)

BHUTAN's Development Prioritles

Annex Al
Page 3 of 9

2017
(iii) generate productive Implement Tourism and Industrial Dev. Master Plans
employment. 
presently in preparation.

Non-lending support to financial sector 

UNDP (institu-
tional/Legal 
framework)
ADB (financial sector
privatization)

5. Private Sector Continue to create an 
Simplify 
licensing arrangements. 
enabling environment for 
Introduce unambiguous commercial 
law. 
Implement proposed long-term strategy for the 
the private sector. 
Increase this sector's role development of the private sector. 
in the nation's future dev.
Create jobs to attract
young people.
Expand opportunities 
for
small businesses,
especially outside service-
oriented activities.
Improve access of private
firms to capital technology

& know-how.
Implement proposed Civil Aviation Master Plan and Master Rural Access Project in support for RGoB's 
6. Transport, 
Further development of 
Communications physical infrastructure Plans for Road Sector and Surface Transport presently 
program of improving rural access in districts
under preparation. 
with poorly developed infrastructure (e.g.
and Information guided by detailed 
assessment of environ- 
Zhemghang, Trashigang, Trashiyangtse &
mental & social impact 
Lhuentse).
assessment while main- 
Dialogue on rural road capacity development.
taining friendly & con-
structive relations with
neighboring countries.
(i) Surface transport. 
Improve public transport 
system. 

IDA (rural access)

India (road construction
& maintenance)
Japan (Paro roads)
Switzerland (bridges &
trails)
WFP (Food for Work)

Ensure that 75% of rural pop. live within half-day's walk 
from nearest road by 2012. 
Upgrade current national trunk roads to take 30-ton trucks 
by 2007. 
Complete second transnational highway by 2017. 
Construct dry ports at 
(a) Phuentsholing by 2002
(b) Gaylegphu by 2007
(c) Samdrup Jongkhar by 2007.
Introduce domestic air services by 2002 (service 

to

Develop dry ports at 
strategic locations on the 
border with India. 

BHUTAN's Development Priorities

Annex Al
Page 4 of 9

(ii) Civil aviation. 

eastern Bhutan is high priority).
Establish improved extemal air links with full instrument
landing system capacity by 2017.
Introduce national television by 2000.
Ensure all major villages & settlements have a post office
Improve & strengthen 
international air services. by 2002.
Develop & establish a comprehensive 
IT strategy by 2002. 
(iii) Telecommunications. 
Expand all services to the 
Introduce by 2000, fully operational 
(a) Intranet services & email systems. 
rural population. 
(b) access to Internet. 

Prioritv: Prepare &
activate an Information
Technology (IT) strategy.

B. Culture & Heri- Interpret the rich cultural Existing policy instruments -
tage 
heritage in a dynamic & 
Heritage Fund launched. 
development-oriented 
manner to ensure that it
maintains its relevance for 
a society in transforma- 
tion.
Make inventory of the 
nation's culture & heritage.
Preserve, conserve & 
promote the culture &
heritage.
Promote the traditional Prepare Construction Code by 2002.
architectural style.

Complete 
inventory by 2007.

Prepare Culture & Heritage Act by 2002.

C. Balanced and Ensure that the benefits of Existing policy instruments -
Equitable 
dev. are shared equitably Royal Decree on Water and Sanitation, 1992193.
Development 
among all income groups Long-term Human Settlement Development Master Plan
launched.
& regions so as to 
(1999-2020) 
promote justice, unity &
harmony.

IDA (telecomm.)
IDF for Corporatization of telecommunications. Japan (microwave,
telephone network)
India (radio transmis-
sion)

India/Austria (Dzong
renovation)

Netherlands/Denmark
(Cultural support)

BHUTAN's Development Priorities

Annex Al
Page 5 of 9

I~~~Go0~~~~s 

Bkuta 2020 DsIe4LhgTen 

~RGOW8-

Ptoifri a~Mlsoe 

1. Urbanization Timely responses to rapid Formulate growth center strategy by 2002. 
urbanization so as to 
minimize negative effects
of this problem. 
Focus on rural 
development. 
Further commercialize 
agriculture.
Establish at most four 
Complete urban dev. plans for Thimphu & Phuentsholing 
regional growth centers 
by 2002.
(as focal points for social Complete dev. plans for other major towns by 2002.
infrastructure & services
as well as for gov't
services) after assessing
their environmental
impact.
Priority Area: Eastern
Bhutan.
Expand existing centers
Improve urban design &
planning.
2. Access to basic Ensure equitable access 
services and infra- 
to Electricity 
structure. 

Implement proposed Rural Electrification Master Plan. 
Provision of electricity to 
(a) 50% of rural pop. by 2012. 
(b) 75% of urban pop. by 2020. 
Provision of potable water supplies to
(a) 80% of rural pop. by 2002 & 90% by 2007. 
(b) 90% of urban pop. by 2002.
Provision of safe sanitation to 75% of rural pop. by 2002 &
90% b 2 07.
Program to limit population 
in ecologically fragile areas.

Potable water 

Safe sanitation 

3. Vulnerable & 
Rapid responses to the 
disadvantaged needs of vulnerable &
rou s. 
disadvantaged groups.
4. Equitable 
Prevent the growth of 
Development 
income inequalities. 
Develop a progressive
sYstem of income taxes.

lA~Inxt 

odDnv

Rural Access and Secondary Towns Credits 
(FY00). 

IDA/ADB (town
development)

Japan (Paro rural dev.)
UNDP/Switzerland/
Germany/Netherlands
(cash crops).

Denmark (urban dev.)

ADB (rural electrifica-
tion)
Netherlands (solar
power)

Denmark (safe water)

Introduce a Personal Income Tax (PIT) by 2000. 
See above. 

Denmark (Tax
assistance)

BHUTAN's Development Priorities

Annex Al
Page 6 of 9

2. Law & 
Jurisprudence 

D. Governance Further develop 
Existing policy instruments -.
institutions, human 
DYT Chatrims, 1981
resources & a system of GYT Chatrims, 1992.
govemance 
to promote Decentralization Guidelines, 1993.
self-reliance & 
Human Resources Development Master Plan (1997-2020).
participatory processes.
1. Management of Progressively 
respond to Revise Decentralization Guidelines by 2002.
Development 
new needs and require-
ments. 
Compact civil service with Establish national Monitoring and Evaluation System by 
adequate highly qualified 2002. 
professionals.
System continues to 
evolve in response to the 
needs of a society in 
change, even though it
remains anchored in
Buddhist principles.
3. Decentralization Devolution of new powers Enhance the capacity of DYTs & GYTs to prepare their 
own plans by 2005. 
& Participation & responsibilities 
to the 
dzongkhag and geog 
Establish financial practice and guidelines for Geog funds
levels, 
by 2007.
Establish well-equipped Gup offices in all Geogs by 2007.
Implement Local Development Funds in
(a) 100 Geogs by 2007, and
(b) all Geogs by 2012.
funds in all Dzongkhags by
Introduce Geog development 
2017.
Implement Long-Term Manpower Development Plan.

Measures to make the system of law proactive in terms of 
the capacity to anticipate change & the appropriate 
legal 
instruments needed.

4. Human 
Resources 
Development 
(HRD) 

HRD strategy is guided by 
the HRD Master Plan
(1997-2002) which is
presently under review to
cover a 20-year period. 
Reduce the nation's 
Establish an independent unit for manpower planning by 
reliance on expatriates, 2002. 
especially in the private Capacity of RIM for management 
training to be fully 

Switzerland/ Denmark/
ADB (strengthen
institutions)

UNDP (modernize 
legal
systems)

Netherlands/ Denmark
(decentralization)

Thailand/
Netherlands/
India/Colombo Plan
(specialized 
technical &

BHUTAN's Development Priorities

Annex Al
Page 7 of 9

O.:0_ 

tb.-t7 

L 

t 

1A

5. Resource 
Mobilization & 
Development 
Financing 

sector. 

developed by 2007. 

Provide tertiary training Establish Doethang Engineering College by 2002.
locally also. 
Establish a National University by 2007.
Reduce reliance on 
New hydropower schemes come on stream in 2006. 
external assistance 
in the 
long-term. 
Examining 
feasibility of introducing sales tax on goods & 
Explore new sources of 
services & property tax. 
revenues & levy user fees Examining possibility of revising the structure of royalties 
for social services on an 
on forestry products. 
'ability to pay' basis. 
Implement proposed Education Sector Master Plan.
Revenues 
Introduce operational system of private health care by
2007.
Already embarked on a major program of tax reform.

Private Schools 

vocational training)

UNDP/IDA

Round Table meeting. 
Economic/Budget advice in the context of the
consultations 
requested by RGoB on
financial, education & health
macroeconomic, 
issues.
Advice on accounting and audit standards.

Health

Improve the nation's tax
base.

E. Environmen- Ensure the nation's 
Existing policy instruments -
tally Sustainable response to challenges Forest & Nature Conservation Act of 1995.
Development 
ahead embody the 
National Forestry Master Plan (1996-2010).
principles of 
National Environment Strategy.
National Biodiversity Action Plan.
environmental 
sustainability & preserve National Environmental Action Plan under preparation.
the natural environment.
Forest protection & 
regeneration 
remains a 
Driority in the future but 
with more sensitivity to 
maintaining biodiversity. 

1. Forest 
Regeneration & 
Biodiversity 

Continually maintain at least 60% forest cover. 

2. Conservation & Make full inventory of the 
Development 
nation's biodiversity 
resource base. 

Inventorying of biodiversity resource base continues 
through 2002 and beyond. 

Bhutan Trust Fund for Environmental Conser- Major donors of Bhutan
vation (focus on national parks & biodiversity). Trust Fund: GEF/WWF/
Forestry Dev. III ($5.4 mill.) July 1993 
Netherlands,/
(ongoing). 
Denmark/Austria/
Norway (biodiversity)
Past Inputs: 
Forestry Dev. l ($5.5 mill.) April 1984. 
IDA/Switzerland/ GTZ
Forestry Dev. ll ($1.1 mill.) April 1988. 
(forestry)
Bhutan Trust Fund for Environmental 
UNDP/Denmark
Conservation 
(biodiversity)
Switzerland/

BHUTAN's Development Priorities

Adapt System of National Accounts to include the compi- 
lation of environmental satellite accounts by 2002. 

3, Greening of the Priorith: Include the 
National Accounts. contribution 
to the 
economy by the 
environment & by
ecological services in the
calculation of GDP.
4. Institutionalize High Priority: Institutional- EIA unit already established 
in National Environment 
Capacities 
for 
ize capacities 
for con- 
Commission 
(NEC). 
Environmental ducting ElAs at all levels 
Implement proposed EIA Legislation.
Impact 
of government. 
Environment Assessment Process (EAP) approved by
Assessments 
NEC in Feb.1999.
(ElAs). 
Introduce (a) mandatory ElAs for all large-scale projects by
2002, and (b)EIAs for all physical infrastructure projects by
2007.
Extend capacity to conduct ElAs to Dzongkhag 
level by
2007.
Prepare fully elaborate (a) standards for water quality &
environmental health by 2002 and
(b) air quality standards by 2007.

5. Watershed 
Preparation of Manage-
Management ment Plans for watershed 
areas as follows: 
High Priority: Wang Chu
Puna Tsang Chu, Mangde Complete by 2002.
Chu, Kuri Chu and 
Complete by 2007.
Dangme Chu
6. Environmental New environmental 
legis- 
lation sensitive to ethical, 
Legislation 
religious & cultural values 
as well as traditional
systems of resource 
management. 
Need legislation that

National Environment Protection Act approved by Parlia-
ment in July 1999,

Annex Al

Page 8of 9

Germany/

IDA(conservation &
sustainable manage-
ment)
Denmark (assistance 
to
National Environment
Commission)

Denmark/UNDP 
(Insti-
tutional assistance)

Denmark (land use &
environment planning)

Denmark (Institu-
tional/technical
assistance)

RGoBWs 

A9_s 

RGo' 
'_ 

f 

BHUTAN's Development Priorities

Annex Al
Page 9 of 9

consolidates & builds on
existing legislation.
Need initiatives to review
related legislation with a
view to updating them, if
necessary (e.g. Inheri-
tance Act, Land Act, Live-
stock Act).

Notes:
DYY: Dzongkhag Yargye Tshogchung 
GEF: Global Environment Facility 
GYT: Gewog Yorgye Tshogchung 
Geog Administrative unit under a Dzongkhag. 
RGoB Royal Government of Bhutan 

Dzongkhag 
Chu 
Chatrim 
Gup 
RIM 

District
River/Water.
Rules and regulations.
Elected leader of the geog
Royal Institute of Management

Social indicators for Bhutan are from RGoB and may differ from that in the World Bank Central Databases.
With regard to performance 
indicators, data for high income countries is used for developed countries while data for lower & middle income countries is used for
developing countries.

Bhutan at a Glance 

AnnexB1

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

South 
Asia 

Low.
Income 

Bhutan 

Development diamond'

1998
Pooulation, mid-vear (millions) 
GNP Per capita (Atlas method, US$i 

0.76 
480 

1.305 
430 

3.515 
520

Life expectancy

GNP (Atlas method, US$ billions; 

0.36 

555 

1,844

Average annual arowth. 199248
Population (%) 
Labor force (%) 
Most recent estimate (latest year avallable, 1992-981 

2.9 
2.3 

1.8 
2.3 

1.7 
1.9 

GNP
GNP 
per 
capita 

Gross
primary
enrollment

e 

Poverty t% of pooulation below national poverty line,

Urban population (% of total populationJ 
Life exDectancv at birth (vears) 
Infant mortality (per 1.000 live births) 
Child malnutrib'on (% of children under 5) 
Access to safe water (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of Population aae 15+1 
Gross primary enrollment (% ofschool-ape Dopulation. 
Male 

15 
66 
71 
38 
64 
46 
72 

27 
62 
77 
53 
81 
49 
100 
109 

31
63
69

.. 

Access to safe water

74
32
108 
113 

Bhutan
Low-income group

.. 

Female 

* 

90 

103 

_

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

Economic ratios,

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of qoods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savinqslGDP 
Current account balance/GDP 
Interest pavments/GOP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debt/exDorts

0.28 

0.40 

0.43

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

30.5 
21A4 
17.2 
10.1 
-34.0 
0.2 
14.4 
1.0 

48.1 
33.0 
38.8 
35.8 
-14.1 
0.6 
30.3 
6.0 

47.3
33.2 
37.9
36.5
-10.8 
0.5 
27.8 
6.3

Trade

.. 

Domestic

.. 
.. 
.. 
..

Investment

Savings

Indebtedness

1977-87 1988-98 

1997 

1998 1999403

(average annual growth,
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of qoods and services 

7.9 
7.2 

6.1 
2.0 

7.8 
2.6 

7.1 
2.4 

7.1 
3.1 

Bhutan
--- --- Low-income group

..

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Growth rates of output and investment (I)

(% of GDP at factor cost) 

8C

Aqriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturinq 
Services 
Private consumption 
General aovemment consumption 

46.0 
27.4 
5.8 
26.6 
65.2 
17.6 

37.8 
36.5 
11.4 
25.8 
35.8 
25.5 

38.2
36.5 
11.6 
25.4 
36.2 
25.8 

.

4

4

20
-20 

93 

94 

95 

93 

97 

98

.
.

GDI 

0-GDP

Imports of aoods and services 

34.6 

42.3 

42.6 

I

(average annual growth, 
Agriculture 
Industrv 
Manufacturina 
Services 

'197747 1988-98 
6.2 
3.1 
14,8 
9.0 
11.6 
12.2 
6.7 
7.0 

1997 
3.1 
3.8 
3.6 
16.1 

1998 
3.4 
7.3
13.0 
7.2

Growth rates of exports and Imports (%)

2-

1

Private consumotion 

.. 

.

, 

i

General aovernment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 

.
9.9 

4.7 

0.3 

7.5 

9 

9S 

96 

9

Imports of roods and services 
Gross national product 

.. 

.

xpons 

-- Imports

9.4 

5.0 

5.7 

5.5

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four kev indicators in the countrv (in bold) compared with its income-group averaqe. If data are missina, the diamond will
be incomplete

BRhlutani Ann,lex B] (coit 'd)

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices 
(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

f

20

.. 
.. 

4.8 
8 6 

7.4 
14 7 

9.0 
5 9 

15r^ 

*

15 0

Governmenf finance 
(% of GOP, includes current grants) 
CulTent revenue 

1

0

18.5 
0 6 

19.9 
3.3 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98

Current budget balance 

.

GDP defator 

-

-CPI

Ovierall surplusideficit 

.

.

-2 3 

3.2

TRADE

(U.S$ millions) 
Total exports (fob) 

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

Export and import levels (US$ millions)

29 

99 
21 
12 

111 
37

162

Electrcity 

.
.. 

.

Agric. Prods 
Manufactures

Tctal imporns 

(cif) 

101 

131 

136 

oI1 

ID 

I|

Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100)

92 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98

.Exports 

E Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

}

(US$ millions) 
Exports of goods and services 
Imnports of goods and services 

Current account balance to GDP ratio I%)

50 
144 

121 
183 

146
203

.

Resource balance 

.. 

-95 

-62 

--57

Net income 

-

0 

0 

0 

-15

Ilet current transfers 

.

0 

6 

11 

-20

Current account balance 

-95 

-56 

-47 

-25 

Financing 

items (net) 

.

79 

78 

92 

-

Changes in net reserves 

16 

-22 

-45 

-35

Memo:
Reserves includinq ooJd (US$ millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, locaW/US$) 

.

176 

218
41 3

8.7 

13.0 

36 3 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE 

FLOWS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998

j'US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

I Compositon of total debt, 1998 (USS millions)

0 
0 
0 

40 
0 
9 

121 
0 
23 

120
0
24 

2

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

0 
0 
0 

1 
0 
0 

7 
0 
0 

9
0
0

Composition of net resource flows

Official grants 

.

.

74 

85

Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 

0 
o 

16 
O 
0 

14 
-2 
0 

2
-2
0

.

Portfolio equity 

0 

0 

0 

0 58

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

0 
1 

14 
1 

A - IBRD 
B - IDA 

E - Bilateral
F - Private

5 

5 - o0 er multilateral 

0 
5 
0 
5 

0 
1 
0 
1 

0
1
0
0

Data on National Accounts and Debt is in calendar year, all other data is in fiscal year 
Development Economics

11117199

Bhutan - Selected Indicators of

Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Annex B2

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment

Number of Projects under implementationa 
Average implementation period (years)b 
Percent of problem projectsa, c
by number 
by amount 
Percent of projects at riska, d
by number 
by amount 
Disbursement ratio (%)e 

Portfolio Management

CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision ('000 US$/project) 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 1/

2 
5.60 

0.00 
0.00 

0.00 
0.00 
17.16 

2 
6.60 

0.00 
0.00 

0.00 
0.00 
15.75 

2 
2.70 

0.00 
0.00 

0.00 
0.00 
9.18 

2
3.65

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
3.76

No 
110.10 
55.05 

No 
127.47 
63.73 

No 
64.53 
32.26 

No
150.26
75.13

Memorandum item 

Since FY80 

Last five FYs

Projects evaluated by OED
by number 
by amount (US$ millions) 
Percent rated U or HU
by number 
by amount 

5 
22.76 

0.00 
0.00 

3
10.76

0.00
0.00

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY)
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the beginning of the
year: investment projects only.
1/ As of November 1999.

Generated by the Operations Information System (OIS)

Annex B3
Page I of I

Bhutan - Bank Group Program Summary, FY 2000-2002

Proposed IDA Base-Case Lending Program, FY 2000-2002a

F:Y 

Project 

2000 RURAL ACCESS ROADS 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
Subtotal 

Total, FY 2000-2002 

US$(AM) 

Strategic rewardsb 
(HIMIL) 

Implementationb
risks (H/M/L)

M 
M 

L
L

10.0 
12.0 
22.0

22.0

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years. Based on the CAS, which emphasizes
knowledge transfers over resource transfers, no furither credits are currently planned but will be considered if
requested by the Royal Government of Bhutan and if prepared, will come to the Board for approval under
nonnal procedures.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H),
moderate (M), or low (L).

Bhutan-Summary of Nonlending Services

Product 

FY 

Cost (US$000) 

Audiencea 

Objectiveb

Annex B4
Page I of I

Recent completions
Country Economic Memorandum 

FY97 

89 

Underway in FY00
Country Assistance Strategy 

FY00 

125 

Global Environment Fund 

Health Operational Planning 

Forestry AAA 

FY00-02 

FYOO-02 

FYOO-02 

43 

225 

180 

Planned for FY00 and beyond 1l
Post-Secondary Education Strategy 

FYOO-02 

210 

Poverty Analysis 

FYO1-02 

130 

Financial Sector Strategy 

FYOO-02 

Public Expenditure Analysis 

FYOI-02 

180 

130 

Govt, Bank, 
Knowledge
donor, public 
generation,
dissemination public debate,
problem
solving

Govt, Bank, 
Knowledge
donor, public 
generation,
dissemination public debate,
problem
solving
Problem
solving
Knowledge
generation,
public debate
Knowledge
generation,
problem
solving

Govt, Bank, 
donor 
Govt, Bank, 
donor 

Govt, Bank, 
donor 

Govt, Bank, 
donor 

Knowledge
generation,
problem
solving
Govt, Bank, 
Knowledge
donor, public 
generation,
dissemination public debate,
problem
solving
Knowledge
generation,
problem
solving
Knowledge
generation,
problem
solving

Govt, Bank, 
donor 

Govt, Bank, 
donor 

a. 
b. 
1/ 

Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
AAA assistance is seen as open-ended in that it will respond to the needs of the government as and when needed, and will
therefore continue while it is justified in terms of the knowledge transfer needs of the government.

Bhutan: Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionlincome group

Annex B5
Page 1 of 1

1970-75 

1980485 

1992-98 

South 
Asia 

1,305 
1.8 
27.3 

3.5 

Low-
income

3,515
1.7
30.7

3.2

0.76 
2.9 
15.0 

5.8 

480 
109 

430 
117 

520
122

3.6

3.5

72 

.. 

64 
75 
54 

84 
87 
38 

66.0 

65.9 
66.1 

71 
97 

.. 
.. 

3.8

100 
109 

90 

81 
84
80

81 

87 
53

62 
62 
63 

77 
100 

413 
423 

108
113

103

74

80
82

63
62
64

69
97

557
513

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 

Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of population)

National headcount index 

Urban headcount index

Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 

Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOIMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 

Gross primary school enrollment rate
M% of' age group)

Total 
Male 

Female 
Access to safe water
(% of population)

Total 
Urban 

Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Life expectancy at birth
(yearsJ

Total 
Male 
Female 

Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
UJnder S (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)

Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 

Maternal (per 1,000 live births) 

0.44 
1.4 
3.5 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

35 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

46 

.. 
.. 

142 

.. 

.. 
.. 

7.7 

0.54 
2.0 

.. 
.. 

..

..

290 
38 

..

..
..

.. 
.. 
..

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

43 
52 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

Sources: 1999 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank and Royal Government of Bhutan.

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Bhutan - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 

Estimate 

Projected

Indicator 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002

National accounts (% of GDP)

Gross domestic product 
Net indirect taxes 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

100 
4 
40 
28 

100 
4 
39 
33 

I00 
3 
39 
32 

100 
3 
36 
35 

100 
5 
36 
35 

100 

100 
5 
36 
35 

100 
5 
36 
35 

100
5
35
38

5 

36 
35 

27 

24 

26 

25 

24 

24 

24 

24 

22

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 
Change in stocks 

55 
52 
14 
38 
3 

51 
51 
14 
37 
2 

62 
47 
15 
32 
1 

61 
46 
15 
31 
2 

62 
45 
15 
30 
3 

61 
45 
15 
30 
4 

60 
45 
15 
30 
4 

59 
46 
15 
31 
4 

56
46
16
31
3

Exports of goods & services 
Imports of goods & services 

30 
39 

37 
42 

34 
44 

33 
42 

33 
43 

33 
42 

33 
42 

33 
41 

35
40

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsa 

45 
42 

49 
41 

38 
31 

39 
36 

38 
36 

40 
38 

40 
38 

41 
40 

44
43

Memorandum items
GDP (US$ million at current prices) 
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 
Real annual growth rates (%)
GDP at market prices 
GDP at factor cost 

271 
360 

317 
390 

342 
420 

404 
460 

428 
480 

446 
540 

492 
570 

538 
600 

594
640

8.1 
6.4 

6.8 
7.4 

5.5 
6.1 

7.8 
7.3 

7.1 
5.8 

7.0 
6.0 

7.0 
6.0 

7.1 
6.1 

7.2
6.2

Gross Domestic 

Income 

.

.

.. 

.

.

.. 

.

.

Real annual per capita growth rates (%)
GDP at market prices 

5.0 

3.7 

2.4 

4.7 

4.0 

3.9 

3.9 

4.0 

4.1

Total consumption 
Private consumption 

.

.

.

..

.. 

.. 

.

.. 

.

..

Balance of Payments (millions of US$)

Exports ofgoods & services 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports ofgoods & services 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 

84 
63 
130 
93 
-47 
7 

90 
70 
132 
97 
-42 
8 

121 
98 
164 
111 
-43 
6 

121 
99 
183 
131 
-62 
6 

146 

146 
109 
243 
165 
-97 
10 

154 
114 
269 
185 
-115 
11 

163 
121 
299 
209 
-135 
11 

180
134
328
231
-148
11

III 

203 
136 
-57 
11 

Current accountbalance (incl. grants) 

17 

18 

43 

18 

39 

38 

19 

7 

3

Net foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissi 
Change in reservesb 

0 
6 
8 
-2 
-10 
-13 

0 
3 
5 
-2 
-6 
-14 

0 
11 
13 
-2 
-29 
-25 

0 
12 
14 
-2 
-8 
-22 

0 
-1 
2 
-2 
7 
-45 

1 
6 
6 
0 
-4 
-4t 

2 
6 
5 
0 
0 
-26 

2 
3
3 
0
3 
0
0 
0
9 
14
-21 
-20
(Continued)

Bhutan - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Indicator 

1994 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002

Actual 

Estimate 

Projected

Memorandum items

Resource balance (% of GDP) 

-17.6 

-14.3 

-13.0 

-166 

-13.7 

-22.2 

-24.6 

-26.2 

-26.1

Real annual growth rates (%)

Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

Public finance (% of GDP)'

Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current surplus (+) or deficit(-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators

M21GDP 
Growth of M2 (%/) 

Private sector credit growth / total credit g 

Price indices (1980 =100)

Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)d

21.2 
19.8 
1.5 
20.6 

.. 

20.3 
20.6 
-0.3 
18.8 
19.1 

19.6 
18.2 
1.5 
21.1 
21.6 

18.5 
17.9 
0.6 
20.0 
18.0 

19.9 
16.7 
3.3 
14.0 
13.9 

19.3 
16.8 
2.5 
18.2 
15.7 

19.8 
17.8 
2.0 
19.3 
17.4 

19.9 
18.2 
1.8 
19.7 
17.8 

20.6
18.4
2.2
19.9
17.6

24.6 
21.5 

.. 

27.2 
29.9 

.. 

30.1 
30.4 

.. 

32.7 
30.9 

.. 

39.2 
41.7 

.. 

44.6 
30.0 

..

49.8 
29.0 

55.2 
28.0 

61.0
28.0

Real Interest Rates 
Consumer price index (% FY change) 
GDP deflator (% CY change) 

-
5.9 
9.3 

8.2 
9.8 

9.3 
11.4 

7.4 
14.7 

9.0 
5.9 

9.2 
7.8 

7.0 
8.0 

7.0 
8.0 

7.0
8.0

a. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
b. Includes use of IMF resources. Note that a minus sign (-) indicates an increase in assets.
c. Refers to Consolidated Central Government accounts
d. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.
Data on National Accounts and Debt is in calendar year; all other data is in fiscal year.
Due to large exchange rate devaluations in 1997 and 1998, there is a big jump in the 1999 GNP per capita projection.

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Bhutan - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 
1995 

Estimate 
1998 

Projected
2000 
2001 

Indicator 

1994 

1996 

1997 

1999 

2002

Totaldebtoutstandingand 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)'

105 

106 

114 

121 

120 

126 

131 

134 

134

Net disbursements (US$mn)' 

6 

3 

11 

12 

(1) 

6 

5 

3 

0

Total debt service (TDS) 

8 

10 

7 

7 

9 

7 

7 

7 

7

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGS' 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

124.9 
38.6 
9.0 
90.7 

117.3 
33.3 
10.9 
93.0 

94.4 
33.4 
5.8 
95.7 

99.5 
29.8 
5.9 
96.2 

82.0 
28.0 
6.4 
100.0 

85.9 
28.2 
5.0 

85.3 
26.6 
4.6 

81.8 
24.8 
4.3 

74.3
22.5
3.8

..

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)C
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d 

0.0 
14.7 

0.0 
12.2 

0.0 
21.4 

0.0 
21.1 

0.0 
18.3 

0.0 
28.8 

0.0 
29.6 

0.0 
31.0 

0.0
31.9

0.0 
0 

0.0 
0 

0.0 
0 

0.0 
0 

0.0 
0 

0.0 
0 

0.0 
0 

0.0 
0 

0.0
0

Of which present value of 
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

21 

23 

23 

23 

24 

25 

29 

33 

36

IFC (US$m)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity Ic 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0
0

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSm) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c, Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Status of Bank Group Operations in Bhutan
Operations Portfolio

Annex B8
Page I of I

Project ID 

Fiscal 
Year 

Borrower 

Purpose

Number of Closed Projects: 5

Active Projects
BT-PE-9582 
BT-PE-9574 

Total 

1994 
1998 

GOB 
ROYAL GOV'T OF BHUTAN 

FORESTRY Ill 
EDUCATION II 

Total Disbursed (IBRD and IDA): 
of which has been repaid: 
Total, now held by IBRD and IDA: 
: 
Amount sold 
Of which repaid 
: 
Total Undisbursed 
: 

Active Projects 
2.64 
0.00 
19.09 
0.00 
0.00 
16.22 

Closed Projects 
21 .00 
.91 
16.37 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

Total
23.64
.91
35 .46
0.00
0.00
16.22

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Difference Between
expected
and actual 
disbursemnents a/ 

Last PSR
Supervision Rating b/

IBRD 

IDA 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig 

Frm Rev'd 

Dev Obj 

Imp Prog

0.00 
0.00 

0.00 

5.40 
13.69 

19.09 

0.00 
0.00 

0.00 

3.41 
12.81 

16.22 

3.03 
2.43 

5.46 

.89 
0.00 

.89

S 
S 

S
S

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursemenits to date as projected at appraisal.
b. Following the FY94 Annual Review of Portfolio perfor=miice (ARPP), a letter based system was introduced (HS = highly Satisfactory, S = satisfactory, 
see proposed Improvements in Project and Portfolio Performance Rating Methodology 
(SecM94-901), August 23, 1994.
RU = highly unsatisfactory): 

U 

unsatisfactory,

Note
Disbursement data is updated at the end of the first week of the month.

Generated by the Operations Information System (OIS)

Bhutan-CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area 

Country 
performancea Major issueb 

Country 
priorioyc 

Bank priorityj 

Reconciliation
of country and
Bank

priorttiesd

Annex B9

Page I of I

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
* Poverty reduction 
* Economic policy 

* Public sector 
* Gender 

Good 
Excellent 

Good 
Good 

Human Development Department
* Education 
* Health, nutrition & population 

Excellent 
Good 

 

Social protection 

Good 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
i Rural development 

* Environment 

* Social development 

Finance, Private Sector &
Infrastructure
* Financial sector 

 
Private sector 
* Energy & mining 

* 

Infrastructure 

Fair 

Excellent 

Good 

Fair 

Fair 
Good 

Good 

Rural poverty High 
Diversify 
High 
econ.
Cap.building High 
Women's 
Moderate 
participation
in the formal
sector

High
High

High
Moderate

Basic educ. 
Improving 
quality of
health care &
pop. growth
Social 
inclusion of 
all groups

High 
High 

High
High

Moderate 

High 

Ongoing
dialogue

High 

More rural 
access roads;
agric. services
Forest manag. High 
& conserv.
Decentral. & 
participation

High 

High

High

Moderate 

Other donors

Liberalization Moderate 

High 

Privatization Moderate 
Hydropower High 
development
Road 
maintenance,
rural mobility
& urban
planning

High 

Moderate
Moderate 

High

Ongoing
dialogue

Other donors

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b. 
Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary
completion;" for enviromment, "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use "low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing
dialogue.

Template created by the Operations Information System (OIS)

MAP SECTION

, 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~IBRD 

30467 

_ 

FLEVATION IN MLTERs. 

~~~~ ~ 
~~~~~~~~~~~28,30- 

~ 

~~~~ ~~~90 

00 

90'30 

91 009,30 

92-'00 

t 

'29,"">e 

5000 

BHUTAN 

MM30

,( 

_,p3. 

,,2 

 E 

_. M 0 

.

' 

' 

., 

' 

_, 

u 

4, 

\. 

NATIONAL PROTECTED AREAS 

<*> 

NATIONALNAL CATECTEDPAREA

z 

-

z 

.

. @ H:( 

M 

t 

L'~~~~~~A 

Y 

.............. 

$;._.... 
AIA

,RIVERS 

NTOA 

1 

.1 

.7- 

+ 

tP 

4 

2 

,4 

;l 

.,< 

-

,{ 

._aF <_,-. 

S O HERTOWNS~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0 
t t AIRPORT 
OTHR 
TWN

> \ r' \ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~2 

NTERNATIONALBOUNDARES~~~~~~~~~~~~- 
EDROADS 
UNPA 
- -
-
N P V E R A D 

I T RN TI N A B U N A R E

89 001 

89 10 

r 

.t 

A fftt 

* 

tSAtnwns 
E 

| KJ y 0 vf 0 lingma:1hu 

ai0 

stb 

tPe~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0?o 

0 

3 

4

t > E 

.c"4; 

,,. 

<;; 

F 

< 

I 

g 

S 

SANOCUP 

(.N 

JE 

|UTiqAN

; <- 

* 

is~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~bo 

/ r9 <L -e ->W~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

( HIfN

WILDLIFE 
SANCTUARY 

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ Lh.t
~~~~ ~ 
~ 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

89900'~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

~ 

~ 

K,U3e' 

900090ms910091 

6'Yongtn
T,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ETL3Tlr

J* 

