Document of
The World Bank

Report No. 20723-UA

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

AND OF THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR UIKRAINE

August 16, 2000

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AIDS 
APL 
BoP 
CAR 
CAS 
CEM 
CIDA 
DFI 
DOD 
EBRD 
EDAL 
EFF 
ESW 
EU-TACIS 
FSAL 
FSU 
FY 
GDP 
GEF 
GOU 
HIV 
IBRD 
IDF 
IFC 
IFI 
IMCAR 
IMF 
LIL 
MIGA 
MOJ 
NGO 
NBU 
OED 
PAL 
PGF 
PSD 
SECAL 
SMEs 
TA 
TACIS 
TB 
UK DFID 
UNDP 
USAID 

Currency Equivalents
Currency Unit = Hryvnia (UAH)

July 2000: US$1=UAH5.43

Abbreviations and Acronyms

Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Adaptable Program Lending
Balance of Payments
Country Assistance Review
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Economic Memorandum
Canadian Intemational Development Agency
Direct Foreign Investment
Deb, Outstanding and Disbursed
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Enterprise Development Adjustment Loan
Extended Fund Facility
Economnic and sector work
European Union - Technical Assistance for the CIS Countries
Financial Sector Adjustmnent Loan
Former Soviet Union
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Government of Ukraine
Human Immune Deficiency Virus
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Finance Institution
Inter-Ministerial Committee for Agrarian Reform
International Monetary Fund
Learning Innovation Loan
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Justice
Non-governmental Organization
National Bank of Ukraine
Operations Evaluation Department
Programmatic Adjustment Loan
Pre-Export Guarantee Facility
Private Sector Development
Sector Adjustment Loan
Small and Medium Size Enterprises
Technical Assistance
Technical Assistance for the CIS (EU Technical Assistance program)
Tuberculosis
United Kingdom Department for Intemational Development
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International Development

Fiscal Year

Government: 

January I - December 31

The World Bank Group Team

IBRD 
IFC
Vice President: Johannes F. Linn 
Vice President: Assaad J. Jabre
Country Director: Luca Barbone 
Director: Edward Nassim
Task Team: Luca Barbone, Lilia Burunciuc, Gregory IJedrzejczak, Vesna Petrovic, Dusan
Vujovic, Luis-Alvaro Sanchez. Kutlay Ebiri. Andriy Storozhuk, Deborah Wetzel

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ....... 

............................................................. 

I. 

COULNTRY CONTEXT ......................................

A. 

INTRODUCTION..I
B. KEY POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS ............................................... 
C. WORSENING SOCIAL OUTCOMES, INSTITUTIONAL WEAKNESSES, AND GOVERNANCE ................... 

Worsening Social and Environmental Outcomes .................................................................... 
The Root Problems of Institutional Weaknesses and Poor Governance ............................................................. 

i

1

1

2

3
6

D. 
E. 

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND THE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM ............................. 
..................................... 7
ECONOMIC PROSPECTS, EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND EXTERNAL FINANCING .......................................... 
10

11. BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY .................................................................... 

A. 

B. 

ASSESSMENT OF THE LATEST CAS ................................................................................... 
BANK GROUP'S PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE .1................................... 

.... 

IBRD Portfolio ................................... 
IFC and MIGA Programs ................................... 

D. 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY, FYO0-03 

.18

Lessons Learned from the Most Recent CAS .18
Objectives of the Country Assistance Strategy, FY01 -03.18

Proggram Strategy.18

Proggram Content..9
Supporting Institution-Building Activities. 
Triggers and Lending Levels .27
Benchmarking and Indicators of Success .28
Selectivity and Partnerships .28
Financial Management and Fiduciary Responsibility .30

E. 

RISKS .. 

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

I'-. CONCLUSION 

............... 

13

13
.. 16

16
16

25

30

33

Boxes: 

Tables:

Box 1: Recent Macroeconomic Developments 
Box 2: Poverty 
in Ukraine, 

Box 3: Update of Sector Reforms 
Box 4: Bank Activity in Ukraine 
Box 5: Country Assistance Review (CAR) 
Box 6: 
IFC Activities in Ukraine 
Box 7: The People's Voice Project 

Table 1: Altemative Macroeconomic 
2000-2003

Scenarios,

Table 2: IBRD Exposure in Ukraine
Table 3: IBRD Tentative Lending Program - FY2001/03
Table 4: Triggers and Lending Levels
Table 5: Key Exposure and Burden Sharing Indicators,
1999-2003

ANNEXES:
Annex A2 Ukraine at a Glance
Annex B2 Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3 Bank Group Program Summary
Annex B3 
(IFC & MIGA)
Annex B4 Summary of Non-lending Services
Annex B5 Social Indicators
Annex B6 Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7 Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8 Status of Bank Group Operations
Annex B8 
(IFC)
Annex B9 Ukraine Country Assistance Strategy Framework
Annex B 10 CAS Summary of Development Priorities

ATTACHMENTS:
Attachment 1: CAS Consultations with Stakeholders

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i. 
This second Country Assistance Strategy document of the World Bank Group for Ukraine comes
at a crucial time. At the beginning of the year 2000 the appointment of a pro-reform administration, with
the support of a newly-established parliamentary majority, opened a window of opportunity for Ukraine
to reverse the weak performance of the past years. But there are difficult challenges in the short term,
beginning with the still uncertain picture for external financing. Beyond that, it has become increasingly
clear that the problems faced by Ukraine are of a long-term nature, linked to the historic lack of pro-
development institutions, i.e. institutions that can support socially and environmentally sustainable
economic growth. This suggests that there are two key developmental challenges to obtaining sustained
growth and poverty reduction in Ukraine: ensuring good governance, transparency and accountability in
the public sector; and developing inclusive, market-oriented institutions. The World Bank Group
assistance strategy, built around these themes, will have a two-legged approach: it will help build demand
for better governance, and it will seize opportunities, when these present themselves, to increase the
supply of better and development-oriented institutions. 
It will also protect the Bank by relating
comtmitment of Bank resources to the pace of reform.

The Lost Decade

ii. 
Despite the great prospects that Ukraine held at the time of the first CAS, and the undeniable
successes in nation-building in a difficult environment, the period since independence must be considered
one of strong disappointment from the economic and social points of view. Only this year has growth
returned to the country, yet recorded output is 60 percent below its 1991 value. Meanwhile, poverty has
increased and 27 percent of Ukrainians are poor (consumption equal to or less than 75 percent of the
median). Other social indicators have also deteriorated.
iii. 
These poor economic and social outcomes are due to the lack of pro-development institutions,
and to the still-limited voice that civil society has in influencing its own destiny. The institutional
framework is in transition, with old (Soviet) and new rules operating side by side; the result has been poor
governance in the public and private sectors. Thus, transaction costs are excessive because of anti-
competitive practices and corruption. Property rights are not adequately defined or protected. While
government strategic thinking and management have improved, weaknesses remain. In this environment,
the logical choice, for those who can, is rent-seeking and private investment is at a disadvantage.

Opportunities and Challenges for Ukraine and the World Bank Group

iv. 
This poor performance can be reversed. Recent political events have been favorable to reform.
After his decisive victory in the run-off of the presidential elections last November, President Kuchma
appointed a Prime Minister and a cabinet largely composed of officials with a progressive track record.
In addition, for the first time in years parliamentary factions were able to coalesce into a pro-Presidential
majority, which approved a strong budget for 2000 and endorsed a pro-reform Govemment Program.
v. 
There is thus a sense of momentum that, if maintained, could lead to substantially better
performance and to measurable changes in the quality of govemance. However, Ukraine's own recent
history, as well as intemational experience, strongly suggest that in the absence of an increased voice
from civil society and pressure for greater accountability of public officials, true institutional change is
unlikely to be sustained for long. Such greater involvement of civil society will have to emerge from
within, but the intemational community can have an important role in both supporting reform efforts at
the top and facilitating the emergence of a stronger demand for good government from the bottom.
At present, the IMF EFF arrangement, suspended since September 1999, has not yet resumed
vi. 
disbursements. Following the allegation of improprieties in handling of IMF resources by the National
Bank of Ukraine (NBU), two audits of the NBU were carried out over the past few months. While they

ii 

Executive Summary

uncovered some discrepancies in reporting foreign exchange reserves, they did not find improprieties in
the use of IMF resources. Nevertheless, at the present writing, Ukraine has yet to meet some of the prior
conditions for resumption of disbursements under the EFF. Discussions between the IMF and the
Ukrainian government are ongoing.
Lessons from the Implementation of the Bank Group Assistance Strategy

vii. 
In the past few years, the World Bank Group has mounted an important effort to assist the
economic and social transition in Ukraine. However, given the difficult environment, and despite some
successes, the assistance strategy envisaged under the CAS that was approved in 1996 did not materialize
as expected. The main factors underlying poor performance were lack of true government ownership and
ability to deliver, symptoms of institutional weakness and political paralysis.
viii. Additionally, the design of the adjustment assistance, based on separate sector adjustment
operations, proved to be a major shortcoming. Stand-alone operations had difficulties in addressing
cross-sectoral institutional and governance issues. This led to a situation in which reforms were reversed
or stalled in some areas while Bank resources were being disbursed in others. Weak institutional capacity
in key government agencies further hampered implementation. With the benefit of hindsight, the Bank
program was caught in a vicious circle resulting from the difficulties of addressing institutional
weaknesses using a sectoral approach. Over time it has become clear that changing institutions is a
process that entails addressing systemic weaknesses and typically involves an effort broader than a single
sector.
Country Assistance Strategy

ix. 
Objectives. The Country Assistance Strategy for Ukraine for the period FY01-03 aims to assist
Government and civil society in the implementation of a broad-based poverty reduction strategy and in
attaining job-creating, sustainable economic growth. To do so, the strategy directly addresses the
institution-building challenges faced by Ukraine both from the demand side (civil society) and supply side
(Government). The strategy seeks to move Ukraine closer to European Union standards, fostering
environmentally sustainable development.
x. 
Program Features: A Two-legged Strategy. To be of most effective assistance to Ukraine, the
World Bank Group's strategy is composed of two key elements: the first (under the Low Case) aims to

support civil society in its denand for better government; 
the second (which would be added under a
Base Case) aims to support opportunities to strengthen institutions that foster sustainable development,

when these opportunities present themselves. The strategy emphasizes program ownership, results on the
ground, and increased attention to material improvements in delivery of social services.
xi. 
During FYO1-03, first leg activities would provide the core of World Bank Group assistance if
there were no progress towards meeting the benchmarks for the Base Case. IBRD lending (of up to
US$456 million equivalent) and non-lending activities (including the IFC technical assistance program)
would have to meet two crucial tests, which the Government supports: First, they would have to

demonstrably help civil society increase its voice for better government and social services provision, or
provide tangible benefits in globally sensitive areas. Second, they would have to be sufficiently shielded
from possible paralysis at the center of government so as to stand a good chance of success-even 
under

less-than-favorable conditions.
xii. 
If the triggers for meeting the Base Case are achieved, World Bank assistance could draw on the
second leg, with additional IBRD lending of up to US$1.4 billion for the three-year period (under the
Base Case), with a mixture of adjustment lending under a Programmatic Adjustment Loan (PAL)
sequence and a number of institution-building operations, in addition to non-lending activities. Moving
to such a scenario would require, in addition to a sustainable macroeconomic framework, achievement of
agreed-upon benchmarks in five cross-cutting areas based on a comrnon vision of a three-year program of
progress in institution-building. These areas are: financial discipline in public and private sectors,

Executive Summary 

iii

improved regulatory framework for business, transparent definition and protection of property rights,
public sector accountability and effectiveness, mitigation of the social costs of transition and
improvements in the delivery of social services. Upon reaching the first set of agreed benchmarks, the
first., one-tranche Programmatic Adjustment Loan (PAL) would be presented to the Executive Board for
approval. Attaining benchmarks for PAL II and PAL III will be required for continuation of the Base
Case scenario into the second and third years of the strategy. Thus, other projects in the Base Case
scenario are linked to the respective PALs going forward.

xiii. More specifically, the benchmarks for the first operation will include: (a) an improvement in
financial discipline through full elimination of non-transparent budget offsets, a major reduction in budget
arrears and energy payment debts; (b) easier business entry and operation confirmed through independent
surveys; (c) enhanced property rights in agriculture through abolition of Kolkhozes, transparent
privatization of large industrial enterprises and legislation enabling privatization of at least 25 percent of
the telecom company; (d) better public sector accountability through transparent budget process
(including a formula-based transfer system), sufficient progress in public administration reform, and
significant reduction of tax exemptions; and (e) improved social sustainability through a review of special
privileges currently extending surrogate social protection and progress in preparing the pension reform.
Two subsequent PAL operations would be presented to the Board depending on meeting the agreed
benchmarks for each tranche and on the overall pace of implementation of reforms (probably at one-year
intervals). A programmatic instrument is proposed as a vehicle for adjustment lending because the PAL
design explicitly addresses two of the main lessons of the previous CAS implementation. It emphasis on
program ownership and attainment of results on the ground, and by linking enhanced financial assistance
to attainment of cross-cutting results, rather than sectoral reform that can be accompanied by backsliding
in other sectors.
xiv. 
Self-regulating Program Structure. As it is performance-based, the assistance program will
automatically relate the commitment of Bank resources to the pace of reform. Slow implementation of
reforms, and consequently slow achievement of the agreed performance benchmarks, would lead to
delayed presentation to the Board of individual adjustment and investment operations, resulting in lower
commitments and disbursements over the CAS period. The government might be able to execute the
agreed three-year program in a shorter time-frame. In this case, the resulting increased creditworthiness
might warrant higher levels of Bank exposure, particularly to deal with problems in areas in which private
capital would be unlikely to flow. This scenario-a high case-is 
rather hypothetical at this time.
However, were it to occur, it would be documented in an update to this CAS.
xv. 
Increased IFC Direct Investments. Complementing this approach, IFC will aggressively pursue
investment operations in cooperation with international and Ukrainian private partners. These are more
likely to arise as the business environment continues to improve. In addition, IFC will carry on with and
extend its current technical assistance activities, which will continue to be coordinated with present and
planned IBRD interventions in assistance to business, both on the policy and the technical assistance
sides. IFC will be strongly involved, on the policy dialogue side, in providing feedback and indications
relevant to the improvement of the regulatory framework and the protection of property rights.
xvi. 
Selectivity and Partnerships. The program is also designed to capitalize on the Bank's
comparative advantages and maximize synergies with other donors and international financial institutions.
Accordingly, the strategy contemplates a major expansion of assistance to reforms in the social sectors,
building on recent encouraging openings and the Government's stated priorities. On the other hand, the
Bank will withdraw from further investment in areas in which investment operations have proven unable
to achieve the hoped-for systemic results or demonstration effects, and will substitute appropriate non-
lending vehicles to conduct policy dialogue (infrastructure, power).

xvii. The proposed program critically depends on two factors: the Bank's ability to take advantage of
opportunities offered by existing and prospective programs of partners in development, and its ability to
capitalize on civil society's activities. These steps will ensure that the Bank's comparative advantage is

iv 

Executive Summary

fully utilized. The Bank has discussed the CAS with all partners, and has taken great care to ensure that
no duplication of efforts occur. Our partners have indicated that they appreciate the Bank's policy
leverage, which helps in making their programs successful and effective.

Issues for Board Discussion

xviii. Executive Directors may wish to address the following questions:
* Does the proposed strategy's emphasis on institution-building and good governance appropriately
take into account the lessons learned on the difficulties of transition in post-Soviet countries?
* Does the Bank Group's assistance strategy for Ukraine take into account the lessons learned from
the implementation of the previous CAS, and in particular the shortcomings of the adjustment
lending experience?
* Does the proposed two-legged program structure provide a balanced mix of sustained support to
Ukraine's reform program, while limiting Bank exposure when required?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR UKRAINE

I. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. 

INTRODUCTION

1. 
This document is being presented at a time when a window of opportunity appears to exist for
substantial advances in establishing more development-oriented and inclusive institutions in Ukraine. It
is the second World Bank Group's stand-alone Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) document for Ukraine,
that follows a Country Assistance note discussed together with the Ukraine Rehabilitation Loan (report P-
6466-UA, November 30, 1994), the first stand-alone CAS (Report No. 15674-UA), reviewed by the
Board of Executive Directors on June 3, 1996, a CAS Update (SEC M98-425) discussed on May 21,
1998, and a subsequent CAS Progress Report (Report No. 19225) reviewed by the Board on May 20,
1999. This document has been prepared by a joint IBRD and IFC team, and has benefited from thorough
discussions with MIGA on the role of guarantees in Ukraine. The outlines of the assistance strategy have
been discussed with the Government of Ukraine and with an unprecedented cross-section of civil society.
The strategy views a stronger civil society as a key component for progress in institutional reform and
poverty reduction. Thus the World Bank Group team consulted with members of the Verkhovna Rada
(parliament), representatives of the business community and local governments, civic organizations and
NGOs. Over 200 interested groups have participated in the discussions, held both in Kyiv and across
Ukraine. The results of the discussions have been incorporated in the strategy and are summarized in
Attachment 1.

B. 

KEY POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

2. 
The Lost Decade. Ukraine re-established its independence in 1991, after more than 70 years of
Soviet rule. As a nation of almost 50 million people, Ukraine is strategically located at a crossroads
between east and west, with a great endowment of human and physical capital. For all the potential that
the country holds, the first decade of independence must be considered one of missed opportunities and
great disappointments on the economic and social fronts, despite many achievements on the political side.

3. 
After an initial period when economic reform took a back seat to political and nation-building
imperatives, expectations were set very high in 1994-96, when a new President and Government came to
power and seemed able to embark on an ambitious program of reform. The Bank reacted to the reform
opening by offering a commensurate assistance program, as set out in the 1996 CAS. Bank assistance
was broad by design, reflecting the need for reform in several sectors of the economy. It was also
designed to provide a graduated response to progress in the execution of the reform program.

4. 
Initial results were encouraging, particularly in the area of small-scale privatization, mass
privatization and legal reforms, such as bankruptcy procedures. Very soon, however, the Government
began displaying a lack of sustained commitment to the reform agenda. This was coupled with growing
paralysis in decision-making in the legislature and rising encroachment of the patrimonial state and the
oligarchs-worsening the capture of the state by vested interests. These negative tendencies were noted

2 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

on the Bank side, in the April 1999 CAS Progress Report. This document set out to protect the Bank by
limiting its exposure to an unwilling reformer through the establishment of performance-based triggers
for resumption of adjustment lending and for the further appraisal of investment operations. As a result,
Bank operations in Ukraine were sharply curtailed.

5. 
An Opportunity for Improvement. This situation can be reversed. The power of the interest
groups, while formidable, is not irreversibly engrained in society. It still depends mostly on opportunities
for graft and private enrichment stemming from transaction and trade privileges obtained through
cronyism, rather than from consolidated ownership of productive sector assets. But the anti-reform camp
is strong. For a reform initiative to succeed and be sustainable in Ukraine, Government must develop a
broad coalition to reduce the influence of those political and social forces that seek to preserve the status
quo. This coalition is not likely to emerge unless civil society feels empowered and increases its demands
for better govemment.

6. 
Recent political events have been favorable to reform. After his decisive victory in the run-off of
the presidential elections last November, President Kuchma appointed a Prime Minister and a cabinet
largely composed of officials with a more progressive track record. More important, for the first time in
years, parliamentary factions have coalesced into a pro-presidential majority that approved a strong
budget for 2000 and endorsed the pro-reform Government program. These events create great potential
for moving forward on reform, but there are reasons to remain vigilant. Prime Minister Yushchenko's
Government will need to withstand pressures to maintain the status quo, particularly as the reform
program starts biting into the vested interests of the more powerful oligarchs, who have deep connections
within the legislative and the executive. In addition, the external financing outlook is still clouded by the
aftermath of the alleged mismanagement of National Bank of Ukraine (NBU) reserves during 1997-98,
despite the relatively favorable second audit report.

7. 
Economic performance has improved in the past few months. Industrial production rose at
double-digit rates in the first half of 2000, with a reported annualized growth in GDP of 5 to 6 percent, as
a delayed reaction to the devaluation of the Hryvnia and strong external demand. It now appears likely
that growth might return to Ukraine for the first time in the past ten years (see Box 1 for a review of
recent macroeconomic developments). 
In addition, the Yushchenko Government successfully re-
negotiated the privately held bond debt contracted in the past few years that had short maturity and high
interest rates. Thus, although the year 2001 is still likely to be somewhat difficult for Ukraine's external
position, the country could look forward to a relatively favorable environment for an ambitious program
of economic reform.

8. 
A Note of Caution. However, short-term successes and uncertainties should not distract from the
fundamental, long-term problems that affect Ukraine's development prospects. The opportunities lost
over the past ten years will not be easy to recoup unless major advances in establishing legitimate, pro-
development institutions take place. These issues are discussed in the next section.

C. WORSENING SOCIAL OUTCOMES, INSTrrUTIONAL WEAKNESSES, AND GOVERNANCE

9. 
Understanding the root causes of the unfavorable political and economic developments of the past
few years requires an analysis of the evolution of the underlying political economy. An incomplete
institutional framework and poor governance have contributed to poor economic performance and
increased poverty. Poor governance has also created favorable conditions for the emergence of early
winners of the transition period-oligarchs and a large part of the bureaucracy that are now trying to
prevent further reforms as they profit from the status quo. These factors have also worsened the
distribution of income. Successful reform will have to address these intertwined relationships.

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

3

Box 1: Recent Macroeconomic Developments
Following successful stabilization between 1996 and 1997, Ukraine has maintained a relatively stable
macroeconomic environment. In the past seven/eight months, signs of economic recovery have appeared.
However their sustainability over the medium term is questionable, in view of the insufficient restructuring in the
economy. Among the highlights of recent macroeconomic performance:
* Real GDP (officially measured), after declining cumulatively by 60 percent over nine years, shows signs of
having bottomed out. Following a modest 1.9 percent decline in 1998, and an even smaller 0.4 percent
decline in 1999, GDP has grown by some 6 percent in the first five months of the year 2000, with industrial
production recording sharply higher double-digit growth rates. The rebound is the result of the combined
effects of the devaluation of the Hryvnia, the strong growth in the Russian economy, and the revival of
domestic demand following an improved pension and wages payment record.
* Annual CPI inflation which was cut from hyperinflationary levels in 1992-1994 to 10 percent in 1997, picked
up again to 19-29 percent in 1998-1999, as a result of the Hryvnia depreciation triggered by the Russian crisis
in 1998 and looser fiscal/monetary policies in the run-up presidential elections in the fall of 1999. Inflation
reached 18.7 percent during the first half of 2000. Policies to bring inflation back to its declining path are
envisaged by the Central Bank and the Government.
* The trade and current account balance have improved due to real devaluation and strong external demand.
The Hryvnia suffered a series of devaluations in the wake of the Russian crisis losing 60 percent of its value
against the dollar between the fall of 1999 and early 2000. Since then it has remained relatively stable in
nominal terms, yet the effective exchange rate is almost 20 percent below its pre-Russian crisis level with real
devaluation against the world's leading currencies even bigger. The current account deficit, which remained
virtually unchanged at US$1.3 billion in 1997 and 1998, turned into an US$834 million surplus in 1999. A
mild US$300 million current account deficit is expected in the year 2000.
* The cash deficit of the general government has been reduced from 5.6 percent of GDP in 1997, to 2.8 percent
in 1998 and 2.4 percent in 1999. The Budget for the year 2000 called for a further reduction in the cash
deficit to 2.7 percent. This would be based on: improved budget discipline; tighter expenditure controls;
elimination of budget offsets; and cuts in tax privileges and social subsidies; while also lowering the tax
burden on the business sector.
* Despite these recent advances, the macroeconomic situation continues to be fragile. The main difficulties
continue to come from weak fiscal and debt management. Meeting the deficit objective will require in
particular strict expenditure control during the rest of this year. The measured deficit on an accrual basis has
been declining and in fact the Government has succeeded in reducing the stock of outstanding wage and
pension arrears. However, the stock of other budgetary arrears is not measured with precision and, jointly
with contingent liabilities, represents a risk whose net effect has not yet been fully determined. Efforts are
under way to improve the measurement of arrears and government contingent liabilities in the economy.
* Debt management continues to be challenging. The successful rescheduling of the private external debt in
March 2000, as well as the increased demand for Hryvnias of the past few months, have allowed the National
Bank of Ukraine (NBU) to service official obligations while maintaining international reserves close to US$1
billion at the end of June. In the absence of disbursements from international financial institutions, the NBU
extensively relied on open market purchases to replenish reserves. So far, this has not had a visible impact on
the exchange rate, which remains stable at the level reached in February 2000.

Worsening Social and Environmental Outcomes
10. 
The transition from the command-and-control socialist state, with its cradle-to-grave social
protection system, to a pseudo-market economy has resulted in substantial dislocations, amplified by the
weakness of institutions and emergence of rent-seeking behavior. Three phenomena are worth
highlighting: the growth of poverty, the disparity of the impact of the transition based on gender, and
environmental degradation.

4 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

Box 2: Poverty In Ukraine
More than one out of four people---some 27 percent of the population---is poor (defined as having consumption
equal to 75 percent or less of median), based on results of a recent household survey covering the first three
quarters of 1999. Some 18 percent of the households are extremely poor: they are spending 80 percent or more
of their total expenditures on food. While valid comparisons between the results of the latest survey and earlier
surveys are complicated by problems related to survey methodology and determination of the poverty line, it is
generally agreed that poverty in Ukraine has increased during the whole period of the 1990s. This trend has
been fueled mainly by a decline in real income during the transition period.
Who are the poor in Ukraine? As in many other countries of the Former Soviet Union (FSU) they are, in
particular, families with children (especially those with three and more children, and those with children under
the age of three); the elderly living alone, especially pensioners that cannot supplement their pensions with some
form of paid work; the unemployed; and-increasingly-the working poor. Households headed by females
appear to be at higher risk as are single mothers/providers or widows. Key facts are as follows:
* Poverty is not confined to those with low/limited opportunities for outside employment. Because of wage
arrears and low wage levels, the share of poor households with a formally employed head is more than 40
percent.
* At the same time, there is a strong correlation between unemployment status of head of household, and
poverty. The poverty rate of households with an unemployed head was 37 percent, and 20 percent of such
households were very poor.
* Poverty rates are much higher among the single elderly, especially those above age 75. However, more
generally poverty among pensioners is tempered by the fact that a large number of such people keep
working. Some 22 percent of males and 13 percent of females aged 60 to 70 work.
* Households with children are more likely to be poor, and the likelihood of poverty increases with the
number of children.
* Poverty is correlated with lack of education and occupational skills: the higher the education level of the
head of household, the less likely the household is to be poor.
* Poverty is differentiated by regions and related to residence outside growth areas (Kyiv city, Chernihiv,
Kharkiv and Transcarpathia show the lowest poverty rates).
* While owning a plot of land will mitigate poverty, plot size plays an important role in determining poverty.
On average, the plots of poor households are half the size of those of the non-poor.
All this indicates a complex, structurally-based picture of poverty, with a significant share of poor and very poor
people, differentiation in poverty by region and status of human capital and asset ownership/access. Poverty is
clearly linked to lack of progress in creating an economy that can offer productive jobs.

11. 
Increase in absolute and relative poverty. The incidence of poverty has increased considerably
in Ukraine to the point that 27 percent of the population now lives below the poverty line, and 18 percent
in extreme poverty'. A fifth of the population is working part-time or is on administrative leave; formal
unemployment has risen to 11 percent of the economically active population. 
(For further detail on

poverty profile, see Box 2). At the same time, the human and physical capital stock has deteriorated. The

underlying reasons for these developments are:

I 
These results are based on a household survey covering the first three quarters of 1999, in which "poor' is
defined as having consumption equal to 75 percent or less of the median. Data presented in Annex A2 represent data
from the World Bank database that reflect an earlier survey and have been adjusted to be comparable across
countries.

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

5

* 

Significant decline in real earnings since 1989. Official statistics indicate that, between 1991
and 1999, measured national income declined about 60 percent, on a cumulative basis2 . There is
massive and popular dissatisfaction with the standard of living, and a deep sense of a sharp
decline in real incomes. One reason is a significant shift of the sources of incomes from the
official sector of public enterprises and institutions to the private sector---mostly in the shadow
economy. The new structure of incomes is inherently less reliable than the old one, and makes
decisions about spending patterns less stable. In addition, the shift from the "economy of
shortages" to the "economy of full shops" made households' budget constraints more acute and
visible. Therefore, for many families the level of consumption has dropped; they can no longer
compensate for the lack of purchasing power by spending more time waiting for goods, bartering
for them, or acquiring them on the black market. Ample anecdotal evidence suggests that
inequality has increased, with the emergence of a small class of very wealthy individuals that
have benefited from the initial stages of the transformation.
* Areas of structural poverty. Changes in relative prices imply that many of the activities carried
out under the old system are no longer viable. One-factory cities, industrially specialized areas
such as the coal mining areas, and the rural areas are particularly affected by such structural
poverty. Certain groups such as single old people and single mothers also continue to be
particularly vulnerable.
* Poor delivery of social services. Shrinking budgetary resources and unclear definition of
responsibilities have led to deterioration in social service delivery. In Soviet times, large state
enterprises were responsible for the provision of many social facilities including kindergartens,
schools, hospitals, sports and social welfare facilities. With the onset of reforms many of these
responsibilities were passed on to local government that lacked the resources to take on these
functions. In some cases communities have simply curtailed the provision of such services. In
others, providers of social services (such as health care and education) exploit the relatively
stable demand and charge "informal fees" for access to these services.

12. 
Poverty in Ukraine has been artificially mitigated by open and hidden subsidies for basic
consumer goods and services (such as bread, housing, public transportation, electricity tariffs) and a tacit
approval of non-payment for housing and utilities. These subsidies alleviate the immediate poverty
impact. At the same time, they make reforms requiring removal of these subsidies more painful socially
and increasingly difficult politically. However, the current system of significant implicit subsidies to
supply basic goods to the population is not economically sustainable and limits the possibilities for
economic renewal.

13. 
The Emerging Gender Dimension. Gender disparities in Ukraine have become increasingly
acute over the years, despite a widespread lack of recognition of their existence. Although the difference
between the situation for women and that for men as far as educational achievements, access to job
market, and the like is not as evident as in other regions of the world, worrisome trends have emerged that
raise serious concerns. As in many areas of the former Soviet Union, male life expectancies have
declined compared to women, largely because lifestyles have deteriorated--including an increase in
drinking problems. Perhaps as a consequence of looser family relations in strata that are most hit by the
social transformation, freedom of travel and increased pressure for ostentatious consumption, trafficking
of young women has reached an unprecedented level even when compared to other FSU countries. In

2 

At the same time the size of the shadow economy has grown significantly. However, the size of the
informal economy has yet to be established with some certainty, but by all accounts it is reportedly substantial,
ranging up to 50 percent of measured GDP. The last country CEM established the size at around 40 percent. But

household surveys, for instance, do not pick up evidence of massive unreported employment The bulk of the
estimated informal economy is largely a reflection of underreporting by officially-registered firms to subtract
income from SOEs and avoid taxes.

6 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

addition, women have been the prime target for job cuts because of redundancies, when these have
occurred. The reduction of social assets in enterprises leads to a greater burden on women who cannot
afford privately provided child care. Access to credit-now 
sharply limited and linked to insider
knowledge-appears to be skewed against women.

14. 
Environmental Challenges. Ukraine is one of the most environmentally damaged countries in
the world, both regarding the environmental consequences of the Chernobyl accident and the
environmental degradation caused by the heavy industries (e.g., metallurgy, chemicals, coal mines).
However, despite the great number of ecological problems, Ukraine has preserved a number of typical
and unique natural ecosystems which have already been lost in most other European countries. The
challenge ahead is to create an adequate institutional and regulatory framework and find the necessary
resources to deal with the increasing problems of pollution while preserving the valuable ecosystems in
place. Despite the advances in legislation and the establishment of agencies formally charged with
protection of the environment, the gap between the objectives to which the country is commnitted and the
reality on the ground remains wide.

The Root Problems of Institutional Weaknesses and Poor Governance

15. 
Fundamental institutional weakness is at the root of the unsatisfactory performance and
worsening social outcomes. Institutional weakness is not to be construed in technological terms, such as
lack of physical means or educational standards. Rather, weakness of institutions is felt in the gap
between written rules and regulations and actual behaviors, particularly in the public sector. The informal
rules that are now established reduce certainty over property rights, increase transaction costs and
uncertainty, and contribute to low levels of private investment and risk-taking. Rent-seeking appears to
be the logical choice in this environment. It is not surprising that Ukraine ranks among the worst
performers in phenomena such as business harassment and corruption, and that foreign investment has
been disappointing.

16. 
Under current conditions, the public sector still represents a hindrance to economic activity, and
is not recognized by civil society as a means for its empowerment. This in part reflects a historical
tradition. Efforts to reform the formal aspects of institutions have had mixed results due to a fundamental
lack of consensus on direction. As a result, the following observations are made:
* Non-enforcement of contracts and soft budget constraints in the public and private sectors. The
government budgetary arrears are a major source of non-payments in the economy (the use of
offsets, among budgetary units and with state enterprises is a major source of corruption).
Unprofitable enterprises continue to operate on the basis of direct and indirect government
transfers and fail to pay taxes;
* Poor contract enforcement and lack of fair settlement mechanisms, including an operating
judicial system. Key laws necessary for commerce are either missing (for instance, protection of
investment rights and mortgaging) or inappropriate (for instance, leasing, banking and collateral
legislation) or badly enforced (for instance, bankruptcy);

* Capture of public institutions by private interests, as observed, for instance, in the way in which
disposition of public assets has been implemented in the energy sector;

* Obsolete public administration, with unclear distribution of responsibilities between agencies and
levels of government;
* A civil service that still clings to an old way of looking at the world and state intervention;
* A highly complex regulatory environment, which is a major source of corruption-with many
agencies still entitled to "inspect" business and demand payments, particularly at the local level;
and

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

7

* Poor management of public moneys, as epitomized by the inquiries into the management of

foreign exchange reserves.

17. 
A New Political Economy of Crony Capitalism. The growth of private interests around rent-
seeking and corruption has redefined the political economy of the country---not as expected, from "plan
to market" but from bureaucratic socialism to crony capitalism3 . These developments can be attributed to
incomplete and partial reforms, rather than hasty ones. The emergence of new vested interests has
reduced the Government's margin of maneuverability to implement further reforms. The groups that
have arisen have an inherent interest in preserving the current power-sharing arrangements, and will
oppose reforms that curtail their influence. The losers in this process are relatively unorganized and-
unless mobilized-do not have the power to change the direction of the process.

18. 
On the positive side, potential gains from rent-seeking are shrinking, reducing the available
resources for graft and introducing rifts between various groups. Also, true liberalization of the economy
is likely to weaken the power of these groups, as their clout is based on trade and transaction privileges
and not asset ownership. However, Government has to prevent the capture of the future privatization
process by these groups and find ways to limit their control of key strategic sectors. These groups extend
in some cases beyond Ukrainian borders and may involve far more powerful players from neighboring
countries.

D. DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND THE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM

19. 
The Nature of Ukraine's Development Challenge. The preceding discussion highlights the issue
that Ukraine's development challenge is of a medium-term nature, and chiefly involves building up
legitimate pro-development institutions, that can deliver on their commnitments in an environment in
which major actors have strong incentives for maintaining the status quo. It is unlikely that poverty-
reducing, broad-based growth will occur if a more legitimate and efficient institutional environment is not
put in place. This is a problem that affects all traditional "sectors," as the reach of the state and the
culture of rent-seeking are pervasive across Ukrainian society (for a review of sectoral developments, see
Box 3). For instance, the culture of non-payments or barter transactions has effectively prevented private
sector development in agriculture, in energy, in industry and in services, and undermines the provision of
social services. Uncertainty over formal enforcement mechanisms affects investment in the financial
sector and prevents the emergence of appropriate markets that could favor restructuring of industrial
enterprises as well as agribusiness. It is thus important to stress that, while putting the right policies in
place remains important, it is the gap between formal rules and informal behaviors that is at the root of
unsatisfactory performance.

20. 
These considerations suggest caution in extending assistance to Ukraine, and realism with respect
to the timeframe in which it should be reasonable to expect results. There are however moments in a
country's history when the presence of pro-reform leadership and a convergence of forces in favor of a

3 

This has occurred because an environment characterized by an incomplete and non-transparent institutional
design, regulations that foster rent-seeking by public officials and weak oversight has created opportunities for
corruption. An example of this has been the extension of trade monopolies in critical sectors of the economy, such
as energy, that has led to privileged groups amassing fortunes, despite the reported decline in economic activity.

But even the privatization process and energy distribution reforms, which were designed to reduce the waste of
public resources and resolve conflicts between ownership and regulatory responsibilities, have in practice created
open-ended opportunities for graft and private enrichment.

8 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

Box 3: Update on Sector Reforms

Private Sector. To date, Ukraine has privatized more than 63,000 mostly small and medium enterprises, which are an
important source of private sector growth. However, a significant number of large enterprises are still owned by the state,
and a number of large privatization transactions resulted in consolidation of insiders' interests. The new Government
started the process- of transparent case-by-case privatizations, and since the beginning of this year, several such
privatizations have taken place. Major achievements of the past years also include adoption of accounting standards
compatible with IAS and adoption of a bankruptcy law. Nascent capital markets today have an independent Securities and
Stock Market Commission. Efforts have also been made to improve the regulatory environment and facilitate
entrepreneurial activity - simplification of registration process and elimination of a number of unnecessary licenses as well
as some reduction in business inspections. However, these changes have had only limited effects on the business
environment and foreign direct investment still remains among the lowest in the region.

Fiscal Reforms. Over the past few years, significant improvements have been made in fiscal management, including
progress in the adoption of a new budget classification system, prohibition of central bank direct financing of the
government, the implementation of a treasury system, creation of the external audit function, introduction of simplified
taxation for small business and reduction of payroll taxes, and improved availability of fiscal information. Nonetheless,
much more remains. The definition of basic fiscal functions and the allocation of responsibilities across different branches
and levels of government and across different ministries is not sufficiently transparent. The new Budget Code, which has
already passed two readings in the Verkhovna Rada and, the new Tax Code, scheduled for deliberations in the coming
months, address these issues.

Public Administration. As this document makes clear, public administration reform is an important but difficult long-term
objective for Ukraine. Some progress has been registered in the past few years. The excessive fragmentation of public
institutions (large number of ministerial and inter-ministerial bodies) has been addressed through restructuring of key
ministries and reductions in cabinet posts. However, the bureaucratic behavior, which relies on the rules from the past, and
lack of transparency as to where decisions are made, still remain to be addressed. The civil service is filled with people in
top positions, vying for power and influence, and poorly trained in modem methods of administration. The relationships
between the central and the regional govemments are unclear, with dual subordination creating confusion about duties and
responsibilities, as is the case of the Oblasts in relation to the central govemment and the municipal authorities.

Agriculture. Performance in agriculture has been disappointing for a country like Ukraine, that can rely on very fertile land
and an experienced labor force. There has been some progress with the elimination of price and margin controls on
agricultural products and the removal of remaining trade restrictions but there have also been reversals in the trade regime,
e.g., the introduction of an export duty on sunflower seeds. The current Govemment's program of reform in agriculture,
discussed in the main text, would represent a welcome acceleration of a process that has stalled. Despite positive events
(such as the abolition of Kholkozes as a form of farm organization, and the beginning of distribution of property certificates
to farmers), true property reformn and trade liberalization have proven difficult, as the struggle between conservative and
pro-reform forces has often brought the process to a standstill. The state retains control of a major share of the storage
facilities in the country, effective control of about 85 percent of the agricultural land, and influence over about 90 percent of
the trade in agricultural commodities. A new Land Code that should resolve the land privatization issue is currently under
the Verkhovna Rada's consideration.

Energy. Ukraine has been grappling with reform in the energy sector with some success, but also a considerable amount of
work remains. Some progress has been achieved in the coal sector-50 uneconomic mines (out of 280) have been closed
and their social impact mitigated. In the power sector, some advances have been made in developing an efficient energy
market. However, like other sectors, poor governance, political interference, and in particular the culture of non-payment
have slowed down progress. Over the next few months, a new round of privatization of regional distribution companies will
provide a crucial test of the Government's ability to implement reform.

Financial sector. Despite having avoided the meltdown that could have been possible in the wake of the Russia crisis, the
Ukrainian financial sector remains very weak. The capital of the banking system represents only 3.3 percent of GDP;
overall monetization is low compared to even other CIS countries, and little credit is available for the business sector. A
number of reforms, supported by World Bank and other donor assistance, have been introduced in the past few years, and
key pieces of legislation are under discussion at present. The weak financial system further enhances the tendency to trade
in barter or make payments outside the banking system. The Bank's involvement in the financial sector has helped to bring
improvements in banking supervision, regulation enforcement, accounting, and payment system.

Environment. Progress in this area continues to be good, although challenges in the environmental area remain substantial.
Improvements in environmental policies and environmental management have been supported through two Bank IDFs.
Progress has also been made in promoting biodiversity and wetlands in the Azov and Black Sea regions.

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

9

reform direction may lead to rapid advances in institutional development and achievement of milestones
in the country's transfornation agenda. Although President Kuchma has been in power for many years,
his recent re-election has been accompanied by the first-ever working parliamentary majority that
supports the Government. On these bases, the present Government has set about to forge a consensus on
critical reform steps, which has included an effort to reach out to the population for support, and has
resulted in the preparation and initial implementation of a multi-year reform plan (see next section). The
present juncture in Ukraine may indeed be a defining moment, despite the fact that many reasons for
qualification and prudence remain.

21. 
The Government Program. As indicated above, there are reasons to believe that greater progress
is now possible. For the first time since independence, the Ukrainian Government has prepared a medium
term (five-year) program that signals a clear departure from the past, Soviet-type programs. It received
the Verkhovna Rada's backing on April 6, 2000.

22. 
The Government Program establishes five strategic goals: (i) developing human resources, (ii)
reducing poverty and increasing the prosperity of the Ukrainian nation, (iii) increasing the
competitiveness of Ukraine's economy, (iv) protecting human rights, freedoms, personal security and the
integrity of the state, and (v) promoting Ukraine's integration with the European Union. For the first time,
the program was prepared in a participatory manner. Representatives of civil society (including
academia, NGOs, and business associations) were invited to help in its preparation. Moreover, the
program envisages widening the consultations with the civil society. The Government has pledged to
provide regular information about its policies and communicate the results of its activities to the public.

23. 
The Government has requested the Bank's assistance in formulating, for the first time in Ukraine,
a comprehensive anti-poverty strategy. A poverty study is currently under preparation with Bank
assistance. This study will be used to formulate a poverty reduction strategy and will help redesign the
social assistance mechanisms to better target benefits and reach the most needy segments of the
population. Local communities are to be involved in the delivery of such assistance.

24. 
In the area of governance, the Government proposes continued reform of public administration to
transform it into a smaller and more efficient bureaucracy. Decentralization and development of a
sustainable system of intergovernmental finance are also high on the Government's agenda. Corruption is
explicitly recognized as a significant problem and anti-corruption measures are identified, including civil
service reform aimed at increasing the accountability and meritocracy, along with training and pay
reform. The reform of the legal and judicial system is foreseen as an important complement of the
enhanced governance strategy.

25. 
Social sector reforms are at the top of the Government's reform agenda, also for the first time.
The Government program has proposed to strengthen primary health care on the basis of family medical
practice, develop a system of health insurance, introduce the concept of family doctors and create
conditions for private medical practice. In education, the curriculum and the textbooks will be revised
along with the restructuring of the school system to meet the demands of a new labor force for the market
system. In social protection, the Government intends to restructure social assistance to provide targeted
support, through means-testing, to the neediest and gradually introduce a three-pillar pension system.

26. 
Important steps are envisaged in the area of budget reform. The Government intends to run low-
deficit budgets from 2000, streamline the tax system, reform the system of budgetary transfers between
levels of government, improve expenditure management, and introduce an open competitive public
procurement system.

27. 
To improve the business environment and make Ukraine more attractive to investors, the
Government will pay particular attention to enhancing and protecting property rights, securing contract
enforcement and the application of well-defined bankruptcy rules, streamnline the tax system and its

10 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

administration, and introduce transparent procedures for case-by-case privatization. In the financial
sector, the Government intends to complete the reform of the legal and regulatory environment initiated
in the past few years (through the adoption of the Banking Law, the Deposit Insurance Law, and laws on
mortgages, leasing, and land) and follow through with effective implementation.

28. 
Important reform measures are envisaged in the energy sector. Elimination of non-payments and
payment arrears, transparent privatization of energy distribution companies, development of energy-
saving programs and diversification of energy supply markets are proposed in this sector.

29. 
In agriculture, the Govemnment plans to continue the on-going land reform: liquidation of
collective farms started in late 1999, approval of a new land code and development of a title registration
system as well as supportive legislation and market institutions.

30. 
There is thus a sense of momentum that, if maintained, could lead to substantially better
performance and to measurable changes in the quality of governance. On the other hand, Ukraine's own
recent history, as well as international experience, strongly suggest that in the absence of an increased
voice from civil society and pressure for greater accountability of public officials, true institutional
change is unlikely to be sustained for long. And while such greater involvement of civil society will have
to emerge from within, the international community can have an important role in both supporting reform
efforts at the top and facilitating the emergence of a stronger demand for good government from the
bottom.

E. 

ECONOMIC PROSPECTS, EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT AND EXTERNAL FINANCING

31. 
As far as economic developments are concerned, the CAS period opens on a positive note.
Measured GDP is on the rise, and growth is expected to be at least 2.0 percent in 2000. The Parliament
recently approved in the first or second reading a series of critical bills, including a Land Code that
envisions private land ownership, a Budget Code that streamlines budgetary process and procedure, and a
Tax Code that substantially cuts tax burdens, improving chances that the current recovery will be
sustained and augmented by a real broad- based private sector growth. On the fiscal side, government
revenues have increased and mutual settlements have been eradicated from the central budget. This may
call for extra budgetary tightening on the expenditure side in order to meet the Government's target
deficit of 2.7 percent for 2000. Finally, due to a combination of cost-push and monetary factors, inflation
has edged up to 3.7 percent for the month of June or 18.7 percent for the first half of the year. While the
economic situation has improved, it will continue to require close attention.

32. 
The external payments outlook is more robust than just a few months ago, even in the absence of
any external financing from official sources. The real depreciation of the currency, especially against non-
CIS countries and economic revival in nearby countries has led to strong export performance, allowing
the country to maintain around $1 billion in reserves while servicing its external debt obligations. This
performance is expected to continue should the present circumstances continue to hold. However, the
events of 1998 have shown that Ukraine's economic performance can be severely affected by down-turns
in nearby economies. The Government is making efforts to diversify trade and reduce the energy intensity
of the economy. In this regard, Ukraine has already initiated preliminary discussions for accelerated
accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO). When effective, WTO membership should allow the
country to further diversify its export and import markets. Reduction of energy intensity will be an
important by-product of the institutional and governance measures supported by this CAS. Overall, it is
expected that the strengthening of the external sector will continue during the CAS period.

33. 
The country's current 40.9 percent debt-to-GDP ratio is not very high by international standards,
although the rate at which it has increased in recent years has been rapid. Also, due to the exceptionally
short term-structure and high cost of external debt, Ukraine was on the brink of a debt crisis earlier this

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

11

Table 1: Alternative Macroeconomic Scenarios, 2000-2003

Base Case 
1 19991 20001 2001 
National accounts (real annual change, %)

1 

I 
Low Case
2002r 2003 _ 19991 20001 2001 2002 2003

GDP at narket prices 

Gross domestic investment 
Exports (GNFS) 
Inports (GNFS) 
GDP Inflation 

External financing requirement (mn.$)' 

oJw Current account deficit2

(% of GDP) 

External financing plan (mn. $)
Private investment (net)3
Net long-term lending 
01w World Bank 
Other capital fows 
Foreign exchange reserves excl. gold 

(months of GS imports4

)

-0.4 
-5.4 
-7.9 
-19.1 
24.4 

-470 

-834 

2.7 

551 
-196 
420 
-825 
0.8 

2.0 
7.7 
8.5 
18.7 
29.0 

580 

311 

-1.0 

850 
-15 
259 
-255 
0.8 

2.3 
5.9 
5.0 
6.3 
18.0 

2.6 
5.7 
5.4 
5.5 
15.0 

3.0 
5.5 
5.7 
5.5 
10.0 

1,341 

1,141 

1,175 

744 

-2.3 

851 

-2.5 

870 

-2.4 

1,000 1,200 1,375 
736 
146 
-45 
264 
294 
324 
-395 
-205 
-155 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 

-0.4 
2.0 
-5.4 
3.9 
-7.9 
5.2 
-19.1 13.9 
24.4 
29.0 

-470 

-834 

2.7 

231 

138 

0.4 

551 
-196 
420 
-825 
0.8 

785 
-424 
109 
-130 
0.8 

1.8 
2.0 
3.2 
1.9 
25.0 

232 

82 

0.3 

785 
-423 
-10 
-130 
0.8 

1.2 
1.0
1.4 
1.0
2.2 
1.5
1.3 
0.9
25.0 25.0

-44 

-109 

-0.4 

625 
-539 
-47 
-130 
0.9 

-186

-244

0.8

525
-581
-22
-130
0.9

IBRD DOD/Total DOD % s 

16.1 

19.9 

20.9 

23.0 

25.8 

16.1 

19.9 

19.9 20.5 21.5

"Current account deficit plus increase in foreign exchange reserves
2'Negative = surplus
3 Direct plus portfolio investment
4' Including factor payments
5' Includes present value of guarantees
Source: 1999 actuals and World Bank staff projections

year until a private debt swap was endorsed by creditors in mid-March4 . The recent swap spread
payments on US$2.3 billion of privately held sovereign debt maturing in 2000-2001 over the next five to
six years. The external liquidity relief provides a favorable window of opportunity over the next two to
three years, during which the country should reprogram its debt with the Paris Club5 , resume its relations
with the IMF, and engage the Bank and other IFIs in supporting the implementation of the Government's
medium-term reforms.
34. 
Status of the IMF Program. The IMF approved a three-year Extended Fund Facility (EFF)
program (about US$2.6 billion) in September 1998. This program has been on hold since September
1999, when it went off track due to poor program implementation in the context of the Presidential
elections in October/November 1999. 
In early 2000, an issue emerged related to allegations of
mismanagement of the central bank's reserves. The two audit reports concluded thus far have confirmed
that the central bank over-reported its reserves but have not revealed any evidence of misuse of IMF
resources6 . Although this issue is no longer an obstacle to resumption of the EFF, a range of issues are
still outstanding, including the approval of fiscal measures to keep the budget deficit to 2.7 percent of
GDP in 2000, initiation of liquidation procedures against a major troubled bank, increase in cash

4 

The year 2000 external liquidity crisis arose from the decision in late 1997 and early 1998 to raise
substantial funds on international financial markets using short-term bonds with excessive interest rates and heavily
concentrated repayments in 2000 and early 2001. The partial rescheduling of the foreign obligations in late 1998
and mid-1999 using additional bond issues against the same maturity dates further exacerbated the problem.
The reprogramming of the Paris Club debt under similar conditions has tentatively been agreed, but the
finalization remains contingent on the resumption of the IMF program.
The period between January 1998 and September 1998 is yet to be audited.

5 

6 

12 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

collection for energy, elimination of the export tax on sunflower seeds, increase in utility tariffs, and
identification of a US$1.5 billion privatization program for 2001. The Bank and Fund teams continue to
work closely, especially on the agenda of structural reform.

35. 
A Base Case Scenario. The central macroeconomic scenario underlying this proposed CAS
-assumes specifically: (i) a full resumption and timely subsequent implementation of IMF's EFF program
(the undisbursed amount is about US$1.6 billion); (ii) successful reprogramming of the Paris Club debt;
(iii) continued enhanced support from the Bank and other multilateral/bilateral sources of long-term
lending; and (iv) increase in privatization proceeds and other direct foreign investment.

36. 
Following an initial period of successful reforms and improved economic performance, it is
expected that the image of the country and its credit rating will gradually improve, leading to a re-entry in
the international capital markets in the medium term. Moreover, strategic investors are also expected to
come to Ukraine in critical sectors, including telecommunications and energy, and, thus, enable the
country increasingly to rely on direct foreign investment to meet its longer-run external financing needs.
Consequently, the initial higher relative dependence on IFIs for long-term external financing is expected
to decline over time.

37. 
Regarding GDP and balance of payments dynamics, the Base Case scenario builds on the most
recent World Bank medium-term macroeconomic projections (Table 1). Recent revival of economic
growth observed in the second half of 1999 and the first six months of the year 2000 is assumed to carry
over through the rest of the year, yielding the first positive annual growth since independence. This
growth, currently conservatively estimated at around 2 percent, is assumed to further increase to 2.3
percent in the year 2001, 2.6 percent in the year 2002, and to reach 3 percent during the last year of the
CAS period. This growth is built upon improved fiscal performance and a reduction in the role of the
public sector (see Annex Table B6) as well as a resolution of the systemic constraints that have hindered
both domestic and foreign private investment. The projected growth path is below Ukraine's ability to
revive production through better capacity utilization under existing technology in the medium run, as well
as below its longer-term growth potential. To sustain increasing growth rates in later years of the CAS
period and move on to higher growth thereafter, continued progress of institutional and policy reforms
supported by Bank adjustment and other IFI operations is assumed. As described below, the main thrust
of Bank adjustment operations will be to put together a consolidated reform effort yielding an improved
business environment and higher investment for growth.

38. 
The Low Case Scenario. The Low Case scenario assumes that the Government continues to
muddle through and has either difficulties or delays in implementing its program of reforms. Specifically,
it assumes: (i) no resumption of the IMF's EFF program; (ii) no reprogramming of the Paris Club Debt;
and (iii) no further adjustment lending. It also assumes, however, that Ukraine continues to make
payments on its financial obligations. Without the measures necessary to produce a more effective
government and better management of public resources the fiscal situation remains tenuous. Absent the
reforms necessary to address systemic issues such as non-payments, property rights, regulatory
interference, better public sector accountability and improved social sector sustainability, both domestic
and private investment remain weak and growth unsustainable. Such a scenario would rnaterialize if the
Government is unable to mobilize and maintain the needed political support and domestic ownership to
push ahead on key aspects of its reform agenda or if the Government is unable to move forward with the
IMF program.

39. 
In this case, growth would peak at two percent in 2000 and then fall to one percent by 2003.
Gross domestic investment would fall sharply and imports plummet. Looser fiscal policy would imply
somewhat higher inflation. Access to external finance would be considerably cut back with direct private
investment estimated to be less than half of its potential under the Base Case in 2003. In this case,
Ukraine's net flows on external long-term lending would be negative throughout the CAS period.

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

13

40. 
In both the Base Case scenario and the Low Case scenario, the Bank has an important role to
play. In the Base Case, there are a wide range of activities that the Bank can support to help the
Government meet the challenges of intensive economnic reform. In a Low Case environment, the Bank
can best assist the Government by helping to lay the groundwork necessary for effective reforms by
strengthening civil society and addressing key social concerns. In either case, it is critical for the Bank to
stay engaged in order to promote dialogue and better understanding of the need for reforms.

II. BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

A. 

ASSESSMENT OF THE LATEST CAS

41. 
The assistance strategy presented in the 1996 Bank CAS document was framed on optimistic
assumptions, which seemed reasonable during the successful 1996 economic stabilization. It was cast as
a "graduated approach", providing for lending of up to US$3.1 billion, depending on the Government's
capacity to deliver on ambitious reform plans in agriculture, energy, privatization, and public sector
reform. The achievements and shortcomings of the Bank Group experience in the past four years have
taught valuable lessons for the future.
Achievements of the Assistance Program. The assistance program that emerged from the 1996
42. 
CAS (and that of the international community at large) can rightfully claim a number of successes and
positive lessons, particularly considering that the transformation process in Ukraine was "uncharted
territory." Perhaps the most important achievement is that many of the formal institutions of a market-
based democracy were put in place, or at least their need identified and their build-up initiated.
Particularly important were price reform, trade liberalization, and opening of the economy to external
competition. Although, as noted, the functionality and legitimacy of these formal institutions has been
weak, their existence provides the basis on which to build. Thus, many of the codes and laws affecting
property rights and commerce have been modernized or created ex-novo, and important amounts of
technical assistance from the donor community have been instrumental in incorporating international
best-practice in their design. Mass privatization of small and medium enterprises, while not free from
flaws, led to the emergence of an entrepreneurial class that represents Ukraine's greatest asset for the
future.

43. 
Headway was made in handling the social consequences of the transformation into a market
economy. For instance, the experience gained in assisting the restructuring of the coal industry has been
encouraging, contributing to and benefiting from the regional experience in dealing with socially
sensitive, regionally concentrated issues. The lessons learned in this respect are being incorporated into
follow-up operations, and have helped the Ukrainian Government focus on the need for integrated
strategies to deal with the social consequences of market reforms (see Box 3 for sector highlights).
The Bank secured strong cooperation from other donors around the Bank projects, leveraging
44. 
donor activities and taking the leading role in many cases (for example, in the IBRD's programs for the
financial sector and for enterprise privatization and restructuring and in IFC's technical assistance work).
45. 
Finally, early experiences in providing support to the growth of civil society have been
encouraging. These are very much at the basis of the proposed new strategy. Donor efforts to facilitate
the emergence of NGOs have proved fruitful in many cases, leading to greater accountability for civil
servants and greater input of civil society in decisions that directly affect its welfare. The Bank was able
to maintain a good dialogue with stakeholders outside the Government - through regular round-tables on
reform topics organized by the Resident Mission or discussions with entrepreneurs on the business
environment in Ukraine. Slowly a more participatory style of work has been evolving, engaging civil
society at the national, regional and municipal levels in the consideration of the economic and political

14 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

Box 4: IBRD Activity in Ukraine

During 1994-1999 the Bank took the lead in helping the authorities define and implement structural reforms (price
liberalization, trade reform, privatization, financial and energy sector reform). This involved a number of large adjustment
loans beginning with the general Rehabilitation Loan approved in December 1994, and followed by five SECALs, which
account for the bulk (67 percent) of all loan commitments to date.

Investment lending---envisaged in the 1996 CAS to be an important part of the Bank program---has been relatively modest.
Sixteen operations have been launched (and twelve' are currently under implementation). Disbursements have amounted to
less than US$200 million.

Resources disbursed during the period 1997/1999 amounted to US$1.1 billion, thereby increasing total Bank exposure to
over US$2 billion (see Table 2). At end-1999, the amount of undisbursed loans stood at US$629 million, with US$170
million in quick-disbursing loans.

Table 2: IBRD Exposure in Ukraine
(US$millions, CY)

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999

Exposure - Debt outstanding and disbursed 

502.6 

908.6 

1,214.1 

1,599.4 

2,021.8

New Commitments 

Committed Undisbursed 

Net Disbursements 

Bank Exposure to Total Public Debt 

146.0 

1,332.4 

170.4 

1,096.4 

101.6 

6.0% 

406.0 

9.8% 

220.0 

992.7 

305.5 

11.6% 

Total Public Debt to GDP 

22.9% 

21.4% 

22.1% 

816.4 

1,304.3 

385.3 

13.5% 

30.0% 

0.0

629.4

422.4

16.3%

40.8%

Due to slow progress of institutional and structural reforms since the beginning of 1998, the Bank formally moved to a low-
case lending scenario, with the adoption of the latest CAS Progress Report in May 1999. The Low Case for new lending
incorporated a very limited number of investment projects (five in FY00, and four in FY01, including Global Environment
Facility projects) which could continue to be implemented even if the IMF program went off track. The Bank has continued
disbursements under three previously approved adjustment loans - EDAL II, FSAL and the Coal SECAL - subject to an
overriding disbursement limitation program.

lncludes one GEF and one guarantee operation.

reform agenda. The People's Voice Project (see Box 7) is a good example of an initiative in which World
Bank, donors (CIDA), local communities and NGOs are working together to improve provision of local
services and the functionality of local administration.

46. 

Weaknesses in Program Performance. However, in many other respects the evolution of the

political and socio-economic situation in Ukraine proved unfavorable, affecting economic growth and the
pace of reform. Under 
those circumstances, although several Bank 
loans were processed and
disbursement conditions met---including substantial adjustment lending (increasing World Bank exposure
to over US$2 billion)---limited 
sustainable 
results were obtained, and policy reversals were not
uncommon (see Box 4 for description of Bank activity). Operational difficulties marred the approval and
execution of several investment operations. This unsatisfactory situation was reflected in the 1999 CAS

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

15

Box 5: Country Assistance Review (CAR)
The World Bank Group's assistance to Ukraine since 1992 was evaluated in the 1999 Country Assistance
Review (CAR) (CODE99-37). The CAR found that given the circumstances at that time, the country assistance
strategy was relevant in terms of proposing a "graduated approach." It noted that some progress had been made
in privatization and trade and price liberalization, but progress in other areas had been limited. The CAR
concludes that the Bank has often overestimated the Government's implementation capacity and the speed with
which the economy would respond to changes in the incentive structure and policy environment. As a result---
despite the Bank's efforts---the fundamental principles of a market economy have not found their way into the
Ukrainian economy. Moreover, in the vacuum that arose because the old rules no longer applied while the new
ones were not yet established, corruption spread, and has become pervasive. This has contributed not only to a
considerable increase in transaction costs but also has pushed a large portion of the economy "underground."
The following lessons emerged from the review:
* The essence of the reform agenda in Ukraine is to change and re-orient the role of government and public
administration in the economy.
* The Bank should promote public education about reform in order to build social consensus.
* Reforms may not realize their intended supply response because of counter-activities by vested interests.
* The scope of Bank assistance should be scaled according to the reform results.
* 
In the case of limited consensus for reform, it should be targeted toward the poorest groups or
demonstration projects.
* The Bank should broaden the range of partners and stakeholders involved in its activities.
These lessons have been used to refine the current country assistance strategy and strengthen the Bank's
assistance efforts. For example, the CAS proposes to focus on building demand for good institutions, which will
include a series of operations at the grass roots of the civil society. This approach will help build social
consensus and support for reform, as well as develop bottom-up pressure for better governance.
Another important lesson incorporated in the proposed assistance strategy is scaling the level of assistance to the
delivery of reform results. The focal CAS operation -
the PAL -
is structured to award outcomes. If the
Gcvernment's reform response is not adequate, the Bank's assistance will be scaled down to activities that
would help build demand for better institutions. The CAR's recommendation for wider participation of the civil
society in Bank activities has also been incorporated in the Bank's work. The preparation of the CAS itself has
been done in a very participatory way, with participation of a broad range of stake holders and has attracted
considerable interest and support from NGOs and other civil society representatives.

update, which made official the "low case" status of the Bank assistance, and set strong conditions for
processing of adjustment operations7 and for any further appraisal of investment operations 8 .

47. As noted in the 1999 Country Assistance Review (see Box 5), the main factors underlying poor
performance were lack of government ownership and capacity to deliver. The Government often acted as
if it had its agenda separate from the program agreed with the Bank. Retrospectively, it appeared that the
main driving force behind these agreements was the Government's need for resources rather than genuine
interest in reforms. As to its own plans, the Government was hostage to its political compromises and
could not commit to a clear strategic direction and a comprehensive framework for advancing reforms.

48. 
Most importantly, the design of the adjustment assistance, based on a number of separate sector
adjustment operations, proved to be a major shortcoming. Stand-alone operations were not well suited to
address cross-sectoral institutional and governance issues. This led to a situation in which reforms were

7 

These are (i) reform of the Apparat of the Cabinet of Ministers, as a critical step for creating a more
efficient government structure; (ii) substantial enterprise deregulation and creation of a business-friendly
environment; and (iii) large-scale privatization based on transparent and efficient procedures, generating cash
proceeds of US$] billion.
No new operations could be appraised until a satisfactory solution to the backlog in ratification of loans by
the Rada was found.

8 

16 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

reversed or stalled in some areas while Bank resources were disbursed in others. Because the design of
the operations focused mostly on inputs rather than effective results on the ground, adjustment loans
focused on the Government producing satisfactory laws and regulations, but did not wait for proper
implementation.

49. Weak institutional capacity in key government agencies further hampered implementation.
Ukraine civil service has a limited number of professional policy analysts or managers, and their
experience is mainly based on the Soviet regime rather than market systems. Moreover, managers and
policy makers often give priority to addressing short term emergencies rather than putting in place the
systemic reforms required to build the foundations for long-term growth.

B. 

BANK GROUP'S PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE

IBRD Portfolio

50. 
In the context just reviewed, the performance of the IBRD lending portfolio has also been rnixed.
At present, 5 out of 12 projects under supervision are rated unsatisfactory in terms of their development
objectives and/or implementation performance. This is partly due to the fact that the country team has
been very transparent in its assessment of these realities: the portfolio currently reflects a Realism Index
of 83 percent and a Proactivity Index of 100 percent9 . Twice-yearly, in-depth portfolio reviews have been
conducted for some time, and have helped focus the attention of the Government on specific and systemic
problems of implementation.

51. 
The currently unsatisfactory projects are Hydropower Rehabilitation (FY95, US$114 million);
Agriculture Seed Development (FY96, US$32 million); Export Development (FY97, US$70 million);
Ozone Depleting Substances (FY98, US$23.2 million); and Financial Sector Adjustment Loan (FY99,
US$300 million). They were discussed in detail at the Country Portfolio Meeting, which was conducted
with the Government in June 2000. As a result, corrective actions were defined for improving the
performance of specific projects in the current portfolio, as well as for successful processing of new
projects. In addition, the Government has established a working group to identify best practice from other
countries in the region to develop new procedures that would streamline project processing. Further, it
was agreed that a study of Project Implementation Units identifying the most effective project
implementation arrangements be undertaken as well.

52. 
The long-standing project ratification problem was also discussed. The project effectiveness
backlog was eliminated over the last year, and the processing of the Kyiv Energy Efficiency Project has
provided the Government with a good test case to simplify internal procedures. From the outdated
guidelines that mandated no less than five reviews by the Council of Ministers for already-negotiated
projects, the Government is now setting in place much more simplified procedures, which will ensure that
the projects of the World Bank (and other international financial institutions) can become effective in
more reasonable timeframes than in the past. Presence of a viable mechanism for Bank project
processing and effectiveness remains an important trigger for both Low and Base Case lending.

IFC and MIGA Programs

53. 
In the past few years, IFC has mounted a mnajor technical assistance operation in Ukraine, aiming at
improving the business environment and at facilitating the emergence of small and medium-sized

9 

It should be noted that implementation ratings are expected to improve for three of these projects

(Hydropower Rehabilitation, Export Development, and Ozone Depleting Substances) by early October 2000 as the

implementation actions agreed upon with the project teams are shown to be sustainable. Another unsatisfactory

project - Seeds Development - will close in September 2000.

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

17

Box 6: IFC Activities in Ukraine
IFC has been supporting private sector development in Ukraine through a variety of direct investments and
technical assistance.

Direct Investments
Since 1994, IFC has approved investments totaling over US$66.0 million, these include:

.
.

Two separate equity investments in a venture capital fund, totaling US$3.5 million;
Support to the First Ukrainian International Bank (FUIB), including a US$6.5 million equity investment and
a US$10 million credit line;
.
An investment in Creditanstalt Ukraine, consisting of US$2.3 million in equity and a loan of US$5 million;
* An investment in a new microfinance bank, including US$2.4 million in equity and a loan of US$5 million;
* Backing for Finansbank Ukraine, a proposed new bank with Turkish capital for US$2.2 million equity and a
US$5 million credit line (this investment has been on hold since the Russian crisis).
Technical Assistance
IFC has over 180 staff in the field in Ukraine assisting with corporate governance, land reform, small business
development, and privatization of unfinished construction sites and other underutilized assets. The technical
assistance program is evolving to meet the country's needs:

.

* The successful auction model from the small-scale privatization program is now used for the privatization
of unfinished construction sites.
After implementing its farm reorganization model in four regions, IFC is advising the central government
on the land code, working with more farms, and establishing local institutions to undertake training in other
regions.
The business development project is assisting in a new national deregulation campaign and providing advice
on leasing.
IFC is also currently providing advice to the Ukrainian Securities and Exchange Commission.

.

.

enterprises (Box 6). Major contributions have been made to the growth of a new class of entrepreneurs,
and to improving governance 
in newly privatized, but inexperienced enterprises. 
In addition, the
technical assistance program in agriculture has provided a wealth of experience in ways to build market
relationships in the sector, while ensuring that the suspension of state-directed credit flows does not lead
to output disruptions, by fostering relationships between primary producers and agro-processors.

54. 
Given the institutional weaknesses already discussed, IFC has had great difficulty in attracting
strong foreign industrial partners to Ukraine, and has therefore focused its investments on the financial
sector. 
IFC's experience has nevertheless provided considerable information about the difficulties that
newly established businesses have to face in the context of the Ukrainian environment, and through its
technical assistance operations the Corporation has provided important inputs into the policy dialogue, as
well as establishing a monitoring mechanism which is well trusted by business, government and the
international community.

55. 
IFC's experience in Ukraine confirms that working in tandem with IBRD and other donors to
support business awareness and to demand a better regulatory framework is a precondition for increased
investment activity. This is particularly true in the early stages of reform, when an appropriate business
environment is not yet in place. As this framework improves, and as transparent privatization methods
take hold, IFC is expected to move toward more direct work with private partners.

56. 

The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency. MIGA has equally been affected by the

unfavorable investment climate and unstable legal environment. At present, it only has one operation
active in Ukraine. However, MIGA is closely watching the development of the economic and investment
situation and will be ready to increase 
its presence when conditions 
improve. Currently MIGA is

18 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

considering a new small guarantee operation and may also be a potential partner with IFC in a program to
help re-convert the high technology industrial sector.

57. 
The Ukrainian privatization program was one of the first participants in MIGA's
PrivatizationLink investor information service, and officials have reported that their use of Internet-based
marketing, via MIGA's online service and their own Web site, has substantially benefited their outreach
efforts, both domestically and with foreign investors, and contributed to the transparency of the
privatization process.

D. 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY, FYO1-03

Lessons Learned from the Most Recent CAS

58. 
The experience gained in program implementation and portfolio management has yielded a
number of important lessons that can help shape future Ukraine-World Bank relationships. Notably, with
regard to:
* Policy-based lending and dialogue: Concentrate on effective results on the ground. When
supporting economic reform, ensure that policy-based operations fully reflect government
ownership, cover the most critical systemic elements affecting the quality of public and
private institutions, and prevent partitioning of reforms that would allow backtracking;
* The time-frame to implement refonns: Assume achieving results will take longer than it
would appear necessary or as promised by counterparts;
* Sustainability of outcomes: Seek a greater involvement of, and tailor activities toward, civil
society, in order to increase the demand for accountability of public officials and for well-
functioning institutions;
Investment operations: Embark on "pilot" projects only when full understanding of the
institutional weaknesses in the sectors concerned is obtained, and when clarity exists as to
how pilot projects will modify the distorted systems of incentives. In addition, fully factor
into their design the likelihood that administrative capacity and bureaucratic simplification
will take a long time to show improvements;
* Overall program effectiveness: Take full advantage of the presence of other donors, by
facilitating their efforts in the areas of their comparative advantage;
integrity. Ensure that all available safeguards against misuse of funds, both
investment and adjustment lending, are in place.

* Financial 

* 

Objectives of the Country Assistance Strategy, FY01-03

59. 
The Country Assistance Strategy for Ukraine for the period FY01-03 builds on the lessons of
implementing the previous CAS, as well as on the knowledge gained on Ukraine's socio-political
challenges. The CAS aims to assist government and civil society in implementing a broad-based poverty-
reduction strategy and in attaining job-creating sustainable economic growth. To do so, the strategy will
directly address the institution-building challenges faced by Ukraine, both from the demand (civil society)
and supply (Government) sides.

Program Strategy

60. 
A Two-legged Strategy. To be of effective assistance to Ukraine, the World Bank Group's
strategy will be articulated into two legs: the first (under the Low Case) will aim to support civil society in
the second (which would be added under the Base Case) would aim to

its demandfor better government; 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

19

support opportunities 

to strengthen 

institutions 

that foster sustainable development, when 

these

opportunities present themselves. The strategy will emphasize program ownership, results on the ground,
and increased attention to material improvements in delivery of social services.

61. Non-lending activities will be a strong component of the Bank Group's assistance under either
assistance scenario (Annex B4). In keeping with the emphasis on increased reliance on and participation
from civil society, the Bank group will ensure that stakeholders are informed, consulted and actively
involved in these activities.

62. 
Complementing this approach, IFC will aggressively pursue investment operations, which are
more likely to come into existence as the business environment continues to improve. In addition, IFC
will carry on with and extend its current technical assistance activities, which will continue to be
coordinated with present and planned IBRD interventions in assistance to business, both on the policy and
the technical assistance sides. IFC will be strongly involved, on the policy dialogue side, in providing
feedback and indications relevant to the improvement of the regulatory framework and the protection of
property rights.

Program Content

Supporting Civil Society's Demandfor Better Government

63. 
As agreed with the Government, the participatory process of CAS preparation will be extended
into its implementation. This will enable the Government and its development partners to benefit from
the voice of civil society. Specifically, the Bank will seek to be a partner in facilitating increased
accountability of public officials, reducing corruption and assisting in developing mechanisms that will
enable the views of the population to be adequately taken into account. Activities under this heading

must meet two crucial tests. First they must demonstrably help civil society increase its voice for better
government and social services provision, or provide 
tangible benefits 
in globally sensitive areas.
Secondly, they will have to be sufficiently shielded from possible paralysis at the center of government,

so as to stand a good chance of success-even under less-than-favorable conditions.

64. 
The Bank will work in close collaboration with donors that have a greater ability to work directly
with non-governmental partners. For its part, the Bank Group will engage in lending and non-lending
activities that can directly increase the voice of civil society, while leading to better provision of social
services. The main vehicles for increased attention to civil society and gender issues in our program will
be:

* The "People's Voice" Project (FYOI-03, see Box 7). This technical assistance effort has led to
increased citizen's involvement in local affairs and greater accountability for elected officials.
The Bank plans to expand this successful assistance.

* The Municipal Development Fund (FY02 LIL(APL)) will help local governments strengthen their
capacity for financial management and effective delivery of basic services using open and
participatory budgetary methods. In the Low Case the project is included as a LIL because of its
capacity building component. Should the Government move to a Base Case it will be included in
the Program as an APL with a corresponding framework for intergovernmental and local finance
reforms.

* The Social Investment Fund (FY02) builds on the experience gained in the region and elsewhere.
It will aim at reducing the passivity and dependence on the center of many of the poorer
communities, and will crucially depend on collaboration with local governments, NGOs and
citizen's groups.

20 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

Box 7: The People's Voice Project

Through the People's Voice Project, the World Bank has initiated a new generation of Bank programs in Ukraine
that focus on the development of civil society. This program is aimed at building integrity at the municipal level
through strengthening the voice of citizen groups demanding better governance and services, and by facilitating
more responsive public organizations. It is a pilot program supported by the Canadian International Development
Agency (CIDA) and covers three cities in Ukraine.
The project's strategy is to bring the supply and demand sides of reform together. Through surveys, information is
gathered on the problems associated with major services. This information is then used by citizen groups to
exercise pressure from below (civil society) on local leaders to improve service delivery. The project is also
supplying technical assistance to municipal agencies (suppliers of services) that should enable them to be more
responsive. In addition, the information gathered through the project is provided in the form of feedback to the
central authorities, as well as to the Bank's teams that operate at the central level of government.
Project implementation began in Ternopil. Surveys were conducted among: (i) households, to collect feedback on
services, corruption and related matters; (ii) the business community, on their interactions with local governments,
and (iii) public officials, to get their side of the story. Not surprisingly, in addition to the citizens' dissatisfaction
with the quality of public services, surveys also revealed that 93 percent of citizens had never filed any
complaints, as they believed that this was worthless. The survey information has been widely disseminated
through media, public discussions, conferences, and NGOs.
Initial implementation results are encouraging. The municipal officials in Ternopil reacted to the survey results by
creating several task groups to work on the most critical problems revealed by surveys. These groups are
currently developing proposals on how to deal with the identified problems. An interesting initiative has emerged
in the city in response to the citizen's demands: Service centers, a one-stop shop where citizens can pay for all
municipal services. The Service Centers might be used for filing and monitoring the citizen complaints.
Surveys are currently being conducted in Ivano-Frankivsk and will soon start in a third pilot city. The People's
Voice initiative has found support among donors, namely CIDA. In addition to providing support to the project
itself, they are also planning on starting similar activities in other cities throughout Ukraine.

* A Gender Dimension of Transition studyl'. 
This study, conducted 
in collaboration with
Ukrainian NGOs and other donors, will review the emerging trends with respect to gender-
specific problems during the transition, identify possible policy options, and suggest a better
integration of gender issues in Bank assistance, particularly with respect to access to finance,
identification of formal and informal obstacles to economic activity, and incorporation of gender
issues in Bank group projects.
65. 
The implementation of the Global Distance Learning Initiative 
(FY01-03) and the Global
Gateway (FY01), now in a pilot phase, will provide a vehicle for increased dissemination of information
and best practice around the country. On the basis of suggestions from the NGO community, the Bank is

exploring the possibility of a project that would provide support to open internet access for library users
across Ukraine. The Government has also requested the World Bank's help in making its Anti-
Corruption initiative more effective. The Bank will work to this end in partnership with stakeholders and

will incorporate benchmarks of increased 
transparency and accountability 
in its operations. Finally,
together with the NGO conmmunity, the Bank has been reviewing 
the legislative and regulatory

10 
Gender issues have not received enough coverage in the Bank's programs in Ukraine with the exception of
a recent initiative under the People's Voice Project - a gender audit. However, this issue has received significant
coverage in other donor programs. UNDP has conducted an in-depth study of gender issues, which is discussed in
the 1999 Human Development Report. Other donors, such as USAID, Renaissance Foundation, CIDA, etc. have
financed programs aimed at helping women to start-up businesses, training targeted to women, building capacity of
female-led NGOs, etc.

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

21

framework regulating non-governmental activities and will work with Government to remove
unnecessary obstacles.

66. 
Strengthening Property Rights. The Title Registration and Distribution operation (FY02) will
support the creation of an efficient and trustworthy ownership framework for land and property
transactions. This effort is critical for building a demand for better governance because ownership and
clear title to property are at the very foundation of promoting accountability and moving toward market
reforms.

67. 
Building a Basis for Sustainable Private Enterprise. The Bank Group (IBRD, IFC and MIGA)
will work jointly to support the business community to put in place the conditions for growth and
employment on a sustainable basis, with emphasis on creating the conditions for increased growth of
small and medium enterprises (SMEs). This includes: (a) reducing the cost of uncertainty and bribes
related to government oversight and regulation; (b) improving access to finance; (c) reducing the costs of
entry and access to internal and external markets, and (d) better management training. The Government
has already established a State Committee for Entrepreneurial Development that focuses on issues of
deregulation, entry, licensing and standards. The Bank Group will support Government efforts to develop
entrepreneurial and managerial capacity for SMEs through a Private Sector Development Project (FY02),
under which participating local authorities and businessmen will work together to improve the regulatory
environment and the utilization of idle capacity by new small and medium enterprises, and so on. LFC is
planning to expand its technical assistance work considerably, with additional initiatives in Ukraine using
its local staff and in-country experience. IFC' s strategy is to strengthen the SME sector through technical
assistance work and to support the entry of foreign strategic investors to Ukraine by linking technical
assistance projects with IFC investment initiatives. IFC is working to secure the additional resources
necessary to expand its TA work in Ukraine. This may include:

* an asset restructuring project, to help privatized companies divest their non-core activities;
* a leasing project, to provide advisory services, market-building, skills transfer, and a public
awareness campaign;
* a mortgage finance project, to help financial institutions develop mortgage services;
an advisory program, to assist SMEs in their efforts to reach regional and international markets;

a 

* a financial re-engineering project, to help banks develop SME credit lines.

68. 
Public Services for Human Development. As a consequence of the economic crisis and lack of
restructuring, Ukraine has neglected its human development, as witnessed by worsened health status,
decreasing life expectancy, and reduced student enrollment rates. The Government Program stresses the
need for substantial improvements in the areas of health, education and social protection. Increasingly,
communities are becoming more active partners in decision-making and service provision. The Bank
intends to increase its assistance in these areas substantially. Improved provision of health and education
services will require significant changes in the current financing mechanisms and delivery structures. The
Bank will support the Government in the development of health and education strategies that will bring
together all stakeholders (Government, beneficiaries, NGOs, civil society, and donors). The Bank will
also assist in the reform of the existing pension scheme into an effective and sustainable old age security
system.

69. 
Basic Social Services. To begin, Bank assistance will focus on addressing critical emergencies
and strengthening community involvement in the provision of improved basic social services to the most
vulnerable groups. The TBIHIV/AIDS control operation FY(01) will attempt to contain the spread of
these public health threats. The Social Investment Fund FY(02) will build on existing demand driven
initiatives to improve community-based social services targeted at the poor and vulnerable.

22 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

70. 
The Bank will assist the Government in the development of health, education, and social
protection reform strategies. Additionally, the Bank will help build capacity to implement these strategies
through a Social Sector Technical Assistance/Capacity-Building loan (FY03) for education and/or health.

71. 
Social Dimensions of Adjustment in the Coal Sector. The Bank will pay increased attention to
the social consequences associated with coal sector reform, though an investment operation (FY01) that
will expand on the gains obtained so far, to help in the closure of fifty uneconomic and unsafe coal mines,
ensure payments of back wages and severance to the affected miners, and set up a regionally based job
retraining and stimulation program. In addition, a Methane Safety Learning Innovation Loan (LIL)
(FY02) will be processed to gain relevant experience on reducing the risk of explosions from the
accumulation of methane.

72. 
Environment. Bringing Ukraine to European environmental standards would require miany years
and billions of dollars. The Government has already begun to address the most serious and immediate
environmental problems that beset Ukraine in biodiversity: land, water, solid waste management and
industrial pollution. During the next CAS period the Bank will aim to: (i) help the Government develop
the legal and institutional framework for environmental regulation; (ii) improve the capacity of the
Ministry of the Environment and related agencies; and (iii) efficiently prepare and implement larger
environmental investment projects in the clean-up of air pollution, protection of biodiversity, and
improvement of land, water, and solid waste management.

73. 
Bank assistance includes the Wetlands (FY01) project, funded by GEF, for the recuperation of the
wetlands between the Black and Azov Seas. In parallel, the Bank would support the development of the
environment institutional and regulatory framework, as discussed in the next section. Further
strengthening of the environmental institutions to implement policies will also come from a thorough
public expenditure review in the environment sector, which will be carried out by FY02. Later in the
CAS period, as the institutional capacity increases in the environment sector, the Bank could support the
Government with a sector-specific operation geared to abate serious air pollution problems in the
industrial belt and other major environmental concerns - Environmental Pollution (FY03). Of more
immediate concern is the management of Ukraine's Black Sea coastal areas, which are under significant
environmental pressure from inland pollution and poor management of coastal resources. This issue will
be tackled by initiating a Coastal Zone Management Institutional Development Fund (IDF) (FY02) in
Crimea and by mobilizing the resources made available by the Danube and Black Sea Strategic
Partnership. Lastly, the Bank will continue to use Global Environment Facility (GEF) resources to
address immediate environmental needs in line with the agreed priorities in the Climate Change National
Strategy Study (NSS) (FY01). Additional work in the areas of climate change and environmental issues
in the energy sector will be carried out following the completion of the NSS and implementation of the
recommended investments.

74. 
Finally, in the early period of CAS implementation, the Bank will also complete the processing of
two operations already in advanced stage of preparation. Sevastopol District Heat (FY01) will introduce
a more efficient decentralized heating system based on gas-fired mini-boilers in order to reduce the huge
wastage of energy and improve affordability of an essential service. In the water sector, the Bank will
complete the Lviv Water Project (FY01) under preparation, which has benefited from considerable
technical assistance from several donors.

75. 
Due Diligence - Economic and Sector Work. The Bank's knowledge of key economic sectors
and cross-sectoral issues is being kept up-to-date. A participatory Country Economic Memorandum was
prepared in FY99 and a Poverty Update (FY01) is in its final stage of preparation. An in-depth
assessment of the financial sector is currently being carried out and will be reflected in the Financial
Sector Note (FY01). An in-depth public expenditure and institutional review is planned for FY01, which
will help us to prioritize our bottom-up institution building programs. Moreover, the Bank monitors
and risks. 

continuously macroeconomic developments 

assessments, 

In 

terms of fiduciary 

the

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

23

procurement and financial accountability assessments are planned for FY01. The results of these
assessments will allow the Bank and the Government to put in place mechanisms that will assure
adequate management of resources and competitive procurement practices.

Supporting the Supply of Pro-Development Institutions

76. 
Addressing Bottlenecks. To support the "supply" of pro-development institutions, the Bank will
center its assistance on breaking critical bottlenecks that have hampered reform in the past. The main
across-the-board bottlenecks, as mentioned above, are incomplete institutional designs and poor
governance. These have permitted the granting of monopoly rents and other privileges, which, in turn,
have fostered rent-seeking, skewed the distribution of income, and resulted in poor delivery of social
services. Effective assistance in this area will require true ownership of the reform program by
Government, Parliament and a sufficiently large segment of civil society. It also calls for verifiable results
on the ground. Assistance efforts will identify a range of lending and non-lending instruments. These
will center on redefining the role of Government, curtailing opportunities for corruption, introducing hard
budget constraints in the public and private sectors, liberalizing economic activity, reducing transaction
costs, and enhancing property rights.

77. 
A Sequential Approach, with a Three-Year Vision. To bring about genuine reform in a realistic
manner, the Government and the Bank would define a three-year program of reform and institutional
action, based on the Government's own recently approved program. The flagship operation for the Base
Case scenario would be a series of Programmatic Adjustment Loans (PALs). These are conceived as a
sequence of three separate operations, totaling up to US$750 million, with disbursements depending
entirely on performance.

78. 
The PAL sequence will be grounded on a shared "vision" for Ukraine at the end of the three-year
time of implementation. The overall vision, based on the Government program discussed above, is one of
Ukraine as a friendlier place to do business, where private investment is in a better position to take place,
and where social service delivery has considerably improved. This vision will be presented to the
Executive Board at the time of the first PAL board presentation, in the form of a Letter of Development
Policy which would provide the "umbrella" for the PAL sequence. Meaningful indicators of success in
execution of the program would be agreed, and each single-tranche adjustment loan would be presented to
the Board upon achievement of the agreed objectives. The PAL would be accompanied by Bank
assistance to the Government to explain the reforms to the civil society and create a momentum to sustain
the process over the medium and long term. It is expected that successive PALs will be one year apart,
but the actual time may be shorter or longer depending on government implementation performance and
effectiveness.

79. 
The main rationale for introducing a programmatic adjustment operation in Ukraine is to address
the shortcomings of sector adjustment operations as described above. 
In addition, single tranche
operations based on achieved benchmarks would set a clear mechanism for measuring Government's
reform performance, thus protecting the Bank from committing resources before results on the ground are
attained. More specifically, the PAL design would include the following five characteristics, derived
from the lessons from the past:

* The program would be based on increased reform ownership by the Government and society
at large;
It would concentrate on results;

* 

* 

* 

It would explicitly take into account inter-sectoral linkages and cross-cutting issues;
It would be sufficiently flexible to reward meaningful overall progress, or to decrease Bank
exposure if performance is not adequate; and

24 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

Table 3: IBRD Tentative Lending Program-FY2001/03
(US$Million)

FY01 

TB/AIDS 
Coal Restructuring 
Wetlands (GEF) 
Lviv Water 
Sevastopol Heat 

Subtotal 

Low Case lending 
plus 
Programmatic Adjustment 
Loan (PAL) (15' loan) 
Tax Administration 
Modernization 

40 
100 
[8] 
24 
17 

181 

181 

250 

100 

Low Case Lending
FY02 

Private Sector Development 
Social Investment Fund 
Title Registration and Distribution 
Environmental TA (GEF) 
Methane Safety LIL 
Municipal Development Loan LIL* 
Subtotal 
Base Case Lending

40 
30 
100 
[15] 
5
5
175 

FY03

Social Sector TA 
(Education/Health)
Environmental Pollution 
Statistics Modernization 

Subtotal 

Low Case lending 
plus 

PAL (2"d loan) 
Public Administration Incentives 
Reform 
Pre-Export Guarantee Facility 
[Municipal Development APL]* 

175 

250 

60 
100 
[150] 

Low Case lending 
plus
PAL (3"d loan) 
Social Sector
AdjustmentlAPL 
Rural Finance/Farm
Restructuring 

Total 
531 
Total 
735* Total 
*If Base Case proceeds Municipal Development Loan will become APL for 150, Total reflects Base Case.

50

20
30

100

100

250

100

100

550

* 

It would help the Government foster its internal capacity to implement the reform program.

80. 
Thematic Areas. Given the cross-cutting nature of the institutional and governance problems
affecting Ukraine's performance, the PAL's benchmarks and milestones will concentrate on the following
thematic areas:

* Financial discipline in public and private sectors. The PALs will help develop and implement a

comprehensive strategy to eliminate the chronic non-payment problem in budget, tax obligations,
and inter-enterprise arrears. The objective is to improve contract enforcement and bring about
hard budget constraints. Particular attention would be given to the energy sector, including gas,
seeking to curtail corruption in the financial relations in this complex and complete its
institutional design;

* 

Improvements 

in the regulatory frameworks for business. The PALs will focus on regulations

facilitating the entry and operation of business and providing clear rules of the game in critical
sectors such as telecommunications, energy, finance, land, and pensions. Moreover, the PALs
will work to reduce the number of required licenses, the registration process, and inspections.

* Transparent definition and protection of property rights. 

This is a cornerstone 

of the

development of the market system and the definition of the role of the state. The PALs will
support Government's intent to transfer state property to private owners in a transparent manner
and to create adequate institutions to protect property rights. Specifically, the PALs will focus on
the comprehensive registration and titling of land and the implementation of the privatization law
in industry. Critical sectors that will receive special attention will be energy and
telecommunications.

* Public sector accountability and effectiveness. The PALs will foster open and transparent budget

processes following adoption of a transparent fiscal code, comprehensive tax reform in line with
international standards, and the continued reform of the public administration and the system of
intergovernmental finance.

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

25

Mitigation of the social cost of transition and improvements in the delivery of social services. 

In

pensions, the main objective will be the reform of the basic pension system (first pillar) and
preparing the groundwork for the introduction of a funded compulsory (second pillar) and
voluntary (third pillar) personal savings schemes. The chief objective in the reform of the social
assistance program will be the introduction of a targeted system that improves the effectiveness of
Government in reaching those most in need. Health and education sector strategies would focus
on mobilizing private resources and improving financial management.
81. 
In the short-term the specific policy measures under these thematic areas foreseen for the first
PAL seek to remove the most damaging constraints hampering business operation and economic growth.
Thus, improving energy payments will result in improved tax performance and timely servicing of foreign
and domestic energy debts. 
Improved tax performance will help Government clear budget arrears,
leading to further improvements in financial discipline throughout the economy. Similarly improving
compliance in the financial sector will help revert the existing non-payment trend in the economy and
enable healthy borrowers to acquire financing needed for investment and growth. Also, an improved
fiscal performance will give an additional impetus to growth and give the poor access to improved social

services.

Supporting Institution-Building Activities

82. 
There is a tight link between advances in policy reform under PAL and the availability of
resources to the Government for technical assistance and/or investment in the Base Case. Investment
projects that require removal of 
critical bottlenecks will be considered only upon reaching the
corresponding benchmarks under PAL.

83. 
The Bank plans to supportfiscal reform and reforrn of the state through various lending and non-
lending instruments. Economic and sector work (Public Expenditure Review (FY01-02)) will provide a
basis for policy advice and improving the management of public resources and streamlining public
expenditure supported by more detailed social sector studies and programs. Reform of key central
institutions of the .public sector is supported by the ongoing implementation of the Treasury
Modernization (FY98) project, the proposed Tax Administration Modernization project (FY01) and a
Public Administration Incentives Reform project (FY02). These operations will help improve revenue
generation, budgetary management, national statistics, and civil service, while increasing accountability
of public officials and public scrutiny. In the Base Case, the Municipal Development LIL (FY02) will
become a full-fledged APL in order to help build capacity of sub-national governments and support key
reforms in intergovernmental and local government finance.

84. 
In the social sectors, as the capacity of Government is strengthened (see the Base Case), the Bank
will support full implementation of the reform programs through either an Adjustment or Adaptable
Program Lending operation (FY03). The choice of instrument will be determined as the dialogue
develops and the degree of Government commitment becomes clear.

85. 
In Ukraine's agricultural sector, as indicated, many elements of a pro-market institutional
framework are still missing. The Bank Group will build on the Title Registration work discussed in the
Low Case by supporting the introduction of the necessary legislation and regulation, and will help ensure
that the pro-market institutions are effectively functioning. This will include completing the legal and
regulatory reform (land code and cadastre laws) that is necessary for the issuance of transactions in land,
using land as a collateral for financing; solving the problem of indebtedness of the former state farms, and
the devolution of social infrastructure to municipalities. The next phase will focus on setting up the
market infrastructure needed for successful agriculture in Ukraine. This would include the establishment
of commodity exchanges, access to agricultural credit, job creation in agricultural services. The Pre-
export Guarantee Facility 
(FY02) will enable Ukrainian agricultural producers and importers of
agricultural inputs to insure against non-commercial risks. A Rural Finance operation (FY03) will

26 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

capitalize on the legal market infrastructure put in place under the PAL (cadasters, movable, collateral,
leasing). It will pilot the establishment of a market-based system of rural finance. IFC, building on the
experience gained through its technical assistance operations, is planning to invest in a number of
agribusiness enterprises, establishing close links with primary producers, and fortifying the market
institutions under construction.

86. 
The Bank will also extend specific support to achieving the environmental benchmarks set forth
in the PAL, in particular by strengthening the capacity of government environmental agencies. The
Public Administration Incentives Reform project (FY02) would support capacity-building in the Ministry
of Environment and related institutions. Other support would be provided through a small, targeted
environmental investment loan to ensure that adequate environmental monitoring is in place to support
policy implementation. At the local level, it is expected that the Municipal Development APL (FY02)
may benefit small municipal infrastructure projects with positive environmental impact.

87. 
The Business Environment. The Bank Group (IBRD, IFC and MIGA) will work jointly to help
Government advance its private sector development (PSD) agenda. It will support government plans to
take the privatization process into large state-owned enterprises and critical sectors of the economy, such
as energy, telecommunications, industry, and agro-industry. At the same time the PAL would support the
development and implementation of a business-friendly legal framework and progress in deregulation.

88. 
As the business environment improves, EFC will play a reinforcing role by more actively pursuing
the investment opportunities that can be expected to emerge. Among the new opportunities, IFC will
continue to work with well-known, highly visible foreign investors and identify projects where Ukraine
has a comparative advantage. Such projects would include export projects, particularly in natural
resource-based industries. IFC will also put significant emphasis on financial market development, which
will focus on institution-building such as leasing companies, with strong technical assistance components
and, where possible, with foreign sponsors.

89. 
Currently, EFC is targeting the following projects in Ukraine: a cellular (and later a fixed line)
telephone project; a food processing project; a brewery; a soda ash plant in Crimea, soon to be privatized;
two carbon black plants; a potato processing facility; renovation of a hotel in Kyiv; and a leasing
company. The Government intends to carry out an in-depth reform of the telecommunication sector
through the creation of a firm regulatory framework and the sale of controlling blocks of shares of the
telecommunication companies to strategic investors. EFC, working with EBRD, is planning to support
privatization through an investment operation.

90. 
Expressions of interest on possible sovereign guarantees have emerged recently, and could
become substantial if the improvement of the business environment continues. MIGA stands ready to
respond in an appropriate fashion.

91. 
Closely linked and complementary to the PSD agenda, the Bank program also foresees further
support to the development of the financial sector. This will be achieved by assisting the Government in
developing a reform agenda on three fronts. First, Bank assistance will focus on specific policy reforms
aimed at improving the environment under which financial institutions operate. Assistance in this area
will emphasize the consolidation of earlier gains in the use of proper enterprise accounting standards, and
will target distortions created by tax privileges and non-cash payments practices. Second, the Bank will
support ongoing efforts to enlarge gains in the regulatory environment of banking institutions into a
coherent legal, regulatory and supervisory framework of the entire financial sector. On this front, Bank
assistance will support ongoing efforts to set up an adequate regulatory environment for non-bank
financial institutions. Third, Bank assistance will aim at consolidating gains in structural reforms in the
financial sector by intensifying support to ongoing efforts to deal with the resolution and restructuring of
large problem banks, such as Bank Ukraina and the Savings Bank.

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

27

Table 4: Triggers and Lending Levels

Lending Scenarios 

Low Case 
Exclusive concentration on activities that increase 
demand for good and legitimate institutions. No 
adjustment lending. FYO1-03 lending to total up to 
US$461 million. 

Base Case 
Activities extended to support the supply of 
legitimate institutions from the center. FYOI-03 
lending up to a total of US$1.8 billion. Adjustment 
lending through performance-based PAL. One 
guarantee operation in agriculture. A number of 
capacity-building operations aimed at central 
government institutions.

Triggers
1. No major deterioration in portfolio performance
(less than 20 percent unsatisfactory ratings)
2. Presence of a viable mechanism for Bank loan
approvals and effectiveness.
3. Strict adherence to financial and fiduciary
obligations.
1. Same as above.
2. Consistent and sustainable macroeconomic
framework in place.
3. Meeting of PAL-specific triggers conceraing
financial accountability, regulatory framework,
property rights, public sector accountability and
social sustainability (see para 94).

Triggers and Lending Levels

92. 
The Low Case. Ukraine remains at present in the Low Case assistance mode as defined by the
1999 CAS progress report. While the Government has made progress in meeting the triggers set out in the
1999 report (see footnote 5), this progress has been insufficient for movement to a higher case. These
triggers will now be superseded by the benchmarks 
to be met for the Base Case set out below. As
discussed above, should the Government be unable to move forward on reforms, the Bank's Low Case
assistance program will focus on activities defined as critical for stimulating the demand for good and
legitimate institutions. Full commitments under this Low Case scenario would amount to US$461 million
over FY01-03 (see Table 3). This scenario will also include non-lending activities, including the lFC
technical assistance program. As agreed with the Government, these activities would have to meet two
crucial tests: First, they would have to demonstrably help civil society increase 
its voice for better
government and social services provision, or provide 
tangible benefits in globally sensitive areas.
Second, they would have to be sufficiently shieldedfrom possible paralysis at the center of government so
as to stand a good chance of success-even 
under less-than-favorable political and economical outcomes.
Moreover, even 
the Low Case 
lending could be significantly curtailed 
if portfolio performance
deteriorates significantly, and/or the loan effectiveness issue re-emerges, and/or financial accountability
issues arise (see Table 4). In the event of an economic outcome significantly worse than those presented
in the Low Case scenario of Table 1, the low case lending would also be curtailed and presented in the
CAS update.

93. 
The Base Case. 
If conditions warrant, the World Bank assistance could move into the Base
Case, with total IBRD lending of up to US$1.8 billion for the three-year period, and a number of non-
lending activities aimed at enhancing pro-development 
institutions, 
increasing 
the capacity of the
Government to design and implement reforms, and facilitating the attainment of results on the ground.
Moving to the Base Case scenario would require, in addition to a sustainable macroeconomic framework
(e.g. full resumption and timely subsequent implementation of IMF's Extended Financing Facility (EFF)
program), achievement of agreed upon PAL benchmarks in the five cross-sectoral issues discussed above.
These will also be the conditions for the first, one-tranche PAL to be presented to the Executive Board for
approval. Attaining benchmarks for PAL II and IIn sequence will be required for continuation of the Base
Case scenario into the second and third years of the strategy. Thus, other projects in the Base Case
scenario are linked to the respective PAL going forward.

94. 
The specific benchmarks under the first PAL, currently under discussion with the Government,
will include: (a) an improvement in financial discipline through full elimination of non-transparent budget

28 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

offsets, a major reduction in budget arrears and energy payment debts; (b) easier business entry and
operation confirmed through independent surveys; (c) enhanced property rights in agriculture through
abolition of Kolkhozes, transparent privatization of large industrial enterprises and legislation enabling
privatization of at least 25 percent of the telecom company; (d) better public sector accountability through
implementation of a formula-based 
transfer system, sufficient progress in public administration reform,
and significant reduction of tax exemptions, and (e) improved social sustainability through a review of
special privileges currently extending surrogate social protection and progress in preparing the pension
reform. Two subsequent PAL operations would be presented to Board depending on meeting the agreed
benchmarks for each tranche and on the overall pace of implementation of reforms (probably at one-year
intervals).

95. 
Self-regulating Program Structure. As it is performance-based, 
the proposed assistance
program will automatically relate the commitment of Bank resources 
to the pace of reform. Slow
implementation of reforms, and consequently slow achievement of the agreed performance benchmarks,
would lead to delayed presentation 
to the Board of individual adjustment and investment operations,
resulting in lower commitments and disbursements over the CAS period. 
It is possible 
that the
Government might be able to execute the agreed three-year program in a shorter time frame. In this case,
the resulting increased creditworthiness might warrant higher levels of Bank exposure, particularly to deal
with problems in areas in which private capital would be unlikely to flow. This scenario-a High Case-
is rather hypothetical at this time. However, were it to occur, it would be documented in a suitable update
to this CAS.

Benchmarking and Indicators of Success

96. 
Success in the implementation of the CAS will depend in large part on the ability of Ukraine's
leadership to rise to the challenge that it faces, and break the vicious circle of bad institutions and bad
economic outcomes. Thus, if the Base Case prevails for the duration of the CAS period, indicators of
success should be measurable in terms of increased growth, reduced poverty and greater social cohesion
(indicators of success benchmarks are illustrated in Annex B9). If the Bank is unable to move to the Base
Case, or will have to return to a Low Case during CAS implementation, 
in addition to the performance
benchmarks related to the projects in our low case lending program (Annex B9), our success should be
measured by the extent to which the Bank's contribution may have helped civil society's voice to be
heard. Accordingly, during the CAS implementation period, the World Bank will conduct an annual
survey of attitudes toward the Bank and toward reform. These surveys will be the Bank's main vehicle
for appraising the effectiveness of our interventions, as well as the perception within the population at
large of our role in Ukraine's society.

Selectivity and Partnerships

97. 
The program is also designed to capitalize on the Bank's comparative advantages and maximize
synergies with other donors and international financial. institutions. Accordingly, a major expansion of
assistance to reforms in the social sectors is contemplated, building on recent encouraging openings and
the Government's stated priorities. On the other hand, IBRD will withdraw from further investment in
areas in which investment operations have proven unable to achieve the hoped-for systemic results or
demonstration effects, or where other IFIs are providing sufficient funding (e.g., infrastructure and
transport or large energy plant rehabilitation). 
In small-scale energy plant rehabilitation, 
the Bank will
complete the processing of two projects now in advanced stage of preparation, and that are expected to
lead to a better understanding of the incentive systems faced by public agents in the utility sector. The
lessons learned will be incorporated into our policy dialogue and the municipal development activities.

98. 
The proposed program critically depends on two factors: the Bank's ability to take advantage of
opportunities offered by existing and prospective programs of partners in development, and its ability to

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

29

capitalize on civil society's activities. These steps will ensure that the Bank's comparative advantage is
fully utilized. The Bank has discussed the proposed CAS with all partners, and the Bank has taken great
care at ensuring that no duplication of efforts occurs. Our partners have indicated that they appreciate the
Bank's policy leverage, which is required for their programs to be successful and effective.

99. Major assistance programs covering a wide range of areas are provided by the U.S. and Canadian
governments. EU-TACIS is also very active, as are many other bilateral European donors (including the
United Kingdom, Germany, Netherlands, and Italy) and UNDP. An overview of donor activities in
Ukraine is presented in the "Partners" column of the CAS matrix (Annex B9).

100. Tighter cooperation with our donor partners has become even more critical as the Bank's future
assistance efforts will focus simultaneously on the demand for reforms aimed at achieving better
governance (bottom-up pressure) and their supply from government (top-down initiatives).

101. Activities to Foster the Demand for Better Government. Donors are already active in
implementing a range of programs aimed at building civil society, strengthening citizen groups,
supporting reforms at the local level, improving the system of assistance to the poor, providing public
economic education, offering gender programs, and the like. Mobilization and coordination of expanded
donor support at the grassroots level has become an important part of the Bank's work. Bilateral donors
are clearly better positioned to act at the decentralized level. 
In particular, activities at the
municipal/community level by the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) and UK's
Department for International Development (DFID) have been providing valuable complementary support
to the Bank's program of municipal development and intergovernmental finance, which will be continued
and expanded. 
In addition, DFID's support to community development and assistance in social
mitigation in areas affected by coal mine closures will enable the Bank to provide assistance in coal mine
restructuring in a more efficient and socially sustainable manner. The Canadian International
Development Agency (CIDA) has also been an important partner and is supporting such initiatives as the
People's Voice Project and the creation of a Distance Learning Center in Ukraine. Important activities
are provided by international NGOs. These include Soros and Renaissance Foundation, in the area of
civil society and training, and Transparency International, in the area of anti-corruption. The Bank's role
is to leverage the above mentioned assistance and provide a framework so that our programs achieve
maximum effect.

102. Activities to Increase the Supply of Pro-development Institutions. A notable example is the
Energy Task Force, which has exerted concerted donor activity to foster greater transparency and better
governance in the energy sector. Conceived as the main vehicle for channeling international support for
the efforts to close the Chernobyl power plant, the task force has provided an important forum for
discussions with Government on measures to increase viability of the sector and reduce the culture of
non-payments. The task force wili remain the main vehicle for policy support in these crucial areas.

103. Bilateral donors have a clear advantage in providing technical assistance targeted at building
institutional capacity, especially in government agencies. Capacity-building requires the presence of
multiple teams in the field and daily monitoring, and is resource-intensive. This is an area where bilateral
donors clearly are better able to handle the demands and also have the capacity to provide support of the
required magnitude. For example, DFID, CIDA, USAID and TACIS assistance to public sector reform
will be continued to help deepen the reforrn agenda in this area. TACIS will continue its assistance with
the preparation of enterprises for transparent case-by-case privatizations. TACIS will also provide
assistance on legal and judicial reform-an area which the Bank has not concentrated but which is essential
for achieving better governance. The EBRD's business plan for Ukraine emphasizes support to
privatization in key strategic areas (notably energy and telecom), interventions in the financial sector, and
support to SMEs, chiefly through the provision of lines of credit and the stimulation of business
associations. The IMF has likewise been active in providing technical assistance in the monetary, fiscal
policy, treasury, tax, statistics and other areas envisaged in its mandate.

30 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

104. Coordination with the IMF. The Bank and Fund teams work in tandem and excellent working
relationships have been maintained. The Bank has provided the IMF with expertise in designing and
monitoring the structural conditions of the EFF. The IMF has had a key role in ensuring that the
macroeconomic program is consistent and fully funded. The Bank and the Fund teams will continue to
work as complements with the PAL and related institution building activities and investments continuing
to strengthen our perspectives on key fiscal and structural issues.

Financial Management and Fiduciary Responsibility

105. Financial management in Ukraine is weak. However, the Government is steadily improving its
management of public funds. The Bank and the Fund are jointly assisting the Government in setting up a
transparent and comprehensive treasury system with a single account in the central bank. The Bank's
Treasury Systems project (US$16.4 million), which became effective in July 1999, provides resources for
technical assistance, training and computer systems. It aims to improve public expenditure management
and control, resource planning, cash management, and budgeting. It also supports efforts to provide
timely, accurate and consistent financial information and to enhance transparency and accountability in
the fiscal process. In addition, the Government has recently put in place a Law on Public Procurement
that was developed in close cooperation with the World Bank. The Bank is planning to provide further
assistance through an Institutional Development Grant to strengthen the institutional capacity in the
public procurement area.

106. Ensuring the Proper Use of Bank Funds. The Bank has focused additional attention on the
proper use of its adjustment money (in view of the recent allegations about possible misuse of IMF
resources). An audited review of the use of World Bank resources under adjustment operations did not
find evidence of any improper use. For future adjustment lending, the Bank will use a tracking
mechanism that would provide the Ukrainian authorities and the Bank with a greater degree of assurance
and transparency on the proper use of Bank funds.

107. Given the co-mingling of adjustment funds with borrower resources, the Bank recognizes that the
focus on the borrower's overall use of foreign exchange and budget resources is more tenable than on its
specific use of Bank funds. To that end, in order to understand the perfornance of key public institutions
and functions and the risks they pose to development effectiveness and Bank funds, a Public Expenditure
Review and a Country Financial Accountability Assessment are planned for FY01 delivery.

108. At the investment project level, additional resources are provided to assess the financial
management framework instituted for project implementation. This practice ensures that systems in place
are in accordance with standard international practices and fiduciary responsibility and accountability.
The Country Procurement Assessment Review planned for October 2000 will, taken together with the
measures above, provide a greater level of assurance that the Bank's resources are being utilized in the
manner intended.

E. 

RISKS

109. Creditworthiness. Ukraine's creditworthiness is currently limited as a result of difficulties with
debt and fiscal management (see Box 1 and paragraph 33) and low foreign exchange reserves (equivalent
to less than one month of imports). This level of creditworthiness is reflected in lack of access to external
financing and by either weak or no ratings at all by the international rating agencies". Ukraine's external

I I 

S&P does not rate Ukraine. Moddy's has a Caal rating for long-term currency bonds and notes, and a Caa3

rating for long-term foreign currency deposits. (FYI grades below Ba are classified as "speculative investment").
Short-term foreign currency banks/notes, and bank deposits are rated "Not Prime Borrower" which means that in
Moody's opinion, in a period of market stress the issuer may not have sufficient access to firm bank lines of credit or
other forms of back-up funding to meet all of its obligations maturing within one year.

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

31

debt has grown rapidly, with debt outstanding and disbursed as a share of GDP increasing from 15.2
percent in 1994 to 40.9 percent in 1999. Although debt service as a share of exports of goods and
services was moderate in 1999 at 15.5 percent, Ukraine was unable to meet its obligations to private
creditors in full and on time. The private debt restructuring endorsed by creditors in mid-March, which
spread payments on US$2.3 billion of privately held sovereign debt maturing in 2000-2001 over the next
five to six years, has helped to reduce the pressure on the country's liquidity position. In the event of
agreement on an IMF program, further relief would be provided by a rescheduling of Paris Club
obligations.

110. 
Improving creditworthiness over the medium term will require strong macroeconomic
management and progress on the structural reforms discussed above (paras 78-81) to lay the basis for
growth and ensure debt and fiscal sustainability. Thus, with sustained implementation of reforms as
envisaged under the base case, Ukraine is not expected to experience further debt servicing difficulties.
However, as discussed below, the risks to preferred creditors will remain high in the near term. This is
particularly true in the case of the Bank, as its share of total public debt is projected to increase over the
CAS period, while the share of other preferred creditors is projected to decline.

111. Although the base case scenario assumes more than US$3.3 billion in gross resource inflows
from IFIs over the CAS period, on a net basis the exposure of IFIs would increase only by US$1 billion.
This level of net resource inflow will: (a) help Ukraine maintain a stable macroeconomic environment
supported by a comfortable level of reserves; and (b) undertake critical public sector reforms and bridge
the financing gap before budget, expenditure and tax reforms take hold. Under this scenario, Bank
exposure is projected to increase up to US$1.1 billion and level off at under US$3.1 billion in year 2003,
equivalent to roughly one-fourth of total projected external public debt (Table 5). Over the long-term,
inflows of foreign direct investment and private financial lending will provide the financing necessary to
support higher levels of growth and reduce the relative exposure of official creditors, including the Bank.

112.. Ukraine's creditworthiness would remain limited under the low scenario. High liquidity risk,
coupled with concerns about debt and fiscal sustainability, would preclude any improvement in external
perceptions of country risk. In this environment, Ukraine will remain dependent on official financing,
particularly from the IFIs. Under the low case lending program, while net disbursements from the Bank
would be negative, Bank debt outstanding and disbursed as a share of public debt would increase to 21.5
percent from its current level of 19.9.

113. Risks. The Base Case scenario faces several sources of political and economic risks. The
political risks arise from the opposition to reform either from those seeking a return to a command
economy or those who want to maintain a partial-reform status to benefit from unclear rules of the game
and access to positions of power. Those who seek a return to the past were soundly defeated during the
past presidential elections and do not pose a major political risk by themselves. A greater political risk is
associated with the possibility that the common political and economic interests, which are keeping the
current parliamentary majority together, disappear, possibly caused, among other things, by strong
political interests and/or deterioration in economic performance. Such developments could well force this
Government to resign and be replaced by another, possibly less committed to reform. If this happens, a
stop-and-go or muddle through policy situation is likely to arise, with mixed reforms and reversals. To
prevent this possibility, the President is seeking to amend the constitution based on the April, 2000
referendum results that would give him power to dissolve the Parliament should it fail to form a working
majority. It is as yet unclear if this political solution is feasible. Debt and fiscal sustainability are key
issues under a muddle through or stop-and-go approach as progress on structural reforms may be
insufficient to lay the groundwork for strong growth. And with less favorable economic outturns than
projected under the base case, renewed liquidity problems are possible under such a scenario.

114. The collapse of the reform initiatives could also come after the Government has succeeded in
normalizing relations with the Fund, reprogramming of the Paris Club debt, and resuming Bank

32 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03

Table 5: Key Exposure and Burden Sharing Indicators, 1999-2003
(Base Case Assistance Levels)
1999 
2000 

2001 

2002 

Debt Outstanding and Disbursed (US$m) a 
Total DOD/GDP (%) 
IBRD DOD/Total DOD (%) b 
IBRD DOD/Preferred creditor DOD (%) 

12,588 
40.9 
16.1 
39.4 

11,473 
37.0 
19.9 
43.7 

12,209 
37.6 
20.9 
41.6 

12,354 
36.1 
23.0 
43.0 

2003

12,310
34.1
25.8
44.9

1,608 

9.1 

1,545 

8.3 

2,600 

15.5 

Total Debt Service (US$m) 
Total DS/XGS (%) d 
IBRDDSiPublicDS(%) 
IBRD DS/Preferred creditor DS (%) 
Memo:
IBRD DOD (inn. $) 
2,030 
2,289 
2,553 
2,847 
3,171
a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private non-guaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short- tern capital.
b. Includes present value of guarantees.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA. the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for
International Settlements.
d. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.

18.6 
37.2 

15.9 
22.3 

11.9 
13.9 

4.8 
12.2 

1,788 

9.1 

2,096

10.1

16.6
36.5

adjustment lending, with the disbursement of the pending tranches under SECALs and the first PAL
operation, and before the present reform initiatives have taken hold. Then, following a full resource
inflow from the IFIs in the year 2000 (equal to the Base Case scenario), a downward adjustment in mid-
term commitments of the IFIs would most likely follow if the reform process stalls. The present design of
the CAS, which commits resources only when meaningful reforms on the ground have been obtained,
would certainly imply no further resource availability from adjustment lending and significant curtailing
of investment lending.

115. 
In the Low Case, Ukraine might not be able to generate sufficient external financial inflows in the
medium term, particularly if a collapse in the reforn government and/or a significant reversal in reform
initiatives were to take place before agreements with the IFIs are obtained. Without significant resources
from the IFIs and limited access to international markets, the only recourse would be tightening of
exchange controls and an increasing reliance on the inter-bank foreign exchange market, combined with
private capital inflows from the near abroad. Should such scenario materialize, Ukraine could face
problems in servicing its debt to creditors. Under such a scenario debt servicing problems to preferred
creditors, including the World Bank, cannot be ruled out. In this case, the triggers for the Low Case
(Table 4) would not be met and the Bank's program would be significantly curtailed.

116. Clearly, there are also economic risks in the external environment. Ukraine's international trade
continues to depend on other CIS countries. The 1998 Russia crisis already showed that the Ukrainian
economy is vulnerable, even though the country managed to somewhat contain the effects of the financial
contagion. Poor economic performance in nearby countries could frustrate the process of economic
revival during the CAS period. An economic downturn could adversely affect Ukraine not only through
lower demand for its products but also through worsening financial conditions under which energy is
being made available to Ukrainian consumers. Ukraine is particularly vulnerable to developments in the
energy sector given the high energy intensity of its industry, large import dependence and the chronic
non-payment problems.

117. Key elements of a proper response to these risks are significantly improved energy efficiency,
reorientation of exports to hard currency areas, and a conscious move to transparent trade (including
energy) transactions based on world market prices. Equally, the present CAS emphasis on improving

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy 2001-03 

33

fiscal and financial discipline will provide strong incentives to reduce energy intensity and develop a
transparent framework of international trade. The investment needed to improve energy efficiency and
move to world prices, however, will put pressure on the balance of payments in the medium term.

III. CONCLUSION

118. The potential for increased global and regional stability from a wealthier and socially more
cohesive Ukraine cannot be underestimated. There appears to be a window of opportunity for substantial
advances in establishing more legitimate and inclusive institutions in Ukraine. At the same time, realism
must be the keyword. The legacy of three generations of Soviet dominance is not easy to shake, and it
may take several attempts before a credible and durable break-through is accomplished. The proposed
strategy tries to position the World Bank Group so that it will be able to respond to opportunity, when this
presents itself, and will also be able to increase its long-term partnership with Ukrainian society---which
will ultimately be the arbiter of its own destiny.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By: Sven Sandstrom 

By: Peter Woicke

Washington, D.C.
August 16, 2000

CAS Consultations with Stakeholders

Attachment 1
Page 1 of 6

1. 
This attachment presents a summary of the consultations with the civil society held during CAS
preparation. Within the framework of the CAS consultations-and with full support from Government,
which has encouraged this open and participatory process-Bank staff met with parlamentarians, members
of local governments, and with over 200 representatives of non-governmental organizations, academia,
professional associations, think-tanks, business circles, mass media, and agricultural workers. A series of
round-tables were held during missions held in April and May/June in Kyiv, Zhytomir, Dnipropetrovsk and
Donetsk with the participation of sector managers and task team leaders who briefed those present on the
respective sector strategies, on-going or planned projects and programs, and instruments for their
implementation. Additional discussions were held by the Resident Mission in Kyiv as well as in the regions.
Written comments on the proposed strategy were provided by a number of NGOs. Background information
about the proposed strategy was made available in Ukrainian and circulated widely.

2. 
The round-tables generated great interest and attracted a variety of participants from organizations
representing intellectuals, youth groups, business professionals, the media, handicapped, disabled, retired,
academicians, small and medium enterprises, charities, scientific circles, environmentalists, etc. The
thematic discussions focused on the most pertinent issues of the reform agenda: poverty alleviation, human
development, social welfare, environmental protection, good governance and anti-corruption. Participants
appreciated the fact that they could freely express their concerns, provide information and give suggestions
directly to representatives of the World Bank. It was agreed that regular consultations would be a good
vehicle for civil society at large to get acquainted with Bank-related activities and their impact on the ground.
Those attending the round-tables expressed their desire to be fully involved in the preparation,
implementation and especially in the monitoring of Bank programs in Ukraine.

3. 
A special web-site has been set up in English, Ukrainian and Russian which will further facilitate the
consultation process by providing regular updates of key information about the CAS, PAL, etc., posting
minutes from relevant meetings, and summaries of the feedback received as well as by inviting the
submission of comments (http://www.worldbank.org./ukrainecas). The meetings were open, selection of
invitees was random and totally unbiased on the part of the Bank, and the conference rooms during all
meetings were packed to capacity testifying to the interest in the discussions. International donors and
government officials were also invited to attend. Written comments were also solicited. Comments received
and their posting on the web-site will assure full transparency and accessibility.

4. 
The CAS public consultations are a relatively new tool and will need some fine-tuning to achieve its
ultimate objective of constructive interactions with all stakeholders'. Nevertheless, they have provided a
good opportunity to exchange opinions with a large number of people, with various professional and
education backgrounds and interests, representing different geographic regions and communities. The
initiative was very well received and all participants expressed their satisfaction with the fact that the World
Bank had engaged in direct dialogue with civil society.

5. 
NGOs expressed their strong desire to be part of the working groups in preparing the CAS and PAL
as well as discussing specific activities and projects. Participants pointed out that implementation of WB
projects should be transparent and carefully monitored with the involvement of NGOs.

6. 
A special Contact Group of NGO representatives was set up in late May. 
It will be the main
advisory body, instrumental in working with the Ukraine World Bank team on organizing future

I 
For example, the Bank has received a complaint from the NGOs in Dnipropetrovsk who apparently were
restricted from attending the meeting with the Country Director by the municipal officials due to the limited space in the

meeting room. Several suggestions were received by the Bank on how to improve the consultation mechanism and
procedures as well as clarifying the format for future discussion. The NGOs also mentioned that usage of the internet
has its drawbacks because only six percent of the Ukrainians has access to internet.

Attachment 1

Page 2 of 6

consultations, and drawing on the expertise and experience of professionals across the country, thus
mobilizing civil society for all-inclusive participation. Several meetings have been held with this group and
the following recommendations emerged as a result:

* Development of an informational bulletin on World Bank projects and other activities in Ukraine
with a description of potential opportunities for NGO participation. This bulletin will also contain
information on how to contact the World Bank staff in charge of these activities;

* Development of a system of public consultations on government policies;
* Review of the legal framework for NGOs and development of recommendations for its
improvement;

* Development of a communication strategy with the civil society.
Observations and commentaries on the main topics are indicated below.

7. 

Progress of Reforms in Ukraine

8. 
A round-table was held with the representatives of the Verkhovna Rada (Parliament), central and
local government officials, business and NGO representatives to discuss the status and implementation of
current reformns. It was acknowledged that the only way to secure successful reforms is through joint
cooperation of all stakeholders together with popular support. In that respect the Bank's initiative to broaden
its consultations on the country assistance strategy through wider participation was highly appreciated.
Following are the main comments:

* The reforms are not yet noticeable, in particular in budget decentralization, privatization, the energy
sector, administrative reform, land reform and agriculture. Transparency was seen as an imperative
for the structural reforms which are the backbone to the transition.

* 

It was noted that public involvement is not customary in Ukraine and civil society should be
stimulated and encouraged to participate, especially at the local level.

* 

It was suggested that good self-governance at the regional and local level would require intersectoral
cooperation, interaction between authorities, businesses and civil society, intellectual support for
reform and training of personnel to carry out the programs and public monitoring at every stage.
* NGOs also suggested that they would like to prepare a report on the implementation of the previous
CAS, including the implementation of individual projects, and its effectiveness. They would like to
circulate this report widely.

The Role of the NGOs

9. 
Comments from the NGOs suggest that they would like to become partners of the Bank. They
specifically mentioned that:

* The NGOs could play a special role in "increasing public knowledge" about the World Bank and
Government initiatives; in increasing public participation through public hearings, information
dissemination, and preparation and distribution of printed material; as well as in monitoring the
implementation of government policy decisions that impact civil society.
* The NGOs can be engaged in providing environmental assessments and social services. The World
Bank could support the creation of a system in which the NGOs could openly compete on an equal
footing with public institutions in the bidding for various programs, including those financed under
Bank projects.

Attachment 1
Page 3 of 6

* The World Bank should support the establishment of a mechanism for public consultations on policy
decisions which concern social and economic issues. The NGO community can play an important
role in this process.
* The CAS should envisage assistance from the World Bank for the development of the capacity of
NGOs through supporting the development of their infrastructure as well as supporting their program
of activities (especially their research programs and programs directed at work with the public).
* The Bank should promote the creation of a favorable legislative environment for the NGO sector.

Good Governance and Anti-corruption
10. 
Good governance and anti-corruption is a topic which cuts across themes and was mentioned during
all discussions, as it is perceived as the major obstacle to the country's development. Two separate round-
tables on the subject were held in Kyiv: one with representatives of the Government, the Presidency, and
parliamentarians linked by videoconference with Bank WBI headquarters; the second was jointly organized
with the Embassy of Canada, other donors, and non-governmental organizations. The Bank also received
additional comments through written correspondence. Following is a synopsis of comments and suggestions:
* The causes for corruption are deeply rooted and further aggravated by low civil servant salaries, the
fall in living standards of the population, and the general disregard of the law. The laws are in place
but their implementation is lax and there are many of loopholes that encourage violations.
- Another reason for rampant corruption is said to be the apathy of the population and its somewhat
indifferent attitude toward unlawful practices. Most people would rather pay a bribe than report
violations or file complaints.
- The governance issue is seen as especially acute in the energy sector and was addressed at the special
round-table devoted to energy sector reform.
* The following issues need to be addressed in the fight against corruption: regulatory reform that
would cut red-tape; strict observance of the existing laws; need to understand the issue of conflict of
interests, especially among businessmen; need for advocacy and civil education to make citizens
aware of their rights and voice in order to prevent abuse by corrupt officials.
* The measures that were suggested are: implementation of the Concept of National Integrity Program
approved by the President; establishing a joint commission (comprising government and non-
government representatives) to review the implementation of regulations and anti-corruption decrees
and make public its findings at a national conference; developing an anti-corruption program
addressing shadow economy problems and introducing a sound monitoring system, including
capacity building, for NGOs to perform monitoring tasks.
* The Bank should help promote the establishment of public relations units in government agencies.
* An NGO anti-corruption coalition has been formed which launched an initiative -- "Public
Resistance to Corruption." The working group of this coalition has drafted a National Anti-
corruption Program which includes a large number of activities including monitoring corruption at
the local level, providing free legal advice to victims of corrupt practices and legal education to
citizens, organizing public hearings, publication of educational materials, etc. Currently the group is
studying laws that contain clauses that give leeway for corrupt practices and will prepare drafts for
amendments to be submitted to Parliament. This exercise will be a good test for cooperation
between all members of civil society since its implementation envisages joint activities among
NGOs, public officials, businessmen and ordinary citizens. The World Bank's role is mostly seen as
advisory, as well as providing some specific training and assistance in structural reforms, especially
that which relates to civil service reform.

Attachment 1
Page 4 of 6

Social Sector, Human Development and Poverty Reduction

11. 
The NGOs pointed out that the CAS has rightfully put an emphasis on poverty reduction. Poverty
has become a very sensitive issue according to responses received from a sociological survey conducted in
the country indicating that 90 percent of Ukrainians perceive themselves as poor. Deterioration of basic
services, especially in healthcare, were highlighted (a survey carried out under the Khrakiv/Lviv/Donetsk
anticorruption initiative showed the highest level of perceived corruption in medical services). Following are
the specific comments received:

* Some stakeholders disagreed with the draft CAS evaluation of the failing quality of education and
suggested an analysis of the education sector [Dniepropetrovsk oblast]. Nevertheless, most
expressed the opinion that the Bank should attach more importance to education and vocational
training that would guarantee better job opportunities in the new labor markets.
* A representative of the Ukrainian Roma Forum raised the issue of the vulnerability of the gypsy
minority who often face social exclusion and having the worst living standards.
* The Deputy Minister of Labor and Social Services, present at a round-table, stressed the importance
for a systemic approach and acquainted the audiences with the instruments that the Govemment
envisages for poverty reduction, such as programs for labor market development, self-protection,
targeted social assistance, social insurance schemes, adoption of European level social standards, and
human resource development.

- The advisor to the President of Ukraine on social issues suggested that the existing system of social
protection should be taken into account when designing the new poverty reduction strategy and
should be coupled with a transition to community-based social care, active employment and self-
employment programs, and measures for dealing with persisting multi-generational poverty. A
survey indicating that 36 percent of Ukrainians have informal incomes brought forth the difference
between rural and urban poverty and the coping skills people have developed for survival.

* The NGOs stressed that demand for reforms and for high quality services should stem from the
people and NGOs should help mobilize the society to that end.
* Development of alternative types of social service was suggested with NGOs at the forefront in
organizing communities. NGOs are active in providing some social services, such as support for
AIDS prevention, care for invalids, street children, handicapped, orphans, training courses for re-
qualification, etc. NGOs all see a necessity for changing regulations to give them legal rights
(through the introduction of a new law on social order and partnership) to compete on an equal
footing with public institutions for provision of services. It was pointed out that laws alone are not
the magic wand that would resolve the issues. Implementation capacity, good institutions, trained
personnel, and investments are necessary.
* Civil society-government cooperation is seen as imperative in the provision of social services and
implementation of the social reforms.

* Technical assistance and investment for reforms was requested from the WB in the support of: (a)
creating territorial communities and comrmunal funds to help the development of small and medium
enterprises; (b) provision of micro-credits through credit unions; (c) special training for women

entrepreneurs; (d) business management training for NGOs to run social services; (e) support for

youth movements; and (f) information on the reforms in the regions.

Environment

12. 
Environment was discussed at the regional meetings and in Kyiv. Numerous written comments were
also received from the environmental NGOs. It was discussed that pollution is extremely severe in some

Attachment 1
Page 5 of 6

-
-
-
-
-

regions (e.g., Dniepropetrovsk region, Chornobyl). However, despite the great number of ecological
problems, Ukraine, one of the largest European states by its territory, has preserved a number of typical and
unique natural ecosystems which have already been lost in most other European countries. The NGOs
believe that it is time to look at Ukraine as the guardian of the European animal and vegetable genetic fund,
and as a possible donor for restoration of many important elements of the biological and landscape diversity
of Europe. Following are the NGOs' recommendations:
* As far as the new CAS is concerned, they would like to see a greater emphasis on environmental
protection, linking it to the improvement in the quality of peoples' lives.
* The World Bank should grant loans to Ukraine only if environmental issues are appropriately dealt
with, including:
conducting environmental assessments during the preparation of all projects,
promoting development of ecological businesses,
encouraging the introduction of modem environment-friendly technologies in industry,
developing appropriate informational activities from those who receive credits, and
improving conditions for activities of public non-government organizations, in particular,
ecological ones.
* The lending program should include more projects on environment. For example, a pilot project to
protect the Ros River Basin and a project on preserving biodiversity, ecosystems, and creation of an
ecological network in the steppe and forest-steppe zones of Ulkraine should be explored.
* Regional representatives are convinced that World Bank staff should consult more often at the local
level especially on matters concerning the environment.
* Environmental monitoring should be made a priority. The legislation regarding monitoring should
be changed to avoid duplication and make it more efficient.
* Public access to environmental data.
* The World Bank should support the establishment of a National Environment Fund.
* The CAS should envisage studies on alternative energy sources and public transportation with
regards to its effect on environment.
* Attention was drawn to environmental problems in agriculture and the fact that the new Land Code
should address issues of land planning and environment.
* NGOs would like to promote environmental education at schools and look for support from the
World Bank.
* The Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources is one of the most progressive regarding dialogue
with NGOs. However, the NGOs are concerned that the liquidation of the Ministry's Department for
Public Contacts might limit the opportunities for such dialogue in the future.

Agriculture
13. 
The World Bank's involvement in the agriculture sector is seen as assistance in managing debt
restructuring; providing agriculture education in new farming methods and farm management; and
eliminating the state monopoly on export taxes of some agricultural produce (e.g. sunflower seeds).

Energy Sector

14. 

A round-table was held to discuss energy sector reform and the Bank's role in this process:

Attachment 1
Page 6 of 6

* While some progress has been noted, all those present shared the concern that reform is severely
lagging and even donors are not unanimous on how to address the problems. The main obstacles are
the huge arrears in collecting electricity fees; lack of a common government approach for improving
the situation; the inefficient and ineffective spot market; lack of transparency (making the sector the
biggest source of corruption and unattractive for prospective investors); poor management at the
local and oblast levels which prevents procurement on a competitive basis; lack of clear ownership
rights; and inefficient operations and tariffs (which do not reflect decommissioning costs,
replacement costs, etc.).
Industrial enterprises are the biggest debtors but there is no mechanism to cut them off from
electrical supply for unpaid fees. Private consumers in general have a much better record for paying
electricity bills and are in effect subsidizing bankrupt industries. Some participants expressed the
opinion that poor households should be subsidized, while others feel that social problems should be
separated from energy issues.
* NGOs are indignant that there is no system to punish violators and feel that civil society has a big
role to play in imposing a fair system on the energy sector.

* 

Business Environment

15. 
This is an area where the Bank has been conducting extensive consultations with the business
community for several years. Regular meetings with businesses and business associations, round tables and
conferences, have helped to develop the deregulation program supported by the Bank as well as to give a
greater voice to the business community in their demand for a better business environment. During the CAS
discussions, entrepreneurs mentioned that:

* The Bank should continue facilitating the dialogue between the government and the business
community in order to achieve stable business laws and good legal protection of businesses.
* The NGOs see the need for an Ukrainian Agency for International Development that would promote
and attract foreign investments to the country.
It was pointed out that while SME credit lines from the World Bank would be valuable, assistance in
training entrepreneurs and enterprise managers has an even greater priority.

* 

General Comments

* The NGOs suggested that a discussion on the results of the implementation of the previous Bank
strategy be conducted.
* The World Bank should ensure that representatives of non-government organizations are included in
the working groups on project preparation as well as monitoring of project implementation.
* Local specialists should be more widely used for project preparation and implementation.

16. 
Finally, it is important to mention that the Government has endorsed public participation as an
important aspect of its new development policy and has shown commitment for cooperation with the
population by setting up a special unit for coordination and work with civil society at the Ministry of
Economy.

Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Ukraine at a glance 

7P6/00

Europe & 
Lower-
Central middle-
Asia 
income 

POVERTY arnd SOCIAL 

Ukraine 

Development diamond

1999
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNP per capita (Atlas method, USS) 
GNP (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

50.0 
750 
37.5 

475 
2,200 
1,044 

886 
1,740
1,541

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1993-99

Population (%) 
Labor force (A) 
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1993-99) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
infant mortality (per 1,000 live birtts) 
Child mainutriton (% of children under 5) 
Access to safe water (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% ofschool-age population) 
Male 
Female 

-0.7 
-0,4 

0.2 
0.6 

1.1 
1.5 

GNP 
per 

Gross
primary

capita 

enrollment

27
68 
67 
14 

66 
69 
22 
8 
-. 
3 
100 
101 

58
68
35
14 
71
14 
102
105 

.. 

Access to safe water

0 
87 
87 

Ukraine

Lower-middle-income group

87 

99 

99

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

_
Economic ratios*

GDP (US$ billions at official exchange rate) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

.

.

1.9 
20.8 
41.9 
18.5 
17.7 

30.8
19.8
62.8 
20.9 
22.5

.. 

28.9 
32.1 

.. 
.. 
.. 

Trade
T

28.8 

36,9 

Current account balance/GDP 
interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Tota debt service/exports 
Pfesent value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debt/exports 

-3.1 
1.0 
30,4 

2,7 
2.5 
40.8 
14.4
37.3
68.7

Domestic 
Savings 
Svn

| 

Ivsmn
Investment

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

11.1 
27.8 
63.8 

Indebtedness

1979-89 198949 

1998 

1999 1999-43

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GNP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

.
.. 
.. 

-10.7 
-10.7 

-1.9 
-2.4 

-0.4 

2.5 
2.6 

-Ukraine

-0.7 
-7.9 

Lower-middle-income group

0.5 

-13.4 

6.0

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of investment and GDP (%)
2

(% of GDP) 

Agriculture 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

22.9 
48.4 
9.1 
28.7 

14.2 
35.4 
5.6 
50.4 

12.8
38.4 
5.2 
48.8 

Industry 

0 
-20 
-40

| 

Manufacturing 

/ 

97 

98 

99

Services 
Private consumption 

53.9 
17.3 
32.1 

59.8 
21.6 
44.2 

60.2 
19.0 
51.7

-60

Generalgovernmentconsumption 
Imports of goods and services 

.

GDI 

0 GDP

1979-89 1989-99 

1998 

1999 

Growth of exports and imports (%.)

(average annual growth)
Agnculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 

.. 
.. 
.. 

-6.3 
-13.5 
-13.4 
-3.1 

-11.2 
-0.1 
0.0 
-0.6 

-4.2 
3.4 
5.5 
-1.8 

30
20 -

10 

Services 

.. 

0eo 

~ 

i

Private consumption 

-8.0 
-4.7 
-22.4 
4.0 
-11.1 

1.3 
-3.5 
0.4 
-14.0 
-2.7 

0.5 

-20 

9

General government consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 
Gross national product 

-12.0
-5.4 
-19.1 
-1.3

-30

Exports 

0 

Imports

.. 

Note: 1999 data are preliminary estmates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Ukraine

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

Domestic prices 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)

(% change) 
Consumer prices 
Implicit GDP deflator 

so

.. 
.. 

.. 

20.0 

19.2 

400
2300. 

3.8 

12.0 

24.4 

\ 

I

Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) o
Current revenue 
Current budget balance 

100

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

36.0 
-2.1 

34.4 
-2.0 

9 

9 

97 

98 

99

-

GDP deflator 

-OCPI

Overall surplus/deficrt 

.. 

.. 

-2.8 

-2.4 

l

TRADE

(US$ millions) 
Total exports (fob) 
Ferrous and non-ferrous metals 
Food items and raw materials 
Manufactures and machinery 
Total imports (ci) 

1979 

1989 

1998 
13,699 
5,336 
1,379 
2,393 
16,283 

1999 
12,463 
4,874
1,418 
1,981 

Export and import levels (USS mill.)

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

25,000

20,DDO

15,000
10,000

12,945 

Food 

.

.. 

1,052 902 5 tI00 1

Fuel and energy 

.

.. 

6,170 

5,441

Capital goods 

3,172 

2,255 

o L

93 

94 

95 

9B 

97 

93 

99

Export pnce index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 

.. 
.. 

.. 

96 
102 

95
105 

,. 

L Exports 

ri Imports

Terms of trade (1995=100) 

.. 

94 

91

BALANCE 

of PAYMENTS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

(US$ millions)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

17,621 
18,828 
-1,207 

16,234
15,237 
997 

2

.. 

.. 

1

Net income 
Net current transfers 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

-871 
782 

-869 
706 

o

a L| 

99 

97 

90 

99

Current account balance 

-1,296 

834 

-2 

L

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

-28 
1,324 

-551 
-283 

-3

4

Memo:

Reserves including gold (US$ millions) 
Official exchange rate (localJUS$, average) 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

793 
2.4 

1,094
4.1

EXTERNAL DEBT 

and RESOURCE 

FLOWS

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999

(US$ millions) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 

Composition of 1999 debt (USS mill.)

0 
0 

0 
0 

12,718 
1,599 

12,588
2,020 

480 

2020

IDA 

0 

0 

0 

0

Total debt service 
IBRD 

0 
0 

0 
0 

2,017 
68 

2,600
96

IDA 

0 

0 

0 

0

Composition of net resource flows 
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 
World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

4682

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 

0 
253 
1,344 
747 
47 

0 
297 
-574 
489
62 

,/

./

-

.. 

0 

1907 

572

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

680 

0 

A - IBRD 

E - Bilateral

385 
0 
385 
68 
317 

422 
2 
420
94
326

B - IDA 

D - Other multilateral F - Private

C - IMF 

G - Short-term

Development Economics 

7/6/00

CAS Annex B2 -
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

Annex B2
Page 1 of I

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a, f 
Average Implementation Period (years) b, f 

Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, cf 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c,f 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount 
n,d,f 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 

1997 

1 1 
1.38 

54.55 
50.91 
72.73 
72.96 
32.86 

1998 

1999 

1 2 
2.03 

25 
42.88 
58.33 
79.74 
12.78 

1 1 
2.58 

18.18 
20 
54.55 
74.83 
5.41 

2000

1 1
3.25

36.36
33.02
63.64
74.71
5.33

Supervision Resources (total US$/FY01) 852,500

Average Supervision (US$Iproject) 

77,500

yes

Memorandum Item 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs

Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

5 
1126.87 
25 
26.62 

5
1126.87
25
26.62

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
f. Does not include GEE and quarantees.

CAS Annex B3 - Bank Group Program Summary 

Ukraine 

Annex B3

Page 1 of 1

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(HIMIL) 

Implementation b
Risks (H/MIL)

2001 

2002 

2003 

COAL RESTRUCTURING 
LVIV WATER 
PROGRAMMATIC ADJUSTMENT I 
SEVASTOPOL HEAT 
TAX ADMINISTRATION MODERNIZATION 
TBIHIV/AIDS CONTROL 

Total * 

METHANE SAFETY (LIL) 
MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT 
PRE-EXPORT GUARANTEE 
PRIVATE SEC. DEV. 
PROGRAMMATIC ADJUSTMENT II 
PUBLIC ADMIN INCENTIVES REFORM 
SOCIAL INVESTMENT FUND 

TITLE REGISTRATION 

Total * 

ENVIRONMENT 
PROGRAMMATIC ADJUSTMENT III 
RURAL FINANCEIFARM RESTRUCTURING 
SOCIAL SECTOR ADJUSTMENT 

STATISTICS MODERNIZATION 

SOCIAL SECTOR TA (EDUC/HEALTH) 
Total * 

100.0 
24.0 
250.0 
17.0 
100.0 
40.0 

531.0

5.0 
150.0 
100.0 
40,0 
250.0 
60.0 
30.0 

100.0 

735.0

20.0 
250.0 
100.0 
100.0 

30.0 

50.0 
55D.0

TOTAL 

1,816.0

* Excluding GEF

M 
L 
H 
L 
M 
H 

H 
H 
M 
H 
H 
H 
H 

M 

M 
H 
M 
H 

M 

H 

M
L
H
L
M
H

L
H
L
H
H
H
H

M

M
H
M
H

M

H

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L).

Template created on 8/16/00.

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Ukraine

Ukraine - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1997-2000

Annex B3 (IFC MIGA)
Page 1 of I

IFC approvals (US$m) 

Sector (%)

FINANCIAL SERVICES 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

1997 1998 1999 2000

14.60 44.20 7.21

100 

0 100 0 

100

100

69 
31 

69
31

0 100 0 

100

0.000 10.000 10.000

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services -

Completion FY Cost (US$000) Audiencea 
(Actual)
521.0 
44.3 
21.4 
36.6 

B, G, PD 
B, G, PD 
B, G, PD 
B, D, G 

FY99 
FY99 
FY99 
FY00 

FY00 

FY00 
FY00 

232.8 

48.7 
73.2 

B, G 

B, D, G 
B, G 

Annex B4
Page I of I

Objectiveb

KG
KG, PS
KG
KG, PS

KG

KG, PS
KG, PS

Product 
Recent completions 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Farm Restructuring Note 
Household Surveys 
Energy Strategy 

Fiscal Study 

Gas Sector Strategy 
Health Discussions 

Underway 
Civil Society Development Activities 
Financial Sector Update Note 
Gender Dimension of Transition Study 
Global Distance Learning Initiative 
Macro monitoring 
Pension Policy Dialogue 
People's Voice Program 
Poverty Update 
Surveys on WB impact on the ground 

Planned
Benchmark Business Surveys/Privatization TA 
Climate Change National Strategy Study 
Coastal Zone Management (IDF) 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
Country Procurement Assessment Review 
Energy Privatization and Reforms* 
Environmental Study 
Financial Sector Development Dialogue* 
Global Gateway 
Health/Education Sector Note 
Human Capital Development Strategy* 
Institutional Capacity Building in Agriculture (IDF) 
Public Expenditure Review 
Public Procurement Capacity Building (IDF) 
Transport Sector Dialogue 

FY01-03 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01-03 
FY01-03 
FY01-03 
FY01-03 
FY01 
FY01-03 

FY01-03 
FY01 
FY02 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01 
FY01-03 
FY01 
FY02 
FY01 
FYO1-02 
FY01 
FY01 

(Budgeted)
99.8 
145.9 
66.5 
80.0 
87.5 
64.3 
79.8 
172.9 
66.5 

B, CS, D, G, PD KG, PS
B, D, G, PD 
KG, PS
B, CS, G, PD KG, PS
CS, G 
KG, PD
B, G 
PS
B, G 
KG, PS
CS, PD 
PS
B, G, D 
KG, PS
B 
PS

99.8 
71.3 
33.3 
58.7 
62.3 
66.5 
133.0 
106.4 
10.0 
133.0 
133.0 
66.5 
232.8 
33.3 
53.2 

B, CS, D, G, PD KG, PS
B, CS, D, G, PD KG, PS
G 
KG
B, G 
KG, PS
B, G 
KG, PS
B, D, G 
KG, PS
B, G, PD 
KG
B, G 
KG, PS
B, CS, G 
KG
B, CS, G, PD 
KG, PS
B, CS, G 
KG, PS
CS, G 
KG
B, G, PD 
KG, PS
G, PD 
KG
B, G, PD 
KG

a. B = Bank; CS = Civil Society;D = Donor; G = Government, PD Public Dissemination.
b. KG = Knowledge Generation; PD = Public Debate, PS = Problem Solving.
B Base Case Scenario

Annex E15
Page I of 1

Ukraine Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Samfe relilon/income group

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY
(%1 of population)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index...
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1 995= 100) 
INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (0% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(%1 of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to safe water
(%/ of population)

Total 
Urban 
Rural 

Immunization rate
(Y. under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 1 00,000 live births) 

1970-76 

1980485 

1993-99 

49.0 
0.7 
58.3 
2.0 

50.9 
0.3 
64.7 
2.1 

... 

... 

... 

... 

... 

...

5.8 

... 

...

...

.

...

...

...

...

..

... 

70 
65 
74 

22 

...

239 
105 

...

..

.. 

5.2 

.99 

43 

70 
66 
74 

16 

282 
112 

50.0 
-0.6 
67.8 
1.3 

27.0

750 
220 
206

32.5
8.6
41.2

3.0 
3.7 
13.0 

99 
99 

55
77
12

97 
96 

.

67 
62 
73 

14 
1 7 

351 
135 
25

2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Europe & 
Central Asia 

474.7 
0.1 
66.2 
1.6 

Lower-
middle-
income

886.5
0.9
57.7
.2.5

2,200 
155 

1,740
131

4.0 
5.1 
8.8

100 
100 
99 

91 
89 

69 
65 
74 

22 
26 

283 
120 

3.0
4.9

94
95
93

89
89
14

68
65
72

35
44

244
137

Annex B6
Page I of 2

Ukraine - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
1995 
1996 

Estimate 
1998 
1999 

Projected
2001 
2002 

Indicator 

1994 

1997 

2000 

2003

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Grossdomesticproducta 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100

Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

16 
47 
36 

15 
42 
42 

14 
38 
48 

14 
34 
51 

14 
35 
50 

13 
38 
49 

13 
39 
48 

13 
38 
49 

13 
37 
50 

13
37
50

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Government investment 
Private investment 
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 
Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

68 
35 
7 
28 

76 
27 
6 
21 

80 
23 
5 
18 

82 
21 
2 
19 

81 
21 
2 
19 

79 
20 
1 
19 

80 
21 
1 
20 

80 
22 
1 
21 

80 
22 
1 
22 

80
22
1
22

35 
39 
32 
32 

47 
50 
24 
24 

46 
48 
20 
20 

41 
44 
18 
19 

42 
44 
19 
18 

53 
52 
21 
22 

57 
58 
20 
20 

57 
59 
20 
19 

57 
59 
20 
19 

57
59
20
20

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Adas method) 
1910 
1630 
Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from previous year prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
-22.9 
-12.2 
-10.0 
Gross domestic investment 
-27.1 
-46.4 
-25.7 
Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from previous year prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
-22.3 
-11.5 
-9.3 
Total consumption 
-8.9 
-2.9 
-7.6 
Private consumption 
-8.1 
-1.2 
-8.7 

36,756 37,008 44,558 50,150 41,883 30,778 30,988 32,494 34,205 36,077

690 

800 

840 

750 

680 

640 

670 

710

-3.0 
0.3 

-1.9 
0.4 

-0.4 
-5.4 

2.0 
7.7 

2.3 
5.9 

2.6 
5.7 

3.0
5.5

-2.2 
-1.1 
-0.9 

-1.5 
0.3 
1.7 

0.2 
-2.6 
1.2 

2.2 
7.0 
8.3 

2.4 
2.4 
3.7 

2.7 
2.0 
3.7 

3.1
2.3
3.3

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)

Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 

16641 17090 20346 20355 
17621 16234 
13894 14244 15547 
15418 13699 12463 
18007 18280 21468 
21891 
18828 15237 
16469 16946 19843 
19623 16283 12945 
-1366 
-1190 
-1122 
-1536 
-1207 
997 
547 
472 
509 
845 
782 
706 
-1066 
-1152 
-1185 
-1335 
-1296 
834 
151 
257 
526 
581 
747 
489 
306 
165 
283 
803 
1597 
-277 
98 
385 
238 
5 
253 
297 
208 
-220 
45 
798 
1344 
-574 

17614 18496 19494 20608
13777 14500 
15317 16232
18081 19220 20280 21387
15751 16783 17748 
18755
-467 
-724 
-786 
-779
703 
640 
701 
707
-311 
-744 
-851 
-870
750 
850 
1000 
1125
338 
369 
235 
109
413 
447 
260 
171
-75 
-78 
-25 
-61

Other capital (net incl. effors & ommissions) 

1155 

1218 

1249 

334 

-2372 

-763 

-255 

-395 

-205 

-155

Change in reservesd 

-546 

-488 

-873 

-383 

1324 

-283 

-522 

-80 

-180 

-209

Memorandum items

Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Annual value growth rates (%)
Merchandiseexports(FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (FOB) 

-3.7 

-3.2 

-2.5 

-3.1 

-2.9 

3.2 

-1.5 

-2.2 

-2.3 

-2.2

33.2 

2.5 
28.5 
3.8 
2.9 

9.1 
8.5 
6.9 
17.1 

-0.8 
-1.6 
-2.6 
-1.1 

-11.1 
-13.1 
-9.0 
-17.0 

-9.0 
-9.2 
-11.1 
-20.5 

10.5 
11.8 
6.7 
21.7 

5.2 
6.2 
2.3 
6.5 

5.6 
6.5 
2.6 
5.8 

6.0
6.8
3.3
5.7

.. 
.. 
.. 

(Continued)

Ukraine - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Indicator 

1994 

1995 

Actual 
1996 

1997 

1998 

Estimate 
1999 

2000 

Projected
2001 
2002 

2003

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)
Current revenues 
41.9 
Current expenditures 
47.0 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
-5.1 
Capital expenditure 
3.6 
Foreign financing 

.

37.8 
40.2 
-2.3 
2.5 

.. 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth ofM2(%) 
Private sector creditgrowth/ 
total credit growth (%)

26.7 
567.9 
21.8 

12.7 
115.0 
4.5 

36.7 
38.6 
-1.9 
1.3 
-0.1 

11.5 
35.4 
9.1 

38.0 
43.0 
-5.0 
0.6 
0.2 

13.4 
33.9 
29.8 

36.0 
38.0 
-2.1 
0.7 
1.8 

14.9 
22.3 
62.0 

34.4 
36.4 
-2.0 
0.4 
0.2 

17.0 
41.3 
41.0 

33.3 
35.4 
-2.2 
0.4 
1.0 

17.5 
35.5 
79.3 

32.1 
33.1 
-1.0 
0.4 
0.9 

17.8 
22.2 
81.2 

31.5 
32.2 
-0.7 
0.4 
0.4 

17.9 
18.6 
80.2 

31.5
31.5
0.0
0.6
0.4

18.0
13.9
76.5

Price developments
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU; 1992=100) 
Consumerpriceindex (%change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

2.2 
401.1 
953.5 

2.4 
181.7 
415.5 

3.3 
39.7 
66.2 

4.0 
10.1 
18.1 

3.6 
20.0 
12.0 

2.7 
19.2 
24.4 

2.7 
28.8 
29.0 

2.7 
18.3 
18.0 

2.7 
15.3 
15.0 

2.7
10.4
10.0

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Page I of I

Ukraine - Key Exposure Indicators

Actual 
1996 

Estimate 
1999 

Projected
2001 
2002 

Indicator 

1994 

1995 

1997 

1998 

2000 

2003

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

5597 

8390 

9498 

11096 

12718 

12588 

11473 

12209 

12354 

12310

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

970 

1527 

1344 

1888 

1875 

-196 

-15 

736 

145 

-45

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)a

299 

1136 

1257 

1358 

2017 

2600 

1608 

1545 

1788 

2096

Debt and debt service indicators
(N)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

32.8 
15.2 
1.8 
0.7 

47.5 
22.7 
6.4 
0.8 

45.6 
21.3 
6.0 
2.3 

52.8 
22.1 
6.5 
1.9 

69.9 
30.4 
11.1 
2.1 

75.2 
40.9 
15.5 
2.2 

64.9 
37.0 
9.1 
2.6 

65.8 
37.6 
8.3 
2.5 

63.1 
36.1 
9.1 
1.7 

59.5
34.1
10.1
0.4

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public /f 
DS (0/%)C
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
Ofwhichpresentvalueof 
guarantees (US$m)
Share of lBRD portfolio (%/o) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

0.0 
21.6 

0.7 
16.9 

2.8 
10.0 

4.9 
14.5 

4.5 
20.5 

4.8 
39.6 

11.9 
85.8 

15.9 
71.0 

18.6 
49.9 

16.6
45.6

0.0 
102 
0 

0.0 
503 
0 

0.2 
909 
0 

0.3 
1214 
0 

0.4 
1599 
0 

0.6 
2030 
10 

0.9 
2289 
10 

1.2 
2553 
10 

1.6 
2847 
10 

1.6
3171
10

0 

0 
0 

1 
0 

1 
0 

1 
0 

1 
0 

2 
0 

2 
0 

2 
0 

2
0

0 

IFC (US$m)
Loans 
Equity andquasi-equity /c 

0 
I 

0 
1 

0 
6 

0 
6 

0 
8 

0 
8 

0 
8 

0 
8 

0 
8 

0
8

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

10 

10 

10 

10 

10

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

CAS Annex B8 - Ukraine

Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)

Annex B8
Page 1 of 1

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 
DvlpetIpeetto
Develoment Impolementation 
Proaress
Obiectives 
U 
S 
U 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
U 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 

Oriainal Amount in USS Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements I

IBRD 

32.00 
114.00 
310.00 
15.81 
300.00 
70.00 
2.60 
23.20 
200.00 
16.40 
300.00 
18.29 

1402.30 

IDA 

Cancel. Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Rev'd

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 

10.9 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

8.61 
70.28 
1.83 
3.43 
70.00 
36.48 
0.09 
20.80 
199.53 
16.30 
100.00 
18.29 

19.48 
65.75 
1.83 
4.42 
70.00 
11.50 
0.09 
15.08 
13.80 
7.85 
100.00 
0.00 

11.90 

545.64 

309.80 

3.88
11.61
0.00
0.27
70.00
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.00
0.00

85.82

Closed
Projects

Board 
Date 
Fiscal 
Year Active Projects 

1995 
P009117 AGRIC. SEED DEVELOPM 
1995 
P038820 HYDROPOWER REHAB 
1996 
P035814 ENTER. DEV. ADJUST. 
1996 
P044110 COAL PILOT 
1997 P040564 COAL SECAL 
1997 
P044851 EXPORT DEVELOPMENT 
1997 
P045940 SOCIAL PROTECT. SUPP 
1998 P044728 OZONE DEPLETING SUBS (GEF 
1998 
P044832 KIEV DISTRICT HEAT. 
1998 
P049174 TREASURY SYSTEMS 
1999 
P040560 FINANCIAL SECAL 
P055739 KIEV PB ENERGY EFFIC 
2000 

TOTAL: 

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements 
to date as projected at appraisal.

Annex B8 (IFC)
Page I of I

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Ukraine

Ukraine
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 4/30/00
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1998 CreditanstaltUk 
1996 FUIB 
1994/96 
Ukraine VC Fund 

Loan 

Total Portfolio: 

Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
2.28 
0 
0 
0 
2.28 
0 
0
6.5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
5 
1.5 
0 
0 
0 
0.8 
0 
0

10.28 

0 

0 

0 

8.08 

0 

0

0 
0 
0 

0 

Approvals Pending Commitment

1998 Creditanstalt Uk 
1996 FUIB 
1998 Finansbank 
2000 MBU 

Loan 
Equity Quasi Partic
5000 
0 
0 
0
10000 
0 
0 
0
5000 
2232 
0 
0
5000 
2209 
0 
0

Total Pending Commitment: 

25000 

4441 

0 

0

Goals 

Government Strategy 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy Framework
Bank Group Activities 
l Lending 
| 
AAA: ESW/TA 

Partners 

_______________________ _____________________ 

A. BUILDING DEMAND FOR BETTER INSTITUTIONS

Annex B9
Page 1 of 9

Bank Group
Performance
B enchm arks

1. Civil society 

Build up the civil 
society's capacity to 
voice its concerns and 
become an important 
partner in the country's 
life. 

* The Government 
Program places regular 
consultations with the civil 
society among top priorities. 
* The Government 
intends to provide regular 
information about its 
policies as well as 
communicate the results of 
its activities to the public. 

People's Voice 
Program (FYOI-03) 
* Civil Society 
Building Activities 
(FY01-03) 
* Survey on the 
impact of Bank 
assistance (FY01) 
* Gender Dimension 
of Transition (FY01) 

All major donors -- 
* Public consultation
USAID, TACIS, 
on major government
UNDP, DFID and 
initiatives (as required
CIDA -- have been 
by new legislation on
active in supporting local normative acts)
initiatives and 
* Open budget
strengthening citizen 
hearings conducted in a
groups. This assistance 
large number of
is likely to expand. 
municipalities/communit
ies
* 
Improved legal basis
for NGOs

2. PSDlBusiness 
Environment 

Reduce the regulatory 
burden on businesses 

3. Public 
Administration 

Improve the quality of 
public service delivery 

* 

* A consultative 
* Private Sector 
* Benchmark business USAID/UK DFID: 
mechanism between private Development (FY02) surveys (FYOI-03) 
* Assistance with the 
businesses and government 
* 
IFC Technical 
regulatory reform 
has been put in place 
Assistance Program 
business 
through the State Committee 
(SME Development) 
environment at the local 
on Entrepreneurship 
IFC advice on 
level 
Development 
corporate governance 
assistance with 
* All new regulations 
drafting the civil code 
have to be published in order 
EBRD: 
to allow the public to 
SME credit line 
comment before that 
reYlaion ae approved
reorganization of 
ministries and other 
bodies/agencies of executive 
power at both central and 
local level to improve 
service delivery 

* People's Voice 
Program (FYO1-03) 

* 

c 

* 

Improved business
environment as
evidenced by
independent business
surveys
Increase foreign
investment by 50% on
an annual basis
Increase the number
of SMEs by 10%
annually

* 

* 

* Better quality of
public services as
evidenced by service
delivery surveys
(conducted under the
People's Voice Project)

* 

* 

USAID has been 
providing support to the 
Ministries of Finance 
and Economy 
DFID/USAID are 
supporting the central 
team on public
administration reform
program management

* Municipal 
Development Loan 
(FY02) 
a Public 
Administration 
Incentives Reform 
(FY02) 
* Statistics 
Modernization 

Goals 

Government Strategy 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy Framework

Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA: ESW/TA 

Project (FY03)
4. Community 
* Separate and balance 
* Municipal 
Development 
responsibilities between the Development Loan 
Improve service delivery central and local executive 
(FY02) 
at the community level 
authorities and local self- 
SIF (FY02) 
administration bodies; 
* Strengthen local 
finances; 
* Finalize establishment 
of property belonging to 
communities;

* 

* People's Voice 
Program (FY0I-03) 

5. Reduce Corruption 
Increase transparency 
and integrity 

* Civil service reform 
strategy developed that 
includes pay reform and 
measures to increase 
accountability 
* New law on Public 
Procurement approved by 
Rada 
* 
Improve business 
environment (see PSD 
section) 
* Use transparent rules in 
privatization 

* Public 
Administration 
Incentives Reform 
(FY02) 

* 

IDF on Public 
Procurement (FY01) 
* Peoples' Voice 
Program (FYO1-03) 
* Country Financial 
Assessment Review 
(FY01) 
* Country 
Procurement Assessment 
Review (FY01) 

6. Environment 
Establish overall policy 
and regulatory 
framework and work on 
specific aspects of air, 
water pollution, or 
coastal zone 
management 

* Develop strategy for 
environment 
* Refocus policy and 
regulatory framework to 
include EU compliance 

* Wetlands 
(FY01) 
* Environmental 
TA project (FY02) 
* Environmental 
pollution (FY 03) 

* Climate Change 
National Strategy Study 
- GEF (FY01) 
IDF on Coastal 
Zone Management 
(FY02) 
* Policy note on 
Environment (FY01) 

Annex B9
Page 2 of 9

Partners 

____________________ 

Bank Group
Performance

Benchmarks

USAID has financed a 
large program to support 
selected municipalities 
in improving economic 
and financial 
management 
DFID has approved a 
program to support local 
government reform 

* Quality of municipal
services improved as
evidenced by surveys in
selected cities
At least 50 poor
communities
implemented basic social
services projects through
the SIF

* 

* 

CIDA has been 
particularly active in 
anti-corruption area. 
DFID is planning to 
support local initiatives 
on anti-corruption 
SIDA has been 
supporting procurement 
reform 

* The incidence of
bribery reduced as
evidenced by PSD
benchmark surveys of
businesses, as well as
citizen surveys
(conducted under
People's Voice Program)
Public procurement
follows new transparent
rules
* Case-by-case
privatization done in a
transparent manner (no
complaints from
investors)
GEF has funded an ODS a Environmental
project and is supporting 
strategy developed and
a wetlands biodiversity 
approved by government
conservation project. 
* Mechanisms for
DFID has been 
coordination and
supporting capacity 
management of
building in Donetsk 
environmental sector in
TACIS is supporting 
place
water sector and waste 
* Mechanism for

Goals 

Government Strategy 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy Framework
Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA: ESW/TA 

The 
government 
has SIF (FY02) 
committed 
to a poverty 
reduction strategy 

7. Reduce Poverty 
Develop a program for 
reducing poverty as part 
of a broader framework 
for a social sector reform 
8. Social Safety nets 
* Strengthen the social 
Support social protection assistance programs 
system reform for fiscal 
sustainability and better 
targeting. Assess / 
implement programs to 
mitigate impact of 
transition on the most
vulnerable.
9. Pension Reform 
Continue initial reforms 
of pensions system 

* 

Introduce a three-pillar 
pension system as a means 
to achieve long term 
sustainability and 
effectiveness of the pension 
system. 

* 

10. Human capital 
Improve service 
development (Health 
delivery in health and 
and Education) Initiate 
education 
efforts to improve 
* More equitable resource 
efficiency in provision of allocation in health and 
health and education 
education 
services 

PAL (FY01-03) 
.
Social Sector 

.
Adjustment Loan 
( 
SIF (FY02) 

* PAL (FY01-03) 
* Social Sector 
Adjustment Loan 
(FY03) 

* PAL (FYO1-03) 
* Social Sector 
Adjustment Loan 
(FY 03) 
* TB/AIDS 
(FY01) 
Social Sector TA: 
Health/Education 
(FY 03) 

Annex B9
Page 3 of 9

Partners 

management. 

Bank Group
Performance
Benchmarks
integrated coastal zone
management in Crimea
developed and
operational
Poverty strategy (FYOI) UNDP and TACIS have Poverty strategy adopted
* Human capital 
supported the 
by Government
development 
Government's Working
strategy 
Group on Poverty and
Social Transfers
USAID has been 
providing TA for 
improvement of social 
assistance programs; 
UNDP has been
supporting community
development programs

Social assistance
targeted to the poor as
evidenced by the
household survey data

* Poverty strategy 
(FY01) 

* 

* Pension Reform TA USAID has been active 
* Government takes
(FYOI-03) 
in helping the 
action to eliminate the
Government with the 
deficit and create saving
pension reform program; 
in the PAYG system that
TACIS has been 
allow for a reduction in
providing assistance 
contribution rate in the
with pension reform and medium term.
administration
USAID is active on 
issues of health 
financing. 

* Health/Education 
Sector Note (FYO1) 
* Global Distance 
Learning Initiative 
(FYOI-03) 

* Pilot a dots TB
treatment in selected
regions
* A strategy for AIDS
prevention and control
embraced by
Government
Improve ratio for
resource allocation
between primary and
hospital care.

* 

WHO and USAID are 
providing assistance 
with the TB/AIDS 
program preparation 

TACIS is providing TA 
on pharmaceuticals 

Goals 

Government Strategy 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy Framework
Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA: ESW/TA 

Partners 

B. SUPPORTING SUPPLY OF DEVELOPMENT-ORIENTED INSTITUTIONS

Annex B9
Page 4 of 9

Bank Group
Performance
Benchmarks
* Bring service
delivery in line with the
available resources in the
hospital sector
* Education reform

strategy put in place

* 

1. Macroeconomic 
Environment 
Consolidate 
macroeconomic stability 
and establish the 
conditions to achieve 
economic growth and 
long term fiscal 
sustainability. 

* 

* 

* Successful restructuring No Bank lending 
Public Expenditure 
of commercial and bi-lateral directed specifically Review/Institutional 
debt 
at this area 
Analysis (FY01) 
2000 budget envisages 
* Macro-monitoring 
0 deficit target (before 
(FYO1-03) 
privatization proceeds) 
1-2% positive economic 
growth envisaged in 2000. 
* Sustained 
macroeconomic stability 

* 

2. Public Expenditure 
* Put in place a better 
Achieve better budgeting budgeting process (Budget 
and improve public 
Code) 
expenditure management * Better targeting of 
public services in line with 
agreed priorities 
* Elimination of subsidies 
* 
Improved efficiency of 
public resources (treasury 
and accounting/ audit rules) 

* 

PAL (FY01-03) 
Public 
Administration 
Incentives Reform 
(FY02) 

* Public Expenditure 
Review/Institutional 
Analysis (FY01) 

* 

* Achieve positive
economic growth
Sustained
macroeconomic stability
(inflation and budget
deficit under control;
relative exchange rate
stability)

IMF: 
Extended Fund 
Facility (US$2.6 
billion available 
over 3 years) 
approved in 
September 1998. 
The Bank and IMF 
have been
cooperating closely
on the structural
actions of the EFF.
IMF advisors to the
MOF on the budget
process and budget
preparation
IMF: 
2001-03 budgets
* Has been working in prepared and
close partnership with 
implemented following
the Bank on setting up a 
new procedures (Budget
Treasury system in 
Code)
Ukraine 
* All expenditures
IMF has conducted 
done through the
an overview of public 
Treasury Single Account
expenditure in 2000 
(TSA)
IMF 
is providing an 
* Transparent budget
advisor 
on 
budget 
reporting in place based
process 
on TSA

* 

* 

Goals 

Government Strategy 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy Framework

Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA: ESW/TA 

Partners 

Annex B9
Page 5 of 9

Bank Group
Performance
Benchmarks
IAS and INTOSAI
standards accepted by
the Government

* 

* 

Simplified and
transparent tax system in
place which will broaden
the tax base and lower
the tax burden (i.e.,
reduce the share of the
shadow economy) (new
Tax Code)
* Close coordination
of revenue
administration by
Customs and STA

* Achieve a
transparent and stable
system of
intergovernmental
transfers through a
formula-based system
(measured through: a)
replication of
expenditure allocation
based on formula; and b)
assessment of formula
implementation at 6
months interval and

USAID is providing 
expert support in budget 
preparation and 
management
DFID is planning to
provid assistance on
selected aspects of
public expenditure
review

IMF has been actively 
involved in advising on 
tax policy and tax 
administration issues. 
USAID has been 
providing assistance on 
tax policy and tax 
administration matters, 
including the preparation 
of a Tax Code 

USAID has financed a 
large program to support 
selected municipalities 
in improving economic 
and financial 
management 
DFID has approved a 
program to support for 
the Commission on 
Intergovernmental 
Finance 
Japanese PHRD grant 
will support the 

3. Revenue Policy 
Reform 

4. Intergovernmental 
Finance 
develop a transparent 
and stable system of 
intergovernmental 
finance 

* PAL (FYO1-03) 
* Tax 
Administration 
Modernization 
Project (FY01) 

* New Tax Code under 
Parliament's consideration 
a Concept of tax 
administration reform 
developed 
* Separate fiscal policy 
and administration of taxes 
* Achieve better 
integration of different 
revenue agencies 

* 

creation of a National 
* Policy Advice 
Commission on 
under PAL (FY01- 
Intergovernmental Finance 
03) 
to develop a vision of the 
* Municipal 
system of intergovernmental Development Loan 
finance 
(FY02) 
* Clarification of 
expenditure responsibilities 
by level and branch of 
government 
* Strengthening local 
government taxation. 
* Development of 

formula based transfers 

I establishment of MDLF 

year-end.

Goals 

Government Strategy 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy Framework
Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA: ESW/TA 

Partners 

___ 

___ 
___ 

___ 
___ 

___ 
_ 

___ 

___ 

___ 

___ 

___ 

__Benchm 

Creating a sound legal 
and regulatory framework 
for sub-national borrowing 

WBI is planning a core 
course on 
intergovernmental 
finance 

5. Public 
* Concept of 
Administration 
administrative reform in 
Improve the efficiency 
place 
of public administration 
* Reform Unit and 
to achieve better quality Working Group created 
of government services. 
* Civil service reform 
strategy developed 
* Decisions to reduce the 
Cabinet fragmentation and 
excessive centralization 
taken 
* Cabinet committees 
created 

* PAL (FYO1-03) * Peoples' Voice 
DFID is supporting the 
* Municipal 
Program (FYOI-03) 
central team on public 
Development Loan 
* Public 
administration reform 
(FY02) 
Expenditure/Institutional program management 
* Public 
Review (FY01) 
USAID has been 
Administration 
providing support to the 
Incentives Reform 
Ministries of Finance 
(FY02) 
and Economy 
CIDA and TACIS have 
been active in civil 
service reform 
SIDA is supporting 
efficiency reviews in 
government 

Annex B9
Page 6 of 9

Bank Group
Performance

arks

* 

* MOF's debt
monitoring unit in place
Improve repayment
performance and reduce
default rate of localities
* People's perception
about government's
effectiveness and the
quality of service
delivery improved as
evidenced by surveys
* The Government
effectively addresses its
reform priorities through
quick policy responses
* Government is able
to attract skillful people
in the civil service
(better pay, meritocracy,
and reduced fringe

6. Public Institutions 
Improve capacity of 
public institutions (such 
as tax administration, 
customs, judiciary, local 
public institutions, etc.) 
to support the needs of a 
modern market economy 

Modernize the STA and 
Statistics 

.
. .
Improve the judc 
system 
Improve preparation of 
laws 

* 

* Public 
Administration 
Incentives Reform 
2) 
a Municipal 
Development Loan 
(FY02) 
* Tax 
Administration 
Modernization 
Project (FY02)
* Tax
Administration
Modernization
(FY03)
* Statistics

.__ _ _ _ _ _ benefits).

* 

Public 
All donors have been 
Improved STA
Expenditure/Institutional providing significant 
performance as showed
Review (FY 01) 
assistance for 
by taxpayer surveys
institutional capacity 
c Case management
building in various 
introduced and shorter
sectors. 
duration of judicial
USAID and other donors process
are supporting a 
c Adoption and
Capacity Building 
implementation of
Project in MOE. 
SDDS data standards

Goals 

Government Strategy 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy Framework
Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA: ESW/TA 

Partners 

7. PSD/Business 
Environment 
Improve the business 
environment, increase 
the competitiveness of 
Ukraine's industries 
(through privatization to 
strategic investors and 
removal of bureaucratic 
obstacles for business) in 
order to support 
economic growth 

Modernization

Project (FY03) 

* 

* 

2000 privatization 
* Policy advice 
program [under Rada 
under PAL(FY01- 
Consideration] which 
03) 
established a US$3 billion 
* Private Sector 
privatization target for 2000- Development (FY 
02 
02) 
* Deregulation strategy 
set forth by President 
* Mandatory regulatory 
impact assessment (RIA) 
initiated [Cabinet decree 
prepared] 
* Strearnlined system of
licensing developed and
under Rada consideration
* Strategy for reform of
certification system

IFC investments 
(equity/lending) in 
selected SMEs and 
larger enterprises. 

(IFC/IBRD): 
* Benchmark business 
surveys (FYO1-03) 
TA on privatization -
SME/CBC (FYOI) 
advice on corporate 

governance 
privatization of 
unfinished construction 

* 

_

USAIDIUK DFID: 
* Assistance with the 
regulatory reform 
* Assistance with 
drafting the civil code 

* 

EBRD: 
SME credit line 
* Advice on 
/investment in telecom 
and energy companies 
privatization

Annex B9
Page 7 of 9

Bank Group
Performance
Benchmarks

* 

Improved business
environment as
evidenced by
independent business
surveys
[25%] of Telecom's
shares privatized
20 industrial
enterprises privatized
through the case-by-case
method

* 

* 

8. Agriculture 
Harness Ukraine's 
comparative advantage 
in agriculture to enable 
the sector to make a 
major contribution both 
to export earnings and to 
income generation and 
growth in the rural areas 
of the country 

addressed by working group_ 

* Eliminate the 
* Policy advice 
government driven input 
under PAL(FYOI -
supply scheme 
03) 
* Restructure the Soviet- 
* Title 
type farms 
Registration and 
* Eliminate trade barriers Distribution (FY01) 
(local barriers for grain 
* Pre-Export 
trade, export duties on 
Guarantee Facility 
safflower seeds, and hides 
(FY02) 
and skins) 
* Rural 
Finance/Farm 
Restructuring (FY03) 
* 
IFC Investments
in medium scale

.

* Capacity Building 
TA (FY01) 
IFC technical 
assistance for selected 
oblast enterprises. 

* 

* 

USAID has been active 
5 million farmers
in building policy 
received land titles as a
development capacity in 
result of collective farm
the agriculture sector 
restructuring
CIDA/USAID are 
* Title registration
considering support on 
legislation and system in
farm debt restructuring 
place
program 
* Government
UK DFID have been 
withdraws from
active in supporting farm agriculture input supply
restructuring and rural
development

9. Energy 
Development of a 

* Privatization of 
distribution companies 

agroprocessors

* Policy advice 
under PAL(FY01- 

* TA on energy 
privatization and 

USAID/TACIS are 
going to continue 

* 

20 energy
distribution companies

Goals 

Government Strategy 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy Framework
Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA: ESW/TA 

financially viable sector 
* Development of a 
operating on commercial strategy for energy 
principles 
conservation 
* Deal with the non- 
payment problems 
* Continue the process of 
closing nonviable coal mines 

03) 
* Coal 
Restructuring (FY01) 
* Methane Safety 
LIL (FY02) 
* Sevastopol Heat 
(FYOI) 

energy sector 
reforms (FYOI) 

10. Financial Sector 
Restructure specific 
targeted institutions and 
improve and expand 
services 

* Complete the 
development of legislative 
framework for the banking 
system 
* Restructure the Savings 
Bank 
* A high level advisory 
board on financial sector 
reform created 

PAL (FYOI-03) 

* FSD TA (FY 01) 
* Financial Sector 
Note (FY01) 

Annex B9
Page 8 of 9

Partners 

Bank Group
Performance
Benchmarks
helping the Government 
privatized
with energy sector 
* Collect 40% of
privatization 
payments in cash in
DFID/TACIS have 
2000; 75% in 2001 and
been active in coal mine 
100% in 2002.
closures 
* Additional 50 mines
DFID has committed 
closed through 2000-
significant TA support to 2003
the Coal Restructuring 
* Reduce the coal
Project 
strain on the budget
EBRD has been advising
the government on
power sector reform
through the Power
Sector Task Force and
has be4enproviding
assistance on nuclear
power sector
restructuring

USAID has been helping * Savings Bank
to strengthen the NBU's 
restructured
supervision function 
* Unhealthy banks
TACIS has been 
(e.g., Bank Ukraina)
involved in bank 
liquidated.
liquidation technical 
* Strategy for
assistance as well as the 
financial sector reform
introduction of IAS in 
approved by
the banking system 
government.
IMF has conducted a
diagnostic study of the 7
major banks in close
cooperation with the
Bank. The IMF ha
resident advisors on
monetary and
supervision matters at

Goals 

Government Strategy 

* Transport sector 
strategy developed 
* New water management 
system developed in Lviv 

Lviv Water (FY01) 

11. Infrastructure 
On a selective basis, 
support areas where TA 
and/or investment, can 
help to achieve the 
provision of a better, 
more efficient and 
financially viable service 

Ukraine: Country Assistance Strategy Framework 

Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA: ESW/TA 

.______________________ 

_ __ __ __ _ __ __ _ 

Partners 

__ _ __ __ __ _ _ __ __ 

NBU.__ 

a 

NBU.
EBRD:
equity investments
in several banks
credit fines
* 
TA on transport sector * USAID has been 
reform (FY01) 
providing assistance to 
Lviv on water 
management issues 
* TACIS has 
cooperated closely with
the Bank on the
Transport Sector Review
* EBRD has been
financing infrastructure
projects ( water,

transportation, power)

Annex B9
Page 9 of 9

l

Bank Group
Performance

Benchm arks

* Concept of transport
sector reform in place
* Quality of water
services improved in
Lviv

CAS Annex 810 -
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex B IO

Page I of I

Network area 

Country 

performance8

Major issueb 

Country Bank Reconciliation of country and
priority C -i 
d

Bank nro2ritieS 

, 

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

poor 
fair 
poor 
fair 

fair 
poor 
poor 

poor 
poor 
poor 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
poor 
Private sector 
fair 
Energy & mining 
fair 
Infrastructure 
fair 

increasing incidence 
high 
high
stability 
high 
high
efficiencylrationaihzation 
of tasks high 
high
disproportionate 
impact on females moderate moderate

targeted quality improvements moderate moderate ongoing dialogue
communicable diseases increasing moderate high 
ongoing dialogue
protect most vulnerable groups high 
high

rura) poverty 
moderate moderate
legacy of environmental damage moderate moderate
increasing incidence of poverty moderate high 
ongoing dialogue

infrastructure 
lacking 
high 
high
hostile environment 
high 
high
non-viablitty of sector 
high 
high
compatibility with EU standards moderate low 

ongoing dialogue

a. Use "exceIlent," 
-good," fair," or 'poor.'
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, 'rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary completion;" 
for environment, "urban air pollution).

c. To indicate priority, use 'low," "moderate," or 'high.'
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Template created on 8/16/00

