d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 21530 TM

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR

TURKMENISTAN

December 22, 2000

Central Asia Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

(as of November 1, 2000)

Currency Unit 
US$1 
US$1 

= 
= 
= 

Manats
5,200 Manats (official rate)
19,000 Manats (black market rate)

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

Metric System

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

ASBP 
CAS 
CBT 
CIS 
DSR 
EBRD 
ECA 
FDI 
FERF 
GDP 
IBRD 
IBTA 
IDA 
IDF 
IFC 
IMF 
LSMS 
MIGA 
MOEF 
NEAP 
NGO 
PER 
SAFI 
TACIS 
USEXIM 
UNDP 
UNICEF 
WBI 

Aral Sea Basin Program
Country Assistance Strategy
Central Bank of Turkmenistan
Commonwealth of Independent States
Debt Service Ratio
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Europe and Central Asia Region
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Exchange Reserve Fund
Gross Domestic Product
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Institution Building/Technical Assistance
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Living Standards Measurement Survey
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry of Economics and Finance
National Environmental Action Plan
Non Governmental Organization
Public Expenditure Review
State Agency for Foreign Investment
Technical Assistance to the Commonwealth of Independent States
United States Export Import Bank
United Nations Development Program
United Nations International Children's Education Fund
World Bank Institute

TURKMENISTAN's FISCAL YEAR

January 1 - December 31

Vice President: 
Director: 
IFC Director: 
CAS Team Leader 
CAS Team Members 

Johannes F. Linn
Kiyoshi Kodera
Khosrow Zamani
Tony Cholst
Guijahan Kurbanova
Chandra Pant
Michael Mills
Gerhard Botha
Mark Lundell
Andriy Storozhuk
Gorton De Mond, IFC
Jim Anderson, IFC
Jens Wandel, UNDP

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TURKMENISTAN
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................ 

.

I. 

INTRODUCTION .........................................

i-iii

1

II. POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT 
.........................................
A. Political Developments and Prospects .........................................
B. Economic Developments .........................................
C. Near and Medium Term Economic Prospects .........................................
D. The Government's 10 Year National Program .........................................
E. Global and Regional Linkages .....

,.1

1
I
2
4
6...................................6

III. KEY DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ...... 
...................................
7
A. The Foundation: Improving Living Standards in Turkmenistan ................................................7
B. Strengthening Public Resource Management .................... 
.................................. 9
C. Improving Health and Social Services ...................................................... 
13
D. Developing an Efficient Rural Economy ...................................................... 
15
E. Supporting Private Sector Development ...................................................... 
16
F. Protecting The Environment and Conserving Water ................................................ ...... 18

IV. WORLD BANK STRATEGY ...................................................... 
A. Lessons Learned from Past Bank Experience ...................................................... 
B. Bank Program for FYO1-03 ...................................................... 
C. IFC Program ...................................................... 
D. Other Bank Group Activities ...................................................... 
E. Partnerships with other Donors ...................................................... 
F. Program Performance Indicators ...................................................... 

V. MANAGING RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES ...................................................... 

VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS ...................................................... 

18
18
20
25
26
27
27

28

30

LIST OF TABLES AND CHARTS

Table 1: Key Economic Statistics ......................................................
2
Chart 1: Turkmenistan: Projected Economic Growth and Sources of Growth ...............................................3
Chart 2: Distribution of Consumption in Turkmenistan ......................................................
7
Table 2: Comparative Health Indicators .....................................................
8
Table 3: Proposed Turkmenistan Country Program: FYO1-03 ..................................................... 
22
Table 4: Selected Performance Indicators ..................................................... 
28

LIST OF BOXES

Box 1: Longer Term Governance Issues ..................................................... 
Box 2: Proposed National Economic Forum ............................................. 
Box 3: Budget and Debt Management Triggers for New Lending .................... 
Box 4: Proposed Base Case Loans ............................................. 

13
20
......................... 23
24

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without

World Bank authorization.

ANNEXES

Annex 1: Letter from the Government on the CAS .................................................. 
31
Annex 2: Status of Projects Under Execution .................................................. 
34
Annex 3: Round-Table Discussions with NGOs and the Private Sector .................................................. 35
Annex 4: Key Reforms for Lending Beyond the Base Case ................. 
................................. 
38
Annex 5: Turkmenistan's Growing Knowledge Base .................................................. 
42

CAS TABLES

Table A2: Turkmenistan at a Glance .43
Table B2: 
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management .45
Table B3: Bank Group Program Summary .46
IFC and MIGA Program Summary
Table B4: 
Summary of Non-Lending Services .......................... 
Table B5: Turkmenistan Social Indicators .48
Table B6: Key Economic Indicators .49
Table B7: Key Exposure Indicators .51
Table B8: Operations Portfolio .52
Table B9: CAS Program Matrix .53
Table B 10: CAS Summary of Development Priorities ....................................... 

47

56

TURKMENISTAN
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Executive Summary

i. 
Since independence in 1991, Turkmenistan has adopted a gradual approach to the transition to a
market economy, so as to improve the living standards of its people. Extensive consultations with the
Government, civil society and the private sector during the preparation of the Bank's Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS) indicate that the prospects for a fundamental change in this policy stance
during the next few years remain uncertain. Against this background, the Government and the Bank
have agreed on a CAS program for the next three years that focuses on improving the efficiency and
transparency of public resource management, including poverty monitoring and the targeting of social
assistance.

ii. 
Economic Performance: Turkmenistan has had a sharp economic upswing over the past few
years and continued growth in the near term is likely in light of recent gas sale agreements. However,
this growth is built atop an economic structure that may be unstable in the long term -- with a large
degree of state involvement, dependence on energy sales prone to fluctuation, and water-intensive
agriculture. Key reform goals to create a more solid foundation to achieve sustainable growth are
outlined both in the 1997 CAS and the Government's 10 year National Program for 2000-2010 -
improved budget and debt management, trade and exchange rate liberalization, agricultural reform, and
privatization. Yet there has been limited progress in identifying and taking near term actions to meet
these goals. Public investments have been large (about 40% of GDP) and have been pursued in roads,
construction, oil refining, textiles, electrification and food processing. However, most of this is
financed through off-budget funds and external borrowings and does not appear to have been
adequately reviewed and prioritized against economic returns, factoring in opportunity and recurrent
costs and future debt service. There appears to be limited commitment to make far-reaching but
necessary systemic changes in the near term. If stronger reform is not achieved, the economy is likely
to face significant risk of economic disruption in coming years.

iii. The Government has recently raised the possibility of moving forward on key economic issues
such as liberalizing the exchange rate regime and improving public resource management - including
stronger debt management, budget consolidation, and splitting the administrative and commercial
activities of Ministries. The Bank agrees that these are priorities. A critical element in making these
refortns work will be the more rational use of Turkmenistan's largest extra-budgetary fund, the Foreign
Exchange Reserve Fund (FERF), which now serves several functions with limited transparency and
unclear allocation criteria. Progress on rationalizing the FERF, including defining rational and
transparent rules for a currency reserve to facilitate exchange rate management, an inter-generational
savings fund to help offset future shocks, and public investments that are reviewed within the budget
framework would be an important step in improving exchange rate and public resource management.

iv. Living Standards: Absolute poverty in Turkmenistan appears low compared to other CIS
countries, although this masks several important challenges. First, about half the population appeared
to be living on less than the official minimum wage in 1998 (as measured by cash income), assisted by
heavy subsidies on commodities and utilities. The Government is reluctant to eliminate subsidies out
of concern that this would increase poverty. However, many of these subsidies do not target those who
are worse off, they reduce incentives for conservation and maintenance of water and energy, and they
create distortions in the economy. Reducing subsidies, combined with a more transparent and targeted

i

approach to social assistance for the most needy, needs careful consideration. Second, Turkmenistan's
health statistics were among the worst in the CIS in 1997, although official statistics show recent
improvement. A number of maj or health concerns exist, including limited access to potable water and
sanitation. The need for deepening health system reformn in budgeting, staff training, and the
availability of essential pharmaceuticals and equipment is also high on the agenda. Third, there is a
wide disparity between the living standards of those in the capital city and those in rural areas. Most of
the poor live in rural areas, and the lack of income opportunities and deteriorating irrigation
infrastructure pose key risks to them.

v. Bank Involvement: The 1997 CAS was designed around mixed signals from Turkmenistan,
with an official gradual approach to reform and indications of the potential for stronger reform,
particularly in agriculture, foreign exchange management, and price liberalization. However, since
then reform progress has been weak. The Bank has sought to support reform through several pieces of
Economic and Sector Work (ESW), but these appear to have had little visible impact on decision
making. The Bank has also struggled with portfolio implementation. All three on-going loans have
experienced difficulties. During 1998-99, disbursements were suspended, due to procurement
problems. The suspension was lifted in June 1999, and the Bank has resumed implementation of
ongoing loans and technical assistance. However, Turkmenistan is in violation of the Negative Pledge
Clause contained in its loan agreements with the Bank and has not met minimum debt reporting
obligations to the Bank; and therefore it does not currently have access to new Bank borrowing. Many
international institutions and donors have pulled back their activities. These include the IMF, which
could not get adequate basic macroeconomic data for Article IV consultation, the EBRD, which
prepared a country strategy early this year which does not contain public sector lending, and bilateral
agencies, which have reduced their assistance considerably. All of this suggests the need for a more
cautious and limited approach in the current CAS.

vi. 

In light of the above, the role of the Bank over the next three years is sequenced in three phases.

.

Initial Phase: During the first phase the Bank will help Turkmenistan build a more solid
foundation of economic capacity and transparency, from which it can launch deeper reforms when
it is ready. Without this foundation, more direct efforts to strengthen the economy and improve
living standards are unlikely to prove successful. To this end, the initial limited role of the Bank
will be primarily to engage in policy dialogue and extend non-lending analytic support to (i)
strengthen economic management capacity within the Government, (ii) increase transparency
of, and access to, economic and public resource information within Turkmenistan, and (iii)
improve living standards monitoring and social assistance targeting mechanisms. The Bank
will also support strategy design in key national and regional issues (water, energy,
environment). During this phase, on the overall issue of fiduciary accountability, the Bank will
continue to stress the importance of transparent accounting and procurement procedures.
Supervision of on-going projects will remain a top priority.

* Second Phase: Given the loan clause violation and Turkmenistan's limited reform progress, it is
likely to prove extremely difficult for the Bank to extend new lending in the near term. However,
the Bank will go forward with a small 1-3 loan program over 3 years for urgent priorities if (i) the
Negative Pledge Clause violation is resolved, (ii) performance of ongoing projects is improved,
and (iii) progress is achieved on key budget and debt management areas, including the reform of
the FERF. The envisaged lending will be on priority human needs (a health project) and disaster
prevention and water management (a canal rehabilitation project). The improvement of services

ii

for the rural economy (a crop protection project) would also be supported, contingent on
improving farmers ability to generate income, pay for the above services, and conserve water.

Longer Term Agenda: If the Government shows strong commitment to moving resolutely forward
on a deeper reform agenda, the Bank will consider additional support. Such support would be
considered in light of progress in, and commitment to, reforms in key policy areas and
achievements in near term CAS benchmarks including improvements in living standards
monitoring and targeting. In this event, a CAS update will be prepared.

vii. The Board may wish to address the following issues during its discussion:

* 

* 

Is the proposed strategy -- focusing initially on non-lending services until the Negative Pledge
Clause violation is resolved, performance of ongoing projects is improved, and progress is
achieved on key public resource management areas, including the FERF -- an appropriate one?

In the event that the lending triggeis are met for a small 1-3 loan program, are the areas for new
borrowings identified herein -
in health, canal rehabilitation, and crop protection -
the right
priorities?

* How can the Bank do more to move the reform agenda forward in an environment where some of
the basic conditions that would support systemic reform may not be apparent?

. .

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE
STRATEGY FOR TURKMENISTAN

I. 

Introduction

1. This is the second Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) document of the World Bank for
Turkmenistan. The first (R97-93/1) was discussed by the Board on May 27, 1997. To prepare the
CAS, the Bank conducted four missions to Turkmenistan during the past year, and met with
Government officials, parliamentarians, donors, NGOs and representatives from the private sector.
The Government of Turkmenistan has added a letter with its comments on the CAS (Annex 1).

II. Political and Economic Environment

Political Developments and Prospects

2. The political landscape has not changed significantly since the previous CAS was prepared in
1997, and does not appear likely to change much over the current CAS period. The President and
Prime Minister since independence in 1991, Saparmurat Niyazov, plays a dominant role in the
political, economic and social life of the nation. The constitution was amended in December 1999 to
permit the first President to remain in his post for life. Parliamentary elections were held in
December 1999, but these were criticized by international organizations for the limited choice
among candidates or parties. Official Turkmen policy recognizes the need for a gradual move
towards a multi-party system.

3. 
Political stability through the centralization of power has a price. There are few checks and
balances within the government and between the government and other institutions, a situation that
can result in sub-optimal political and economic choices. Outside of the office of the President,
government agencies and officials have limited authority to make key policy decisions. There is
wariness of sharing information across institutional lines and with international organizations. Most
importantly, policies and investment decisions which are not shaped through a participatory process
are often less than optimal and lack the broad ownership to make them sustainable in the long run.

4. Turkmenistan maintains a foreign policy of "permanent neutrality" recognized by the UN, is a
signatory to several UN conventions, is a member of the Economic Cooperation Organization
(ECO), and is a member of the "six plus two" group seeking a resolution to the Afghan conflict.

Economic Developments

5. 
Following independence in 1991, the economy of Turkmenistan experienced a steep decline,
caused by disruption in oil and gas exports, poor harvests, and weak economic management.
Between 1992-97, it is estimated that real GDP fell cumulatively by about 50 percent, comparable to
that experienced by other CIS states. With the discontinuation of gas exports to Ukraine in 1997 the
economy fell further, and the current account deficit rose to over 20 percent of GDP in 1997 and to

33 percent of GDP in 1998. Financing of such a sizeable external gap led to a 200 percent increase
in external debt between 1996 and 1998. However, beginning in 1998 the economy started to grow,
according to official statistics by 7 percent in 1998 and 17 percent in 1999, fueled in part by a
recovery in agriculture output and (starting in 1999) energy exports. The prospects for 2000
continue to be bright, and GDP is projected to
rise by 18 percent, powered by oil and gas 
production (particularly a resumption in gas 
sales to Russia and Ukraine). 

I. Key Ecoinomic Statistics

19E 19 19990*

0GblJphkat*offcia2.7' 
itte)23 

2.8 
28 

3f3x 
33 

43
*

6. Apart from energy sales and agricultural 
production, growth has also been spurred by a 
large public investment program (about 40 
percent of GDP) in roads, railways, oil 
refineries, textiles, construction, electrification 
and food processing. However, much of this 
has been carried out through extra-budgetary 
funds, and the financial and economic returns 
of many of these investments do not appear to 
have been adequately reviewed and prioritized, 
factoring in opportunity and recurrent costs, and 
future debt servicing. According to official 
statistics, inflation is in check and the official 
state budget is in balance.4.6 

metch 
Real GDP growth,% 
kfl0o 

2 % 1 

ttBU4t 

tur 

'xpC 
25 

* fw2 
B 
Dalime 

0 

tadAlias 640 

550 

660 

70

-11 

22 

7 
20 
25 
25of S 
-3 

17 
20 
22 
22 
0 

18
14
21
21
0

614 1,164DP37

MR. $ 
N p1an 

ma. S

E xt 
bin. 
ran. $ 

In0outa, 
;ise 

g 

l0 4

1e7a22l23 

I

263 

313 

480 

5,0 

520 

I

2.32

374

2G

7. While these are important achievements, ; ; X5

there is need for caution in their interpretation. 

Suc:Vro*~W 

i~aet M,G~ 

a~~~t~

Fist, concerns remain about the reliability of
national accounts and trade price/volume data.1 Limited access to full and reliable economic and
fiscal data remains a major issue. Second, the deceleration in officially recorded inflation is to some
extent due to the control of prices of utilities and some commodities, as well the availability of cheap
imports from its neighbors due to an overvalued exchange rate. Underlying inflationary pressures are
still likely to be high, as reflected in the parallel exchange rate (which is over three times the official
rate) and growing money supply. Third, the balanced state budget represents only a small subset of
public revenues and expenditures, due to large extra-budgetary activities (see para. 28-31).

Near and Medium Term Economic Prospects

8. 
Economic Projections: 
In the near term, the economy is likely to continue to grow
significantly, even with limited policy reforms. The potential for this growth rests to a very large
degree on Turkmenistan's tremendous hydro-carbon endowment 2 combined with below full
utilization of currently available capacity in the gas sector. Turkmenistan's pre-independence
production level of natural gas has been estimated at 80-90 bcm. The resumption of gas exports will

l For example, while Turkmenistan's national accounts appear to be compiled in general accordance with international
standards, significant revisions in past data are not uncommon. Also about half of gas exports is conducted in barter and
agriculture production is considered by some to be overstated.

2 Turkmenistan has the fourth largest gas reserves in the world, amounting to 2-3 trillion cm in known reserves (and
potential reserves are estimated to be much larger). This could allow Turkmenistan to maintain a production capacity of
100 billion cm per year for the next 20-30 years.

2

raise Turkmenistan's gas production to about 45 bcm in 2000, and Turkmenistan has recently agreed
to increase production levels further. Specifically, it has agreed to increase its supply of gas to
Ukraine from 5 bcm in 2000 to 30 bcm in 2001 and is negotiating an agreement to supply Russia
with 30-40 bcm in 2001 (up from 20-30 bcm in 2000). This, combined with smaller but rising levels
of gas exports to Iran and domestic use, will enable it to reach full utilization of existing capacity
over the CAS period, with most of the production growth taking place in 2001. Earnings related to
Turkmen gas are more dependent on negotiations as regards supply routes rather than fluctuations in
world energy prices (the price of Turkmen gas is estimated to remain at about $38-42 per 1,000 cm
for the CAS period). The oil sector also continues to attract foreign investor interest and is expected
to grow robustly, especially considering the relative transportability of oil compared to gas.

9. 
Prospects beyond the energy sector seem less bright given the limited commitment to
fundamental reform, particularly as regards implementing agriculture liberalization and reducing
barriers to private sector development. Turkmenistan has planned for a significant growth in
agriculture production, including cotton and wheat. However, such growth is unlikely to be
achieved without giving farmers greater control over their production and creating incentives to
conserve water. Growth in infrastructure and construction may continue, mostly supported by
continued large public investments.

10. 
In sum, GDP growth is expected to be on
the order of 21 percent in 2001, after which it 
may level off to about 5 percent per year (see 
Chart 1). The source of this growth is expected 

to be concentrated in the energy sectors. It 

should be noted that the impact associated with 
this growth is moderated due to the fact that 
40-50 percent of gas exports to CIS countries is 
payable in kind. 
In addition, unless part of 
energy sector proceeds are plowed back to 
maintaining production facilities and pipelines, 
energy production may not be sustainable over 
the longer term. As noted, these projections 
assume little reform progress. On the other 
hand, if Turkumenistan were to proceed with a 

Chart 1h Turkmeeistan: Projected Economic
Growth and Sources of Growth (1998 = 100)

_

5% 

3*

| 

21* 

5

--

tn on 

_P

S 

160 _ OH 

160 JU 

14m
207%
100

80

60

40

20

0

199S 

199 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003 

2004

more systemic reform program, growth Source: Turknen authorities' historical data and World Bank

projections would be even higher. 

staff proiections

11. The Risk of Economic Disruption: This economic growth projection is, however, subject to
considerable risk, as the economy is highly dependent on (i) oil and gas exports which may
fluctuate significantly due to price considerations, export route disruptions and payment difficulties3
and (ii) water intensive agriculture which is both dependent on regional cooperation and over the
long term contributes to the salinization of land and reduces yields. Turkmenistan's large public
investment and construction program, which often appears to be pursued without feasibility
studies or proven financial and economic rates of return, represents another source of concern. Not
only is the current capital investment level (about 40% of GDP according to official statistics) high
by international standards (South East Asia has averaged about 30%) but it locks Turkmenistan into
high recurring costs to maintain these projects. Finally, Turkmenistan has relied heavily on public

3 For example, due to payment problems, gas exports to Ukraine were discontinued in 1997, resulting in a sharp decline

in GDP. The various pipeline proposals to Turkey, Pakistan, Iran and China would reduce economic risk if realized.

3

and publicly guaranteed debt to finance public investments, and servicing this debt could be
problematic if oil and gas revenues are ever disrupted.

12. The risk of economic disruption can only be mitigated by (i) improving public resource
management, (ii) accelerating market reforms which will permit more diversified private sector led
growth and investment and (iii) improving national water management. However, Turkmenistan's
efforts on these fronts have been limited. Budget and debt management are strongly in need of
improvement (see paras 27-37), 'although the Government has recently indicated interest in moving
forward in this area as well as in foreign exchange market liberalization. Barriers to private sector
development, including limited access to foreign exchange and trade restrictions, are quite high (see
paras 48-53). Agriculture policies are still predicated on the state order as well as excessive water
usage and drainage (including the creation of a new large collector lake in the Karakum Desert)
rather than conservation (see paras 42-47).

13. Therefore, unless greater reform progress can be made, growth outside of the energy sector
will be hard to sustain and the potential for a significant economic downturn caused by a disruption
in gas supply routes will remain. Sensitivity analysis indicates that a suspension of natural gas
exports to Russia and Ukraine would result in an immediate GDP drop of over 20 percent, and a
marked slowdown in growth thereafter. Such a downturn could have a significant impact on the
living standards of the people of Turkmenistan. In this event, the large external debt burden may
also limit the availability of further external financing to help manage the impact of a downturn.
Even if growth is maintained, Turkmenistan runs the risk of becoming an energy enclave, with
limited benefits trickling down to the bulk of the people, especially those living in rural areas.

The Government's 10-Year National Program

14. The Government's goals are articulated in the National Program "Strategy Of Socio-Economic
Developments in Turkmenistan For The Period Up To 2010" (hereafter referred to as the National
Program) published in December 1999. The National Program identifies four primary goals. These
are: (i) Economic Independence (including increasing economic growth through private sector and
foreign investment), (ii) Food Safety (including increasing domestic food production and
promoting food exports), (iii) Social Security (including labor rights, employment opportunity, and
a social safety net), and (iv) Ecological Safety (including preventing disaster in the Aral Sea
region; providing high quality drinking water, and reducing soil salinity). The National Program
devotes considerable attention to meeting these goals by establishing production targets. For
example, by 2010, cotton and wheat production would both double to 3 million tons each, sugar beet
would triple to 900 thousand tons, and the number of sheep and goats would double to 16 million.
There are production targets for eggs, melons and berries as well. Gas production is targeted to triple
to 120 bln cubic meters and oil production to rise five times by 2010. There are similar details about
each branch of the economy.

15. The National Program also describes in broad terms some of the public policies by which
these objectives will be met, albeit without specificity of detail nor implementation time frame:

(i) Fiscal and Monetary Policy: The budget should be expanded to cover all government
transactions and to eliminate all extra-budgetary accounts. Tax policy will aim at reducing the
burden on enterprises, and promoting import-substitution and exports. The budget deficit and

4

monetary policy will be tightly controlled to reduce inflation. Directed credits will be eliminated,
and positive refinancing rates will be phased in, supported by a market for government securities.

(Qi) Foreign Exchange and External Debt Management: A market based exchange rate will
be introduced. External debt management is to be strengthened to ensure a reasonable volume of
borrowing and its efficient utilization.

(iii) Investment Policy: Investments will be maintained at a high level to achieve the
government's ambitious growth objectives. State commercial banks will be encouraged to extend
long term credits and new financial institutions are to be created as well. Remunerative yields will
be offered to mobilize household savings. Foreign investment and joint ventures will be
encouraged. With the strengthening of their financial positions, enterprises will begin to rely on
their own funds for investment purposes.

(iv) Private Sector and Financial Sector Development: Bureaucratic obstacles to private
businesses and small enterprises will be reduced. Privatization through auctions or corporatization
will be continued but in ways that ensure that living conditions are not worsened. In agriculture, the
transfer of land ownership to private farmers will continue. In the financial sector, the development
of a stock market and an insurance market will be encouraged.

(v) Social Welfare: Efforts noted above to stimulate economic activity will help generate
increased employment. In addition, the Government will continue to provide free gas, electricity,
water and salt (up to a fixed limit) at least up to 2005, as well as free health and education services.
Reform of the pension system and allowances is envisaged to make these more effective.

16. Analysis of the Program: The National Program contains many of the goals related to a
transition to a market economy, and the Bank can therefore in principle find a match between many
of the government's stated goals and the policies it regards as necessary to build sustainable
economic growth and poverty reduction. However, there are some serious concerns. A critical
concern is that there is an inherent contradiction in the National Program between the aim of
creating a market economy and conserving the environment on the one hand and on the other hand
mandating large growth targets for output of various commodities up to year 2010 that is
reminiscent of a centrally planned economy. For example, enforcement of targets for ever
increasing cotton sales would reinforce the state-order system and undermine the ability of farmers
to freely choose which types of crops to grow. Water conservation could also be undermined by the
significant growth in land under irrigation needed to meet projected agriculture production.

17. Other general concerns exist. First, the National Program has a strong emphasis on import
substitution. While understandable as a reaction to the narrow specialization of Turkmenistan during
the Soviet era, state-sponsored protectionary policies ultimately can be very costly as experience in
other countries has shown. Second, the government policy of providing free commodities and
utilities up to set limits, including water, electricity, flour, and gas can undermine its own goals of
promoting water and energy conservation and environmental protection. The provision of these free
goods also undermines the potential for commercialization of providers of these goods. Finally
there are some important issues that are likely to arise during the transition that have not been
adequately addressed. These include, for example, the restructuring of state banks and state
enterprises.

5

18. Beyond these general concerns, within each sector, the National Program does not spell out
specific priority actions and time frames within which they should be implemented. In fact, there
appears to be a disconnect between the government's stated goals in the 10 year National Program
and activities being pursued in practice. Therefore, the Bank's CAS seeks to identify priority sectors
on the basis of improving the living standards of the people of Turkmenistan, and then to help
translate many of the Government's long term goals in these priority sectors into near term policy
actions necessary to achieve these goals and enable Turkmenistan to transition to a well functioning
market economy (see section III).

Global and Regional Linkages

19. Following independence, Turkmenistan has focused on building its national identity.
However, Turkmenistan is a country of only about 5 million people and is geographically distant
from many of the advanced economies. The speed at which it develops is likely to depend on how
well it can (i) participate in global knowledge sharing and initiatives on key development issues and
(ii) cooperate with its neighbors on key regional issues.

20. Global Knowledge Sharing: The most important global public good that Turkmenistan needs
access to is knowledge - particularly knowledge about best practices in areas such as taxation,
debt management, budget reform, exchange rates, privatization, pensions, health reform, energy
contracts, water conservation in agriculture, etc. There are many ways to do this including training,
learning forums, and the internet. To maximize its ability to participate in global knowledge transfer,
Turkmenistan needs to increase its support for training of officials and provide permission for
private internet providers to operate. The benefit related to such knowledge transfers will likely be
directly proportional to how widely it is made available within Turkmen society. Numerous global
initiatives exist, such as the Consultative Group on International Agriculture Research (CGIAR), the
Global Water Partnership, Distance Learning Networks, and the Global Gateway which can
facilitate such knowledge transfer. Participation by Turkmenistan in such initiatives could yield
positive results.

21. Regional Cooperation: The most important regional issue is water. Turkmenistan is
dependent for both drinking and agricultural water on the flow from the Amu Darya - which travels
from Afghanistan and Tajikistan through Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan to the Aral Sea. There are
limited rules governing how each country treats the water and there are few incentives to conserve
water, reduce contaminants, or assist in infrastructure maintenance. As a consequence the overall
water quality and flow of the river has deteriorated. To ensure long term viability of this regional
lifeline, the first priority is for all states in the region to improve water management. Beyond this,
the international community supports the Aral Sea Basin Initiative to improve regional water use.
Turkmenistan currently holds the rotating Chair of the Executive Committee of the International
Fund for Saving the Aral Sea (IFAS). At the same time, it has recently announced the development
of a new drainage collector reservoir which falls outside the Aral Sea Basin Program parameters,
and this needs to be carefully reviewed against financial, regional and environmental concerns.
Beyond water, there are other critical areas in need of regional cooperation such as energy supply
routes, the ecology of the Caspian Sea, and trade that would benefit from a regional approach.

6

III. Key Development Challenges

22. The Bank and Turkmenistan have agreed that the priorities identified within the CAS be based
on the extent to which they contribute to improving the living standards of the people of
Turkmenistan. In light of this strategic foundation, and taking into account the Government's 10
year National Program, the CAS identifies five focus areas noted below and specific actions needed
within each in order to implement the Government's program and improve the living standards of
the poorest parts of the population.

* Strengthening Public Resource Management
* Improving Health and Social Services
* Developing an Efficient Rural Economy
* Supporting Private Sector Development
* Protecting the Environment and Conserving Water

The Foundation: Improving Living Standards in Turkmenistan

23. A growing literature exists on living standards and poverty in Turkmenistan, including the UN
Human Development Report, reviews of the education and health sectors, and a World Bank
analysis of one of the poorest regions, Dashowitz. Most recently, a Livings Standards Survey was
conducted by the Statistics Agency in 1998 and has been further analyzed by the Bank.4 While the
absolute incidence of poverty appears low, about half the population appeared to be living on less
than the official minimum wage in 1998 (as measured by cash income). 3 Most of these are
supported by heavy subsidies on 
rt 2: Distribution of Consumption 
in Turkmenistan
commodities and utilities. It also reveals
a large level of inequality, with almost 
half the national consumption being 
consumed by only 10 percent of the 
population (see Chart 2). There is a 
particularly stark difference between 

percent of national total consumption

10 percent population consuming 44

(1998)

16 
E 14 

percent of

population 

consuming 56 

90 percentof

_

IS 

R 1 2 

n 

to 

those who live in Ashgabat, where 

almost no poverty is recorded, and the | 

rest of the country, particularly in the 
rural areas. Beyond geography, the 

most distinguishing features of the 

poorest group are their high numbers of

children and their low access to some
infrastructure (such as piped water).

total national

0 

8 

6 -

4

2

0

Manat (100) per capita per day, 1998

4 "A Profile of Living Standards in Turkmenistan" (World Bank, Jan. 2001)

5The measurement of poverty has proven difficult in Turkmenistan. The results of the 1998 Living Standards Survey
indicated that 7% lived below the $2.15 poverty line using purchasing power parity. However, this data should be used
with caution as it depends on calculations of purchasing power parity based on uncertain price indicies. As noted, the
income of about half the population fell below the minimum wage in 1998, if only cash income is counted. However, it
is uncertain what the impact of recent increases in wages and economic growth over the past few years has been on
living standards. Turkmen authorities have recently suggested using another measure - the share of population with
incomes below 50% of the median per capita income. According to government statistics, only 1% of the population
currently falls below this level. Additional work on developing a common and appropriate poverty line is needed.

7

24. Key Areas in the Battle Against Poverty: The Profile of Living Standards identifies the
following areas as being in urgent need of attention to improve the level and sustainability of living
standards of the poorest segments of the population:

* Improving the Effectiveness of Public Support for the Poor: While the policy of providing goods
and services (eg. flour, salt, gas, oil, water, electricity) free or at very low prices has served to
alleviate the conditions of those with limited incomes, it has also reduced incentives to conserve,
maintain and improve services. Further, these subsidies are only partially paid for explicitly
from the budget and farmers both have to sell their crops to the state-order and obtain subsidies
in return, which makes it difficult to determine net benefits. Hidden subsidies distort the ability
of enterprises supplying and receiving such commodities to operate on a market basis. Finally,
there is evidence that such subsidies are not well targeted, and much of the benefit may be
absorbed by those better off.6 To improve long term financial sustainability and the quality of
service, increased charges for commodities and public utilities combined with a targeted
benefits program transparently provided by the budget should be phased in. A reduction in
subsidies without an approach to increasing income generating opportunities and a safety net for
those left behind is likely to hurt living standards, at least in the short term. A holistic approach
is therefore needed to address these issues together.7 A central element in such an approach
ought to be transparency and accountability, to ensure adequate support is provided to those
most in need.

* Improving Health Care: In 

terms of human 

development 

indicators, health is a top priority. 

Table 2: Comparative Health

Indicators (1997/98) (1

Turkmenistan has historically had some of the 
lowest life expectancy rates and highest infant 
mortality rates in the CIS (see Table 2), although 
official statistics suggest that there have been some 
improvement recently. These issues affect the poor 
in particular, as they tend to have more children 
and more limited access to piped water, and cannot 
afford unofficial payments to health care workers. Albania 

Kyrgyz Rep 
Bulgaria 

Turkmenistan 

Life 

Infant

Expectancy Mortality
(yrs) 

(#/1000
births)

66 

69 
71 
73 

33 (2)

24
18
33

68 

24

There are three key components that impact health 

Kazakhstan 

indicators: (i) poor water quality and sanitation 
which leads to infectious and parasitic diseases, 
particularly 
in 
infants, (ii) 
life-style factors 
(including consumption of fat, smoking, drinking) which increases the incidence of heart disease
and related ailments, and (iii) the quality of the health care system. On the last, Turkmenistan
has initiated some improved policies including better family planning services, some staff
retraining, and a stronger emphasis on primary care. It is critically important that these initial
reforms be supported and deepened, including through changes in the budgetary and incentive
systems.

(1) Statistics are from the Bank's live data base or from
the UNDP's "Human Development Report," 1999.
(2) Recent government reports indicate this may have
fallen to as low as 26/1000

6 Although there are eligibility criteria for subsidized flour (children, elderly, veterans, disabled), in practice over 60% of
the population receive this. Also, many of the poorest do not receive piped water and have few electric appliances.
There are official limits to free utilities, but meters and taps are scarce and there are few incentives for conservation.

7 In late 1999 the Government introduced a new system to provide one-time grants of assistance to the most needy. Local
commissions are being formed at the etrap and town level to identify those that require assistance. The system is still in
its infancy, and its effectiveness is not yet known, but it could be a foundation to build on.

8

* Supporting Education: While basic education continues to provide near universal literacy, there
are worrying signs of deterioration, particularly as regards the time spent in primary and
secondary grades, the content of the curriculum, and access to higher education. The link
between education and employment also appears weak at present, and this will become more
important as the move towards a market economy progresses. It is critical for the Ministry of
Education to address these systemic issues facing the sector.

* Strengthening the Rural Economy: The vast majority of those in the lowest income quartile live
in the rural areas. In 1998 all of the surveyed residents of Ashgabat lived above the level of 50
percent of mean consumption, and in each of the five regions, there is a higher incidence of
poverty in the rural rather than urban areas.8 The best way to address income inequality and
improve the living standards of the poorest is therefore to improve the efficiency and market
orientation of the rural economy (including the elimination of the state order), providing the poor
with both increased income and greater employment opportunities. Preventing the breakdown of
the poorly maintained irrigation infrastructure is equally important. But the two go hand-in-
hand. Providing farmers with greater income potential will enable them to pay for, and maintain,
water and irrigation services.

25. Poverty Monitoring: A key element in moving forward with poverty focused development is a
strong poverty monitoring system and reliable statistics on key indicators. Turkmenistan has a
statistics agency which takes the lead in most such efforts, including the preparation of the 1998
Living Standards Survey, but there is a significant need to improve its capacity and train its staff to
produce and analyze reliable statistics that meet international standards. A number of government
and donor-sponsored reviews now exist on key social sectors (education, health, living standards,
employment, human development etc) but continuing work on these is needed. The statistics agency
has requested Bank support for improving its capacity to monitor living conditions.

26. Gender Issues: Turkmen society involves both traditional roles for women as well as support
for modern equality rights which are embedded in the constitution. Although available information
on gender issues is limited, there do not appear to be large differences in women's and men's access
to basic education or other social services. The UN's gender-related human development index and
Gender Empowerment Measure (measuring participation in parliament, public administration) also
do not indicate significant inequality, although there is some indication that women may be
underrepresented in some key ministries and higher education opportunities. Maternal mortality
figures are high but official statistics suggest they may be decreasing, as with the case of infant
mortality. Looking towards the future, the Bank will emphasize the need to deepen Turkmenistan's
knowledge base on gender issues, particularly in the context of its planned support for monitoring
living standards statistics. In the Bank's round-table discussions with NGOs (see Annex 3), training
for potential women entrepreneurs was suggested as an important development tool. It will also be
important to factor in the role of women in agriculture reform, both in terms of land ownership and
working conditions.

Strengthening Public Resource Management

27. The living standards profile highlights the importance of a transparent budget-based approach
to transfers to the poor, and the weak connection currently between the extensive funds made

8 The Living Standards Survey may, however, exaggerate somewhat the real difference in living standards between
urban and rural areas, since rural residents may be able to grow some food for themselves, and have a stronger level of
community support.

9

available for public investments on the one hand, and critical unmet needs in basic health and
education on the other. At the root of both of these concerns is a public resource management
system that requires serious systemic improvements in investment review and allocations, in
transparency, and accountability. In light of these considerations the top development priority of
Turkmenistan is to put in place a transparent system of public resource management that can direct
public resources to priority uses. With a better system in place, Turkmenistan could use its
considerable natural resource wealth to address the large level of income inequality and improve
basic living standards with its own resources. Without such a system, more direct assistance to
strengthen particular sectors of the economy and reduce poverty are unlikely to have a lasting
development impact.

28. Budget Management and Transparency: At present the Ministry of Economy and Finance
provides allocation management and oversight over only a small portion of government revenues
and expenditures through the state budget. The rest is managed by autonomous extra-budgetary
funds and ministries that follow their own sectoral priorities. There are five major extra-budgetary
funds (the Oil and Gas Fund, the Transport Fund, the Agricultural Fund, the Health Fund and the
Foreign Exchange Reserve Fund) as well as smaller funds and off-budget ministerial activities.9
This makes it difficult to ensure that public spending as a whole reflects the government's priorities
and is used effectively. Inclusion of many state enterprises within the Government also misdirects
scarce budget funds for activities that ought to be done by the private sector. The non-transparency
of key operations makes accurate measurement and analysis of investments across sectors difficult.
For example, self-financing ministries appropriate after-tax surpluses from enterprises under their
control to fund other operations (including capital expenditures and cross-subsidized services to the
population) without considering investments elsewhere.

29. 
In the 1997 CAS, the Bank indicated that fiscal discipline, including consolidating all fiscal
funds into the budget, would be the linchpin of reform. The government's 10 Year National Program
has also established strong goals in this area. All extra-budgetary accounts are to be eliminated, and
all investments are to be included in an investment budget with an appropriate analysis of rates of
return. Also selected government companies are to be separated from ministries to facilitate
privatization. Very limited progress has been made since then, although some progress was made in
FYOO by presenting planned revenues and expenditure outlays of most extra-budgetary funds in the
state budget document.

30. The World Bank has made a number of concrete suggestions to the government to promote a
transparent, rational and efficient utilization of scarce public resources.1 0
An important
recommendation is that budget coverage must be made more complete by progressively eliminating
the funds and integrating their activities in the budget. A transparent process should be put into
place to evaluate and prioritize investments within a common framework, and with adequate
review by sector specialists. The commercial activities of the self financing ministries must be
separated from the non-commercial ones and the latter incorporated in the budget. Quasi-fiscal
operations such as subsidized credit should also be included in the budget. Until such time as these
measures are implemented, regular reporting to the MOEF of all expenditures and revenues of the
funds and self-financing ministries, including the Foreign Exchange Reserve Fund, should be

9 It has been estimated that the expenditures under the state budget which are allocated by the Ministry of finance

represents only about 20 percent of all public expenditures.

10 Turkmenistan: Improving the Management of Public Expenditure, World Bank, October 1998.

10

enforced." Consolidated budget information should be widely available. These efforts should be
supported by procurement reform, the introduction of international accounting standards, and a
reduction in netting (non-cash offsets between institutions). 
The Bank is supporting the
modernization of the budget process through its on-going IBTA loan (see Annex 2), although the
effectiveness of this will depend on progress on the more fundamental reforms noted above.

31. The Bank has recently advised the Government of Turkmenistan that a central element in good
budget management will be establishing improved and transparent rules for the largest extra-
budgetary fund, the Foreign Exchange Reserve Fund (FERF). Only limited information is
available on the size, rules, and transactions of the FERF. However, it is estimated to be on the
order of about $1.7 billion (equal to about 14 months of imports) held abroad. A large percentage of
foreign currency earnings (possibly on the order of 30% - 50%) on exports of energy, cotton, and
possibly other transactions are transferred to this fund each year, and large public investment
expenditures are made out of it. The FERF also may include elements of a foreign reserve
management function (though the Central Bank has only limited control) and an inter-generational
savings fund to cover future shocks. If public resources are to be managed transparently, it is
therefore essential that the rules governing these FERF functions should be carefully considered in
light of international experience. This will be a critical element in exchange rate management as
well (see Annex 4). The Bank is prepared to provide advice to the government on the reform of the
FERF based on international experience during the CAS period.

32. Debt Management: Currently, there is no clear system to consolidate all external debt
obligations, and ensure that debt service is monitored and paid when due. Part of the external debt is
managed under the Central Bank and part under the State Bank for Foreign Economic Affairs.
Further the process of making public investments and contracting foreign debt are often separated.
Many investments appear to have been undertaken on an ad-hoc basis and without considering
future debt service obligations, and recurrent costs of investments.12 This has resulted in large levels
of external public debt and debt service payments which could limit Turkmenistan's
creditworthiness and future access to external capital if poor debt management persists.'3
Faced
with an increase in foreign debt, a Presidential decree was issued in 1999 seeking greater control on
the project formulation and loan approval process. Accordingly, all investment projects must be
evaluated by the State Agency for Foreign Investment (SAFI). The Deputy Chairman of the Cabinet
of Ministers in charge of the national economy must personally sanction all new projects above a
certain threshold. It is unclear, however, how effective these procedures are.

33. The rising level of external debt was flagged as an important creditworthiness issue in the
1997 CAS. The government's 10 Year National Program also establishes improved external debt
management as a key goal, with the targets of increasing its credit rating, improving the efficient use
of borrowed funds and establishing a reasonable level of total borrowing and government control. It
also proposes a central process for external debt repayments under the government budget.

11 In the past, audited accounts of extra-budgetary funds were not made available to the MOEF. It is reported that as of
July 2000, MOEF has had access to such accounts. Such access will need to be carefully verified and monitored.

12 The MOEF maintains an overall plan for "centralized investments" which are largely funded in domestic currency and
implemented through ministries. However, foreign borrowing generally falls outside this framework.

13 Turkmenistan's stock of debt has increased from $1.7 billion at end 1997 (66% of GDP) to about $2.3 billion in March
2000 (about 50% of GDP). Debt service payments are now about $400 million annually (about 15% of exports). Given
the expected rise in exports and GDP, this level of debt, although large, is not unmanageable with appropriate review of
new debt proposals and public investments, and greater economic diversification.

11

34. The government needs to take a number of near term steps to meet its goal of strengthening its
debt management. Appropriate limits should be placed on all new external borrowing (including
publicly guaranteed debt) and borrowed resources should be used only for priority investment
projects with high economic rates of return. Appropriate institutional arrangements to manage
external debt need to be put in place. These include (i) a high level policy making body that sets
strict borrowing ceilings for each year, approves external borrowing proposals of the government
and specifies the responsibilities for debt service, etc; (ii) a debt management unit that is
responsible for the daily management of all external debt, collecting information on foreign debt
contracts, and preparing periodic status reports and projections on debt; and (iii) a debt law that
clearly sets out debt management limits, procedures and responsibilities. In addition, international
experience suggests that providing access to external debt information is an essential element in
building relationships with external investors and donors. The Bank is supporting these efforts
through an IDF grant for debt management, which has placed an international debt advisor with the
Government.

35. Good Governance and Transparency: There is a strong need to improve information
transparency and information sharing in Turkmenistan. As noted, there is limited information on the
bulk of government spending and on debt. Most enterprises do not operate using international
accounting principles and there is a heavy use of non-cash transactions. During CAS consultations
with civil society and the private sector, many participants indicated that the main issue is not
the existence of good laws, but the transparent application of laws.14 The basis for good public
management has to be access to appropriate information, both information generated within
Turkmenistan and outside information (best practices etc). Limited transparency can also lead to a
lack of accountability and is often a leading ingredient in rent seeking. Limited transparency is of
course primarily an internal issue, but also prevents a more robust cooperation with foreign investors
and international institutions

15

36. 
Inadequate and non-transparent accounts also hamper control over improper practices and
corruption (bribes, kickbacks, favoritism, etc). Levels of corruption are hard to measure given the
non-transparent nature of public investment activities, but are generally considered to be significant.
In this light, it is essential to build a system of public financial accountability and control.
Turkmenistan has taken initial steps in this regard by drafting a Public Procurement Law, which is
expected to be submnitted to Parliament over the coming year with the support of the Bank.
Turkmenistan is also beginning to introduce International Accounting Standards, also supported by
the Bank, which should help improve accountability over expenditures. Looking towards the future,
these specific activities need to be institutionalized in a way that facilitates implementation and
makes them sustainable.

37. Good governance involves many aspects besides information sharing and transparency. For
example, it requires establishing rules and institutions that separate regulatory and business
functions and other forms of checks and balances. Transparency in public resource management
should therefore be considered as a first step, which will help to (i) reduce incentives for officials to

14 The one area where the civil society roundtable did, however, indicate a need for a new law was in the legal status and
registration of NGOs themselves, without which they face restrictions in carrying out their activities. The enactment of
an effective legal framework for NGOs would be an important step in enhancing the delivery of social services.

15 For example, adequate information on the full budget, extra-budgetary funds, and debt will be an important element in
determining the extent of Bank activities. A recent IMF Mission in November, 2000 was also unable to obtain the
information it needs to prepare the ground for an Article IV Consultation.

12

engage in inefficient or corrupt activities in the absence of checks and balances and (ii) set a good
foundation for future work in improving governance. However, a longer term governance agenda
should be recognized and begin to be discussed as well (see Box 1).

Box 1: Longer Term Governance Issues

Given the large role of the Government in the economy, and the centralized decision-making process, the level
of checks and balances within the system will require considerable enhancement. Beyond increasing
transparency, some longer term challenges include:
* Separation of Government from Commercial Activities: In most sectors, Ministries act as both regulator
of commercial activities, and as the operator of enterprises. This leads to a conflict of interest. The
separation of commercial and non-commercial activities within ministries would both lead to greater
financial discipline in enterprises and permit the Government to concentrate on supervision and regulation.

* Reduction in Government Controls Over Normal Transactions: High levels of Government control over
normal transactions, such as trade and exchange activities, can provide an opportunity for rent seeking.
Similarly, registration requirements for most business transactions with the State Commodity Exchange
provides scope for harassment of the private sector and for corruption. The liberalization of trade and
exchange regimes w3uld therefore be particularly effective in eliminating the opportunity for corruption.

* 

Improvement in Procurement/Auditing Practices: Turkmenistan is readying itself for the adoption of
internationally acceptable procurement and accounting principles. And yet, it needs to be recognized that
much of the economy continues to operate on non-cash transactions and on informal arrangements.
Strong banking and auditing institutions are needed if there is to be substance behind these procurement
and accounting practices.

* Public Accountability of Officials: Many countries are adopting disclosure laws and monitoring
met,hanisms to prevent nepotism, corruption, and conflict of interest. Given the small population, and
tendency for individuals to handle multiple positions, it will be important for Turkmenistan to consider an
appropriate approach to this important issue.

* 

Independent Legal Institutions: In discussions with the civil society and the private sector, the single most
important issue mentioned was not the lack of good laws, but the transparent and objective application of
these laws. There is also a need to develop appropriate institutions to enforce private contracts.

* Greater Level of Participation in Informing Decision-Makine: Experience has indicated that the greater
the level of participation in the government decision making process, the more sustainable those decisions
are, and the more likely that they will be effective.

Improving Health and Social Services

38. Health Services: The Living Standards Survey indicates that there is a strong need to
strengthen health services, and that the development of the health care system is a main priority for
Turkmenistan. Turkmenistan' s health indicators (such as life expectancy and infant mortality) were
historically among the worst in the FSU countries. According to the official data, however, there
have been improvements in recent years in the maternal and infant mortality rates. It will be
important to test the accuracy of the official statistics after the results of the recent demographic and
health survey have become available. In addition, there has been a reported decline in several types
of infectious diseases (such as blood circulation diseases, respiratory diseases and genital-urinary
diseases). Despite these improvements, life expectancy (at 66 years) and infant mortality (reported

13

by the government at 26/1000 in 1999) remain of major concern.

39. The 1997 CAS recognized the critical priority of improving health indicators, and proposed an
immediate pilot health reform project. The government's 10 year National Program establishes
significant long term goals in the health services area. These include maintaining free medical
services, raising the amount spent on health to 7% of GDP, vaccinating up to 99% of children, and
the intensive development of the domestic pharmaceutical industry. It also recognizes the need to
stimulate the development of private services in health care. The Government has recently
introduced a system of medical insurance for employed citizens.

40. There are many health challenges to address, including life styles and environment. However,
two critical issues that should be tackled as a priority in the near term are the quality of drinking
water and sanitation, and the health care system:

Drinking Water and Sanitation: Many of the poor do not have a piped water supply, but rather
have to obtain water from wells or canals (which are often polluted). Few have adequate
sanitation. For those with piped water, there are additional concerns relating to the poor state of
repair of the pipes aid pumps, as well as the quality of water, much of which comes from the
Karakum Canal or downstream Amu Darya and also has contaminants. These problems have
contributed to the still high incidence of infectious and parasitic diseases, particularly in infants.
The Government, with donor support, is working on addressing these water supply issues.
Participants in the NGO Roundtable agreed that the top sectoral priority is water supply.
Introducing improved management of water supply systems, including charging for water, can
assist in ensuring sustainability and improving service. Of course, such an approach also needs
to ensure access to safe water by those most in need and unable to pay for services. The current
Bank project in Water Supply and Sanitation is playing a critical role in helping to improve the
provision of water supply in one of the poorest regions of Turkmenistan (see Annex 2).

* The Health Care System: A critical element in need of reform is the manner in which the health
care system is organized, funded, and staffed. Basic medicines and medical equipment (such as
syringes) are in severe shortage, and patients often have to buy them themselves in order to get
services, despite the newly introduced insurance policy. There is therefore a need to ensure that
the poor have adequate access to care. A fundamental reason for the inefficiencies in the health
care delivery system is the poor system of budgeting. The overall health budget may be
adequate, but a high proportion of it goes to funding tertiary level facilities. Further, reforms are
required in the continued reliance upon the use of outdated norms to determine service and
resources, and more attention needs to be paid to the quality of care provided. Some
institutional reform towards a more quality oriented primary care system, appears to be
underway. It is critically important that these reforms be supported and deepened. The
proposed Pilot Health Project would play a critical role in this regard (see Box 4).

41. Other Social Services: On general social support, the Government's 10-year National Program
provides for free access to water, gas, electricity and salt up to fixed limits. At the same time, the
Living Standards Profile has identified the need to move away from general subsidies through a
more targeted approach to social protection. A small program to provide one-time support payments
through local communities has recently been initiated, and could provide a foundation for a larger
effort. Beyond this, a deteriorating education system (including reduced time in secondary school, a
sub-standard curriculum, and limited access to higher education) is a key concern, althougl. there

14

appears to be only limited commitment to addressing these systemic issues at this time.

Developing An Efficient Rural Economy

42. The dynamic growth of the agriculture sector is especially important to address the income
inequality between the urban and rural areas and reduce poverty. First, the sector accounts for a
substantial share of GDP and is a source of livelihood for a major part of the population.
Agriculture contributed 26 percent to GDP in 1999 and it employs more than 45 percent of the labor
force. Agricultural growth will therefore have a significant impact on the overall economy and the
living conditions of the population, both in rural and urban areas. Second, most of the poor, as
earlier noted, live in rural areas. Growth in agriculture and the generation of employment
opportunities in the rural areas is the most effective way to lift the living standards of the population,
including those that are poor. According to the Living Standards Profile, the elasticity of poverty
with respect to economic growth is about 1.75. That is, a 5% growth in income of the population
close to the poverty line is likely to reduce poverty by about 9%.

43. The 1997 CAS highlighted the substantial progress on changing the status of most farmers into
"lease-holders" at that time, and reported on government intentions to give efficient lease-holders
private title to their land (albeit with some restrictions) within a few years. It was in fact, envisaged
that by 1999 half of the land would be privately owned. However, progress since then has been
limited, and only a very small portion of lands has been transferred to private ownership. Further,
both lease-holders and private farmers access to critical inputs, storage facilities, marketing facilities
and credit is limited unless they fulfill state orders.

44. The government's 10 year National Program envisions rapidly expanding agricultural
production, including a doubling of wheat and cotton production. At the same time, it indicates that
by 2010 57% of all agricultural production will be under private ownership. The programme also
recognizes the importance of developing the agro-processing industry and the development of new
hydro facilities and pumping stations.

45. The near term challenge to increase rural income should be to stimulate market based growth
in agriculture. An environment must be created in which agricultural activity is not discriminated
against and private farmers are induced to increase their productivity and adopt best cultivation
practices. About 75% of arable farmland is used for cotton and wheat. At present virtually all of
cotton and wheat sales are carried out through the state order system. State procurement prices for
cotton and wheat paid to farmers in local currency average about 50%-60% of world prices valued at
official exchange rates, and less than 20% when valued at the parallel (street) rate. It has been
estimated that these prices, net of subsidized water, fertilizers, and other inputs, resulted in a real
transfer of resources from agriculture to the rest of the economy equal to as much as 15% of GDP.16
A further significant burden is that farmers would likely be able to obtain even greater benefits if
given the opportunity to grow and market alternative crops.

46. These restrictions on farmer income will have to be reversed if agricultural growth is to be
stimulated. For this, the scope of the state order system should be progressively reduced and farmers
should be able to sell their produce freely in the domestic market or export it. At the same time,
input subsides should be phased out to prevent wasteful use, and in particular user charges for water

16 "Turkmenistan - The Burden of Current Agricultural Policies" (IMF Working Paper, June 2000)

15

must be gradually raised to recover costs (see Annex 4). 
Introducing payments would be
particularly important in order to (i) help maintain rapidly deteriorating agriculture irrigation
and other infrastructure, and (ii) help provide the incentives for water and other input
conservation, vital to building a sustainable approach to water management. These are both
urgent needs. On the first, there are increasing reports of the deterioration of the Karakum Canal,
putting millions of people at risk of a serious health and environmental disaster. On the second, it is
estimated that water loss on the Canal approaches 50% due to evaporation, over-use and poor
management. The Bank's proposed Karakum Canal Rehabilitation project would seek to address
these concerns (see box 4).

47. Removing restrictions on farmers without giving farmers access to alternative input and sales
opportunities is also not likely to produce significant improvements. To alleviate this problem, the
government must encourage private sector investment in marketing, storage and cotton ginning
facilities and accelerate the privatization of agro-industries. The government has already begun to
improve its pest control services to farmers, and the Bank's proposed Crop Protection project would
help to ensure that these were provided on a commercial service-oriented basis (see box 4).

Supporting Private Sector Development

48. Private sector development is critical to stimulate the income and jobs necessary to provide
opportunity to the population of Turkmenistan. A vibrant private sector is also essential to provide
an alternative to public investment, to diversify the economy, and to create a favorable atmosphere
for foreign investment, in and outside the energy sector. The roundtable with Civil Society in
particular highlighted the importance of strengthening the private sector environment to both
improve social services and generate additional income in poor communities, including among
women entrepreneurs. Although estimates of the extent of the private sector in Turkmenistan
differ'7 , there is general agreement that its contribution to the economy remains well below its
potential.

49. The government's 10 year National Program recognizes the importance of the private sector and
seeks to raise the non-Government share in GDP to 67% by 2010. It also advocates the liquidation
of bureaucratic obstacles to private businesses and continuation of the privatization process for
selected governmental companies. The program also establishes the goal of moving to a market
based exchange rate system.

W0. The 1997 CAS notes the Government's emphasis on private sector growth (particularly
through land reform - see previous section) and privatization, particularly of small scale enterprises.
In 1996/97 the government had issued a decree on small enterprise privatization and was preparing
regulations for the mass privatization of medium and large enterprises. However, after privatizing
about 2000 small scale enterprises, mostly in the field of trade and catering, since the end of 1998
the privatization process has essentially stalled.18 A key reason for this is the poor environment for
private sector enterprises to flourish. Further progress on privatization, while important, is unlikely
to be successful until the overall environment for private sector development and foreign investment
is improved.

'M The government claims the private sector accounts for 30-40% of GDP. Other estimates are in the range of 20-25%.

At the same time, the Government has indicated its intention to draw up a list of larger enterprises for privatization.

16

51. Consultations with the private sector identified two key constraints that dampen private
activity, particularly in the SME sector, and provide a breeding ground for rent seeking and
corruption. These should be addressed with some urgency (see Annex 4 for a fuller discussion):

* Limited Access to Foreign Exchange at a Single Exchange Rate: The foreign exchange regime of
Turkmenistan is highly distorted, with a restrictive exchange rationing system and a wide
difference between the black market and the official rate. Participation in foreign currency
auctions is carefully screened, and the inter-bank market was closed in 1998. Since then the
government has imposed significant additional restrictions. More recently the government has
indicated its intention to unify its official rate and the black market rate, and is piloting a lower-
than-official rate in a few public enterprises. The Bank has indicated that the first steps towards
sustainable currency reform should be to provide the Central Bank with adequate foreign
exchange to support the exchange rate, to reduce restrictions on participation in auctions, and to
re-open the inter-bank market.

* Excessive Trade Restrictions: While import tariffs are at minimal levels, there remain
significant trade barriers including rationing of foreign exchange (noted above), export licensing
requirements, and a requirement that all exported goods be pre-paid (In the case of imports too
there is a requirement that they be paid for only on delivery.) But by far the most egregious
controls are implemented through the State Commodity Exchange (SCE), for which almost all
trade must be registered. Such registration can be time-consuming and costly. Differences over
"appropriate" prices have limited legitimate transactions, led producers to import inferior
products, and provided opportunity for rent seeking.

52. A well run financial sector is another essential element in creating a positive environment for
private sector development. The financial sector in Turkmenistan has recently undergone some
consolidation with the merger of several insolvent banks with other institutions in 1998, but there is
need for further improvement. At present the banking sector operates largely as a conduit for
channeling state funds for designated activities to large state owned enterprises rather than as an
evaluator of risk and financial return on market-based investments. There are only two private
commercial banks operating in the financial sector, and these are subject to continuing government
interference. A wide range of interest rates and directed credits for different categories of customers
exist. Finally, the central bank is developing an electronic inter-bank payment system, although
there continues to be significant use of non-cash transactions between enterprises. The IFC has
approved a small loan to a private bank to help provide a best practices model for the banking sector
(see paras 71-73)

53. Beyond these urgent issues, other factors dampen private sector activity including (i) the
limited state of internet access, which is an essential business tool, (ii) continued non-transparency,
conflict of interests, and bureaucracy in licensing and application of regulations, (iii) harassment of
private sector enterprises by various government agencies, (iv) the required majority state
participation in joint ventures, (v) limited vocational learning opportunities, and (vi) heavy
restrictions on travel including leaving the country (eg requirement of an exit visa), travel within the
country (eg checkpoints) and for foreign businessmen visiting Turkmenistan. All of the above
issues are critical for foreign investors as well as local businessmen. If the investment climate is
improved, MIGA's online information systems, IPAnet and PrivatizationLink, can help attract
investment in key sectors such as mining, oil, and gas (see para 74).

17

Protecting the Environment and Conserving Water

54. Turkmenistan faces serious environmental problems in both the industrial and the agricultural
sectors which affect the living standards of the population. In industry, oil refineries are major
sources of pollution. Pollution occurs also from the burning of associated gas from oil fields as well
in the processing of gas to reduce its sulfur content. Industrial pollution is particularly a concern
around the Caspian Sea area. 
In agriculture, groundwater and the soil are contaminated by
pesticides and fertilizers. But perhaps the primary environmental issue facing the country is the
overuse of water to irrigate cotton fields and a lack of incentives for individuals and businesses to
conserve water. This overuse has increased the salinity of the soil with a resultant reduction in crop
yields. The overuse of water is also a source of regional environmental concern. The recent plans to
build a large reservoir from drainage water should be reviewed further against such concerns.

55. The government's 10 year National Program identifies Ecological Safety as a key goal,
including ensuring environmental considerations in industrial development, insuring a high quality
of drinking water, the reduction in harmful chemicals in agriculture, and the prevention of ecological
disaster in the Aral Sea region. The Government has signed important international conventions on
bio-diversity and climate change, and currently holds the Chairmanship of the Executive Committee
of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea (IFAS). It has also published a "Red Book" on
flora and fauna, and is in the middle of preparing a National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP),
supported by the Bank.

56. While there are many environmental actions needed, the government's policy of providing
free water and energy for domestic and agricultural uses requires priority attention as a large amount
of water is being wasted. As mentioned, it is necessary to introduce user charges, and other
measures (including taps and meters) to encourage wiser, economical use of water and energy. This
would both promote conservation and help mobilize the necessary funds to maintain irrigation and
water supply equipment. Of course, in implementing this, care needs to be taken to ensure that those
most in need are not adversely impacted by such charges. The institutional capacity for
environmental management needs to be strengthened to prevent fragmentation of responsibilities, to
develop appropriate strategies, and tighten enforcement.

IV. World Bank Strategy

Lessons Learned From Past Bank Experience

57. Policy Reform: The 1997 CAS presented a program designed around mixed signals on the
pace of reform. On the one hand it indicated that the Government preferred a more gradual pace of
reform implementation than the Bank thought warranted. At the same time, it observed that there
was agreement on overall development goals and that there was some indication that the
Government might be willing to accelerate the reform effort, including the potential for
implementing an IMF-supported program that would unify the exchange rate and reduce price
controls. The government had indicated that a significant proportion of land would be privatized

18

within a few years and regulations for privatizing medium and large enterprises had been prepared.
The results since 1997 indicate that this later view was too optimistic. The key priority goals
outlined in the 1997 CAS - budget and debt management, rural development, trade and foreign
exchange liberalization, and privatization of larger enterprises - remain outstanding issues.
58. As a result of this experience, the current CAS scales back both the Bank's expectation of
more rapid reform and the extent of Bank support, particularly as regards lending. For the FY01-03
period, the Bank will concentrate on building a stronger foundation of shared approaches with the
government, and providing practical, non-lending support to build the Government's capacity to
move forward at its own pace.

59. Lending: The Bank has extended three projects to Turkmenistan. These are the Institutional
Building Technical Assistance (IBTA) Loan approved by the Board in FY95, and the Urban
Transportation Loan and the Water Supply and Sanitation Loan approved by the Board at the time of
the 1997 CAS. No further lending was extended from FY98 to FY00 due to (i) a misprocurement
issue which took more than a year to resolve and suspended both new lending and disbursements on
existing loans (this suspension was lifted in June 1999) and (ii) a negative pledge clause violation
which was identified in 1998 and continues to prevent new lending. All three ongoing projects have
experienced problems due to (i) procurement and implementation difficulties and (ii) failure to
achieve adequate institutional change. Annex 1 provides the specific status and plans for each
project.

60. On the overall issue of fiduciary accountability, the Bank must continue to heighten the
awareness of the importance of good accounting and procurement, including helping the
Government to bring the public procurement law into being and providing training in international
accounting (both supported by IDF grants).'9 Continued use of PIUs will, however, be necessary for
the near future. Supervision of on-going projects will remain a top priority. New loans will need to
be stricter on confirming Government commitment to both technical activities and policy reforms,
regularly monitoring progress and providing for more hands-on support for implementing reform
measures. It is also recommended that the Government strengthen its own capacity to help review
projects and resolve key issues.

61. Loan Covenant Violation and Debt Reporting: Turkmenistan is in violation of the Bank's
Negative Pledge loan covenant. It has also not met its debt reporting obligations to the Bank. Until
these issues are resolved, the Bank can not extend any new loans. On the first, Turkmenistan has
recognized the problem with collateralizing other lenders over the Bank and has issued a Presidential
Decree prohibiting such practices. The Government has indicated that since then, similar operations
have not been entered into. However, it has been unable to renegotiate the pertinent clauses of the
offending loan.2 0
In the absence of being able to address the issue directly, the Bank is ready to
explore ways of meeting the loan clause provision through obtaining equal and ratable collateral. As
regards debt reporting, Turkmenistan has not submitted any debt reports to the Bank's Debt
Reporting System in over one year. However the Bank has supported the placement of a debt
advisor with the Government and the Government has indicated that it would provide debt statistics
by the end of the first quarter of 2001.

19 These efforts will assist both on the immediate tasks of passing the public procurement law and providing training in
accounting, as well as the development of longer term institutional structures to make these efforts sustainable

20 The violation is related to a 1996 loan provided by a consortium of German banks, for the rehabilitation of the
Turkmenbashy Oil Refinery. Proceeds of oil sales are collected in an overseas collateral account to repay the loan.

19

62. Non-Lending Experience: To date, the bulk of the Bank's non-lending work has been in the
form of major policy papers. Other donors have also contributed to this knowledge base including
various papers on private sector development by USAID, a 1997 Education Review by UNDP, and
the annual UNDP Human Development Report (Annex 4 provides a list of major studies undertaken
recently). More recently, the Bank has also begun to provide hands-on policy advice through the
placement of a debt advisor in the Government, and a review of a draft tax code. It is, however, too
soon to tell whether these hands-on efforts will yield better results. The Government has also
expressed a strong interest in such hands-on support, most recently requesting a grant to help
introduce international accounting principles. Ultimately, the effectiveness of ESW may depend less
on how it is delivered, and more on whether there is continual follow-up by the Bank and the
borrower, since change is likely to be a long term process.

Bank Program for FY01-03

63. 
Initial Phase: Over the next 1-3 years the Bank will largely limit its focus to strengthening the
implementation of existing projects and helping Turkmenistan build a stronger foundation for
pursuing reform through non-lending activities. Any such support would depend on adequate
access to basic information necessary to complete individual tasks.

64. Within this non-lending phase, primary
emphasis will be placed on improving public 
resource management and governance. 

Specific support will be provided for (i) budget 

modernization (through the IBTA Loan), (ii) 

debt management 

(through 

the IDF Debt 

Box 2: Proposed National Economic Foru
e p 
N 
Eo 
F 
would

:
-- Be prepared with the Government, Donors, civil
society, and other parties

Management Grant) and (iii) helping to host a
"National Economic Forum", which would 
facilitate information sharing both within and 

io Enformationsri 

whihi wuand 

fiate 

outside the Government (see Box 2). The Bank 

-- Focus on bringing best practice information fromn

outside of Turkmenistan as well as disseminaig
existing information generated within Tuwk -eitan.00 

e 

ita

would also foster international standards of 

financial accountability 
through (iv) support 
for bringing a public procurement 
law into 

operation and (v) an international accounting 

standards IDF grant. As noted in para 62, the 

-- Have a public event where participants could present
key studies and activities, as well as pivate meet*i
with decision-makers on key topics.
-- Identify how to continue such information flows
(annual event, standing secretariat, internet page etc)

effectiveness of such efforts depends on I
continuing follow-up. Thus, these efforts would support both specific immediate actions as well as
building institutions to enable these efforts to be sustainable over the long term.

65. The Bank will also engage Turkmenistan on poverty monitoring (through a Living Standards
Monitoring and Targeting IDF grant), the environment (eg the NEAP, comprehensive water
strategy), and private sector development (a downstream energy sector study). The Bank also
stands ready to engage in shorter policy advice on various issues including the FERF and agriculture
reform. Given the importance of fostering transparency (see paras 35-37), in all these efforts the
Bank will seek to encourage and facilitate as wide dissemination of information as possible.

66. Second Phase: Given the weak reform progress and the loan clause violation, it is likely to
prove extremely difficult for the Bank to extend new loans in the near term. However, the Bank

20

would provide a small 1-3 loan program over three years of $10-20 million per year if (i) the loan
covenant violation is resolved, (ii) performance of ongoing projects is improved, and (iii) substantial
progress is achieved on budget/debt management and transparency, including improved
management of the Foreign Exchange Reserve Fund. Possible lending operations fall into the area
of priority human needs (e.g. a pilot Health project) and disaster prevention and water
management (e.g. the Karakum Canal Rehabilitation). This latter project would be important in
improving water management, from both a national and regional perspective. The Bank would also
consider a project to support the improvement of environmentally friendly services for the rural
economy (e.g. a Crop Protection and Animal Health Project), contingent on improving farmers'
ability to generate income to pay for the proposed services as well as conserve water.2 ' The need for
and commitment to these potential loans are described further in Box 4.

67. Longer Term Agenda: There are many challenges to be addressed in Turkmenistan. The key
element to moving forward on them is the commitment of the Government to take concrete
actionable steps. The CAS lays out a longer term agenda in agriculture reform, foreign exchange
and trade liberalization, and improving the environment for private sector development. Continued
improvement in public resource management and governance beyond the measures taken in the
initial stage would also be important. The Bank will consider additional loans and non-lending
support in these areas in light of progress in, and commitment to, reforms in key policy areas --
access to foreign exchange at a single exchange rate, substantial reduction in the state-order, and
reform of the State Commodity Exchange -- and achievements in near term CAS benchmarks (see
Table 4) including improvements in living standards monitoring and targeting. In this event, the
Bank will prepare a CAS update outlining progress on reform programs and identifying specific
Bank interventions.

68. Field Presence: Given overall resource constraints and the limited reform progress by the
Government, it would not be cost-effective to upgrade the Liaison Office to a Resident
Representative Office at this time. Using the limited budget to support a more continuous ESW
effort, with follow-through, might be more effective. However, implementation of agreed activities
would be facilitated by a second national professional in the country office to help with operations
supervision, collection of information, external affairs etc. 
It should also be noted that the
Government has indicated an interest in having a Resident Representative. This issue will be
monitored over the CAS period and could be reconsidered in light of Turkmenistan's reform
progress and available resources.

21 The primary role of the Bank in these projects would be on project design. Because of creditworthiness concerns, the

level of Bank lending would be kept limited and significant cofinancing from the Government and other donors would
be sought. 
In this light, even if the conditions for Bank lending are not fully met, the Bank could consider the
possibility of designing these projects for the Government and other donors, without direct Bank financing.

21

Table 3: Proposed Turkmenistan Country Program: FY01-FY03

Non-Lending Services

Oning 

!Oo2-03

FY01 

-- Debt Management 
Grant (IDF) 
-- Public Procurement 
Grant (IDF) 
-- Living Stand. Profile 
-- NEAP (PHRD) 

-- Downstream Energy Study 
-- Macro/Sector Reform Dialogue 
-- Int'l Accounting Principles (IDF) 

-- Water Strategy
-- Living Standards
Monitoring (IDF)
-- Country Economic
Memorandum
-- National Econ. Forum

On-Going Lending

-- IBTA Project ($9 million undisbursed - closing date 12/01)
-- Urban Transport Project ($13 million undisbursed - closing date 12/01)
-- Water Supply Project ($28 million undisbursed - closing date 2/04)

New Lending

Basic 
Needs 

Base Case 

Stronger Reform 

S 

-

: 

T--:----7777 

70.77}ij 

... 

,...

Pilot Health Project
($10 million)
Karakum Canal
Rehabilitation Project
($20 million)
Above loans plus

Crop Protection
Project
($15 million)

Additional Lending to
be Determined
(CAS Update Would be
Prepared)

-7: 

77 

E 

.

.

7 

r-- 

TriggersFY20
-- resolution of loan covenant violation 
-- significant improvement in the number of 
on-going loans rated satisfactory 
-- Progress in budget/debt management and 
transparency (see Box 3 for details) 
-- Satisfactory performance as above plus 

-- Approve an acceptable time-bound action

plan, with immediate first steps, to reduce 
the state order on cotton and wheat and 
increase the ability of farmers to process 
and export crops on a market basis.

-- Institute at least 20% cost recovery on a

cash basis for agriculture water supply
-- Satisfactory performance as above plus 
--Progress on near term CAS benchmarks 
(table 4) including improved approach to 
poverty monitoring and targeting 
-- Reduction in foreign exchange and trade
controls including: (i) substantially open
access to foreign exchange at a single
exchange rate, (ii) substantial reduction in
the state-order, and (iii) significant reform
of the State Commodity Exchange.

22

Box 3: Budget and Debt Management Triggers for New Lending

Each of the actions described below would need to be acceptable to the Bank:

Debt Management
Obiective: to strengthen the management and transparency of external borrowing and to ensure timely
repayment

Basic Actions Necessara:
(i) Submit an acceptable consolidated debt report regularly to the World Bank Debt Reporting System, as
required by Bank regulations.
(ii) Establish tight borrowing ceilings and monitoring mechanisms consistent with the budget and macro-
economic framework.
(iii) Establish institutional arrangements with clear terms of reference and action plans to:
a) regularly affirm debt statistics, decide on annual borrowings in the context of the budget, approve
external borrowing proposals of the government (and other public organizations), specify the
responsibility for debt service, and establish other rules for sound debt management.
b) have day-to-day responsibility for the management of external debt (such as registering all foreign
debt contracts and loan information, preparing reports on debt and projected debt, issuing
borrowing guidelines, and analyzing the impact of borrowings on the budget and debt structure).
(iv) Submit a debt law to Parliament providing the legal process for debt management.

Budget Management:
Objective: to consolidate revenues and expenditures in a single framework and make this more transparent
so as to facilitate conformity of spending decisions with national priorities.

Basic Actions Necessara:
(i) Approve a time-bound action plan, with inmmediate first steps, to separate and clarify the functions of
the FERF - with the assignment of adequate foreign currency reserves and management to the Central
Bank, the establishment of a contingency and/or savings fund operating under clearly defined and
transparent rules, and the integration of the public investment function fully into the budget
framework.
(ii) Enforce detailed quarterly reports of revenue and expenditure of all extra-budgetary funds to the
MOEF, including the FERF, and inclusion in the overall budget framework.
(iii) Prepare a plan for the dissemination of the full budget each year after parliamentary passage.
(iv) Establish institutional arrangements to prepare and agree with Ministries a list of enterprises to be
separated from Ministries and time-table for implementation. In this context, establish a secretariat to
be responsible for the day to day management of this activity (such as maintaining an updated list of
enterprises to be separated, preparing status reports on such enterprises, & establishing methods of
separating such enterprises.)

23

Box 4: Proposed Base Case Loans

In light of the overall weak commitment to reform and the poor experience to date in project
implementation, it is essential that any new project have both a strong developmental impact and
demonstrated commitment from the Borrower in working with the Bank to introduce change. In all three
proposed loans, the Bank's financial contribution would be quite small, and would be used to leverage both
more systemic reform, and Government and other donor funding. Also, each would need to be prepared
and supervised with careful financial diligence (see para. 66).

Pilot Health Project

Health has been identified as a top social development priority for Turkmenistan, and is one of the few
areas where the Government has started to introduce some reform, with the assistance of the Bank (which
prepared a Health Sector Report in 1997), WHO and UNICEF. The pilot project would help to deepen this
effort by allowing the Government to test specific reforms in a single district including the consolidation of
health services, tying budgets to performance, and introducing new protocols of care. It would also support
efforts to strengthen the training of health workers, rehabilitate peripheral facilities, and adequately fund
basic supplies and equipment. The proposed project would include a monitoring component so that the
lessons learned through this pilot effort could be later scaled up in a systemic manner. The Bank could
play a critical role in ensuring that health reforms, now ongoing, are deepened and extended in line with
international approaches.

Karakum Canal Rehabilitation Project

International experts have indicated that the unstable canal alignment, rapid sedimentation, and
deteriorating and under-sized control structures could take the Canal out of operation. This would seriously
affect the living conditions within Turkmenistan, as close to half the population depend on it as their aor
source for both drinking water and irrigation. But beyond this disaster concern, better water management in
the Amu Darya river basin is also a top regional priority, as the over-use of wateri in upnver structures like
the Canal can lead to a worsening of conditions downriver. By repairing key structures, impring
communication along the canal to better regulate flows, and piloting efforts to reduce water use in farms
both of these concerns would be addressed. Turkmenistan has identified this as their top priority for Bank
lending. Several other lenders such as the Kuwait Fund and the Islamic Development Bank have also
indicated to the Government that they would be interested in cofinancing such a project. Bank involvement
would ultimately be critical to ensuring that any rehabilitation and reform of Canal management isrit
towards using less water rather than more.

Crop Protection and Animal Health Project

The project will assist the Government in making a first step in reforming the agriculture service sector.
Prior to independence, Turkmenistan had an extensive system of environmentally friendly crop protection
using insects to combat bollworm, a major cotton pest. This system deteriorated on independence but
improvement has begun. However, in the event that farmers are given more choice in inputs and sales (a
cordition of this loan), there is concern that farmers might turn to more pesticide use without reform of this
key service. This project would support the rehabilitation of insectories into fee-based and service-oriented
commercial providers, improve pesticide detection, and help develop a pest management policy. It would
also support the introduction of private veterinary services, and the provision of essential vaccines to
enhance animal health, a key limiting factor. Since most livestock is now privately held, this would further
support rural income. The Government has already begun rehabilitation efforts even without Bank
involvement. Bank involvement would, however, be critical to ensuring that such efforts are sustainable,
generate income for service providers, and provide cost-effective inputs to farmers.

24

69. Choice of Lending Instrument: Turkmenistan is currently an IBRD-only country.
Turkmenistan's GNP per capita ($660 in 1999) has fallen below the IDA operational cut-off ($885
in 1999) as calculated using World Bank Atlas methodology for the past four years. However, this
drop below the cut-off appears temporary, resulting from disruptions in natural gas exports, poor
harvests, and economic mismanagement. With the resumption of significant gas sales to Russia and
Ukraine, Turkmenistan's Atlas GNP per capita is projected to rise over the IDA operational cut-off
during the CAS period, even allowing for limited reform and some depreciation of the exchange
rate. In view of this, it is appropriate for Turkmenistan to remain an IBRD-only country.

70. 
IBRD lending to Turkmenistan is constrained by creditworthiness concerns related to their
high debt and continuing weak economic management (see paras 80-84). As a result, the Bank will
only extend new IBRD loans if there are improvements in debt and budget management, and even in
this case such lending would be tightly limited in size. At the same time, Turkmenistan's
creditworthiness and economic growth - and hence its potential for IBRD lending - would rise if
Turkmenistan pursued a stronger reform path. Both IBRD creditworthiness and IDA-eligibility
indicators will be carefully monitored during the current CAS period.

IFC Program

71. The IFC has undertaken a number of initiatives over the past two years in order to develop an
investment program. These initiatives have included: the hiring of a fulitime local field officer
stationed in the IBRD Ashgabad Office; utilizing outside consultants on four extended missions to
survey the market and identify potential projects and sponsors; technical assistance to project
sponsors for business plan preparation; over 20 missions by IFC headquarters and regional staff to
the country for both promotion and evaluation of potential projects; organizing training seminars for
private businesspeople as well as trade finance seminars for staff of the only two local private banks
in the country; and the preparation of a study by Petroconsultants-MAI, together with EBRD, to
define market needs and a proposed strategy for development of the oil and gas support services
sector. These initiatives, unfortunately, have produced little in the way of investment opportunities
for IFC due to the difficult environment for private sector development as well as continuing
governmental bureaucracy and interference in private enterprises as described in paragraphs 48-53.

72. 
IFC has approved a small loan to a private bank under its Extending IFC's Reach Initiative.
This investment, while small, is the first foreign investment in a local financial institution and is
designed to serve as a best practices model for the banking sector. As part of its investment in the
bank, IFC is providing institution building technical assistance financed by Dutch Trust Funds.
Another approved investment in the dairy industry was subsequently cancelled.

73. 
IFC can envisage a more active investment program in Turkmenistan once the business
environment becomes more conducive to private sector development and foreign investment, though
this is not expected in the near term. As a result, IFC' s role over the next three years covered by this
CAS can be divided into two phases.

* 
Initial Phase: During the current phase, IFC will continue to focus on institution building in the
financial sector, including institutions to serve micro-enterprises, with an enhanced emphasis on
technical assistance and institution building rather than direct project lending. It is anticipated that
IFC will, when possible, work with private service providers which have the capacity to support the

25

oil and gas industry as the lynchpin in private sector development. As part of IFC's institution
building role, it will also seek to support the development of the leasing industry. IFC believes that
leasing is one of the most effective means of channeling capital investment funds to local SMEs. As
part of this initiative, IFC will undertake a study of the market and regulatory environment for
private sector leasing as well as identification of a potential technical partner for establishment of the
first private joint venture leasing company in the country IFC will also look into providing financial
support for micro-enterprises through one or more intermediaries. Total lending under the first
phase scenario is likely to remain below $3 million over the coming three years.

* Second Phase: Should major reforms take place in the country, such as unification of exchange
rates and free access to foreign exchange, removal of trade restrictions, a reduction in governmental
controls and bureaucracy, and elimination of state orders in agriculture, then IFC would see a
stronger investment program and move into the second phase. This scenario would therefore require
deeper reform, particularly on issues affecting the private sector, than the IBRD's triggers for its
second phase (basic lending) scenario. In its second phase, the IFC would play a more active role in
the financing and development of larger financial intermediaries that could play a significant part in
financial intermediation of medium and long-term financing to SMEs. IFC could look at investment
in larger projects as foreign investors become more attracted by a more liberal private sector regime,
particularly those in construction materials, infrastructure as well as the oil and gas production
sector. With the removal of state orders in agriculture and the privatization of the cotton and food
processing industries, IFC could also play a role in the development of processing projects in this
area, both in terms of technical assistance and investment.

Other Bank Group Activities

74. MIGA Activities: MIGA operations in Turkmenistan have been relatively modest. Not many
investors have applied for MIGA coverage. However, in fiscal 1999, MIGA signed its first contract
on Turkmenistan in the manufacturing sector for US$8 million, and this is operating successfully.
Currently, MIGA has one active application and a number of preliminary applications targeting
projects in mining, oil and gas, and manufacturing in Turkmenistan. MIGA's online informnation
systems, IPAnet and PrivatizationLink, feature information on the investment climate and
privatization investment opportunities. These programs cannot be accessed in Turkmenistan due to
underdeveloped internet systems. However, information about Turkmenistan's developing
businesses can be disseminated via these information services, which also serve as tools for outreach
to attract investment in key sectors such as mining, oil, and gas.

75. WBI Activities: WBI has prepared a number of regional seminars, but has not been very
active in Turkmenistan to date. Part of this relates to the fact that the Government has thus far
provided only limited funds for public officials to travel and attend regional seminars. Given the
need for capacity building and training, WBI is exploring the possibility of providing increased
training support, provided the Government also increases its support. Such WBI assistance, if it
materializes, could support both in-country and external training.

26

Partnerships With Other Donors

76. Selectivity and Partnership: 
In light of slower than anticipated reform progress, many
international institutions and donors have pulled back their activities. These include the IMF which
has withdrawn its Resident Representative, the EBRD which has recently prepared a country
strategy which does not contain public sector lending, and USAID which has reduced its assistance
considerably. Turkmenistan has just become a member of the Asian Development Bank, which will
be considering its focus in the coming months. Given the current focus of the EBRD, TACIS, and
the IFC on private sector development, there is arguably a greater role for the Bank to play in public
resource management.

77. Nevertheless, many of the activities that the Bank intends to focus on - improving capacity
within the government, information transparency, and deepening poverty monitoring and analysis -
are generally considered to be high priorities for the donor community. Rather than splitting our
assistance, it would be better to pool each institutions limited capacity and focus together on the top
priorities. Specifically, we intend to work closely with the following partners:

* 
IMF on budget, macro-economics, and tax codes
* USAID on budget improvement, and the water strategy
- UNDP on debt management, NEAP, and the water strategy
- UNICEF on health and the water strategy
- TACIS on tax codes, training, and international accounting
- UK possibly on living standards and statistics
-
Japan and Switzerland on the NEAP
- EBRD is collaborating closely with IFC on several private sector studies
- AsDB possibly on the water strategy and public procurement

78. The proposed "National Economic Forum" would be developed in close collaboration with the
Government and all other donors, providing them an opportunity to bring their expertise to the
forefront. Since there is no Consultative Group for Turkmenistan, this would help to build a shared
understanding between the Government and donors of the challenges ahead, and provide a
mechanism to deepen coordination.

Program Performance Indicators

79. The Government has developed a set of long term goals, as expressed in their 10 year National
Program. Based on this, and an analysis of living standards, the Bank has compiled a set of five
priority challenges outlined in Chapter III, and identified a number of near term performance
benchmarks for each that are listed in Annex Table B9. Table 4 below extracts some of the key
government goals and near term performance benchmarks to be monitored over the CAS period.
Since there is limited data available, these benchmarks concentrate on the establishment of good
information and plans as a first step. 
It should be noted that while the Bank can support
Turkmenistan in achieving some of these near term goals, the Bank will have limited avenues of
support over the CAS period; most of them will depend more on the commitment of the
Government. For the Bank's own portfolio, new lending is conditioned on raising the number of
projects rated satisfactory. The Bank will continue regular consultations with the Government,
donors, and civil society, as was done as part of this CAS (see Annex 3), to gain further feedback.

27

Table 4: Selected Performance Indicator:
Governent Long Term Goals a/ 
Bia Near Term Bechmarks

Publk 

-- Eliminate all extra-budget accounts 
-- Include all investments in budget with 
analysis of rates of return 
Management -- Centralize debt repayment under budget 
-- Introduce internat'l accounting standards 

Resource 

Healthnd 

5 

sociai 

Sekes 

-- Education expenditures to reach 10% of GDP 
-- Teaching to meet world standards 
-- Health care expenditures to reach 7% of GDP 
-- Vaccinate up to 99% of children 
-- Water, gas, electricity to be free up to a limit 

from 2000-2005

S 

Sec 0 

: 

An ffcient 

Rural 

Private 

Economy2 0 

-- 57% of land to be under private ownership 
-- Double cotton and wheat production 
-- Construct new hydro/pumping stations 
-- Establish market based foreign exchange 
system 
tor 
-- Liquidate bureaucratic obstacles to private 
Development -- businesses. 
Non-government share of GDP to rise to 67% 
-- Private housing share to increase to 90% 
-- provide quality drinking water and reduce 
harmful chemicals in agriculture 
-- Prevent disaster in Aral Sea region

:Environment 

Protection of 

0 

Portfolio 0 0a 
Performane ;rated 

-- Adoption of an effective plan to rationalize the
FERF
-- Wide dissemination of the full budget
-- Submission of debt reports to Debt Reporting
Service
-- Adoption of a Public Procurement Law
-- Improved dissemination of macroeconomic data
-- Improved country approach to poverty
monitoring and targeting.
-- Increase in % of population with access to safe
water. Build a framework for introducing
water charges for conservation & maintenance.

-- Gradual increase in % of private farmers
-- Gradual reduction in % sold via state orders.
-- Cost recovery for agriculture water at least 20%
-- Improved access to foreign exchange at a single
rate
-- Exemption of most private sector transactions
from registration in the commodity exchange.
separated from ministries and commercialized
-- Publication of an effective National
Environmental Action Plan (NEAP)

Creation of a list of public companies to be

-- Improvement in the number of on-going loans

satisfactory

a/ goals for 2010 as stated in the 10-Year National Programme

V. Managing Risks and Uncertainties

80. Creditworthiness: Turkmenistan has an unusual position among developing countries as
both a major debtor and a major creditor. In January 2000 Fitch IBCA confirmed Turkmenistan's
long-term sovereign rating of B- . Moody's has given a rating of B2 to Turkmenistan's long term
foreign currency bonds. These ratings both indicate significant risk and are below investment grade.
They reflect on the one hand a rising debt service burden and limited debt management capacity but
on the other hand large foreign exchange reserves. Reserves are estimated at $1.7 billion, equal to 14
months of exports, although part of the reserves may not be freely available. However, while the
short term outlook for oil and gas sales remains strong, Turkmenistan's failure to be transparent
about public investments and its debt (about 50 percent of GDP) and debt service (about 15 percent
of exports) could hurt its creditworthiness. At this level, debt is worrisome, but not unmanageable
with appropriate borrowing controls, adequate reserves, and growing exports. However, in the
absence of good debt and public investment management, payment difficulties to several
international creditors have arisen in the past, and may continue to occur periodically. Turkmenistan
also faces several investment disputes with foreign investors.

28

81. Turkmenistan contends that its debt situation should be considered in light of the fact that it is
a large creditor of other CIS countries with claims of around $1.2 billion2 2 for gas deliveries as well
as uncleared balances dating back to the collapse of the Soviet Union. However, much of this is not
currently being serviced, or is being paid in-kind at inflated prices. Turkmenistan has thus far
resisted participating in Paris Club relief efforts for countries where it has outstanding loans.

82. Risk: Turkmenistan has large potential for exports of oil and gas which if properly managed
can boost economic growth and generate sufficient foreign exchange resources to service debt. The
high growth rates achieved in 1999 and projected for 2000 were in fact triggered by increased
exports of gas. If agreement is reached and maintained between Russia and Turkmenistan on a long
term gas delivery contract, if public resources are well managed, and if progress continues towards
addressing the major constraints to private sector development, the prospects for growth and foreign
exchange earnings appear to be good. The main risks to the economy are:

(i) Heavy Reliance on Energy Exports: Oil and gas export earnings could fluctuate
significantly because of price changes or because of demand changes, pipeline delivery
disruption or payment difficulties in key markets (such as Russia, Iran and Ukraine). The
potential for disruption can be mitigated by accelerating market reforms which will permit
more diversified private sector led growth. Especially important in this regard are agricultural
reforms, liberalization of the trade and exchange rate regime, and elimination of various
registration/licensing requirements that inhibit the private sector.

(ii) Heavy Reliance on Water Intensive Agriculture: Beyond energy, the most important
sector for Turkmenistan is agriculture, in which about half the population is employed. Since
rainfall is limited, Turkmenistan relies on an extensive irrigation infrastructure inherited from
the former Soviet Union. However, over time, water intensive agriculture will act to reduce
yields by increasing salinization. It will be important for Turkmenistan to begin to reduce
water usage, which should be feasible with appropriate incentives and support. Water
intensive agriculture also increases the need for greater cooperation with other users of the
Amu Darya (Tajikistan, Uzbekistan).

(iii) Weak Public Resource Management: As already noted, public resource management is
in need of significant improvement. The state budget managed by the Ministry of Economy
and Finance covers only a small fraction of public resources. The rest is managed through
extra-budget funds and ministries that follow their own sectoral priorities and often support
uneconomic investments. There is still no effective system for external debt management and
debt and debt service levels appear to have reached worrisome levels. Lack of reliable
information on basic economic parameters such as the full budget and external debt further
undermines efficient economic management and confidence. Measures to bring about
transparency and rationality in the budget and debt management process are critical.

(iv) Slow Transition to a Market Economy: Growth prospects also will depend on how
quickly market oriented reforms are implemented. Price controls remain for many
commodities, services, and utilities; trade and foreign exchange controls are still significant.
Privatization beyond small companies has stalled, and the general business environment has
not yet attracted significant foreign investment nor national private sector growth. 
In
agriculture, there has been some transfer of land ownership to private farmers, but state orders
for wheat and cotton are still prevalent. Many public enterprises continue to operate to a large

22 Most of them on Ukraine, Georgia, and other CIS countries.

29

degree through non-cash transactions, and benefit from large scale subsidies, explicit and
hidden. To obtain the benefit of private sector growth, the environment for private sector
development must be improved, and the state needs to focus on non-commercial activities.

83. As far as the Bank is concerned, notwithstanding periodic short term arrears due to poor debt
management, risk is limited by the low level of debt. The Bank's share in total debt is currently
extremely small (about $29 million outstanding) in comparison to Turkmenistan's total debt
outstanding (estimated at about $2.3 billion), and is expected to remain below 3 percent even if
lending is resumed. New lending is contingent on resolving the Negative Pledge Clause violation
and agreed actions to better manage public resources and debt. In such a scenario, the debt service
to export ratio is expected to level off at about 15%, which, while grounds for caution, is within
limited creditworthiness parameters.

84. Finally, Turkmenistan's economic development is closely linked to other Central Asian
countries. Regional cooperation in water usage, in power generation, in trade, in pipeline
development, in knowledge sharing, and in environment will have a large impact on development in
Turkmenistan as well as other Central Asian countries. Bank supported activities will, therefore,
need to be considered against regional issues and concerns, as well as national priorities.

VI. Concluding Remarks

85. With good near term growth prospects, but also an economy with substantial risks,
Turkmenistan now has an important window of opportunity to accelerate reform while avoiding the
social disruption that has plagued other CIS countries. The Government has a National Program
which includes a number of important goals, but it has yet to translate these goals into appropriate
concrete action plans. The Bank will therefore match its program of assistance to Turkmenistan's
progress on reform, and assist Turkmenistan in the near term mainly by providing non-lending
support for building economic capacity within the government, improving information flows, and
deepening living standards monitoring and analysis mechanisms.

86. Although moving beyond this role is likely to prove extremely difficult, the CAS sets out a
road-map of first-step actions necessary to jump-start the reform process, and enable the Bank to
resume lending. A central element of this is improved public resource management, including
strengthened budget and debt management, and the rational reform of the Foreign Exchange Reserve
Fund (FERF). If basic conditions for lending are met, the Bank would extend a small lending
program aimed at priority human development needs, disaster prevention, and rural development.
This approach should help establish a stronger foundation for a more ambitious Bank program of
support in a few years, if the government decides to move forward at a faster pace.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By: Sven Sandstrom

Washington, D.C.
December 22, 2000

30

ANNEX 1:

CABINET OF MINISTERS
TURKMENISTAN

Reference No. 13-2252
December 19, 2000

Mr. Kiyoshi Kodera
Director
Central Asia Country Unit
The World Bank

Dear Mr. Kodera:

I would like to express my appreciation to you and to your team for your intensive work during the
last few months to prepare a new Country Assistance Strategy for Turkmenistan that will determine
the future direction of our mutually beneficial cooperation.

We view the World Bank as a reliable partner that provides necessary technical assistance and
finances priority areas in the development program of Turkmenistan. In the process of preparing
the CAS we had the opportunity to discuss in a productive manner the main parameters of economic
policy and challenges that we face in the period of transition to a market economy. Despite the fact
that we pursue common development objectives -
the rational use of public resources, the
liberalization of exchange rate and trade regimes, speeding up the privatization process and
agricultural reform - we do not always agree on the issue of how best to achieve these objectives.
We think that a gradual approach in addressing these issues is the most reliable path in making the
difficult transition from our recent past to the sustainable productive development of our state. We
are very interested in continuing constructive cooperation with the World Bank; however,
unfortunately, we should note that the World Bank's lending is small. I would also like to note that
this CAS does not quite objectively reflect the current situation and the long term development
strategy of the Government of Turkmenistan.

Immediately after Turkmenistan became independent, the country declared and started to implement
with the utmost priority a policy of social protection for its people and guarantees against poverty,
which has allowed us to ensure social and political stability and build confidence in the reform
policy being pursued. Turkmenistan, in addressing the challenges of transition, is taking significant
steps to promote economic growth and to improve the well-being of its people. I would like to share
with you several examples of the results of these efforts.

a From January to October 2000 the growth of GDP was 17% over the same period a year ago.
There was a significant improvement in performance in the main sectors of the economy.
Industrial output increased by 23% in comparable prices, including the electric-power complex
(by 11%), energy/fuel sector (by 71%), chemical industry (by 19%), and the textile industry
(17%). Agriculture output rose by 18%.

31

* As a result of positive trends in the real sector of the Turkmen economy and an increase in the
income of economic entities, the state budget of Turkmenistan for January-October 2000 had a
surplus in the amount of over 205 billion Manats.

 The income of domestic enterprises and organizations during 10 months amounted to 2.4 trillion
Manats, 2.5 times higher than last year's figure for the same period.

* From January to October 2000, capital investment in economic development was 8% higher than
in the similar period last year. This increase in capital investment has been mostly brought about
by relatively high growth rates of public investment (130%), foreign investments (111%) and
other investments (175%).

(We have provided additional comments regarding several indicators in the CAS tables:
Turkmenistan at a Glance, Poverty and Social Indicators).

With your permission I would like to focus your attention on the future development program of the
Government of Turkmenistan. As stated in the CAS, the further development of social and
economic policy is reflected in the National Program of the President of Turkmenistan "Strategy of
Socio-economic Development of Turkmenistan for the period up to 2010". It envisages continuing
the priority policy of social programs, taking into consideration economic realities which have
formed during the years of independence. In the next ten years economic reform will be directed at
intensifying the structural reform process; further introduction of market relations; improvement of
economic management mechanisms; development of progressive forms of ownership, modes of
production and methods of administration; as well as the creation of a favorable environment for
investments. Economic growth by itself cannot guarantee the well being of the people, it can only
create the necessary conditions and prerequisites for this. Hence, significant attention is given to
strong and systemic efforts to address social issues. The key objective of our social policy up to
2010 is to increase living standards and improve health care, to increase the educational level of
people, as well as to provide targeted social protection to the most vulnerable groups. In the course
of reforms, the non-public sector of economy will be further developed. The number of private
enterprises will significantly increase. These changes will be brought about by the development of
private and mixed forms of ownership, speeding up of the privatization process and improvement of
the environment for the efficient development of the private sector.

I would like to cover several issues that impede new lending by the World Bank - the negative
pledge clause and foreign debt reporting. As to the first issue, we have made numerous efforts to
resolve this problem with the representatives of concerned banks. These efforts have not been quite
effective; therefore we are in the process of identifying other mutually acceptable ways to solve this
problem. We understand your concerns about delays in providing information on foreign debt. But
this is related to purely technical problems and an inadequate system for collecting and analyzing
data. As we have already discussed, we are taking steps to strengthen our foreign debt management
system with the assistance of an adviser financed by the World Bank. 
I can assure you that a
foreign debt report will be presented to you by the end of the first quarter in 2001.

32

I would like to assure you again that the goal of the Government of Turkmenistan is to make
Turlnenistan a prosperous country, a secure home for everyone. All the government programs of
independent Turkmenistan have been developed with the objective of achieving a continuous
increase in the welfare of its people and the inviolability of their rights. In view of this, we welcome
the preparation of new Country Assistance Strategy for Turkmenistan and hope that it will become a
cornerstone for our further cooperation.

Sincerely,

Seitbay Kandymov
Deputy Chairman
Cabinet of Ministers

cc: Mr. M. Meyer, Executive Director, the World Bank

33

ANNEX 2:

STATUS OF PROJECTS UNDER EXECUTION

Institution Building/Technical Assistance (L 3791).

Loan Amount: US$25 million; Effectiveness Date: July 20, 1995; Closin' Date: December 31, 2001

Status: 
Implementation under this project was curtailed in March, 1998 due to the suspension of
disbursements in Turkmenistan. During this period, the bulk of the funds were cancelled. The Bank lifted
the suspension on disbursements for this Loan in June, 1999. Subsequently, the Bank and the Government
agreed to extend the closing date, to re-instate funds and refocus these funds on improvement and
computerization of the budget, tax and pension systems.
Strategv for Implementation: This project, as refocused, is considered to be of vital importance to improving
public resource management (a key goal of the current CAS). USAID assisted the Government in submitted
a detailed plan to refocus the funding on budget consolidation and computerization in March, 2000, as a result
of which the Bank extended the closing date to December 31, 2001. After some modest adjustments to the
plan (including the inclusion of funding for a PIU Unit), in August the Bank agreed to re-instate $9.2 million
of earlier cancelled funds for this purpose. The Government has appointed a PIU Director and is in the
process of hiring a budget/treasury expert to help guide the process. USAID may provide parallel technical
support.

Water Supply and Sanitation Project (L4171)

Loan Amount: US$30.30 million; Effectiveness Date: August 15, 1997: Closing Date: February 28, 2004

Status: The Bank suspended disbursement on all Bank-financed projects on March, 1998. The suspension
was lifted in June, 1999. Since then, the Bank has agreed with the Government to restructure the civil works
component into two parts: (i) urgent rehabilitation carried out through government's force account; and (ii) a
larger main civil works contract to be redefined with more precise detailed engineering. The first phase of the
urgent rehabilitation has been completed and the government is preparing the bidding documents for the
second phase. Consultants for the institutional and policy studies have been hired. The undisbursed balance
is currently about US$28 million.
Strategy for Implementation: The project is considered to be of vital importance in addressing a key cause of
Turkmenistan's serious health problems (poor water quality and supply). In the past, it has suffered from
both procurement difficulties, as well as limited progress towards increased water pricing. In August, 2000
the Government changed PIU staff as well as decentralized some decision making to improve procurement
implementation. The project is also funding the preparation of a strategy to achieve improved water
management and pricing, necessary to ensure that pumps are well maintained. This process should be
facilitated by a parallel effort, the Water Strategy.

Urban Transport (L 4170)

Loan Amount: US$34.20 million; Effectiveness Date: August 19, 1997; Closing Date: December 31, 2001

Status: Implementation of the investment part of the project has made good progress since the suspension of
disbursements on all Bank projects was lifted in June 1999. Two major contracts for the purchase of 100
urban buses and 46 trolley-buses were signed. All the buses have been delivered now as well as 16 trolley-
buses with the completion of that contract expected soon. In addition, about US$1.0 million of spare parts
have been, or are being, procured. However, almost no progress has taken place regarding urban transport
sector policies and institutions, and the financial framework under which the sector operates. Most
problematic are the poor cost recovery (about 20% excluding depreciation), the absence of sound institution
to manage the sector, and the lack of policy to involve private operators in the provision of urban transport
services. The undisbursed balance is currently about US$13 million.
Strategv for Implementation: In July, the Bank communicated to the Government that in order to proceed
with the project, an acceptable action plan necessary to address the above noted issues would need to be
provided to the Bank. While Turkmenistan has responded with an action plan, it is not clear at this time if the
Government's plan is sufficient and a mutually agreed approach is achievable. Disbursements have been
suspended as of December 31, 2000, pending resolution of outstanding issues.

34

ANNEX 3

ROUND TABLE DISCUSSIONS WITH NGOS AND THE PRIVATE
SECTOR

Minutes of Round-Table Discussion with NGOs

(Held in Ashgabat on the 1 7 th of May, 2000)

The Purpose of the Roundtable discussion was to hear the view of the civil society
organizations on the issues they consider of priority in Turkmenistan, in order to take account of
these issues in the World Banks new Country Assistance Strategy. The agenda focused on issues
relevant to the field of each NGO as well as crosscutting issues such as constraints faced in their
activities.

Points Raised:

-

Private Sector Participants generally expressed a belief that the development of the private
sector in Turkmenistan is key in improving the situation of ordinary people, but pointed to a
number of issues which need to be addressed:
1. The conditions for starting business are difficult, generally entrepreneurs need
support to understand the legal requirements, and women in particular are ill-
informed about the opportunities and their right to engage in business. Inadequate
application of existing legislation hampers private sector development
2. The private Sector can supply services in the interest of the public which at present
are not adequately provided by government, such as private medical care, but more
needs to be done to support the development of enterprise in this sector
3. Private sector development increases need for consumer protection

* Registration: Some participants emphasised the problems that arise from the absence of clear
legislation on NGO activities, and the failure to obtain legal status as organisations.
1. Many NGOs are functioning without registration, because though they have applied for
licenses their cases have stalled within the relevant ministry.
2. The government does not directly interfere with the activities of the NGOs but on the other
hand does not register them, thus preventing them from engaging in a number of activities
which would benefit people and enable the NGOs to raise funds.
3. The absence of legal status makes it difficult for NGOs to lobby the legislative assembly and
other government organs for their issues.

* Legislation:
1. Many participants stressed that Turkmenistan has an adequate legal framework but the laws
are not consistently applied.
2. There are inconsistencies in the legal framework between regulations, laws, and decrees
3. Civil Servants do not seem to know how to apply the legislation
4. People are often not familiar with the law and therefore do not know their rights

* Media Coverage:
1. Participants raised the issue of problems in obtaining coverage for NGO issues (ranging from
ecology to consumer rights) in the media (which is state-controlled)

35

2. Getting material on relevant issues to the public in a language they can understand as much
material distributed for public information is distributed in Russian (which is not perfectly
understood by the whole population)

* Suggestions of the participants:
1. Consolidating the legal framework, removing the contradictions in the existing legal
framework.
2. Training civil servants and users of the law together to bring clarity into the application of the
law.
3. The establishment of a centre by the government to support entrepreneurs with legal advice
4. The establishment of a clear law on NGO activity
5. Pushing for the legal status which will enable NGOs to conduct activities for general and
fundraising purposes
6. As regards the problem of obtaining public coverage of NGOs special fields on participant
suggested co-operation amongst NGOs themselves might overcome this issue, through taking
advantage of economies of scale in publication and writing of materials.
7. Greater consolidation among NGOs would boost their impact and fund-raising abilities.
8. Greater attention should be paid to activities taking place outside Ashgabat
9. Water quality and supply should be a top sectoral priority
10. Income-generating community efforts should receive more attention
11. It would be beneficial to have support from the international community through further
conferences or roundtables for dissemination of information.

All participants agreed that the meeting had been useful but suggested that perhaps in the
future more would be gained by providing a more clearly defined agenda developed by NGOs
themselves. Furthermore, it was suggested that in the future such consultations should be divided
by area of interest/work to enable more NGOs to participate and provide more detail on their
special areas.

Round-Table Discussion with the Private Sector

(Held in Ashgabat on the 19'* of May, 2000)

The purpose of the Private Sector Round Table was to hear from different people, who work as
entrepreneurs, what the environment is for the private sector activity in the country, what major
obstacles they face from the state authorities, banking sector, how they are protected by
legislation, and what they would like to change in future. This information would be used as part
of the World Bank Country Assistance Strategy.

Topics discussed:
1. Financial issues (banking, finance, taxation)
2. Trade (import, export, money investment)
3. Legal issues (licensing, inspection, standards)

* Finance and Trade: In terms of financial issues there is a problem of conversion.
Lack of hard currency and limited access to the currency auctions of the CBT;

-

36

Exchange rate;
The procedures to obtain currency are too onerous
Registration by State Commodity Exchange and Customs are time consuming and
inconsistent with current laws;
The State Commodity Exchange and the CBT limit the rights of investors to utilize the
capital
The Custom Agency requires a quality certificate, which is not easy to obtain from
Gosstandards

-
-

* Registration and Licensing: Some participants raised the problems faced in obtaining licenses
and registration for a private company.
The private sector needs to understand the legal issues.
Many private companies are operating without registration. They have applied for
licenses but still have not received appropriate response from relevant ministries;
The absence of the necessary licenses hampers the commercial activities ( to
as from obtaining credits for investments and restructuring their businesses.)

-

-

* Legislation:
Many participants noted that Turkmenistan has an adequate legal framework, but the
application of laws in practice is not clear either to state authorities nor entrepreneurs;
Entrepreneurs expressed frustration at the lack of accountability of the civil servants
making decisions.
There are contradiction between newer legislation in support of private activity and older
rules and regulations
There is considerable duplication of documentation in the legal processes, placing a
excessive burden on businesses.
People do not seem to know the legislation therefore they do not know their rights;

-

Suggestions from the participants:
1. Consolidation of the legislation related to the private sector in one place;
2. Timely publication of all new laws;
3. Application of existing laws in a transparent manner in legislation;
4. Training of government officials on the new legislation and its practical application;
5. Documentation: submission and registration processes to be reduced and simplified;
6. Allocation and conversion of currency and obtaining licenses should be a more transparent
process, including knowing why one is turned down
7. Importers should be able to obtain and hold foreign currency to open up letters of credit
8. Exporters would like grater knowledge of trade preferences provided to them by developed
countries
9. Trade registration should be with customs not the State Commodity Exchange
10. Local governments should be authorized to make sure State bodies help entrepreneurs

All participants agreed that the Roundtable was very useful. It was suggested that in the future
representatives from the Cabinet of Ministers, Central Bank, and Customs should also be invited,
to create a dialogue between the private sector and the State. The importance of creating a
positive investment image for Turkmenistan also stressed. Furthermore, they thanked World
Bank for organization of the Roundtable.

37

Annex 4

KEY REFORMS NEEDED FOR LENDING BEYOND THE BASE CASE

1. 

Exchange Rate Regime

Background
Turkmenistan has had convertibility restrictions since independence in 1991. Several attempts to
eliminate the restrictions and unify rates ended in reversals. The latest attempt was in 1998. A
devaluation of the official exchange rate from 4,165 to 5,200 Manat/$ on April 17 eliminated the
gap between the official and market exchange rate, and was accompanied by the elimination of
some controls. A reference exchange rate for the use by commercial banks, which was about 20%
lower than the official rate, was replaced by a maximum percentage limit by which comnmercial
banks could deviate from the official rate. Foreign exchange market stability was maintained for
three months with the Central Bank intervening to keep the official exchange rate at 5,200
Manat/$. However, following the Russian financial crisis in 1999, other CIS countries sharply
devalued their currency and there was market pressure on Turkmenistan as well. Turkmenistan
resisted this pressure, keeping the exchange rate fixed by tightening access to the official rate.
This allowed Turkmenistan to keep inflation down, but also resulted in a large Manat
depreciation in the curb market.

Current Status of Constraints
While Turkmenistan maintains a single official exchange rate, this has been accompanied by a
large gap with the curb market and the imposition of severe foreign exchange access restrictions.
In December 1998 currency trading between commercial banks was suspended. Domestic
enterprises and individuals can now purchase foreign exchange only at weekly auctions at the
Central Bank currency exchange (ICE).

Enterprises regardless of their form of ownership are allowed to purchase foreign exchange at
ICE auctions exclusively for the following purposes: (i) repayment of publicly-guaranteed loans,
(ii) repatriation of foreign direct investments and related profits, (iii) import of medicines, raw
materials, and other production inputs, (iv) purchases of machinery and inputs under foreign
credit lines, and (v) import of consumer goods (except alcohol and tobacco products) provided
the goods will be sold in Turkmenistan marked up no more than 30% over the official price
converted into Manat at official rate. Individuals can purchase foreign exchange only for: (i)
medical treatment abroad, (ii) studies abroad, and (iii) official travel abroad. The CBT and
Foreign Currency Committee carefully screen bids submitted for the auctions to enforce the
above regulations.

In January 2000, in an attempt to stem capital flight, additional requirements were imposed.. To
have access to foreign exchange, enterprises and individuals should demonstrate that, in addition
to meeting the above conditions, they: (i) have no tax arrears in Turkmenistan, (ii) are current on
their loans received from Turkmen banks, (iii) have no wage arrears and arrears to extrabudgetary
funds in Turkmenistan, (iv) comply with currency circulation regulations, including compliance
with limits on cash in safe and daily reporting of cash flows, and (v) have a contract directly with
the producer of goods to be imported.

Exporters face additional restrictions. Currently most state enterprises except cotton and gas
exporters are required to sell 50% of their export earnings in hard currency through commercial
banks at ICE auctions at an official rate. Gas exporters are required to surrender 25% of their
export earnings at Central Bank auctions, and also pay another 50% of their foreign exchange

38

earnings without conversion as a transfer to the Foreign Exchange Reserve Fund. Oil exporters
also transfer a portion of their earnings to the Foreign Exchange Reserve Fund and the Oil and
Gas Fund. Earnings of cotton exporters are taxed and/or sold at the auctions on an annual basis,
normally resulting in about a 33% transfer to the Foreign Exchange Reserve Fund.

Privately-owned enterprises are not subject to surrender requirements but they are at a
disadvantage when trying to buy foreign exchange at the auctions. Enterprises can hold and use
without restrictions foreign currency in their bank accounts after all the currency surrender
requirements have been met. This acts to place importers at a disadvantage as compared to
exporters. Without assured access to foreign exchange, importers are unable to open letters of
credit. In addition, a Presidential Decree of March 29, 2000 states that preference must be given
in allocation of foreign exchange to those involved in import substitution activities.

Recently, Turkmenistan has indicated its intention to begin to unify the exchange rate, and has
started to pilot the use of an exchange rate between the official and black market for a few state
owned energy enterprises.

Reform Program Suggzested
The Foreign Exchange Reserve Fund is substantial, with an estimated level of about $1.7 billion,
about 14 months of exports. However, while administratively under the Central Bank, it has
traditionally been used as a tool for extra-budgetary public investments rather than as a tool for
the Central Bank. To move towards a more market based exchange rate, a first step would be for
the Central Bank (CBT) to have management control over an adequate level of foreign exchange
reserves for use in exchange rate management.

Second, the auctions conducted by the CBT needs to be liberalized by terminating the screening
of bids (other than through a small negative list) and allowing universal access to the auctions. In
parallel, the inter-bank market for foreign exchange should be re-opened and restrictions on
commercial bank forex transactions with enterprises (both exporters and importers) and
individuals be lifted to attract transactions that are currently carried out in the black market.
Together with tight financial policies, the parallel rate and the adjusted official rate will move
closer and stabilize the exchange market.

2. State Order System in Agriculture

Backg.round
Following disastrous harvests in 1996, the authorities initiated a program of significant land
reform. Under the reform, members of farners' associations (former kolkhoses) by the end of
1998 physically received plots of land, normally between 2 and 20 hectares, on a 10-year lease.
After the lease expiration, the land was to be transferred to private ownership of the leaseholders
(although land transfers outside of the immediate family would still be restricted). During the
leasing period the farmer officially has freedom to make crop decisions, but in practice most
transactions continue through the state order which provides farmers with subsidized inputs such
as fertilizer and bank credit, but buys crops from farmers at below-market prices.

By 1999 over 80 % of arable land has been leased under the land reform program. Further, the
leasing period after which a farmer could receive private ownership rights for the plot was
shortened to 2 years provided the farm has performed satisfactorily during the leasing period and
the farmer has demonstrated skills required to run a private farm. After getting private ownership
rights for the land, farmers have been promised full independence to choose the crops to be
grown and prices at which to sell them. However, private ownership does not include the right to

39

sell land outside of the family nor to use the land as collateral for bank loans.

With the 2-year probation leasing period coming to an end for most farmers, only a limited
number of leaseholds have been given private ownership certificates. Authorities have been
reluctant to convert leaseholds, especially those growing cotton, into private property. The
authorities cite reasons like failure to meet government production targets during the probation
period or lack of experience in private farming in rejecting the applications for private ownership
certificates. Lengthy procedures to obtain the required application clearances from a multi-layer
hierarchy starting with management of the farmers' association and all the way to the State
Commission for Land Reform has also been a deterrent.

Current Status of Constraints
Although private farms and leaseholds that produce their crops without government subsidies can
formally sell their output outside the state order system at market prices, the government can
affect their decisions through land reallocation (revoking of leases), input supplies (curtailing
access to farm machinery), or limiting financing available through state banks. In practice,
leaseholds producing cotton, grain, and sugar beets (which cover 75% of arable land) continue to
operate almost exclusively within a state order system.
Under the system, the government provides subsidized inputs, low-interest (0-2% per year) bank
financing through the specialized state agricultural bank Daykhanbank, and virtually free water
while purchasing harvested crops at procurement prices that are 50-60% of the world prices and
less than 20% when valued at the black market rate. Some have estimated that these prices, net of
subsidized water, fertilizers, and other inputs, resulted in a real transfer of resources from
agriculture to the rest of the economy equal to 15% of GDP. The fact that state order system
keeps farmers from growing and marketing alternative crops which have higher margins serves as
an additional significant hidden burden on farmers and leaseholds.

Reform P 
dgram Sugkested
The reform agenda should include phasing out of state order system combined with the gradual
elimination of input subsidies and admninistrative interference with production decisions. Prompt
conversion of leaseholds into private farms with minimum red tape will also be critical. With the
lifting of the state order, private traders, including international concerns, must be allowed into
the market. Beyond this, an acceleration of the agro-industrial privatization and private sector
investment in new marketing, storage and cotton ginning will ensure that the growth of private
farming is not constrained by state-owned agricultural infrastructure.

3. State Commodity Exchange

BackR round
The State Commodity Exchange (SCE) was established in 1994 to help match buyers and sellers
in the economy. In 1995-1996 the powers of the State Commodity Exchange were substantially
expanded to include the regulation of all the domestic and international trade transactions,
including those that are not concluded at the exchange. Currently, almost all trade contracts, both
domestic and international, including barter transactions but excluding oil and gas exports, that
have a value in excess of Manat 30 mn. ($5,700 at the official exchange rate) must be registered
with the SCE. The requirement applies both to state-owned and private enterprises. Contracts
may not be approved if the terms are not considered to be favorable for Turkmenistan. An export
contract should not be underinvoiced compared to an "average" world price and goods to be
exported should be in sufficient supply in the domestic market. Some products, including certain
foodstuffs are prohibited from being exported. As a world price reference, SCE uses a variety of
databases, including searches on the Internet. Import and domestic contracts are also checked for

40

over or underinvoicing using the same reference methods. If there is a domestic producer of the
product to be imported, imports contract may be prohibited or a surcharge required.

Current Status of Constraints
Experience has shown that the registration process is time-consuming, and costly for businesses.
Enterprise surveys indicate that only around half of businesses manage to complete contract
registration process in less than 2 weeks and it takes some enterprises several months to register a
contract. Delays with import contracts registration mean that import shipments cannot be cleared
through the Customs and have to be stored in the warehouses charging steep fees. Differences
over "appropriate" prices have led producers to import inferior products. The requirement that
the imported goods are resold in the domestic market at the registered price lead to a loss of
flexibility by the businesses in case of a change in market conditions (discounting price in case of
inventory accumulation or product aging). SCE assesses a fee of 0.4% of the contract value.
Opportunities for rent-seeking at the SCE are not uncommon.

Reforn Program Suggested
The role of the SCE must be re-considered. Requirements for the registration and price review of
arms-length commercial transactions between private entities should be stopped. Under-invoicing
is best prevented by maintaining appropriate exchange rate policies and by strengthening customs
regulations and capabilities. The SCE should be restructured to fulfil its original objective -
facilitate trading in standardized cash commodities on a voluntary basis - with a possible
addition of advisory services on a strictly voluntary basis on issues such as marketing, search for
business partners, or risk reducing strategies.

41

ANNEX 5:

TURKMENISTAN'S GROWING KNOWLEDGE BASE

PUBLIC SEeJ0OR MNGMT 

POViIRTYI ' XAL SRUTO8R 

PFRVAT1WSE4~rOR 

DR. 

RURLDEVJENV. 

ENERGY

EFFECTIVE FISCAL MNGMT * LIVING STANDARDS SURVEY * CAPITAL 
MARKETS * AG. SECTOR REVIEW 
(IMF, 97) 
(WB,00) 
REVIEW (USAID, 99) 
(WB, 97) 

* ENERGY SECTOR STUDY
(WB, 95)

PUBLIC 
EXPENDITURE * EMPLOYMENT 
REVIEW (WB, 98) 
(GoV,00) 

REPORT * ASSESSMENT 
OF * 
FOREIGN TRADE REGIME 
(USAID, 00) 

FARM SURVEY (WB,00) 

* ENERGY EXPORT
PROSPECTS (WB,00)

* 

* 

* 

PROGRAM OF BUDGETARY * EDUCATION 
IMPROVEMENT (USAID, 
(GOV,99) 
00) 

FOR 

ALL 

* COMMENTS ON DRAFr TAX 
CODE (WB, 00) 

* HuMAN DEVLPMT REPORT 
(GOVIUNDP, 99) 

* EDUCATION SECTOR REVIEW 
(UNDP, 97)

* DASHKHOWVUZ:REGIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
(WB, 98)

* RATIONALIZING THE HEALTH
SECTOR (WB, 97)

* WATER SUPPLY AND
SANITATION: NEEDS
ASSESSMENT (WB 95)

* ENERGY SERVICES (EBRD,
IFC, 00)

* ENERGY TAXATION (WB,
00)

* BURDEN 
OF 
POLICIES (IMF,00) 

AGRIC

* ADMINSTRATIVE AND 
REGULATORY ENV. FOR * 
BUSINESS (USAID, 00) 

STRATEGY FOR AGRIC
INVESTMENTS (EU,99) 

* TURKMENISTAN AGRIC
DEV. (USAID, 98)

* RED BOOK ON FLAURA AND
FAUNA (UNDP, 00)

42

CAS TABLE A2

Turkmenistan at a glance 

12/19/00

Euroos &
Central 
Asia 

POVERTY aWn SOCIAL 

Low-
Income 

Turkmenbstan 

Delpment diamond

1999
Population, mid-vear (millions) 
GNP Der capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNP (Atlas method. US$ billions) 
Averaq annuat arowth. 1993-99
Population (%l 
Labor force f%l 

4.8 
660 
3.2 

475 
2.150 
1.022 

2,417 
410
988

Ule expectancy

2.1 
2.5 

0.1 
0.6 

1.9
2.3 

GNP 

Gross

per 

prImary

Moat recent etimate (latest vear available. 1993-99) 
Poverty (% of population below national povertv line)-- 
Urban population (% of total opoulaton) 
Life expectancv at birth (vears) 
Infant mortalitv (per 1.000 lve births).- 
Child malnutritlon (% of children under 5) 
Access to improved water source (% of pooulation) 
Illiteracv (% of Population ace 15+) 
Gross Drlmary enrollment /% of school-ace populaton) 
Male 
Female 

capita 

enrollment

58
44 
66 
33 

67 
69 
22 

31
60
77
43 
64
39 
96
102 
86

.. 

Access to safe water

61 
1 
93 
93 
93 

.. 

3 
100 
101 
99 

Turamenssn

Low-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1979 

199 

1998 
2.9 
45.5 
29.7 
10.8 
12.8 

1999
3.3
46.3
41.6 
26.0
29.0

GDP (US$ billions at official exchanae rate) 
Gross domestic InvestmentVGDP 
ExDorts of moods and services/GDP 
Gross domestc savina/sGDP 
Gross national savinqslGDP 
Current account balancelGDP 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

35.2 

.. 

Trade

26.1 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

-32.7 
2.3 
79.2 
32.0 
74.2 
217.1 

-17.3
2.4 
70.0 
32.0
B5.6
145.0

Interest pavmentstGDP 

Domestic 
SavIngs

Inveatma nt

Total debVGDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present valuie of debUtGDP 
Present value of debtexDorts 

.

.. 

.. 

.. 

Indebtedness

1979-8 1989-99 

1996 

1999 1999-03

(averace annual cr0 wth)

GDP 
GNPpercadta 
ExDorts ot oods and seices 

.. 

-8.8 
-10.1 
-15.1 

7.0 
3.6 
-18.6 

17.0 
13.3 
61.7 

11.9 
10.2 
32.7

-

Tudmenistan
Low-income group

.. 
.. 

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Growth of GDP and agricutture%)

(% of GOP) 
Aoriculture 
Industrv and constructon 
Industr 
Services 
Private consumrtion 
General covemment consumption 
ImDorts of aoods and services 

4

.. 
.. 
.. 

28.9 
33.8 

25.2 
40.6 
30.8 
34.2 
74.2 
15.0 
64.5 

24.7
43.3 
33.6 o
32.0 
62.4 
11.6 
61.9

20

.. 

37.3 
51.4 
22.5 

-20 
.

9* 

9

.. 
.. 
.. 

e arzP 

.. 

(averace annual cowth) 
Aariculture 
Industrv and construction 

G19 
Growth of exports and Import 1)
80
do -
20

1989-99 
-7.7 
-5.9 

19 

1999 
25.5 
13.1 
12.6 
13.8 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

24.4 
4.7 
1.3 
6.3 

Industry 

.. 

Services 

-5.9 

20, 

/_ 

1

Private consumption 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

-20 

99

General aovemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Importsof aoodsand services 
Gross nabonal product 

..
.

9.4 
-1.5 
-7.2 

17.0 
9.9 
4.9 

3.0 
10.9 
14.5

40

.

ENcf1 

a 

Imports

.. 

Note: Due to restrictons on access to statistical data Imposed by Turkmen authorities, the numbers In the tahle need to be treated with caution.
* The diamonds show four key Indicators In the countrv (in bold) comDared with Its inconmroug averaae. If data are missina, the diamond will
be incomplete.
- According to the 1998 Uving Standards Measurement Survey, 58% of population had Incomes below the oicia minimum wage at the time.
Turkmen authorites suggest that another, relative poverty measure - share of population wfth incomes below 50% of median per capita inoome -
- mav be apDrooriate. Official statsics Indicate that onlv 1% o ooulaton falls below this level.
Recent official statistics indicate that this may have fallen to as low as 26 per 1000 live births.

43

Turkmenistan

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

Inflation (%)
.50
1000

(% chanpe) 
Consumer DNces 
Implicit GDP deflator 
Govwrnment finance
t% of GDP, Includes current arants) 

.. 
.. 

.. 

19.8 
17.7 

20.1 
5.0

10.7 

500

0

Current revenue 

.. 

.. 

18.5 
-6.0 
-2.6 

19.9 
-1.7 
0.0

95 

5 

907 

98

Current budoet balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

-

GDP detlator C CPl

TRADE

(US$ millions) 
Total exports (lob) 
Natural gas 
Oil and oil Products 
Manufactures 

1979 

1989 

1998 
614 
70 

1999 
1,164 
390 

Export and Import level (USS mill.)
3,000

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

2,500

236 

352 

2 000

116 
1,137 
91 

182 
1,374 
221

.
00

_.0

Total Imports (fob) 

.

.

Food 

.

.. 

Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

.

.. 

46 
35 

60 
362 

So

0[ 

, 

1

Export rnce Index (19940100) 
Import price lndex (1994-100) 
Terms of trade (1994-100) 

.. 

.. 

62 

53

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

104 
60 

107 
49

C Exports 

Wimports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(USS millions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 
851 
1,845 
-994 

1999 
1,376 
2.046 

Currant account balance to GDP(%)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

20

10

-670

0

Netincome 

.. 

.. 

33 

-6 

o 

w 

5 

U 

97 

U 

U

Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Financina items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 
Memo:
Reserves Including gold (US$ millions) 
Official exchanoe rate (IocaI1US$. averagee 

.. 

.. 

27 

105 
-571 
705 
-134 

-10

.. 

.e 

-935 
1,029 
-94 

-20

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

-30

-40

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

1,379 
4.890 

1,513
5.200

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ millions) 

1979 

1989 

1998 

1999 

ComposItlon of 1999 debt (USS mll.)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 

.. 

0 
0 
0 

2,265 
9 
0 

2,314
9
0 

IBRD 

.. 

IDA 

G:322 A: 9 D: 33

Total debt service 

.. 

0 
0 
0 

313 
0 
0 

479
1
0

IBRD 

.. 

IDA 
Composition of net resource flows

Offkiial arants 

,, 

5 
124 
343 
62 
2 

4
97
166
125
0 

Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct Investment 
Port.ollo eouitv 
World Bank program 
Commitments 
Disbursements 

.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 

0 
0 

.. 
.. 

F: 1,594

0
0 

.. 

0 

0 

A - IBRD 

E - ENilatral
- IDA D - Other miuttilteral F - Prtvate
C - IMF 
a - Short-term

P 

o 

o 

o 

Principal reDavments 

* 

0 

0 

0 

 

Net flows 

0 

0 

0

Interest payments 

.. 
.. 

0 
0 

0 
0 

1
-1

Net transfers 

Including shutte trade 
Development Economics

12/19/00

44

CASTABLEB2

Turkmenistan: Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio
Performance and Management

As Of Date 12/07/2000

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment

Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 

Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount as c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) 9 
Portfolio Management

CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001

3 
1.6 

33.3 
27.9 
33.3 
27.9 
5.3 

3 
2.6 

100 
100 
100 
100 
0 

Disbursement Suspension 
207 
70 

3 
3.6 

100 
100 
100 
100 
23.3 

No
225 
75 

3
3.1

100
100
100
100
10.3

220
73

Memorandum Item 

Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last 
FYs
0 
0 
0 
0 

Five

0
0
0
0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

45

CAS TABLE B3

Bank Group Program Summary for Turkmenistan
As Of Date12/07/2000

Fiscal year Proj ID 

US$(M) 

Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program a

Strategic 
Rewards b 

(HIMIL)

Implementation b
Risks (HIMIL)

2001
2002 
2003 

HEALTH 
KARAKUM CANAL 
CROP PROTECTION & ANIMAL HEALTH 

10 
20 
15 

H 
H 

M 

M
H

M

Turkmenistan - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1998-2001

1998 

1999 2000 

2001

IFC approvals (US$m) 

2.75 

13.70 

2.75

IFC by Sector (%)

FINANCIAL SERVICES 
FOOD AND AGRO-BUSINESS 

Total 

IFC by Investment Instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity
Quasi-Equity 
Other

Total 

MIGA

9
91

0 

0 

100 

0

91

9

0 

0 

100 

0

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

0 

8

46

CAS TABLE B4

Summary of Nonlending Services - Turkmenistan

As Of Date 12/07/2000

Product 

Completion FY Cost (US$000) Audiencea Objectiveb

120 
120 
115 

115 
50 
15 
100 
120 

180 
40 
30 
56 
110 
32 

30 
40 
100 
200 
170 

G, B 
G, B, D 
G, B 

G, B 
G 
G 
G, B 
G, B 

G, B 

G 

G 
G 
G 
G, B 

PD, KG
PD, KG
PD, KG

PD, KG
PD, KG, PS
PD, KG, PS
PD,KG
PD, KG

PS, PS

PS, PD

PS, PD
PS, PD
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD

G, D, B, PD 
G 
G 
B, D, PD 
G, B 

KG, PD
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG
KG, PD, PS

Recent completions
-- Agriculture Sector Review 
-- Rationalizing the Health Sector 
-- Turkmenistan: 
Improving the 
Management of Public Expenditure
-- Dashkhovuz: Regional Priorities 
-- Energy Export Prospects 
-- Advice on Tax Code 
-- Farm Survey 
-- Living Standards Profile 

Underway
- Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) 
-- Debt Management (IDF) 
-- Public Procurement (IDF) 
-- lnternat'l Accounting Principles (IDF) 
-- National Environmental Action Plan 
-- Energy Restructuring Study 

Planned
-- National Economic Forum 
-- Living Standards and Statistics (IDF) 
-- Comprehensive Water Strategy 
-- Country Economic Memorandum 
-- Macro & Sector Reform Dialogue 

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-
solving.

1997 
1997 
1999 

1999 
2000 
2000 
2001 
2001 

2001 
2002 
2001 
2002 
2002 
2001 

2002 
2003 
2002 
2003 
2001-3 

47

CAS TABLE B5

Turkmenistan Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

1970-75 

1980485 

1993-99 

Europe & 

Central Asia 

Low-

Income

POPULATION

Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY
(% of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount Index 

INCOME

GNP per capita (US$) 
Consumerprice 
index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNP) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total 
Male 
Female 

Access to safe water
(% of population)

Total 
Urban 

Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)** 

Under 5 (per thousand live births) 

Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 populafton) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 

Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

2.5 
2.9 
47.5 
5.7 

3.2 
2.4 
45.7 
4.7 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

67 
63 
70 

57 

.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
..
..

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
..

65 
61 
68 

52 

.. 

267 
268 

.. 

4.8 
1.2 
43.7 
2.2 

58.0

660 
954 
1,058

67

7
49

2.6 
5.4 
3.4 

.. 
.. 
.. 

61
85
42

99 
98 

66 
63 
70 

33 

46 

278 
283 

110

474.7 
0.2 
66.5 
1.6 

2,417.0
1.9
31.4
3.8

2,150 
183 

410
137

4.3 
5.1 
8.8

100 
100 
99 

91 
89 

69 
65 
74 

22 

26 

283 
120 

1.1
3.2

76
81
71

77
82

60
59
61

77

108

277
248

* According to the 1998 Lvng Standards Measurement Survey, 58% of population had incomes below the official minimum wage at the time.

Turkmen authorites suggest that another, relative poverty measure -- share of population with Incomes below 50% of median per capita income -
may be appropriate. Official statistics indicate that only 1% of population falls below this level.

** Recent official statistics Indicate that this may have fallen to as low as 26 per 1000 live births.
2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, Worid Bank

48

CASTABLEB6

TURKMENISTAN: KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS *

Actual 
1997 
1998 

Estimate 
2000 

Projected
2002 
2003 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry and construction 
Services 

1996 

1999 

2001 

2004

100 
13 
65 
23 

100 
20 
44 
36 

100 
25 
41 
34 

100 
25 
43 
32 

100 
22 
52 
26 

100 
16 
66 
18 

100 
15 
67 
18 

100 
15 
68 
17 

100
15
68
17

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 

105 
18 

89 
44 

74 
45 

58 
36 

49 
33 

53 
33 

55 
32 

58
32

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

75 
75 

39 
63 

30 
64 

42 
62 

61 
56 

97 
79 

99 
86 

101 
89 

100
91

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savings' 

-5 
-3 

11 
13 

26 
29 

42 
42 

5 1 
50 

47 
46 

45 
45 

42
42

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

2,379 

2,682 

2,862 

3,305 

4,313 

4,117 

4,246 

4,458 

4,618

790 

640 

550 

660 

870 

970 

930 

900 

900

Real annual growth rates (%, at previous year prices)
Grossdomesticproductatmarketprices 
-6.7 
Gross domestic investment 
Real annual per capita growth rates (%, at previous year prices)
Gross domesde product at market prices 
-8.5 
-12.4 
Total consumption 
Private consumption 
Balance of Payments (US$ millons)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 
Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 

-11.4 

7.0 
17.0 

17.0 
3.0 

18.1 
-2.9 

20.5 
4.6 

4.5 
2.1 

5.0 
1.6 

2.7
1.6

.. 

.. 

5.6 

15.8 

16.6 
2.1 
-0.4 

18.8 
10.0 
7.2 

2.8 
5.3 
5.9 

3.2 
2.3 
2.1 

0.7
1.4
2.4

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

1,775 
1,692 
1,794 
1,388 
-20 
5 
2 
108 
86 
-79 
165 

1,046 
774 
1,679 
1,005 
-634 
-31 
-580 
108 
791 
28 
762 
-206 
-113 

851 
614 
1,845 
1,137 
-994 
27 
-934 
62 
467 
124 
343 
500 
-94 

1,376 
1,164 
2,046 
1,374 
-670 
105 
-571 
125 
263 
96 
167 
318 
-134 

2,646 
2,437 
2,413 
1,578 
233 
34 
204 
112 
-4 
53 
-57 
46 
-266 

3,975 
3,757 
3,271 
2,139 
704 
14 
641 
100 
78 
3 
75 
-228 
-591 

4,189 
3,963 
3,644 
2,392 
545 
4 
486 
104 
6 
-23 
29 
-302 
-293 

4,504 
4,271 
3,966 
2,671 
538 
4 
494 
109 
-59 
-32 
-28 
-248 
-294 

4,624
4,386
4,197
2,871
427
4
393
114
6
-38
45
-240
-274

Other capital (net, icl. euors & omiissions) 

-194 

Change in reservesd 
Memorandum items
Resourcebalance(%ofGDP) 
Annual value growth rates (%)
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (FOB) 

-2 

-0.8 

-23.6 

-34.7 

-20.3 

5.4 

17.1 

12.8 

12.1 

9.2

-18.8 
-19.2 
-5.5 
-15.5 

-54.3 
-56.0 
-7.1 
-27.6 

-20.7 
-30.7 
107.7 
13.1 

89.5 
97.3 
56.4 
20.8 

109.3 
131.3 
-9.2 
14.9 

54.2 
56.0 
28.9 
35.6 

5.5 
5.3 
8.8 
11.8 

7.8 
7.9 
6.5 
11.7 

2.7
2.6
4.6
7.5

__...._..._....

* National Economic and Debt Information are World Bank estimates using various
different and incomplete sources. They should be considered with a degree of caution.

49

Turkmenistan - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)

(Continued)

Indicator 

1996 

Actual 
1997 
1998 

Estimate 
2000 

1999 

2001 

Projected
2002 
2003 

2004

Pssblic finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues 
16.6 
Current expenditures 
16.3 
Cumrent account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
0.3 
Capital revenuesf 
Foreign financing 

-0.3 

.. 

Monetary indicators
M3/GDP 
Growth of M3 (%) 
Private sector credit / GDP (%)5

Price indices
Nominal exchange rate (LCUIUS$. 
annual averagep
Real exchange rate (US$1LCU, 
Jan 1996 =100t
Consumerprice index (%change) 
GDPdeflator(%change) 

23.1 
25.3 
-2.2 
2.2 
-0.5 

10.2 
81.2 
1.4 

18.5 
24.5 
-6.0 
3.4 
-0.1 

14.9 
65.3 
1.6 

19.9 
21.6 
-1.7 
1.7 
0.0 

14.9 
22.6 
1.5 

20.0 
20.7 
-0.7 
0.7 
0.5 

14.5 
27.0 
2.0 

20.7 
20.9 
-0.2 
0.5 
0.2 

9.2 
28.3 
0.8 

20.8 
21.6 
-0.8 
0.4 
0.0 

9.2 
28.7 
1.1 

21.0 
22.0 
-1.0 
0.3 
0.0 

9.6 
30.9 
1.9 

21.2
22.2
-1.1
0.3
0.0

10.0
29.5
2.3

8.1 
411.7 
0.6 

3,258 

4,143 

4,890 

5,200 

5,200 

11,015 13,682 

16,426 19,557

193.0 

225.0 

212.0 

233.0 

263.5 

201.5 

191.9 

186.5 

184.1

445.8 
1174.3 

21.4 
61.6 

19.8 
17.7 

20.1 
5.9 

13.9 
10.5 

35.0 
67.8 

21.8 
22.6 

20.0 
20.1 

18.9
20.1

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. State budget only. Due to the lack of access to information on activities of extrabudgetary funds, the funds, including Foreign
Exchange Reserve Fund, are included in the residual private sector. The funds service most of external debt and have independent
sources of tax and non-tax income.
f. Primarily repayments on rescheduled natural gas debts
g. Private sector proper, excluding extrabudgetary funds.
h. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in real exchange rate index denotes appreciation.

50

CAS TABLE B7

KEY EXPOSURE INDICATORS *

Indicator 

Actual 
1997 
1998 

1996 

Estimate 
2000 

2001 

Projected
2002 
2003 

1999 

2004

Total debtoutstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

751 

1771 

2265 

2314 

2304 

2263 

2269 

2211 

2217

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

86 

791 

467 

263 

-4 

78 

6 

-59 

6

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)'

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
ConcessionaUTDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 

DS (%)c

IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m) 
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
IDATDO(US$m) 

IFC (US$m)
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equitye 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

193 

263 

313 

480 

374 

501 

450 

451 

418

39.5 
31.6 
10.1 
2.6 

0.1 
32.6 

0.0 
3 
0.0 
0 

0 
0 

0 

147.3 
66.1 
21.9 
2.2 

231.7 
79.2 
32.0 
5.2 

154.7 
70.0 
32.1 
9.8 

0.2 
0.5 

0.0 
7 
0.01 
0 

0 
0 

0 

0.1 
0.6 

0.0 
9 
0.01 
0 

0 
0 

0 

0.2 
0.9 

0.1 
9 
0.01 
0 

0 
0 

8 

85.0 
53.4 
13.8 
11.7 

0.5 
2.8 

0.1 
29 
0.02 
0 

0 
0 

8 

55.8 
55.0 
12.4 
12.3 

0.7 
2.3 

0.1 
37 
0.03 
0 

52.9 
53.4 
10.5 
11.9 

1.3 
3.2 

0.1 
39 
0.03 
0 

47.9 
49.6 
9.8 
11.3 

1.8 
3.8 

0.2 
41 
0.04 
0 

46.6
48.0
8.8
10.0

2.2
4.3

0.2
43
0.04
0

0.3 
0.0 

0.5 
0.0 

1.0 
0.0 

1.5
0.0

8 

8 

8 

8

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS' denotes exports of goods and services, including factor services and workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

______.__._.___________.

* National Economic and Debt Information are World Bank estimates using various
different and incomplete sources. They should be considered with a degree of caution.

51

CAS TABLE B8

STATUS OF BANK GROUP OPERATIONS IN TURKMENISTAN

As of Date 12/07/2000

Project ID Project Name 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating b/ 
Develogment Imolementation Fiscal Year 
Oblectives 
Progress

Expected and Actual
Original Amount in US$ Millions 
Disbursements a'
IBRD 
IDA 
GE Cancel. Undisb. 
Orig. Frm Rev'd

Number of Closed Projects: 0

Active Projects

P034083 URBAN TRANSPORT 
P008867 WATER SUP/SAN 
P034092 
IBTA 

U 
U 
HU 

Total 

S 
U 
U 

1997 
1997 
1995 

34.2 
30.3 
25.0 

89.5 

0 
0 
0 

0 

0 
0 
0 

0 

0 
0 
10.2 

10.2 

13.2 
28.1 
8.9 

50.3 

13.1 
20.2 
19.1 

52.4 

-10.9
0
4.1

-6.8

IFC's PORTFOLIO IN TURKMENISTAN
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio

As of 06/30/00 in US Dollars Millions

FY Approval Company 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic

Held 

Disbursed

Approvals Pending Commitment

2000 SEF Esret Dairy 
2000 SEF Garashsyzlyk 

Total Pending Commitment: 

2.5 
0 

2.5 

0 
0 

0 

0 
0.25 

0.25 

0 
0 

0 

0 
0 

0 

0 
0 

0 

0 
0 

0 

0
0

0

52

CAS TABLE B9: TURKMENISTAN CAS MATRIX FY01-03

Goals 

Government Strategy 

_______________ 

________________L_ 

l 

Bank Group Activities 
Key 
| Lending | 
AAAh ESWITA |International 

agPartners 

{ 

A. PUBLIC RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

1. Strengthen Budget 
Management and 
Transparency 

Government Budget to 
reflect all Govt funds and 
elimination of all extra- 
budget accounts (pages 265- 
6 of National Program) 

Restructured IBTA 
Loan 
(on-going)

Dialogue on FERF 

USAID 

2. Strengthen Debt 
Management and 
Transparency 

Government to strengthen 
control over Debt and 
Payments (pages 268-9 of 
National Program)

IDF Debt Management 
Grant 
(on-going) 

UNDP 

3. Increase 
Information Quality 
and Dissemination 

* Govt's participation in 
external forums and 
training is limited 

* Govt supports the 
introduction of Int'l 
Accounting Principles 

* National Economic 
Forum (proposed) 

All Donors 

* Public Procurement 
Grant (IDF)

* 

Int'l Acct Princ Grant 
(IDF) 

53

Key
Performance Benchmarks

_ __________

* 

Progressive elimination of Extra-
Budgetary Funds

* Adoption of an effective plan to
rationalize the FERF

* Wide dissemination of the full
budget.
Submission of a complete debt
report to the Debt Reporting
System

* 

* Leveling off of the DSR to no
more than 15% of exports.

* 

* 

Improvement in timely
repayment of debt
Improved dissemination of
macro-economic and other
information within
Turkmenistan

* Progressive increase in use of
International Accounting
Principles

* Adoption of a Public
Procurement Law

I 

Goals 

GovernmentStrategy f 

Bank Group Activities 

A 

S 

XLnding 
0 

{ 

A AA: ESWA 

-

Key 
Ineatiol 
; 
I:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Partners 

Key

Perfoman Benchmarks

B. HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES

4. Improve Poverty 
Government Statistics 
Monitoring and 
Agency has prepared a 
Targeting 
Living Standards Survey 
5. Enhance Delivery of Government has committed Water Supply Project Comprehensive Water 
Water to the Poor and 
to expanding availability, 
(on-going) 
Strategy 
improve sustainability 
but has yet to increase water 
(proposed)
tariffs 

(proposed IDF Grant)

TA for Living Standards 
UNDP, UK, 
Monitoring and Targeting UNICEF 

6. Enhance ADocation Government is interested in 
of Health Resources 
exploring reform in the 
health care system 

Pilot Health Project 
(proposed loan) 
I_I_I

7. Improve Financial 
Returns of Farmers 

8. Improve Water 
Conservation and 
Maintenance 

9. Rehabilitate 
Agriculture Facilities 

The Govt has transferred 
most land to lease-holders, 
but most continue to use the 
state order for lack of
alternatives 
The stated position of the 
Govt is for free water, but 
some interest in water user 
charges emerging
The Govt has put funding 
for crop protection. It has 
not put enough funding for 
Canal Rehabilitation 

C . AN EFFICIENT RURAL ECONOMY

Policy Dialogue 

Comprehensive Water 
Strategy (proposed) 

USAID, AsDB 

* Crop Protection 
(proposed loan) 
* Ka 
Canal 
(proposed loan) 

USAID 
Potential Cof. 
from the Kuwait
Fund, IsDB

54

UNICEF, 
USAID 

WHO, UNICEF 

* 

* 

Improved country approach to
poverty monitoring and targeting

Increase % of populace with
access to safe water

* Build a framework for
introducing water charges to
promote maintenance and
conservation
Improvement in Life Expectancy
and Infant Mortality Statistics

* 

* Reduce share of state order and
increase freedom of farners to
sell produce at market prices.

* 

Increase share of private farmers
Increase in the percent of cost
recovery on a cash basis for irrigation
water supply to at least 20%.

Rehabilitation of facilities, with
sustainability through user charges

Goals 

Government Strategy 

l 

Bank Group Activities 
Lending 
AAA: ESWtrA 

______________________I 

| 

Key 
International 

| 

~~~~~~~Partners

Key
Performance Benchmarks

D. PRIVATE 

SECTOR DEVELOPMENT

Downstream Study on 
Energy Sector 
Commercialization 
(FY01)

Policy Dialogue 

10 Commercialize 
State Companies 

Most large enterprises still 
operate largely under the 
control of the State 

11 Liberalize Trade 
and FX controls 

* The Govt maintains a 
single official exchange 
rate, but access is
limited, and the curb 
rate is quite far apart 

* The State Commodity
Exchange maintains
extensive controls over
normal trade

a Create list of public companies
to be separated from Ministries
and commercialized

* Some Energy Co's placed on a
commercial basis (eg
Turkmenbashy Oil Refinery)
Improved access to FX via
single exchange rate

* 

a Exemption of the Private Sector
from registration under the
Comrnodity Exchange

E. ENVIRONMENTAL 

PROTECTION

12. Participate in 
Multi-Country 
Environmental Efforts 

Govt is a member of several 
regional efforts 

13. Develop a National Govt has made a 
Environment Strategy 
commitment to preparing a 
NEAP 

.

a Aral Sea Program 
(on going) 

UNDP/GEF 

m Caspian Sea Program
(on-going) 

Preparation of a 
NEAP 
(FY01)

UNDP, Japan, Switz. 

w 

Improvement in living
conditions in the Aral
Basin

a Reduction in Caspian
based pollution
Publication of an effective
NEAP document

* 

55

CAS TABLE B1O:

TURKMENISTAN - CAS SUMMARY OF DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES

Network Aria 

Country 
Performance 
Poverty Reduction & Economic Management

Major Issue 

Country 
Priority

Bank Priority 

Priority Reconciliation

Poverty Reduction 

Poor/Fair 

Allocation of Public Resources, Inequality 

Medium 

High 

Economic Policy 
Public Sector 
Gender 

Human Development

Poor 
Poor 
Fair 

Currency Liberalization, FERF 
Budget and Debt Management 
Access to Higher Level Education 

High 
High 
Medium 

High
High
Medium

-- Continued Dialogue and
information sharing
-- IDF Grant for Living
Standards Monitoring

Education 
Health, Nutrition, & Pop 
Social Protection 

Poor 
Fair 
Poor/Fair 

Curriculum, Time in School, Access to Higher Ed. 
Poor Water Quality, Health Care System 
Need for Targeting Assistance to Poor 

Medium 
High 
High 

Medium
High
Medium 

Dialogue on Pov. Statistics

Environment & Sustainable Development

Rural Development 

Environment 
Social Development 

Poor 

Fair 
Fair 

Eliminating State Order, Conservation of water and 
Maintenance of Irrigation System 
Realizing the NEAP 
Transparency in laws, NGO registration 

Medium 

High 

Medium 
Low 

Medium
Medium 

-- Dialogue on Agric. Reform
-- Water Strategy

Work with civil society

Finance, Private Sector & Infreastructure

Financial Sector 
Private Sector 
Energy and Mining 

Infrastructure 

Poor 
Poor 
Fair 

Fair 

Basic Functioning, Inter-bank transactions 
Access to FX, State Commodity Exchange, State Order 
Maintaining Access to Export Market, 
commercialize firms
Maintenance of Existing Infrastructure 

High 
Medium 
High 

High 

Medium 
High 
Medium 

Medium 

Dialogue on Banking Sector
Limited Dialogue
Energy Sector Dialogue

-- Dialogue on Water Supply
-- Proposed Canal Rehab pro.

MAP SECTION

J 

KtEAKH 

gAN 

+.' 

1UZBEKISTANUZBEKISTAN
KAZAKHSTAN~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~AZKSA

60

< 

<~55 

-

Saq.kamysh 

"~.Koturdep

Dusk 

SELECTEDYCITIESGYZ_R.E-P- 

.T 

T KRR.

.Oserokh5 

~ RIVERS 

I RN 

-35 ~ ' 

OF 

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC 
/h 
AMINITRATVE OUNDRIES(VELYET)< sc w n ma doAFGHANISTAN

Tism 

y te 

\-( 

_ I 

,, 

ni o Te odIRAN

C 
CHINA

0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0Nfoaoo 

0 

50 

10KLMTR

UZBEKISTAN ~ ~ ~ 

PKITA 

-

@ NATtoNALcAPrAL < 

< 

\ 

_ 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~AJIKAISTAN-

T U R KM EN I 3TjK4AjRN 

L) 

\ EPrnd R Tedrulocs

KoturN 

INALCAPALAFGANITA

as~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~iy 

K55y 

lar6ot~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Klio

60 5' 

AO'- z

SANDY DESERT 
*-- RIVERS 

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC 
OF RAN 

-

-

This nsapsons producedby she Map Desgr Unit of Tre World Reno

35~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~UkAzhlD 

-0 

~TUKENSA

-a 55~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

P,. enstroy~~~~~~~~~~edrsmnto 

ccpacea 

uc ondre

60 

65~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~rOsSny 

