Document of

The World Bank

Report No. 20185-GH

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND THE

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF GHANA

June 29, 2000

Country Department 10
Africa Region

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

P

b
u

i
l

c

D

i

c
s

l

o

s

u

r

e

A

u

t

o
h

r

i

z

d
e

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF LAST CAS

August 13, 1997

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

Currency Unit = Cedi (%)
US$1.00 
(as of February 20, 2000)

= p3750

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System

FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31

ADB 
AFD 
APL 
CAS 
CDF 
CG 
CIDAV 
CIVISOC 
CWIQ 
DANIDA 
DflD 
ERSO II 
ESW 
EU 
FAO 
FDI 
GDP 
GLSS 
GTZ 
HIPC 
IDA 
IFAD 
IFC 
IMF 
JICA 
KfW 
LAR 
LIL 
MDAs 
MIGA 
MTEF 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

African Development Bank
French Agency for Development
Adaptable Program Loan
Country Assistance Strategy
Comprehensive Development Framework
Consultative Group
Canadian International Development Agency
Civil Society Coordinating Council
Core Welfare Indicators Questionnaire
Danish International Development Agency
Department for International Development
Second Economic Reform Support Operation
Economic Sector Work
European Union
Food and Agricultural Organization
Foreign Direct Investment
Gross Domestic Product
Ghana Living Standard Survey
German Development Agency
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Intemational Development Association
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Japan Intemational Cooperation Agency
Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau
Lending Allocation Review
Learning and Innovation Loan
Ministries, Departnents and Agencies
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium Term Expenditure Framework

Vice President 
Country Director 
Task Team Leader 

Callisto Madavo/Jemal-ud-din Kassum
Peter Harrold/Cesare Calari
Theresa Jones/James Emery

NGO 
OECF 
OED 
PHRD 
PRGF 
PRSP 
PUFMARP 
SAPRI 
SDR 
SME 
SPGs 
TA 
UNDP 
UNICEF 
UNU 
VAT 
WBI 
WHO 

Non-Governmental Organization
Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund
Operations Evaluation Department
Policy and Human Resources Development
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Public Financial Management Reform Program
Structural Adjustment Participatory Reform Initiative
Special Drawing Rights
Small and Medium Enterprise
Sectoral Partner Groups
Technical Assistance
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Children's Fund
United Nations University
Value-Added Tax
World Bank Institute
World Health Organization

GHANA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Table Of Contents

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .....................................................

INTRODUCTION .....................................................1

A. STAFF ASSESSMENT OF CAS PART 1:
"Development Strategy for Poverty Reduction" ..................................................... 

i

2

Page No.

B. PROGRESS TOWARDS OBJECTIVES IN PREVIOUS CAS ................................... 3

What Worked Well .....................................................
What Did Not Work Well ..........

4
4.......................................... 
4

C. INSTRUMENTS OF BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE .................................................. 5

D. PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT .....................................................

7

E. SUPPORT TO GHANA'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA ............................................. 7

Proposed Country Assistance Strategy .....................................................
Increasing Growth .................................................... 
Redefining the Role of the State .................................................... 
Implementing the Strategy More Effectively .................................................... 

7
7
12
14

F. SIZE AND COMPOSITION OF BANK GROUP PROGRAIL .................................. 
15

G. COLLABORATION WITH OTHER PARTNERS (CDF Process) ............................ 1 7

H. MONITORING OUTCOMES .................................................... 

I. RISKS .................................................... 

18

19

GHANA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Table Of Contents

TEXT TABLES:

Table 1: 
Table 2: 
Table 3: 

Selected Indicators of Portfolio Management
Triggers for Lending Program
Proposed CAS Core Benchmarks

TEXT BOXES:

Box 1: 
Box 2: 

Box 3: 

The CAS Preparation Process
Main Results of Client Survey, Consultations with
Civil Society, and Country Assistance Evaluation
Private Sector Views

ANNEXES:

Annex A2: 
Annex B 1: 
Annex B2: 

Annex B3: 

Ghana at a Glance
Ghana: Summary of Proposed IDA Program, FY200 1-2003, by Case
Ghana: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
Ghana: Bank Group Program Summary
Ghana: IFC and MIGA Program, FY97-00
Ghana: Summary of Nonlending Services
Ghana: Social Indicators
Ghana: Key Economic Indicators
Ghana: Key Exposure Indicators
Ghana: Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
Ghana: Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex B9: 
Ghana: Country Assistance Strategy Matrix FY1998-2000
Annex B1O: Ghana: CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Annex C: 
Comprehensive Development Framework: Ghana - Second Updating Note

Annex B4: 
Annex B5: 
Annex B6: 
Annex B7: 
Annex B8: 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. 
The second part of the Country Assistance Strategy for Ghana presents the business
strategy for the World Bank Group. It was prepared on the basis of CDF principles. It is not
solely a response to Ghana's development agenda because it was formulated in the light of better
knowledge about the activities of all partners. Part I of this CAS was prepared by the
Government of Ghana. The strategy outlined by the Government balances growth with human
development and empowerment in a way that should enable Ghana to continue to reduce poverty
in the coming years. While the strategy as a whole is considered sound, there are several
elements of concern to staff. Both recent performance of the economy and the external
environment raise doubts about the ambitious 8 percent medium-term growth target. Macro-
economic instability is a major risk facing the Government's strategy. Doubts remain about the
commitment to speedy and transparent processes of divestiture. Management of the program in
education is weak. The Government is perhaps over-cautious in the speed at which it wishes to
move in decentralization. In the roads sector, there are issues with the overhang of arrears, as
well as a proposed program which appears to be beyond current financial capacity.

2. 
The FY98 CAS emphasized four objectives: restoring and sustaining macroeconomic
stability; ensuring a breakthrough in private investment; promoting broad-based social and rural
development; and implementing direct poverty-alleviation measures. Considerable progress was
made under the first objective during 1997-98, but budget performance deteriorated in 1999,
largely because of a worsening in the terms of trade. Ghana is far from a "breakthrough" in
private investment, although non-traditional exports have expanded four-fold since 1994. The
record is mixed on the third objective. Health status has improved and poverty has declined
modestly. However, agricultural growth has not accelerated enough to raise consumption levels
for some regions (North) and groups (food crop farmers). With Bank support, the Government is
implementing direct poverty alleviation measures.

3. 
Two aspects of the approach during the previous CAS period went especially well: the
strong effort in the context of the CDF to improve and deepen donor coordination, and the
decentralization to the Ghana Office.

4. 
In spite of the progress in restoring macroeconomic stability and implementing structural
reforms, problems remain. Without additional efforts to resolve them, it will be difficult for
Ghana to achieve its goal of becoming a low middle-income country. The domestic debt burden
is high. The Government is in a vicious circle of borrowing to cover domestic debt service - an
untenable situation which crowds out private borrowing and puts upward pressure on interest
rates. Private participation in infrastructure remains limited. It is the Bank staff s views that
more than a decade after starting to divest, relatively little has been achieved. The private sector
doubts the commitment of the Government to private sector-led growth. Reflecting these
problems, IFC's portfolio has decreased.

5 .

During the upcoming CAS period, several changes in approach are envisaged:

* First, the proposed program is more oriented to the poor and to reducing poverty by
focusing on the areas critical for poor Ghanaians (food crops, land titling) and on increasing their
access to basic services.

* Second, the program's analytical base needs to be recapitalized.

ii

* Third, there should be more effective collaboration with partners outside the
Government.

* Fourth, the program continues to support reforns in public sector management,
using it as a vehicle to make progress on legal reform, governance/corruption and financial
management.

* Fifth, IDA would reduce direct lending for private sector development, while
maintaining a focus on improving the legal and regulatory framework. Assuming progress on the
enabling environment and on private sector participation in infrastructure, IFC and MIGA expect
to expand activities.

6. 
The portfolio was streamlined during the previous CAS period. In the future, portfolio
management would emphasize: better project monitoring, led by the implementation team in the
Ghana Office; increasing the proactivity of our Ghanaian partners; and moving to more
programmatic lending.

7. 
The overriding goal of the Government of Ghana's Development Strategy for Poverty
Reduction and the support of the World Bank Group is to eliminate hard core poverty. Within
that broad goal, the proposed business strategy of the Bank Group would help the Government to:
(i) raise the growth rate of the economy; (ii) redefine the role of the State; and (iii) implement
their strategy more effectively on the ground. Lending of US$490 million over FYO 1-03 is
proposed in the base case, consistent with the indicative IDA allocation for Ghana. The proposed
base case is slightly higher than actual lending (US$454 million) in the previous CAS period. In
the high case, proposed lending (US$640 million) would be about 40 percent higher than the past.
In the low case, which would apply if fiscal performance deteriorates significantly, lending would
be a third below the previous level.

8. 
The proposed core benchmarks are: growth rate, the headcount and gap for extreme
poverty; the infant mortality rate; under-five child malnutrition (rural), and the literacy rate
(female). The CAS matrix includes 10 additional indicators that are more sector specific. These
indicators have been chosen partly to permit Ghana's progress towards the international
development targets to be monitored. They are the same as those Government listed in Part I to
monitor its poverty reduction strategy.

9. 
The main short-run risk is the possible inability of the Government to maintain
acceptable fiscal performance and macroeconomic stability in the face of the deterioration in the
terms of trade and pre-election pressures. In the medium term, the main risk is the continued
"under-performance" of the economy relative to the rates of growth and poverty reduction that
could be achieved with the right enabling environment, stronger fiscal performance, and more
attention by the Government to the task of ensuring equitable development.

PART II

GHANA - BANK GROUP DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIP

INTRODUCTION

1. 
The goal set out in Ghana- Vision 2020 is for Ghana to increase growth in order to become
a low middle-income country (threshold of US$760 per capita) by the turn of this decade. The
vision calls for a transformation of the economy and society, in order to improve the quality of
life for all Ghanaians, including through equitable distribution of the benefits of development, so
as to achieve fairly balanced regional development and to eliminate gross deprivation and
hard-core poverty. Ghana's development agenda and the Government's current priorities are
covered in Part I of the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS). In addition to the benefits that would
come to the population from higher growth, the Government has outlined several specific
objectives related to poverty reduction which are to:

* Reduce the incidence of poverty in both urban and rural areas;
* Strengthen capabilities of the poor and vulnerable to earn income;
* Reduce gender and geographical disparities; and
* 
Improve the health and education levels and productivity of the population.

2. 
The second part of the Country Assistance Strategy for Ghana presents the business
strategy for the World Bank Group. This was envisaged when the Comprehensive Development
Framework (CDF) for Ghana was launched in the Spring of 1999. We realized that it was not
consistent with CDF principles for Bank staff to present the Government's strategy to the
Executive Directors. Rather, it was agreed that the Government would present its strategy, and
that staff would present to the Executive Directors their business strategy for how the World
Bank Group would assist the Government to implement its program. The Executive Directors
endorsed this approach when they discussed the Ghana CDF on May 27, 1999, on the basis of
IDA/SecM99-286, "Comprehensive Development Framework: Ghana Pilot - Updating Note."
Other development partners, such as the United Kingdom and Canada, have indicated that they
will take a similar approach to their country strategy processes, reflecting their involvement in
and commitment to the CDF in Ghana.

Box 1: The CAS Preparation Process

* 

In June. the Washington-based Country Team and several people from outside the region "brainstormed" to define
issues for the Upstream Review.
* The Bank asked an umbrella organization for civil society (CIVISOC). who organized the consultations sponsored
by the Structural Adjustment Participatory Reforrn Initiative (SAPRI), to arrange consultations between the Bank
and civil society. Meetings in six regions took place in November. About 35 persons participated in each two-day
meeting. Participants included people from non-governmental organizations. professional associations, local
governments and small businesses.
* The documents prepared by the Government tor the Consultative Group meeting held on November 23-24.1999,
including a First Draft Comprehensive Development Framework Towards (ihana Vision 2020, updated thc
devclopment strategy expressed in Vision 2020, discussed extemal conditions, and laid out the country's priorities.
panicularly for poverty reduction. Sector papers presented in the CDF volume had been prepared by Joint
CGovemment-Donor working groups. Donors discussed the Government's priorities and outlined their plans for
assistance, Further strengthening the base for coordination.
* Country Team meetings in January in both Aecra and Washington (including a joint video conferenee) worked on
the details of the issues to be raised in the CAS and the corresponding Bank Group instruments.
* Consultations with the Government took place in mid-February at which time we agreed on Parts I and 11 wid
reviewed the portfolio. The Bank Group also consulted with the private sector.
IFC staff participated in the Country Team meetings. Both IFC and MIGA took part in the discussions with the
Government and the consultations with the private soctor in mid-February.

* 

2

3. 
The CAS was prepared in a highly consultative way (see Box ]) and on the basis of CDF
principles. It is not solely a response to Ghana's development agenda. It is a business strategy
fornulated in the light of better knowledge about the activities of all partners. The "CDF
pay-off' is that greater selectivity is possible without concern for leaving gaps in support. The
strategy of greater selectivity has influenced the proposed program in several ways. First, in
order to support the private sector more effectively, the role of IDA is differentiated to focus on
the legal and regulatory framework, while IFC and MIGA intend to expand direct lending and
guarantee facilities for private investors. Their role will be complemented by other donors, for
example, the African Development Bank (agribusiness) and USAID (trade and investment
promotion). Second, the proposed program reflects a decision to move out of those infrastructure
activities in which either private investors are becoming involved (electricity) or other donors are
taking the lead (West Africa Gas Pipeline). Third, the shift to sector-wide programs continues.
In these programs - for 2xample, in the health and roads sectors - donors share responsibilities.
The coordinated group has the ability and resources to provide better policy advice than would be
the case if IDA were "going it alone." The table in Annex C contains the partner group
arrangements for the CDF and shows that the Bank is not the lead donor in every area in which it
is involved in Ghana. Fourth, the C2DF enables the Bank to see more clearly where the role of
other donors may permit it to focus less (basic education) and, conversely, where the lack of
donors implies a need for IDA (urban infrastructure).

A. Staff Assessment of CAS Part .r: "Development Strategy for Poverty Reduction"

4. 
The strategy appears to staff to be appropriate to Ghana's circumstances and the document
provides a sound basis on which to discuss the Bank's business strategy.! It balances growth with
human development and empowerrnent in a way that should enable Ghana to continue to reduce
poverty in the coming years. It correctly identifies the sources of poverty, and its strongest
feature is the way that poverty is mainstreamed into sectoral strategies. In particular, there is the
notion of the "poverty sieve": the idea that all sectoral strategies and programs should be judged
explicitly by the extent to which they contribute to poverty reduction. There is a strong emphasis
on rural development and the need for balanced growth if the plight of the rural poor is to be
addressed effectively. Given Ghana's limited financial capacity, there are no extensive programs
of social protection. There are small-scale pilot activities supported by development partners.
The poverty program, in terms of expenditure, appears to be feasible, if subject to the
qualifications in paragraph 6 below..

5. 
The process of preparing Ghana- Vision 2020: Second Step is under way, and the Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) is fully integrated into this. Bank support is being provided to
assist this process. It is a sound and broad approach to participation that can be expected to result
in a PRSP that is supported by the population.

6. While the strategy as a whole is considered sound, there are several elements of concern to
staff, and which are the topic of ongoing dialogue with the authorities. Several of these are
discussed in detail later in this document, but are highlighted here:

* Macroeconomic Performance and Framework. In 1999 economic performance

began well but the effects of the adverse terms of trade were compounded by the fact that
external budgetary support was well below expected levels. Also, it is the Bank staff 's view that
the authorities were slow to react to changing circumstances. Although, as of today, there is not
yet a final agreement on the macroeconomic framework for 2000-2002, the direction which

The Interim PRSP for Ghana will be based on this document and will be submitted to the Executive Directors of the
Bank and the International Monetary Fund. It is expected that the Interim PRSP will provide the basis for a
discussion of a second-year PRGF arrangement with the IMF, once the final dimensions of the macroeconomic
framework for 2000-2002 have been agreed.

3

policies should take has been established, and the Government has completed many of the steps
needed to effect such policies, such as adjustment of taxes. Nevertheless, with the large external
shocks of changes in the prices of cocoa, gold and oil, and with the inevitable fiscal pressures in
an election year, macroeconomic instability is a rnajor risk facing the Government's strategy. It
has been explicitly agreed that key poverty-oriented expenditures, such as in the social sectors,
would receive the highest priority in the final fiscal program. Both recent performance and the
external environment raise doubts about the ambitious 8 percent medium-term growth target.
Achievement of the target would require a sharp reduction in the fiscal deficit to lower real
interest rates and stimulate a higher level of private activity.

* Privatization. In these difficult economic times, accelerating privatization would
seem to be one potential source of revenue enhancement, especially if such revenues could be
used to reduce domestic debt. However, it is Bank staff's view that doubts remain about the
commitment to speedy and transparent processes of divestiture, and a major effort in the dialogue
with the Bank and the IMF will be continued. In particular, we hope to be able to draw clear
links between poverty reduction and privatization, and to ensure that more open processes of
privatization are adopted.

* Education Capacity. The strategy document places appropriate emphasis on
education as key to poverty reduction. There is no disagreement on the core strategies, nor on the
resource allocation. The issue is the effectiveness of expenditures, deriving from weak sector
management. This is agreed by both sides and we are working together to address it. But the
weak capacity remains a risk for the strategy.

* Decentralization. It is encouraging to note the importance that the Government
attaches to governance issues, especially anti-corruption and decentralization. Yet, the pace of
decentralization has been slow, and the Government is perhaps over-cautious in the speed at
which it wishes to move. This will continue to be a primary dialogue issue, but also calls for a
major effort in capacity building. It is weak capacity, especially in financial management, that is
the Government's greatest fear in decentralization.

* Roads. This is a sector where notable achievements have been made with respect to
funding, management and maintenance. Two key issues remain. First, there is a hangover of
payment arrears from earlier road contracts. Second, the program of expansion presented in the
Government's strategy appears to be beyond current financial capacity. Therefore, it will be vital
for the Government to prepare a priority program of road construction and maintenance at a level
well below that proposed in the strategy document, both to avoid a recurrence of arrears, and to
ensure that construction can be carried out effectively and rapidly, and without the stop-start
patterns that have often been observed in the past. This will be the key issue addressed in the
Bank's proposed new Roads Sector Program.

B. Progress Towards Objectives in Previous CAS

7. When the FY98 CAS was formulated, Ghana was emerging from several years of
macroeconomic instability. It emphasized four objectives: restoring and sustaining
macroeconomic stability; ensuring a breakthrough in private investment, especially exports;
promoting broad-based social and rural development; and implementing direct poverty-
alleviation measures. Progress was made under the first objective as fiscal performance improved
substantially in 1997-98. However, budget performance deteriorated in 1999, and continues to be
under pressure because of the sharp deterioration in the terms of trade and shortfalls in program
assistance. In reference to the second objective, we are far from a "breakthrough" in private
investment, although non-traditional exports have expanded four-fold since 1994. Recent data
indicate a mixed record on the third objective: broad-based social and rural development. Health
status has improved and poverty rates have declined modestly. However, agricultural growth has

4

not accelerated enough to raise consumption appreciably in some regions (North) and groups
(food crop farmers). The Bank is helping the Government to implement direct poverty alleviation
measures through a LIL, which includes targeted interventions for child nutrition and street
children.

What Worked Well

8. 
The Bank's adjustment operations (a one tranche Economic Reform Support Credit in
FY98, followed by a three-tranche ERSO II in FY99) worked effectively to support Ghana's
improvement in fiscal performance, as well as structural reforms - higher electricity tariffs,
reintroduction of the VAT, demonopolization of external marketing for cocoa, and strengthening
of the banking system. Support to reforms in public spending also worked fairly well. The
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework was established. Support to the expansion of access to
safe water and sanitation in rural areas was effective; the share of the rural poor with access to
safe water increased by nearly 50 percent in the 1990s.

9. 
Two aspects of the Bank's approach have gone especially well. First, there has been a
strong effort in the context of the CDF to improve and deepen donor coordination, notably
through the creation of the "Mini-CG." The recent in-country Consultative Group Meeting
recognized that considerable improvements have been achieved in the last two years. This is a
key focus of Ghana's CDF, and is also reflected in the extent to which Ghana's development
partners have been able to move towards programmatic approaches to assistance in health and
roads. Second, during the period, the Bank rapidly decentralized operations to the Ghana Office,
which elicited a strong positive response in the 1999 Client Survey.

What Did Not Work Well

10. 
In spite of better fiscal performance, the domestic debt burden remains a serious problem.
Efforts to reduce expenditure and improve tax administration were not sufficient to reach the
primary surplus target set out in the last CAS (5 percent) and interest rates did not decline as
projected, leaving the Government: in a vicious circle of borrowing in order to cover domestic
debt service. This is an untenable situation which crowds out private borrowing and puts upward
pressure on interest rates. The Bank erred by financing directed credit despite this poor policy
environment. The Government established the Public Utilities Regulatory and the Energy
Commissions, but the regulatory framework for telecommunications is inadequate, in spite of
Bank support. Private participation in infrastructure remains limited. More than a decade after
starting to divest, only 25 percent of public enterprises (by value) have been privatized. Long-
standing Bank support to the process of privatization has not been successful in improving either
the quality or the quantity of its achievements. It is the Bank staff's view that the private sector
doubts the commitment of the Government to private sector-led growth.

11. 
IFC's portfolio decreased during the previous CAS period, due to a lack of large-scale
investments requiring international project finance, notably in infrastructure. IFC's involvement
in other areas, such as finance, was, limited by the sluggish pace of reforms and low levels of
investment. IFC's SME investments and support facilities, however, expanded and were a source
of innovation. In spite of progress on the policy front, in recent years annual FDI inflows to
Ghana averaged only about US$70 million, low even by African standards. MIGA's perspective
suggests that the reason is not lack of interest (several inquiries and preliminary applications have
been received) but because investors finally decided not to pursue projects. Only three
guarantees are outstanding - all related to one mining equipment company. Insights from MIGA
technical assistance activities suggest that regulatory obstacles are a problem.

2 Domestic marketing of cocoa is already liberalized.

5

12. The Government has begun to reform public statutory agencies, but the size of the public
service is still bloated. Reforms supported by earlier Bank lending were not sustained. They
were too narrowly focused and did not address problems in sufficient depth. More work is
needed to improve public services by refocusing the operational objectives of government
institutions and subvented organizations, including by commercializing (fully or partially) some
agencies. Our efforts in education have not worked well. A tertiary education project closed with
an unsatisfactory rating because of little progress on reforms. Poor quality is a problem and the
public sector could do more to close gaps in school attendance rates between the poor and
non-poor, the North and other regions, the city and the countryside, and boys and girls.

C. Instruments of Bank Group Assistance

13. During the upcoming CAS period, Sector Investment Credits and Adaptable Program
Loans would continue to be used in all areas where capacity, as well as the agreement on
objectives and the future program, support such lending. Proposed program lending (i.e., quick
disbursing budget support) represents about a third of total lending. The following changes in
approach and instruments are envisaged.

* First, the proposed program is more oriented to the poor and to reducing poverty. In
practical termns, this means a focus on areas critical to poor Ghanaians (food crops, land titling)
and on increasing their access to basic services (education, health, water and sanitation) which are
crucial to expanding economic opportunities for them. Within "national" programs, project
design would ensure that underserved, poor areas (the Northern Region and rural areas) receive
priority. In discussions with the Government, the National Development Planning Commission
describes this as using a "poverty sieve" for each activity in order to enhance the links with
poverty reduction. Poor communities will be more involved in project implementation.
Increasing the explicit priority on poverty reduction was a strong recommendation received in the
Client Survey. Also, a more consistent and effective strategy to promote decentralization needs
to be developed, which focuses on the efficient delivery of key social services. In that context,
there is room to simplify and rationalize the design of projects being implemented in a
decentralized framework.

* Second, the analytical basis of the program needs to be recapitalized, and economic
work would focus more on the potential for non-traditional exports, as well as on
decentralization. The objective of the FY98 CAS to move in this direction was not possible, not
least since the budget for the Ghana program fell by over 25 percent in this period. The
considerably rationalized portfolio (see paragraph 14) should now facilitate this shift.

* Third, an objective of the program is to work more, and more effectively, with
partners outside the Government, especially civil society and the private sector, and continue to
deepen collaboration with other development partners through the CDF institutional mechanisms.
This is particularly important for governance issues.

* Fourth, the program continues to stress the importance of supporting reforms in
public sector management, using it as a vehicle to make progress on important issues such as
legal reform, governance/corruption, and financial management, including the consistent use of
the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF).

* Fifth, the IDA program would reduce direct lending for private sector development,
while maintaining a focus on improving the legal and regulatory framework. IDA would reduce
direct financing of infrastructure that the private sector could finance (e.g., electricity and urban

6

B 2:. Main Results of Client Su vey, Consultations with Civil Society ai CountrytAssisnce baluatioD

I. Client Survey

0 

Q 

fi 

* Director's move to Accra
* World Bank works in partnership with Government

Low RtatingsS 00 

Country Conditions
* Respectfor local knowledge and expertise
Al biity to adat our knowledge to Ghana's needs
Policy advice.' respecting Ghna's social priorities

* 

Poverty Reduction

* Giving appropriate priority to pvet 

Projet Designhmplementation

redtion

* G 
Setting 
the projetthro im 
plementation 
qickly enoughfor Ghana'ls needs 
* Hdelpig restructure projects that are nat doing well
* 
Flexi00bilit i ajstoi~ngff to0 changing::: coun;; ;;try 
c;ircmsane
* World; Bankirealism givenGhana's situation and constraints
* ;V0Flexiilty in applyng procrement irulesT0d0i 
Suporting project mang 
lipemenii 
Long-Term Issues
* Establishing conditions fr 
long-term sustainability
* Helping to safeguard the envoment

ff 
qtationprlems

f 

fiTu00 

aSt

C,ommunications

* Disseminaftioniof the results to the people in Ghana who need therm mos t
0Loweffectivenessratings 

from Cs and organized interest groups

Lower levels of authority (local government, district assemblies, co 
forusing resources, dcision-making and Monitorngrsults.

i 

shoudb m 

respoible

Concern on resource allocation.

terarea of concern:
Agriculture/Environment: Food crop perforance crop diverii 

organizations. infrastructure, technology, extension, lnd tenuen 

* 

Education: Girls' edueation, pre-school services,teacconditios, 
consultations, quality, and services in ruril areas.
*0 Health Disparities in access; cash/carrsystem d 

s. ex 

sge 

d processing faclities, fare r

gtion.

ipmtioof 

icy, lk of

ystemandserfesheat 

isae,

* Rad: Neeid for imorpeinvestmne;t 
0 s.:t;;: ; ;(XXt

* jFinance/Credit: Lack ofaccess to crediltis major problem, particulairy for farmers.

;IL Country Aosstnce £v*l**tiou (2000)

* 

Pevious)Country Assistan Strategies (1995 and 1997) did not aequately focus on key porities, 

consequent shoralls in macroeconomic stability, public secor management, and prvate sector developmnent.
* The portfolio is actively managed and has po 
well, exceot in the criticalareas of private 
dnt

* 

and some EducationlPHN proJects.
Fven though many aspects of the program succeeded, 
governance have not been addressed.

it has not been fu 

llyr n 

e imortntissues of

*0 IDA should focus its efforts on impoing governance; public fncepc 
Stability: and private sector developmen Dependi 
e avail 

ty 

then also support huma n capital developmernt in health an education, :selCted other 
sector s

iyasit 

afects macroeeornii

atl ad hr Su o I 

ld

7

water) with possible support from IFC and MIGA. IDA would not be directly involved in
agribusiness. It is an area where both the African Development Bank and the IFC are active and
can deepen their involvement. IDA would also move away from direct lending to financial
institutions, reflecting a shift to IFC support in providing term finance, equity and capacity
building.

D. Portfolio Management

14. As of January 1, 2000, there were 23 active projects in the Bank's portfolio in Ghana,
totaling US$ 1003.8 million, of which US$540 million is undisbursed, significantly lower than the
35 projects totaling US$1400 million at the start of the previous CAS period. Portfolio
performance initially deteriorated (partially reflecting more realistic ratings), but has improved
recently. At the end of FY98, there were eight problem projects representing 38 percent of
commitments. At present, there are five problem projects representing about 11 percent of
commitments. Of these, four projects have recently been restructured. The target for end
FY2000 is zero problem projects. Slow disbursements remain a problem. Disbursement lags
were over 33 percent for 12 projects and over 50 percent for eight of them. The Realism Index
improved from 80 to 100 percent during the previous CAS period, while the Proactivity Index,
dropped slightly to 67 percent because of delays in reaching agreement with the Government on
how to restructure projects. The Client Survey criticized the Bank on this point. It is an area
which needs to be improved. On service standards, Ghana's performance during the last fiscal
year was slightly worse than the Bank average, particularly for time elapsed between Board and
Effectiveness. Only a third of projects met the four-month standard. All projects met the
five-month standard for time elapsed between Appraisal and Board.

15. Future Portfolio Actions. We intend to focus on the following three priorities in order to
improve performance during the upcoming CAS period:

(a) better and more frequent project monitoring led by the implementation team in the
Ghana Office;

(b) 

(c) 

increasing the proactivity of our Ghanaian partners, especially the Ministry of
Finance, in monitoring the program and addressing problems early; and

trying to resolve the perennial counterpart funds issue by moving to programmatic
lending, and replacing it with the concept of appropriate levels of sector funding by
the Government through the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.

E. Support to Ghana's Development Agenda

Proposed Country Assistance Strategy

16. The overriding goal of the Government of Ghana's Development Strategy for Poverty
Reduction and the support of the World Bank Group is to eliminate hard-core poverty. Within
that broad goal, the proposed business strategy of the Bank Group would help the Government to:
(i) raise the growth rate of the economy; (ii) redefine the role of the State; and (iii) implement
their strategy more effectively on the ground.

Increasing Growth

17. Higher growth is key to accelerating poverty reduction in Ghana. In spite of a 15 percent
reduction in the share of the population below the poverty line during the previous decade, about

8

29 
24 
8 
28 
38 

44 

28 
30 
6 
21 
12 

14 

23
30
5
22
11

20

Number of Projects 
Investment Disbursement Ratio (%) 
Number of Problem Projects 
Percentage of Problem Projects by Number 
Percentage of Problem Projects by Amount 

Canceled (US$M) 

Estimated

40 percent of Ghanaians are classified as poor and about 30 percent are extremely poor3 The
Government has an ambitious target for economic growth (8 percent per annum), which they
failed to meet during the previous CAS period. If Ghana is to become more successful, it will
have to address with more effort the key constraints to higher growth. First, for the private sector
to become the engine of growth and generate employment, further improvements are needed in
the legal and regulatory framework. Parliament is considering a revised labor code which was
prepared with the assistance of the International Labor Organization (ILO) and is in line with that
organization's guidelines on core labor standards. In other areas as well, the private sector has to
perceive a more attractive investment environment and greater consistency in the application of
policies and regulations (see Box 3). Second, infrastructure bottlenecks need to be alleviated.
Costly transportation is a barrier to agricultural marketing. Power outages are a problem. In
some areas - transportation, power, and water - it will not be possible to expand access and
improve quality without more private sector participation. Progress on both of these fronts would
lower the cost of doing business in Ghana and promote a buoyant private sector.

18. Recent data show that the pattern of growth will, to a great extent, determine whether the
Government is successful in reducing poverty. In spite of a modest decrease in overall poverty in
Ghana during the 1990s, poverty rates either stagnated or increased in the rural coast and
savannah. Food crop farmers need to participate in the expansion of the economy to a greater
extent than they have up to now. During the 1 990s, the share of food crop farmers falling below
the extreme poverty line fell only slightly from 50 to 46 percent. Strongly related to that issue,
social and economic disparities between the North and other regions need to be addressed. Given
Ghana's relatively small domestic market, higher growth will have to be led by exports. In the
previous decade, an expansion in traditional exports - cocoa, timber and gold - led growth.
These products will continue to be important, but further expansion must come to a greater extent
from non-traditional products.

19. 
If growth in Ghana is to be pro-poor, the performance of agriculture must improve by
increasing productivity in food crops and expanding opportunities in commercial crops. The
Bank has long been active in agriculture, but progress has fallen short of the goals, a view also
expressed during the consultations with civil society. This year we will review our performance

The upper poverty line is the equivalent of $1/day, while the extreme poverty line (covering only minimum calorie
requirements) is about $0.75/day.

9

Box 3: Private Sector Views

Biggest obstacle is high interest rates
Mistrust of the Government
Government does not provide enough information on economic trends or budget
Focus on exports
Feel effects of exchange rate instability
No facility within World Bank Group for small businesses
World Bank Group needs to put more pressure on Government to improve enabling environment
Inadequate regulatory fiamework for telecommunications
Customs procedures are cumbersome
Tied aid does not promote the private sector
Difficult labor-management relations

"We have been talkingfor a long time. There does not seem to be any progress.
"`f you dont have the right affiliation, you don't go far. "
"The best people to help thepprivate sector are the private sector themselves."

in agriculture by examining the results of five projects which are closing. The main instrument of
future Bank support is an Agriculture Services APL, an integrated, sector-wide approach to
work with the Government and other donors, to increase productivity by improving the efficiency
and impact of supporting services, including research and extension. Current land tenure
arrangements, including for women, hinder agricultural development. These would be addressed
in a proposed Land Administration Project. More than half of the workers in agriculture are
women and they are more likely than men to cultivate food instead of cash crops. There is
considerable scope for improving women's agricultural productivity, as well as incomes from
enterprises, simply by improving their access to key inputs needed for production. To that end,
the Agriculture Services APL will give priority to improving access to inputs needed for
agricultural production, developing agricultural extension services that better meet the needs of
small farmers, and improving small-scale agroprocessing and storage techniques.

20. An Economic Report to be completed in CY2000 will analyze the performance,
constraints, and potential for growth in nontraditional exports, many of which are agriculture-
based products. In cooperation with IFC and the African Development Bank, a Review of
Agribusiness would be carried out. It could lay the base for more opportunities for IFC
engagement, as well as support from ADB, for whom this is a priority set out in their Country
Strategy paper, which is being prepared in parallel with this CAS.

21. The Bank program would concentrate on helping to establish an appropriate regulatory
framework, assisting the Government to expand participation of the private sector in electricity
and water, and alleviating infrastructure bottlenecks, particularly in roads. Improvements in the
regulatory environment will be supported through a restructured project (Public Enterprise and
Privatization Technical Assistance) in the existing portfolio, while other unsuccessful private
sector projects are wound down. The one new project proposed in the private sector area
(Gateway II) would follow up on an ongoing activity, which is strengthening supporting services
for export expansion such as customs, trade facilitation, and improvements in transportation. The
ongoing project aims also to support the Environmental Protection Agency in monitoring
compliance with environmental regulations and standards. MIGA collaborates in project

10

implementation by providing capalcity building for investment generation. The second project
would extend the reach of the service improvements beyond the current focus on the free zone.

22. The Bank Group's support to private sector participation in infrastructure would integrate
the services and products available from the Bank, IFC and MIGA. This is already the case in
power (where joint activities are in progress) and will be explored in other areas. IFC will
actively seek to finance investments which ensue from the new focus on private participation in
infrastructure, initially in power and telecommunications, where projects are underway. IFC will
also seek to finance investments in urban water, ports and other transportation areas, as those
sectors are opened to private participation. To help implement complex privatizations and
structure private participation, IFC will provide advisory services at the transaction stage, to
complement the Bank's assistance, as it is already doing in power. While a larger role for the
private sector is a key element for economic growth and poverty reduction, experience worldwide
indicates that a sound regulatory fiamework for ensuring that environmental and social
safeguards are in place is a prerequisite to ensure that such growth is sustainable. Additionally,
in-country capacity for monitoring compliance needs to be assured. With regard to the private
provision of infrastructure and services, the Bank Group support will ensure that appropriate
safeguards are in place, with regard to the integration of environmental and social considerations.

23. The Bank is assisting the Government to restructure the Urban Water system, including
private participation. At the time of writing, however, it is unclear whether the Bank will be
compelled to withdraw from this sector, as the Government plans to award a major contract under
this program in a non-transparent rnanner. If this occurs, the Government has been informed that
the allocated funds in the proposed lending program (FY2001), US$100 million, would be
cancelled from the proposed three-year program. To address the constraints posed by an
inadequate transportation network, the Bank is preparing a Roads Sector Investment Project for
presentation to the Board in late FY2000 or early FY2001. A supplement to help the Government
further expand electricity generaticin capacity is also being prepared for this fiscal year. Possibly,
the Bank would prepare an electricity project to help the Government expand services in poor
areas of less interest to private operators. When, and in which circumstances, we would enter
into such lending would depend on the timing and the outcome of the ongoing efforts to expand
private sector participation in power.

24. 
It is the Bank staff's view that macroeconomic instability during much of the previous
decade was a major factor behind (ihana's failure to achieve higher growth rates. The Bank's
main instruments to support macroeconomic stability are the recently approved Second Economic
Reforn Support Operation (ERSO II), policy advice, and new adjustment lending. In view of the
severe deterioration in Ghana's tenns of trade this year, a supplement to the second tranche of
ERSO II is being considered. This will depend on the size of the financing gap as other partners
firm up their intentions, and, more importantly, on the quality and timeliness of the Government's
response to the difficult situation it faces.

25. The high burden of domestic debt - a legacy of past expansionary fiscal policies and
continued high interest rates - is the major obstacle to private sector-led growth. Private
investors cannot access the funds thiey need given high interest rates and crowding out by
Government borrowing. In order for the Government to get out of the vicious circle it is in now
of borrowing to cover domestic debt service, fiscal performance must improve significantly.
Domestic interest payments were equivalent to a third of discretionary expenditures in 1999. Sale
proceeds from privatizations (power, for example) could be used to reduce the stock of domestic
debt. Better management of the budget, including domestic debt, will be supported under the
second Public Financial Management Project, and the Bank will continue to encourage
stronger fiscal performance and progress on privatization, which are program triggers. Program

11

assistance (i.e., quick-disbursing budget support), such as the new Economic Reform Support
Operations (III and IV) proposed in paragraph 47, also permits the Government to reduce the
burden of domestic financing. We would explore the possibility of structuring this support as
Adaptable Program Assistance.

26. A strong and efficient financial system is necessary to underpin higher growth, and the
Bank and IFC both have roles to play. The Bank will continue to support improvements in
financial sector regulation and public sector capacity, while IFC intends to expand its direct
investments in the private sector. Together with other donors, the Bank would participate in a
Rural Finance Project which aims to strengthen rural banks. The ongoing Non-Bank Financial
Institutions Project supports improvements in regulation and supervision of the financial system,
thereby protecting savers, contributors and Government from costs of institutional failure, as well
as improvements in payments system linkages, including to the rural (poorer) areas. The IMF,
IFC and Bank would work together on a Financial Sector Assessment (FY2001). Expanded
support to the financial sector is a key part of IFC strategy for Ghana. IFC's targeted areas for
investment include: providing term resources to commercial banks for medium-term finance;
helping introduce new financial products; investing equity in start-up ventures, particularly
non-bank financial institutions (life insurance, microfinance); and providing capacity building
and advisory assistance. Three new operations in this area are under preparation. The increased
involvement by IFC in financial institutions involved in microfinance would tend to benefit
women as they dominate trading and retail activities (an expected focus of lending) and are more
likely to participate in small companies.

27. 
In order to ensure the sustainability of growth, environmental concems need to be
adequately addressed. The key natural resource management issues in Ghana are land and forest
degradation and the loss of biodiversity associated with unsustainable harvesting levels in the
high forest and the savanna, and with inappropriate farming practices. The Bank's main
instrument to support the Government's efforts to ensure sustainable development is the ongoing
Natural Resources Management APL. Its objective is to establish the institutional and policy
framework for implementing ecologically and socio-economically sustainable management
systems for high forest, savannah woodland and wildlife resources, in collaboration with local
communities.

28. The Bank has supported water resources management by coordinating analytical work, as
well as by assisting the Water Resources Commission to participate in a regional study on Volta
Water Resources. The rural water infrastructure component of the ongoing Village Infrastructure
Project aims to promote water conservation practices and the rational use of water for agriculture.
The coastal zone management component aims to promote local capacity and investments for
sound management of the coastal and marine ecosystem, in line with the strategy developed by
the Environmental Protection Agency and the Bank, with support from the GEF and donors.
Effective coastal zone management is likely to influence significantly poverty reduction efforts in
the rural coastal area (which has not benefited as much as other areas from economic growth).

29. Under the ongoing programs supported in mining, the Bank facilitated the privatization of
the state-owned mines, providing assistance in capacity building and policy dialogue, as well as
in addressing environmental, health and safety concerns. Poor provision of urban infrastructure is
also a serious environmental issue in Ghana. This problem is being addressed through existing
projects (Urban Environmental Sanitation and Local Government Development), as well as two
proposed projects: Urban V (Medium-Sized Towns) and Greater Accra Urban Poverty.

12

Redefining the Role of the State

30. As expressed in Ghana-Vision 2020, the role of the Government is to efficiently provide
public goods and services and ensure an equitable distribution of the benefits of development.
Two main obstacles are hindering progress. On one hand, the public sector is overextended in
several areas (cocoa marketing, media, utilities) which are not public goods. To make matters
worse, public sector performance has been poor (utilities, for example), acting as a drag on the
economy. The main factor behind Ghana's relatively low marks on structural reforms, as
measured by several indicators of the World Bank, in spite of its early adjustment program, is
either excessive state involvement in the economy, or the consequences of that involvement (for
example, non-performing loans). It is the Bank staff's view that the main factor which has
limited the disengagement of the state is lack of commitment by the top level of the Government
to go very far. The lack of will is demonstrated by the slow progress and low proceeds from
privatization and political interference in the process. The disengagement that has occurred has
been piecemeal, not part of a clear, overall strategy. The role of the non-profit private sector
could be enhanced and a more constructive and proactive relationship promoted between it and
the Government. One obstacle is the lack of a general framework for the participation of non-
governmental organizations.

31. On the other hand, it is widely felt that the Government does not do enough to deliver
public goods and services and ensure equitable development. In key social indicators such as
literacy and school enrollments, Ghana is losing its previous advantage over other Sub-Saharan
African countries - a trend at odds with its goal of becoming a middle-income country. There is
also a wonrying recent trend of lower utilization of health services. Data on poverty trends
indicate that the benefits of Ghana's moderate growth have not been shared equally by all regions
or groups, particularly the Northern Region and food crop farmers. More effort is needed to
improve the monitoring and evaluation of public programs and policies, including by ensuring
consultations between the public sector and other groups, such as the business community and
civil society at all stages of the process. Many groups think that the flow of information
(economic and budget data, for example) to those outside of the Government is insufficient. A
better partnership with the non-profit private sector could help improve the Government's
effectiveness in ensuring equitable development.

32. There are indications that the Government is becoming more willing to disengage from
some activities - cocoa marketing and utilities being important examples. The work to improve
the regulatory and legal framework described above will be important to support the
Government's efforts to disengage. In addition, the Bank will continue to promote improvements
in the divestment process, focusing on large enterprises for which decisions have been taken to
privatize key activities (power, urban water, ports, and railways), and where private sector
participation could have a large positive impact on the quantity and quality of services. Better
integration and more strategic use of the instruments of the different Bank group entities (IDA,
IFC and MIGA) are likely to be more effective in encouraging progress than sole involvement of
IDA. IFC advisory services on sector restructuring and privatization in infrastructure, for
example, can be effective in following through with complex transactions, as in power. As this
process moves forward, we foresee the need to update our analytical work on the roles of the
public and private sectors in infrastructure provision in Ghana. The first phase of the
liberalization of external marketing of cocoa is a condition of the ERSO II adjustment loan, and
subsequent phases would be supported in future lending.

33. 
In order to improve the efficie:ncy and responsiveness of public services, reforms are
necessary in policy formulation, budget accounting, public administration, and monitoring and
evaluation of Government performance. The main instruments for continued Bank support to

13

improvements in public finance (including better information flow to the public and private
groups) is the proposed Second Public Financial Management Project. Though we have no
instrument to address directly the size of the bloated public service, the ongoing Public Sector
Management APL aims at commercializing Government operations and thus indirectly reducing
the number of public servants. In addition, other partners are assisting the Government in this
regard. The social impact of these actions are being examined through a broad participatory and
systematic stakeholder analysis. The results will feed into the design of programs to assist
retrenched workers and their families, and other actions to ensure sustainability of the changes.
Reforms at the center must be complemented by a credible decentralization process which
deconcentrates administrative and fiscal authority.

34. The Bank strategy envisages support to both education and health, to help the Government
improve the access to services and outcomes, particularly for poorer groups and regions, and
women. In nonformal education, the Bank supports the Government's literacy program, which
focuses on women and residents of rural areas. While 60 percent of Ghanaians over the age of 15
are literate, this is true for only about a third of women or farmers.

35. During the.upcoming CAS period, the Bank faces two major challenges in education. The
first is the poor performance of basic education, reflected in the unsatisfactory status of the
ongoing Basic Education operation. This is being addressed through support to the Ministry of
Education in management and organization, and will be a primary area of focus for all
development partners. At this time we believe it may not be necessary for IDA to program
additional lending in basic education, given the large availability of other sources of funding, and
their current low rate of utilization. However, that judgement would be reexamined if necessary,
in the light of any identified financing gaps in this area once the sector program is better defined
next year.

36. The second challenge is to assist the Government to expand access and to improve the
quality of post-basic education. Weak implementation of the Government's education policy was
an important concern raised by many during the consultations with civil society. Although
enrollments in senior secondary schools are growing, still less than 30 percent of Ghanaian
children reach this level, and, whereas the gap in enrollment in basic education between girls and
boys has narrowed significantly, at higher levels the participation of girls drops. In senior
secondary, only about a third of the students are girls and it drops to about a quarter at the tertiary
level. Preparation of support to post-basic education has been delayed because of implementation
constraints in the Ministry of Education. A PHRD grant has been mobilized to address some of
these constraints and to support analytical work. Assuming that those activities can be used to
improve capacity and better define strategies, we hope to be able to prepare two phases of an
Education APL. The first would focus on tertiary education and the second on senior secondary
schooling.

37. A Second Health Sector Project is planned which would continue the sector-wide support
to health services. The adult HIV prevalence rate in Ghana is estimated to be about 4.6 percent;
incidence rates are two times higher among women than men. HIV remains predominantly in
groups whose behavior places them at high risk, but Ghana's current prevalence rate is on the
threshold of becoming a more generalized epidemic, in which case the disease would spread
rapidly to the general population. In connection with the ongoing and the proposed follow-up
Health Sector Projects, and in cooperation with our partners, particularly UNAIDS, the Bank will
assist the Government to ensure that an effective multi-sector program is in place to change the
behavior of those at highest risk of contracting and spreading HIV, and to support better services
for those living with HIV/AIDS. In particular, the Bank will try to address one of the gaps in the
response in Ghana - the lack of a mechanism to provide resources to community-based and civil

14

society groups to undertake activities in this area. In the short run, we may address this by

proposing a supplement to the ongoing Health Sector Investment Credit.4 In addition, we are

examining the scope within the portfolio for restructuring to incorporate programs of education
and prevention, in such areas as the basic education program, agricultural extension and road
building. Opportunities to support these activities would also be sought in new projects. In both
education and health, the private sector plays a significant role, and IFC is actively exploring
projects in these sectors in Ghana. There is potential for expanded participation and for better
collaboration between the private and public sectors. In future analytical and project work, the
Bank will take this into account more. including by taking advantage of IFC's recent increased
involvement.

38. Recent data on poverty trends in Ghana have highlighted the need to focus more on the
impact of public policies and programs on the poor. This is a relatively new priority, as the
disparities among different regions and groups in the past were not as pronounced as they are
now. The Bank will try to improve capacity in this area, including through the recently approved
Community Development LIL, and would begin work towards the end of the CAS period on
scaling up activities supported in that operation. Important links also need to be strengthened
with public finance initiatives, such as the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.

39. The Urban V (Medium-Sized Towns) project is designed to address the infrastructure
constraints in the smaller cities of Ghana. This is a poverty-targeted intervention since, with the
exception of Accra, poverty levels either stagnated or rose in all other urban areas of the country
during the 1990s. The planned Greater Accra Urban Poverty Project will incorporate specific
mechanisms to target the poorest population, including an emphasis on community participation,
and will be part of the "Cities without Slums" initiative. An important activity to improve
services for the poor is the Second Community Water and Sanitation APL, approved by the
Board earlier this fiscal year. The project supports the Government of Ghana program to extend
coverage of water and sanitation facilities to 85 percent of the rural population by the year 2009,
and establish a sustainable operations and maintenance system in rural communities. Inadequate
infrastructure facilities - especially vater supply - greatly curtail women's productivity and
increase their time commitments. Such time constraints hamper most women's ability to manage
farms or other enterprises. Women in rural areas traditionally play a strong role in household
water supply and sanitation. The project promotes the involvement of men and women in project
planning and operations and maintenance. There is a requirement that women sign all
community agreements.

Implementing the Strategy More Effectively

40. Several problems hinder the effective implementation of Ghana's development strategy.
First, although the implementation oi decentralization of government services and responsibilities
to the district level5 has started, the process is not complete. Most central government agencies
are resisting the decentralization of financial and human resources which is critical to make
decentralization work. In some areas local political authorities and the representatives of central
government agencies are at loggerheads. Second, the systems governing the management and use
of the Government's financial resources are weak in areas such as monitoring actual
expenditures, auditing, and clearly and consistently applying regulations. The expenditures
supporting the Govemment's Development Strategy for Poverty Reduction needed to be linked
closely to the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. There is a need for simple and transparent

4 As an incentive to the Govemment to clean Iup the portfolio, we are considering proposing such a supplement in the

same amount as would be canceled in the rationalized operations.

Ghana presently has 110 Districts in its 10 regions. Each district has a minimum of 75,000 residents.

15

systems, including in public procurement. Excessive bureaucracy creates opportunities for
corruption and identified corrupt officials are often not sanctioned. Third, there is mistrust
between Government and civil society. The flow of information is inadequate and there are few
established mechanisms to promote a partnership between Government and civil society. In
consultations with civil society and the business community for this CAS, this came through time
and again as an important area for increased Bank involvement. The citizens of Ghana and
groups outside of the Government can have an effective input into public policy and programs
only if they have a sufficient base of knowledge and information. We would address this
weakness by being more proactive in disseminating the results of our analytical work and projects
within Ghana, as well as by using projects to strengthen the Government's commitment to better
information flows, as well as its capacity to deliver better service.

41. 
In the area of decentralization, analytical work is planned that would in the first instance
help us and other donors rationalize different approaches to local governments and communities.
This work would feed into the next Consultative Group Meeting for Ghana (tentatively scheduled
for late 2001), whose theme is expected to be decentralization. A Decentralization APL would
support implementation of the Local Government Service Act which is expected to be sent to the
Cabinet soon. The design of the Urban V (Medium-Sized Towns) APL was modified to be
more demand-driven, thereby encouraging the transfer of greater responsibility to local
governments. We would look for other opportunities to apply that principle, including by
supporting community action in the upcoming urban project in Accra. Both of these projects (as
well as the ongoing Local Government Project) focus on capacity building at the district level.
The importance of moving in this direction was highlighted during the consultations with civil
society.

42. We would help the Government address weaknesses and corruption in the management
and use of financial resources, including procurement, by putting in place the appropriate legal
and regulatory framework; by assisting Parliament to strengthen its oversized capacity; and by
improving capacity through the Public Sector Management APL and Public Financial
Management Reform II. In cooperation with WBI, a survey on corruption will be carried out.
A Comprehensive Financial Accountability Assessment, which would identify areas that need
to be improved, is planned later this fiscal year. The Bank would continue to take a strong stand
if corruption is identified in our projects. We also are considering providing support to enhance
the monitoring and evaluation capacity of Government and other stakeholders (for example,
non-profit private sector) through one of the projects mentioned above. WBI (jointly with the
Operations Evaluation Department of the Bank) also is sponsoring training courses on monitoring
and evaluation for public officials and the non-profit private sector.

43. We would also propose to deepen our relationships with organizations outside the
Government. A LIL(s) for Promoting Partnerships with Traditional Authorities would
support opportunities to collaborate with traditional leaders and local government in areas of
common interest such as community involvement in education, land titling, HIV/AIDS
prevention and cultural heritage, recognizing the influence of such leaders and their renewed
interest in developmental issues. WBI also has supported activities to strengthen Parliament. In
the area of information dissemination, WBI has sponsored activities to strengthen economic
journalism.

F. Size and Composition of Bank Group Program

44. We envisage four to five new projects (including second phases of APLs) a year, totaling
US$490 million over the period FY2001-2003 for the base case. The program includes several
APLs, as well as at least one LIL. We anticipate that in FY2002, assuming good progress, the

16

second stage of the Public Sector Management APL would begin, and in FY2003, the second
phase of both the Natural Resource Management APL and the Community Water and Sanitation
APL would begin.

45. The amounts proposed compare with actual lending of SDR 317 million (US$454 million)
for FY97-99 and an indicative IDA allocation in the LAR for FYO1-03 of SDR 365 million
(US$490 million). The proposed base case is only slightly higher than past lending levels and
assumes continued adequate fiscal performance. In the event that we reach the high case, our
proposed lending levels would be about 40 percent higher than the past. In the low case, lending
would be a third lower than the previous lending level.

46. The triggers are the public sector borrowing requirement, portfolio performance, cocoa
reform, private participation in infiastructure, and education sector performance (Table 2). A key
trigger is the extent to which the Government moves forward on the program to increase private
participation in infrastructure. In the event that progress in this area is completely stalled (or not
carried out in a transparent manner), one infrastructure project, as well as the proposed Gateway
II Project, would drop out of the program. We would follow a low case in the event that the
Government's fiscal performance deteriorated significantly. If this were to occur, the proposed
adjustment loans (totaling US$153 million) would drop out of the program, and the proposed
lending program for the three-year period would fall to US$286 million. Lack of further progress
on the reform of external marketing of cocoa would reduce the amount of adjustment lending. A
summary of the proposed IDA program for the three cases is in Annex B I.

47. Program lending. The Government still has important reforms to deepen in the areas of
cocoa marketing, taxation, trade policy (particularly exemptions) and regulatory environment, if
they are to lay the basis for accelerated private sector and export-led growth. The high domestic
debt-servicing burden, the low level of reserves, Ghana's vulnerability to external shocks, and the
risk that domestic interest rates may be higher than is projected, means that continued program
lending (i.e., quick-disbursing budget support) is necessary during the next CAS period.

48. 
IFC. The volume of IFC investments is difficult to forecast as it depends on demand
which emanates from the levels of private investment. However, if pending private infrastructure
projects proceed, IFC would expect to double or even triple the current portfolio of approximately
US$40 million. These large infrastructure investments would be complemented by financial
sector investments; investments in competitive sectors such as agribusiness, tourism, and export
manufacturing; and increased activity in IFC's SME support facilities.

49. Continued progress in policy reforms and improvements in the regulatory environment for
business would be expected to result in significant levels of MIGA guarantee activity.
Preliminary applications for coverage received by MIGA over the last year include investor
interest in telecommunications, services, water, power and agribusiness, and their indicative
investment values range from US$10 to US$80 million. In addition, MIGA will continue to
provide technical assistance to the Giovernment and the private sector partners on:

* Developing a foreign diirect investment promotion strategy that reflects national
attributes and serves economic objectives;
* Building effective partnerships with public and private sector counterparts;
* Strengthening country image building in the international business community;
* Generating and targetinfg investment opportunities that lead to actual investments;
and
* Servicing investors to ensure that investment is secured and retained.

17

Table 2: Triggers for Lending Program

Triggers 

High Case 

Base Case 

Low Case

Fiscal Performance
Net Public Sector Borrowing Requirement 

<0 

< 3% of GDP > 3% of
GDP

Portfolio Performance
Disbursement Lags in Portfolio6

Structural Reforns
Expanded Private Sector7
Participation in Infrastructure (power, urban water, 
rail, ports)

Liberalization of Cocoa Export Marketings 

Effectiveness in Education9

< 10% 

< 20% 

>20%

Substantial 
Progress 

Little 
Progress

No change

Substantial 
Progress 

Implement 
Planned 
Reforms 

Substantial 
Progress 

Little 
Progress

Fail to
implement
Reforms

No change

G. Collaboration with other Partners (CDF Process)

50. The Government, in cooperation with donors, has carried out substantial work in the
context of the Comprehensive Development Framework. That process already has strengthened
the Government's role in managing donor resources more effectively. This work and local donor
coordination would continue during this CAS period, with a view to promoting more
rationalization of different donor interventions in support of the Government's development
agenda through more sector-wide, coordinated approaches. Under the umbrella of the
"Mini-CG," some 14 partner groups are now functioning, and each has prepared a sector status
and strategy report. These were a key part of the documentation for the November 1999
in-country CG, and have been published on the Government's CDF website
(www.ghanacdf.org.gh/). A feature of the CDF in Ghana is the close collaboration of all resident
UJN agencies. There are explicit linkages between the CDF and the CCA (Common Country
Assessment) and the UNDAF (United Nations Development Assistance Framework) in
particular.

51. 
In the next stage of the CDF, the priorities will be dissemination to and greater
involvement of civil society, as well as building on the CDF for the next phase of development

7There 

6 Disbursement lag in each project weighted by value of commitments. The base in FY99 was 20%.
are five key enterprises concerned: power generation, power distribution, urban water supply, railways and
ports and harbors. "Little progress" would entail private sector participation in two of these enterprises, while
"substantial progress" would entail PSP in at least three out of the five.
s Substantial progress in liberalization of cocoa export marketing would entail allowing private domestic purchasers of
cocoa to export more than the 30 percent share that they will be free to export as of the crop season which starts
October 2000.
Greater effectiveness in education would be assessed on a composite index (1 999= 1 00) of enrollment (40%), rate of
disbursement of donor funds (30%/o) and results of standardized achievement tests (30%). Progress would be
judged "substantial" if the index rises to at least 120 and it would be judged "little" if the index is above 100, but
below 120. If the index does not rise from 100 or declines, it would be considered that "no" progress had been
made.

18

planning (Vision 2020, Second Steps, 2001-5). There is also room to improve donor cooperation
in some areas, in particular, cross-cutting themes such as decentralization, governance and public
sector reform, as well as coordination between the Government and civil society groups. A full
update of progress on the CDF is provided in Annex C.

H. Monitoring Outcomes

52. The proposed core indicators that would be used to measure progress are shown in Table 3.
We include the poverty (extreme) headcount and the poverty gap, with the caveat that the next
Ghana Living Standards Survey is not scheduled to be carried out until 2002/2003, with results
available in late 2003. The CAS matrix includes 10 additional indicators that are more sector
specific. Several would permit Ghana's progress towards the international development targets to
be monitored. They were chosen in collaboration with Government and are the same as those
Government listed in Part I to monitor its poverty reduction strategy. A subset of these
indicators, relating to areas with significant Bank involvement, would be used to monitor Bank
performance. In the area of portfolio management, our goals are zero problem projects and 100
percent for both the Realism and Proactivity Index. Improvements in the latter, in large part
reflecting the role of the implemenitation team in the Ghana office, would address the criticism
received in the Client Survey that vve responded poorly to problems during project
implementation. We would also aim to maintain our performance on service standards where we
are currently in line with Bank guidelines (elapsed time between Appraisal and Board) and to
improve our record in the area where we lag (elapsed time between Board and effectiveness). We
will use two additional instruments to assess the Bank's performance in carrying out this CAS.
First, we intend to carry out a client survey in order to measure changes with the recent client
survey which has informed this CAS. In addition, a Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) would
be carried out by OED close to the end of the CAS period.

Table 3: Prposed CAS Core Benchmarks

Country Performance 

199 

2003

Economic Growth (%) 
Extreme Poverty Headcount Ratio (%) 
Extreme Poverty Gap Ratio (%) 
Prevalence of Child Malnutrition
Rural (%) 
Infant Mortality Rate' 
Literacy Rate
Female (%) 

4.5 
29 
31 

28 
57 

36 

7
25
27

24
52

45

Per 1,000 live births

53. This Country Assistance Strategy is consistent with recommendations of the recent OED
Country Assistance Evaluation described earlier (Box 2). First, the triggers for the lending
program focus on progress on macrceconomic stability, redefining the role of the state, and
improving governance. Second, the CAS identifies several opportunities for better integration of
the instruments and relative comparative advantage of the three parts of the World Bank Group
with a view to improving the environment for private sector-led growth in Ghana. Third, a
concise set of 16 indicators will be used to measure progress. Fourth, the need to accelerate
agricultural growth is a key theme o:f the CAS. Improving the access for women farmers to

19

agricultural services is an important aspect of the program's strategy. Fifth, the CAE highlighted
the need to reduce the gender gap in basic education. In fact, recent data shows progress in this
area. In addition, IDA's ongoing Literacy and Functional Skills Project is targeted to rural
women who have the highest rates of illiteracy. The Bank is also aiming to improve its advocacy
role in education, as well as donor coordination. Sixth, the CAS recognizes the importance of
containing the HIV/AIDS epidemic. The Bank, in cooperation with.other partners, particularly
UNAIDS, is working with the Government to step up its efforts. One priority is to provide
financing for non-governmental and community-based organizations to undertake activities in the
areas of prevention and services for those living with AIDS.

I. Risks

54. The main short-run risk to this program is the possible inability of the Government to
maintain acceptable fiscal performance and macroeconomic stability in the face of both the
severe deterioration in the terms of trade and likely pre-election pressures for spending and for
not taking difficult decisions. In the medium term, the main risk is the continued
"under-performance" of the economy relative to the rates of growth and poverty reduction that
could be achieved with the right enabling environment, stronger fiscal performance, and more
attention by the Government to the task of ensuring equitable development.

55. 
In particular, insufficiently strong fiscal performance would mean that the enabling
environment for the private sector would remain problematic and the financial system would have
little incentive to increase private lending. Slow progress on incorporating private sector
participation in infrastructure or doing it in a non-transparent manner would mean that Ghana
would continue to suffer from critical infrastructure bottlenecks, thereby discouraging private
investment and limiting the access of Ghanaians to a safe supply of water and electricity.
Together, cocoa and gold exports represent nearly three-quarters of the total value of Ghanaian
exports. The Government's ability to manage unfavorable changes in commodity prices - as is
occurring now - is limited, leaving Ghana vulnerable to periodic external shocks. The Bank has
been a close partner of the Government for nearly two decades now. At this juncture, facing an
important political transition and a difficult external environment, it is important that the Bank
continue its close involvement with Ghana and its support in order to encourage the Government
to take the necessary actions to accelerate growth and poverty reduction.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By: Shengman Zhang 

Peter L. Woicke

Attachments

Washington, D.C.
June 29, 2000

Annex A2

Page 1 of 2

Ghana at a glance 

a-Mar

Sub-

POVERTY md SOCIAL 

Saharan Low_-
Africa ncome 
1998 1998
628 3,515 
480 
520

Ghana 
1999 
18.9 
399 

an .e.m..,dI.. 

d

Population, mid-year (mitons) 
GNP per capita (Als method, US$) 

UOOO cV5

y

Average annual growth, 1992-98 
Popuation (%) 
Laborlforce () 
Most recent estimate (latest year availabl. 1992-981
Poverty (6o(popufabon behw naticna/poverwy kne) 
Urban population (% of totpopulation) 
Life epectancy at birth wrs) 
Infent mortality (per 1,000 Me bIfths) 
Child malnutriion (N otchlten under 5) 

GNP

26 

286 1.7 

P.

27 

26 

1.9 

5plO,re,

29
37 
59 
57 

33 
51 
91 

31 
63
69 

Aw0 

ole

_Gh

27 
56 

- -

I

Accoss to safe water (% ofpopulation) 

47 
42 
77 
84 
69 

74

Ilileracy (% ofpopuaton ae 15+) 
Grom pniary enrollment (% of schooage popuatkon) 
Male 
Fwnala 
KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

36 
76 
83 
70 

32
108
113
103

1987 

1997 

1998 1999

GOP (USS biltions) 

5.1 

6.9 

7.5 

7.6 

Trod.

Gross domwetic 
investmentGDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

10.4 
19.7 
3.9 
5.6 

24.0 
32.0 
4.0 
15.0 

25.0 22.0
34.0 32.0 
12.0 
4.0 
19.0 21.0

D-t.

seolnoc

Cument account blance,GDP 
Interest paymentsGDP 
Total debtaGOP 
Total debt service/exports 
PresntvalueordebtlGWP 
Presentvalueofdebtlexports 

-4.4 
1.1 
646 
458 

.14.4 
1.9 
81.3 
254 
480 
150.6 
1997 

-5.1 
-9.9 
1.9 
1.5
79.5 82.1
24.4 24.1
53.8 51.8
156.9 180.6
1998 1999 

hdbO

1977-87 

198B-B8 

2000-2003

(ave 
GOP 
Exports of goods and services 

annul growth)

0.4 
-4.7 

4.3 
9.7 

4.2 
-0.7 

4.7 
16.3 

4.5 
3s5 

5.0
8.1

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1977 

1987 

1997 1998 1999 

Growth rates of output and

(56 of GDP) 

invesment I%)

Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Servces 
Prh'a coonsumpfion 
General govemment consumpton 
Imports of goods and serices 

56.2 
15.8 
10.8 
28&0 
77.4 
12.6 
11.6 

50.6 
16.3 
9.9 
33.1 
85.5 
10.6 
26.2 

35.8 36.0 36.0 
25.0 25.0 25.0 2
9.2 
91 9.3 r
28.0 28.0 280
84.1 77.4 85.4 
12.0 10.6 10.6
53.0 47.0 50.0

E xEport

1977-87 1988-9B 

1997 1998 199J

(average annual growth)
Agricuttwe 

0.8 

27 

4.3 

47 4.5 

Growth rates of exportsad Imports(%)

Industry 
Manuacturing 
Services 

-4.0 
-4.0 
1.9 

4.8 
31 
5.8 

6.4 
7.5 
6.6 

3.2 6.9 
4.0 6.0
6.0 2.2 

4

Private consumption 
General govemrnment 
consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

0.3 
1.4 
-4.6 
-7.0 

3.7 
4.6 
3.8 
7.3 

21.5 
5.1 14.5
0.0 -12.4 7.3 
3.4 21.2 -6.0 
30.5 15.9 12.8

'o

Il)rports 

-Expots

*To. dtned slw fo'r key hdoto nh "s 

/( 

bol) 

red wsib 0. hkm oooe- 

. If dte ter 

. H.e damrod 4

be hsokke.

FWioes h txt df rot my be 

ifnt beas moe 
rent dats (189&99), evn If prenrhary, ha ben ud.

FtA updating of metuer eli be done or cornplte data hae officay ben reased by Govennewo nd Often comparator ngue 
can be Lpdted as we.

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

8-Mar 

Ghana

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE 

s 
80.

t 

i

1987 

1997 

1998 

1999 

Domestc prices
(% change) 

20

Consumer prices 
ImplicitGDP deflator 

39.8 
39.2 

27.9 
19.5 

19.3 
17.1 

12.4 
11.4 

oi

93 

94 

9a 

e8 

67 

98 

99

Govemment finance
(6 of GoP, Includes current grants)

Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

14.1 
2.9 
-5.1 

18.3 
1.6 
-10.8 

18.4 
1.1 
-9.7 

17.0 
0.6 6
-8.4

-

GDP deflator 

CPI

TRADE

1987 1997 

1998 

1999 

Export and Import
Levels (US$millions

(USS inlions) 

Total exports (fob) 
Cocoa 
Timber 
Total imports (cit) 
Fuel and energy 
Export price index (198S=100) 
Import price index (198S=100) 
Terms of trade (1985=100) 

824 
495 
91 
1,009 
145 
97 
69 
141 

1,810 
580 
172 
3,324 
240 
113 
176 
65 

2,091 
688 
170 
3,167 
202 
112 
144 
78 

1,962
542 
174 
3.473 
306 
102 
140
73 

4000
2000 

*

2000 -
0 1,

1

9 

5 96 97 9. 9, 000

_ 

Exports 

Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1987 

1997 

1998 

1999

(USS mIllions) 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 
Net income 
Net cunrent transfers 

Current account balance to
GDP rtio (%)

903 
'1,203 
-300 

2,231 
3,648 
-1417 

2,561 
3,487 
-926 

2,437 
3,772
-1335

-127 
202 

-134 
400 

-139 
454 

-118
472

Current account balance 
Changes in net reserves 

-225 

-990 

-382 

-755

-138 

-25 

-100 

94

Memo:

Reserves including gold (US$ mIllions) 

332 

508 

502 

561

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1977 

1987 

1997 

1998 

1999

(USS mrilions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 
Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

1.067 
43 
79 
38 
5 

3,280 
151 
700 
415 
22 

5,599 
30 
2,617 
578 
15 
31 

5,943 
27
2,963
636 
9 
34

6,205

599
1 0

1 

7 

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

65 
70 
22 
19 
0 

122 
254 
3 
5 
0 

160 
333 
88 
55 
46 

230 
295 
-25 
-10 
80

302
84
53
53

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Netflows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

57 
30 
3 
27 
3 
24 

233 
194 
13 
181 
16 
165 

54 
237 
23 
214 
22 
192 

147 
261 
19
241
20
221

295
208

Ghana: Summary of Proposed IDA Program, FY2001-2003, by Case

FY 

Projects 

MM

Low

Case (b 

Base Case 

High Case

Annex B1

2001 Economic Reform Support 11 
Public Financial Managemrent II 
Promoting Partnerships with
Traditional Authorities LIL (s) 
Greater Accra Urban Poverty 
(Health Supplement for HIV/AIDS) (a) 
Urban Water Restructuring 
Subtotal - FY2001 

2002 Decentralization APL 
Land Administration 
Education Sector (Tertiary) APL 
Health Sector 11 APL 
Public Sector Manag. APL. Phase II 
Subtotal - FY2002 

2003 Trade and Investment Gatewav II 
Educ. Sector APL II - Senior Secondary 
Economic Reform Support IV 
Community Water APL, Phase II 
Natural Resource Manage. APL., Phase II 
Subtotal - FY2003 

-- 

50.0 

5.0 
50.0 
(18.0) 

-

105.0 

25.0 
25.0 
30.0 
30.0 
35.0 
145.0 

--- 
--- 

-

25.0 
10.7 
35.7 

90.0 
50.0 

5.0 
50.0 
(1 8.0) 

-- 

195.0 

25.0 
25.0 
30.0 
30.0 
35.0 
145.0 

50.0 
--- 
63.3 
25.0 
10.7 
149.0 

Total Lending FY2001-2003 

285.7 

489.0 

Nonlending

Support to Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers 
Poverty Analysis, including Incidence of 
Public Expenditures 
Agri-Business Review (w. IFC) 
Financial Sector Assessment Update 
Promoting Foreign Investment (w. IFC, MIGA) 
Country Infrastructure Framework (w. IFC) 
Safety Nets/Targeted Poverty Interventions 

Other

Policy Briefs 
General Economic Work 
Gas Market Development Study 
Client Survey 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

-- 

--- 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 

-- 

Yes 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

100.0
50.0

5.0
50.0
(18.0)
100.0
305.0

25.0
25.0
30.0
30.0
35.0
145.0

50.0
30.0
75.0
25.0
10.7
190.7

640.7

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(a) This supplement would equal any canceled fimds from rationalized operations.
(b) This is a worst-case scenario, with poor performance in the fiscal and private sector participation areas.

Annex B2

GHANA 
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Pedormance and Management

318U

Indicator 
Prfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementabon 
Average Implementabon Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number ^ 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount ^ 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount d 
Disbursement Rato (%) 6 
Poflrbio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (totW USS) 
Average Supervision (USSproject) 

1997 

34 
3.9 
11.76 
11.95 
14.71 
15.76 
22.88 

No 
2757' 
67.6 

1998 

1999 

29 
3.78 
27.59 
38.03 
34.48 
45.07 
23.74 

Yes 
2314' 
62.5 

28 
3.79 
21.43 
12.09 
21.43 
12.09 
29.81 

No 
18400 
54.1 

2000

23
3.33
21.74
11.49
21.74
11.49
30

Yes
2757 I
72.0

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eva] by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (USS millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
65 
23
2385.59 
940.08
29.2 
34.78
23.39 
1914

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the BanKs country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementabon progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfobo Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year Investment projects only. Estmated for 2000.
f. Direct cost for FY2000 not available.
g. Direct cost
h. Fug cost

Ghana - Bank Group Program Summary

Annex B3
Page I of 2

3/81

Proposed IDA Base-Case Lending Program 

Recolyew Pmied 

2 

4 

2001 

Agrncutural Sector Investment APL 
Community Water and Saniation II APL 
Urban 5 APL (Medium-Sized Towns) 
Rural Financial Service 
Therml Power Project Suppement 
Roads Sector 
Subtotal 

Eoonomic Reform Support III 
Public Financial Managenent II 
Pronoting Partnerships with Tradiional
Authorities LIL (s) 
Greter Accra Urban Poverty 
[Heath Sector Supplement 
for HIVIAIDS] 
lUrban Water Restructuring] 
Subtotal 

2002 

Decentralization APL 

Land Adminisuation 

Educaton Sector (Tertiary) APL 
Haat Sector li APL 
Pubic Sector Management APL Phase II 
Subtotal 

2003 

Trade and Investment Gateway li 

Natural Resource Managet APL., Phase 11 
Economic Reform Support IV 
Community Water APL, Phase II 
[Education Sector APL (Son. Sec.), Phase liq 
Subtotal 

Total FY20012003 

USS(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(H/MpL( 

ImpiomenteAion b
Rfsks (lh/ML)

H 
H 
M 
M 
M 
H 

H 
H 

M 

M 
H 
H 

H 
H 
M 
H 
H 

M 

M 

H 
H 
M 

M
L
L
M
M
M

M
H

M

M
M
H

M
M
M
M
H

L

M

M
L
M

45.0 

25.0 
15.7 
5.0 
15.0 

tN.0 

205.7

90.0 
50.0 

5.0 

50.0 
[ [18i 
11001 
195.0

25.0 

25.0 

30.0 
30.0 
35.0 
145.0

50.0 

10.7 
63.3 
25.0 

[P30 

149.0

489.0

a. This table presnts the proposed program for the neat three fiscal year
b. For ach pr 
idte wtr 
c, 
the strategic rewards and imp 
to be high (H). modate (M), or low (L).
c. Not inclded in total for BSe Case. In the cae of the HIV/AIDS supplemt resources match amount beinrg canceled in a
rioabaon d he poory perftorming private sector portfolio. Othr p eiects reer to high cas.
d. FY2000 is i pwreious CAS period. It is shown for infomion only end is not hcluded ki the totals for the upcoming CAS period.
Cumunuiy Water and Sanition II has been apprved by the Boawd. The oths we epected to 9O beforet end of the FY.

_nentsions 
are qe ted

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Ghana 

3/8/

Ghana - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1997-2000

1997 1998 1999 2000

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

IFC appovals (USSm) 

Sector (%)

FINANCIAL SERVICES 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other 

Total 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

8.00 0.00 100.00 0.00

100

0 100 

0 

0

100

0 100 

0 

0

9.850 0.000 18.000 18.000

Annex B4

Ghana-Summary of Nonlending Services

Product 

Completion 

Cost (USS000) 

Audiencea 

Objective'

FY

Recent

Completions

Education Strategy 

FY99 

51 

Govemment. Bank, Donors 

Problem-solving,

___________ ______________ _ 

_____ 

Policy orientation

HIPC- Debt Sustainabilitv Analysis 

FY00 

17 

Govemment. Bank Donors 

Policy-orientation

.__ _ _ _ _ 
_ _ _ _ 

_ __I 

Underwiay

Agriculture Development Bank Study 
Private Sector Development Strategy 

FY00 
FY00 

50 
53 

Govemment, Bank, Donors 
Government, Bank, Donors 

Policy orientation
Policy-orientation,

_____________ 

___________________ 

_ ______________ _ 

___ __ 

problem-solving

General Economic Work 

FY00 

125 

Government, Bank, Donors 

Policy-orientation,

__ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___I_ 

_ 

problem-solving

Policy Briefs 

FY00 

85 

Govemment, Bank, Donors 

Policy-orientation,

problem solving

Economic Report on Exports 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Fiscal Decentralization 

FY01 
FY00 
FY0I 

250 
150 
150 

Govemment, Bank 
Government, Bank 
Govemment, Bank Donors 

Policy orientation
Policy orientation
Policy orientation,
Problem-solving
Policy orientation
Policy-orientation,
Problem-solving
Policy-orientation
Policy-orientation,
Problem-solving

Poverty Profile/Recent Poverty Trends 
Comprehensive Financial 
Accountability Assessment 
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 
Anti-corruption Survey (w. WBI) 

FY00 
FY01 

100 
100 

Government, Bank. Donors 
Govemment, Bank, Donors 

_ 

f 

FY00 
FY01 

80 
100 

Government, Bank. Donors 
Govemment, Bank. Donors 

T 

l___________________________________________________________________ 

Planned

ESW

Support to Poverty Reduction Strategy 

FYO1-03 

240 

Govemment, Bank, Donors 

Policy-orientation

Papers 

_

Poverty Analysis. incl Incidence of 
Public Expenditures 
Agri-Business Review (w. IFC) 

Policy-orientation,
Problem-solving
Policy-orientation,
Problem -solving
Policy-orientation,

FY01 
FY01 

100 
100 

Govemment, Bank. Donors 
Govemment, Bank. Donors 

1 

l___________________________________ 

_______________ 

___________________ 

Financial Sector Assessment Update 

FY01 
150 
.__ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ 

Govemment, Bank. Donors 

___ 

___ 

_.___ 

___ 

___ 

___ 

__ 

_ ___ 

___ 

___ 

___ 

___ 

__ 

Problem 

-solving

Promoting Foreign Investment 
(IFC/MIGA) 
Country lnfrastnucture Framework 
(w.IFC) 
Safety Nets/Targeted Poverty 
Interventions 

Policy-orientation,
Problem-solving
Policy-orientation,
Problem-solving
Policy-orientation,
Problem-solving

| 

FY02 

100 

Govermment, Bank, Donors 

FY02 

100 

Goverment, Bank. Donors 

FY03 

150 

Govemment. Bank, Donors 

Other

Policy Briefs 

FYO 1-03 

150 

Government, Bank, Donors 

Policy-orientation,

Problem-solving

General Economic Work 

FYOI-03 

375 

Government, Bank. Donors 

Policy-orientation,

_________________________ 
___ 

Problem-solving

Gas Market Development Study 

FY02 

50 

Goveoment, Bank, Donors 

Policy-orientation,

Problem-solving

Client Survey 

FY02 

100 

Bank 

Problem-solving

a. 
b. 

Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Template created by the Operations Information System (OIS) on 04/21/00

Ghana Social Indicators

Latst single year 

Same regionrincomw group

POPULATION
Total population. mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 
POVERTY
(V. of population)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNP per capita (USS) 
Consumerpriceindex(19951W00) 
Food pnce index (1995.100) 

INCOMEiCONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION

Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure

Heath (% of GDP) 

Education (% of GNP) 
Social secunty and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to afe water
(V of population)

Total 

Urban 

Rural 

Immunization rate
(f under 12 months)

Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth

(years)

Total 

Male 
Female 
Mortlity

Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousaid live births) 

Adult (15.59)
Male (per 1.000 populaton) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 

1970M75 

1980485 

1992-97 

9.8 
Z6 
30.1 
6.6 

12.6 
3.2 
3Z3 
6.5 

310 
0 

350 
7 
8 

5.9 

2.6 

35 
86 
14 

50 

48 
52 

108 
186 

459 
377 

1 
19 

54 
52 
56 

90 
157 

400 
334 
1.000

18.0 
2.2 
36.9 
4.9 

31.4
26.7
34.3

390 
171 
136

32.7
8.4
41.7

Z9 

65 
88 
52 

59 

60 
27

60 
S8 
62 

es 
102 

278 
226 

Sub-
Saharan 
Africa 

12Z4 
2.2 
32.3 
5.5 

Low.
Income

2,035.6
1.7
28.4
4.0

510 
118 

350
122

2.5 

4.3

1.0

47 
74 
32 

58 

53 

51 

49 
52 

91 
147 

428 
375 

69
80
66

74
76

59

S8
60

82
118

274
255

1999 Wortd Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank
Figures in text of report may be slightly different beause more roeent data (1998-99). even if still preiminary, have
been used. Full updating of numbers will be done once complete deta have officially been nreesed by Govrnment
and when comparator flgures can be updatd os wel.

Annex B6
Page 1 of 3

Ghana - Kqy Economic Indicators

3/8I

National accounts
(as % GDP at current
market prices)

Gross domestic product 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100

Agriculture' 
Industy' 
Services' 

38 
25 
27 

39 
24 
28 

39 
24 
26 

36 
26 
28 

36 
25 
22 

36 
25 
2$ 

36 
25 
2S 

35 
26 
29 

35 
26 
29 

36
27
30

Total Consumption 
Goss domestic fixed 
investment
Govermncnt investment 
Private investment 
(includes increase in
stocks)

87 

88 

86 

96 

88 
25 

96 

94 

92 

92 

91

23 

21 

21 

24 

22 

26 

26 

25 

25

13 
11 

14 
6 

13 
8 

12 
12 

11 
13 

8 
13 

14 
12 

13 
13 

12 
13 

11
14

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

23 
34 

24 
33 

32 
40 

32 
53 

34 
47 

32 
50 

44 
64 

45 
64 

47 
64 

48
64

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingse 

13 
16 

12 
14 

14 
15 

4 
15 

12 
19 

4 
21 

6 
22 

8 
23 

8 
24 

9
25

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product 

5440 

6457 

6926 

6884 

7475 

7558 

6183 6482 6903 

7594

(USSS million at cunrent
prices)
Gross national product per 
capita (USS, Atlas method)

327 

378 

395 

383 

405 

399 

402 

403 

-

Real annual growth rates

Gross domestic product at 

3.3% 

4.00/% 4.6% 

4.2% 

4.7/o 

4.5% 

4.0%/e 4.5% 5.5% 

7.0%

market prices

Gross Domestic Income 

3.90/o 6.1% 

4.4% 

4.0% 

11.9% 

3.8% 

0.7/o 4.9% 6.6% 

6.7/o

Real annual per capita
growth rates

Gross domestic product at 
market prices

0.6% 

1.4% 

1.9% 

1.6% 

2.0% 

1.9% 

1.6% 

1.S% 2.9% 

3.4%

Total consumption 

-9.8% 

7.5% 

-4.3% 

15.0% 

0.1% 

10.8% 

3 7e/ 

1.2% 3.2% 

3.2%

Gbana - Key Economic Indicators

Annex B6
Page 2 of 3

Balance of Payments
(USSm)

Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
inports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 

(including official current
transfers)

Current account balance 

(after official capital gmnts)

Net private foreign direct 
investment
LT and MT loans (net) 
Other capital (net, including 
errors and omissions)

Changeinreservesd 

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of 

GDP at current market
prices)
Real annual growth rates

1374 
1227 
2000 
1580 
-626 
271 

1582 
1431 
2126 
1684 
-544 
263 

2224 
1810 
2776 
2295 
-552 
276 

2231 
1810 
3648 
3041 
-1417 
400 

2561 
2091 
3487 
2897 
-926 
454 

2437 
1962 
3772 
3181 
-1335 
472 

2715 
2199 
3939 
3308 
-1224 
496 

2925 3270 
2375 2681 
4119 4446 
3463 3752 
-1194 -1176 
520 
546 

3636
3015
4830
4091
-1194
574

-265 

-154 

-214 

-990 

-382 

-755 

-550 

-554 

-574 

-575

128 

83 

70 

55 

-10 

53 

100 

100 

170 

259

228 
-22 

135 
63 

351 
-220 

500 
461 

254 
238 

84 
525 

325 
0 

326 
0 

262 
211 

240
251

-464 

-211 

14 

-25 

-100 

94 

-27 

-79 

-69 

-176

-11.5% 

-8.4% 

-8.0% 

-20.6% 

-12.4% -17.7%/e -19.8% -18.4% -17.0% -15.7%

Merchandise exports 

15.3% 

3.8% 

12.5% 

-0.7% 

16.3% 

3.5% 

9.2% 7.8% 8.5% 

-1.3%

(FOB)

Merchandise imports 

-8.5% 

-0.2% 

31.0/% 30.5% 

15.90/ 

12.8% 

-0. 7/ 

3.1% 5.2% 

-7.6%

(CIF)

Public finance
(as % of GDP at current
market prices)'

Currentrevenues 
Current expenditures 

19.7 
17.9 

21.7 
16.4 

18.3 
16.4 

18.3 
16.5 

18.4 
17.3 

17.0 
16.4 

19.1 
18.8 
16.7 
16.6 
(Continued)

19.0 
14.9 

19.4
14.2

Annex B6
Page 3 of 3

Ghana - Key Economic Indicators

, 

, 

, 

.

_ 

.

_ 
V 

._- 

.

..

Cumat account suplus(+) 
or deficit (-)

1.8 

5.3 

1.9 

1.8 

1.1 

0.6 

2.4 

2.2 

4.1 

5.3

Capital expenditure 

13.3 

14.0 

13.3 

12.4 

11.3 

8.3 

13.8 

12.9 

11.0 

10.4

Foreign fmnancing 

7.1 

6.7 

5.6 

5.5 

4.7 

1.7 

8.2 

7.5 

4.7 

4.0

Monetary indicators

M2GDP(atcurrent market 
prices)

19.4 

18.4 

17.6 

19.9 

19.0 

19.0 

19.0

Gwth of NM2(%) 

53 

41 

65 

41 

18 

16 

14

Price indices (1985 - 100)
Merchandiseexportprice 

89 

100 

112 

113 

112 

102 

105 

105 

109 

93

index
MeTchandise importprice 

155 

166 

173 

176 

144 

140 

147 

149 

154 

182

index
Merchandise teras oftrade 
index

57 

60 

65 

65 

78 

73 

71 

70 

71 

51

Real exchange rate 

63 

72 

Sl 

86 

93 

101 

..

(USS/LCU)t
Real interest rates

Consumer price index 

24.9Yo 74.3% 46.6% 27.9% 

19.3% 12.4% 11.4% 5.7% 5.0%1. 5.0Y.

(% growth rate)

GDPdeflator 

30.1% 43.2% 39.9Yo 

19.4% 17.1% 11.4% 

9.9% 6.5% 6.0% 

5.5%

(% growth rate)

a. If GDP components m estimated at factor cost, a footnoote indicating this fact should be added.
b. 'GNFS' denotes 'goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IME resources.
e. Should indicate the level of the govenmment to which the data refer.
£ "LCU" denotes 'local currmcy units.' An increase in USS/LCU denotes appreciation.

Ghana -Key Exposure Indicators

3/8/

Annex 87

Total debt outstanding snd 
disbursed (TDO) (USSm)

5133 5520 5773 5599 5943 6205 6371 

6612 

6823 

6823

Net disbursements (USSm) 

228 

135 

351 

500 

254 

84 

325 

326 

262 

240

Total debt service (DS) 
(USSm)

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

DO/XGS' 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
ConcessionaltTDO 

IIRD exposure indicators (%)
BRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRDTDO(USSm)b 
IDA TDO(USSm) 

379 

567 

476 

578 

636 

599 

531 

469 

453 

441

87.0 349.0 260.0 251.0 232.0 255.0 235.0 
94.3 
85.5 
81.3 
79.5 
82.1 103.0 
27.2 
35.4 
25.4 
24.4 
24.1 
19.2 
63.6 
62.5 
69.2 
70.0 
70.3 
71.0 

21.1 
64.2 

83.4 

5.4 
46.9 

3.7 
40.4 

2.9 
53.1 

2.6 
50.9 

1.5 
43.4 

1.7 
34.8 

1.6 
31.2 

1.4 
1.2 
0.6 
0.6 
0.3 
0.4 
0.3 
69 
59 
44 
30 
27 
18 
27 
2094 2375 2530 2617 2963 3672 3312 

226.0 
102.0 
15.8 
70.8 

209.0 
98.8 
13.7 
71.0 

209.0
99.8
12.0
73.4

1.3 
36.4 

0.2 
28 
3438 

1.2 
35.7 

0.2 
29 
3547 

0.9
39.8

0.1
29
3547

a. "XGS' denotes expots of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
b. Includes present value of guarantees.

Ghana - Status of Bank Group Operatbns (Operadons Portlolio) 

Closd 72
Projects

Board 
Date 
Fiscal 
PrjcsDevelopment 
year Actve Projects 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating b/ 
implemnentation 
ntlvs Prdess 

Obi*c 

Orbinal Amount In USS Mllilons 
ROIA 
Cne. 
Udb. 
IBRD 
Cancel. Undisb. 

IDA 

Annex BS
Page 1 of 2

1IU

Differnce Between
Expected and Actual
Dbsbursnts 
Og.FmRd
Orl. Frm Rev'd

i993 
1994 
1994 
1995 
1995 
1995 
1995 
1995 
1996 
1996 
1996 
1996 
1996 
1997 
1997 
1998 
1998 
1999 
1999 
1999 
1999 
1999 
2000 

P000953 NAT'L ELECTRIFICATION 
P000924 COMMUNITY WATER & SA 
P000936 
LOCAL GOVT DEV. 
P000948 EDUCNVOC.TRNG 
P000962 
FISHERIES 
P000966 MINING SEC.DEV & ENV 
P000960 PRIV SECTOR DEV 
P000926 
THERMAL (P-VIt) 
PO00975 BASIC EDUCATION 
P000957 HWY SECT INV.PROG 
P000943 NON-BANK FIN INS AST 
P042516 PUBLIC ENTERPRISE/PR 
P000973 URBAN ENV.SANITATION 
P045588 PUB. FIN. MGMT. TAP 
P041150 VILLAGE INFRASTRUCTU 
P000949 HEALTH SCTR SUPPORT 
P000946 NAT.RES.MANAGEMENT 
P04065. 
COMMUNITY DEV. 
P040557 ERSO II 
P000974 NAT FUNC LIT PROG 
P050615 
PUB.SECTOR MNGT.PROG 
P000970 
TRADE GATEWAY & INV. 
P050616 COMMUNITY WATER II 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
U 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
U 
U 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

75.3 
21.69 
38.04 
9 
8.45 
10.77 
12.37 
170.6 
47.34 
92.43 
21.98 
24.97 
65.16 
19.64 
28.54 
34.44 
9.45 
5.08 
182.07 
32.52 
14.41 
51.69 
25.66 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

7.36 
5.67 
13.3 
3.35 
3.3 
4.15 
7.5 
37.9 
35.69 
45.26 
16.04 
17.37 
42.82 
15.4 
22.71 
24.66 
8.2 
5.08 
101.12 
32.52 
12.83 
48.19 
25.66 

10.73 
5.61 
7.94 
2.49 
2.02 
3.53 
7.23 
40.32 
24.52 
8.48 
16.55 
9.38 
38.3 
12.21 
-0.71 
4.84 
5.25 
0.16 
26.29 
2.4 
1.59 
3.92 
0 

9.03
0
0
-0.85
0
0
0
34.01
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

a. Intended disbursements 
to date minus actual disbursements 
to date as projected at appraisal.

g _2oV2

Gh_m

Statemnt of IFC'm

Hed mud Diburswd PutteD.

An of Februy, 2000
(In US Dollan Milliona)

IFC Held 

IFC Disbunscd

Compcny 
AEF Tacks Fm 
Bopaw 
Cont Acceptances 

Ecobek -GhCna 

GAGL 
GHACEM 
GHANAL 
Ghan lAsing 
Hotel Inv. Ghaa 
Wahouc Steel 
AEF Afariwaa 
AEF Alugan 
AEF BMYK 
AEF CFL 
AEF Dupcul Wood 
AEF GHUMCO 
AEF NCS 
AEFPTS 
AEF Pelkrite 
AEF Shangri-l 

Loan 
EquityQuesi Panic 
0.37 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
4.50 0.00 
5.35 9.34 
0.00 0.33 
0.00 0.00 
4.10 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
4.22 2.55 
3.11 0.00 
0.01 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
0.00 0.44 
0.00 0.00 
0.75 1.48 
0.00 0.00 
1.17 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
0.87 0.44 
0.00 0.00 
0.13 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
0.05 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
0.46 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
0.28 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
0.25 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
0.02 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
0.67 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
0.31 0.00 
0.05 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
1.10 0.00 
0.00 0.00 

Loa 
037 
4.50 
0.00 
0.00 
4.22 
0.01 
0.00 
0.75 
1.17 
0.S7 
0.18 
0.05 
0.46 
0.28 
0.25 
0.02 
0.00 
0.00 
0.05 
1.10 

EquitvQuasi PNc
0.00 0.00 0.00
0.00 5.35 9.34
0.83 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00
2.55 8.11 oo
0.00 0.00 o oo
0.44 0.00 000
1.43 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00
0.44 0.00 a.00
0.00 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00 c oo
0.00 0.00 o00
0.00 0.00 0.00
0.00 0.00 eoo
0.00 0.67 o0.0
0.00 0.31 0.00
0.00 0.00 0,00
0.00 0.00 0.00

13.33 5.79 

14.44 9.34 

14.28 

5.79 14.4 9.34

Approvals Pendine Commitment

Project Name 
Loan 
AEFGHANAPAC 
0.36 
AEF Garden Court 
1.50 
AEF apn Motors 
1.50 
AEF PhwrmaCac 
0.40 

EquityQuasi Panc
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0
0 
0 
0

Total Pending Commi_mut: 

3.76 

0 

0 

0

FY Appnol 
1996 
1933/39/91/93 
1939/91/93 
1993/96/98 
1990/91196 
1994 
1991 
1992/93 
1991/92 
1939/92 
1993 
1990/94 
1992 
1992 
1995 
1993 
1993 
1997 
1991/95 
1994 

otal Portfolio: 

FY Approval 
1995 
1999 
1999 
1999 

Nowe Values do not efect off4slance sheet tms mich auVraewe an ruk manaema Products.

GHANA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX FY2000-2003 

Annex B9
Page 1 of 7

OBJECTIVE 1: INCREASING GROWTH

POVERTY REDUCTION 
* About 40% of Ghanaians are poor, 
* Promote higher agricultural growth. 
and about 30% are extremnely poor. 
* Raise living standards of the poorest 
• Between 1991/92 and 1998/99 both 
segments of the population. 
poverty and extreme poverty declined * Continue to improve capacity to 
by about 15%. 
monitor changes in poverty. 
* Poverty reductions were concentrated 
* Implement GLSS (every 4-5 years) 
in Accra and the Rural Forest, (which 
and CWIQ (in between) to assess 
produce most of the traditional exports 
progress in poverty reduction. 
while poverty stagnated or increased in 
the Rural Coast and Savannah. 
. Food crop farmers, among whom 
poverty is by far the highest, need to 
participate more in the economic 
expansion. 

Extreme 
poverty 
headcount 
ratio 

1999 2003 

29% 25% 

Extreme 
poverty gap 31% 27% 

PORTFOLIO
. Village infrastructure 
* National Functional Literacy Prog. 

UNDP, Afl)B, IFAD support to
projects that boost food production,
incomes of the rural poor, and
LENDING 
village infrastructure.
* Agriculture Services Sector 
Joint UNDP/AfDB Microstart project
to build capacity in selected
Investment APL 
microfinance institutions.
. Rural Finance 
* Urban V APL (medium-sized towns) CIDA (rural water), KfW (Germany)
* Greater Accra Urban Poverty 
in village infrastructure.
AfDB, IFAD (rural finance).
World Food Programme (women in
road construction).

NON-LENDING 
. TA for supporting poverty 
monitoring system.
. Poverty Dynamics report, 1988-1998
* Participatory Poverty Analysis
(incidence of public expenditure)
. Safety Nets/Targeted Poverty
Interventions

MACROECONOMIC STABILITY 
. The IMF negotiated a new 3-year 
ESAF program in 1999. Inflation 
declined from 20.8% in 1997 to 
13.8% at end-1999. The domestic 
primary surplus rose from 3.2% to 
3.6% of GDP in 1998 before 
dropping to 2.4% in 1999. VAT was 
successfully reintroduced in 1999. 
. Domestic borrowing requirements 
remained high due to insufficiently 
strong fiscal performance and high 
interest rates. Road sector arrears 
continued to accumulate, due to large 
interest accruals. 

* Reduce domestic debt 
* Eliminate road arrears 
* Raise domestic primary surplus to 
over 3.5% of GDP
* Continue to improve public finance 
and expenditure management 
. Continue to improve efficiency of 
revenue mobilization, especially 
import duties 
. Review tax system and make 
adjustments to ensure that the 
revenue-to-GDP ratio does not decline 
in the medium term. 
* Continue moratorium on non-
___ __ __ __ __ __ ___ __ __ __ __ __ ___ __ __ __ __ 

__ ___ __ __ __ __ __ ___ .1 __ __ __ __ ___ __ __ __ __ __ ___ __ __ __ __ __ ___ __ __ __ __ __ ___ __ __ _ 

GDP growth 
rate 

1999 2003 

4.5% 7% 

PORTFOLIO
* Economic Reform Support Operation EU, AfDB, DFID, Japan,
(ERSO 11) 
Netherlands, (provision of
* Public Financial Management TA 
adjustment/budget support).

* Public Sector Borrowing LENDING
Requirement * would 
* ERSO III, ERSO IV
decline from 5% of GDP 
. PUFMARP 1:
in 1999 to 3% in the base
case and to 0 in the high 
case. 
* Domestic primary surplus 
(target 3.5%) 

NON-LENDING
* Quarterly economic updates
* Policy briefs on macro-management
issues
. HIPC-Debt Sustainability Analysis

__ __ ___ __ __ __ __ __ ___ __ __ __ __ 

_ ___ __ __ __ __ __ ___ __ __ __ __ __ ___ __ __ __ __ __ ___ __ __ __ __ __

GHANA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX FY2000-2003 

Annex B9

Page 2 of 7

roncessional extemal borTowing
* Raise VAT rate from 10% to 12.5%
- Complete review of tariff regime
. Increase the petroleum levy

* Implement the macroeconomic 
program with commitment to reduce 
public borrom.Ar.g a-id thereby reduce 
interest rates. 
* Improve the legal and regulatory 
environments. 
* Remove remaining distortions in the 
tariff regime, and ensure that the trade 
system enhances external 
competitiveness. 
* Reduce the top tariff rate to 20% in 
harmony with the subregion. 
* Improve land administration systems 
a Achieve sustainable rate of forest 
resource extraction.
* Improve envirommental resource 
management by strengthening the 
relevant institutions and encouraging 
community participation. 

.Budget pLrformance in 1999 
deteriorated due to sharp 
deterioration in terms of trade (cocoa, 
gold and oil prices) and shortfalls in 
program assistance.
SUSTAINABLE PRIVATE
SECTOR GROWTH (INCLUDING 
AGRICULTURE) 
. Accelerated growth will come in part 
from the expansion of non-traditional 
exports, which have quadrupled since 
1994. 
* If private sector development is to 
generate significant growth, the real 
interest rate will have to come down 
sharply from the present level of over 
20 percent. 
* For private sector to become engine 
of growth, further improvements are 
needed in legal and regulatory 
framework. 
* The private sector has to perceive a 
more attractive investment 
environment and greater consistency 
in the applications of policies. 
* Land allocation remains hampered by 
inefficient titling and information 
systems. 
. Sustainable rates of resource 
extraction need to be achieved, and
environrental concems addressed. 

* Agricultural growth rate 
(target: 5-6%). 
Annual agt.rcultural growth 
averaged 4.4% during 1995- 
97 

PORTFOLIO 
IFAD, AfDB, KfW, DANIDA (rural
. Public Enterprise and Privatization 
finance), GTZ (rural infrastructure),
TA 
EU (micro projects in agriculture),
* Gateway 
FAO.
. Mining Sector Development 
USAID (Trade and Investment
* Natural Resource Management APL, Reforrn Program -TIRP-on customs
Phase I 
and trade policies, export promotion,
micro agribusiness), DANIDA
(private sector credit), AFD (credit
lines)
DF]D, EU, FAO, (support for
AgSSIP).

LENDING 
* Agricultural Services Sector 
Investment API, 
. Gateway 11 
. Land Administration
* Natural Resource Management APL,
Phase nI

NON-LENDING
. Economic Report on Non-Traditional
Exports
* Bank Group consultations with
private sector
. Promoting Foreign Investment
(IFC/MiIGA)

IFC
* Direct financing and support
facilities for Small and Medium
Enterprises
. Agri-Business Review
. IFC financing for key private
investments.

GHANA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX FY2000-2003 

Annex B9

Page 3 of 7

* Possible support from MIGA
guarantees in various sectors where
foreign investors are involved.
Technical assistance to Ghana in
investment promotion activities..
PORTFOLIO
* Non-Barnk Financial Institutions 

LENDING 
. Rural Finance 

NON-LENDING 
. Agriculture Development Bank
Study
* Financial Sector Assessment

IFC
. Term credit facilities to commercial
banks equity and institution building
to deepen financial sector.

PORTFOLIO
. Highway Sector Investment 
. Thermal (P-VII) 

USAID, DANIDA (rural finance),
AFD (credit lines).
Joint UNDP/AfDB Microstart project
for building capacity in selected
mnicrofinance institutions.
AfDB, IFAD (rural finance).

OECF, KfW, AfDB, EU, DANIDA,
BADEA (Arab Bank for Economic
Development in Africa), DUTCH-
AID, OPEC Fund (reconstruction
and major rehabilitation and
upgrading of trunk roads).
DFID, EU, AFD, OPEC Fund,
DANIDA (feeder roads program),
World Food Program (women in
road construction), JICA, AFD
(bridge development program).
France- AFD, DANIDA, OECF
(urban roads).

* Maintain Road Fund, in part by 
adjusting fuel levy. 
. Complete implementation of Power 
Sector Reform Program, including the 
establishment of a transparent 
regulatory system in energy. 
* Complete divestiture and entry of 
private participation of public 
transport and utilities. 
* Promote competition in marketing and 
supply of petroleum products. 

. Percentage of roads in 
good condition: 
1999 
2003 
35% 
59% 

LENDING 
. Roads Sector 
. Percentage of roads in fair * Power Supplement 
condition: 
1999 
45% 

2003 
29% 

. Progress on divestiture of 
rail transoort, port 
services. electricity 
distribution, and urban 
water services P 

IFC and MIGA 
* Financing and guarantees for private 
infrastructure operators 

NON-LENDING 
Country Infrastructure Framework
(with IFC)

* No specific indicators, but 
progress on privatization 
and the level of non- 
performing loans will be 
watched closely. 

* Complete privatization of the state- 
owned banks. 
* Increase stability of the banking 
system by lowering ratio of non- 
performing assets to total assets of the 
banking system. 
* Implement revised banking law and 
improve supervision. 
. Strengthen and deepen rural finance 
system.

FINANCIAL SECTOR 
. Governnent-owned banks still 
account for one-third of the deposits 
in the banking system. 
* Credit flows to the government, 
linked to government ownership of 
banks, are substantial. 
* Three Banks (two of which are 
government-owned) have non- 
performing loans of over 80%. 
* Financial sector needs strengthening 
and deepening in general, but 
especially for micro/ SMEs and in the 
rural sector. 

INFRASTRUCTURE 
. Infrastructure bottlenecks need to be 
alleviated. 
. Transportation costs, especially for 
agricultural production and marketing 
need to be reduced. 
* Power supply needs to expanded and 
made more reliable. 
. Water supply needs to be expanded 
and quality improved. 
. Significant corrections have been 
made to electricity and water rates 
and these pricing policies need to be 
kept under review and adjusted as 
necessary. 

GHSANA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX FY2000-2003 

Annex Bg
Page 4 of 7

OBJECTI VE 2: REDEFINING THE ROLE OF THE STA TE

*Numnber of public sector 
employees (excluding 
SOEs) as a proportion of 
total population-to 
decrease fromn 1.8% in 
I 996 'Lo 1. 5% int 200i3. 
*Complete the prograrn of 
liberalization of cocoa 
exports 

PORTFOLIO
* ERSO 11 
* Public Enterprise and Privatization 
TA 
* Public Sector Management APL , 
Phase I 
a Non-Bank Financial Institutions 
(NBFI) 
. Natural Resource Managernent APL, 
Phase I
* Gateway

DFID) (civil service performance and
improvement program, integrated
payroll database), EU, Germany
CIDA, (local government
dece.ntralization reform), CIDA
(Econonmic Governance project),
UNDP (national governance
program).

LENDING
. Public Sector Management APL,
Phase 11
* ERSO m, ERSO IV

NON-LENDING
Country hInfrastructure Framnework
(with IFC)

PORTFOLIO
. Community Water and Sanitation 
APL, Phase I 
. Community Development LIL

LENDING
* Community Water and Sanitation
APL, Phase 11
* Urban V (Medium Towns)
*aGreater Accra Urban Poverty

NON-LENDING
.Participatory evaluation of the
impact of public scrvice on poverty

CIDA, DANIDA (rural water), DFID
(urban water), OECF.

PUBLIC SECTOR 
•Public service is still too large, both 
. Complete first phase of reform of 
in termrs of the range of programs/ 
subvented agencies and reduce the 
activities and employment levels. 
level of subsidies to subvented 
Th'ere continues to be slow progress 
agencies 
in pnvatization and political 
* Complete restructuring of central 
interfeerence in the privatization 
rnanagemenet agencies 
process. 
a Continue reforms in policy 
In energy and water, autonomous 
formulation and public administration 
regulatory bodies are in place 
* Complete accelerated privatization 
allowing for private participation. 
prograin 
The Governmaent still has a monopoly * Allow private sector to fully
in cocoa exports. 
participate in all aspects of the cocoa 
•Continued weak capacity in public 
sector 
sector institutions, including central 
. Capacity building in various public 
managernent agencies, regulatory 
sector institutions 
bodies in finance, infirastructure,
envirommnental nmanagement, customs, 
inunigration, among others, 
Poor service delivery by public 
utilities..
EOUITABLE DEVELOPMENT 
•Poverty is still substantially higher in 
rural areas and disproportionately 
concentrated in the Savannah. 
•Reduction in poverty was 
predominantly among those closc to 
the poverty line, leaving the very 
poorest without any significant 
improvement in their living 
standards. 

* lInprove the delivery of social ser-vices * Increase share of niral 
to the rural areas (see below) 
Po,pulation with access to 
* Complete transfer of all small water 
safe water. 
systems and remaining sewerage 
L998199 
systems to Districts and communities. 
66% 
* Implement targeted pilot poverty 
alleviation programs in urban and 
rural areas. 

2003
75% 

GHANA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX FY2000-2003 

Annex B9
Page 5 of 7

EDUCATION 
* Improve the quality and access to 
* According to the GLSS4, net 
enrolments in primary schools 
schooling. 
* In particular, increase national girl's 
increased from 74% in 1991/92 to 
net enrolment in primary schools by 
84% in 1998/99. 
targeting basic education at girls and 
* Enrolment rate for girls, at 82%, is 
disadvantaged areas. 
still lower than that for boys (85%). 
* Enhance efficiency of public 
* Enrolment rates do not vary much by 
geographic area, except in the Rural 
expenditures in education. 
Savannah where rates are much lower * Decentralize school management 
at 67% for boys and 62% for girls. 
responsibilities to districts.
* The secondary enrolment rate is 
* Revise policy framework for tertiary 
lower at 41%. Girls' rates remain 
education, with a view to sustainable 
below that of boys'. 
financing. 
. The weak institutional and 
* Implement functional literacy 
managerial capacity at the Ministry of 
programs with an emphasis on the 
Education hampers effective 
Northern regions.
implementation of its basic education
strategy, resulting in low quality
services and poor education
outcomes.
. The tertiary subsector is plagued by
insufficient financing and inadequate
infrastructure.

* Increase Government and total public 
financing of health, increase health 
expenditure as a percent of domestic 
primary expenditure, and maintain a 
reasonable balance between capital 
and recurrent expenditures. 
. Increase funding to district services, 
under-served areas and for the poor. 
. Enhance efficiency of public health 
expenditures. 
. Increase number of budget 
management centers (BMC) that are 
able to provide quarterly expenditure 
returns. 
. Increase private participation in

HEALTH 

* Under the sector- program for health 
being implemented with donor 
support, annual evaluation reports 
some improvements in public health 
related inputs. 
* GLSS4 indicates lower utilization of 
health services. The percentage of 
individuals seeking modem medical 
care following an injury or illness 
declined from 58% in 1991/92 to 
52% in 1998/99. The proportion of 
the sick who seek no form of outside 
medical advice or care increased from 
43% to 48% over the same period. 
. Overall access to health services is 

UNICEF, AfDB, EU (in-service
and pre-service training of
teachers), USAID, DFID, JICA.

PORTFOLI
* Basic Education 
. Education/Vocational Training 
* National Functional Literacy 
* PHRD grant for analytical work

LENDING
* Education Sector (Tertiary) APL
* Education Sector APL, Phase n1
(senior secondary)

NON-LENDING
Education Strategy

* 

Female Literacy 
1999 
2003 
36% 
45% 
* Net enrollment ratio in
basic education: 
1998/99 
82.4% 
85.5% 

2003 
93% 
93% 

Girls: 
Boys: 

* Criteria Reference Test 
scores for primary and 
secondary education. 'I
* English 34% 
50%
. Math 
30% 
45%

1998 2003 

PORTFOLIO

* Health Sector Investment Program 

52 

Child 
Malnutrition -
Rural: 
28% 24% 
Infant mortality rate 
(per 1000) 
57 
Under 5
Mortality rate 108 
(per 1000) 
* HIV/AIDS behavior 
indicator - condom use 
1998 
2003 
6% 
10%
25%
15% 

Female 
Male 

95

LENDING 
* Health Sector APL, 11 
* Health Sector Supplement for 
HIV/AIDS 

NON-LENDING
* Participation in international
partnership and local multi-agency
cooperation on HIV/AIDS

Danida, DFID, USAID, Netherlands,
UNICEF and WHO are involved in
several areas including training staff,
procurement and fmancial
management of investment programs
within health.

GHANA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX FY2000-2003 

Annex B9
Page 6 of 7

delivery of health services.
* Improve coverage of fanily planning
services and contraceptive use.
* Increase immunization coverage rate.
* Develop and implement HIV/AIDS
Multi-Sector Strategy.

still low, with proportionately worse 
access for women, the poor, and in 
disadvantaged regions. 
* Poor community involvement and 
fragmented management of services 
contribute to poor service quality. 
* Population growth rates and fertility
rate are still high, and poor nutrition
remains an important health concern.
* The HIV prevalence rate is estimated
at 4.6%, with the potential to spread
rapidly to the general population.

OBJECTIVE3: 

IMPLEMENTING THESTRATEGYMOREEFFECTIVELY

DECENTRALIZATION 
* Although decentralization of key 
government services and 
responsibilities to the district level 
has started, the process has been 
slow, 
* Most central government agencies are 
resisting decentralization. 

. Local Govenunent Service Act due to 
be presented to Cabinet and 
Parliament shortly 
* Improve management and 
administrative capacities at local 
govermnent 
* Increase share of public resources 
managed at district levels 

ECONOMIC GOVERNANCE 

* Irnplementation of the MTEF has 
* Deepen implementation of MTEF and 
improved budgeting systems, but 
PUFMARP for improved cash flow 
overall fmancial management 
management, accounting and auditing
remains weak in areas such as cash 
* Improve timeliness of Accountant-
flow management, monitoring actual General's monthly reports on

PORTFOLIO
. Local Govemment Development 
* Village Infastructure 
* Community Water and Sanitation 
Community Development LIL 

.

LENDING
. Decentralization APL, Phase I
* Community Water and Sanitation
APL, Phase 11

NON-LENDING
. Fiscal Decentralization study
2001 CG meeting focus on

Decentralization

PORTFOLIO

. Public Financial Management TA 
* Government PERs 

EU, GTZ, NGO (local governunent
decentralization reform), CIDA
(Economnic Govemance project),
UNDP (national govemance
program).

DFID (MTEF), CIDA (fiscal
decentralization), EU (audit service).

GHANA COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY MATRIX FY2000-2003 

Annex B9
Page 7 of 7

govermment operations 
* Complete implementation of 
integrated, cornputerized budget
system in all MDAs. 
* Develop public sector procurement 
code 
* Implement Anti-coruption strategy 
* Strengthen ParliamentaTy capacity for
oversight over public finances 
* Improve flow of information on public 
fuinances to the public 

. Develop mechanisms for including 
civil society to participate in local and 
national decision making over public 
. Inplement new NGO policy 

expenditures, auditing, and clearlty 
and consistently applying financial 
regulations. 
* Public procurement policy is neither 
clearly defined nor transparent. 

INCLUSION OF
ORGANIZATIONS OUTSIDE OF 
GOVERNMENT 
. CAS consultations revealed a deep 
mistrust between the Govermment 
and civil society, including an
inadequate flow of information to the 
public, and few established 
mechanisms for partnership between 
Government and civil society. 
. The Bank's Client Survey also had 
low effectiveness ratings for the Bank 
from NGOs and organized interest 
groups.

LENDINS
* Public Financial Management TA n

NON-LENDING
. Comprehensive Financial
Accountability Assessment
. Anti-Corruption Survey

WBI
* Program Evaluation training
* Monitoring and Evaluation (with
OED)

LENDING 
* Promoting Partnerships with 
Traditional Authorities LEL(s) 
. Public Financial Management TA I

NON-LENDING
. Comprehensive Development
Framework and sector groups
. PRSP consultations
* Participation in Vision 2020 Second
Step
. SAPRI

WBI
* Training on Economic Journalism
. Strengthening Parliament

USAID (governance), GTZ,
DANIDA, CIDA, Gernan
Foundations.

CAS Annex 810 - Ghana
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Coia"y 

Maja isuC 

cenry 

Bank Re

NeAvoe* ales 

-Pfl*f 

P-iOVty of colmY aNW

Bpnk piW*O

Povety Reduction & Eonmic

Povt 

rduction 

Eonic 
poicy 
Publi sector 
Gedr 

Humnn Deelopmet Department
Education 
Health. nutrition & populton 

Sociel poton 

Environmentally & Scialy Susttinble

Rural developdmnt 

Environment 

Socia developnent 

Fkinnce. Private Sector b Inraatructure
Financial sedtor 

Private sector 
ergy & mining 

Infrstructure 

Fair 

Good 
Fair 
Good 

Fair 
Good 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Fair 

Poor 
Fair 

Fair 

High 

Modet povety reduction: 
gins unequally disffibuted
Gromwth below brget 
High 
High
Ovestald and oveeended Modeate High 
Gapsin access to servces 
Mode 
Moderat

High

Ongog Dialogue

Poor magemnt 
Poor access to services 
HIV prevalence rate at 4.6 %
Nhe to tWt direct poe rty 
alleAtion msures

High 
High 

Moderate Othr donomi volved
High

Modrate Modert

High 

Nee to Increase growth 
Hoff of food crop farmers are
xtrnme poor
Unsustinable hrvesing 
level Moderate Modeate
Inapproprita farmning practices
Insutficient decentraliztin 

Modere Moderate

High

High lve of public domestic Moderate High 
debt: state-owned banks
High rel interest rates 
Privatizatlon of utilities and 
petroleum companies
Rood awrs and 
privatizaton of urban watr

Moderate High 
Moderate High 

High 

High

Ongoing Diaoue

Ongoing Dialogue
Ongoing Diague

a Use *l- 
goad 'ee' 
orpoar.
h. Indb_ai purinia covti.~eMc 
_mam (e.g. tor pomfy raluction, nruml pave to~tr educaolio, 'tiao 
bigk
w mea- 
or 
iN psWi_e do not aeee or 
fcample., aothe MOB may ha" the load on tie iesue. or Mer may be onoing dialogue.

aeanuy camien:' 

d. Gbu _cplana, 

c. To r 

pn r u 

fo0r eflwafllmt 

'inteln staA.ig

T 

_mipe 

creted on 4113l0O

COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK

Ghana: Second Updating Note

Annex C
Page I of 6

A. Background

1. Ghana embarked on a major economic reform effort in the early 1980s and made
measurable progress in the earlier years. The Government hosted "the National Economic
Forum" in 1997, with participation from civil society, the private sector, academics, the political
opposition, etc. The event marked a turning point in accepting the principle of including civil
society and other domestic stakeholders in setting the policy agenda. Furthermore, the increasing
use of sector-wide operations had strengthened Government ownership of the development
process, in addition to helping build partnerships among the country's key external partners. The
relationship between the Bank and the UN system in Ghana is also particularly strong, an
important consideration from the standpoint of forging closer collaboration with the key players.

2. 
In short, Ghana had the basic ingredients to try an approach premised on national
consultations, supported by a long-term vision, and founded on country ownership of the
development agenda. The country was thus a suitable candidate to pilot the Comprehensive
Development Framework (CDF) approach and was one of the first to come forward as a pilot. It
helped also that Ghana had already introduced a "Mini-CG" process to facilitate regular
consultations between the Government and its external partners. It was through the Mini-CG
forum that the CDF was launched in February 1999 - barely a month after Mr. Wolfensohn's
discussion draft proposing the new approach. On April 22, 1999, the country's Cabinet
considered a Cabinet Memorandum on the CDF, an important step in building consensus around
the principles embodied in the approach. On May 27, 1999, Executive Directors discussed this
first phase of the Ghana pilot and requested that they be updated on progress at the time of the

CAS.I

B. 

Long-Term Vision

3. 
There is already in place, a long-term comprehensive vision called "Vision 2020," covering
the period 1995 to 2020 and fully discussed in the country's Parliament. In addition, the country
also has a more detailed medium-term plan for the period 1996-2000 with clearly defined goals
and actions. Only recently, the National Development Planning Commission launched an
ambitious consultation mechanism for involving a wide range of domestic stakeholders in
preparation for the second medium-term plan for 2001-5 -- "Vision 2020: Second Step."
Significantly, poverty reduction is at the core of "Vision 2020" and the Government recently
prepared a Poverty Reduction Paper as part of the background material for the in-country CG
held in Accra, the capital, in November 1999. This also forms the core of Part I of this CAS.

4. 
It is worth making the point also that it was "Vision 2020" that formed the basis for
Ghana's last CAS. More recently, sector strategies have been elaborated as the Government
develops its Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). The MTEF has emerged as an
important instrument for budgetary management in implementing the country's development
strategy. The Government's commitment at the November 1999 CG to postpone non-essential
capital works and limit new spending to what was already in the MTEF, underscores this point.

l "Comprehensive Development Framework: Ghana Pilot - Updating Note." IDA/SecM99-286, May 18, 1999.

Annex C
Page 2 of 6

C. 

Ownership

5. 
The CDF approach is premised on country ownership of the policy agenda. Ghana is
increasingly taking the lead in setting the agenda and in coordinating aid activities. Action taken
in April 1999 to fully brief the country's Cabinet was an important step in promoting country
ownership. Also building on the 1997 National Economic Conference, the Government has
increasingly sought to involve other stakeholders in discussing strategies and identifying
priorities. A good example is the consultation process that preceded and followed the in-country
CG last November with extensive CAS/CDF consultations. These consultations were with and
led by civil society in six regions of the country. This effort should have the effect of broadening
the base for the changes being put in place, an important goal that helps sustainability of the
reformn agenda.

6. 
It is worth recalling also that the country's long-term vision, "Vision 2020," was actually a
report to Parliament. The involvement of Parliament is important in building ownership for the
vision among the political leadership and in examining the country's long-term options. To
further strengthen ownership, especially among other stakeholders (civil society, the private
sector, etc.), outreach efforts will have to be intensified. Support from Canada and Japan has now
been obtained to finance such an outreach effort, which will be the focus of much activity during
the rest of the CDF pilot phase.

7. 
One aspect of ownership which is worth highlighting is the Government's role in preparing
this CAS. The country's development strategy, prepared by the authorities, constitutes the first
section of the CAS, which simultaneously serves as the Government's Interim PRSP. It was also
agreed with Executive Directors in May 1999 that the Government would hold an informal
discussion of the strategy with the Board. Staff would then present Part II of the CAS, the
institution's business plan for defining how it intends to support the priorities and strategies of
Ghana. This is the first time this approach is being tried and it could therefore have implications
for other countries, although it is very much in line with the process envisaged under the PRSP.
This new CAS process is at the core of the CDF for Ghana.

8. 
Leadership in aid coordination is an important aspect of country ownership. In Ghana,
there has been measurable progress made with aid coordination, especially through the Mini-CG
mechanism, as indicated above. Mini-CG meetings are held on a quarterly basis while sectoral
meetings are held on a monthly, bi-monthly or quarterly basis. As already noted above, an
important recent development was the holding of the Tenth CG for Ghana in Accra, the country's
capital. Contrary to concerns about in-country CGs attracting a lower level of representation
from capitals, this was not the case for the Ghana CG. On the contrary, the level of
representation was actually higher than for the preceding CG which was held in Paris. All
partners agreed that all future CG meetings for Ghana should be held in-country. Holding the CG
in Ghana's capital enabled donor representatives to experience first hand the difficulties faced by
the authorities. The CG also focused on the problem of HIV/AIDS, anti-corruption and
decentralization. Ministers who would not have been present in Paris were able to dialogue with
partners on these key issues.

D. 

Partnerships

9. 
In Ghana, the initial effort in CDF implementation has focused on building stronger
partnerships. To this end, a network of 14 Sectoral Partner Groups (SPGs) comprising the sector
ministries, departments and agencies as lead national agencies, with Ghana's development
partners as focal points for support, have been formed. As noted in the earlier "Updating Note," a
key feature of these groups is that different partners (EU, UN agencies, CIDA, DFID etc.)

Annex C
Page 3 of 6

provide "focal support to the Government leaders. The list of these groups is attached again for
ease of reference. SPGs provide a forum for exchanging information, identifying key constraints
and coordinating donor assistance. In preparation for the CG held in Accra in November 1999,
each SPG prepared an Issues Paper setting out the strategy being followed by the Government
and its partners. The Issues Paper also includes a statement/listing of the main programs in place,
as well as identifying three to five indicators that should be used to assess performance.

10. Flowing from the Issues Papers, Ghana has now prepared a draft CDF, which was
completed shortly before the CG in November 1999. While the draft is regarded as a "living
document" that will continue to evolve, it was nevertheless an important achievement in the
process of documenting what the CDF approach means for Ghana. The active participation of
domestic stakeholders and Ghana's external partners in the process of reviewing and establishing
sectoral priorities was an important step in forging closer partnerships in the context of the CDF.
The document seeks to provide the context for the CDF (emphasizing the links to the Ghana
Vision 2020), as well as covering developments in individual sectors. The Government's paper,
which forms Part I of this CAS as well as serving as the Interim PRSP, is based heavily on the
CDF document.

11. A recent area of focus for some CDF pilot countries is the development of websites to
disseminate information on CDF developments. The Ghana CDF website became operational in
November 1999, and will continue to be further developed. In the meantime, the site carries some
of the key CDF background documents (www.ghanacdforg.gh, and includes all the sector issues
papers.

12. An important offshoot of the Mini-CG process is the emergence of greater selectivity
facilitated by much better coordination of donor activities. This should build on Ghana's
experience with sector-wide operations and avoid undue duplication. A related development is
closer alignment between the national strategy and the business plans of individual donors.
While more work is needed to rationalize the strategy formulation process, the CDF does provide
a framework for this purpose. It can be seen that this process has taken place for the Bank's own
lending program for this CAS period in, for example, education. Partners also intend to examine
such additional scope as may exist to use the Mini-CG process to support inter-sectoral
coordination.

E. 

Emerging Challenges

13. Capacity weaknesses constitute a major challenge in Ghana. Ghana's experience with
sector-wide operations has helped, to some extent, both to highlight capacity limitations and to
begin to address them. The Mini-CG process also provides a forum for looking at capacity issues
and how they might be addressed. In the meantime, it is recognized by the authorities that this is
an area that must continue to receive attention. The recent support obtained from Canada and
Japan will be used to support this aspect of the CDF, creating a "CDF Secretariat" in the
Government, and lending technical support to the deepening of the analysis already carried out in
the SPGs. In the meantime, a "CDF for Capacity Building" has been developed and this is
attached.

14. A second major challenge is engaging, more systematically, civil society and the private
sector in the policy debate. Ghana is laying the foundation for this through recent consultations
with civil society. As noted above, these efforts will have to be intensified. Since the country
already has a draft CDF, a third challenge is to ensure an appropriate alignment between the next
phase of the Development Plan for Vision 2020 and the CDF. A strong alignment will suggest
that the CDF process is firmly taking root, with undue duplication in these exercises avoided. In

Annex C
Page 4 of 6

the Budget Statement for the year 2000 (on February 9, 2000), the Minister of Finance proposed
the reconvening of the National Economic Forum this year, to refocus on national economic
priorities in the light of the serious challenges the country is facing this year.

15. A fourth major challenge will be dealing with the issues raised at the in-country CG in
November 1999: in particular, these include HIV/AIDS, anti-corruption and decentralization.
Ghana's development partners used the last CG as a focal point to bring to the Government's
attention the growing problem of AIDS, which in Ghana, as elsewhere in much of Africa, has the
potential to become desperately more serious. While the Government shows signs of accepting
the gravity of the problem, concrete action needs to be taken without delay. Similarly, there is
agreement in principle on the need to intensify anti-corruption work. However, as in the case of
HIV/AIDS, the challenge now is for concrete action. These are harder issues to address, as they
are cross-cutting, and do not fall naturally into the activities of any one ministry, as is the case for
most of the present SPGs. This, however, is where the Mini-CG mechanism can help.

16. Decentralization poses a somewhat different challenge: while the country's partners
express concern about the slow pace, the Government appears to be more satisfied with
achievements to date. This is will be the "theme" for the next CG and preparing the ground for
that discussion poses its own challenges for the authorities in collaboration with their
development partners.

17. 
Finally, there are three challenges facing the maintenance of momentum: first, this is an
election year for Ghana, and the first without President Rawlings, so attention will be heavily
focused on that; second, the external shocks affecting Ghana (cocoa, gold and oil prices) are
drawing attention more to short-tern than to medium-term issues; and third, having achieved so
much in time for the in-country CG meeting, there is an inevitable loss of momentum. However,
efforts continue, and, while progress may be slower than in 1999, the creation of the Secretariat
and the incentive of the new CAS process should mitigate these effects. Ghana can be expected
to continue to be one of the more interesting and dynamic CDF pilots.

Annex C
Page 5 of 6

EXISTING AND PROPOSED PARTNER GROUP ARRANGEMENTS

.
ini onsu tative Group Ministry of Finance 
2. Poverty Reduction (incl. National Development Planning 
Nutrition, Street Children, Commission
Poverty Monitoring)
3. Govemance (incl. Justice) National Institutional Renewal 
Program/Office of the Speaker of
Parliament
Ministry of Health 
Ministry of Roads and Transport 
Ministry of Education 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture 

4. Health 
5. Roads 
6. Education 
7. Agriculture/Food 
Security

ank

Wor 
UNDP

UNDP

Danida/DFID/USAID/WB
EU/WB
UNICEF
FAO

8. Public Finance 
9. Decentralization 

10. Energy 
I1. Private Sector and 
Industrial Development 
12. Urban Development 

l _______________________ 

13. Water 

Ministry of Finance 
DFID
Ministry of Local Govenmment and Rural CIDA/Germany
Development
Ministry of Mines and Energy 
WB
Private Enterprise Foundation, Ministry USAID
of Trade and Industry
Ministry of Local Govemment and Rural WB/AFD/Germany
Development
Ministry of Works and Housing 

l_________________________________ 

14. Natural Resources and Ministry of Lands and Forestry/ 
Environment 
Ministry of Environment, Science and
| Technology
Bank of Ghana/Ministry of Finance 

15. Financial Sector 

CIDA/Danida (rural); DFID
(urban)
WB/UNU

IMF/USAID

Selected Areas 

of the CDF 

l 

Governance 

Effective Legal & 
Justice System 

Financial System 

Social Protection 
Education & 
Knowledge Institutions 

Health & Population 

Private Sector 
Environment 

Urban Development 

Rural Strategy & 
Decentralization 

GHANA: CDF Matrix for Capacity Building

World Bank 

| UNDP and other UN 

Agencies 

l 

Other Multilaterals 

Bilaterals 

NGOs 

Private

Sector

Annex C
Page 6 of 6

Diagnostic 
- Anti-corruption Strategy 
- Strengthening Parliament 
- Public expenditure analysis and 
management 
- Economic Journalism
- Legal sector reform 

- UNDP: National 
Govemance Program 
- UNDP: National 
Institutional Renewal 
Program 

Strengthen capacity of Bank of Ghana 

______________________ 

____________________________________ 

- CIDA: National Policy Process and 
Cabinet Process Reforms 
- DANIDA: Strengthening Parliament 

- National Governance
Program
- Konrad Adenauer
Foundation: Human
Rights Education

- DANIDA: Legal education of women 
leaders 

- Friedrich Ebert Found.:
Legal and Inst. Framework
for Decentralization and

~~G 

ovemnance

Goveanc

- USAID, DFID, KfW, JICA, CIDA,
France: In-service and pre-service
training of teachers

- UNICEF: In-service 
and pre-service training 
of teachers 

- ADB, EU: In-service 
and pre-service training 
of teachers 

- Social Assistance
- World Links for Development 
- In-service and pre-service training of 
teachers 
- Institution strengthening for the
National Functional Literacy Program
IDA, WHO, other multilaterals, bilaterals are involved in improving staff skills through in-service training in many areas, including
procurement, financial management, management of investment programs, addressing cross-cutting issues of poverty reduction.
- Improvement of systems and processes,
seeks PS involvement in policy design
and decision-making of Government
- Gateway project
- Training for institutional and human 
resource development, resource 
mobilization, and financial management 
- Strengthening community management 
(budget, planning, evaluation and 
monitoring) 

- EU: CB for 
Decentralization in 
Ghana 
- EU: Human Resource 
Development Program 

- UNDP: Training of 
local govemment 
officials 
- UNDP: Strengthening 
community 
management 
- UNICEF: Rural 
community-based 
development 
- UNICEF: Institutional 
capacity building & 
rural community 
development 

- Germany and Canada: TA in secondary
towns for water supply improvements and
road improvements
- JICA: Integrated Human Dev. Program 
- USAID: Enhance capacity of civil 
society at local level 
- CIDA: Fiscal decentralization & district 
CB 
- Netherlands: Urban Environmental 
Sanitation 
- GTZ: Promotion of District Capitals and 
Program of Rural Action
- DANIDA: Support to District
Assemblies

- National Govemance
Program (decentralization
objectives)
- Konrad Adenauer
Found.: Decentralization
and Govemance
- ACTIONAID: Support
to District Assemblies

GENERAL: 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation of CDF 
Program 

- Distance Learning course in
Introduction to Program Evaluation
- Diagnostic and proposed plan of action
for Monitoring and Evaluation capacities
in Ghana

IBRD 23606

BC 

BC 

1' 

0 

1 

2-

BURKINA FASO
.
*_-_ 

C1* R -*-s 

\_ 

* 80wJs6_Oj~~~~~~-RowP~' 

Pulimokom1'

H>Fossle a 

XEge 

F 

0 

VPR...WNkduGHANA

q f 

X WEST 

Lo 

.

, 

% 

Ycl: 

§ 

X< 

C/ 

9I. 

kNoSic 

) 

0'g 

RA 

\ 

. EulngOo .) 

-<it 

8 

) 

{tP 

#t 

9 

' 

PRIMARY ROADS

.u t s- 

) > up 
--- 

SECONDARY ROADS
..- TERTIARY ROADS

..... 

RTHERN t 
^ 

/ D:bO^J 
E < 

4 

, 

-'----r-RAILWAYS

Sborgo 

® 

\_ 7 i u , i)REGION 
HEADQUARTERS

gChcrche t°\ 

\ 

.Bucunu 
shcmbulgu 

w 

a 

X 

( 

J 4 

* 

NATIONAL CAPITAL

9,. 

. rtBole 

\ 

YoworO 0;Z 

AY 

.

C 

C 7 

. -

j 

o - -

REGION BOLNDARIES 

9_

-

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

The boundaries, co/ors,
p'I 3o imply, on the part of
other information shown
this map do not
Bi 
Wor/d Book Grasp,
any judgment on the /egal
of any terr/tory,
any endorsement

c6TE 

E 

0 0. tn AX *' 

denominations 

and any

Mokongs 

~~~~~on 
~~~The 
~~~~status 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~or 

D'IVOIRE 

\ 

\ 

\ 

< 

) 

\ 

M,°k°na °tA'i>>s9S7Bimbi 

/ 

Rorrrbn/ 

-

-

.

f 

BS ' 

~<K 

boundaries. 

D'

/ 

-.

.

2 

g RONG-AH- 

... 

t 

/ ' / bub!'. 

at 

p C 
20 

lo 

30 

40 

50 4LES

BkL 

w~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0 
B mLo-ERS

0 

u 

0 

(LSmccNYANI, ~<\§>n,> 

EjuroATI

,. 
setsu 
z~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~BwR '30 ,'Q 
\,,, 
'uk 
.rs 
' 

~~~~Ob-s 

rrsb.dn

00515,5 

05

S > 
, 

| 

t 

< 

4 

wkowFOR 

5WV_/(9 

t 

Cr

s~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~GJFFLtIl 

OWlS 

bb00n)0 

At CAN Rt tsjBLic- 

ftY 
\ 

-

M E-hioo 6A 

re-ENTRALW

'WESTERN 

A vCC.RA

(Pre- 

,>\ 1ol. 

A [ 

, 

T

e WTurL 

X 

> 

} 

.

M~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~AUR 

TANIAj 

; 

\ 

< 

27 

< 

W 

t 

|~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~MALIU 

~~~~~~~~plb 

< 

_\s 

a 

E 

O 

5 

S;E,S' 
r 2z0(XehaU^

.

NIGER 

ChA 

$~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4 

OAM04 

,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~E 
.
SEf PSit 

A, ,. 

,$ 

D;~~~~~~ ~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

-

.

; 

1OEtN 

.G

FEBRUARY 1995

