Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 27838-GH

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE
WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

REPUBLIC OF GHANA
FEBRUARY
20,2004
Country Department 10
Africa Region
The International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
of their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

Date of Last CAS
March 30,2000
Currency Equivalents
Currency Unit = Cedi ($)
USSl.00 = $8675
(as of February 1, 2004)
Weights and Measures
Metric System
Fiscal Year
January 1 December 3 1

-

Abbreviations and Acronyms

AAA
AFD
AfDB
APL
BOG
BPEMS
CAGD
CAS
CBRD
CDF
CEM
CFAA
CG
CPAR
CPPR

cso

DA
DACF
DRL
DSW
ECG
ECOWAS
EdSeP
EFA
ERP
ERSO
ESW
FDI
FIAS
FINSSP
FSAP
GCB
GDP
GEF
GIPC
GLSS
GNP
GPRS
HIPC AAP
HIPC
ICT

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Agence frayaise de developpement
African Development Bank
Adaptable Program Lending
Bank o f Ghana
Budget Planning & Expenditure Management System
Controller and Accountant General Department
Country Assistance Strategy
Community-Based Rural Development
Comprehensive Development Framework
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Consultative Group
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Civil Society Organization
District Assembly
District Assembly Common Fund
Debt Recovery Levy
Department of Social Welfare
Electricity Company o f Ghana
Economic Community of West African States
Education Sector Project
Education for A l l
Economic Reform Program
Economic Reform Support Operation
Economic and Sector Work
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Services
Financial Sector Strategic Plan
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Ghana Commercial Bank
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environmental Facility
Ghana Investment Promotion Center
Ghana Living Standards Survey
Gross National Product
Ghana’s Poverty Reduction Strategy
HIPC Expenditure Tracking Assessment and Action Plan
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Information and Communication Technology

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IDA
IEA
IFC

iL0

IMF
IPPD
JSA
M&E
MDBS
MDG
MFEP
MIGA
MMDE
MSME
MTEF
NDAP
NDC
NGO
NPP
NTE
NTFP
OED
PAC
PER
PIU
PLWHA
PNDC
PPMED
PRGF
PRSC
PUFMARF'
SFIA
SMEs
SPGs
SWAP
TOR
UEMOA
VAT
VRA
WAGP
WAMZ
WAFJP
WBI
WTO

International Development Association
Institute for Economic Analysis
International Finance Corporation
International Labor Organization
International Monetary Fund
Integrated Personnel and Payroll Data System
Joint Staff Assessment
Monitoring and Evaluation
Multi-Donor Budget Support
Millennium Development Goals
Ministry o f Finance and Economic Planning
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Ministry o f Manpower Development and Employment
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
National Decentralization Action Plan
National Democratic Congress
Non-Governmental Organization
New Patriotic Party
Non-Traditional Exports
Non-Timber Forest Product
Operations Evaluation Department
Parliamentary Accounts Committee
Public Expenditure Review
Project Implementation Unit
People Living with HIViAIDS
Provisional National Defence Council
Policy, Planning and Monitoring and Evaluation Department
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Public Financial Management Reform Program
Strategic Framework for I D A in Africa
Small and Medium Enterprises
Sectoral Partner Groups
Sector-Wide Approach
Tema Oil Refinery
West African Economic and Monetary Union
Value-Added Tax
Volta River Authority
West African Gas Pipeline
West African Monetary Zone
West Africa Power Pool
World Bank Institute
World Trade Organization

Callisto Madavo
Mats Karlsson
Nichola Dyer

Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

Assaad Jabre
Haydee Celaya
Solomon Quaynor

Vice President
Director
Principal Investment Officer

Table o f Contents

...............................................................................................
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................
COUNTRY CONTEXT ........................................................................................

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i

I

1

.
I 1.

.

I11

A.
B.
C.
D.

B.

IV

.

A.

C.

.
V I.

................... 17

Country Priorities and Agenda ..................................................................
i. Ghana’s PRSP .......................................................................................
Economic Outlook ....................................................................................
i. External Environment ...........................................................................
ii. Medium-Term Prospects .....................................................................
...
111. External Debt ......................................................................................

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

B.

V

Historical and Social Context ..................................................................... 2
Poverty: Profile, Trends, and Policy Analysis ........................................... 4
Recent Economic Developments ................................................................
7
Structural Issues ..........................................................................................
9
i. Progress and Challenges ......................................................................... 9
ii. Sources o f Potential Growth ................................................................
11
iii. Governance and Corruption................................................................ 12
i v . Other Cross-Cutting Issues ................................................................. 14

GHANA’S DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND PROSPECTS

A.

..................................................

Implementation o f the Last CAS ..............................................................
i. What Worked Well and What Worked Less Well ................................
ii. Lessons from Operations Evaluation Department (OED) Work and
Client Surveys ...................................................................
iii. Evaluation o f Bank Performance........................................................
Participation and Partners .........................................................................
i. Participatory Process Followed ............................................................
ii. Partnerships and Donor Coordination .................................................
Proposed Assistance Strategy ...................................................................
i. Bank Group Support to Results Pillars .................................................
ii. Lending Program .................................................................................
...
111. Scenarios and Triggers ........................................................................
iv. Non-lending ........................................................................................
v . Regional Programs ...............................................................................
v i . Global Environmental Issues and Role of GEF ..................................
v i i . Selectivity and Choice o f Instruments ...............................................
...
v i i i. Portfolio Management ......................................................................
i x . Core Monitoring and Benchmarks ......................................................

...................................................................................................................
Concluding Remarks ..........................................................................................
Risks

2

17
17

24
24
24
25

26
26
27
29
30
30
30
31
32
32
41
44
46
49
50
51
52
53

54
55

List o f Charts
Chart 1: Access to Education. Health and Water by Locality (1999) .................................
Chart 2: Ghana: Budget Execution o f Domestically-Financed Poverty Related
Expenditures 2002-2003 .............................................................................................
Chart 3: Inflation ................................................................................................................
Chart 4: GPRS Targets for Growth, Poverty Reduction, Human Development and
HIV/AIDS Prevention -- 2000 to 2005 .....................................................................

5

6
9
21

List o f Tables
Table 1: Recent Economic Developments ........................................................................ 8
Table 2: Linkages between GPRS and CAS .................................................................... 27
Table 3: Ghana - FY04-07 Lending Scenarios (US$ million) ........................................
43
Table 4: Triggers ..............................................................................................................
45
List o f Boxes
Box 1: Public Procurement Law: Ghana’s Institutions Working Together to Strengthen
Accountability ........................................................................................................... 22
Box 2: C i v i l Society Consultations ................................................................................... 31
Box 3: Ghana’s Efforts to Facilitate Trade are Getting Results .......................................
34
Box 4: A New Approach to Service Delivery to Poor and Marginalized Groups: The
Experience o f the Community Development LIL .................................................... 40
List o f Annexes

1

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.

One o f the few countries in sub-Saharan Africa to have a chance o f meeting the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), Ghana’s economic potential and strong social
capital base set it apart from a troubled sub-region. Development partners are strongly
supportive. This results-focused CAS, prepared by an IDA-IFC team, joins with donors
to support Ghana’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS) for 2004 to 2007.
Following a major terms-of-trade shock in 1999, and recovery from a difficult
2.
post-electoral fiscal situation, Ghana made good progress in achieving 2003
macroeconomic targets. The growth outlook i s positive, with signs that a 5 percent real
GDP growth target can be achieved, sustained over the next two years, and possibly
accelerated. Ghana i s likely to achieve the HIPC Completion Point in 2004.
Nonetheless, the underlying structure o f the economy needs to change. I t i s vulnerable to
external shocks, dependent on a few commodities and subject to sub-regional fragility.
Historically, cyclical and external factors, and slow progress on structural issues, have
constrained economic growth. Despite progress on poverty reduction, inequalities
present a continuing challenge, with poverty more acute in the three northern regions and
in the rural coastal zones. For continued progress on poverty reduction, i t will be
necessary to raise growth and target the deprived. Non-traditional exports, especially in
agriculture, which s t i l l has unexploited potential, may be key to lifting growth rates.

3.
While fiscal and monetary discipline have recently improved, structural
performance has remained uneven. The energy sector, a critical growth bottleneck, i s
now targeted for substantial reform; progress i s s t i l l needed on the investment climate.
There i s weak policy and implementation coordination in the public sector, financial
management needs further strengthening, and the GPRS and budget management need to
be better linked. Cross-cutting issues include HIV/AIDS, disability, gender and child
labor. Ghana rates fourth among sub-Saharan countries o n Transparency International’s
survey o f perceptions o n corruption, just behind countries such as Namibia and
Mauritius; nonetheless it i s an issue on which the government intends to maintain a highlevel focus.
4.
During the previous CAS, the Bank provided analytical and advisory support to
help the new government take cognizance o f the situation. Multi-donor approaches and
decentralization o f Bank Group activities worked well. However, many o f the targets set
in the last CAS were not achieved, as a result o f significant implementation delays, some
overly ambitious targets, and slow progress in key structural areas.
Overall development partner coordination in Ghana i s strong. Development
5,
partnership strengthened in 2003 with the government’s implementation o f the MultiDonor Budget Support (MDBS) framework with nine development partners, including

..

11

the Bank. Sector-level support i s shifting to programmatic lending and multi-donor
funding.
6.
The GPRS, approved by Parliament in February 2003, mapped out a mediumterm strategy for promoting growth and reducing poverty. The GPRS aims at
maintaining macroeconomic stability and increasing production and employment, and
targeting accelerated economic growth. Further, it seeks for Ghana to achieve the human
development targets under the MDGs. Finally, to ensure good governance through
accountability and transparency, the GPRS seeks to build a democratic and inclusive
state, and improve public sector management for better service delivery.

7.
The Bank Group’s proposed assistance strategy, rooted in the Strategic
Framework for IDA’s Assistance in Africa, rests o n three pillars to support the GPRS:
(i)sustainable growth and jobs creation; (ii)service provision for human development;
and (iii)governance and empowerment. There i s an intensive and integrated Bank Group
approach to growth, exemplified by the joint Bank-IFC w o r k in the power and related
sectors. The specific results that are being sought are spelled out in a results matrix, and
particular emphasis will be given to monitoring and evaluation.
Ghana i s currently considered to be in the base case. A move to the high case will
8.
correspond to a shift to a path o f accelerated growth, while the l o w case w o u l d be
triggered by a serious and sustained decline in performance. In the base case, IDA’s
proposed lending program provides for US$1.06 b i l l i o n over the four-year period o f the
CAS, through three m a i n clusters o f operations. First, a series o f annual PRSCs will
continue to support GPRS implementation. Second, infrastructure constitutes a
significant portion o f the lending program. Third, complementing the PRSC i s a series o f
specific investment and technical assistance operations, covering education, HIV/AIDS,
public sector reform, and finance and private sector development, including support to
Ghana’s decentralization process. National-level interventions, such as in energy, will
complement regional support delivered through the implementation o f the West Africa
Regional Integration Strategy. T w o operations are being prepared for possible GEF
support.
Analytical w o r k and economic dialogue are proposed, to meet the Bank’s due
9.
diligence requirements, enhance the effectiveness o f Bank support by informing policy
reforms and n e w lending, and help improve the results focus and support implementation.
Dialogue, stakeholder involvement and active dissemination will feature prominently.
The Bank’s non-lending services will be coordinated more closely with those o f other
development partners, to ensure complementarity, avoid duplication, and explore
opportunities for j o i n t production. Stakeholders are to be involved more closely in AAA
at all stages.
10.
strengthen public-private dialogue
IFC’s program will complement IDA’s to: (i)
o n improving the investment climate and assist with implementation o f k e y reforms;
(ii)
attract the private sector to the provision o f infrastructure services and utilities,
including energy and telecommunications; (iii)
help build and expand services o f
competitive financial institutions; (iv) enhance micro, small, and medium enterprise

...

111

development through expansion and integration o f financing and technical assistance
interventions; and (v) promote non-traditional exports.
To support the continued results focus, a comprehensive IDA portfolio
11,
performance improvement action plan will be agreed. A Readiness Assessment o f
Ghana’s monitoring and evaluation will be conducted. A results-focused progress
review, joint with development partners, i s planned midstream in CAS implementation.
The major risks to the proposed program include: political risks, particularly in
12.
relation to the electoral cycle; operational risks, especially o f delays or inappropriate
instrument choice; and the risk o f external shocks, including from events in the fragile
sub-region. Specific risk mitigation measures are foreseen.
Ghana i s well-poised to sustainably lift growth rates. Recent gains could be
13.
transient, though, if structural inertia persists. The coming elections present an
immediate fiscal challenge; governance improvements and social capital accumulation
may help sustain Ghana through this period. There i s strong and increasingly harmonized
development partnership. This CAS aims to support Ghana’s efforts to make significant
progress on i t s structural agenda and in so doing put i t s e l f o n a growth path leading to
achievement o f the Millennium Development Goals and eventually to middle-income
status.

The following issues are proposed for Board discussion:

14.
0

0

0

Alignment with the government’s results agenda and adequacy o f Bank
Group’s response: Does the results matrix focus on the key priorities for
Ghana’s development, and help to map out a four-year strategy for continued
progress towards achieving these results?
Lending program and triggers: I s the m i x o f programmatic, investment and
technical assistance lending appropriate to help achieve the desired growth,
service provision and governance results? D o the base case triggers capture a
scenario o f continuous improvement on growth and poverty reduction, and are the
triggers for the high case achievable, while challenging Ghana to move to a higher
growth path?
Harmonization: Development partnership has strengthened significantly through
the Multi-Donor Budget Support framework as well as at the sectoral level. Does
the strategy provide the Bank Group, development partners, and Ghana with an
adequate framework for continued progress on the harmonization agenda?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF
THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF GHANA
FOR 2004-2007

I.

INTRODUCTION

Ghana i s a strong performer in sub-Saharan Africa and i s one o f the few
1.
countries in Africa with the potential to achieve some, if n o t all, o f the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). Ghana’s economic potential and strong social capital base
set it apart f r o m i t s troubled sub-region. The country has ambitions to achieve middleincome status within one generation, driven by private sector-led growth. Development
partners are strongly supportive and have been harmonizing their approaches. This C A S
aims to j o i n with them in a results-focused approach that would strongly support Ghana’s
poverty reduction and growth strategy for 2004 to 2007.’
The previous CAS, which was prepared o n the basis o f the Vision 2020
2.
strategy document, was discussed by the Board on M a r c h 30,2000. Since then,
following political transition in 2001, c i v i l society has continued to strengthen, and a
revised national strategy for wealth creation and poverty reduction, Ghana’s Poverty
Reduction Strategy (GPRS) Paper, has been developed. However, Ghana faces important
challenges if i t i s to successfully harness i t s growth potential and sustainably reduce
poverty.

3.
This CAS emphasizes results at three levels. These are: (i)describing the
identifying the government’s desired results
current situation, for a robust baseline; (ii)
and strategy to achieve them; and (iii)
defining the Bank Group’s contribution to the
achievement o f those results within the relevant implementation period, through the
existing portfolio and with n e w operational assistance. Monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) will provide k e y inputs into the midstream progress review to be carried out with
the government and other development partners.
4.
The CAS process entailed significant engagement with t h e country
authorities and the Bank Group team in an explicit attempt t o foster a resultsdriven implementation culture. The document i s j o i n t l y prepared with International
Finance Corporation (IFC), by a team consisting o f staff based in Accra, Washington, and
Johannesburg. The consultative process employed for this CAS i s described in detail in
Annex 1.

’

While Ghana i s not an official pilot for a Results-BasedCAS, this CAS has incorporated key elements o f
the results methodology that i s being developed by the pilots.

2

11.
A.

COUNTRY CONTEXT
HISTORICAL
AND SOCIAL CONTEXT

5.

Robust political culture. Ghana was the first country in sub-Saharan Africa to
emerge from colonialism, achieving independence in 1957. Following independence, the
country experienced a series of military takeovers. From 1982 to 1992, Ghana was
governed by a military regime, the Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC), and
thereafter until 2000 b y the National Democratic Congress (NDC), both under President
Jerry John Rawlings. In December 2000, the New Patriotic Party (NPP) won the
presidential vote and parliamentary majority, and on January 7 , 2001, the new
government, headed by Mr. John Agyekum Kufuor, took office. With the next
presidential and legislative elections scheduled for December 2004, the incumbent will be
running against a number of opponents including Professor John Atta Mills, Vice
President in the previous N D C government and a presidential candidate in the last
elections. As the next election draws near, it i s occupying greater space in public
discourse.
Strong social capital. Ghana i s a nation characterized by strong social
6.
institutions that play a mediating role critical for promoting national consensus and
easing social tensions. The traditional authorities, explicitly apolitical, play a crucial role
in societal discourse. They are represented formally through “Houses o f Chiefs” at
regional and national levels, with the National House o f Chiefs supported by a secretariat.
Public dialogue i s open and facilitated b y a burgeoning independent media, including a
plethora o f newspapers, popular FM radio stations countrywide, and several licensed
private television networks. Social discourse covers a wide range o f social, political and
economic issues, animated by civil society organizations that reach out to the poor and
provide an avenue, through advocacy, to give them voice o n national issues, by thinktanks providing solid local analyses, and by other social institutions, such as labor unions.
The government has made important strides to deepen i t s dialogue with the growing civil
society movement and with the private sector. The formulation process o f the Ghana
Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS), and continuing plans for participatory GPRS
monitoring and improved access to information, have contributed to increased
participation in Ghana’s development process. A strong precedent for dialogue between
the government and civil society now exists where little existed before, and i t s value i s
widely recognized within Ghana.
Ghana i s at a vital geographical, political and economic crossroad. Situated
7.
in the middle o f the West African coast, between C6te d’Ivoire to the west, Togo to the
east and Burkina Faso to the north Ghana i s the third largest member (after Nigeria and
CBte d’Ivoire) o f the 15-country Economic Community o f West African States
(ECOWAS) and a major trading partner o f i t s three neighbors, all o f them also members
o f the West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA). Ghana i s a signatory to
the Accra Declaration that in April 2000 created the West Africa Monetary Zone
(WAMZ) a second monetary zone within ECOWAS, as a first step toward a wider
monetary union that i s eventually to include all the ECOWAS countries. Under the
WAMZ agreement, Ghana i s expected to host the headquarters o f the West Africa

3
Central Bank. Ghana i s a key player in on-going regional activities, including trade and
transport facilitation and energy.

8.
Stable regional player in a fragile sub-region. Ghana, with i t s strong social
capital, continues to enjoy peace in a sub-region plagued with political and ethnic
problems. In light o f the fragility o f the sub-region and concerns regarding ethnoreligious conflicts, Ghana’s authorities are paying careful attention both to domestic and
external stability. Within the sub-region, Ghana i s actively supporting peace efforts.
Beyond i t s contribution o f troops to the UN peacekeeping force in Sierra Leone, in i t s
current capacity as Chair o f ECOWAS, Ghana has been involved in the peace dialogues
for C6te d’Ivoire and Liberia. O n the domestic front, a protracted chieftaincy dispute that
erupted in early 2002 has resulted in the maintenance o f a state o f emergency in the
Dagbon traditional area in the Northern Region.
Leader in partnership innovations. Ghana was among the first countries in
9.
1999 to pilot the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF). I t moved
Consultative Groups (CGs), traditionally held in Paris, to Accra to facilitate participation
by civil society and the private sector. To further facilitate regular dialogue with and
among development partners, the government introduced quarterly mini-CGs as well as
sectoral partner groups (SPGs) that meet regularly and are led by national agencies with
clearly-defined focal support points from specific development partners. Ghana has
taken on increasing leadership as co-chair with the Bank. Stronger sectoral dialogue has
led to the pioneering o f Sector-Wide Approaches (SWAPS)in several sectors, including
roads, agriculture and health. In the health sector, Ghana and i t s development partners
have broken new ground in partnership arrangements, having gone beyond the SWAP to
implement multi-donor pooling o f funds, together with joint monitoring arrangements, a
common reporting format for financial management and auditing and the use o f the
government’s own procurement procedures. The Health SWAP serves as a model for
other countries, and has influenced.the design o f Ghana’s programmatic approach in
education. Strong partnership also contributed to Ghana’s eligibility to participate in the
Education For All Fast Track Initiative in 2004. Such innovations were important
precursors to the multi-donor budget support (MDBS) framework introduced in 2003
with the participation o f several o f Ghana’s key development partners, including the
Bank through i t s Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC). Under the MDBS, good
progress has been made to align policy support with the GPRS, advance agreement on
policy actions, and pool funds for budgetary support, as well as to harmonize mission
schedules and the timing o f assessment reviews. In changing their way o f operating,
development partners have significantly freed up country capacities.

10.

Ghana i s one of the few countries in sub-Saharan Africa to have a chance of
meeting the MDGs. A recent study2 found that Ghana could achieve most o f the MDGs
if the policy environment and the commitment to achieve set targets are sustained over
the medium- to long-term (2000-201 5). Ghana has already made good progress, over the

National Development Planning Commission: Ghana, Report on the Millennium Development Goals,
2002.

4

past decade, in reducing overall poverty f r o m around 52 percent to just under 40 percent3
M o s t o f the social development targets, as well as long-term debt sustainability, are likely
to be achieved if growth i s accelerated and partnership for poverty reduction i s deepened.
T w o MDG areas requiring concerted attention are maternal mortality and malnutrition.

B.

POVERTY: PROFILE,

TRENDS,
AND POLICY ANALYSIS

T h e r e has been progress o n poverty reduction but m o r e needs to b e done,
11.
including tackling inequalities. As outlined above, Ghana has begun to make progress
o n poverty reduction and the incidence o f poverty has declined over the past decade, but
considerable effort will s t i l l be required to reverse the post-independence slide in living
standards (see para. 20). Poverty in Ghana has been found to be related to a number o f
factors including geographic location, access to services, demographic, educational
attainment, and socioeconomic group.4 For instance, in 1999, the incidence o f poverty
among food crop farmers was 50.4 percent, compared to those in private formal
employment, where only 1 1.3 percent were considered poor.5 Access to both potable
water and electricity improved over the period f r o m 199 1 to 1998, and poorer rural
groups benefited f r o m these gains. While overall social indicators have improved, public
facilities for education and health have generally favored urban rather than rural areas,
with a tendency, for example, for urban-based hospitals to be better financed. As a
consequence, urban areas have registered better poverty and inequality reduction results
than rural areas; Accra in particular showed improvement in a l l poverty indicators.
Poverty i s m o r e acute in the three regions o f the n o r t h and in the rural
12.
coastal zones. Regional inequalities have persisted, with large numbers o f households in
the savannah and rural coastal zones appearing to be in a situation o f chronic or persistent
poverty, owing to their relative isolation f r o m markets. There remain significant
disparities in household access to health, education and water by locality (see Chart 1).
While Accra and the urban coastal and forest zones have enjoyed significant
improvement in their living standards, with even the poorest groups in these areas
appearing to benefit, the savannah and rural coastal areas have seen very little
improvement in economic well-being. Uneven quality o f service delivery and
availability o f funding for n e w priorities have contributed to increasing poverty
concentration in these areas. A large contributing factor i s inadequate development o f
rural infrastructure. Households in these regions have remained largely disconnected
f r o m economic growth taking place in the rest o f the country, with limited opportunities
to escape f r o m poverty because o f their limited access to education, markets and public
services.

Source: Ghana, 1998-99 Ghana Living Standards Survey (GLSS).
Source: Ghana Statistical Service, 2000, “Poverty Trends in Ghana in the 199Os,” Accra.
Ibid.

5
Chart 1: Access to Education, Health and Water by Locality (1999)

24

18

43

45

38

Incidence o f C o n s miption
Poverty

i

70

-

I

9

6
G

e
3

1

Source Data derived from Ghana Lving
Standards Survey 3 & 4 , C o u l o m b e and
Mckav 1200 II

7

s

+

C

m

e
3

T
I

g
L

-s

-

B

a:

L?

v)

e
3
Zone

m

m
m

C

L

-

I

9

2

s

2
m
2

s
a:
r/)

0 Health (% consulting In hospital)
I3 Net Primary Enrollment (Girls)
Net Primary Enrollment (Boys)
Water (% w t h access to potable water)

1

1

13.
Raising growth f o r continued poverty reduction, and targeting the deprived,
will be key. Annual real GDP growth o f 5 percent i s projected to bring poverty down to
32 percent by end 2007. A per capita growth rate o f just 2 percent will be sufficient to
achieve the MDG poverty goal, as Ghana has already made significant progress on
reducing headcount poverty.6 While growth i s important for poverty outcomes in Ghana,
growth alone will not reduce poverty. Policy interventions to empower rural populations
and target all vulnerable groups including women, children and disabled persons will be
required to bridge the gap in access to social services. The cost as well as the quality o f
services and infrastructure provided will need to be considered.

There has been good progress on poverty-related expenditures. Rates o f
14.
budget execution for poverty-related expenditures (see Chart 2) have increased due in
part to timely inflows o f external support, including HIPC releases originally scheduled
for 2002. B y September 2003, poverty-related programs had executed 80 percent o f real
allocations (the fiscal year corresponds to the calendar year). Basic education and
primary health care, along with feeder roads, were among the programs with the highest
rates of budget execution, while water and housing programs lagged the furthest behind.
Source: World Bank Report No. 26220-GH, “Ghana: Reducing Poverty and Improving Human
Development”, June 13, 2003.

6
To accommodate needed expenditure in the fourth quarter o f the year, while s t i l l
remaining within overall fiscal targets, the government approved a supplementary budget
o n November 4, 2003, providing additional funding to local governments and to the
educational fund.
Chart 2: Ghana: Budget Execution o f Domestically-Financed' Poverty
Related Expenditures 2002-2003

Improving budget execution rates for poverty-related programs
(percent o f GDP)

Total Government Expenditures
Poverty Reduction
Feeder Roads
Basic Education
Education Sector
Primary Health Care
Health Sector
Poverty -Focused Agriculture
Agriculture Sector
Roads & Highways
Energy Sector
Works & Housing
Rural Water

0Yo

20%

40%

60%

80%

Public structures for provision o f basic services must be strengthened and
15.
non-governmental provision expanded. While government has made progress o n
increasing poverty-related expenditures, the decentralized structures at the front l i n e o f
service provision are not yet able to ensure efficacy o f expenditure. As major providers
o f water and sanitation, education and health services, the efficiency and effectiveness o f
public sector delivery structures need to become more effective and efficient if service
provision i s to improve. The capacity o f decentralized public service provision structures
to plan and execute programs, manage financial resources and processes, and monitor and
evaluate interventions must be strengthened. The private sector and non-governmental
sector can and should play a larger, better role alongside the public sector. In education,
the private sector i s expected by 2015 to account for at least 20 percent o f a l l pupils
enrolled, but mostly in urban areas. Private schools will provide the needed space for the
government to concentrate o n provision to deprived rural areas. In health, a Health
Insurance Act, w h i c h has the flexibility for participation by private insurance companies
and i s financed primarily with borrowed pension funds f r o m the state social security trust,
i s in the early implementation phase. In the provision o f urban water and sanitation, the
government has been m o v i n g towards increased private sector participation, although
progress has been slower than anticipated.

100%

7

C.

RECENT
ECONOMICDEVELOPMENTS

I n 1999, Ghana suffered a major terms-of-trade shock when prices for i t s
16.
two m a i n exports, gold and cocoa, plunged, while petroleum prices increased. This
shock, together with a delay in adjusting fiscal and monetary policy accordingly, led to a
sharp deterioration in macroeconomic performance, including a build-up in external
arrears. The exchange rate depreciated rapidly in the latter part o f 1999 and inflation
increased significantly. These problems were compounded by delays in the adjustment
o f domestic petroleum prices and electricity rates, resulting in an accumulation o f large
bank debts at the state-owned monopoly importer, Tema O i l Refinery (TOR), and
threatening the financial viability o f the power utilities. Fiscal and monetary discipline
faltered once again in the run up to the December 2000 elections. As the terms o f trade
worsened further, exchange rate depreciation and rising inflation continued through 2000.

Recovery from a difficult post-electoral fiscal situation was a challenge. After
17.
the 2000 elections, the new government inherited a challenging economic situation, and
had initially to focus o n restoring macroeconomic stability. After early progress,
however, serious fiscal and quasi-fiscal slippages in 2002 prevented the completion o f the
final review o f the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)-supported program.
In late 2002 and early 2003, the government redoubled reform efforts, implementing a
number o f important measures to improve the fiscal situation, including significantly
increasing petroleum prices at the pump and moving towards automatic electricity and
water tariff adjustments. O n the strength o f the reforms undertaken and the economic
program set out by the authorities, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Board
approved a second PRGF arrangement on M a y 12,2003. In i t s first review under the
PRGF, conducted December 17,2003, the IMF commended Ghana on i t s strong
macroeconomic performance and prudent fiscal and monetary management, but also
called for acceleration o f structural reforms and indicated that in view o f past history in
election years, the year 2004 poses a particular challenge.
Financial authorities are acutely conscious o f past slippages; w i t h careful
18.
fiscal and monetary management and a favorable external situation G h a n a made
significant progress in achieving macroeconomic targets for 2003. Real GDP growth
increased from 4.5 percent in 2002 to an estimated 5.2 percent in 2003, exceeding the 4.7
percent target. This stronger growth was led b y robust performance in cocoa and gold
exports as well as increases in private remittances. A one-time jump in the annual
inflation rate, from 15.2 percent at the end o f December 2002 to an all-time high o f 30
percent in April 2003, was due to the 95 percent increase in petroleum prices in February
2003 (see Chart 3). That spike dampened progressively, with year-on-year inflation
declining steadily to close the year 2003 at 23.6 percent, slightly higher than the revised
target o f 22 percent. L o w monthly increases now indicate that a considerably lower
annual inflation rate may be achieved in 2004. The value o f the domestic currency also
depreciated by a modest 4.7 percent against the US dollar, compared to 7.4 percent in
2002. The overall budget deficit o f 3.4 percent o f GDP was marginally above the revised
target o f 3.3 percent, although an improvement over the previous year’s 5 percent. N e t
domestic financing registered a repayment o f 0.4 percent o f GDP against a target o f zero.

8
Table 1: Recent Economic Developments
INDICATOR

2002
Actual

2003 Budget
Target

2003
Actual

GDP growth
Agriculture
Industry
Services

4.5
4.4
4.7
4.7

4.7

5.2
6.1
5.1
4.7

Inflation (year-on-year)

15.2

9

23.6

0

0.4

Net domestic borrowing (% o f GDP)

Overall Budget Deficit (%GDP)

8.7

3.3

3.4

Domestic primary balance (% GDP)

2.0

2.2

2.5

Current Account (US$ million)

30.0

Gross Reserves (monthsiimports)

2.0

I

40.8

2.3

3.9

Source: 2004 Budget Speech

* Minus

= net borrowing;

Plus = N e t repayments

While fiscal and monetary discipline have improved, structural performance
19.
has been uneven. Expenditure controls have been strengthened, tax revenue collection
improved and inflows o f external support higher than anticipated. Revenue-raising
measures introduced in 2003 include the national reconstruction levy, the debt recovery
charge o n petroleum products, and timber licenses. Improved fiscal performance in turn
facilitated a decline in the pace o f monetary expansion, which in 2003 had been driven
primarily by a substantial accumulation o f foreign reserves at the Bank o f Ghana. The
decline in inflation also opened r o o m for the central bank to gradually reduce i t s prime
interest rate, with yields o n three-month treasury bills sliding f r o m 38 percent in
December 2000 to 16 percent in January 2004. However, high levels o f public domestic
debt (two-thirds o f w h i c h was being rolled over at maturities o f three months) and
ensuing high interest rates continued to crowd out private investment and constituted a
significant drain o n public expenditures. Approximately three-quarters o f total interest
outlays in 1999-2001 stemmed f r o m the domestic interest burden. By end-2003 the
government had reduced domestic public debt to 22.6 percent f r o m 29 percent o f GDP at
end-2002 . Nonetheless, there has been only modest progress o n structural reforms in
some key areas, such as the public sector, business environment, energy, finance, and
telecommunications.

9
C h a r t 3: Inflation
I

Inflation Rate (year-on-year)

Jan

Feb

Mar

Source:Bank o f Ghana and IMF

D.

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Month

STRUCTURAL ISSUES

i. Progress and Challenges
Cyclical and external factors have constrained economic growth. With i t s
good endowment o f natural resources and strong export base, Ghana was well-poised to
achieve a sustained increase in economic growth after independence. Yet, that outcome
was not achieved. Ghana experienced spurts o f growth in the 1960s, propelling it into a
higher per capita income bracket (Ghana borrowed f r o m IBRD until M a r c h 1977) but
rapid economic decline set in during the mid- 1970s. An Economic Reform Program was
launched in 1983, marking a change in policy direction f r o m state-controlled to marketdriven economy. By that time, though, standards o f living had declined so sharply that
Ghana had joined the ranks o f other low-income African countries. The economy was
able to rebound in the mid-1980s with the aid o f buoyant cocoa and gold prices. A period
o f sustained output growth, punctuated by episodes of weak macroeconomic management
associated with the electoral cycle, followed.

20.

Growth prospects stymied by slow progress on structural issues. Beyond the
21.
economy’s vulnerability to external shocks and weak economic management associated
with the electoral cycle, however, Ghana’s growth prospects have repeatedly been
stymied by slow progress o n structural reforms. Despite recording average real G D P
growth in the 4 to 5 percent range over the last 20 years, the structure o f the Ghanaian
economy has remained broadly the same since independence. Agriculture remains
dominated by smallholder farming and the natural resources sector has not yet been able
to operate efficiently and effectively, while the manufacturing sector has not diversified
much beyond the industrial activities developed as a result o f the industrial-cum-trade

10
policy reforms o f the 1980s. In addition, budget rigidities have curtailed flexibility to
address poverty issues. During the 1990s the share o f wages and interest payments in
total budgetary expenditures rose substantially, and n o w account for 69 percent o f total
budgetary revenues including grants. In this context, the scope for shifting the allocation
o f expenditures among wages, goods and services and investment has shrunk
considerably. Since 2002, improvements in managing wage expenditures have helped to
keep the share o f wages and salaries in the total budget in check. However, quasi-fiscal
deficits have become a major source o f financial imbalances, with the m a i n source being
the state-owned enterprises sector.
The state-owned enterprises sector weighs heavily on the economy, and state
22.
involvement i s extensive, including in the public enterprises and utilities; divestiture
experience has been mixed. In spite o f the large privatization program o f the mid1990s, the size o f the government remains large. Divestiture o f k e y public utilities has
had a m i x e d experience, including significant midstream shifts, such as in the finance
sector, or delays arising f r o m disputes with the strategic investors involved, such as in the
telecommunications sector. The central government owns a 50 percent o r greater share in
nearly 50 companies, many o f which have been operating at less than cost recovery
pricing, thus perpetuating inefficiency in service delivery, generating financial
imbalances to the government, and leaving a significant debt burden to future
generations. Between 1999 and 200 1, while the overall deficit o f the general government
averaged 7.5 percent o f GDP, the consolidated overall deficit o f the five largest stateowned enterprises’ averaged 9.25 percent o f GDP. Recent estimates suggest that the
planned subsidy payments f r o m the budget to public enterprises in 2003-2004 i s likely to
reach 1.6 percent o f GDP. Nonetheless, with the establishment o f the Public Utilities
Regulatory Commission (PURC) in 1997, there has been gradual progress o n introducing
automatic tariff adjustments, especially for utility companies, and electricity and water
tariffs have begun to be adjusted to begin to cover costs at these utilities.

23.
The energy sector, critical for growth, i s now targeted for substantial reform.
Until recently, subsidies to the loss-making Tema Oil Refinery (TOR), an o i l importer,
presented a significant burden o n the budget and the size o f i t s debt affected the financial
sector through i t s overdraft facility with the Ghana Commercial Bank (GCB). To address
some o f the critical energy sector issues, in mid-January 2003, the authorities raised
petroleum prices by 90 percent o n average, bringing retail prices t o import parity levels.
In addition, the Parliament enacted a Debt Recovery Levy (DRL) o n petroleum products,
estimated to generate 1.6 percent o f GDP in 2003, to help retire the bonds issued to cover
the losses at the TOR. A major reform program covering generation and distribution i s
n o w underway. These actions drew o n the lessons f r o m the energy sector performance
during the 1990s when the Electricity Company o f Ghana (ECG) and V o l t a River
Authority (VRA), the t w o major energy sector public enterprises, became financially
weak due to delays in adjusting electricity tariffs and petroleum retail prices. Until
recently, VRA, w h i c h manages the Akosombo Dam, provided power at highly-subsidized
rates to a private aluminum smelter, the largest power consumer in the country. Also,
7

Volta River Authority, Ghana Water Company, Tema Oil Refinery, Electricity Company o f Ghana, and
Ghana Commercial Bank.

11
delays in maintenance and needed investments further contributed to weakening the
performance o f these enterprises, making a comprehensive improvement in sector
performance urgent.
Investment climate constraints still hinder private investment. High real
24.
interest rates driven by excessive local borrowing by government have long hindered
private enterprise access to affordable financing. Compared t o other sub-Saharan African
countries, Ghana’s financial intermediation i s weak, as a result o f historically poor
allocation o f pension resources, and continued distortions in the financial services
markete8Other constraints to private sector development include: inefficiency o f
institutions that interface with the private sector, including the dominant Ghana
Commercial Bank (GCB) and to some extent the commercial banks; poor trade-related
infrastructure; unreliable provision o f and relatively high cost utility services; nonconducive policy framework relating to factors o f production; bureaucratic red tape; and
corruption. The government has recognized these adverse factors, and has recently begun
to take action to address some o f the issues. T o help improve the dialogue between
government and the private sector, the President established the Ghana Investors
Advisory Council; it has been effective in setting forth a clear agenda. However, a 2003
FIAS analysis o f administrative barriers to investment, that measured progress in meeting
identified constraints since 1995, found only a few areas where identified reforms had
been implemented, and those were not comprehensive enough to make a significant
i m p r ~ v e m e n t .Results
~
f r o m at least two surveys” suggest that small- and medium-size
firms bear a relatively high share o f the costs o f the business environment in Ghana,
preventing them f r o m expanding and reaching a size sufficient for entering world
markets.

ii. Sources o f Potential Growth
25.
The agricultural sector still has unexploited potential, and fostering nontraditional exports (NTEs), especially in agriculture, will be key to lifting growth
rates. Agriculture accounts for about 35 percent o f GDP. I t has done better than the
manufacturing sector, mainly because i t s exports, both cocoa and non-traditional crops,
have performed quite well. Indeed, Ghana has seen strong growth in non-traditional
crops, especially tropical fruits and vegetables, over the last five years. However, crop
losses are high and access to markets i s limited. M a k i n g better use o f Ghana’s
agricultural potential w o u l d require giving i t s farmers more options and better incentives
to develop crops that have emerged in the last decade and others with potential for
growth. Access to infrastructure, technology, international markets and quality control
systems will be critical to improve storage, enhance marketing and processing o f
agricultural commodities, increase the volume o f non-traditional exports, improve land
use, and foster environmentally-friendly agronomic practices. Agricultural development
Source: World Bank and IMF, FSAP Update, July 2003.
Foreign Investment Advisory Services (FIAS), “Ghana Administrative Barriers to Investment Update,”
June 2003.
l o “World Business Environment Survey, 2000” and “Regulatory and Administrative Cost Survey, 2003,”
conducted by Bruks and Associates and sponsored by FIAS, Ghana Investment Promotion Council.

12
strategies, both in traditional and non-traditional crops, will need to be guided by market
demand and by their environmental soundness.
Information and communication technology (ICT), tourism, and
26.
manufacturing: other non-traditionalsectors with potential. The potential crosscutting impact f r o m a well-functioning I C T environment o n growth and employment,
improved government services, and accountability and empowerment, i s high. For
example, a dynamic I C T sector in Ghana has the potential to bring greater efficiencies to
day-to-day operations of both government and private sector, as w e l l as a platform for
value-added services, such as outsourced data and call center services for overseas
corporations. Strengthening the policy environment and regulatory capacity, and
improving ICT infrastructure and access in both urban and rural communities, including
resolving an investment dispute between the government and a shareholder o f Ghana
Telecom, are necessary preconditions to realizing this potential. Ghana’s ICT policy,
developed in June 2003 following extensive consultation with stakeholders countrywide,
seeks to engineer an ICT-led socio-economic development process with the potential o f
transforming Ghana into an infrastructure-rich, knowledge-based and technology-driven
economy and society. Tourism i s another area in which Ghana m a y have a comparative
advantage in niche markets such as community, cultural and historical tourism as w e l l as
eco-tourism. In 2002, earnings f r o m tourism represented 8 percent o f GDP, up f r o m 2
percent in 199 1; in 2003 tourism revenues were 25 percent higher than in 1999.l1
Growth in such non-traditional sectors, as w e l l as manufacturing prospects, may hinge o n
Ghana’s effectively harnessing the potential for economic growth and poverty reduction
that accompanies urbanization.

iii. Governance and Corruption
The current institutionalsetup in the public sector i s characterized by weak
27.
policy and implementationcoordination among government ministries, subvented
agencies and local governments. The current institutional structure o f the government
includes 36 central ministries and some 280 subvented agencies, w h i c h are departments
and agencies operating under these ministries. The total number o f government
employees in the subvented agencies i s large both in absolute terms as w e l l as in
comparison to other countries. The Auditor-General has tackled the problem o f ghost
names, and the National Institutional Renewal Program (NIRP) recently completed a
public employment census to consolidate efforts. As responsibilities for implementing
crosscutting reforms involve various branches o f government, the fragmentation o f
responsibilities makes the pace o f reform implementation uneven. T o consolidate public
sector reform efforts, oversight was transferred to the office o f the Senior Minister in
early 2003. Overall, difficulties in policy coordination have also hindered rationalization
o f government activities and reduction in the size o f the public sector, including, as
described earlier (see para. 22), in the state-owned enterprises sector.
Greater empowerment i s being sought through strengthened institutions and
28.
greater inclusion. First, districts are often unable to use their long- and medium-term
”

Ghana, Tourist Board Datasheet and Ghana Export Promotion Council.

13
development plans to forecast the delivery o f infrastructure and other social services, due
to uncoordinated implementation o f development partners’ programs with their own;
these programs are not always consistent with the GPRS. The result i s that District
Assembly Common Fund (DACF), HIPC, and other grant transfers are not used
effectively enough. District-level capacity needs to be strengthened and streamlined, so
that all district-level operators may w o r k together effectively and to foster greater
accountability at the local level. Second, the constitutionally-mandated entities have only
weak oversight capabilities. In Ghana, the institutions that were established for that
purpose have not yet acted as a strong counterweight to the executive. O f particular
urgency i s Parliament’s ability to exercise effective oversight, including o n the budgetary
process. Since 2002, watchdog and oversight institutions have received budgetary
allocations, and support has been provided to modernization (for example, the “Fast
Track” Courts are computerized). Third, participation by c i v i l society in the management
o f public affairs has been constrained by lack o f access to information. The draft
Freedom o f Information Bill i s intended to bring about fundamental improvements in
political and bureaucratic culture as regard access to information o n government
business.
Competence and professionalism of the public service: After more than 15
29.
years o f public sector reform programs, the Ghanaian public service remains large
and weak. Uncompetitive compensation packages and an unrewarding j o b environment
have made the public service an unattractive employment destination for talented
managers and professionals, most notably in the areas o f medicine, tertiary education,
economics, and public policy analysis. A dilemma for Government i s that i t s ability to
improve the pay to recruit and retain critical skills in the public sector i s limited by the
size of the public service and by overall budget constraints. A perennial problem o f high
economic significance i s the brain drain o f well-educated nurses, doctors and teachers. A
comprehensive public sector reform strategy, to improve effectiveness, efficiency and
accountability, i s under preparation.
Financial management needs further strengthening, and better linkage of the
GPRS and budget management i s still needed. The I M F - W o r l d B a n k H I P C
Expenditure Tracking Assessment and Action Plan (HIPC A A P ) concluded that in 200 1
Ghana met only 1 out o f 15 benchmarks in the areas o f budget formulation, execution and
reporting. The 200 1 assessment highlighted that basic revenue, expenditure and cash
management controls required strengthening. The assessment also pointed out that the
budget preparation system needed to provide a better overview for planning, considering
that budget deadlines were met with delays, meaning that the budget was generally
enacted well after the start o f the financial year. Finally, accounting systems needed
strengthening to produce reliable financial statements and meaningful figures for
budgetary control. These latter problems were aggravated by auditing backlogs, and by
audits that did not address high-risk areas. A new A A P i s to be conducted in February
30.

2004.

3 1.
Government has initiated several programs to strengthen its financial
management processes. With the strengthening in the regulatory framework through
new laws covering financial administration, auditing and procurement, as w e l l as

14
improvements in the scope, timing and quality o f the reporting o f budget execution, there
have been recent improvements in public financial management. Some o f the problems
raised by the 2001 assessment were addressed in 2003 through the introduction o f cash
and commitment controls, the prompt reconciliation o f budgetary and banking accounts,
and more frequent and timely reporting on budget execution. The government has also
identified a prioritized number o f public financial management issues to be addressed
under i t s Short Term Action Plan over 2003-2004. The Medium Term Expenditure
Framework (MTEF) i s part o f the government’s budget preparation system.
Furthermore, the core government accounting system i s being replaced by a new
integrated computer system (Budget Planning and Expenditure Management System or
“BPEMS”) that i s being progressively rolled out, and the payroll system by the Integrated
Personnel and Payroll Data System (IPPD 11). The final 2004 budget discussions sought
to explicitly link GPRS priorities and sectoral budget allocations. Pre-payment audits o f
arrears (both road and non-road) have been carried out. It should be noted that military
expenditures are transparently audited and reported; Ministry o f Defence expenditures are
reported in a manner similar to that for civilian entities. According to the 2003 budget,
Ghana’s military expenditures were about 4.2 percent o f total discretionary expenditures
in 2003 and are projected to be around 4.8 and 4.9 percent in 2004 and 2005
respectively.

Corruption should be kept in focus. The President’s “State o f the Nation”
32.
address in 2001 emphasized the Government’s “zero tolerance on corruption”. At the
sub-regional level, Ghana convened ECOWAS Justice Ministers in 2001 and sponsored
the Accra Declaration against corruption and related crimes, the text o f which has since
been adopted as a binding ECOWAS Protocol. Ghana acceded in 2003 to the African
Peer Review Mechanism, providing an avenue for independent public critique o f the
government. Ghana i s also a signatory to the African Union’s convention against
corruption. Ghana ranked favorably on Transparency International’s Corruption
Perceptions Survey in 2003 and was fourth among sub-Saharan African countries in the
2003 survey, behind Mauritius, Botswana and Namibia. Still, the government intends to
keep doing better on corruption. Tax administration, customs, exchange controls inter
alia have been identified as important sources o f corruption that work as deterrents to
new businesses in Ghana and should be tackled with commitment by the government in
the very short term.l3

iv. Other Cross-Cutting Issues
33.
HIV/AIDS. Ghana’s HIV/AIDS prevalence rate, at 3.4 percent, i s the lowest
among the surrounding c ~ u n t r i e s , although
’~
recent studies suggest prevalence may be
approaching the five percent mark nationwide. Alarmingly, December 2002 data show
prevalence in six cities significantly exceeds the five percent mark, with a further
increase likely. Ghana has rallied to combat the disease. Awareness among Ghanaians
12

Source: 2004 Budget Statement. Ministry o f Defence as a share o f total government discretionary
expenditures (including donor funding, and covering personal emoluments, administrative services and
investment).
13
Source: FIAS, op. cit.
14
By contrast, prevalence in CBte d’Ivoire i s 15 percent.

15
o f the risks o f contracting HIV i s very high. However, behavior has been slow to change
and there i s reluctance to seek counseling and undergo voluntary testing. Efforts should
be geared towards addressing the issues o f stigmatization o f people living with
HIViAIDS (PLWHAs) and to caring for infected people.
Disability. The presence o f people with disability needs fuller recognition and
34.
their needs better addressed. While Ghana has special needs schools, there i s a deliberate
effort to integrate disabled children into the school system. I t i s estimated, however, that
at least t w o thirds o f all disabled children are not in school, as they are difficult to reach.
With regard to the physically challenged, the capacity o f agencies that provide relevant
services needs strengthening. A draft Disability Bill outlines special incentives to
improve livelihoods for disabled persons, and the government i s exploring health
exemptions and training for the disabled.
Natural resource sustainability at risk. Forests, wildlife, livestock and fisheries
3 5.
are all under strain because o f poor management and overexploitation. Although these
sectors’ contribution to G D P growth, export earnings, j o b creation and livelihoods i s
significant, human activities are threatening the role they play. For instance, land i s
degraded by bush burning, resource overexploitation, and unsound agricultural practices.
At present, exploitation o f renewable natural resources in the high forest and savannah
zones far exceeds their natural regeneration and artificial restocking capacities. The
unsustainable pattern o f management o f natural resources has led to reduction o f forest
cover, with an annual rate o f deforestation estimated at about 1.6 percent (about 65,000
ha annually), threatening the m a i n source o f rural energy for heating and cooking and
putting several timber species under severe threat o f commercial extinction. If
unchecked, desertification and changes in climate o n national, regional, international and
global scales could result.
36.
Other environmental concerns include mining. Mining concessions in forest
reserves are emerging issues, even more so as ore processing methods, particularly those
applied by small-scale artisanal (“galamsey”) miners, result in contamination and
pollution o f water bodies, soils and air. Beginning in the late 1980s, formal mining
operators began to adopt environmental and social safeguards and social responsibility
agreements (or Community Action Plans). Recent studies conducted by independent
reviewers have shown that pollution abatement and environmental cleanup at the mines
has gained greater prominence. Companies’ performance in ensuring due diligence with
social and environmental safeguards needs continued close monitoring by the public.
Beyond mining, solid waste generation and disposal pose major environmental risks
throughout the country.

37.

Overall, the cost to the economy o f inadequate attention to sustainable
environmental and natural resource management has been estimated to be on the
~
the national environmental issues also
order o f 4 percent o f GDP a n n ~ a l l y . ’Further,
pose a threat to the global environment. O f trans-boundary and international concern are:
(i)ecosystem fragmentation; (ii)
aquatic weeds invasion in the Black V o l t a shared by
l5

Source: Ghana Environmental Action Plan, Vol. 2, 1994.

16
Ghana, C6te d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso and in the Tan0 River, particularly the Tano/Ehy
lagoon shared by Cote d’Ivoire and Ghana; and (iii)
deprivation o f free movement o f wild
animals within and across frontiers. Under the K y o t o Protocol, Ghana benefits from
support for integration o f cleaner technologies in production systems under the Clean
Development Mechanism. In addition, the Ghana Environmental Protection Agency has
adopted the Polluter-Pay Principle as law, and Ghana observes the principle o f Prior
Informed Consent, under which as a receiving country, Ghana’s consent w o u l d be
required prior to any disposal or dumping o f hazardous or toxic waste. However,
monitoring o f compliance and enforcement o f environmental regulations, guidelines and
standards need to be strengthened and made more efficient.
W o m e n and m e n play equally central roles in economic production, yet
38.
women, compared to their m a l e counterparts, experience greater poverty, have
heavier time burdens, l o w e r rates o f utilization o f productive assets, and lower
literacy a n d numeracy rates. M o s t economically-active women in Ghana can be found
in the informal economy, where they outnumber men; they are particularly involved in
micro-enterprises and trade. In addition, women are active in food crop production, as
well as marketing and processing o f agricultural products, including fish in coastal areas.
While the majority o f cash crop farmers are men, women dominate the food crop sector,
and as indicated earlier (see para. 1l),
the GLSS4 found that food crop farmers are
among the poorest in the country. The situation i s further aggravated by difficulty in
accessing land, w h i c h tends to be determined by cultural and traditional practices related
to land, that vary across the country.
G e n d e r and access to basic services. While gender disparity i s steadily
39.
improving and almost non-existent at the pre-school level, the gap between girls and boys
enrolled increases significantly with higher levels o f education. In 2002, for example,
girls represented 50, 47, 45 and 4 1 percent respectively at pre-school, primary, junior
secondary and senior secondary levels. At university level, the proportion o f females
declines to 30 percent.I6 The perceived quality and environment o f the school, in terms
o f adequacy and condition o f school amenities and facilities (e.g. classroom blocks,
availability o f water and toilets), affect girls’ enrollment d e c i s i o n ~ . ’With
~
regard to
health, maternal mortality rates in Ghana, at an estimated 214 per 100,000 l i v e births,’*
are considered to be unduly high since most immediate causes (including post partum
hemorrhaging, obstructed labor, infections, eclampsia and abortion complications) are
preventable. Unsupervised deliveries, and inadequate postnatal care, as w e l l as
malnutrition, high fertility rates and harmful traditional practices contribute to high
maternal mortality. Water i s another area o f concern f r o m a gender standpoint. Women
are traditionally responsible for water provision for domestic purposes and they carry
heavier time burdens in the quest for water. While these problems and others are being
addressed through several development interventions by government with the support o f
l6Ministry o f Education, “Education Strategic Plan, 2003 to 20 15 - Volume 1: Policies, Targets and
Strategies,” May 2003.
Source: Awedoba, Albert K. et al., “Household Demand for Schooling in Ghana,” February 2003.
Ghana, “Report on the Millennium Development Goals,” National Development Planning Commission,
2002.

17
development partners, and by NGOs, Ghana i s s t i l l a long way from making a significant
impact on the issue o f gender disparity in the country, especially in the poorest regions.
40.
Ghana has made significant progress in the implementationof the Core
Labor Standards. The distribution o f the labor force in Ghana has remained stable since
1995, with the agriculture sector accounting for about 50 percent, formal sector
employment at between 14-18 percent, and the remaining 32-36 percent in the informal
sector. Informal sector employment has been growing faster as the formal sector has
been unable to absorb the increasing urban labor force. Labor rights are protected by the
1965 Industrial Relations Act, which sets out, inter alia, the framework for the formation
o f trade unions at the enterprise level, procedures for obtaining the Collective Bargaining
Certificate, and mechanisms for settling industrial disputes, and created a tribunal on
unfair labor practices. The 2003 Labour Act (65 1) amended and consolidated laws
relating to labor, employers, trade unions, and industrial relations. I t also established a
National Labor Commission with a mandate to address issues related to tripartite
dialogue. O f growing concern, nonetheless, i s the issue o f child labor. About 1.2 million
children in Ghana are estimated to be engaged in child labor, in activities such as street
peddling, quarrying, illegal mining, fishing and providing household help.l 9 Ghana has
several legal and policy instruments aimed at combating this phenomenon, including i t s
ratification o f the I L O Convention o f the Rights o f the Child in 1990, establishment o f
the Ghana National Commission on Children (1991), passage in 1998 o f the Children’s
Act (which directly addresses child labor issues, especially the worst forms o f child
labor), and the National Plan o f Action to Combat Child Labor (November 2000).

111.

GHANA’S DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND PROSPECTS
A.

COUNTRY PRIORITIES AND AGENDA

i. Ghana’s PRSP
41.
Ghana’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS), which was considered by the
Boards of the Fund and the Bank together with the Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) in
March 2003, mapped out the medium-term strategy for promoting growth and
reducing poverty. The overarching goal o f the GPRS i s to achieve sustainable,
equitable growth, acceleratedpoverty reduction, and the protection of the vulnerable and
excluded within a decentralized democratic environment. The government set i t s poverty
reduction goals in alignment with the MDGs, and articulated i t s strategy around five
pillars: (i)
maintaining macroeconomic stability; (ii)
increasing production and
employment; (iii)
promoting human resource development; (iv) implementing special
programs for the vulnerable and excluded; and (v) ensuring good governance through
accountability and transparency.

The GPRS was approved by Parliament in February 2003. I t underwent a
42.
consultation process that involved all levels o f government and reached outside
19

Source: Ghana Child Labor Survey, Ghana Statistical Service, March 2003.

18
government to c i v i l society organizations, the private sector, labor unions, think tanks
and academia. The preparation process enhanced ownership o f i t s content both within
and outside o f the government, by increasing the level o f engagement in national strategy
formulation beyond that o f any previous national strategy initiative. Though even deeper
consultation was in demand, it l a i d the building blocks for deepening country ownership
through plans for improved access to information and permanent mechanisms for
dialogue o n M&E, local development planning, and revisions and updates consistent with
the GPRS’ standing as a living document.
43.
The Joint Staff Assessment of the GPRS found that it provides a sound
framework for implementing the government’s anti-poverty agenda. Nonetheless,
while the programs embodied in the GPRS are based o n realistic assumptions about
possible external financing, the medium term poverty reduction targets are subject to a
number o f uncertainties. Under the projected average real GDP growth rates o f 5 percent
per annum, some MDGs might not be attainable within the expected timeframe in the
absence o f stronger actions in expanding the delivery o f social services in deprived areas,
in removing impediments t o private sector-led growth and in implementing public sector
reforms including decentralization and public enterprise reform. Also, the GPRS updates
need to continue elaborating policy measures in some areas to operationalize and
prioritize program implementation, strengthening the link between the diagnosis and
medium term priorities, and translating policies into time-bound measures.
The first t w o pillars of the GPRS, maintaining macroeconomic stability and
44.
increasing production and employment, target accelerated economic growth over
the medium to long term. The growth strategy focuses first o n continuing to ensure
macroeconomic stability and t o deepen poverty reduction. T o raise growth rates, the
government intends to tackle the existing constraints to private sector-led growth, and
harness the sources o f growth so that new opportunities are generated. T w o key issues
need to be addressed to consolidate progress o n macroeconomic stability and poverty
reduction: high domestic debt, and a weak public expenditure management framework
that inadequately targets poor people.
Over the last t w o decades, private sector performance has been hampered in
45.
part by the crowding out effect of the government’s excessive reliance on domestic
borrowing to finance the budget. The net effect o f the government’s high domestic
borrowing has been high real interest rates, which are driven mainly by high discount
rates for government treasury bills. The government’s domestic debt, w h i c h was
dominated by short-term securities, increased f r o m 3 percent o f G D P in 1994 to about 29
percent o f GDP in 2002, due to fiscal slippages as w e l l as shortfalls in expected donor
inflows. The government’s decision to use 20 percent o f the HIPC savings to offset
domestic debt as well as i t s determination to maintain fiscal discipline, especially during
this election year, are already yielding results. Lower demand for domestic borrowing
helped to reduce treasury bill discount rates. Domestic debt stock i s expected to fall to
14.8 percent by end 2005, and to remain at reasonable levels for the remainder o f the

19
C A S period. The share o f total domestic credit to the private sector has risen from 47
percent in 2002 to 54 percent in 2003 .20
46.
Improvements in budget planning, execution and evaluation are key to
maintaining fiscal discipline and to maximizing the impact of poverty-related
expenditure. As outlined earlier (see para. 14), there has been solid progress in the past
year o n the execution o f the poverty-related budget items. Further, in a significant
improvement over past practice, during the budget conferences for 2004, the Ministry o f
Finance and Economic Planning and individual spending ministries have met to clarify
the linkage o f proposed expenditure programs with the GPRS. As budget rigidities are
addressed (see para. 21), more space may be created for poverty-related expenditures.
Over the coming years, the government i s aiming to significantly increase poverty-related
expenditures as a percentage o f government domestically financed spending, with
particular attention to non-wage poverty-related expenditures, and henceforth maintain
that increased level.

47.

I n addressing the constraints to growth, the government aims on one hand to
reduce the high cost o f doing business and remove the obstacles to competitiveness,
and on the other to improve the minimum infrastructure platform necessary f o r
private sector operations. K e y to reducing the high cost o f doing business will be
greater access to land and land tenure, a reduction in the time and cost o f registering a
business, and an overall improvement in the legal, judicial and regulatory framework. In
dealing with these issues, the government i s seeking to reduce significantly the time to
register land f r o m the current four years, to reduce the backlog o f pending c i v i l cases, and
to slash the time to complete business registration f r o m the current 120 days.
Strengthening the regulatory framework for the financial sector entails implementation o f
the government’s Financial Sector Strategic Plan (FINSSP), which calls for enactment
and implementation o f n e w legislation, such as the Banking Act, and the Payments
System, Bills and Checks, Anti-Money Laundering, Offshore Banking, Foreign
Exchange, and Credit U n i o n bills. To ensure a reliable and cost-effective minimum
infrastructure and services platform, the government aims to significantly increase private
sector participation. A comprehensive intermodal transport sector strategy i s envisaged.
Progress will be measured by the reduction in power distribution system losses f r o m their
current average o f 26 percent, improvement in the condition o f the road network, and
increase in the local telephone call completion rate.

To catalyze new sources o f growth, the government i s seeking to address low
growth in agriculture and non-traditionalsectors, while improving natural resource
and environmental management to ensure long-term sustainability, and tapping
better into global knowledge. In addressing these issues, the government hopes to
achieve the following outcomes: (i)
expanded and diversified production base and
increased incomes, especially for rural communities; (ii)
sustainable natural resources
and environmental management and enhanced compliance with existing legislation and
regulations; and (iii)
increased income potential f r o m knowledge- and informationintensive sectors. Progress towards these outcomes m a y be measured by an increase in

48.

2o

Source: Bank o f Ghana Statistical Bulletin, 2003.

20
the value o f nontraditional exports, an increase in the expansion o f forest cover, and
increased access to internet services. The government has introduced the President’s
Special Initiatives, a strategy to create jobs, diversify exports and above all reduce
poverty, b y facilitating production and marketing o f products such as cassava, o i l palm,
salt, and textiles. The Rural Enterprise Development Programme i s aimed at promoting
improvements in the living conditions o f people in rural settlements b y providing ample
opportunities for poverty reduction, access to basic social and economic infrastructure
and improvements in environmental conditions. The I C T policy, which sets out a road
map for development o f Ghana’s information society and economy, foresees deployment
o f core I C T network infrastructure, building human capacity and promoting I C T in
education, supporting a transparent and inclusive policy process, providing access to
financial capital and markets, and facilitating demand-driven content and application
development.

49.

The third and fourth pillars o f the GPRS aim at achieving the human
development targets under the MDGs. With 40 percent o f the population living below
the poverty line, and even more in times o f drought, overall poverty reduction arising
from accelerated growth will need to be complemented with specific targeting o f
vulnerable and excluded groups. In addition, to achieve the human development MDGs
Ghana will need to improve water supply and sanitation coverage, quality and access to
education, nutrition, and access to supervised deliveries. The rising incidence o f
HIViAIDS and high stigmatization o f PLWHAs also need to be addressed. The
government i s addressing these human development issues through specific interventions,
sector strategies and plans, policy actions and programs, as well as studies to help inform
interventions and better target the poor. Some o f these actions are the Community
Driven Development interventions aimed at reducing poverty and the Poverty and Social
Impact Assessments. A Private Sector Participation strategy for urban water i s currently
being drafted. Legal aid i s available for the poor. Other actions are the strategic plans
and programs o f work developed for the education and health sectors respectively and
programs in health such as the Expanded Program on Immunization, Hand Washing and
Roll Back Malaria. For HIV/AIDS, in addition to the National HIV/AIDS/STI and
Workplace H I V / A I D S policies, a program to introduce anti-retrovirals i s being
implemented and a transport policy on H I V / A I D S i s being developed.

50.

The fifth GPRS pillar, ensuring good governance through accountability and
transparency, seeks to build a democratic and inclusive state, improve leadership
and management skills, and improve public sector management for better service
delivery. The GPRS views good governance as a system in which public and private
entities and actors are empowered to contribute to the development process. Improving
governance therefore rests upon the effective application o f legal, regulatory and
institutional frameworks to facilitate accountability o f state institutions, the private sector
and civil society groups.

21
Chart 4: G P R S Targets for Growth, Poverty Reduction, H u m a n Development and H I V / A I D S
Prevention 2000 to 2005

--

GPRS Targets, 2000/2005

~

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

Source GPRS Progress Report. 2 0 0 4

T o build a democratic and inclusive state, it i s necessary to strengthen the
oversight capabilities o f Parliament and the other constitutionally-mandated
entities, to empower the people to participate effectively in the development process,
and to enhance transparency and accountability and reduce corruption. One o f the
key hindrances to effective parliamentary oversight i s inadequate financial, physical and
human resources. The government has set up a National Governance Program that has
prepared strategic plans for a l l the oversight institutions, and has also prepared a legal
sector strategic plan. Elements o f these plans are currently under implementation. To
achieve the goal o f empowering people to participate effectively in the development
process, the k e y issues revolve around Ghanaians’ ability to effectively h o l d government
and service providers accountable for service delivery failures, and the k e y outcome that
i s sought i s improved access to information that will guide them in their participation in
the development process. The government has developed a Development
Communication Enhancement Program that seeks to enhance communication with the
citizenry, and the Freedom o f Information and Whistle Blower bills have been approved
by Cabinet. To enhance transparency and accountability and reduce corruption, the
government i s prepared t o implement i t s anti-corruption plan through the Ghana Anti-

5 1.

22
Corruption Coalition. A diagnostic study o f anti-corruption agencies will also help to
prioritize resource allocations.

Box 1: Public Procurement Law:
Ghana’s Institutions Working Together to Strengthen Accountability

The Parliament o f Ghana approved the Public Procurement Bill on December 18,2003
and the President signed it into a Public Procurement Act on December 3 1,2003. Preparation o f
the bill began in 2000, and it was first presented to Parliament in November 2002. The
Parliamentary Accounts Committee (PAC) invited public input in March 2003 and received
comments from a broad cross-sectiono f stakeholders, including the Bank. The bill was widely
discussed in the media, in round table conferences, and in meetings with the PAC. Concerns were
expressed about the bill and i t s coverage, the role of the Bank, other donors, the WTO and the
possible impact on Ghanaian businesses. The bill was one o f the most publicly-debated bills in
Ghana, inside and outside Parliament. Following this open public debate over about nine months,
Ghanaians made a choice about the objectives and expected impact o f the bill. The final version
o f the Public Procurement Act i s considered a good procurement law according to global best
Dractice.

52.
T o improve public sector management for better service delivery, leadership
and management skills, fiduciary management, M&E, and service delivery at the
local level must be strengthened. T o improve leadership and management skills in the
public service, competence and professionalism must be sought, at all levels. T o attain
that goal, the inadequacy and ineffectiveness o f the professional, managerial and
leadership skills in the public service must be addressed, so that skills are effectively
translated into outputs and outcomes. In order to enhance the efficiency o f the public
service, the government intends to design and implement a human resource management
policy and system, including a public sector pay policy that will address the recruitment
and retention o f critical public service positions. T o improve fiduciary management,
aimed at the efficiency and effectiveness o f the system, the government has developed
and i s committed to implementing a short term action plan o n public financial
management. In addition, the government intends to implement the Public Procurement
A c t enacted by Parliament in 2003 (see Box 1). The government also plans to conduct
regular payroll audits and install a new computerized payroll management system. T o
strengthen monitoring and evaluation, Policy, Planning and Monitoring and Evaluation
Department (PPMED) staff are being trained in policy and budget management and in
M&E, and coordination between the PPMEDs i s being strengthened. T o improve M&E
at the national level, the government has also been conducting annual reviews o f the
GPRS with the National Development Planning Commission as the lead agency.

To improve service delivery at the local level, local governments need to be
53.
able to deliver services and manage their own development. In the short term, the
government i s seeking to decentralize responsibility for service delivery, ensuring the
provision o f the corresponding resources. The implementation o f the Local Government
Services A c t aims to support that outcome, including through the establishment o f a local
government service (along the lines o f the public service). Another issue i s inadequate

23
capacity o f district assemblies (DAs) in local revenue generation and expenditure
management. The government’s approach i s embodied in the National Decentralization
Action Plan (NDAP), which has been submitted to cabinet for endorsement. The N D A P
has four m a i n program areas - policy and institutional arrangement for decentralization
implementation, district development funding facility, capacity building and human
resource development, and partnership and participation for accountable local
governance. H I P C funds have been distributed to all districts for implementation o f
development projects at the local level.
Regional issues include transport, trade, energy, and HIV/AIDS. Ghana’s
54.
importance as a transit country toward landlocked countries has increased as a result o f
the recent crisis in CBte d’Ivoire. Conscious o f this role, Ghana has embarked o n a
comprehensive program t o improve procedures and infrastructure services, and to
contribute to the building blocks o f the common market. Ghana i s committed to
implementing UEMOA’s Common External Tariff, which i s quite similar to Ghana’s
o w n and which E C O W A S has adopted as the base tariff for i t s own planned Customs
Union. Customs information flows were improved in response to the complaints f r o m
the private sector about cumbersome customs procedures, resulting in accelerated transit
as w e l l as increased customs revenues. However, other obstacles remain as demonstrated
in a recent survey o f road blocks o n the Ghana-Burkina Faso-Niger corridor. Road
infrastructure on critical regional itineraries i s in fair to poor condition, raising transport
costs. Ghana was an early leader in air transport oversight, and i t i s key for the country to
maintain and further develop a safe, reliable, and affordable air transport network. In the
energy sector, the West African Gas Pipeline (WAGP) will enable Ghana, Benin and
Togo to replace oil-based electricity generation with cheaper and environmentally cleaner
gas n o w flared in Nigeria. It will also open opportunities in these countries t o use natural
gas in l i e u o f solid and liquid fuels for other industrial, commercial, and domestic uses, in
the process boosting the respective economies through private investment and j o b
creation. The pipeline could constitute the single largest private investment in the region
and could h o l d the k e y to opening up private sector potential in several related industrial
and commercial ventures. The West African Power Pool (WAPP) was established in
December 1999, following the declaration by the ECOWAS Heads o f State o f their
intention to develop a comprehensive power reform program by actively supporting the
build-up o f a regional power market in four successive phases, to be implemented over a
20-year period. The W A P P will complement the W A G P in promoting regional energy
trade and integration, and at the same time i s expected to stabilize the regional economy
in the longer term by mitigating some o f the regional fragilities alluded to earlier.
Finally, West Africa has already been for some time at the forefront o f “research-action’’
efforts to analyze and address the factors causing the spread o f HIV/AIDS along the m a i n
transport corridors and to develop approaches that take into account the high levels o f
migration o f both short and long duration within the sub-region.

24

B.

ECONOMIC
OUTLOOK

i. External Environment
55.
High vulnerability to external shocks. Ghana’s relatively small and open
economy has over the years suffered from external shocks such as o i l price hikes and
fluctuations in the prices o f primary commodities. Cocoa, gold and timber together
account for over 70 percent o f Ghana’s total export earnings. Even though Ghana has a
comparative advantage and a premium price for cocoa, the strong dependence o n a few
primary commodities makes the country vulnerable to external price fluctuations. Ghana
has made efforts to reduce i t s vulnerability through measures to enhance i t s international
competitiveness, diversify the export base and improve productivity at the micro level.
Ghana made important strides in developing non-traditional exports (NTEs) during the
1990s. NTEs’ contribution to total merchandise exports earnings rose f r o m 10 percent in
1993 to about 20 percent in 1999. However, Ghana s t i l l remains largely vulnerable to
negative effects o f global economic trends because o f the slow progress made so far in
the diversification o f i t s export base.
56.
Sub-regional fragility. The negative spillover effects o f the political turmoil in
parts o f the West African sub-region over the last t w o decades continue to pose
significant challenges for sustainable growth in Ghana. About 48,000 Liberian, Sierra
Leonean, and Togolese refugees lived in Ghana at end-2003.21 Although instability in
C8te d’Ivoire contributed to an upsurge o f international cocoa prices, and diverted freight
traffic originally destined for Abidjan to other West African ports, overall the subregional crisis dampened Ghana’s growth and stability prospects. Last year’s forward
sale o f the cocoa crop meant Ghana was not initially able to reap the full benefits o f the
increase in w o r l d prices; inefficiencies at the port prompted shippers to go elsewhere;
major trunk roads are deteriorating faster than anticipated o w i n g to increased traffic o f
heavy duty trucks transshipping goods to the landlocked countries to the North; and
population displacements have exacerbated the risk o f rapid H I V / A I D S transmission. In
general, anecdotal evidence suggests that sub-regional volatility has had a deterrent
impact o n foreign investment.

ii. Medium-Term Prospects

57.
The economic outlook i s positive. In spite o f the inherent challenges, the growth
outlook for the near future i s positive, with signs o f robust economic activity that should
allow the economy to achieve and sustain i t s 5 percent real GDP growth target, and
2.9 percent average per capita real G D P growth, over the next t w o years. Current
industry forecasts project cocoa production comparable to the record levels o f 2003.
There i s also evidence o f strong investment activity in cement production, mining and
agro-processing, as w e l l as continued growth in the service sector (tourism, banking and
communication). Finally, expatriate remittances, estimated to have reached over US$500
m i l l i o n in 2003, are expected to remain high with the rising number o f Ghanaian

’’Source:

UNHCR.

25
professionals working abroad and measures to improve the processing o f foreign
transfers.
Underlying assumptions for positive growth scenario. The realization o f a
58.
positive growth scenario assumes the continuation o f the current macroeconomic policy
environment, in particular prudent fiscal policy, and a benign external environment.
Prudent fiscal management would translate into domestic primary balances in the range
o f 3 percent o f GDP. Achieving this target for the domestic primary balance would
require sustained revenue growth, including f r o m revenue measures introduced in 2003.
Expenditures w o u l d continue t o track tax revenue growth owing to lower transfers to
utility companies (resulting f r o m timely adjustments in tariffs for electricity, water, and
petroleum products) and lower interest payments o n the domestic public debt. The key
for the realization o f this growth scenario i s the gradual recovery in private investment,
which depends o n the increase in credit to the private sector. That in turn results from
interest rates that are lower because o f the decline in inflation, and improved financial
intermediation resulting f r o m the ongoing strengthening o f the regulatory framework for
the financial sector, reforms in the public banking system, and improvements in the
enabling environment for private sector development.
Anticipated macro results. Under this scenario, gross investment i s expected to
59.
remain roughly unchanged, in the range o f 23 to 24 percent o f GDP, and poverty i s
expected to decline. Private investment i s anticipated to increase over the period. To
finance this investment, public savings are expected to increase substantially during the
2004-06 period, while private savings would decline to accommodate increases in private
consumption. While Ghana does not have a formal quantitative framework for projecting
income poverty outcomes at different real GDP growth levels, estimates based o n
income-poverty elasticities are available. These estimates indicate that at the projected
5 percent real G D P growth, the poverty headcount could have reached 32 percent by
2007.

iii. External Debt
60.
Ghana i s likely to achieve the HIPC completion point in 2004. Ghana reached
the decision point in February 2002 and i s expected to reach the completion point in 2004
(see Annex 2). At the decision point it was determined that assistance amounting to
US$2.2 b i l l i o n in net present value terms would be required for Ghana to reach the
targeted debt-to-fiscal revenues ratio o f 250 percent. Completion Point triggers have
been met in the areas o f education and local government service. Progress has also been
made toward meeting triggers in the use o f budgetary savings, procurement reform,
installation o f a computer-based financial management system, and electricity and
petroleum pricing. Corrective measures will need to be discussed for five pending
conditions: (i)full staffing o f internal audit functions; (ii)
monthly publishing in the
government gazette o f reports o n cash expenditures and commitments by ministry
departments and agencies; (iii)
development o f a district composite budget; (iv)
expanding rural water coverage to 46 percent; and (v) raising recurrent health
expenditures at district and lower-level governments to 45 percent o f the total health
budget.

26

IV.

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

61,
Three pillars to support the GPRS. This C A S will support implementation o f
the GPRS through a mix o f lending and non-lending activities. The C A S i s built o n three
strategic foundations: (i)sustainable growth and jobs creation (supporting GPRS Pillars
1 and 2); (ii)
human development and service provision (supporting Pillars 3 and 4); and
(iii)governance and empowerment (supporting Pillar 5). This design was a m a i n
outcome o f a C A S country team retreat held in March 2003 in Akosombo, Ghana, and
attended by the Minister o f Finance and Economic Planning and other technical officials.
I t was also developed and applied in the PRSC.

Close linkage with Strategic Framework for IDA in Africa (SFIA)22and the
62.
West Africa Regional Integration Assistance Strategy
This C A S i s rooted
solidly in the SFIA and the RIAS. The twelve lessons o f the S F I A bear directly o n
Ghana’s development challenges and the strategy’s response to those challenges,
including the importance o f growth, gender, H I V / A I D S , as well as addressing capacity
constraints; the need for regional cooperation; and mitigation o f the risk o f external
shocks. The three pillars o f the CAS map directly into the pillars o f the SFIA. Moreover,
this C A S responds to the fourth SFIA pillar, building o n solid partnerships, moving
strongly towards programmatic support through the PRSC as well as through sector-level
operations, and building in M&E through strengthening Ghana’s o w n M&E systems, as
w e l l as periodic progress reviews o f the CAS to be carried out during i t s implementation.
With i t s support to the national-level programs o f key regional operations, this C A S
complements the R I A S .

A.

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LAST
CAS

Progress under the last CAS. The FYO1-03 C A S supported three objectives o f
63.
the government’s Vision 2020: (i)increasing economic growth, to raise incomes;
(ii)
redefining the role o f the state, to provide efficient public goods and services and
equitable distribution o f benefits; and (iii)
increasing the effectiveness o f the
implementation o f the national development strategy, by improving governance and
making efficient use o f public resources. The C A S was discussed extensively with the
new government. Nonetheless, significant implementation delays were experienced as
the new government sought to ensure that the programs and projects reflected i t s o w n
priorities. As a result o f those delays, but also because the targets m a y have been overly
ambitious from the outset, many o f the targets set in the last C A S were not achieved (see
Table 2). For instance, the C A S target o f 7 percent growth by 2003, while ambitious,
may not have been realistic. Ghana’s GDP growth averaged around 4.1 percent during
2000-2002, one o f the better performances in sub-Saharan Africa. On the other hand,
progress in key structural areas could have been improved, particularly budget execution
and operation o f public enterprises.

22 World Bank, “Africa: Strategic Framework for IDA’SAssistance to Africa (SFIA): The Emerging
Partnership Model,” Report No. 262 17, June 24, 2003.
23 World Bank, “West Africa: Regional Assistance Strategy,” Report No. 22520, July 1 1, 2001,

27
Table 2: Linkages between GPRS and CAS

GPRS Pillars

CAS Pillars

1. Maintaining
macroeconomic stability
1. Sustainable growth
and jobs creation

2. Increasing production
and employment

CAS Outcomes

Reduced dependence on domestic borrowing by
government, effective public expenditure management;
Improved access and security to land, improved legal
judicial and regulatory framework; reduced time and COI
o f registering business; reliable and cost effective
minimum infrastructure and services.
Expanded and diversified production base and
increased incomes to rural communities; sustainable
natural resources and environmental management and
enhanced compliance; increased income and potential
from knowledge intensive sectors.
Reduce the proportion o f people living below the
poverty line, increased access to safe and sustainable
water supply and sanitation.
Stigmatization reduced for PLWHASs through
advocacy and increased awareness creation for
HIViAIDS; target groups increasingly change risk
behavior; maintain prevalence levels and make antiretrovial treatment available.

I
3. Promoting human
resource development

:. Human developmenl
and service delivery

4. Implementing special
programs for the
vulnerable and excluded

5. Ensuring good
governance through
accountability and
transparency
I

Increased basic literacy and numeracy; increased
access to basic education in deprived districts and for thi
disabled.
Improved nutritional status o f children under five;
improved health status o f communities and decreased
under-five mortality from disease.
Reduce mortality associated with malaria and other
preventable diseases among children.

3. Governance and
development

Improved access to essential quality obstetric care an(
implementation o f programs o f behavioral
communications for change.
Improved ability o f Parliament and other institutions 1
perform oversight roles vis-a-vis the executive; improve
capacity o f civil society groups to monitor government
and provide feedback on policies and service delivery.
Strengthened transparency and accountability
mechanisms, enhanced efficiency o f public services

i.What Worked Well and What Worked Less Well
64.
Multi-donor approaches have worked well. As a result o f capacity building
efforts in procurement and financial management, sector-wide approach (S WAp)
projects/programs have worked well. The experience with SWAps has helped both to
highlight capacity limitations and to begin to address them. The SWAP has led to a much

more coordinated approach: (i)
moving away f r o m a large number o f individual,
typically donor-initiated and extra-budgetary projects towards a single sector strategy and
expenditure program; and (ii)
working towards strengthening and utilizing government
systems and procedures for planning, budgeting and management, as w e l l as for
procurement, auditing, reporting, and M&E. At the project level, that experience was an
important building block for the FY03 Health SWAp, and informed the preparation o f the
F Y 0 4 Education Sector Project (EdSeP), which has a pilot programmatic component.

65.
Decentralization strengthened responsiveness. During the previous C A S
period, decentralization o f the Bank’s operations to the country office progressed rapidly
and key decision-making capacity was firmly rooted in the country. M o s t decisionmaking o n procurement was shifted to the Bank’s Accra office, speeding up procurement
processes sharply. Country Office staff n o w play a significant role in strategy and project
design and implementation. I F C had removed investment staff f r o m Accra, following a
regional plan to consolidate staff in Abidjan and sub-regional offices. With the recent
implementation o f further decentralization, I F C placed t w o investment officers in Accra
beginning in January 2004, complementing the APDF staff who had remained throughout
the period. Although the government had expressed concern about the lack o f IFC
presence o n the ground, IFC staff have responded rapidly, in particular in the
telecommunications and energy sectors.
66.
Critical diagnostics not carried out; Analytical and Advisory Activities
(AAA) insufficiently strategic o r dissemination strategy inadequate. The Bank relied
o n government Public Expenditure Reviews (PERs) and did not conduct any PERs during
the previous C A S period, missing the opportunity to use the PER as a diagnostic tool to
engage in dialogue o n strengthening budget formulation and resource allocation as w e l l
as learning f r o m experiences o f previous public sector reforms. In addition, some AAA
prepared during the last C A S period, while potentially useful, did not engage the client
meaningfully and were not disseminated (for example, the Gender Assessment).
67.
IFC’s experience and lessons learned. Progress o n private sector development
was mixed, as was IFC’s experience. Foreign direct investment (FDI), w h i c h had
previously been driven by mining and privatization proceeds, declined overall. High
profile privatizations and concessions such as Ghana Telecom and Westel experienced
prolonged shareholder disputes, which further constrained private investment for
expansion o f infrastructure and services. IFC’s major investment during this period,
US$IO0 m i l l i o n in Ghana Telecom, was ultimately cancelled prior to disbursement given
these problems. Overall, IFC’ s planned support for private provision o f infrastructure did
not materialize, due to an unfavorable environment, including slow progress in sector
reform in k e y areas such as power. On the other hand, IFC supported the second cement
factory in the country, adding competition and helping lower prices to consumers. I F C
helped establish a commercial micro-finance institution and a n e w l i f e insurance
company. SME non-investment intervention was relatively successful at company levels
and efforts were made, through APDF, to scale up to the wholesale level o f building
business development services markets and strengthening the capacity o f providers. Key
lessons from IFC’s experience in Ghana include: (i)comprehensive and integrated
enhancement to the investment climate i s needed in order to realize measurable increase

29
in FDI; (ii)
financing for SMEs without the appropriate technical assistance i s unlikely to
result in sustainable development; and (iii)
innovative risk capital investment sources
have to be developed for financing SMEs.

ii. Lessons from Operations Evaluation Department (OED) Work and Client
Suweys
68.

F o r projects completed over the past five years, OED found poor project
sustainability, limited impact in the rural sector, and wavering government
commitment, but also good impact in education and strong sustainability in health.
O f the 22 projects completed since 1999, OED rated 64 percent as being successful by
outcomes. However, only 35 percent are rated as likely to be sustainable, w e l l below the
Bank and Africa Region averages. Evaluations indicate that extensive Bank assistance in
the agriculture sector has had only limited impact o n removing critical constraints and
stimulating product diversification and sustained growth. Sustainability o f the Bank’s
rural sector lending program has been particularly low, with none out o f the six projects
completed since 1999 rated as likely to be sustainable. Four economic policyiprivate
sector development operations have been completed since 1999. O f these, the outcome
o f just one was rated satisfactory and Borrower Performance was rated unsatisfactory in
three o f them. Evaluations indicate limited successes in several important areas, due
largely to weak government ownership. For example, a focus o n fiscal reform has
produced periodic, but not sustained, fiscal discipline; privatization efforts have run
consistently into roadblocks and the government s t i l l has significant commercial
interests; several financial sector interventions were unable to help reduce the costs and
increase access to finance. On the other hand, a forthcoming OED study o f the impact o f
Bank assistance to the education sector suggests that the inputs financed by the Bank
(mostly books and classroom construction) have been a significant factor behind
improved school quality and consequent improvements in school outputs. Finally, OED
has rated all three o f the operations in the health sector as likely to be sustainable.

69.
I n February 2003 the Bank conducted a Client Survey, providing insight into
the client’s perspective on the implementation of the previous CAS. Three major
findings emerged. First, communities did not feel the impact o f Bank-financed programs
and perceived the Bank as doing little to empower c i v i l society to participate more in
development and implementation o f the programs it finances. Second, the survey
suggested the need to strengthen Bank partnership with other development partners and
some o f the major development-oriented NGOs. Third, the survey results suggested
clients needed to k n o w more about the Bank, i t s mandate and i t s w o r k in Ghana to reduce
negative perceptions, misrepresentations and misunderstandings.

70.
As a consequence, with this CAS the Bank i s actively addressing the issues
raised by the suwey. First, the Bank i s seeking to step up the pace o f project
implementation as w e l l as participation o f beneficiary communities, to better empower
them and in so doing, i t i s hoped, enhance accountability and reduce corruption. Second,
under the last CAS, the B a n k facilitated significantly deepened coordination between the
government and development partners, notably through the “Mini-CG”. The GPRS and
the extensive consultations that preceded it, together with the CDF framework, helped to

30
lay the groundwork for the multi-donor budgetary support (MDBS) arrangement
currently in place in Ghana. Third, over the past f e w years the Bank has sought to
expand and improve i t s relationship with c i v i l society organizations, including working
with the government to invite c i v i l society representatives to address the plenary o f the
2002 CG. Building o n this strengthening relationship, in 2003 the Development
Dialogue series was introduced (see para. 73).

iii. Evaluation o f Bank Performance
During the previous CAS period, the Bank helped the new government to
71,
take cognizance o f the situation through additional analytical and advisory support,
including briefings and supporting forensic audits. The move to programmatic
lending was well-timed and i s showing results at the level o f overall budget support as
w e l l as at the sector level, particularly in health. Nonetheless, despite the intent to put the
country in the driver’s seat, the Bank’s program did not respond as w e l l as it could have
to the emerging GPRS and to critical needs, particularly in the area o f growth, for which
ambitions had been high - perhaps unrealistically so. The energy and agriculture sectors,
so critical to the growth agenda, did not receive adequate policy attention, and were
supported with only aging or poorly-adapted operations, without n e w analytical w o r k to
inform policy development and shape the future package o f support.
Implementation o f portfolio review action plan has brought results. A
72.
Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) was carried out in mid-2002 to help
address the implementation delays mentioned previously (see para. 63). I t identified:
delays in effectiveness; slow pace o f project implementation; and l o w utilization o f
funds, indicated by disbursement lags, frequent extensions, and cancellation o f funds on
closing projects. Ownership of projects by Government was identified as a critical factor
affecting projects from preparation to completion. The CPPR A c t i o n Plan aimed at:
reducing the number o f effectiveness conditions to only one (the legal opinion);
strengthening overall implementation through the preparation o f project plans and
improvement of monitoring and evaluation systems; and ensuring sustainability, for
instance through mainstreaming of Project Implementation Units (PIUs). Effectiveness
delays have been significantly reduced, but implementation o f the other action plan
elements has been uneven. An implementation improvement plan will be developed in
2004.

B.

PARTICIPATION AND PARTNERS

i. Participatory Process Followed
I n preparation for the current CAS, a number o f steps were followed to
73.
engage the Ghanaian authorities, civil society, and development partners (see Annex
1). In March 2003 a retreat was held in Ghana, to do early design w o r k o n the strategy
(see para. 61). The Development Dialogue series was launched in the first quarter o f
2003. In June 2003 the Bank carried out consultations with c i v i l society in five regions .
across the country, with the assistance o f the Institute for Economic Analysis (IEA), an
Accra-based think tank (see B o x 2). The m a i n C A S mission conducted in

31
October/November 2003 followed up o n these consultations. During that mission
stakeholders f r o m the government, c i v i l society, and development partners were
consulted o n the evolving strategy and key aspects o f the process, and the mission’s aidememoire, which included the draft results matrix, was widely circulated. In a follow-up
mission in January, officials from the administration reviewed the matrix in detail, and
the resulting version was shared with development partners. There are many ways in
which these consultations have been incorporated into the strategy and i t s presentation,
including increased attention to informal mining, correction o f inaccuracies in the results
matrix, and modifications to the indicators and the way in which development
partnerships are presented.
Box 2: Civil Society Consultations
I n June 2003, the Institute for Economic Analysis organized for the Bank five
consultations with civil society organizations, covering all ten regions o f Ghana, with the objective
o f giving civil society organizations the opportunity to provide input into the Bank’s Country
Assistance Strategy for Ghana. About 400 participants participated in consultations involving
NGOs, trade unions, women’s groups, the private sector and district assemblies. The meetings
focused on the Ghana Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS), and included representatives o f the
administration. IEA’s report i s available upon request.
There was strong backing for the GPRS’ aim to accelerate rural development in Ghana by
modernizing the agricultural sector. Participants also called for the govemment to commit more
strongly to private sector development by facilitating access to capital by MSMEs. Contributions
were also made on the development o f education, including suggestions for priority attention to be
given to basic education, upgrading Teacher Training Colleges and supporting polytechnics in
practical training and establishing a sustainable loan scheme for tertiary education. Discussions on
good govemance focused on the need to deepen Ghana’s decentralization program and enhance
the capacity o f governance institutions such as the judiciary. Participants suggested that
infrastructure development should focus on the construction o f feeder roads to facilitate the
movement o f food crops to markets, the intensification o f rural electrification programs, and
universal extension o f telecommunication facilities to rural Ghana. The establishment o f the
National Health Insurance Scheme and the development o f small rural clinic were two Health
sector priorities identified by participants.
Some issues raised in the northern part o f Ghana were distinct from those o f the south.
For instance, in the North there was a call for interventions to alleviate poverty, improve irrigation
and explore the use o f altemative energy sources like solar energy. Participants in southern Ghana
raised issues o f discrimination against disabled persons, improving maternal health and the need
for actions against environmental pollution and the disposal o f plastic waste. The rich discussions
revealed the diversity o f concerns, strategies and a strong determination for Ghanaians to find
altemative solutions to their problems and take charge o f their own destiny.

ii. Partnerships and Donor Coordination
Overall coordination i s strong. Key partners among the bilaterals in Ghana
74.
include Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Switzerland, the
UK, and U S A . Multilateral donors include the African Development Bank, EU, FA0
IFAD, ILO, Nordic Development Fund, UNDP, UNICEF, and WHO. China and India
have also introduced cooperation programs. Annex 4 indicates the sectors in which
development partners are active, either in lending or non-lending activities. The “MiniCG”, created by the government and development partners, meets quarterly under the co-

32
chairmanship o f the Minister o f Finance and the Bank’s Country Director, i s attended by
major bilateral and multilateral agencies, and was the forum for the launch o f the CDF in
early 1999. Currently, 14 CDF Sectoral Partner Groups (SPGs) are active, with the
sector ministries, departments and agencies as lead national agencies, and Ghana’s
development partners as ”focal points” for support. The partnership process has resulted
in greater selectivity facilitated b y much better coordination o f donor activities, with a
concomitant avoidance o f undue duplication, and closer alignment between the national
strategy and the business plans o f individual donors.
Building on that experience, coordination and partnership among
75.
development partners strengthened significantly in 2003 with the government’s
implementation of the MDBS framework with nine development partners, including
the Bank. With the signature o f a framework agreement by the Bank and other
participating MDBS development partners June 30,2003, a major watershed was
achieved in donor coordination. The Bank contributes to the MDBS through the series o f
Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSC). Good progress has been made in aligning
mission schedules, advancing agreements on policy actions and on the timing o f
assessment reviews. While a few differences remain between the broader actions o f the
MDBS 2004 policy matrix and those envisaged under the Bank’s planned second PRSC,
the triggers are identical. Stronger donor coordination has achieved another important
objective, namely reducing the government’s transaction costs through the establishment
o f a focal point for sharing information and for policy dialogue with development
partners, as well as through greater complementarity between the budget support
provided by the MDBS and the government’s own poverty reduction strategy.

76.
Sector-level support i s shifting to programmatic lending and multi-donor
funding. The SWAp, exemplified in Ghana’s Health sector, i s also being applied to
donor support in roads and agriculture. In changing their way o f operating, donors have
significantly freed up country capacities in the sector. About 60 percent o f the total
external financial assistance to the health sector i s now pooled into a Common Health
Account managed by Ministry o f Health institutions in parallel with the national budget.
Building on that experience, the government i s introducing a pilot programmatic support
through i t s Education Sector Program.

C.

PROPOSED
ASSISTANCE
STRATEGY

i. Bank Group Support to Results Pillars
The Bank Group strategy i s designed around key development results that
77.
Ghana wishes to achieve. The results matrix i s shown in CAS Annex B9. In this
section, an overview o f Bank Group support to the desired development outcomes i s
followed by a comprehensive presentation o f the lending and non-lending programs. The
lending program (paras. 112-116), i s followed by sections describing the non-lending
program (paras. 1 19-126) and regional programs (paras. 127-132) as well as a discussion
o f selectivity and the choice o f instruments (paras. 134-139). Bank Group support to
achieving the desired results would be through a m i x o f the full range o f lending, nonlending, IFC, MIGA, and WBI activities. These are outlined below for the base case.

33

Pillar I: Growth and Employment
Growth and Employment Generation. The W o r l d Bank Group shares the
78.
central objective o f the Ghana Poverty Reduction Strategy to achieve the 5 percent
economic growth rate that historically has represented an upper limit, and subsequently
accelerate growth significantly and sustainably. A market-responsive private sector i s
identified as the single most important source o f growth and productive n e w jobs. The
strategic support by the Bank Group i s therefore aimed at assisting the Government o f
Ghana to continue making progress o n macroeconomic stability and poverty reduction,
remove the constraints to private sector investment, and harness potential sources o f
growth.

79.
Managing public finances for macroeconomic stability and poverty
reduction. The Bank strategy will assist in reducing dependence o n domestic borrowing,
and thereby reducing pressure o n interest rates, and strengthening public expenditure
management. To do so, the proposed series o f PRSCs, as the m a i n vehicle o f support to
the GPRS, and aimed at reducing poverty and ensuring a more equitable distribution o f
resources and provision o f basic services, i s strongly geared to ensure that this basic
objective o f public policy i s achieved.

80.
T o help improve the effectiveness and efficiency o f public expenditure
management, in addition to the PRSC series the Bank intends to provide support through
several non-lending activities, including the F Y 0 4 Country Economic Memorandum
(CEM), the annual PERs, the Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA), and
the Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR). The B a n k will also support the
government in assessing progress made in the use o f H I P C savings for poverty-related
outcomes through the HIPC AAP, and will be ready to present Ghana’s progress towards
the H I P C Completion Point (which could take place around mid-2004).
Expected results: The Bank w i l l contribute to the government’s efforts to reduce
81.
domestic debtfrom 29percent of GDP in 2002 to 14.8percent of GDP in 2005 and to
increasing total poverty-related expenditures by 3 percent annually through 2007.
Removing constraints to private sector investment. T o help Ghana to improve
82.
access and security o f land, to improve legal and judicial systems as well as the business
regulatory framework and reduce the time and cost o f business registration, and to help
ensure provision o f a reliable and cost-effective framework o f minimum infrastructure
and services, the B a n k Group strategy will employ a range o f lending and non-lending
instruments.

Ongoing IDA lending includes the (i)Ghana Trade and Investment Gateway S I L
83.
(US$5Om, FY99-05) to attract a critical mass o f export-oriented-investors to Ghana, to
accelerate export led growth, and facilitate trade; (ii)
newly effective L a n d
Administration SIL (US$20.5m, FY04-08) to help develop a sustainable, fair, efficient,
cost effective, and decentralized land administration system t o increase land tenure
security; (iii)
Road Sector Development SIL (US$220m, FY02-06) with the objective o f
achieving sustainable improvements in the supply and performance o f roads and road

34
Box 3: Ghana’s Efforts to Facilitate Trade are Getting Results
The Bank-financed Gateway project supported an initiative to enhance trade facilitation in Ghana,
with the explicit intention to make Ghana more attractive for foreign investors. Inspired by the examples o f
Singapore and Mauritius, Ghana set up a joint venture company (GCNet) to spearhead the introduction o f
the most modem information electronic system for processing trade and customs documents. GCNet i s
owned by the Societe Gknerale de Surveillance, Ghana Customs (with Gateway Project financing to
purchase I T equipment), two local banks and the Shipping Council. GCNet contracted with a Singapore
enterprise to install the Electronic Data Interchange that i s to connect all members o f the trading
community electronically. Thus traders, customs brokers, customs, the Shipping Council, port authorities,
Ministry o f Finance and other regulatory agencies are all to be connected electronically. This phase o f the
project made an excellent start in 2002; its hrther expansion w i l l require greater support o f the other trade
related govemment agencies. GCNET has also assisted Customs in the introduction o f a computerized
customs management system. The system i s now fully operational at the airport and the Tema port, as well
as in Takoradi. Further extension o f the system i s programmed for 2004.
Results so far include third quarter 2003 revenues at the airport that are 40 percent higher than in
the same period in 2002 (only one quarter of which is likely to be due to the increase in volume or the
depreciation of the cedi) and a substantial decline in clearance times. At the airport 75 percent of all
cargo is cleared in one day, at the Temaport 44percent is cleared in less than two days. This is at least
four times faster than before the intervention of GCNet.

transport services in a regionally equitable manner; and (iv) Ghana Thermal S I L
(US$175.6m, FY95-04) to assist VRA to maintain electricity supply by providing
additional generation capacity and enhancing operational efficiency. The Thermal Power
project i s putting in place the platform to facilitate other projects m o v i n g forward,
particularly through a debt restructuring exercise with E C G and VRA and the
strengthening o f ECG’s operations and financial management, including IFC’s proposed
investment in Takoradi 11, as well as the West African Gas Pipeline. A proposed
extension o f the project i s being prepared. Complementing the annual PRSC series,
which will continue to provide strong support to removing hindrances t o growth, will be
investment lending for micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME), U r b a n Water,
Energy, Public Sector Capacity Building and Private and Financial Sector Development
(Capacity Building) Technical Assistance, investment lending for Infrastructure, and the
regional West African Gas Pipeline and West Africa Power Pool. IDA funding under the
MSME project will also support the IFC SME Solutions Center, through w h i c h carefully
selected SMEs with good growth potential can receive risk capital financing combined
with technical assistance, hands-on involvement by the fund manager, training and
necessary capacity building, and access to relevant business information.
84.
Proposed non-lending activities include follow-up o n the recommendations o f the
ongoing Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) update, including exploring the
possibility o f developing an efficient financial intermediation system and creating
markets for the transfer o f assets such as stocks, bonds and shares. Should the
government so request, an anti-money laundering assessment could also be undertaken.
MIGA intends to carry out a sector-specific competitiveness benchmarking study, which
would a i m at fostering an increase in non-traditional exports, development o f a trade
policy, establishment o f entrepreneurship schemes, promotion o f agri-business, and
increase in foreign and domestic direct investment in non-traditional sectors such as I C T
and tourism. WBI proposes to organize judicial reform workshops to facilitate proposals

35
for quick adjudication o f cases. Finally, should the government request the Bank
Group’s assistance regarding the proposed sale to the government o f the aluminum
smelter, the request will be considered o n the basis o f the available information.

85.

Expected results: The Bank w i l l help achieve from 2002 to 2007: (i) reduction in
time for registering landfrom an average of four years to four months; (ii) reduction in
the backlog ofpending civil casesfrom about 17,000 in 2002 to about 13,000 in 2007 (25
percent reduction); (iii) reduction in the time required for business registration f r o m 120
days to 30 days; (iv) reduction in average power distribution lossesfrom 26 to 15percent
by 2007; (v) shft in proportion of road network classiJed as good (29percent), fair (27
percent), and poor (44percent) in 2001 to good (45 percent), fair (30percent), and poor
(25percent) in 2007; and (vi) increase in local telephone call completion ratesfrom 85
percent in 2002 to 95percent in 2006.

86.
Harnessing sources o f growth. T o accelerate growth, the economy needs to be
diversified in order to catalyze n e w opportunities and to reduce the risk o f international
shocks. The Bank Group will bring together lending and non-lending support from IDA,
IFC, MIGA and WBI t o support an expanded and diversified production base, sustainable
natural resources and environmental management and an increased income potential f r o m
knowledge intensive sectors. Strong cooperation in the government’s evolving strategy
and other development partners i s foreseen o n this critical agenda for the future.
Four ongoing IDA operations are supporting this agenda: the first PRSC, the
87.
ongoing Agriculture Services Sub-sector Investment APL (US$67m, FYO1-OS),
restructured to add relevant activities that will contribute to expanding and diversifying
the agricultural sector; Rural Financial Management Services S I L (US$5.1 m, FY00-04);
and Public Enterprise Privatization and Technical Assistance (US$26.5m, FY96-04).
There are two GEF projects in support o f the natural resource management agenda:
Forest Biodiversity and Northern Savannah. N e w lending w o u l d be led by the proposed
series o f PRSCs (US$125m, FY04-07). In complement will be the proposed Education
Sector Development, Community Based Rural Development, the j o i n t IDA-IFC MSME,
and Agriculture. Proposed AAA are the Investment Climate Assessment, Country
Environmental Assessment, Natural Resource Management, Productive Uses o f
Electricity and Knowledge for Development, Mining , and Employment and Youth study,
together with the n e w CEM.
Intensive joint Bank/IFC approach in growth. To help the government to
88.
foster private participation in infrastructure development and service provision, the Bank
Group support will be delivered seamlessly, and in a comprehensive and integrated
manner, utilizing the combined expertise and experience o f sector specialists across the
Bank Group. IDA support will be delivered through ongoing lending such as the
Thermal Power project, as w e l l as the new Energy and Infrastructure projects and the
Capacity Building TA, and IFC support could include transaction advisory services and
financing. Sector reform advice to government will be led by Bank teams, with I F C
input appropriately integrated. T o manage potential conflicts o f interest, the Bank
Group’s Conflict o f Interest office has been integral in finalizing the working relationship
across the integrated teams.

36

89.
The power and related sectors offer a good example of this type of integrated
Bank Group effort in Ghana. The assistance from the Bank Group would include IDA
support through government dialogue and PRSP support to restore the financial
soundness o f the whole sector; I F C investment to refinance the existing thermal
independent power producer to lower costs and release funds for the second stage
expansion; introduction o f private management with structuring assistance and advisory
services f r o m IFC; IDA funding for the expansion o f distribution and access; and I F C
funding for the expansion o f the Takoradi thermal plant to combined cycle. The
coordination o f Bank Group teams in the power sector extends to other key aspects o f the
supply chain in the power sector, including the developing gas sector, w h i c h would
diversify and reduce the cost o f fuel sources for power generation and other industrial
uses. IDA and IFC are coordinating closely o n the West African Gas Pipeline,
recognizing that the critical drivers o f the financial health o f the o i l and gas and power
sectors are either identical or interrelated. The overall approach presents a unique
opportunity to dialogue with the government o n sector reforms with a unified and
coordinated Bank Group position.
MIGA also intends to provide strong support to this pillar, beyond the
90.
benchmarking study (see para. 84). Currently, MIGA i s underwriting five projects,
with total potential coverage o f US$145 million, in finance, infrastructure,
manufacturing, services, and o i l and gas. In FY03, MIGA completed a capacity building
needs assessment o f the Ghana Investment Promotion Centre (GIPC) and the Ghana Free
Zones Board, and will support additional capacity building if progress i s made to
restructure these institutions into effective promotional agencies. Ghana i s also one o f
four African countries where MIGA i s undertaking an investment facilitation program,
co-funded by the Swiss Government. This program identifies opportunities for Ghana to
integrate better into the international economy, with particular attention to opportunities
generated by the privileged trade access agreements with the EU and the United States.
This information i s used to select investment target sectors. Also, MIGA, with GIPC and
other appropriate investment intermediaries, i s jointly undertaking an investment
outreach program approaching selected potential investors. The first o f these initiatives
was an apparel industry outreach program in China in September 2003. Currently,
MIGA’s online investment promotion services (www.fdixchange. com and
www. ipanet.net) feature more than 200 documents o n investment opportunities and the
related legal and regulatory environment in Ghana. As they emerge, MIGA will continue
to post notice o f suitable investment opportunities in Ghana o n these sites.

91.
Expected results: The Bank’s strategic support is expected to contribute to
increasing non traditional exports by an average of 10 percent per annum over the CAS
period, expanding forest cover from 20,000 hectares in 2002 to SO, 000 hectares by end
2007, and increasing access to internet services from 20,000 internet subscribers in 2002
to 100,000 subscribers in 2007.
Pillar 11: Service Provision for Human Development
92.
Service Provision for Human Development. The Bank Group will assist the
Government o f Ghana to reduce poverty, increase access to sustainable and safe water

37
and sanitation services, combat H I V / A I D S , achieve quality universal education, reduce
child mortality and improve maternal mortality by targeting interventions especially to
deprived areas and to poor and vulnerable persons.
Reducing poverty. The Bank expects to contribute to reducing the proportion o f
93,
people living below the poverty line, through the ongoing PRSC series as w e l l as
investment lending complemented by LILs to test new approaches to poverty reduction,
and strong analytical support through C E M s and a Poverty Assessment. The
Community- Based Poverty Alleviation LIL (US$Sm; FY99-05) tests approaches and
mechanisms for delivering, coordinating, monitoring and evaluating community-based
poverty reduction through nutrition, food security and support to street children. Lessons
from this LIL o n helping resources and services reach front-line implementers will
inform future community-based operations the Bank m a y undertake. The LIL in support
o f Promoting Partnerships with Traditional Authorities (US$Sm grant; FY03-08) tests
ways to develop partnerships with government that substantively integrate and improve
traditional authorities’ involvement in the social and economic development, and hence
poverty reduction, o f their communities. In addition, the proposed CBRD would transfer
technical and financial resources to rural populations to help reduce rural poverty. The
F Y 0 4 and F Y 0 7 C E M s will analyze progress o n poverty reduction and policies needed to
accelerate it. A Poverty Assessment will be undertaken in FY07.
Expected results: The Bank’s intervention w i l l help reduce poverty from 40
94.
percent in 1999 to 32percent in 2007.

95.
Increase access to sustainable and safe water supply and sanitation services.
Coverage o f water and sanitation services i s low, especially in rural and deprived areas.
T o achieve the outcome o f increasing access to safe and sustainable water and sanitation
for the poorest population, the Bank’s ongoing support comes through t w o Adaptable
Program Lending (APL) operations. The first i s Phase 1 o f the second Community Water
and Sanitation (CWSP2) APL (US$25m, FY00-04), designed to increase the coverage
and achieve effective and sustained use o f improved community water and sanitation
services in villages and small towns in four regions. The second i s Phase 1 o f the Urban
5 A P L (US$lO.Sm, -FY02-04) which i s seeking to strengthen the technical, financial and
management capacities o f 23 participating towns and finance rehabilitation o f some basic
infrastructure. Four additional operations are proposed as part o f the Bank’s strategy to
increase access to water and sanitation services: the Urban Environment and Sanitation 2
SIL, the Urban Water SIL, the second phase o f the CWSP2 APL, and the proposed
Decentralization for Community Empowerment.
96.
Expected results: The Bank’s operations will help provide water to: (i) 500,000
additional rural population and 300,000 additional urban population; (ii) sanitation
services to 50,000 additional rural population and 116,000 additional urban population.

97.
Combat H I V / A I D S . The Bank expects to support a reduction in stigmatization
for people living with H I V / A I D S (PLWHAs), to have a positive impact o n behavior
change and risk behavior, and to halt the increase in prevalence in six major cities with
higher than average prevalence rates. The major vehicle for support t o achieving these

38
outcomes i s the Ghana A I D S Response Fund (part o f the Africa Region’s Umbrella
MAP) (US$25m, FYO1-05), which aims to reduce the spread o f HIV infection and
impact o f A I D S o n those infected, by providing prevention and care services. In
addition, the Traditional Authorities project and t w o regional projects, the H I V / A I D S
Corridors Project and Treatment Acceleration Program, , are aimed at addressing local
and regional dimensions o f the pandemic. A follow-up GARFund MAP i s planned. The
Global Fund for Malaria, Tuberculosis, HIV and AIDS, managed in Ghana by the
Ministry o f Health, supplements resources to the health sector and supports activities in
the health sector Program o f Work.
98.
Expected results: During the CASperiod, the Bank w i l l support and fund all 110
(or the f i n a l number, should the proposed increase in number of districts be
implemented) districts to set up AIDS committees and implement district AIDS plans. It
is expected that the Bank’s efforts w i l l also contribute to capping (at 5percent) the
prevalence of H I V among pregnant women. A third outcome is implementation, by the
end of 2007, of 1,000programsfor high-riskgroups. A l l districts w i l l be expected to
carry out behavior change and orphan care activities. The number of PL WHAs to
receive anti-retrovirals (AR Vs) is expected to increase by 2,000 persons annually.
Achieve quality universal education. T w o outcomes the Bank expects to
99.
influence are an increase in basic literacy and numeracy and an increase in basic
education access in deprived districts and for the disabled. To help achieve these
outcomes, the series o f PRSCs provides programmatic support for education policy
reform. The Bank i s also financing the National Functional Literacy S I L (US$32m,
FY99-04) aimed at increasing the number o f Ghanaian adults, aged 15-45 years, and
particularly women and the rural poor, who acquire literacy and functional skills. In
addition, the Traditional Authorities LIL has an education component. It i s proposed to
provide n e w lending support through the Education Sector Project w h i c h was negotiated
in January 2004. ESW o n the disabled i s proposed, with a focus on disabled children and
strategies for improving their access to education and achieving EFA. Finally, IFC i s
developing a mechanism for providing a package o f financing and technical/managerial
assistance to private primary and secondary schools.
100. Expected results: From 2004 to 2007, the Bank intends to contribute to
increasing the proportion of basic pupils from the 40 most deprived districts: (i) passing
the Basic Education Certijkate Examination (BECE) English from 39.9 to 55 percent,
and (ii) passing the BECE Math f r o m 49.9 to 55 percent. The Bank Is interventions w i l l
also contribute to increasing Gross Enrollment Rates (GER) in the 40 most deprived
districts,from 70.7 to 93.2percent, and for girls f r o m 65.5 to 93.2 percent. From 2002
to 2007, primary completion rates are expected to increase f r o m 65.6 to 79 percent in
2007, andfor girls from 60.6 to 75.7percent.

101. Reduce child mortality and improve maternal health. Health outcomes the
Bank will help achieve are improved nutritional status o f under-five children, reduced
under-five mortality f r o m diarrhea-related diseases, reduced mortality associated with
malaria and other preventable diseases, and improve access to essential quality obstetric
care.

39
102. T o support the government’s efforts to achieve these key health outcomes, the
Bank will continue i t s support through the second Health Sector SWAP (US$89.6m,
FY03-OS), whose objective i s to improve the health status o f the population while
reducing geographical, socio-economic and gender inequalities in health outcomes.
Other ongoing interventions aimed at health outcomes are the PRSC, CWSP2 Phase 1,
and the CBPR and Traditional Authorities LILs. The pipeline operations are C B R D and
UESP 2 and CWSP Phase 2. Finally, an E S W o n the implementation o f the National
Health Insurance A c t i s underway.
103. Expected results: The Bank’s strategic support is expected to contribute to
reducing, from 2002 to 2007: (i) malnutrition rates of under-five childrenfrom 25 to 20
percent; (ii) under-Jive diarrhea-related mortality reported at health centers by 2.5
percent; (iii) under-Jive casefatality showing in malaria and inpatients departments from
4.4 to 3.5percent; as well as increasing (iv) immunization coverage from 80 to 90
percent, and (v) the proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel f r o m 4.5 to
60 percent.

Pillar 111: Governancefor Empowerment

104. While Ghana has a strong governance and social capital base, constraints to
growth and effective and efficient service provision include, among others,
inefficiency of the institutions interfacing with clients. Ghana’s fifth GPRS pillar
seeks to ensure good governance through the effective application o f accountable legal,
regulatory and institutional frameworks o f public, private and c i v i l society institutions.
The Bank’s strategy supports the government’s goals o f building a transparent,
accountable, and inclusive state and improving public sector management for better
service delivery.
105. Supporting Ghana’s efforts to build a transparent, accountable, and
inclusive state. The Bank’s strategic support will contribute to: (i)improving the ability
o f Parliament and other institutions to perform their oversight roles vis-a-vis the
executive; (ii)
improving the capacity o f c i v i l society groups to monitor government and
provide feedback o n policies and service delivery; and (iii)
strengthening transparency
and accountability mechanisms.
106. The Bank’s m a i n lending instrument to help achieve these outcomes i s the series
o f annual PRSCs. In addition, the Education Sector Project will help support the
production o f citizens’ report cards in the 40 deprived districts. In terms o f non-lending
support, the W o r l d Bank Institute Parliamentary Support Program seeks to strengthen the
oversight capabilities o f Parliament and other constitutionally-mandated entities; other
ongoing non-lending support includes the communication and outreach program, the
Development Dialogue series and a media program to engage with stakeholders o n
development issues. In addition, WBI proposes t o conduct quarterly Parliamentary
dialogue sessions and to undertake an anti-corruption training program starting in FY05.
107. Expected results: The Bank’s strategic support w i l l contribute to (i) enhancing
regular and effective Parliamentary Committee meetings; (ii) increasing access to

40
information measured through annual surveys and publication of government
information on-line; (iii) implementation of citizen’s report cards in 40 districts, and
(iv) strengthened transparency and accountability mechanisms measured in part by the
outcomes of two tracking surveys to assess the impact of corruption by 2007.
Box 4: A New Approach to Service Delivery to Poor and Marginalized Groups:
The Experience of the Community Development LIL

Poor and marginalized groups have had inadequate access to services in Ghana for the most part o f
post independence. The Community Poverty Reduction Project aims at testing approaches and
mechanisms for delivering poverty reduction interventions to street children through community nutrition
and food security interventions and activities, and to test and build capacity, at national and district levels,
for monitoring and evaluating poverty reduction programs. Just over one year into implementation, some
lessons have been learned regarding targeting service delivery to marginalized groups.
What gains have been made?
With active involvement o f the communities and beneficiaries, more children in the project
communities are participating in growth promotion activities than with the traditional service delivery
approach. Children are gaining weight. Mothers are taking better care o f themselves and the children.
Men are getting involved in the activities. Utilization o f services providing iodized salt, bed nets, and
family planning have also increased. Health personnel, environmental health officers and district assembly
staff, communities and beneficiaries are all collaborating in these efforts. Marginalized groups such as
street children are receiving training, formal education and other services targeted at them specifically
using non-government institutions, and as a result they are leaving the street.

A best-practice district level system o f data collection, analysis and utilization has been
established, leading to improved capacity for decision making and resource allocation at that level. There
i s considerable potential for application o f these methods in poverty monitoring, planning and budgeting by
district authorities. The methodology and computer and training system could prove significant in
promoting decentralization. Furthermore, these methods would have powerful applications if the collection
and processing system were extended to the national level. With some extension o f the design, the
statistical system could measure the receipt o f social services and quality o f social services and provide a
basis for action to correct slippage in services.
What are the challenges?
Community work takes time. Language issues may arise: high levels o f illiteracy among
community volunteers makes training longer and more difficult as most training manuals are in English,
bringing to the fore the need to translate documents into local languages and to build in flexibility in project
scheduling. Integration o f activities into the district assembly system, and hence nonpayment o f allowance
to staff on project, affects their morale and commitment. Finally, once the project closes, the fact that most
parents also are poor makes it difficult to solicit their involvement after project close.

108. Improving public sector management f o r better service provision. The Bank
expects to help to: (i)enhance the efficiency o f public services; (ii)
institute an efficient
and effective public financial management system; (iii)
improve the capacity o f
institutions to monitor and evaluate policies and programs under implementation; (iv)
decentralize responsibilities for service provision; and (v) improve local government and
public expenditure management.

109. The ongoing and proposed PRSCs w i l l be the main instrument for intervention, in
addition to ongoing operations in many sectors that support capacity building in the
Policy, Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Departments within the MDAs o f their

41
respective sectors. Five lending operations are proposed to support relevant outcomes,
including the C B R D SIL, UESP 2 SIL, CWSP 2 APL, and the proposed Capacity
Building and Decentralization for Community Empowerment operations. The proposed
analytical package comprises the H I P C A A P Update, a Monitoring and Evaluation
Readiness Assessment, and analytical support for decentralization and capacity building.
OED i s prepared to f o l l o w up previous studies to build sustainable evaluation capacity
and to support establishment o f a Ghanaian network to share insights into common
problems and good practice approaches.
110. Expected results: The Bank w i l l contribute to: (I, implementation of a
comprehensive human resources management policy, with client surveys to evaluate
progress,’ (ii) effective implementation of the procurement law; (iii) timely production of
Jinancial statements and audit reports; (iv) setting up of an effective payroll system by
end-2007; (v) budget management and monitoring and evaluation training of 70 percent
ofpublic servants; (vi) development by at least 10 districts of composite budgets by end2005; (vii) number of functioning sub-district structures (sub-metro, area, urban, town
and zonal councils) increasedfrom 300 to 800from 2004 to 2007; and (viii) 85percent
of DAs submit their monthlyjinancial statements to the Ministry of Local Government
within 4 weeks of the end of the month.

11 1. Monitoring and Evaluating. Monitoring indicators have been discussed,
negotiated and agreed with the government. The report f r o m the annual review o f the
GPRS will also serve as a basis for monitoring the results o f the CAS. Monitoring and
evaluating the results will employ existing mechanisms and structures wherever they
exist. The M&E Readiness Assessment will address any gaps. Identified reports and
surveys will also be collected f r o m identified government agencies. The indicators to
monitor service provision for human development have been negotiated and agreed with
the government and wherever possible, they correspond to the government’s o w n
indicators for monitoring the GPRS. The next Ghana Living Standards Survey (GLSS)
planned for 2005 will provide m u c h o f the data required to monitor the poverty indicator
o f population living below the poverty line. The GLSS will also provide data for
monitoring improved water and sanitation coverage as w e l l as education and health
outcomes. In addition to the GLSS, the annual Education Management Information
System (EMIS) i s expected to provide data for monitoring pass rates in Basic Education
Certificate Examinations (BECE), Gross Enrollment Rates (GER) and completion rates.
The National Minimum Standards Test will be introduced in 2005, with the support o f
USAID; it i s expected that this test will provide a better indicator o f education
achievement than the BECE. Information provided by the Ghana AIDS commission will
help in monitoring the results for HIV/AIDS. Through WBI, the B a n k will strengthen the
government’s capacity to monitor and evaluate the GPRS. The M&E Readiness
Assessment, to be conducted j o i n t with DFID, will produce an action plan t o strengthen
M&E.
ii. Lending Program

112. In the base case, w h i c h provides for US$1.06 b i l l i o n over the four-year period o f
the CAS, IDA’Slending support to Ghana’s desired development outcomes will be

42
through three m a i n clusters o f operations: Annual PRSCs, lending in complement to the
PRSCs, and strong support to infrastructure.

113. The PRSCs (FY04-07; each about US$125-150 million) will continue to
support the implementation of the GPRS. The PRSCs reflect the three C A S pillars:
growth and employment, service provision for human development and governance and
public sector management. The Bank will continue focusing o n these areas, deepening
the reforms already begun under the first PRSC. The rationale for Bank support to the
country’s program through the PRSCs i s defined both by the instrument and the Bank’s
commitment to w o r k aligned with the development community. The instrument i s
programmatic lending, grounded in clear country commitment and capacity to reform,
structured in a series o f operations supporting a medium-term reform program, and
disbursed o n the basis o f completed actions rather than future commitments. The
partnership aims at reducing the government’s transaction costs in dealing with
development assistance by ensuring greater complementarity between the Bank’s
assistance and the government’s o w n poverty reduction strategy, and by developing a
focal point for information sharing and policy dialogue. Over the coming years, it i s
expected that in addition to continuing to cover the present areas, the PRSC may in future
support natural resources management, financial sector development, capacity building
and decentralized investment and services. By presupposing and building o n strong
ownership, the PRSC seeks to address a major factor behind l o w evaluation ratings o n
sustainability in the previous lending portfolio.
114. Complementingthe PRSC i s a series o f specific investment and technical
assistance operations, covering the education sector, HIV/AIDS, public sector
reform, and finance and private sector development. The proposed Education Sector
Project (US$78m, FY04) will address and promote equitable access to, and efficient
delivery of, quality services at basic and higher levels. With three components (capacity
building, a pilot programmatic component, and tertiary education), it will lay the
foundations for Education for All (EFA) and renew support to tertiary education. The
Pilot Programmatic component o f the EdSeP will provide additional resources for
improving education quality at basic level to the 40 most deprived districts. The
proposed second MAP for Ghana (US$20m, FY06) will continue the Bank’s strong
support to combating this disease. I t will draw o n the lessons and results f r o m the
regional project. Given the importance o f addressing the risk o f contracting H I V / A I D S at
source, the Bank will ensure, through i t s country dialogue, that increased attention i s
given by the government to implementing regional measures to facilitate transport flows
and reduce idle time at border crossings. The Public Sector Capacity Building/Private
and Financial Sector Development TA (US$20m, FY06) would combine support for
public sector reform with private and financial sector development; subsuming the
project under the PRSC m a y be considered. A public sector w i n d o w could help to build
the state’s capacity at all levels to ensure effective and efficient service delivery,
including through c i v i l service and public finance management reform; i t s character will
be determined by the content o f the public sector reform strategy that the government i s
currently developing. A private/financial sector window could accompany the state in i t s
evolving role as facilitator for private sector investment, in line with the government’s
Private Sector Development Strategy, informed by the Public-Private Partnerships E S W

43
and by the government's FINSSP and the Bank-IMF FSAP Update. In additional support
to private sector development, IDA and IFC will jointly provide advisory and business
development services for micro, small and medium enterprises through the IDA-IFC
MSME (US$25m, FY05). The MSME project will involve an integrated program, to
support SME needs and key activities o f the government's Private Sector Development
and Financial Sector strategies, and to develop a Community-Based Challenge Fund.
Table 3: Ghana - FY04-07 Lending Scenarios (US$ million')

PRSC 2

0

125

125

Education Sector Development

65

78

78

Second Urban Environment and Sanitation

0

62

62

Community-Based Rural Development

30

50

50

PRSC 3

0

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Support: Joint
IDA-IFC MSME
Community Water and Sanitation 2 (2)

0

25

30

25

25

50

Urban Water

0

100

130

West African Gas Pipeline (Regional)

25

25

25

1

125

1

150

15

15

15

65

315

400

PRSC 4

0

125

150

MAP 2

20

20

20

Energy

0

40

70

Public Sector Capacity Building and Private and
Financial Sector Development
FY06 total

20

20

25

40

205

26.5

PRSC 5

0

125

150

Infrastructure

0

40

100

Agriculture

20

20

70

Decentralization for Community Empowerment

25

35

70

West Africa Power Pool (Regional)

FY05 total

FY07

I

FY07 total
FY04-07 I D A Commitments

I

45
245

I

220
1055

I

390
1370

1

' Consistent with the indicative IDA allocation for Ghana, at an exchange rate o f US$l.SO/SDR.

44

115. As a further complement to the PRSC, Bank support i s designed to
accompany Ghana’s decentralization process and help it move forward,
strengthening institutions at the local level, and working with development partners
to develop a common framework for harmonized donor interventions. The package
o f Bank Group support t o results at the local level includes the follow-up UESP2 (see
para. 116), CBRD (itself a follow-up to the successful Village Infrastructure Project), the
second phase o f the CWSP2 APL, and the j o i n t I D A - I F C MSME pilot (see para. 114).
CBRD (US$5Om, FY04) aims to support the capacity o f the rural population to improve
their quality o f life, through the transfer o f technical and financial resources. The second
phase o f CWSP2 (US$25m, FY05) i s designed to increase the coverage and achieve
effective and sustained use o f improved community water and sanitation services in
villages and small towns in four regions. Together, and informed by parallel AAA o n
decentralization, community empowerment, and issues specific to the urban agenda (see
para. 122), the implementation o f these operations would inform the design o f
Decentralization for Community Empowerment (US$30m, FY07).
116. Infrastructure constitutes a significant portion of the lending program.
UESP2 (US$62m, FY04) builds o n the successful experience o f i t s predecessor, to help
improve urban living conditions through improvement to sanitation, drainage, vehicular
access, and solid waste management in a sustainable fashion, with emphasis o n poor
people. The Urban Water S I L (US$100m, FY05) aims to expand the reliable supply o f
safe water in urban areas, in a sustainable manner, with affordable access for poor people.
Energy (US$40m, FY06) aims to improve the provision o f electricity services where
access exists, and to promote energy access in rural and peri-urban areas through grid and
off-grid initiatives. The Infrastructure operation (US$40m, FY07), as a vehicle for
support to private sector-led growth, could contribute to the implementation o f a
comprehensive intermodal national transport sector strategy, should the strategy be at the
implementation stage, and m a y also provide space for activities needed to cover the urban
agenda. The West African Gas Pipeline (US$25m, FY05), and West A f r i c a Power Pool
(US$15m, FY05), both regional projects, are described elsewhere (see para. 130).
iii. Scenarios and Triggers
117. Ghana i s currently considered to be in the base case. The macroeconomic
situation i s sound and there has been progress o n poverty reduction expenditures and
public finance management. T o stay in the base case, Ghana will need to show continued
progress o n macroeconomic management, poverty reduction, and o n public finance
management. Poverty-related spending w o u l d maintain the current share o f
domestically-financed expenditures (the average o f 2002-3 actuals). In v i e w o f the
proactive approach to address the current high proportion o f unsatisfactory IDA
commitments in the overall portfolio, Ghana will need to show satisfactory progress o n
an agreed IDA portfolio performance improvement plan. During the C A S period, the
strategic thrust o f portfolio improvement encompasses: (i)
risk monitoring and
mitigation, especially with respect to high-impact operations; (ii)
satisfactory
implementation o f agreed CPPR actions, including acceleration o f project
implementation and disbursements (a trigger for the base case); and (iii)
continuous
improvement o f OED ratings o f outcome, sustainability and institutional development

45
impact during the C A S period (a trigger for the high case). The l o w case would be
triggered by a serious and sustained decline in performance, with a corresponding retreat
to support for basic needs projects, such as the support for the fight against H I V / A I D S .
Table 4: Triggers
Trigger Areas
Macro

T o Stay in the Base Case
Macroeconomic framework and external financing plan
satisfactorv to IDA

Means of Verification
Regular Bank progress
reviews

Poverty
reduction

Maintain current share of poverty-related spending with
respect to total domestically-financed expenditures

Governance

Progress on public financial management, in particular
on the 15 points o f the HIPC Accountability
Assessment and Action Plan (AAP)

Annual Public Expenditure
Reviews; Annual GPRS
Progress Reports and
associated JSAs
Regular Bank progress
reviews including the HIPC
Accountability Assessment
and Action Plan (AAP)

Portfolio
performance

Satisfactory implementation o f forthcoming IDA
portfolio improvement plan

Bank project supervision
reports

Trigger Areas
Poverty
reduction

T o M o v e To The High Case
Sustained progress towards increasing share o f povertyrelated spending with respect to total domesticallyfinanced expenditures to about 33 percent by the end o f
the CAS period

Ouarterlv oortfolio review
Means o f Verification
Annual Public Expenditure
Reviews, Annual GPRS
progress reports and
associated JSAs

Growth and
Employment

Energy: Increased opportunities for private sector
participation by (a) undertaking upstream and
downstream reforms in the petroleum sector; and (b)
establishing necessary policies and regulation in the
electricity sector
Private Sector Development: Successful
implementation o f agreed strategy, especially
significant reduction in the time and cost o f registering
businesses

Regular Bank progress
reviews

Governance

Progress on Public Sector Reform (PSR), including
continued progress on developing and implementing a
civil service reform stratew

Regular Bank progress
reviews

Portfolio
performance

Maintenance o f good IDA portfolio performance, and
continuous improvement in OED project evaluations

Bank project supervision
reports
Quarterly portfolio review

OED evaluations

A move to the high case will correspond to a shift to a path of accelerated
growth. This scenario i s predicated o n solid progress o n poverty reduction, growth and
employment, and governance policy areas together with sustained improvements in
portfolio performance and results. A trigger for the high case w o u l d be sustained
progress towards increasing share o f poverty-related spending with respect t o
domestically-financed expenditures to about 33 percent by the end o f the CAS period. In
view o f the critical importance o f an improved enabling environment for the private
sector for a shift in the economy’s growth trajectory, the high case w o u l d be
characterized by good progress o n removing key hindrances to private sector
development, including in the energy sector and implementation o f the private sector
118.

46
development strategy. On the governance front, significant and sustained advancement
would be made o n developing and implementing key aspects o f the public sector reform
strategy. With sustained development o n the private sector development and governance
fronts, which would help both to accelerate growth for sustained poverty reduction and to
better target the poor, the Bank would be willing and able to provide higher levels o f
financial support, directed towards those priority areas. For instance, in the energy
sector, stronger progress o n sector reforms could allow for broader investments in
improvements to the distribution system. Similarly, if significant progress i s made o n a
critical mass o f other policy issues underlying the minimum infrastructure platform, such
as adoption o f a comprehensive intermodal transport sector strategy or o f an urban sector
strategy, the financing needs may be correspondingly larger and the proposed
infrastructure operation could be designed accordingly. Finally, implementation o f a
c i v i l service reform strategy, a trigger for the high case, would l i k e l y involve more
detailed design w o r k and possibly financing for pilot reforms.
iv. Non-lending

119. Analytical work and economic dialogue will figure prominently in the Bank’s
assistance program, with non-lending services to be used in several different ways.
First, to meet the Bank’s due diligence requirements, core diagnostics will be carried out.
Second, non-lending will be used to enhance the effectiveness of Bank support by
informing policy reforms and new lending, including through fast turnaround policy
notes as w e l l as flagship studies that would help address key challenges in the lending
program, for instance helping to define the community empowerment agenda. The
Bank’s non-lending program will seek to help improve the results focus and support
implementation. In v i e w o f the number o f studies undertaken in Ghana in the past, an
underlying principle will be to use existing analysis as effectively as possible. Finally,
dialogue, stakeholder involvement and active dissemination will feature prominently in
the non-lending services component o f the CAS, as complements to lending and formal
analysis. Increasingly, the Bank’s non-lending services will be coordinated more closely
with those o f other development partners, to ensure complementarity, to avoid
duplication, and to explore opportunities for j o i n t production. Implementation will be
supported through greater attention to involving stakeholders more closely in AAA from
the upstream design stage through dissemination.
120. The scope o f the core diagnostic work ranges from a broad review o f
Ghana’s unfinished reform agenda in the CEM, to a very specific assessment o f
public sector financial accountability arrangements under the CFAA. Core AAA
include the annual PER, which will examine h o w to efficiently manage public resources,
supporting ongoing w o r k under the PRSC, as w e l l as future lending in public sector
reform. The F Y 0 4 CPAR and C F A A Update have been completed. B o t h reports contain
actions plans for required improvements in public procurement and financial
management; in line with the results focus, these also a i m to support higher quality in
development planning, budgeting, project management, and procurement. A H I P C A A P
update will be carried out in FY04. The CEM o n “Growth, Poverty and Public Sector
Management”, under preparation, highlights the role o f fiscal laxity in impairing growth,
budget rigidities, inadequate infrastructure and l o w productivity in manufacturing and

47
agriculture, and recommends in the short t e r m to streamline the government structure,
improve coordination o f information within the government, and tackle corruption. As
part o f due diligence in advance o f the next CAS, a Poverty Assessment will be
conducted in FY07.

121, Enhancing the effectiveness of Bank support. Underpinning the Bank’s
ongoing and new lending, formal and informal analyses will be carried out in several
sectors and on several cross-cutting themes. In FY04, formal AAA pieces will address
urgent policy issues in the health and energy sectors. A policy note will aim to help the
government to develop an implementation strategy for the recently-approved National
Health Insurance Act, to ensure i t s fiscal sustainability and poverty impact. The ongoing
Energy AAA will help the government to formulate strategic interventions for
implementing the energy sector reforms embedded in the PRSC, addressing energy
related macroeconomic issues, and facilitating energy sector investments (including, for
instance, the West African Gas Pipeline). Proposed ESW on the improvement o f PublicPrivate Partnerships would be a platform for continued dialogue on policy orientation,
implementation o f an efficient regulatory framework, public debate, removal o f
administrative barriers, and strengthening o f the legal and judicial system.
122. With a view to advancing the governance, empowerment and public resource
management agenda, and to underpin planned lending in the context o f the PRSC
and for community and district empowerment and public sector reforms, ESW on
Decentralization, Service Provision and Social Accountability i s being proposed.
WBI i s contributing to this effort b y carrying out detailed capacity building needs
assessments in priority areas where government programs have so far not been successful
(e.g., delivery of education, health, and water services to poor people at community
level). Upcoming government decisions on the strategy to pursue the public sector
reform agenda will inform the Bank’s approach to design and implementation o f
appropriate assistance. Further support may be provided through AAA delivered within
the context o f the multi-donor support to capacity building, including through a common
technical assistance pool. A flagship ESW on the urban strategy will provide important
input into the design o f the Bank’s proposed support to decentralization and community
empowerment.
123.

The Bank’s non-lending will also plan f o r the analytical underpinnings
required for the second round o f PRSCs (PRSC4-6) to be implemented in support o f
the government’s new poverty reduction strategy. In this context, the non-lending
activity in fiduciary management will continue to play a major role, and will involve (but
will not be limited to) capacity building and dialogue, to help public officials to become
more action-oriented, and empower civil society to monitor implementation.
Accordingly, the next C F A A Update i s planned for FY06, and a Poverty Assessment will
be undertaken in FY07 following the release o f the upcoming GLSS 5 data. As for
CEM/Development Policy Review work, decisions will be taken during CAS
implementation in order to help feed the policy dialogue appropriately. Also
underpinning the PRSCs will be a series o f PSIAs that will further examine issues such as
electricity access, ability to pay, and consistency with macroeconomic targets.

48
124. Helping to fill gaps in understanding and supporting the results focus.
Further to the FY03 FIAS Update, and the Post-FSAP Follow-up (FY04, designed to
update FY00-01 FSAP analysis, and assist with formulating a fresh financial sector
program), an Investment Climate Assessment i s planned. It would seek to understand
conditions in Ghana’s investment climate, identify features that matter most for firmlevel productivity and growth, and in so doing provide a basis for future private sector
development lending. In line with the results focus, it will produce a baseline assessment
to help track changes over time to gauge the impact o f reforms. I F C will be actively
involved in furthering this agenda, in the areas o f business advisory services, and general
privatization advisory services. As a complement, and to facilitate the removal o f the
critical bottleneck to growth posed by the telecommunications sector, joint Bank-IFC
AAA work will be carried out in FY05 to prepare the platform for possible IFC
involvement in the sector in FY06. The recent study on micro-finance will further chart
options for the sector, guiding both the PRSC and the cluster o f sector operations.
Building on the lessons o f the f i r s t phase o f the Natural Resources Management APL, the
Bank will engage in policy dialogue prior to considering a second phase o f lending, to be
developed through ESW. The Disability Study (FY06) will help fill critical knowledge
gaps in this area that i s new for the Bank in Ghana.
125. T o build the results focus, the Bank will undertake work to highlight ways to
improve the government’s ability to monitor and evaluate. A Readiness Assessment
o f M&E will be carried out early in the CAS period, to assess Ghana’s ability to measure
the key results, and identify areas where capacity building may be required. That work
will be used as an input during the stock-taking exercise midway through CAS
implementation.
126. Dialogue and stakeholder involvement. To raise awareness o n emerging issues
and promote capacity building and knowledge sharing, the Bank will employ various
tools to develop and disseminate knowledge: from short pieces o f sector work and policy
briefs to formal pieces o f analytical and advisory work; technical assistance; conferences;
workshops and short, focused policy notes distilling conclusions from existing AAA.
Workshops and conferences, to be organized in collaboration with the World Bank
Institute, will be used to disseminate findings and facilitate the debate on economic
reform. Work i s ongoing in four key areas in communications: the Development
Dialogue Series, which in collaboration with leading Ghanaian think-tanks and
institutions, promotes vibrant discourse on development policy choices; the Development
Communications Enhancement Program, designed by the Ministry o f Information and
supported under the first PRSC, which promotes the flow o f information and gives people
an opportunity to participate in the development dialogue; Development Communications
Training which provides training for government projects staff in strategic
communications; and the Media Capacity Enhancement Program which aims to enhance
capacity for development reporting within the media. A Communications Review will be
undertaken to identify ways in which communications can enhance implementation and
support achievement o f the CAS outcomes. WBI will also lead on some flagship
activities, such as workshops on capacity building for a knowledge-based economy. In
general, increased attention will be paid to dissemination, in particular to fostering
ownership in the dissemination process through early and sustained involvement o f

49
counterparts and development partners. The Ghana Office Public Information Center
(PIC) has also been rehabilitated and re-equipped to serve as a major point for the
dissemination o f development information. A key expected result i s strengthened l i n k s
o f accountability between the government, the private sector, c i v i l society and
development partners.
v. Regional Programs

127. West African countries and regional institutions are preparing a number of
strategies and programs with support from the donor community; the Bank’s
support will be delivered through the implementation o f the RIAS. These programs
are in areas including transport (roads and air), energy, telecommunications, HIV/AIDS,
and trade liberalization. Efforts in these areas are important to the eventual objective o f
creating a common market among the ECOWAS states.
128. The regional transport and transit facilitation program aims to increase
competition among more efficient corridors to boost internal and external regional
trade. The Bank i s preparing a project which will focus o n a limited number o f corridors
where a minimum platform o f criteria i s met by the countries. The objective i s to set up
the platform o f criteria and identify the corridors by end-February 2004, and to present
the project to the Board in FY0.5. T w o regional corridors in Ghana have been identified
as potential candidates in the program: f r o m Ghana to Burkina Faso and Niger, and f r o m
Ghana to C6te d’Ivoire and to Togo. The first i s mostly supported by the African
Development Bank’s (AfDB) regional project, approved in November 2003. On the
second, the section f r o m Akatsi to Dzodze (border o f Togo) i s in poor condition and
financing o f works i s being sought. Additional support i s required to complete corridor
improvement such as j o i n t border posts, long-term performance-based maintenance
contracts, truck stations, road safety, and truck monitoring, which w o u l d translate o n the
ground the concept o f an efficient corridor. Support to improvement o f transit procedures
and implementation o f the E C O W A S inter-state transit system as w e l l as harmonization
o f truck and axle-load regulation would be provided under a regional project,
129. A regional project for Air Transport in West and Central Africa i s currently
being prepared. The project, which includes Ghana, will have national components
(loans) for security and safety projects, as well as regional funds (grants) for the
development o f regional safety and security oversight capacity. Since the amounts
involved for such projects at a national level are relatively modest (approximately US$3
m i l l i o n for safety and security combined), the national-level project could be embedded
in an appropriate national-level operation. In addition, I F C has embarked o n proactive
project development for investment in select private airlines in west and central Africa, to
bring rapid improvement and improved safety in regional air services, through investment
for expansion o f services from leading and self-regulating private airlines. This effort i s
being carried out in close coordination with the Bank o n the regional air transport project
described above.

130. I n the energy sector, t w o regional operations, the West African Gas Pipeline
(WAGP) and the West Africa Power Pool (WAPP), are under preparation. In

50
supporting the WAGP project, the Bank Group would assist the respective countries to
structure the project in an economically and financially robust manner, and reasonably
share its benefits and risks, including providing: (i)
advice for developing the required
policy, institutional, legal and regulatory framework to optimize project benefits and
ensure reasonable risk sharing among the project's stakeholders; (ii)
selective political
risk guarantees to backstop government commitments; and (iii)
lending to Ghana to partfinance i t s equity stake. The first phase o f the W A P P will cover the regulatory and
contractual frameworks (both regional and national), priority investments in the
transmission networks, and capacity building. The subsequent phases seek to further
strengthen the frameworks and develop the regional market and supporting infrastructure.
Although all participating countries have endorsed the proposed program, it will be
important to assess the impact o f the Ivorian crisis o n i t s structure and timing.
13 1. HIV/AIDS. The Bank i s helping to concretize regional efforts through a US$16.5
m i l l i o n IDA grant to support an HIV/AIDS project in the Abidjan-Lagos transport
corridor over an initial four-year period. The project i s helping to increase access to
H I V / A I D S prevention, basic treatment, support and care services, for underserved
vulnerable groups. The Heads o f State o f the five participating countries - Nigeria,
Benin, Togo, Ghana and C6te d'Ivoire - signed a declaration in April 2002 committing
themselves to support a program o f common actions, including the establishment o f an
institutional framework t o manage the project, which explicitly recognizes the subregional dimension to containing and eventually reversing HIV prevalence. The regional
project focuses o n the cross-boundary issues that are not easily addressed through country
specific projects and i s thus a complement to country efforts to reduce the spread o f
HIV/AIDS.
132. Trade. The Bank i s working closely with ECOWAS, IMF, and other donors to
provide the analytical w o r k which will support the government's efforts towards trade
liberalization in the regional context.
vi. Global Environmental Issues and Role o f GEF
133. Two GEF-supported operations are currently under implementation, High
Forest Biodiversity (US$8.7m, FY98-04) and Northern Savannah Biodiversity
(US$7.9m, FY03-09), and two are being prepared. The High Forest Biodiversity
project i s supporting the development and implementation o f an integrated program to
conserve and manage the biological diversity in selected high forest areas o f Ghana by
creating globally significant biodiversity areas and providing alternative livelihood
support systems to communities living in or fringing these areas. The Northern Savannah
Biodiversity Conservation project seeks to improve the livelihood and health o f Northern
Savannah communities and their environment through conservation and sustainable use
o f natural resources and medicinal plants. The Community-based Integrated Natural
Resources Management (US$850,000, FY04) project in Okyeman seeks to enhance
biodiversity conservation and sustainable use o f renewable natural resources in
collaboration with traditional authorities and community members w h o o w n the
resources. GEF has also approved under i t s Medium-sized facility a grant o f
US$200,000 to provide, o n a p i l o t basis, electricity to small businesses and service

51
providers in poor, isolated, off-grid communities. Electricity will be generated by
locally-made wind turbines.24
vii. Selectivity and Choice of Instruments

134. The Strategic Framework f o r IDA in Africa, with its emphasis on selectivity,
underlies the CAS. A number o f criteria were applied to choose the set o f operations
that the Bank would support, and the instruments by which that support would be
delivered. The three C A S pillars have been derived directly f r o m the GPRS, and the
issues o n which the Bank i s focusing represent key constraints to achieving the desired
development outcomes. The choices o f sectors in which to be involved, and the
instruments through w h i c h to provide the support, have been driven by strategic
importance o f the sector in the eyes o f the government and the W o r l d Bank, by the
Bank’s comparative advantage, and by the anticipated contribution to the ongoing
harmonization agenda.
135. Multi-donor budget support and financing for sector-wide programs. In
keeping with the principles o f the SFIA, especially the emerging partnership model, and
to support and further the harmonization agenda, the PRSC i s the primary vehicle for the
Bank’s contribution to the GPRS. The PRSC, already covering important policy aspects
across the three C A S pillars, will evolve as significant progress i s made in particular
areas and responding t o n e w objectives, and issues may be dropped o r added following
the first three year series. For example, it i s foreseen that natural resources management
can be addressed in the forthcoming PRSC2. The PRSC program would support the
policy aspects o f FINSSP, while specific investment and technical assistance needs
would be addressed by the Capacity Building and Infrastructure operations. The Bank
will also continue t o strongly support multi-donor approaches at the sector level, through
ongoing support to the S WAps in health and roads, and through proposed assistance to
the education and water sectors. Beyond the timeframe o f this CAS, i t i s anticipated that
the PRSC would support more of the programmatic sector-level interventions, such as in
education and health.

136. Through continued active engagement and partnership in a variety o f areas,
a comprehensive multi-donor approach i s being built to support Ghana in its
development and implementation of its decentralization, urban and community
empowerment agenda. The proposed package o f assistance to decentralization and
community empowerment (see para. 1 15) informs the design o f the future support in this
area. If conditions warrant (implementation o f the national decentralization strategy i s
well under way, and development partners are rallying under that as a common
implementation framework), Bank support could henceforth be channeled through a
single instrument, the proposed Decentralization for Community Empowerment program.
Key to success o f this strategy will be to continue to build in the lessons f r o m recent
experience, to w o r k very closely with development partners active at the local level, and
to ensure the l i f e spans o f these intermediate projects are o f relatively short duration.

24

This project was a Development Marketplace winner.

52
137. Flexibility i s the watchword, particularly on natural resource management
and the urban agenda. Lessons learned from the first phase o f the Natural Resources
Management A P L suggested that a direct follow-up to the first phase o f the A P L might
not be the best vehicle to achieve the desired results at this juncture. In view o f the
overall importance o f sound environmental and natural resource management to
sustainable growth, however, the Bank Group intends to remain actively involved,
through policy dialogue (supported through the PRSC) and analytical support, and with
targeted activities at the local level that could be financed through the CBRD, MSME, or
GEF operations. Should developments in the sector warrant, it i s proposed to revisit the
advisability o f this approach, and consider preparing the second phase o f the N R M P
APL. The strategy incorporates similar flexibility with regard to the support to
decentralization and the urbadrural split. If the experience with community-based
operations and the accompanying analytical work on the urban strategy and i t s interplay
with the rural agenda for growth suggest that it i s the best avenue, the Bank would
reconsider providing separate support to urban development through the second phase o f
Urban V. These issues will be explicitly revisited during the progress review.
138. Investment operations are being proposed to support infrastructure for
growth. This i s an area in which historically the Bank has had a comparative advantage.
Wherever other development partners are interested in engaging with the Bank, the Bank
Group welcomes this involvement.
139. High strategic value in niches. Tertiary education i s an area in which the Bank
alone i s providing support, due to i t s high strategic interest. While several partners are
active in the sector overall, and participating in the pilot programmatic component o f
EdSeP, only the Bank i s engaged in tertiary education. In telecommunications, the Bank
Group will continue to advise and support the government in overcoming the regulatory
obstacles constraining investment in the sector, which will enable potential investments
in the sector including those that could be financed b y IFC. Inpetroleum and railways,
the Bank Group will support the government’s efforts to end ongoing subsidies to
parastatals and bring in more productive forms o f public-private partnerships, through
ongoing operations including PEPTA, informed by the Public-Private Partnerships ESW,
and through new support such as the proposed Capacity Building and Infrastructure
projects.
140. U s e o f I D A grants. Ghana i s eligible for IDA grants under the l o w income
category. In FY04, the indicative allocation o f U S 4 7 million in IDA grants would be
directed to the PRSC. The FY05 grant allocation for Ghana has not yet been determined,
but grants that are available would be directed preferentially towards projects with a high
social sector content, such as Community Water and Sanitation 2.
viii. Portfolio Management

141. As part o f the continuing CPPR follow up, a comprehensive I D A portfolio
performance improvement action plan will be agreed, including quarterly portfolio
reviews to be led by the Ghana office in collaboration with the World Bank Desk at
the Ministry o f Finance and Economic Planning. Base case and high case triggers are

53
proposed (see para. 117). There are 16 active projects (excluding GEF) totaling
US$793m, o f which US$507m i s undisbursed. Three operations - Road Sector
Development, AgSSIP, and National Functional Literacy - with a total commitment
amount o f US$3 19m, are currently rated unsatisfactory. The unsatisfactory rating o n the
Road Sector Development Project i s due to the lack o f sustained progress with respect to
road arrears, funding for road maintenance, efficiency in the use o f resources,
management o f road fund revenues and plans for development and maintenance. The
government has indicated i t s commitment to bring the arrears to closure and review
institutional arrangements for road maintenance financing through a series o f studies,
workshops and realistic action plans which include the redrafting o f the Road Fund Law.
In addition, contract management i s being strengthened. The bulk o f the c i v i l works
commitment under the project i s completed (about 70 percent) with three years
remaining. Progress will be reviewed during the March 2004 road sector donor
conference to be held in Accra. In v i e w o f these specific actions, an upgrade to
satisfactory i s likely. AgSSIP i s being restructured to remove the obstacles to speedier
implementation, and t o add new activities in support o f the government’s initiatives for
rapid agricultural growth. Adequate progress i s being made o n fulfilling the A P L
triggers, and the development objectives are expected to be met with the extension o f the
closing date by three years and the implementation o f the activities envisaged for the
restructured project. National Functional Literacy has retained i t s unsatisfactory rating in
the interest o f proactive portfolio management; although performance has improved, the
project has not yet caught up completely following the significant delays at i t s outset.
ix. Core Monitoring and Benchmarks

142. The government adopted a comprehensive GPRS M&E plan, which contains
a presentation o f 52 indicators to track progress on the GPRS, in March 2003. With
the government’s M&E capacity as yet fairly weak, it i s to be determined whether the
GPRS M&E system i s adequate to measure and demonstrate whether the Bank’s C A S i s
achieving i t s stated goals and outcomes. A careful review o f the CAS outcome indicators

for the three pillars i s needed, to determine both the overlap and the gaps with the GPRS
indicators.

143. A mission, j o i n t with DFID, i s expected to take place in the coming weeks to
assess government capacity to monitor and evaluate the GPRS goals and use the M&E
system for the Bank’s C A S monitoring. This mission would review the key aspects o f
the current M&E system, including institutional arrangements and capacity issues in the
National Development Planning Commission (NDPC), Ghana Statistical Service (GSS),
and line ministries. It w o u l d also explore donor/partner collaboration with an explicit
view to avoiding building parallel systems. The mission will draw o n existing support
and capacity, including w o r k by the government and by DFID, t o devise a system to
monitor CAS outcomes j o i n t l y with the government, to identify w h o w o u l d be in charge,
have clear responsibility flow, and build in flexibility to adjust t o changing country
conditions.
144. T o keep attention on results, and to provide for flexibility within the overall
framework o f the CAS, a results-focused progress review, joint with development

54
partners, i s planned midstream in CAS implementation. This progress review will
comprise a portfolio review exercise focused o n the specific results attributable to each
operation in the lending portfolio and on defining any necessary actions to improve
impact during the lifespan o f the operation. Carried out j o i n t l y with other development
partners, it will also seek to identify synergies and overlaps with a v i e w to identifying
major actions that could help improve the impact o f overall donor funding. In addition,
again in close collaboration with other development partners, a comprehensive review o f
the analytical and advisory w o r k carried out to date and i t s results implications will be set
out. This progress review will provide early input o n the implementation o f the C A S and
would be used as a proactive tool to manage portfolio issues and, if necessary, guide reorientation o f the strategy. Building o n the consultations employed to develop this CAS,
the midstream progress review would once more seek the feedback o f clients and
stakeholders to better assess the impact o f the strategy o n the ground.

145. As the GPRS evolves in the coming years, the W o r l d Bank Group will seek to
further improve, align and harmonize i t s support with other development partners to
better support the agenda for accelerated growth and the achievement o f the MDGs. In
particular, the possibility o f a Joint Assistance Strategy for participating DPs will be
explored during 2005.

V.

RISKS

146. Political risks, particularly in relation to the electoral cycle, must be
identified and mitigated. The incoming government, after the December 2004
elections, may wish to thoroughly review ongoing programs to ensure that they reflect i t s
o w n development priorities, w h i c h m a y lead to preparation and implementation delays.
This C A S builds in the lessons learned f r o m the previous CAS in this regard.
Consultations have been broad-based and, importantly, focused o n outcomes as opposed
to inputs or outputs. The operational calendar has also been designed with the elections
in mind, with an acknowledgment that certain decisions are unlikely to be taken as the
elections approach. The progress review i s to be timed to serve as an active dialogue tool
with the incoming government. I t i s also worth noting that the government has taken an
active stance in mitigating the risk o f pre-electoral fiscal excesses. In preparing the 2004
budget, the Ministry o f Finance and Economic Planning has undertaken intensive
consultations with each sector, with a v i e w to best planning and implementing the 2004
budget. Finally, the F Y 0 5 progress review, with the F Y 0 5 CPPR, are designed to address
the need to plan for and t o mitigate any loss in implementation time in the post-election
period.
147. The main operational risks are that preparation o f specific operations will be
delayed, o r that the choice o f instrument was not appropriate. For instance, Ghana’s
progress o n public sector reform by 2006 and o n decentralization by 2007 i s as yet
unknown. The government m a y lack the implementation capacity, especially with
respect to decentralization and institutional reforms, to implement the strategy as
conceived. Further, the risk o f policy modifications or reversals, inherent to a situation

55
with an impending change o f government, must be addressed. The flexible approach
described in the section o n selectivity has been adopted to mitigate these risks, In
addition, the consultative approach seeks to ensure continuity and ownership o f the
strategy throughout the CAS period, including to work with the incoming government in
case it should choose to review any policy decisions.
148. External shocks and fragile sub-region. These risks, o f sub-regional fragility
and o f vulnerability to external economic shocks, have been clearly set out in the
document. On the former, Ghana’s own proactive stance in the sub-region i s an
important mitigating factor. Also, the Bank Group support to the regional projects i s
designed, in keeping w i t h the SFIA, to draw the regional parties closer together. Second,
terms o f trade shocks may be addressed rapidly and flexibly through modulation o f the
timing and level o f the PRSC.

VI.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

149. Ghana i s well-poised for growth that could propel it to sustained leadership in the
sub-region and indeed the continent. I t s recent excellent macroeconomic performance
may constitute a major break with the past. With favorable terms o f trade, the country
has a window o f opportunity. The fiscal picture has dramatically improved recently, as
has inflation performance, helping to address some o f the past hindrances t o growth.
Decentralization, while slow, i s taking place. On the other hand, if the inertia that has
hindered structural change in the past prevails, these recent gains could be transient. It i s
the staffs belief that the underpinning governance improvements and social capital
accumulation can help sustain Ghana through a period that has historically presented i t s
most difficult fiscal challenges. There i s strong partnership among development partners,
with harmonized support at the macro level, increasingly so at the sectoral level, and the
Bank i s committed to supporting strengthened government leadership to help keep Ghana
at the forefront in this area. The Bank has long accompanied Ghana in i t s reform efforts.
This CAS aims to support Ghana’s efforts to make significant progress o n i t s structural
agenda and in so doing put itself o n a growth path leading to achievement o f the MDGs
and to middle-income status.
James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Peter Woicke
Washington, D C
February 20,2004

By:
Shengman Zhang

GHANA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Annexes

Annex 1:

Preparation o f the Ghana C A S

Annex 2:

Debt Sustainability

Annex 3:

Ghana: Fund Relations

Annex 4:

Ghana’s Extemal Partners and their Activities

Annex 5:

CDF Thematic Group

Annex 6:

Ghana’s Progress towards the M i l l e n n i u m Development Goals

Annex 7:

C A S Annexes:

A1
A2
B2
B3
B3
B4
B6
B7
B8
B8
B9
B10

Key Economic and Program Indicators
Ghana at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Performance and Management
IBRDLDA Program Summary
IFC & M I G A for Ghana
Summary of Non-Lending Sewices
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Statement of IFC’s Held & Disbursed Portfolio
Operations Portfolio (IBRDLDA & Grants)
Results Matrix
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex 1

PREPARATION OF THE GHANA CAS

This C A S was developed through a consultative process, both in-country and
w i t h i n the Bank’s country team. Preparation began in January 2003, with the drafting o f
short sector notes by country team members. Those notes and other preparatory material,
including detailed analysis o f past portfolio performance, were inputs for a retreat to
launch the C A S process in M a r c h 2003 at Akosombo, Ghana. That retreat, attended by
country office staff, other members o f the country team, and several o f their managers,
also benefited f r o m the participation o f the Finance Minister and several other key
Ghanaian officials, and o f the Bank’s Vice President for Operations Policy and Country
Services.
The next milestone in the consultative process was a series o f meetings w i t h c i v i l
society, organized by a local think tank, the Institute for Economic Analysis (IEA’s full
report i s available upon request). These consultations were held in five regions across the
country, with approximately 100 people attending each. They were conceived as
listening events, with the discussion to be kicked o f f by a b r i e f presentation o n the GPRS
by a government official, followed by a b r i e f outline to explain the CAS process and
provide some context o n the Bank’s involvement in Ghana. The ongoing Development
Dialogue series and other ongoing consultations incorporated the evolution o f the C A S
thinking, and helped to provide a continuous feedback loop, including a session o n
decentralizing the GPRS that was held in Tamale.
The next major milestone in C A S consultations was the m a i n mission, held f r o m
October 27 to November 8, 2003. During the mission, sectoral ministers presented their
development visions, a series o f consultations o n cross-cutting issues was held with
stakeholders f r o m govemment and c i v i l society, and the draft matrix was thoroughly
reviewed w i t h technical participants before discussion with the government. As part o f a
follow-up mission, a revised version o f the matrix as w e l l as a draft o f the C A S document
were reviewed with Ghanaian counterparts in the administration.
W i t h i n the Bank, consultations were l e d by pillar leaders in the Country Office
w i t h counterparts in Washington. In the relevant government sectors, consultations were
led by leaders representing the Ministry o f Finance, the National Development Planning
Commission and the Governance Office. On other levels, dialogue was h e l d with the
private sector, c i v i l society and with development partners.
The C A S team sought wherever possible to use existing structures o f engagement
and/or to follow up and expand the already existing consultation agenda, as well as to use
the consultative process to facilitate consultations among Ghanaian stakeholders (e.g.
bringing together diverse stakeholders o n gender). One area in which the consultative
process could have been improved was the environment. W h i l e t w o sessions were
devoted to the environment during the m a i n CAS mission, and previous IFC missions
have carried out extensive dialogue o n environmental issues in mining areas, dialogue
w i t h NGOs that are active in Ghana and internationally suggests there i s scope for
expansion o f such consultations in future.

Annex 2

GHANA CAS
Debt Sustainability Analysis
EXTERNAL
DEBT
Ghana reached i t s decision point under the Enhanced H I P C Initiative in February 2002.
At that time it was determined that assistance amounting to US$2,186 m i l l i o n (equivalent
to a reduction o f 56.2 percent in the NPV debt stock after the full application o f
traditional debt relief) w o u l d be required for Ghana to reach the targeted debt-to-fiscal
revenues ratio o f 250 percent. Since that date creditors including the Paris Club, IDA, the
IMF, the African Development Bank and the European U n i o n have begun providing
interim relief, and a number o f additional creditors have committed to providing their
share o f HIPC assistance at the completion point. Ghana could reach i t s H I P C completion
point by mid-2004.

This annex updates the debt sustainability analysis conducted at the decision point with
n e w disbursement data obtained from the largest creditors, and with exchange and
interest rate parameters as o f end-2003. With these changes, the NPV o f debt after
assuming the full delivery o f enhanced H I P C assistance w o u l d stand at US$2,629 m i l l i o n
as o f end-2003, as compared with US$2,154 m i l l i o n projected in the decision point
document. While new borrowing was somewhat lower than projected, this was more
than compensated by the fall in the dollar exchange rate and the discount rates, w h i c h
increased the NPV o f debt expressed in U S Dollars.
Over the next three years (FY04-07), Ghana i s projected to borrow around US$350
m i l l i o n per annum, three quarters o f which will be o n highly concessional terms (with a
grant element o f at least 60 percent), with the remainder being o n concessional t e r m s
(with a grant element o f 35 percent). Under these assumptions the NPV o f debt i s
estimated to grow at 7.6 percent per annum over the next five years. Under the high case
lending scenario the NPV o f debt w o u l d increase by around 8.3 percent per year over the
same period. In order to maintain stable debt ratios, the nominal (dollar) GDP, export,
and revenue growth w o u l d have to increase as rapidly as the growth in the debt stock and
debt servicing requirements over the medium and long term.
The medium term growth assumptions underlying the PRGF-supported program and the
PRSP suggest that GDP growth in current dollars will be around 4.4 percent over 20047. Over the same period nominal export revenues are expected to grow at 4.5 percent
per annum. Under these assumptions the NPV-debt-to-exports ratio w o u l d remain about
the same over the projection period, falling slightly f r o m 101 percent at end-2003 to 100
percent at end-2007 (assuming full delivery o f enhanced H I P C relief). The NPV debt-

to-GDP ratio w o u l d fall slightly from 37 percent to 35 percent, and the benchmark NPV
o f debt-to-revenue ratio will fall from 186 to 165 percent over this projection period.

The debt relief awarded to Ghana through the HIPC initiative i s sufficient to reduce
Ghana’s k e y extemal debt ratios to levels which compare favourably with other countries
in the region. Under the favourable assumptions o f the baseline scenario, the NPV o f
debt to revenues w o u l d decline considerably, to about 133 percent at end 201 1. However,
assuming that the fiscal revenues as a percentage o f GDP remained constant at the
historical 2003 level, and dollar GDP growth remained at around 4.2 percent (the
historical average for 1990-99), the NPV debt-to-fiscal revenues ratio could rise under
this lower growth scenario by about 30 percentage points between 2003-2011 (see chart
below) .
Projected NPV debt-to-revenue ratio
(Assuming full delivery o f HIPC assistance)

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

201 1

DOMESTIC
DEBT’
The authorities noted in the decision point document their intention to use 20 percent o f
the additional resources provided under the enhanced HIPC initiative to pay down the
domestic debt. The rationale for this was that the high level o f public domestic debt
(two-thirds o f which was being rolled over at maturities o f three months) and the ensuing
high interest rates were crowding out private investment, as w e l l as constituting a

’

The information o n domestic debt i s drawn from “Ghana: Selected Issues”, IMF Country Report
No.031134, M a y 2003

significant drain o n public expenditures - approximately three-quarters o f the total
interest outlays in 1999-2001 stemmed from the domestic interest burden. A reduction in
this stock o f debt would therefore play a key role in stimulating the private sector in
Ghana.
Since the decision point in February 2002, a series o f fiscal and quasi-fiscal slippages
(including an overrun in the c i v i l service wage bill and a delay in the implementation o f
increases in electricity and water tariffs) led to a recourse to domestic financing o f 3.6
percent o f GDP rather than 0.3 percent as outlined in the PRGF-supported program.
Large quasi-fiscal losses also arose f r o m a failure to implement an automatic adjustment
mechanism for petroleum prices, which led to the Ghana Commercial Bank incurring
losses amounting to almost two percent o f GDP. The central government was forced to
recognize these losses in order to protect GCB’s balance sheet.
The net result o f the budget overruns, the quasi-fiscal slippages, and a financing shortfall
was that as o f end-2002 the stock o f domestic debt stood at almost 29 percent o f GDP,
rather than the 20 percent projected at the time o f the H I P C decision point.

LONG-TERM
DEBTSUSTAINABILITY

The HIPC Initiative has provided Ghana with the potential to achieve long-term extemal
debt sustainability. With NPV debt-to-export ratios around 100 percent and NPV debtto-revenues ratios below 200 percent, Ghana’s extemal debt indicators n o w compare
favourably with most other countries in the region. Given the government’s ambitious

public investment plans outlined in the GPRS, these ratios m a y rise somewhat over the
coming years, but should s t i l l remain at manageable levels. The government and the
intemational community should pay close attention to these levels, so that in the event
that the k e y indicators begin to show a consistent upward trend, an appropriate policy
response including increased concessionality o f financing, lower borrowing, and policies
to stimulate growth m a y be implemented.

The relatively favourable extemal debt situation i s not matched by similar positive
developments o n the domestic side. The immediate causes o f the recent fiscal slippages
have been addressed; however, Ghana’s recent history exhibits a pattem o f policyslippages followed by periods o f reform, accompanied by a continued growth in the stock
o f debt. Domestic debt sustainability will require a sustained commitment to fiscal
discipline f r o m the government.

Ghana: Fund Relations

Press Release No. 03/222
December 17,2003

Annex 3

International Monet ary Fund
700 19t h Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 2043 1 USA

IMF Completes First Review Under Ghana's PRCF Arrangement
and Approves US$38.5 Million Disbursement
The Executive Board o f the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today completed the first
review o f Ghana's economic performance under a Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) arrangement. The completion o f the review makes immediately available to
Ghana an amount equivalent to S D R 26.35 m i l l i o n (about US$38.5 million) under the
arrangement.
Ghana's three-year PRGF arrangement was approved o n M a y 9,2003 (See Press Release
No. 03/60) for SDR 184.5 m i l l i o n (about US$270 million). So far, Ghana has drawn SDR
26.35 m i l l i o n (about US$38.5 million).
The PRGF i s the IMF's concessional facility for low-income countries. PRGF-supported
programs are based o n country-owned poverty reduction strategies adopted in a
participatory process involving c i v i l society and development partners, and articulated in
a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). This i s intended to ensure that each PRGFsupported program i s consistent with a comprehensive framework for macroeconomic,
structural, and social policies to foster growth and reduce poverty. PRGF loans carry an
annual interest rate o f 0.5 percent, and are repayable over 10 years with a 5 '/-year grace
period o n principal payments.
Following the Executive Board's discussion o n Ghana's request, Shigemitsu Sugisaki,
Deputy Managing Director and A c t i n g Chair, stated:
"The authorities are to b e commended for their successful conduct o f macroeconomic
policy in 2003. The economy i s o n a steady growth path, fiscal discipline has been
restored, and official reserves have exceeded targets. The fiscal framework for 2004 and
the medium term will support the objective o f reducing the domestic debt-GDP ratio by
at least h a l f over the three-year program period. Steadfast implementation o f the
authorities' monetary targets should bring about single-digit inflation in early 2004. As a
result, prospects for achieving the medium-term macroeconomic and economic reform
objectives set out in their poverty reduction strategy are good.
"The authorities are committed to steadfast implementation o f well-prepared structural
reforms, which will b e further developed early next year. An immediate priority will be
to continue to adjust prices to achieve full cost recovery for petroleum, electricity, and

water. Although the planned divestiture o f the Ghana Commercial Bank (GCB) was
suspended, the authorities are taking welcome steps to strengthen i t s financial
management and operational efficiency.
"Successful implementation o f Ghana's poverty reduction strategy over the coming year
will depend o n avoiding further losses in the energy and utility companies, and
liberalizing petroleum prices as intended in mid-2004. I t will also be vital that the
authorities remain resolute in their commitment to counter pressures to raise government
spending in 2004, an election year. Achievement o f these objectives will help to
consolidate the progress already made under the 2003-2006 PRGF-supported program.
This, together w i t h action on the remaining policy triggers under the enhanced Initiative
for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries and continued strong program implementation, will
help pave the w a y for Ghana to reach the HIPC completion point around mid-2004," Mr.
Sugisaki stated.

Contact:

Mr. Hugh Bredenkamp
D i v i s i o n Chief
West Africa, Division 3
(202) 623-8881

nets and tt

UNESCO
UNICEF

Note F represents Financingv.+ile N indicates Non Financingactiuties.

I

I o

a

$

n
0

I

.-m
L

c

u
(3

0
I

(3

E

0
P
0
m
S

P

Lu

5
m
0

I

Annex 6

GHASA'S PROGRESS TO\\'ARDS THE JIILLENSIt'Jl DEVELOPJIEIVT GOALS
GOALS

WIILL GOAL BE R E A C H E D ?

Extreme poverty and hunger
Halve the proportion o f people below
the national poverty line by 20 15

STATE OF S U P P O R T I V E
ENVIRONMENT

Probably

Strong

Halve the proportion o f people who
suffer f r o m hunger
Universal primary education
Achieve universal access to primary
education by 2015
Gender equality
Eliminate gender disparity in primary
and junior secondary education by
2005
Achieve equal access for boys and
girls to senior secondary by 2005
Under-five mortality
Reduce under-five mortality by twothirds by 2015
Maternal mortality
Reduce maternal mortality ratio by
three-quarters by 2015
HIV/AIDS & Malaria
H a l t and reverse the spread o f
H I V / A I D S by 20 15
Halt and reverse the incidence o f
malaria
Ensure environmental
sustainability
Integrate the principles o f sustainable
development into country policies
and programmes and reverse loss o f
environmental resources
Halve the proportion o f people
without access to safe drinking water
by 2015
Global partnership for
development
Deal comprehensively w i t h debt and
make debt sustainable in the long
term

Fair

Unlikely

Potentially

Fair

Potentially

Fair

Potentially

Fair

Probably

Strong

Unlikely

Fair

Fair

Potentially

Fair
Lack o f
data

Fair

Potentially

Weak but
improving

Weak but
improving

Potentially

Potentially

Weak but

improving

Fair

Strong

Annex 7

CAS ANNEXES

a

h
C
C

n
a

(c

C

C

n
a

Ir:
C
C

cv
V

3
C

-n
U

c?
C

8
U

n
C
C

-n
a

c?
C

2
a

n
C

2
-

-

a

C

-8
a
C

C

2

F

s>

$
2
i

Ghana at a glance
Ghana

SubSaharan
Africa

Lowincome

20.1
270
5.5

688
450
306

2,495
430
1,072

2.1
2.4

2.4
2.5

1.9
2.3

37
55
57
25
73
26
80
84
76

33
46
105

30
59
81

58
37
86
92
80

76
37
95
103
87

1982

1992

2001

2002

4.0
3.4
3.3
3.7
3.5

6.4
12.8
17.2
1.3
3.6

5.3
26.6
45.2
8.8
21.3

6.2
19.7
42.5
5.9
20.2

-2.7
0.7
36.8
15.5

-5.9
1.3
69.6
28.2

-5.3
1.3
126.8
8.5
74.3
162.0

0.5
1.2
119.3
7.8
50.1
116.4

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2002
Population. mid-year (milllons)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

2119104

Developmentdiamond'

Average annual growth, 1996-02
Population (%J
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 199642)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
infant mortality (per 1,OOOlive births)
Child malnutrition (% ofchildren under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% ofpopulation)
illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

-&
1
Life expectancy

capita
per
GNI

Gross
enroilment
primary

Access to improved water source
Ghana
Low-Income group

I

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmenWGDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Gross domestic savingsiGDP
Gross national savingsiGDP
Current account balancelGDP
Interest paymentsiGDP
Total debtiGDP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debtiGDP
Present value of debtiexports
1982-92

1992-02

2001

2002

200245

4.7
1.1
6.8

4.2
2.0
8.8

4.2
2.1
-3.6

4.5
2.6
10.2

4.9
3.5
7.1

1982

1992

2001

2002

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

57.3
6.2
3.6
36.4

44.8
17.4
9.3
37.8

35.9
25.2
9.0
38.9

36.0
24.3
9.0
39.7

Private consumption
General government consumption
imports of goods and services

89.8
6.5
3.0

86.6
12.1
28.8

83.3
7.9
64.7

82.7
11.4
54.5

1982-92

199242

2001

2002

2.1
7.1
7.3
7.3

3.8
3.8
1.2
4.8

3.7
4.8
6.1
4.5

4.1
6.3
0.0
4.4

4.7
4.5
7.1
7.4

4.5
3.8
2.0
8.3

4.9
2.3
23.9
7.7

9.1
-4.4
-17.6
-4.4

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

I% of GDPJ

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

Economic ratios'
Trade

i

Indebtedness
Ghana
Low-income group

1 Growth of investment and GDP (Oh)
30
20
10
0
10
-20

* GDI

+GDP

Growth of exports and imports (Oh)

l.40

1
*

Exports

-imports

Note: 2002 data are preliminary estimates
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will

be incomplete.

I

I

I
I

Ghana
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1982

1992

2001

2002

22.3
27.9

10.0
11.2

32.9
34.6

14.8
22.8

6.0
-3.2

18.5
4.2
-6.1

18.0
3.8
-10.7

21.6
2.4
-0.7

1982

1992

2001

2002

986
302
114

2.380
381
169

2,681
463
182

1,589
38
162
277

3,781

4,099

257

275

85
103
83

78
99
79

81
96
a5

1982

1992

2001

2002

71 1
813
-103

1,105
1,845
-740

2,399
3,437
-1,038

2,613
3,355
-742

-89
-1

-106
255

-loa
866

-129
901

Current account balance

-107

-377

-283

30

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

106
1

253
124

283
-79

-30
-291

21.4

437.1

344
7.170.8

636
7,942.6

1982

1992

2001

2002

1,484
131
125

4,460
87
1,631

6,734
6
3,172

7,338
5
3,471

111
16
1

318
21
14

314
4
59

21 1
2
30

0

215

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit
TRADE

(US$ millions)

Total exports (fob)
Cocoa
Timber
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995-700)
Terms of trade (1995=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions)

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

Memo:
Reserves including gold IUS$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Oificial grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfoiio equity

58
14
16
0

309
45
23
0

429
269
154
89
0

160
-23
0
0

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

0
24
8
16
9
7

375
170
15
156
20
136

433
193
37
156
25
130

0
99
12
88
20
67

'lnflatlon)

GDP deflator

-0ICPI

1

Export and Import levels (US$ mill.)
4500
4 000
3 500

-

3 000

2 500
2 000
1500
1 000
500
0

96

97

99

98

0 Exports

00

01

H Imports

I Current account balance to GDP ( O h )

1

'T

0
2
4
6
8

-10
.12

1

Composltion of 2002 debt (US$ mill.)
G 5934 5

~

1

B 3471

316

C 363

A - IERD

B - IDA

.

C IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private

G - Short-term

-

CAS Annex B2 Ghana
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 12/09/2003

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a r c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount ai
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision Resources (total US$'OOO)
Average Supervision (US$'OOO/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2001

2002

2003

2004

23
3.8
8.7
5.0
8.7
5.0
26.1

22
4.1
0.0
0.0
4.5
0.4
24.2

18
4.3
16.7
10.3
16.7
10.3
18.1

17
4.4
17.6
33.8
17.6
33.8
9.2

no
1423

Yes
1642
66

no
1465
61

no
1771
68

57

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
83
17
3,150.3
558.9
32.5
35.3
27.8
30.4

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex 8 3

- IBRDllDA Program Summary

P r o p o s e d I B R D l l D A B a s e - C a s e L e n d i n g Program

Ghana

a

Fiscal y e a r

Proj ID

US$(M)

2004

Education Sector DevelODment
PRSC II
C o m m u n i t y B a s e d Rural Development
Urban. Environmental Sa nitation I I
Result
Urban W a t e r Restructuring
Micro, S m a l l and Medium Enterprise Support
C o m m u n i t y W a t e r and Sanitation I I
W e s t African G a s Pipeline (Regional)
W e s t Africa P o w e r Pool (Regional)
PRSC Ill
Result
Public Sector Reform and Capacity Bldg.
Energy
M a p II
P R S C IV
Result
Infrastructure
Agriculture
PRSC V
Decentralization for Community Empowerment
Result

80.0

2005

2006

2007

Overall Result

125.0
50.0
60.0
315.0
100.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
15.0
125.0
315.0
20.0
40.0
20.0
125.0
520.0
40.0
20.0
125.0
35.0
220.0
1,055.0

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

lmplementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

M
H
M
M

M
M
M

M

M
M
M
M
M
H

M

H
H
M
H

H

H
M
H
H

M
M
M
M
H

H
M
H
H
M

H
H

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Ghana

-

Ghana IFC and M I G A Program, FY 2001-2004
IFC approvals (USSm)

Sector (%I
Finance & Insurance
Nonmetallic Mineral
Pulp & Paper

Total

2001 2002 2003 2004

7.7

0.0

0.0

0.0

0
78
22
100

0

0

0

0

0

0

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-E quiiy
Other

Total

MIGA guarantees (USSm)

87
13

100

0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00

CAS Annex B4 -Summary o f Nonlending Services - Ghana
As of February 9,2004
Producr

Compierion
FY

Cosr (USSOOOj Audience'

Recent completions
ISNPRSP
Gender Assessment
Ghana Poverty Note
Client Survey
Country Procurement Assessment Rev
Adnlinistrative Barriers (FIAS study)
Microfmance Background Study

FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03

80
16
20
100
147
FIAS funded
FSE funded

Underway
FY04
CEM on Growth, Poverty, Budgeting
FY04
Country Assistance Strategy
FY04
Energy Policy Note
FY04
Public Expenditure Review (PER)
FY04
Trade Study
FY04
Energy PSlA
FY04
National Health Insurance Implementation
Post Financial Sector Assessnient Prog. Follow-up
FY04
FY04
Promoting Foreign Investment (IFCIMIGA)
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
FY04
FY04
Conuilunication and Outreach, i n c l . Media
FY04
PRSP Progress Report
FY04
A&A ROSC
FY04
Ghana Corporate Governance Assessment
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
FY04
Capacity Building for Sustained SubnationalRegional
FY04
Development Compet.
HIPC AAP
FY04
Development Dialogue Series
FY04
FY04
HlPC Conipletion Point
FY05
Monitoring and Evaluation Readiness Assess.

Planned
WB-Parliamentary quanerly dialogue sessions
Inveshiient Climate Assessment
Country Environmental Assessment (CEA)
Country Portfolio Perfoniiance Review (CPPR)
Telecommunications
CAS Progress Report
PER
Benchmarking Study (MIGA)
ConnnunicationsReview
Public-Private Partnerships
Urban Strategy Note
Natural Resources Management
Conununity Empowerment
Disability in Ghana
PER
CFAA
Employnent and Youth Study
Poverty Assessment
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM)
PER
CPPR

FYO5-07
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07

a. Govemiient, donor, Bank, public dissenunation.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.
c. Econonuc Monitoring takes place each year.

195
150
120
100
125
75
100
105
100
100
82
25
50
60
25
20

25
30
40

Objectiveb

Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Bank
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Pri. Sec
Govemnient, Bank, Donors

Policy orientation
Policy orientation
Policy orientation
Problem-solving
Problem-solving
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation, Problem-solving

Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Govemment, Bank, Donors
Govemiient, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank
Government, Bank

Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy Orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Knowledge Generation,Public Debate
Knowledge Generation,Public Debate
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation
Policy orientation
Policy orientation, Problem-solving

Government, Bank
Governnient, Bank, Donors, Public
Government, Bank
Government, Bank, Donors

Policy orientation
Public debate
Problem-solving
Policy orientation, Problem-solving

Govemnient, Bank, Public
Govemment, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Public
Government, Bank, Donors
Govemnient, Bank
Government, Bank, Donors

Public debate
Policy orientation, Problem-solving

Government, Bank, Donors
Govemment, Bank, Donors
Govemment, Bank, Public
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Public
Government, Bank, Donors
Govemment, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Govemnient, Bank
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Government, Bank, Donors
Govemment, Bank, Donors

Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Public debate, Public policy
Policy orientation, Public Debate
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation, Problem-solving
Policy orientation
Policy orientation, Problem-solving

Ghana - Key Economic Indicators

Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

100
37

100
36

100
36

100
36

100

100

36

35

100
35

I00
34

100
32

Industry

25

25

25

24

25

22

22

22

22

Services

38

39

39

40

39

43

43

44

46

94
20.5
9.8
11

92
24.0
9.2
14.8

91
26.6
12.8
13.8

94
19.7
6. I
13.6

94
22.5
9.1
13.4

90
23.1
9.5
13.6

91
23.9
9.7
14.2

90
24.3
9.5
14.8

89
24.5
9.5
15.0

32
50

49
68

45
65

42
55

38
52

35
48

34
47

32
45

31
43

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment
(GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)

EXPOITS

Gross domestic savings

6

8

9

6

6

10

9

IO

11

Gross national savingsc

12

15.6

21.3

20.2

22.0

22.0

22.3

23.0

23.2

7710

4978

5309

6152

7545

8595

9390

10167

I1035

390

330

300

270

320

370

430

460

500

3.7
2.8

4.2
4.9

4.5
5.9

4.7
1.8

5.0
8.8

5.0
5.2

5.0
4.9

5.0
5.1

2.1
2.2
2.8

2.6
4.0
7.1

3.0
2.7
2.0

3.6
0.9
11.2

3.8
4.1
4.6

3.2
3.4
3.3

3.2
3.4
3.4

Memorandum ifems

Gross domestic product
(US$million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$,Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1975 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
4.4
Gross Domestic Income
2.3

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1975 prices)
2.1
1.3
Gross domestic product at market prices
2.4
-0.4
Total consumption
-3.8
Private consumption
4.6
Balance o f Payments (US$ millions)

Merchandise FOB

2488
2005

2440
1936

2399
1867

2613
2057

2856
2262

2969
2368

3161
2548

3260
2633

3390
2739

Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Ket current transfers
Current account balance

3841
3252
-1353
620
-896

3362
2759
-922
650
-419

3437
2831
-1038
866
-283

3355
2714
-742
90 1
30

3910
3190
-1054
1177
-35

4100
3360
-1131
1226
-90

4391
3639
-1230
1285
-150

4593
3834
-1333
1400
-137

4775
4010
-1385
1451
-140

E X ~ O ~
(GNFS)~
~ S

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. eirors & ommissions)

63

65

88

50

75

101

57

61

66

180

180

269

160

328

140

170

161

184

Change in reservesd

204

96

-29 1

-157

-378

-157

-160

-178

-201

-17.6

-18.5

-19.6

-12.1

-14.0

-13.2

-13.1

-13.1

-12.6

3.5
4.7

9.2
5.1

7.8
-6.7

8.5
10.7

-1.3
33.1

12.8

-0.7

3.1

5.2

-7.6

Memorandum items

Resource balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( Y R 7 5 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

-

Ghana Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

1999

Actual
2000
2001

2002

Estimate
2003

2004

Projected
2005
2006

2007

Public finance (as % o f GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing

17.8
16.4
1.4
9.8

19.5
18.5
0.9
9.2

23.7
19.9
3.8
12.8

22.0
20.0
2.0
6.1

22.4
20.6
1.8
8.7

20.9
18.4
2.5
8.9

19.8
16.2
3.6
9.1

18.3
15.3
3.0
9.0

17.8
14.9
2.9
9.1

Monetary indicators
M2lGDP
Growth o f M 2 (%)
Private sector credit growth l
total credit growth (%)

19.3
19.8
32.9

19.5
33.4
29.7

20.7
48.4
14.2

24.2
49.6
18.2

22.6
25.1
17.9

18.9
19.1

12.5
13.3

11.5
12.1

11.0
7.3

104.3
142.3
73.3

90.3
120.9
74.7

105.1
149.2
70.4

109.1
153.8
70.9

124.3
181.6
68.5

12.4
14.0

25.2
27.2

32.9
34.6

14.8
22.8

26.9
27.6

8.6
13.3

6.0
7.1

5.0
6.2

5.0
6.4

Price indices( YR75 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index
Real exchange rate (USSILCU)'
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (?hchange)

a. GDP at market prices
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use o f I M F resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in USULCU denotes appreciation.

-

-

CAS Annex 87 Key Exposure Indicators Ghana

ludicator

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$ni)a

1999

Act~al
2000
2001

2002

6,979

6,625

6,734

7,338

420

397

226

192

277.1
90.5
16.7
68.5

268.0
133.1
16.1
71.2

276.6
126.8
9.3
68.8

276.9
119.3
1.3
70.5

2.1
38.2

2.3
35.4

1.6
60.7

0.9
52.2

0.4
18

0.4
9

0.2
6

0.1
5

Estimate
2003
2004

1005

Proiected
2006

Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS)
(USSni)a
Debt and debt service indicators

Ph)

TDOIXGSb
TDOiGDP
TDSIXGS
ConcessionaliTDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DSipublic DS
Preferred creditor DSipublic
DS (%)c
IBRD DSiXGS
IBRD TDO (USGm)d
Of which present value o f
guarantees (USSm)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d

3,099

0

0

3,130

0
0
3,172 3,471

IFC (USSni)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity IC
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of I M F credits and net shorttemi capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intematioual Settlements.
d. Includes present value o f guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f both loan and equity instruments.

2007

CAS Annex BS (IFC) for Ghana
Ghana
Statement o f IFC's
H e l d and Disbursed Portfolio
As o f 11/30/2003
(In U S Dollars Millions)

' FY Approval
1993
1995
2000
2001
1998
1997
1999
1994
1996
1989191193
200 1
2000
1991
2001

Company
Loan Equity Quasi Partic
AEF Afariwaa
0.16
0
0
0
AEF Antelope Co.
0.30
0
0
0
AEF Computer Sch
0.12
0
0
0
AEF GPPI
1.49
0
0
0
AEF NCS
0
0 0.53
0
0
0 0.31
AEF PTS
0
AEF PharmaCare
0.15
0
0
0
AEF Shangri-la
0.93
0
0
0
AEF Tacks Farms
0.43
0
0
0
Cont Acceptances
0
0.88
0
0
Diamond Cement
5.00
1.00
0
0
ELAC
0
0.10
0
0
GAGL
1.22
2.55 1.56
0
GHANAL
0
0.44
0
0
MFI SSLC
0
0.49
0
0
Total Portfolio:

9.80

5.46

8.41

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.16
0
0
0
0.30
0
0
0
0.12
0
0
0
1.49
0
0
0
0
0 0.53
0
0
0 0.31
0
0.15
0
0
0
0.93
0
0
0
0.43
0
0
0
0
0.88
0
0

0

0
1.22
0
0

0
0.10
2.55
0.44
0.49

0
0
1.56
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0 4.80

4.46

8.41

0

r m
0 0

w

(0

l o t

m o

..
(0

r-w
wv)

h

M

d

E
h

vi

a

e

R

0

I

5

r
h

c

.

t;

I

L

E

L

I

a,

5

-0

5

D

U

V

E

x

I
,

CAS Annex BIO -Ghana
As of 1/11/2004
Country
performancea

Major issue

County
Bank
priorityc priority"

Network area

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction
Economic policy
Public sector
Gender

G
G
G
F

Rural poverty
Fiscal policy
Governanceand accounbbility

H
H
H
H

H
H
H
H

Human Development Department
Education
Health, nutrition 8 population
Social protection

G
G
G

Female secondary Education
Pccess to water
Bettertargetingof poor

H
H
H

H
H
H

G
F

G

Diversification
Forest resources
Decentraiization

H
H

M

H
H
M

P
F
F
F

Public debt
Increased credit
Unsustainablefarmingimining practices
Increase private sector participation

M
M

M
M

H

H

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development
Environment
Social development
Finance, Private Sector & infrastructure
Financial sector
Private Sector
Energy R mining
Infrastructure

I

a. Use "excellent,""good,""fair," or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g.,for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education,"female secondary completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution")
c. To indicate priority use "low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

MAP
OF

GHANA

