Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 28419-MOG

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL, DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE
WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR
MONGOLIA

Public Disclosure Authorized

April 5,2004

Southeast Asia and Mongolia Country Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region

has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(as o f M a r c h 3 1,2004)
Currency unit = Tugrik (Tg)
U S $ l = T g 1177
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 3 1
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA
ADB
CAE
CAS
CG
CPIA
CPPR
ECTAC
EGSPRS

EU
FA0
FIAS
GDP
GEF
GFMIS
GTZ
HIES
ICT
IDA
IDF
IFC
IMF
JBIC
JICA
JSA
LSMS
M&E
MDG
MPRP
MTEF

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Asian Development Bank
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Consultative Group
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Economic Capacity Technical Assistance Credit
Economic Growth Support and Poverty Reduction
Strategy
European U n i o n
Food and Agriculture Organization
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Government Financial Management and
Information System
Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit
Household Income and Expenditure Survey
Information and Communication Technology
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Japan Bank for International Cooperation
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Joint Staff Assessment
L i v i n g Standards Measurement Study
Monitoring and Evaluation
Millennium Development Goals
Mongolia People’s Revolutionary Party
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team:

NGO
NPV
ODA
PETS
PHRD

PIU
PRGF
PRSC
PRSP
PSD
PSDC
PSMFL
QPPR
SDR
SLP
SME
SWAP
TA
TF

UN

UNDP

USAID

WBI
WTO

Nongovernmental Organization
N e t Present Value
Official Development Assistance
Public Expenditure Tracking
Survey
Policy and H u m a n Resources
Development
Project Implementation Unit
Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Private Sector Development
Private Sector Development Credit
Public Sector Management and
Finance L a w
Quarterly Portfolio Performance
Review
Special Drawing Rights
Sustainable Livelihoods Program
Small and M e d i u m Enterprise
Sector-Wide Approach
Technical Assistance
Trust Fund
United Nations
United Nations Development
Programme
United States Agency for
Intemational Development
W o r l d B a n k Institute
W o r l d Trade Organization

World Bank
Jemal-ud-din Kassum
Ian C. Porter
Saha Dhevan Meyanathan
Zafar Ahmed
Christopher Finch
Lynne Sherburne-Benz

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MONGOLIA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Table of Contents

.........................................................................................
I. Country Context ..........................................................................................
Executive Summary

A . Political Transition ................................................................................
B. Economic Transition ..............................................................................
C. Poverty: Profile and Trends .......................................................................

.

.....................................................

.

.........................................

i
1
1
1
4

I1 Country Development Program and Prospects
7
A . Country Priorities ................................................................................. 7
B. Key Development Challenges ...................................................................
8
C . Medium-termEconomic Outlook ............................................................... 10
D. Debt and Creditworthiness .......................................................................
11
I11 The World Bank in Mongolia: Building on Experience
A . Key Findings from Retrospectives and Consultations .......................................
B. Lessons Learned ..................................................................................

11
11
13

IV

14
14
17
20

. Bank Group Assistance Strategy ..................................................................

A . Bank Group Activities ..........................................................................
CAS Objective I : Consolidating the Transition .......................................
CAS Objective 2: Reducing Vulnerabilities ............................................
CAS Objective 3: Strengthening the Alignment of Policies and Resources

Around Results ......................................................
B. Assistance Program ..............................................................................
C . Portfolio Management ...........................................................................
D. Monitoring Implementation .....................................................................
E. Scenarios and Triggers ...........................................................................

........................................................................................................
VI. Concluding Remarks ...................................................................................
V

.

Risks

23
26
29
29
30
31

33

This document has a restricted distribution and m a y b e used by recipients only in

.

the performance of their official duties I t s contents m a y n o t be otherwise disclosed
without W o r l d Bank authorization.

Text Tables
Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4:
Table 5:
Table 6:
Table 7:
Table 8:

Mongolia and Millennium Development Goals ........................................
Mongolia: Urban-Rural Differences, .....................................................
EGSPRS Pillars and CAS Objectives ...................................................
Consolidating the Transition ..............................................................
Reducing Rural and Urban Vulnerability ...............................................
Strengthening Alignment o f Policies and Resources with Development Results
Proposed Assistance Program: Base Case ..............................................
C A S Triggers ...............................................................................

Text Figures
Figure 1:
Figure 2:
Figure 3:
Figure 4:
Figure 5:
Figure 6:
Figure 7:

Mongolia’s CPIA Compared to IDA Average ..........................................
GDP Growth Rate ..........................................................................
Sectoral Composition o f GDP ............................................................
Change in Consumer Prices ...............................................................
Current Account Balance to GDP .........................................................
Total Revenue and Expenditure to GDP .................................................
Foreign Direct Investment to GDP ........................................................

2
4
4
4
4
4
4

Text Boxes
B o x 1:
B o x 2:
B o x 3:
B o x 4:
B o x 5:

Comparative GDP Performance in Transition Economies .............................
Regional Development Strategy ..........................................................
Effective TA: Debt Management in Mongolia ..........................................
Major Donor Activities ....................................................................
The IFC in Mongolia ......................................................................

2
9
13
25
26

Attachments
Attachment 1:
Attachment 2:
Attachment 3 :
Attachment 4:
Attachment 5:
Attachment 6:
Attachment 7:

C A S Matrix
Mongolia: Phases o f Transition
Mongolia: Debt Analysis
Mongolia: Country Assistance Evaluation: Summary
Client Survey: Summary o f Findings
Mongolia: Toward Environmental Sustainability
EGSPRS - C A S Priorities and Donor Activities

Standard CAS Annexes
K e y Economic and Program Indicators
Annex A1:
Mongolia at a Glance
Annex A2:
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B 2 :
Annex B3:
IBRDIIDA Program Summary
Proposed IDA Base Case Lending Program
IFC and MIGA Program
Annex B 4 :
Summary o f Nonlending Services
Annex B5:
Mongolia Social Indicators
Annex B6:
K e y Economic Indicators
Annex B 7 :
Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8:
Status o f Bank Group Operations in Mongolia
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
Statement o f IFC’s Portfolio
Annex B 10:
CAS Summary o f Development Priorities
M a p (IBRD 3 153 1)

,.

5
6
16
17
21
24
28
31

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Achievements, Challenges, and World Bank Role

i.

Mongolia has made significant strides in achieving macroeconomic stability and
fundamental structural reforms since i t s transition to democracy and a market-based system in
1990. The next development challenge i s to improve the lives and welfare o f i t s people and
reduce poverty by accelerating sustained and equitable economic growth. This vision i s
articulated in i t s Economic Growth Support and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EGSPRS), a
comprehensive medium-term framework o f strategies, policies, and programs to raise average
annual growth to the country’s potential o f 5-6 percent-and to reduce poverty from i t s current
incidence o f 36 percent.

ii.
Mongolia faces considerable challenges in achieving the objectives o f the EGSPRS.
Capacities for public sector management and service delivery are not aligned with the overall
strategy. And the vulnerabilities to climatic and terms-of-trade shocks continue. I t i s in this
context o f opportunities and risks that this four-year (FY05-FY08) Bank Group Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS) i s presented.

iii.
The Govemment’s EGSPRS represents a commendable effort. Country-owned and
participatory, i t aims to reduce urban and rural vulnerabilities, engender sustainable human
development, emphasize good govemance and gender equality-by
accelerating private-sectorled, broad-based equitable growth, and improving the efficiency o f public expenditures. Couched
in the localized Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the strategy i s aimed at:
0
Ensuring macroeconomic stability and public sector effectiveness.
0
Supporting production and exports and improving the environment for private-sector-led
development.
0
Enhancing regional and rural development and environmentally sustainable development.
0
Fostering sustainable human development.
0
Promoting good governance, and implementing and monitoring the strategy.
Previous reforms have established the policy, legal, and institutional framework for the market
economy. The focus n o w i s o n building capacities for implementation and enforcement.
iv.
The Bank’s C A S would support the Government in i t s efforts to overcome the challenges
o f implementing the EGSPRS by enhancing measurable results o n the ground. Based on
extensive consultations and retrospective reviews, the CAS i s broadly aligned with the EGSPRS
and would directly support a selected subset o f the EGSPRS priorities that reflect key
development areas where the W o r l d Bank has a comparative advantage. The new CAS, departing
from previous approaches in i t s strategic objectives and directions, builds o n the evolution o f
Bank assistance in recent years. Bank lending to Mongolia represents about 11 percent o f the
country’s overall Official Development Assistance (ODA) flows, implying the need to be
selective and to complement and help enhance other donor efforts. The C A S initiates a resultsbased approach that relates outcomes t o the country’s longer term EGSPRS goals, including
results that integrate these goals with the MDGs.
v.
Managing risks in implementing this C A S will be essential for effective Bank support.
Faltering commitment to the EGSPRS i s a minor risk given the broad consultations, participation,
and ownership. But, implementation involves other internal challenges: the need for tight
management o f public expenditures and for increasing the limited institutional capacity o f the

Government. It also involves mitigating climatic and terms-of-trade shocks. Working with other
donors, the Bank’s proposed program reflects innovations in supporting the Government to
overcome these challenges.

CAS Objectives and Results
The C A S proposes that World Bank assistance to Mongolia focus on three objectives
vi,
with the following expected outcomes:
Consolidating the economic transition through institutional reforms that improve public
sector and market eficiency. Expected outcomes: (i)improved public sector effectiveness
through strengthened public expenditure management and a reformed civil service, (ii)
further consolidation o f market reforms to establish a sound institutional and regulatory
environment for the private sector, (iii)improved efficiency and distributive impact o f
infrastructure investments, and (iv) strengthened institutional capacity to deliver social
services.
Addressing growing equity concerns and reducing rural and urban vulnerabilities. Expected
outcomes: (i)reduced loss o f livestock from weather-related shocks, (ii)improved
environmental governance and management, (iii)
improved municipal service delivery for
vulnerable populations in peri-urban areas, and (iv) helped the Government to analyze the
viability o f options to support i t s regional development objectives.
Aligningpolicies and resources around results. Expected outcomes: (i)
strengthened national
institutional framework for implementing and monitoring the EGSPRS, (ii)improved
articulation and implementation o f sector strategies linked to the EGSPRS, and (iii)
strengthened the Government’s ability to coordinate aid and harmonize donor procedures.

Bank Assistance

vii.
To achieve these results, the Bank proposes a judicious mix o f adjustment, investment,
and non-lending services. A key program feature i s the proposed use o f annual, single-tranche
Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) to support the implementation o f priority EGSPRS
objectives, starting with areas where high levels o f consensus and agreement have already been
reached. Investment operations will be undertaken selectively and based on clear, shared, and
agreed-upon sector and thematic strategies that emphasize sector-wide approaches (SWAPS) to be
supported by all external partners. The Bank’s non-lending program will focus o n developing
economic and sector work in the areas o f growth, poverty monitoring and analysis, and
knowledge-building to support the planned PRSCs and selected areas o f investment lending and
will inform the policy dialogue. The C A S also emphasizes the importance o f the current
International Development Association (IDA) portfolio to deliver o n these goals. The
International Finance Corporation’s (IFC’s) program will complement the Bank’s support by
continuing to focus o n the financial sector through a mix o f investment and technical assistance
activities.
viii.
A four-year, base case IDA lending envelope o f about SDR 60 m i l l i o n i s envisaged. I t i s
characterized by satisfactory performance on macroeconomic management, implementation o f
the key elements o f the EGSPRS (such as public expenditure management and civil service
reforms), improvements in governance and transparency (including procurement processes), and
a well-performing IDA portfolio. In a possible high case s c e n a r i w t o be triggered by strong and
early implementation o f EGSPRS policies o n the public investment program, pension reforms,

and the financial sector-additional
resources o f about 30 percent will be channeled through
increased PRSC amounts. In the l o w case, lending levels would be reduced and adjustment
lending deferred until conducive conditions return.

Agenda for Board Consideration
Given this assessment and proposal, Board members may wish to discuss, among others,
ix.
the following aspects o f this CAS:
0

0

The CAS focus on Mongolia’s particular development challenges: (1) consolidating the
transition to a market economy, (2) reducing vulnerabilities, and (3) aligning donor
efforts around EGSPRS development results.
The proposed C A S approach (in the light o f constrained IDA allocations) to combine
PRSCs and selected investment lending.

MONGOLIA

--

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

1.
Mongolia’s last Country Assistance Strategy (Report N o . 17604-MOG), discussed by the
Bank’s Board o f Directors in April 1998, covered FY99-FYO1. The follow-on C A S was held back until
Mongolia’s EGSPRS (Report N o . 26563-MOG)-the
country’s Poverty Reduction Strategy paper
(PRSP)-was
completed to enable the Bank to align i t s program with the country’s strategy. In
September 2003 the EGSPRS was discussed by the Board o f Directors. This C A S reflects the guidance
provided by the Board o n that occasion.
I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

2.
Endowed with an area of 1.6 million square kilometers and a population of 2.4 million,
Mongolia is the least densely populated country in the world. Landlocked between Russia and China,
the country has a per capita income o f only US$440, making it one o f the poorest in the region.
Inflicted with a cold, harsh climate and short growing season, Mongolia also experiences frequent
droughts and occasional severe winters, known as “dzuds.” About h a l f o f Mongolians live in rural
areas; two-thirds o f them engaged in livestock herding. In 2003 the agriculture sector accounted for
about 20 percent o f gross domestic product (GDP), compared with 30 percent in 1993, and more than
45 percent o f employment. It mainly comprises livestock, which provides rural residents food, clothing,
and shelter, as well as r a w materials for the commercial production o f cashmere, other wools, meat, and
leather products. Copper and gold mining, a small manufacturing sector, and the services and trading
sector complete the undiversified economic base.

A. Political Transition
3.
Mongolia made a successful transition to a democratic political system starting in 1990.
Democratic elections since then have led to wide shifts in political power. In 1996 a Democratic
Coalition, including two relatively new opposition parties, won a majority o f seats in Parliament from
the long-ruling Mongolian People’s Revolutionary Party (MPRP). However, the Coalition was
challenged continuously by remaining MPRP members in Parliament and by internal strife among
members. This resulted in three successive governments serving from 1998 to 2000, followed by the
MPRP’s return to power (it w o n a landslide victory over the Democratic Coalition in the 2000
elections, capturing 72 o f the 76 parliamentary seats). The next elections are scheduled for June 2004.
Whichever party wins, it i s expected that the leadership will be pro-reform, continuing o n the path
toward a market economy and budget discipline, and favoring private-sector-led growth.
The political process has been accompanied by the emergence of a dynamic civil society.
4.
Mongolian society i s largely open, with an expanding c i v i l society, including a growing number o f
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and a largely free media-although
transparency and
accountability mechanisms linking the Government with citizens are s t i l l developing and generally
remain weak. Women are active in most arenas o f the economy and society, although significant
gender-based disparities persist in poverty, vulnerability, economic opportunities, and working hours.

B. Economic Transition
5.
Since the early 1990s, Mongolia has made steady progress in its transition to a market
economy. The country moved quickly to dismantle the command economy and began to establish a
framework o f laws, policies, and institutions to support a market-based system. The progress has placed
Mongolia at the forefront o f rapid reformers among transition economies (box 1). These achievements
are also reflected in the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA), which shows that
Mongolia compares favorably with other IDA countries (figure 1). Mongolia scores as well or better
than the IDA average in most areas rated for the CPIA, with neither glaring weaknesses nor star

-2performances. The fiscal rating i s below average due to the high tax burden imposed o n the private
sector, and there are outstanding issues o f environmental management.

I

Box 1: Comparative GDP Performance in Transition Economies, 1990-2001
Despite temporary setbacks, Mongolia's economic
transition and adjustment process compares favorably to
most transition countries. Mongolia experienced a smaller
initial contraction in GDP immediately following
transition, and better subsequent growth performance
overall than did the Baltics, Commonwealth o f
Independent States (except Uzbekistan), and the poorer
performers o f Central and Eastern Europe. Cheng (2003)
attributes Mongolia's relatively smooth transition to the
combined effects o f the early adoption o f appropriate
adjustment policies and market-based reforms and some
favorable initial conditions, such as a relatively simple
economic structure, which reduced the complexity o f
initial market reforms, and a peaceful and relatively stable
social and political environment.

Comparative CDP Performancein Tramition
Economies, 1990.2001
(I
9 9 0 4 00)

Source: Kevin C. Cheng: Growth and Recoveql in Mongolia During Transition, IMF Working Paper No. 03/21 7, November I. 2003

Figure 1 : Mongolia's CPlA Compared to IDA Average, 2003

Macroeconomic balances
Revenue Mobiliza

evelopment Program

Budget Management
Property fights and Govemance

Financial Stability
Banking Efficiency
Pnvate Sector Environment

Social Protection and Lab
Gender

-Mongolia's CPlA 2003

IDA Averages 2003

1

6.
Despite a harsh initial shock, the country moved ahead with economic reforms. During 199093, the collapse o f the Soviet U n i o n and breakdown o f monetary and trade relations among the
Comecon states resulted in a sharp contraction o f Mongolia's real GDP (falling by about 23 percent
between 1989 and 1993) and high inflation (peaking at 321 percent in late 1992). The country moved
quickly to liberalize the exchange rate, trade, and prices, and open up the financial sector (details in
Attachment 2). Stabilization and recovery followed between 1994 and 1996, although the scope and
pace o f reforms slowed. Buoyed by increasing livestock production and favorable international prices
for copper and gold, GDP growth averaged 3.6 percent.

-37.
Poor external conditions and political gridlock affected economic performance between I997
and 2000. The 1997-98 East Asian and Russian crises exposed Mongolia’s underlying structural
inefficiencies. With sharp falls in the export prices o f the main commodities, large revenue shortfalls
resulted. By 1998 the country’s deficit reached an all-time high o f 14.3 percent o f GDP. T o maintain
public confidence and protect the most vulnerable income groups, the Government increased public
employment and cash transfers to the population. Three successive governments between 1998 and
2000 also slowed the pace o f reform implementation. The Government’s deficit reduction to 7 percent
o f GDP in 2000 stemmed mainly from i t s stepped up efforts to mobilize revenues.
8.
SigniJcant progress has been made in structural reforms in the last three years. T o strengthen
public expenditure management, the Government introduced a Treasury Single Account, adopted the
Public Sector Management and Finance L a w (PSMFL), initiated installation o f a Government Financial
Management and Information System (GFMIS) and initiated the implementation o f the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework (MTEF). In the financial sector, rehabilitation o f the banking system,
following the crises o f the 1990s, improved confidence, as reflected in increased re-intermediation and
monetization. The legal environment for loan recovery and bank competition improved with legislation
to facilitate bank seizures o f collateral o n non-performing loans, rehabilitation and privatization o f the
Agricultural Bank (AgBank), privatization o f the Trade and Development Bank, and startups by various
foreign-based credit institutions o f operations in Mongolia. State enterprises were the target o f some
recent reforms (including sales), while privatization o f other large enterprises, such as the Gobi
cashmere factory (which i s s t i l l carrying out loss-making activities), was delayed. Mongolia ratified key
International Labor Standards conventions and drafted the Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the
Financing o f Terrorism law.
9.
Gradual diversijkation and better weather contributed to stronger growth in 2002 and 2003,
though the economy remains vulnerable to natural disasters and other external shocks. After three
harsh winters, Mongolia’s GDP growth has climbed steadily--from 1 percent in 2001, to 3.9 percent in
2002, and 5.3 percent in 2003. This rise reflects stronger and more diversified non-agricultural growth
and the recovery o f the agricultural sector (figures 2 and 3). Inflation declined steadily from a high o f
8.1 percent in 2000 to 1.7 percent in 2002, and remained at 4.7 percent in 2003 (figure 4). In 2003 the
current account balance, excluding official transfers, fell to 15.2 percent o f GDP (figure 5), with good
export performance (19.7 percent growth).
10.
The transition has been accompanied, however, by a heavy tax burden on the private sector
and continued public sector dominance. Although strong gains in revenue mobilization in recent years
have kept pace with rising public expenditures, there are concerns about the sustainability o f the
revenue effort and i t s impact on private sector activity. During 1996-2002 revenues as a share o f GDP
increased from 28 percent to 39 percent and expenditures f r o m 36 percent to nearly 45 percent (figure
6). Since 1999 the fiscal deficit has begun to narrow, from 12 percent to about 6 percent. Over 19902002 the average budget deficit for Mongolia was 9 percent o f GDP, compared with 5 percent for the
Kyrgyz Republic and 4 percent for Hungary.

11.
Foreign aid and investment levels have been relatively high. Over 19962002, domestic
investment ratios remained at about 33 percent o f GDP, while domestic savings accounted for 13
percent o f GDP. Foreign direct investment reached about 7 percent o f GDP in 2002 (figure 7). Since the
initial transition the country has received more than US$2.6 billion in aid (half as loans), heavily
concentrated in the economic sectors (transport, industry and construction, and electricity and heating).
The main sources o f Official Development Assistance (ODA) have been Japan, the Asian Development
Bank (ADB), the W o r l d Bank, Germany, and the United States.

-4Figure 3: Sectoral Composition of GDP

Figure 2: GDP Growth Rate
6.0

j

P.

(2.0)
:

9

(8.0)

9

2000
g

;

3

/

e

1

Figure 5: Current Account Balance to GDP

Figure 4: Change in Consumer Prices
200.0

40.0

-

1990-93

--

20.0 --

1990-93

1994-96

19972000

2001

2002

(20.0)

1.

-Current

2001

2002

2003ie

account balance, including official transfers

Figure 7: Foreign Direct Investment to GDP

T

‘‘O
7.0 --

60.0

20.0

10.0
I
199093
-Total

T

19972000

+Current account balance, excluding official transfers

I
2003/e

Figure 6: Total Revenue and Expenditure to GDP

E

5.0

1994-96

199496

revenue

19972000

2001

2002

I
2003/e

E

6.0

--

5.0

--

4.0

--

3.0

--

2.0

-I

-at- T o t a l expenditure

1990-93

1994-96

19972000

2001

2002

I
2003/e

C. Poverty: Profile and Trends
12.
Mongolia has managed to protect high levels of human development inherited from the
socialist period, but progress toward several Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) has been mixed.
After the transition, indicators for secondary school enrollment and infant mortality deteriorated
significantly, but these negative trends have been largely reversed. Mongolia shares many
characteristics with other transition economies (table 1). I t i s well on track to achieve universal primary
education. The goal o f eliminating gender disparities in education has been achieved at the primary
level and i s considered attainable at secondary and tertiary levels, despite the so-called “reverse gender
gap” (where male enrollment rates are lower than those o f females) that increases at progressively

-5Table 1: Mongolia and Millennium Development Goals
Situation in Europe and
Central Asia Region
Proportion o f people living in
poverty: 5 percent below $1
and 19.5 percent below $2 a
day. Goal i s achievable given
annual average o f 3.6 percent
income growth, but seven
countries unlikelv to meet coal.
Most countries are well on
track; only five countries are
unlikely to meet the goal.

Millennium Development
Goal
Goal 1
Halve, between 1990 and
2015, the proportion of
people living in poverty
and who suffer from
hunger

Situation in East Asia and
the Pacific Region
Income-poverty reduced
from 32 percent to 24
percent over last decade.
Region could achieve target
o f 17 percent but target on
hunger i s likely to be missed.

Goal 2
Achieve universal
primary education

Little progress as primary
enrollment remained static at
93 percent; some countries
may achieve target.

Goal 3
Eliminate gender
disparity in primary and
secondary education by
2005 and to all levels of
education by 2015
Goal 4
Reduce under-five
mortality rate by twothirds between 1990 and
2015

Gender balance i s improving
faster than expected.
Disparities in secondary
enrollment are lower than
primary.

Goal i s likely to be met, except
in Azerbaijan, Tajikistan and
Turkey.

Progress from 59 per 1,000
in 1990 to 44 in 2001, but
not adequate to achieve
target.

ECA’s rate o f 44 in year 2000
was lower than in other
regions; still, many countries
are unlikely to meet the target.

Goal 5
Reduce by three-quarters,
between 1990 and 2015,
the maternal mortality
ratio
Goal 6
Halt and reverse spread of
HIV/AIDS and
tuberculosis

Wide variation across the
region (high mortality in Lao
PDR, Cambodia and
Indonesia, but l o w in
Thailand and China).
L o w HIV prevalence rate
compared to South Asia and
Africa, but TB incidence i s
higher than world average.
Thailand and Cambodia
made good progress.

Trends indicate that most
Commonwealth o f Independent
States (CIS) countries are
unlikely to achieve this goal.

Goal 7
Reverse loss of
environmental resources.
Halve, by 2015, the
proportion of people
without access to safe
water. Achieve a
significant improvement
in the lives of slum
dwellers by 2020

Rapid industrial
development increasingly
stresses the environment.
Target on water supply i s
likely to be missed.
Coverage o f effective
sanitation is very low; target
o f f track.

All countries are on track for
targets on water supply and
slum dwellers, but water
quality and sewage systems are
in serious problem. Seriously
o f f track on energy efficiency
and carbon emission.

Goal 8
Develop an open trading
and financial system;
(deal with the debt and
special needs of
landlocked Mongolia)

In many countries, trade
doubled during the decade;
goal i s attainable given
increased trade benefits.
Declining O D A needs to be
reversed to achieve MDG.

Ten countries are in
negotiations to j o i n EU. Most
countries benefit from EU
reduced trading barriers. Highincome countries are
committed to reverse declining
trend o f O D A .

H i g h risk and rapid spread o f
HIV in CIS countries. H i g h
incidence o f TB. Most l o w
income countries are unlikely
to meet the goal.

Current situation in
Mongolia
35 percent of people living on
$0.70 or less a day; growing
income inequality;
xhievement o f this goal i s
:onsidered difficult unless
growth rates accelerate and are
maintained.
Mongolia i s well on track and
likely to achieve this goal as
enrollment rate o f 91 percent
(2000) i s increasing at 2
percent annually. Challenge i s
improving the completion rate.
Achieved in primary
education; higher female
enrollment rates in secondary
and tertiary; goal i s attainable
given rates o f annual increases
in male enrollment.
Progress from 87.5 in 1995 to
42.4in 1998; declining trend
puts Mongolia well on track.
MDG target i s likely to be
achieved if resources continue
at current levels.
Decline from 200 in 1992 to
109 in 2003 i s not sufficient
to reach the target o f 50 (per
100,000 live births) by 2015.

Very l o w A I D S incidence but
high risk factors. TB
incidence increased from 70 to
141 (per 100,000) in the last
decade and i s closely linked to
poverty and unemployment.
Goal off track but still
achievable.
Increasing pasture and forest
degradation, urban pollution,
loss o f biodiversity. Estimated
40 percent o f population lack
access to safe water.
Increasing rural-urban
migration (45 percent increase
in Ulaanbaatar population
over last decade) i s a
challenge to improving ger
district conditions. T h i s goal
w i l l be difficult to achieve
Liberal trade regime in place,
but underdeveloped financial
markets. Improved transport
infrastructure i s key to address
landlocked status. Debt
currently at sustainable level.
T h i s goal i s achievable.

-6-

higher levels o f the educational system. Mongolia i s also likely to reduce under-five mortality by twothirds between 1990 and 2015. But the matemal mortality rate, while falling, i s not declining fast
enough to achieve the MDG. And while the incidence o f H I V / A I D S remains low, the incidence o f
tuberculosis has increased from 70 (per 100,000) to 141 over the last decade. As in many transition
economies, high levels o f alcohol consumption i s o f particular concem.
High poverty levels have persisted throughout the transition. In 1998 more than one-third o f the
13.
population was poor; inequality, as measured by the Gini coefficient, was 35 percent. Province or
“aimag” centers had the highest poverty rates, with a poverty incidence o f 45 percent, while one-third
o f rural residents were poor. There are n o reliable estimates o f changes in poverty incidence since 1998.
Three harsh winters in 1999-2001 clearly hurt rural incomes, but rural growth recovered in 2003. The
2003 Living Standards Measurement Study/Household Income and Expenditure Survey ( L S M S / H E S )
i s expected to redress this knowledge gap, and data analysis i s under way.

14.
Poverty has been accompanied by the emergence of multiple sources of vulnerability. With the
initial transition and privatization o f state-owned collectives and enterprises, people tumed to
livelihoods based on their own production in the informal sector and as livestock herders. Formal safety
nets and systems to manage risks weakened, and household vulnerability increased dramatically.
Increased rural vulnerability-at both household and macroeconomic levels-was illustrated vividly in
1999-2001, when more than 20 percent o f the national livestock herd was lost in successive “dzuds.”
Rising environmental insecurity is closely tied to local overexploitation of natural resources.
15.
Rapid depletion o f Mongolia’s scarce forest resources eliminates key sources o f fuel and vital
watershed protection (a Bank-supported forestry assessment makes the preliminary conclusion that the
depletion o f Mongolia’s forests i s occurring at rates o f up to four times sustainable levels). Available
evidence suggests that urban air pollution i s correlated to high levels o f respiratory diseases that
particularly afflict the poor. Mongolia has weak institutional capacity to enforce i t s fairly progressive
set o f environmental laws and regulations.

Table 2: Mongolia: Urban-Rural Differences, 2002
Indicator
Human Development Index
GDP per capita (Purchasing Power Parity,
US$)
Population without access to safe water (%)*
Population living in gers (%)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Matemal mortality (per 100,000)*

* D a t a for 2000
Sources: Mongolia Human Development Report 2003;
Ministry offiealth

Urban
0.723

Rural
0.636

3,423
9.2
28.3
25.3
121.1

1,246
65.6
78.3
33.0
189.5

GDP per capita (PPP, US$)

3500

2500
1500

500

1999

2000

+Urban

2001

2002

Rural

16.
Inequalities are widening between and within rural and urban populations. While inequality in
Mongolia i s within the range observed in other countries that have recently experienced the transition to
a market economy, strong disparities exist between regions and within urban and rural areas (table 2).
Income i s strongly differentiated between the larger cities o f Ulaanbaatar (with average incomes 165
percent above the national average) and Erdenet (125 percent) and all other areas o f the country (below
average). Migration to urban areas, particularly to Ulaanbaatar, has been increasing rapidly;

-7Ulaanbaatar n o w accounts for about 30 percent o f the country’s total population. Rural residents have
less access to education, health care, safe drinking water, information, and basic services than do their
urban counterparts. Their life expectancy i s lower, and their mortality and incidence o f disease are
higher. Within rural Mongolia, economic opportunities and access to basic and social services differ
significantly between herders and the residents o f smaller provincial centers and towns. In Ulaanbaatar
and the few other larger urban settlements, income, employment, and access t o basic services are
strongly differentiated between residents o f expanding peri-urban “ger” (Mongolian felt tents) areas and
apartment dwellers.

11.

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM AND PROSPECTS
A. Country Priorities

17.
The EGSPRS represents the Government of Mongolia’s vision to accelerate pro-poor growth
and reduce poverty. Several years o f work have culminated in taking on the challenges o f widespread
and persistent poverty, large spatial disparities, widening inequalities, and increasing vulnerability. This
has resulted in the development o f an overall strategy to increase GDP growth in order to reduce
poverty and improve people’s living standards. The strategy has been developed in a fully participatory
manner with many consultations with various stakeholder groups-including donors, NGOs and the
private sector as well as the Government and in both urban and rural areas and at various decentralized
levels. Line ministries and agencies were part o f the process o f developing sectoral and thematic
programs, and the overall strategy i s couched within the macroeconomic program supported by the
International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF). The EGSPRS,
discussed by the Boards o f the Bank and the Fund in September 2003, was endorsed by both
institutions as providing the basis for continuing support and concessional financial resources.

18.
The EGSPRS, a major step forward in the development dialogue in Mongolia, shifts the
county’s focus to medium-term policy directions. T o manage development and results for poverty
reduction, while continuing t o maintain stability and consolidating the transition process, the
development framework emphasizes private-sector-led growth and economic restructuring, and
underscores participation and the overriding importance o f implementing and monitoring the EGSPRS.
The EGSPRS articulates key development challenges and priority actions organized around
19.
five main pillars:
0
Ensuring macroeconomic stability and public sector effectiveness.
0
Supporting production and exports and improving the environment for private-sector-led
development.
0
Enhancing regional and rural development and environmentally sustainable development.
0
Fostering sustainable human development.
0
Promoting good governance, and implementing and monitoring the strategy.
20.
The Bank-Fund Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) of the EGSPRS recognizes the Government
strategy ’s strongpoints. The EGSPRS begins to align national development goals-as articulated in the
MDGs-with sectoral strategies and development programs. I t shifts Mongolia’s poverty reduction
approach from income transfers and safety nets to growth-promoting reforms and sustainable human
development. The JSA notes that the EGSPRS has great potential for aligning donors and civil society
with national development goals and strategies.
2 1.
The JSA also suggests areas where the EGSPRS is weak and where subsequent updates could
result in improvements. The EGSPRS reflects the strengths and weaknesses o f the country’s sectoral
and thematic strategies. In areas for which there i s agreement on strategic priorities, concrete programs

-8and actions should be developed to fit within existing budgetary resources (e.g., energy). Areas in
which the underlying strategic framework i s weak because o f inadequate diagnostic work or lack o f
consensus on priorities require more systematic, diagnostic work. For example, in private sector
development, where commitment to private-sector-led growth i s clear, more diagnostic work i s needed
to better understand the constraints to private sector activity. Specific actions and policy measures to
enhance transparency, predictability, and accountability o f public policies should also be developed.
Poverty diagnostics should be updated once results o f the ongoing LSMS/HIES exercise are available.
Finally, as with many Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs), the EGSPRS i s not well prioritized
or costed, and the monitoring and evaluation plans and capacities can be further improved.

B. Key Development Challenges
Ensuring macroeconomic stability and public sector effectiveness

22.
This first pillar of the EGSPRS recognizes the importance of prudent monetary and fiscal
policies to maintaining overall macroeconomic stability, and captures the breadth of the ambitious
public sector reform agenda launched by the Government beginning with passage of the PSMFL. I t
highlights the need to further consolidate progress in public expenditure management. This includes
strengthening the linkage between policymaking and budget allocation, improving the financial
sustainability o f key social services, further articulating a medium-term expenditure framework linked
to a system o f output-based evaluation, and developing improved rules and regulations for public
procurement. The EGSPRS also notes key challenges related to the c i v i l service reform agenda,
including unreliable and multiple estimates o f the number o f existing c i v i l servants; fragmentation,
duplication, and overlap o f administrative structures and functions; and an inappropriate functional
composition, compensation regime, and slulls mix.
23.
The JSA agrees with the critical importance of the foregoing challenges. In the area o f public
sector reforms, it notes the need for greater comprehensiveness and transparency in the public
investment budget-a critical factor in achieving the EGSPRS objectives. For c i v i l service reform, the
EGSPRS stops short o f discussing the politically difficult measures needed to contain the growth o f
Mongolia’s wage bill, which has been fueled by large, successive wage increases in recent years.
Supporting production and exports and improving the environment for private-sector-led
development

24.
The EGSPRS recognizes that the private sector must be the driving force for sustainable
growth and poverty reduction. I t acknowledges the importance o f continuing privatization and
promotion o f small and medium enterprises (SMEs). I t recognizes the importance o f creating an
adequate policy environment for the development o f Mongolia’s mineral sector. It further recognizes
the importance o f infrastructure for overcoming the country’s difficult physical constraints and creating
a more favorable business environment. Ensuring that the public investment program i s based on
economic considerations and insulated from political pressures will be critical if infrastructure
investments are to support national growth and poverty reduction goals effectively.
25.
The JSA notes the remaining challenge of converting the broad policy statements of the
EGSPRS into a coherent private sector strategy. Specific policy actions are needed for a smaller, more
efficient govemment; better integration o f Mongolia’s private sector into regional and global markets,
and removing the remaining physical, legal, and financial constraints to create a level playing field and
an enabling investment climate. K e y challenges include the need to develop further an effective legal
system and an efficient, competitive, and well-governed banking system. For the private sector
development o f minerals, the JSA emphasizes the importance o f maintaining a legal and regulatory
regime based on the country’s progressive Minerals Law. Effectively implementing the energy strategy

-9and further updating the transport strategy (paying strong attention to the quality o f the publicinvestment program and the cost and sustainability o f proposed investments, including the Millennium
Road) are further challenges identified in the JSA.

Enhancing regional and rural development and environmentally sustainable development

26.
The EGSPRS highlights the need to address the rural-urban disparities in economic growth
and service delivery that have emerged since the transition-and
the Government’s vision for
addressing them in its regional development strategy. It notes the central role o f Ulaanbaatar in
Mongolia’s economy and the challenge o f improving the poor living conditions o f residents in “ger”
districts, which have spread with migration. I t strongly emphasizes the importance o f the livestock
sector for rural livelihoods and the national economy. I t acknowledges the challenges related to
increased vulnerability caused by structural changes in the economy, the more than doubling o f the
numbers o f herders in the 1990s as former workers took up herding, the breakdown o f key support
systems and services, and the consequences o f increased concentrations o f herds and overgrazing. The
EGSPRS also recognizes that the sound management o f natural resources and the environment i s a
necessary dimension o f sustainable growth over the long run. And i t stresses the need for Mongolia to
improve environmental quality, reduce degradation o f the natural resource base, and clearly articulate
the links between poverty reduction and improved environmental management.
27.
The JSA recognizes the Government’s desire to give equal opportunities to all, but stresses the
need for careful assessment of financial costs and benefits of alternatives, including examining other
country experiences with regional development. Improving municipal finance and administrative
capabilities will be important to achieving sustainable improvements in the efficiency and equity o f
municipal service delivery. The JSA notes the importance o f further prioritizing and articulating the
actions proposed in the Rural Development Strategy, (box 2) including those that strengthen pastoral
risk management, improve rural financial intermediation, and improve rural access to infrastructure,
setting them in the context o f the regional development agenda. The Government has progressed
considerably in defining an environmental strategy, though challenges remain in strengthening national
and local institutional and legal capacity and costing and prioritizing policy interventions and actions.
Box 2: Regional Development Strategy
The Government’s approach to the Regional Development Strategy reveals tensions between
interventionist and market-based policies. While regionally-balanced development i s clearly important,
the Government’s proposed strategy relies o n large infrastructure investments, the development of
designated urban centers as growth poles, and the identification o f designated production activities for
each region. The economic feasibility o f the approach--as w e l l as i t s implications for debt sustainability,
potentially hidden fiscal liabilities, and lack o f successful international experience with similar
approaches-- raise concerns.

Fostering sustainable human development

28.
The EGPRS makes the linkages among growth, poverty reduction, and human development,
presenting a strategy to meet the social sector MDGs. In education it recognizes the challenges o f
increasing access to schooling, rural-urban and gender disparities, improving quality, and strengthening
the overall sector framework. The health strategy identifies medium-term actions to lower infant and
maternal mortality, control the incidence o f infectious diseases, improve primary health care and access
for the poor, and ensure broader coverage o f health insurance. The employment and social welfare
strategy recognizes the high and rising budgetary burden o f current transfer programs (pensions) and
needed short and medium-term actions (such as raising the retirement age).

- 1029.
The JSA notes that the strategy should further address issues of resource allocation, private
sector participation, and financial sustainability. The EGSPRS does not address private provision o f
educational inputs or the limited analysis o f resource allocation among primary, secondary, and tertiary
levels. N o r does i t address the lack o f clarity o n the financing or sequencing o f options for addressing
gender and age-at-entry issues. The health strategy omits two key issues: sector reforms to broaden the
coverage o f the health insurance system and make health financing more sustainable, and restructuring
hospital services (mainly those concentrated in the capital city). The JSA points to the need for stronger
discussions o n labor market and employment policies, more specificity in social assistance reforms, and
addressing the equity, sustainability and governance o f the pension system.

Promoting good governance and implementing and monitoring the strategy
The EGSPRS emphasizes good governance, participatory processes, and the importance of
30.
monitoring strategy implementation. Priority areas for sound governance include improving
accountability and transparency, ensuring an independent judiciary, and fighting corruption. Extensive
participation o f c i v i l society will be sought through collecting bottom-up feedback and undertaking
consultations, outsourcing delivery o f selected services to NGOs, and open exchanges with the media
and other community groups (businesses).
The EGSPRS also notes the crucial role of effective aid coordination and donor alignment for
3 1.
successful implementation. Given that the Mongolian economy’s share o f ODA i s fairly large, i t i s
important that donor programs support government priorities articulated in the EGSPRS. The
Government needs to lead in coordinating financial flows, allocating resources, streamlining
procedures, increasing transparency, and aligning i t s policies and documents to provide clear signals to
external partners.
The JSA concludes that while key monitoring indicators for EGSPRS implementation are linked
32.
to the MDGs, further refinements are needed. These could be improved to include energy and private
sector development, disaggregations by region and gender, and better links to such priority outcomes as
educational quality. The major challenge i s to build institutional mechanisms that engage stakeholders,
improve public access to information, create agency and line-ministry monitoring capacity, strengthen
statistical facilities and personnel, and build o n existing data.

C. Medium-term Economic Outlook
The EGSPRS is based on a plausible macroeconomic framework, with strong economic growth
33.
projected over the next four to five years. Under the baseline scenario, GDP growth i s projected to
average 5.5 percent a year-significantly
higher than growth in the past decade. The non-agricultural
sector averaged annual growth rates o f more than 10 percent during 2000-02. So, even if nonagricultural growth slows markedly over the medium term, reversion to a more normal pattern o f
agricultural growth (about 3.8 percent) should suffice to attain the growth rates envisaged in the
baseline scenario. Within a sound macro environment, the expected sources o f growth (in addition to
agriculture) are private sector activities through privatization o f remaining public enterprises; mining,
expected to grow at 8 percent a year between 2004 and 2007; small and medium enterprises; and
tourism, given Mongolia’s unique culture and unspoiled terrain. Export volumes are expected to grow
at about 6 percent a year, slightly higher than GDP, while import growth i s projected to remain strong,
reflecting the higher imports of capital equipment associated with strong investment activities.
34.
Mongolia should benefit from greater integration with the rest of Northeast Asia. Mongolia has
been a member of the W o r l d Trade Organization (WTO) since 1997. T o take advantage o f the WTO
and the large markets that open with China’s entry to it, Mongolia must do more to attract foreign
investment, improve the skills mix of the population and adjust to external demand. China’s entry to the

- 11 WTO and Russia’s imminent entry will provide an opportunity for Mongolia to discuss removal o f
main tariff and non-tariff barriers constraining i t s exports.
D. Debt and Creditworthiness
35.
At the end of 2003, Mongolia’s total stock ofpublic debt was estimated at US$1.4 billion, of
which US$1.2 billion was external debt equivalent to 103 percent of GDP and 147.3percent of exports
of goods and services. This includes debt o f US$212 m i l l i o n contracted to settle Transferable Ruble
debt obligations. In December 2003, the Government negotiated a debt settlement agreement with
Russia to close i t s pre-1991 debt, estimated at US$11.4 billion or about 10 times Mongolia’s GDP. The
agreement provided for a writing o f f o f 97.8 percent o f Mongolia’s pre-1991 debt, with the remaining
US$250 m i l l i o n (about 20 percent o f Mongolia’s GDP) to be paid in full by the end o f 2003. W h i l e the
settlement o f the Russian debt i s a welcome event, as i t provides international investors more certainty
regarding Mongolia’s credit standing, more information o n the nature o f the transaction i s needed to
assess the full impact on short-term macro-sustainability. The total extemal debt-to-GDP ratio in Net
Present Value (NPV) terms rose from 59.4 percent in 2002 without the Russian debt to 70.1 percent
after the Russian debt settlement. With strong growth projected over the medium-term, the extemal
debt-to-GDP ratio in NPV terms i s expected to decrease incrementally to about 58 percent by 2008.
The revised Debt Analysis finds Mongolia’s external debt sustainable, although export-led
36.
growth is critical to continue lowering the debt-service burden over the coming years. At the policy
level, structural reforms, particularly fiscal consolidation, should continue to be aggressively pursued to
avoid incurring additional debt (Attachment 3). Contracting loans on non-concessional terms should be
avoided to the extent possible. It i s expected that Mongolia will remain creditworthy for concessional
IDA credits at levels envisaged under current allocation norms. Also required i s the expansion o f
foreign direct investment, which, in turn, will require structural reforms to promote private-sector-led
growth, including continued privatization. Prudent macroeconomic policies, including a flexible
exchange rate that adequately reflects Mongolia’s external competitiveness, are keys to this strategy.

111.

THE WORLD BANK IN MONGOLIA: BUILDING ON EXPERIENCE

37.
The present CAS is Jirmly rooted in the findings and lessons from an extensive set of
evaluations, reviews, and consultations. The Bank’s Operations Evaluation Department issued a
Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE, CODE2002-00 13) in March 2002, and has undertaken Project
Audits and Quality o f Supervision Reviews. A Client Survey, an informal review o f the last CAS, a
Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR), follow-up quarterly reviews, project Implementation
Completion Reports, and extensive consultations with various stakeholders have all been undertaken.
These reviews and consultations note Mongolia’s significant advance-but highlight key structural and
institutional weaknesses that contribute to lack o f progress o n reducing poverty, improving equity, and
achieving overall development outcomes.

A. K e y Findings from Retrospectives and Consultations
38.
The Countq Assistance Evaluation found that Bank services were of high quality but had
limited influence on institutional development. The C A E found that the overall professional quality o f
the Bank’s services was good, objectives were relevant, and interventions were selective (see
Attachment 4 for a summary). The C A E recognized that the Bank’s program helped to avoid a collapse
o f key public services and industries during the initial transition, improve macroeconomic management,
and provide income support to many o f Mongolia’s poor. Even though the outcome o f Bank assistance
was rated as moderately satisfactory, the C A E found that institutional development was modest and
sustainability unlikely. I t noted the Bank’s relatively late shift away fi-om emergency-type, short-term
support and the limited linkages between the lending program and the policy and institutional reform

- 12agenda, All donor outcomes could have been better if agreements on strategic frameworks could have
been reached for more sectors. The CAE also noted the limited effect o f capacity-building efforts.
While initial technical assistance (TA) helped to change the thinlung toward a market-based economy
(particularly within the Ministry o f Finance and the Central Bank), many aspects o f the institutional
framework for a market-based economy remain fragile (lack o f compliance with new laws and
regulations, weak institutional capacity and resources, and poor accountability o f public service
delivery).
39.
The Country Portfolio Performance Review found satisfactory project outcomes, but weak
implementation capacity. The 2002 CPPR found that, while completed projects had satisfactory
outcomes, projects in Mongolia face high risk o f not achieving their development outcomes, largely
because implementation capacity remains a major constraint. The CPPR diagnosed three core problem
areas: (i)lack o f project readiness and significant delays in project start-up; (ii)
complex design and
scope o f project components, which constrain project implementation, given weak capacities; and (iii)
lack o f implementation capacity in Project Implementation Units (PIUs) and line ministries. The CPPR
developed performance criteria, n o w regularly used to monitor progress in the Quarterly Portfolio
Performance Reviews (QPPR), and highlighted the need to enhance focus on policy and institutional
reforms and strengthen project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) systems.
Informal reviews of performance under the 1998 CAS found that while most objectives were
40.
achieved, external factors, shifting client commitment, and a weak CAS monitoring system limited the
impact. The first three C A S objectives-supporting macroeconomic stabilization, facilitating private
sector development, and developing infrastructure-were largely reached, albeit with delays. Progress
under the fourth CAS objective-improving
equity in development-was
limited. External factors
(including political instability, terms-of-trade shocks, and natural disasters) impacted o n both client and
Bank performance. Sustained dialogue with the Government and alignment with the IMF and other
donors helped to build consensus on macro policy and public and energy sector reforms. In some other
areas, lack o f consensus on the policy and institutional reform agenda restricted progress. Shifting
commitments to implement key reforms (such as rebalancing utility tariffs, cessation o f quasi-fiscal
activities) limited the sustainability and impact o f development initiatives in several sectors.
Establishment o f the country office in 1998 increased Bank participation in policy dialogue and
improved overall effectiveness. Deliberate disengagement in certain sectors where other donors had
lead roles (e.g., social) l e d to critical gaps in Bank knowledge and ability to provide policy advice. The
varying quality and relevance o f CAS monitoring indicators, and limitations in the systems to measure
them, complicated monitoring and the assessment o f development impact.
The Client Survey identiJied policy advice as the Bank’s greatest value. A Client Survey
41.
conducted in early 2003 solicited the views o f a range o f local stakeholders on Mongolia’s development
and Bank assistance (see Attachment 5 for key findings). Clients reported that Mongolia’s primary
challenges are i t s economy, corruption, and poverty, followed by education. Areas identified as
important for Bank involvement included economic growth, followed by strengthening the financial
system and the private sector, and helping to reduce poverty. Respondents identified the Bank’s greatest
value in Mongolia as policy advice, followed by financial resources and donor coordination. The strong
importance attached to policy advice i s notable, as Client Surveys in most IDA countries identify
financial resources as the Bank’s highest value. The Bank i s perceived positively for i t s work in donor
coordination and i s considered effective, but familiarity with the Bank i s fairly low. Respondents also
believe the Bank i s less effective in building community-level capacity and including local
communities and civil society in strategy development.
42.
CAS consultations underscored the need to place greater emphasis on development results,
Extensive consultations conducted in preparation for the C A S included a two-day retreat with the
Mongolian Prime Minister and Cabinet and various consultation events with a wide range o f

- 13 stakeholders: government officials, members o f Parliament, civil society representatives, the private
sector, local and international NGOs, donors, and project staff in Ulaanbaatar and provincial centers. In
the consultations the Prime Minister emphasized the need to move from emergency support to longer
term development needs, and from drafting laws and regulations to implementing and enforcing them.
In l i n e with Client Survey findings, participants in the CAS consultations highlighted the need for
economic growth, rather than direct transfers, as key to poverty reduction. Consultation participants
strongly urged greater attention to governance, rural needs, and the sustainable use o f environmental
resources. Participants at several consultations raised questions about donor effectiveness and called for
greater civic engagement in the design, implementation, and monitoring o f development projects.

B. Lessons Learned

43.

Key lessons can be drawn from Bank assessments and direct stakeholder feedback. The lessons
focus on placing more emphasis o n building capacity and institutions, building shared strategic
frameworks, building o n the Bank’s strength in policy work, maintaining a sustained dialogue on
critical issues, undertaking measures to enhance project effectiveness and outcomes, and increasing
field presence.

44.
Sharper focus is needed on capacity-building and institution-building. Improving these efforts
will require greater attention to sequencing and selectively integrating capacity-building support within
overall public sector reforms, establishing effective M&E systems to measure desired results, and
emphasizing participatory approaches. Building on lessons o f experience, some recent Bank-supported
TA has been effective in building capacity (box 3). Strengthening institutional accountability
mechanisms and civic engagement (such as transparency and information-sharing systems; consultation
processes; and mechanisms to engage C i v i l Society Organizations and the private sector in policy
development, implementation, and monitoring) are also key to improving the impact and sustainability
o f institution-building efforts.
Box 3: Effective TA: Debt Management in Mongolia
The Bank has been able t o provide effective TA to Mongolia t o strengthen capacities and institutions in several
areas. An example i s the recent Bank-supported TA component which has significantly improved Mongolia’s
debt management system. The debt database was upgraded to the UNCTAD Debt Management and Financial
Analysis System (DMFAS) in 2002 under a newly-established Debt Management D i v i s i o n in the Ministry o f
Finance and Economy. Using a unified system linked t o the Central Bank, the unit can n o w provide timely
information o n external and domestic debt, onlending activities and repayment schedules o n a loan-by-loan basis,
and can analyze debt sustainability and liquidity positions for decision-making. This enhanced capacity was
effectively used in the negotiations t o settle the outstanding pre-transition Russian debt. Mongolia i s one o f the
countries which can electronically report up-to-date data to the Bank’s D e b t Reporting System in a process that
n o w takes only hours compared t o months previously. Factors contributing t o the success o f t h i s component
included commitment and ownership at a l l levels o f government, a good procurement process, effective
collaboration with the vendor, high quality o f the technical staff, valuable study tours, and extended training and
change management with a resident advisor in place.

45.
Building and implementing shared strategic frameworks that align donor and government
resources with development results are crucial. Given the large amount o f ODA available to Mongolia,
better alignment o f donor resources i s a key leverage point for improving development effectiveness.
Considerable progress has been made in developing strategic frameworks-including the EGSPRS and
certain sector strategies. But, the alignment o f development resources and the quality and
comprehensiveness o f strategies vary considerably across sectors. Continuing effort will be needed to
further refine the results frameworks, translate strategic priorities into specific actions in sectors where
consensus has been largely achieved (as in energy and the public sector), and strengthen the knowledge
base and facilitate dialogue in sectors where consensus has not yet been reached.

- 1446.

The Bank should build on its strength in policy work. As Mongolia places high value on the
Bank‘s policy work, the Bank should build on this strength, focusing more o n policy work while
maintaining selectivity in lending. I t should also work to integrate better i t s Analytical and Advisory
Activities (AAA) with lending and technical assistance to improve i t s impact. Undertaking AAA more
collaboratively i s another important way to enhance results and support capacity-building. Involving
government counterparts at each stage o f the AAA cycle, providing adequate resources for
dissemination and dialogue around findings, and ensuring linkage o f policy work with sector strategies
and projects are all important. Analytical work in non-lending sectors o f the Bank i s desirable to
support key reforms, strengthen the Bank’s knowledge base, and contribute to the development o f
shared strategic frameworks.

47.
Sustained dialogue is critical for developing consensus on complex issues. Extended and timely
Bank engagement with the Government has been a particularly important success factor in supporting
reforms. Sustained dialogue i s key to addressing areas where progress on structural reforms has been
more limited (as with rebalancing utility tariffs). I t i s also important that the Bank engage and sustain a
dialogue in areas where significant tensions exist between advocates o f interventionist and open-market
policies (as with the regional development strategy).

48.
Better eficiency and outcomes could be gained at the project level. Assessments highlight the
need for more attention on outcome-oriented development objectives in project design, supervision, and
M&E systems. Specific measures may include retrofitting existing projects with outcome/impact
indicators. Strengthening the Government’s capacity to establish effective M&E systems that monitor
project outcomes, as well as process indicators, can also improve project effectiveness.
49.

The Bank’s field presence is critical to donor-coordination efforts, sustained dialogue, and
improved project implementation. Improving the Bank’s development impact requires efforts to
enhance the capacity and responsibilities o f the local office. Efforts to deepen the Bank’s engagement
in sector dialogue, donor alignment, and institutional capacity-building, all o f which are labor-intensive
and time-consuming, will place increased demands on the local office and will require efforts to build
and strengthen office systems and capacity.

IV.

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
A. Bank Group Activities

50.
The World Bank strategy for FY05-FY08 reflects the Government’s development priorities, as
laid out in its EGSPRS, lessons from Bank engagement through the last CASperiod, and the Bank’s
comparative advantages. Though it represents a significant departure from the strategic objectives and
approach o f the previous CAS, the strategy reflects and builds upon the ongoing evolution o f the W o r l d
Bank’s assistance in recent years.
5 1.
The CAS strategic objectives target a subset of EGSPRS priorities. Within the comprehensive
EGSPRS agenda, Bank assistance will focus selectively o n addressing core systemic and institutional
constraints to growth and poverty reduction to complement and enhance the impact o f other
development resources (table 3). The C A S objectives are:
Consolidating the transition. The f i r s t C A S objective supports critical remaining transition
challenges that cross-cut EGSPRS pillars. Under this objective, the Bank will support the
Government’s efforts to implement expenditure and administrative reforms across public sector
institutions. These reforms aim to improve service delivery for human development, the
enabling environment for the private sector, and macroeconomic stability. Support for civil
service reforms in particular, will be important for improving the impact o f capacity-building

-15efforts throughout the public sector. Reflecting the strong consensus built around the
Government’s public sector reform agenda, i t s alignment with the findings o f Bank analytical
work, and the good partnership that has evolved, the Bank will support these reforms with a
broad mix o f instruments, complementing the support o f ADB and others. For the related
reforms in the infrastructure and social sectors, and for private sector development, the Bank
will place greater emphasis early in the CAS period on analytical and strategy work to build
agreement around reform agendas.
0

Reducing vulnerabilities. The second CAS objective supports EGSPRS pillar 3-“Enhancing
regional and rural development and environmentally sustainable development”-with
interventions that address underlying and differing sources o f rural and urban vulnerability. In
rural Mongolia, the deterioration o f multiple systems that supported the livestock sector and
rural economic activity (pasture and fodder management, veterinary services, well
maintenance, collection and distribution) has sharply increased vulnerability at the household
and macro levels. Increasing rural-urban migration has l e d to the rapid growth o f vulnerable
populations living in temporary, peri-urban “ger” districts around city centers. In addition to
support under Objective 1 to improve the sustainability o f key services (social protection,
health, education) important for vulnerable populations, Bank assistance will build on
analytical work and previous operations as well as the assistance o f other donors. Support will
be provided to scale-up and institutionalize innovative rural approaches to reduce vulnerability,
strengthen the financial sustainability o f municipal service delivery t o peri-urban populations,
and assist in the effective costing and analysis o f national programs to promote balanced
regional development.
Aligning policies and resources with development results. The third C A S objective directly
supports EGSPRS pillar 5-“Promoting
good governance and implementing and monitoring
the strategy”, while building linkages with related activities supported under the f i r s t two CAS
objectives, in particular, the public sector reforms which are central to improving governance.
Closely linked to these reforms, this objective supports the Government’s efforts: (i)
at the
national level: to strengthen the institutional framework for EGSPRS implementation and
monitoring, further refining priority results and indicators, aligning public expenditures and
donor resources across sectors, and building participatory monitoring systems that provide
feedback to resource allocation decisions; (ii)
at the sector level: to strengthen sector strategies
that prioritize and sequence reforms and build institutional capacity and systems that in turn
support national development results; and (iii)
at the project level: to strengthen the linkages o f
projects with larger development outcomes, including efforts to streamline and harmonize
project and government processes. Building on continuing assistance provided by the Bank and
other donors (such as the UN and ADB) to support parts o f this framework, this objective will
assist in the building o f linkages among these often compartmentalized initiatives.

52.
The new CAS objectives reflect a shift from the previous CAS, changing client needs and
priorities, and on assessment of lessons learned and the Bank’s comparative advantage. Compared
with the last CAS, key differences in objectives include: (i)less Bank emphasis o n support for
macroeconomic stability, reflecting the continuing lead o f the IMF and the significant progress in recent
years; (ii)
more emphasis o n core transition issues, given their critical importance for macro stability,
the performance o f the public sector, the enabling environment for the private sector, and better service
delivery; (iii)
more emphasis o n vulnerability, in view o f the complex nature o f these issues in the
Mongolia context and the requests for enhanced Bank support; and (iv) sharper focus o n results, in
view o f the importance o f the Bank complementing and increasing the impact o f other development
resources, including public expenditures and donor support.

- 16Table 3: EGSPRS Pillars and CAS Objectives
CAS OBJECTIVES

EGSPRS PILLARS
nsuring macroeconomic
stability and public sector
effectiveness
Supporting production
and exports and
improving the
environment for privatesector-led development
Fostering sustainable

work (below)
Support development o f the PSD strategy; strengthen regulatory framework for
financial
sector; judicial
and legal
reforms to improve
private
sector environment
_____________________________
_________________-_____
____________________------_---_-___
................................................
Support infrastructure reforms t o develop comprehensive Public Investment
Program, rebalance tariffs, encourage private participation
Improve financial sustainability and targeting
- o f social protection, health,

Enhancing regional and
rural development, and
environmentally
sustainable development

Promoting good
governance, and
implementing and
monitoring the strategy

53.
To enhance impact, the Bank w i l l also introduce further changes in the way of doing business,
reflecting the evolution of the portfolio and the lessons learned. K e y elements o f this new approach
include:
Sharpening the focus o n building institutional capacity to deliver key development results.
M o r e emphasis o n building partnerships and agreement o n common strategic frameworks that
prioritize and sequence policy and institutional reforms and capacity-building efforts to
strengthen institutions.
A carefully sequenced program o f policy work that i s conducted in a collaborative way to
ensure that analytical findings inform sector dialogue and strategies as well as project
interventions.
Greater integration o f the Bank’s program with the policy and institutional reform agenda by
sequencing analytical work and support for sector strategies ahead o f Bank adjustment and
investment lending with more policy content.
Modulating Bank support to the level o f consensus and knowledge, engaging with a broader
mix o f instruments where there i s strong agreement (such as in the public sector), and with
more policy work where there are knowledge gaps or agreements have not been reached.
Piloting innovative, bottom-up approaches.

- 17CAS Objective 1: Consolidating the Transition

54.
TheJirst CAS objective supports elements of the EGSPRSpillars to deepen the transition to a
market economy by removing the remaining structural barriers to effective public service delivery and
a vibrant private sector. Under this C A S objective, the Bank will support reforms t o build a more
performance-oriented public sector -- closely linked to reforms and investments to improve the delivery
o f key infrastructure and social services, and reforms to improve the financial, legal, and regulatory
environment for the private sector. The broad lines o f the results expected to be achieved over the CAS
period can be found below (table 4) and are detailed in Attachment 1.
Table 4: Consolidating the Transition
Longer-term/ higher order
country outcomes

CAS outcomes the Bank expects

Instruments supporting
outcomes

Improved service delivery and
macroeconomic stability through
better efficiency and effectiveness
of the public sector
Budget deficit decreases from
6.2% in 2004 to 4.5% in 2006
Wage bill as share o f GDP
decreases from 8.5% in 2003

Strengthened systems and capacities to align public
expenditures with policy priorities
Comprehensive, rolling MTEF aligned with
EGSPRS priorities in place and annually
updated based on feedback from national
M&E systems
General public have access to all budget
documents on timely basis
Incentive-basedcivil service established
Salary range broadened by 25%
Effective human resources system improves
sectoral staffing mix consistent with
MTEFIEGSPR~ goals
Constraints to a vibrant private sector identified
through the Investment Climate Assessment, and
key obstacles either removed or in process o f being
removed
Government and donor consensus on
prioritized PSD agenda
Improved performance o f the banking sector
with reduction in non-performing loans from
8% of assets to 5%

Portfolio:
Fiscal TA; Economic Capacity
TA Credit
Lending:
PRSC-I, 11,111, IV;
Judicial and Public Sector
Reform TA
Public Expenditure
Review/IntegratedFiduciary
Assessment

Growing, vibrant private sector
FDI as a share of GDP
increases from 7% to 11% by
2007
Stronger diversification o f
economic base
Exports as share of GDP
increases from 47% to 60% by
2007

Improved efficiency and
distributive impact of infrastructure
investments to support service
delivery and private sector
development
Deal with special needs of
Mongolia as a landlocked
nation.
Strengthened human capital
Under-5 mortality decreases
from 87 per 1,000 to 29 by
2015
Primary enrollment increases
to 100% by 2015

t o influence in four years

More cost-efficient and sustainable infrastructure
investments
Costed public investment program, consistent
with the MTEF and EGSPRS, prioritized
across sectors
Adequate resources allocated for maintenance
Greater private sector participation in
provision of infrastructure
Improved financial sustainability o f health,
education, social protection
Improved allocation o f health and education
expenditures; hospital spending decreased
from 85% to 70% o f total health spending
Improved targeting and sustainability o f social
assistance programs, including pensions

m:

Portfolio: Financial Sector Adj
Credit; Financial Capacity
DevelopmentProject; Private
Sector Development
Credit-I
Lending: PRSC-11; PSDC-11;
Judicial and Public Sector
Reform TA
&:
Investment Climate
Assessment, PSD Strategy;
Financial Sector Mid-term
Review
Portfolio: Transport
DevelopmentProject; Energy
Credit
Lending: Ulaanbaatar Services11; InfrastructureProjects (2)
Sector Strategies

m:

Portfolio: Economic Capacity
TA Credit
Lending: PRSC-I; 11, 111, IV;
Social Sector TA
Sector Strategies;
Poverty Assessment/ PETS

m:

55.
Consolidating reforms for a more performance-based public sector. The Bank will intensify
support for the Government’s public sector reform agenda under the PSMFL, which i s well-aligned

-18with the findings o f extensive analytical work by the Bank and other donors. Public sector reforms will
be supported through a mix o f instruments - including a series o f single-tranche Poverty Reduction
Support Credits (PRSC), the first o f which focuses primarily o n the public sector and institutional
reform agenda (with follow-on actions in subsequent PRSCs), an ongoing Economic Capacity TA
Credit (ECTAC), and an ongoing program o f analytical work and policy dialogue. The Bank i s
collaborating with other donors active in the sector, including the ADB and the IMF.
e

Strengthen public expenditure management to improve the alignment of budgets with policies and
the efJiciency of public spending. The Bank will support reforms to articulate and institutionalize a
full-fledged MTEF that aligns budgets with policy priorities set in the EGSPRS, improve budget
coverage and financial management through implementing a Government Financial Management
and Information System, improve public procurement processes, and strengthen access to public
expenditure information.

e

Reform and restructure the civil service and introduce performance-based incentives for public
servants. The Bank will support the further articulation and implementation o f a comprehensive
civil service reform program designed to streamline the size o f the civil service, strengthen
performance-based salary and bonus systems, and integrate fragmented management systems, in
part through introducing a Human Resource Management and Information System.

56.
Establish a sound enabling environment for the private sector. The Bank’s support will focus
o n further consolidation o f market reforms to establish a sound institutional and regulatory environment
for the private sector. Support will be provided through adjustment lending (the PRSCs, particularly
PRSC 11, and an ongoing financial sector adjustment loan), and analytical work to address key
knowledge gaps and to inform the development o f a private sector strategy.
Support development of a comprehensive private sector development strategy. Ongoing analytical
work, including analysis o f sources o f growth (mining, cashmere, and trade), an investment climate
assessment, and a supply-chains study, will be integrated with w o r k by the Govemment and other
development partners, including USAID, ADB, JICA and GTZ, into an overall assessment o f the
sources o f growth for Mongolia and the strategy for private sector development. Follow-up
activities will be supported by measures in PRSC I1 and I11to further strengthen the regulatory and
incentive framework for private sector development, and explore ways to address training needs.
e

0

Support deepening ofJinancial intermediation. Support to strengthen the regulatory framework for
banks and improve commercial bank risk-management will be continued under the PRSCs and the
ongoing financial capacity building project. The Bank will support (with the ADB) a financial
sector mid-term review, which has provided the framework for donor interventions. In addition, the
Bank i s planning a follow-on Private Sector Development Credit that will build o n the experience
with an earlier project to provide financing for PSD. The PRSC will support measures to improve
the regulatory framework for the insurance industry and effective livestock insurance. I t will also
be closely linked t o interventions that target reduction o f rural vulnerability (the ongoing
Sustainable Livelihoods Project and a proposed pilot index-based livestock insurance project). I F C
support will continue to focus o n the financial sector, including possible further investments-and
TA to recently privatized banks, TA to develop the enabling environment for a leasing industry,
and efforts to enable banks to increase their lending to SMEs.
Support the strengthening and effective implementation of judicial and legal reforms and the ruleoflaw to facilitate private sector activities. The Bank-supported Legal Reform Project has been
instrumental in improving access to legal information, establishing specialized courts, and
improving legal education. Progress over the past few years will be reviewed in FY05 with the
Government and other donors involved in supporting the sector through an update o f the Legal

- 19Needs Assessment (done in 2000). The priorities identified could be supported by a follow-on
project. In addition, PRSC-I1 will focus on streamlining government processes and improving the
transparency o f regulations.

57.
Support reforms to improve the eficiency and distributive impact of infrastructure investments.
Provision o f infrastructure i s critical for supporting service delivery and economic activities given
Mongolia’s vast, isolated territory and harsh climate. However, the impact o f the considerable
investment devoted to infrastructure has been limited by weak capacity to cost and prioritize, and
develop sustainable financing mechanisms. While recognizing the long-term nature o f the challenges in
the sector, Bank assistance will place greater emphasis o n reforms that strengthen institutional capacity
to manage infrastructure in support o f objectives for equitable growth and improved service delivery.
These objectives will be supported through assistance in developing a comprehensive infrastructure
strategy, closely linked to public expenditure reforms, to build agreement on outstanding issues such as
tariff rebalancing, and more closely link Bank investments in essential infrastructure with these
reforms.
Develop an integrated infrastructure strategy with the Government, donors, and other stakeholders.
This strategy will be aligned with a comprehensive public investment program and the MTEF to
cost and set priorities for the many infrastructure needs, build a more comprehensive and better
sequenced policy and regulatory reform agenda, and address inequities in infrastructure service
delivery resulting fkom hidden subsidies. The strategy will underpin future Bank support for
infrastructure development, including cross-sectoral support.
Support reforms to improve financial sustainability and create an enabling environment for publicprivate partnerships in the energy sector. Based on dialogue in the energy sector with the
Government and major donors, the Bank will support the Government in establishing commercially
viable public-private investment partnerships to mobilize internal and external resources to achieve
universal access to affordable energy (heat/electricity) services in rural and peri-urban areas-and
to implement high-priority infrastructure investments (such as hydropower, urban heating,
transmissioddispatch reinforcement, integrated road/energy urban services). This will be achieved
through the Energy Credit to ensure the financial sustainability o f electricity distribution
companies, PRSC-I1 to consolidate the Energy Regulatory Agency and implement pricing reforms,
and new lending to facilitate the establishment o f public-private partnerships, takmg regional
dimensions into account.
Strengthen institutional capacity to manage the road network to meet the objectives of equitable
growth and service delivery. The Bank will collaborate with the ADB and JICA o n updating the
roads sector strategy and strengthening the investment program to account for recurrent costs. The
Transport Development Project has been supporting better accessibility o f isolated and remote
central and western regions, and a subsequent project i s envisaged to finance priority segments
identified within the overall sector strategy and integrated network.
Increase access to ICT services through articulation of a universal access strategy and
establishment of a universal service fund. The Bank will support activities to develop an enabling
environment and funding mechanism to increase access to Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) infrastructure and services, particularly in rural areas. Policy and regulatory
reforms, seed financing o f the universal service fund, and technical assistance in I C T sector
interventions will be supported under the PRSCs, planned AAA and infrastructure investments.

5 8.
Strengthen institutional capacity to support human development. W h i l e other donors, including
the ADB and Japan, will continue to take the lead in assisting the Government in the social sectors, the
Bank will play an increasing, but narrowly-focused role in supporting reforms to improve the financing

- 20 and targeting o f social sector programs. Bank support will be aligned within the strategic frameworks
that the Government and lead donors are implementing in these sectors, and linked with the sequenced
program o f policy and institutional reforms supported under the PRSCs. Initial PRSC reforms will
target public spending, transparency in financial management, and fiscal sustainability. Later PRSCs
(particularly PRSC 111) will put more emphasis o n sectoral policies and human development outcomes.
The PRSCs will be complemented by capacity-building work under the ongoing ECTAC, P H R D and
LDF grants, a possible stand-alone TA project, and the ongoing AAA program closely coordinated with
the ADB and Japan International Corporation o f Welfare Services. The Bank will support reforms and
actions to:
0

0

0

Improve the financial sustainability and targeting of the pension and social insurance programs.
The Bank will support a series o f measures-through PRSCs, AAA, and capacity building-to help
reform the pension system and improve the administration and targeting o f social protection
systems.
Deliver better health sewices by strengthening transparency and sustainability of the health
financing system, improving access to essential drugs, and strengthening the enabling environment
for private participation. Within the Government’s health sector strategic framework, the Bank will
assist in rationalizing health assets and expenditures to better target health needs, including support
to develop a hospital optimization plan, strengthen the system to procure and distribute essential
drugs, and develop better standards to regulate private participation in the sector.
Improve delivery of education services through better linkage of expenditures with needs and
strengthened systems in higher education accreditation and M&E of educational outcomes. For
public expenditures, the Bank will support the development and implementation o f more efficient
education financing norms for primary, secondary, and tertiary education, in l i n e with MTEF
targets and policies. I t will also support strengthening the accreditation system for private, higher
education institutions and upgrading the student assessment system to better measure educational
outcomes nationwide.

CAS Objective 2: Reducing Vulnerabilities
The Bank w i l l continue to expand its support to strengthen systems that reduce risk and enable
59
improved sewice delivery to key vulnerable populations. The Bank will continue to pursue innovative
approaches to reduce rural vulnerability, support better management o f environmental resources that
improve human security, strengthen the financial sustainability o f key services to vulnerable urban
populations, and provide options to strengthen the effectiveness o f national initiatives to balance rural,
regional, and urban development (table 5). Interventions to strengthen the delivery o f social protection,
health, and education services under C A S objective 1 will also support this objective.

60.
Address key sources of rural vulnerability. The Bank will continue to support new approaches
to identify, strengthen, and replicate local and national mechanisms to reduce rural vulnerability. These
include innovative mechanisms that reduce risk f r o m climatic shocks, as well as initiatives that reduce
vulnerability by improving the environment for rural economic activity. The Sustainable Livelihoods
Program has been intensively pilot-testing new approaches to reduce risk and support growth in eight
selected “aimags” (provinces). The second phase o f the Program (SLP-11) would scale up and “scale
out” the tried and tested institutional innovations to the national level from the pilot “aimags,” and will
likely place a greater emphasis o n activities related to rural growth, including support for livestock
marketing and production systems. These efforts will be strongly linked with further Bank support for
the Government’s rural development strategy, and a greater emphasis o n building synergies with rural

- 21 -

Table 5: Reducing Rural and Urban Vulnerability
Longer-terdhigher order
service delivery to reduce ruralurban disparity
Livestock production
increases by 3.5% per year
Animal losses f r o m winter
disasters decreases by h a l f
and households losing a l l
animals reduced by 60% by
2014

Improved sustainable
management o f natural
resources to reduce income
variation and support steady
growth
Forest cover does not
decrease from 8%
Carbon dioxide emissions
reduced from 4.19 tons per
person in 2000
Proportion o f population
without access to safe drinking
water halved by 2015, from
45% in 1990
Proportion o f population using
adequate sanitation facilities
increased f r o m 25% in 2000 to
50% in 2015
Sustained reductions in regional
disparities in economic growth
and human development

CAS outcomes the Bank expects to injuence

in four years
Systems strengthened, and new mechanisms
established o n a pilot basis, to reduce rural
vulnerability. Improved community pastoral
risk management in target regions
0
Proportion o f herders making adequate
winter preparations increased by 30% in
eight target provinces
Herders covered by livestock insurance in
pilot provinces increased f r o m zero t o 37%
Enhanced enabling environment for rural
investment
20% o f target group have access to
microfinance services
Improved mechanism t o target rural
expenditures o n infrastructure through
greater participation
Improved environmental and natural resource
management
Public participation in EIA process and
access to data and i n f o m t i o n o n
environment systematically allowed
0

Community-based forest management
leads to reduction in forest loss in three
pilot “soums” (counties)

Instruments supporting
outcomes
Portfolio: Sustainable
Livelihoods Project
Lending: SLP-11;
[ndex-Based Livestock
[nsurance Project;
Land Administration
Management Project; PRSC-V;
Poverty Assessment;
Decentralization Study

m:

Lending: PRSC-11, 111; Forestry
Project
Natural Resource Use
Strategy
Others: IDF to Ministry o f
Nature and Environment

m:

Strengthened municipal govemance and
service delivery to serve vulnerable
populations
Number o f persons per water kiosk d o w n
f r o m 1,490 in 2004 t o 1,275 in 2008
Municipal and donor resources aligned t o
Ulaanbaatar city development strategy

Lending: Ulaanbaatar Services11; PRSC-IV

Options to improve impact and sustainability
o f regional development expenditures
provided
Regional development interventions
better costed and prioritized in framework
o f MTEF and EGSPRS; reflect
international experiences, good practices

&:
Regional Development
Policy Note; Investment Climate
and Supply Chain studies; CEMi
Development Policy Review;
Decentralization Study;
Integrated Infrastructure
Strategy

projects supported by numerous donors, including ADB, Japan, EU, USAID, FAO, and UNDP, on a
wide range o f rural issues (including veterinary services, cooperatives, integrated crop and livestock
management).

- 22 Pilot and scale-up mechanisms toprepare for and mitigate risk from periodic episodes of unusually
severe winter weather through better monitoring and forecasting of climatic and pasture
conditions, fodder reserve systems, and disaster response planning. In addition to ongoing support
for these activities provided by the ongoing SLP project, the Bank will extend efforts to develop a
pilot index-based livestock insurance system through an anticipated stand-alone project. Further
support to improve pasture management will be provided through a planned Land Administration
and Management Project, building on previous Bank-supported analytical work to assess possible
options to strengthen the management o f Mongolia’s open access pastures.
Support new approaches to improve the environment for rural economic growth. Rural
vulnerability will be further addressed through efforts to improve the environment for rural
economic growth and increases in productivity, complementing the work o f other donors. These
include initiatives to extend access to rural microcredit and financial services, improve the targeting
and efficiency o f rural infrastructure investments through increased participation, and analytical
work (on supply chains, decentralization) to identify possible approaches to address key rural
barriers to growth.

6 1.
Improve environmental governance and management of natural resources. In recognition o f
the strong linkages between vulnerability and the increasing exploitation o f natural resources that has
accompanied transition, the Bank will support efforts to improve environmental governance. at the
national and local levels (Attachment 6). At the national level, analytical work under an ongoing
Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant will support reforms to strengthen the existing institutional
framework for environmental management and enforcement. Reforms will be supported by the PRSCs,
particularly the overall public sector improvements being sought, and complemented by M A including
regular environment monitors. Improvements will include the broadening o f public participation in the
Environmental Impact Assessment process and increasing the overall access to environmental data and
the ability to incorporate this information into policies and programs. At the local level, the Bank will
support the piloting o f community-based use and management o f forestry resources to reduce overexploitation o f rapidly-dwindling forest resources that provide key sources o f fuel, watershed
protection, and critical habitat for biodiversity under a proposed forestry project. These efforts may be
supplemented by Global Environment Facility (GEF) funds. Support will be closely coordinated with
other donors active in the sector including the ADB, UNDP, USAID, Germany (GTZ), the Netherlands,
and Sweden.
62.
Improve municipal service delivery for vulnerable populations in peri-urban areas. The Bank
will continue to build municipal government capacity in Ulaanbaatar and other major urban centers to
effectively and sustainably provide services to the growing numbers o f rural migrants living in “ger”
districts surrounding these cities. Further support will be provided through the Second Ulaanbaatar
Services Improvement Project to improve the access o f “ger” district residents to clean water through
investments in physical infrastructure and increased emphasis on TA to strengthen financial
sustainability and administration o f the municipal water authority. Based o n the new project and
ongoing dialogue with the municipality o f Ulaanbaatar and donors (including ADB, UN, USAID,
W o r l d Vision, and Japan) within the context o f the city’s development strategy, the Bank will address
broader municipal governance issues by supporting further alignment o f donor and municipal resources
around priority needs in municipal administration, land management, and development o f integrated
urban strategies for Darhan and Erdenet. The poverty assessment and related analytical w o r k will shed
light o n the composition and characteristics o f vulnerable populations in peri-urban areas and o n ruralurban linkages, particularly migration. I t i s also anticipated that this work will build on the successful
cooperation among the Municipality o f Ulaanbaatar, international and local NGOs including W o r l d
Vision, Save the Children-UK, and the Christina Noble Foundation, and the Bank in a nearly-completed
Japan Social Development Fund-supported project to help street children.

- 23 63.
Assist the Government in analyzing the viability of options to support its regional development
objective. While there i s widespread support for the underlying objectives o f the Government’s regional
development strategy, concems continue to be raised about the costs and benefits o f the approaches
proposed - including large infrastructure investments, free trade zones, and support for specific
industries -- in the strategy, particularly given the limited success o f similar approaches in other
countries. Analytical work on the regional development strategy, the integrated infrastructure strategy,
and o n decentralization will seek to assist the Government in assessing options for achieving regional
development objectives based o n analysis o f costs and benefits and international experience. The
analytical work on regional development and decentralization will be done in close collaboration with
the Government, ADB, Japan, GTZ, and other donors, and will draw upon findings o f the integrated
infrastructure strategies and the investment climate assessment and supply chains study. I t will analyze
prospects for economic growth in the various regions and the proposed “growth poles” and will
contribute to the debate on their economic and financial viability. It will also assess the implications o f
this analysis for the overall decentralization program. After the first three PRSCs, consideration will be
given to addressing issues o f regional development and decentralized public administration, including
needed analytical work to fill knowledge gaps, in the context o f subsequent PRSCs.
CAS Objective 3: Strengthening the Alignment of Policies and Resources Around Results
64.
The third CAS objective directly supports the fifth pillar of the EGSPRS, but it reflects the
Bank’s evolving approach in Mongolia -- emphasizing partnership and collaboration at multiple levels
to improve results. I t i s aimed at building synergies among substantive priorities and approaches at the
national, sectoral, and project levels. M a n y o f the elements o f this approach have been pursued in the
context o f previous Bank assistance including Consultative Group (CG) meetings, sector work,
individual projects, and ongoing formal and informal coordination efforts. This new approach seeks, by
contrast, to support the Government in building linkages that integrate disparate systems and initiatives,
funded by domestic resources and ODA, toward the national development priorities for poverty
reduction and growth (table 6).
65.
Strengthen the national institutional framework for further developing, implementing, and
monitoring the EGSPRS. The Bank will continue to provide support to strengthen key elements o f the
institutional framework for implementing the EGSPRS. I t will support the Government in the annual
updates o f the EGSPRS using mechanisms (Trust Funds [TFs], consultants) similar to those used for
supporting the EGSPRS itself. It will also support government efforts t o develop and strengthen
mechanisms to improve public participation in EGSPRS implementation and monitoring through the
PRSP TF, a small-grants program, AAA o n civic engagement, and Bank-Netherlands Partnership
Program grants. The Bank will work with the U N D P and the ADB through ongoing AAA and the use
o f trust funds to help the Government strengthen the reliability and frequency o f the national poverty
monitoring system and enhance the capacity o f the National Statistical Office. Support will also be
provided to strengthen sector ministerial M&E systems (especially in infrastructure, agriculture,
education, social welfare, and environment) and better integrate them with the national EGSPRS
monitoring system. T o ensure that Bank support on these initiatives i s w e l l aligned with support from
others, the Bank will participate in the multi-sector Government-Donor Working Group that i s about to
be formed and in the ongoing UN Thematic Group on the MDGs. The Working Group will focus on
integrating EGSPRS and MDG M&E systems, harmonizing procurement and project management
procedures, supporting public sector reforms, and integrating rural and regional development.

66.
Facilitate the development and implementation of sector strategies linked with the EGSPRS.
This support, embedded throughout the Bank’s assistance program, forms a common and critical set o f
interventions that will contribute to the development and implementation o f the EGSPRS. Sector
strategies are already in place for a number o f sectors (energy, education, and health). In many others,
efforts are needed t o further articulate and implement strategies (private sector development, transport,

- 24 agriculture). The Bank plans to increase i t s emphasis on strategic frameworks to build agreement
around outstanding reforms and prioritize investments. Shared sector strategies based o n collaborative
analytical w o r k will provide an important opportunity for the Bank and others to take a new approach to
institution-building efforts by setting measurable goals for institutional capacity in a given sector,
sequencing and integrating reforms o f institutional systems with capacity building efforts, and
emphasizing initiatives that strengthen institutional mechanisms to promote accountability and civic
engagement.

Table 6: Strengthening Alignment of Policies and Resources with Development Results
Longer-term/ higher
order country outcomes

Institutional structure for
EGSPRS implementation
enables effective public
sector and donor responses
to support development
priorities (see also CAS
Objective 1)

Improved results from the
implementation o f sector
strategies

Strengthened govemment
capacity and systems to
coordinate ODA in support
o f EGSPRS and national
development results

Expected CAS outcomes in four years

Oversight and line ministries have appropriate national-level
implementation and M&E frameworks to facilitate alignment o f
govemment and donor resources, reliably assess progress
toward EGSPRS goals, and adjust allocation of resources based
on M&E feedback
EGSPRS goals further prioritized and costed in framework
of MTEF; updates reflect findings of M&E system and
revisions in sector strategi,es
EGSPRS monitoring system strengthened with indicators
reflecting national priorities, fully integratedwith MDGs,
and reliably and regularly monitored
Civic engagement mechanisms institutionalized in
implementation and monitoring of EGSPRS
Greater consensus and alignment among donors and the
Govemment on costed and prioritized sector strategies that are
linked to MTEFIEGSPRS (including infrastructure, social
sector, and public sector management)

Govemment uses CG meetings as a mechanism to align donor
resources with EGSPRS priorities, informed by M&E feedback
Government-DonorWorking Groups institutionalized and serve
as mechanism to align donor resources with national priorities
and strategies, informed by M&E systems

Instruments supporting
outcomes

m:Poverty

AssessmentPETS; Civic
engagement assessment
Others: PRSP Trust Fund
for monitoring (with
UNDP); Multi-sector
Govemment- Donor
Working Group

AAA: Sector strategies in

PSD, infrastructure, social
sectors, etc.;
Others: Participation in
Goa.-Donor Working
Groups; Consultative
Grouo meetings
Others: Govt.-Donor
Working Groups;
Consultative Group (CG)
meetings; harmonization

Harmonized donor and govemment processes allow more
efficient use of donor resources in support o f development
priorities, reduced transaction costs and burden on govemment
The Govemment and major donors use harmonized
procurement procedures leading to reduced procurement
time and increasedtransparency
Govemment reviews of donor portfolios harmonized and
focused on development outcomes
PIUs consolidated, integratedwith counterpart agencies
and sector strategies

67.
Strengthen the Government’s efforts to coordinate aid and harmonize donor procedures. The
Bank will continue to participate actively in aid coordination and harmonization efforts. As co-chair
(with the Government) o f the CG meetings, the Bank will focus attention on the implementation o f the
EGSPRS, and the need for donor alignment around this. The C G meetings and continuing dialogue
will provide opportunities for the donor community t o receive and discuss progress reports and updates
o n EGSPRS implementation and plans linked to the medium-term expenditure framework. The Bank
will also enhance i t s participation in Government-Donor Working Groups in line with the lead donor(s)

- 25 concept: social sector Working Group (with the ADB, Japan, and the UN agencies in the lead);
infrastructure Working Group (with the Bank, ADB and Japan taking the lead); and a multi-sector
Working Group to address public sector management and govemance issues, procurement and project
financial management, regionallarea-based development, and overall E G S P R S M D G implementation
and monitoring. The Bank will continue i t s work with the ADB to support streamlining and
harmonizing procurement processes. The Bank has agreed with the ADB and other donors to
collaborate o n addressing PIU issues-improving joint project financial management standards,
aligning multiple donor PIUs with sector strategies, and where possible, consolidating and integrating
multiple PIUs in a given sector to ensure that project implementation capacity i s retained in the
government agency. The Bank i s pursuing joint portfolio performance reviews (with the ADB) to
emphasize project outcomes. I t will expand efforts, with the donor community, to engage China and
Russia in donor-coordination efforts (box 4 and Attachment 7).
Box 4: M a j o r Donor Activities
United Nations. T h e U N D P supports the Govemment in aid coordination efforts and, with other UN agencies, provides
assistance to key capacity and institution-building efforts. In particular, the UN system i s helping the Govemment develop and
monitor the Mongolia M D G s and providing support through i t s specialized agencies in each goal area. T h e UN system also
supports good govemance and human security, enterprise restructuring, environment and natural resource management, earlychildhood and non-formal education, nutrition and sanitation programs, and education. T h e Bank works very closely with the
Government and UN system in aid coordination, aligning the EGSPRS goals with the MDGs, environment, governance and
poverty research support.
IMF. An IMF program under the PRGF i s in place, and the first and second reviews were concluded in September 2003. T h e
EGSPRS macroeconomic framework is the program basis for the short and medium terms. T h e Bank collaborates closely and
regularly with the I M F on macroeconomic developments, the fiscal framework and public sector reforms (particularly wagebill implications o f civil-service reforms), the financial sector, private sector development and investment regimes, and
poverty. The two institutions produce the JSAs for the PRSPs and monitor their implementation.
ADB. The ADB i s developing i t s assistance program for Mongolia for the coming years, aligning i t with EGSPRS priorities.
ADB activities have emphasized the financial sector (bank-risk management, capital markets, and insurance), public sector
accounting and auditing, development o f highways, agricultural services (veterinary, well development, irrigation, and seeds),
urban services in provincial towns, housing finance and mortgage market development, education and health services
investment, and welfare system reform. T h e Bank has indicated that i t w i l l take part in the development o f infrastructure and
social sector strategies and in other donor harmonization efforts w i t h the ADB. ADB will also explore ways o f cofinancing
PRSCs I 1 and 111.
Japan. Through the JICA grant facility and JBIC concessional lending, Japan has emphasized the economic sectors o f energy,
transport, railway rehabilitation, agriculture, and water supply, as well as support to tourism development, health, and
education (including capacity building). I t i s also updating its Mongolia assistance strategy to align it with the EGSPRS. I t i s
expected that the Bank and Japan w i l l collaborate closely in the energy, transport, education and health sectors and in rural
development.
USAID. A major focus o f U S A I D i s improving the private sector policy environment, development o f business capabilities,
entrepreneurship, support for privatization and sector competitiveness, and urban micro business development. Other areas o f
concentration include legal and judicial reform, economic policy advice, creating markets for herders, govemance and support
for democracy, and environmental protection. T h e Bank works closely with their advisors in energy policy, financial sector
and privatization policy and the minerals sector development. Over the CAS period, the Bank w i l l closely coordinate efforts in
private sector development, the urban sector and in legal and judicial reforms.
European Union. T h e EU has focused on a number o f activities that have included health, environment, democracy and rule
of law and administrative support at provincial levels; assistance for statistical capacity, vocational education and training;
support for S M E and banking management capabilities, and aid coordination. Looking forward, the Bank w i l l work closely
with the EU in cofinancing PRSC I1 and 111.
Germany. Germany continues to focus in generating rural sector growth, emergency relief, rural finance and cooperative
development, privatization o f veterinary services, and environment and natural resource management apart from providing
assistance in legal and judicial reforms and the training o f legal professionals. Other areas include supporting policy reforms in
the financial and energy sectors, training and support for SMEs and the development o f I C T in the westem aimags. The Bank
has collaborated with Germany in energy sector reforms and in the financial sector. Further collaboration will take place over
the CAS period in rural and regional development, environment, energy and PSD.
Sweden. Sweden has been focusing efforts in strengthening govemance and the public sector, supporting poverty research,
capacity building in urban land administration, civil aviation, environment, and rehabilitation o f the transmission grid. T h e
Bank i s working with Sweden to cofinance PRSC Ithat will focus on public sector reforms.

- 26 B. Assistance Program

68.
The proposed four-year program to support the CAS objectives integrates Bank instruments
around a core set of policy and institutional reforms that support implementation of the EGSPRS.
Building o n the high value attached to the Bank’s policy work in Mongolia, a program o f ongoing,
collaborative analytical work will inform the reforms to be supported. A stronger emphasis on Bank
participation in ongoing sector dialogue and strategy work will seek to support greater agreement
around reform agendas and alignment o f resources to the reforms. Lending will support these policy
and institutional reforms -- through the sequenced series o f PRSCs, investment operations with a
greater policy component linked to the sector strategies, and selected technical assistance in support of
key public sector reforms. The instruments will be integrated and sequenced for the highest impactadjustment lending supporting needed policy reforms that make selected investment lending more
effective, AAA and dialogue to fill knowledge gaps and build consensus, TA Credits and training
activities to address critical capacity constraints, and I F C partnerships with the private sector to
complement public policies (box 5). The World Bank Institute (WBI) will also address training needs
and critical capacity constraints.
Box 5: The IFC in Mongolia
In recent years, IFC’s focus in Mongolia has been directed toward: (i)
enabling financial intermediaries
increase lending to SMEs; (ii)
TA initiatives aimed at improving the investment climate; and (iii)
larger
natural resource projects. IFC currently has two projects in Mongolia. One i s a loan t o XacBank to help
expand lending operations and improve liquidity accompanied by TA f r o m S M E Capacity Building Fund,
designed to introduce international operating and governance standards and building o f institutional
capacity. The second i s a loan extended to a leather processing facility in 1997, which i s currently
undergoing restructuring.

IFC i s also providing advisory services and TA through the Private Enterprise Partnership t o develop
Mongolia’s leasing industry. The project seeks to establish a conducive legislative environment for
leasing; build capacity o f the proposed leasing regulator; create opportunities for investments in the
sector; provide training and consulting services to enterprises interested in leasing; and conduct a public
campaign t o educate private enterprises, financial institutions, and regulatory agencies about leasing. T o
support SMEs, IFC plans t o localize its S M E Toolkit in Mongolia; it will provide small businesses access
to W e b and CD-ROM-based interactive tools and training.
IFC undertook a sector study o n mining in 2002. This w o r k has been followed up by the Bank with a
review o n the current performance and future potential for growth in the sector which will be the basis for
a policy note and recommendations t o the Government. The Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS)
has provided assistance o n improving the foreign investment climate in Mongolia. F I A S has also offered
training t o the Foreign Investment and Foreign Trade Agency (FIFTA), the foreign investment promotion
agency, to help it restructure.
Over the C A S period, IFC will continue i t s focus o n the financial sector through a mix o f investment and
TA activities. IFC i s investigating post-privatization investment opportunities in the Trade and
Development Bank and has reviewed possible participation to help the AgBank extend its rural network.
I t i s undertaking an initiative t o identify opportunities t o provide TA t o Mongolian SMEs associated with
the mining sector. This initiative is expected to enable Mongolian SMEs t o become suppliers o f products
and services to mining companies; respond to the needs o f mining SMEs in management training,
business consulting, and finance; and create alternative business opportunities o r formalize illegal
“artisanal” mining activities. IFC plans t o help Mobicom, the country’s largest mobile phone service
provider, t o assess the viability o f a capital increase and stock listing.

- 27 69.
Adjustment lending will be provided through a series of annual single-tranche PRSCs (with
actions fulJlled prior to credit effectiveness) to support selected key elements of the reform agenda in
the EGSPRS. The PRSCs will be sequenced based on requisite analytical work, agreement, consensus,
ownership, commitment, and readiness to implement. PRSC-I will focus o n supporting the
Government’s public sector and institutional reform agenda within the first EGSPRS pillar. PRSC-I1
will support the second EGSPRS pillar, which aims to establish a sound institutional and regulatory
environment t o complete the transition to a market economy and enable the private sector to become an
engine o f growth. PRSC-I11 will focus on implementing reforms in the social sectors, and as with PRSC
11, continue to support public sector reforms. Future annual PRSCs would follow up on various policy
issues and support other priorities determined by EGSPRS updates and reviews o f progress. The Bank
will work closely with key donors to develop the policy reform agenda around the PRSCs and seek
cofinancing opportunities (there have been initial expressions o f interest from the ADB, EU, and
Sweden).
70.
Proposed investment lending w i l l be selective and focus on priority areas agreed upon among
the Bank, the Government, and other donors within sector-wide approaches (SWAP) where possible.
Lending decisions will take into account the poverty impact and results, EGSPRS alignment, country
and Bank experience, and activities o f other donors and partners. In most cases, lending will be
undertaken only when there i s clear articulation, consensus, and agreement on broad sector strategies
among stakeholders. Working with others to strengthen the sectoral and other Government-Donor
Working Groups, the Bank will help develop shared sector strategies and multiyear investment
programs. This will enable the Bank to move toward SWAPS and greater collaboration with other
donors (with increased co-financing) in investment operations in infrastructure, and also possibly in
rural development, environment, and other sectors . Selected TA operations will buttress adjustment
and investment lending. Where possible, IDA lending will be supplemented by donor grant resources.
The use o f TF grants, beneficial in the past, i s expected to continue. GEF resources will help Mongolia
address i t s priorities in biodiversity conservation, climate change, and sustainable land management.

7 1.
The Bank’s program of assistancefor FY0.5-FY08 includes lending for adjustment, investment,
and TA credits. The notional base case lending program (table 7) includes annual, single-tranche
PRSCs (about 40 percent o f lending) and up to two additional projects per year depending on progress
o n project preparation, readiness o f the client, and overall pace o f implementation o f the program.
PRSC-I and the Second Ulaanbaatar Services Improvement Project are expected to be delivered in
FY04. For the CAS period, the proposed operations are:

e

e
e
e
e

A pilot Index-Based Livestock Insurance Project (FY05) to support a private-company scheme
o n a full commercial basis with international reinsurance.
A second Private Sector Development Credit (FY05), building on the success o f the f i r s t credit
to finance capital investment by SMEs through commercial banks.
A Social Sector TA (FY06) to complement PRSC I11to assist the Government to implement the
policy conditions, build capacity in social sector ministries, and provide limited investment.
The second phase o f the Sustainable Livelihoods Program (FY07) to expand institutional
innovations from the eight pilot “aimags” under the first SLP to the national level and continue
with activities in pastoral risk management, microfinance, and the Local Initiatives Fund.
Follow-up to the E C T A C and Legal Reform LIL to continue support for capacity enhancement
to implement the EGSPRS and undertake related policy analysis (FY07).
A Land Administration and Management Project (FYO8) to support implementation o f the new
Land Law, focused on both pasture and arable lands.
A Forestry Project (FY08) to address issues o f sustainable forestry and livelihoods.
T w o infiastructure projects are also envisaged in the second and fourth year o f the C A S period
(FY06 and FY08). The components are expected to be based on results o f the integrated

- 28 infrastructure strategy work being undertaken and agreement on priorities and possible SWAP
arrangements. These could focus on providing basic infrastructure services (heat, electricity,
ICT, roads, and clean air) to urban, rural, and peri-urban areas by rationalizing delivery o f
infrastructure services, as well as transport sector investments.

Table 7: Proposed Assistance Program: Base Case
Year
FY05

Lending
PRSC-11: PSD Issues (US$lOm)
Index-Based Livestock Insurance
Project (US$5m)
Private Sector Development Credit-I1
(US$4m)

FY06

PRSC-111: HD Issues (US$ 1Om)
Social Sector TA (US$3m)
Infrastructure Project: (to be
determined) (US$13m)

FY07

PRSC-IV (US$9m)
Second Sustainable Livelihoods
Project (US$Sm)
Judicial and Public Sector Reform TA
(US$3m)

FY08

PRSC-V (US$9m)
Infrastructure Project: (to be
determined) (US$Sm)
Land Administration and Management
Project/ Forestry Project (US$6m)

AAA
Poverty Assessment' Public Expenditure Tracking
Survey
PSD Strategy (Investment Climate Assessment'
Supply Chains)
Integrated Infrastructure Strategy
Social Sector Strategy
Regional Development Policy Note
Financial Sector Mid-term Review
Monitor: Economicl Environment
Country Economic M e m o r a n d u d Development
Policy Review (Sources o f Growth)
Decentralization Study
Livestock Support Services Study
Social Sector AAA
Judicial Reform Review
Civic Engagement Assessment
Monitor: Economicl Social
Integrated Public Expenditure Review1 Integrated
Fiduciary Assessment
Natural Resource Use Strategy
ICTStrategy
Infrastructure AAA
Monitor: Economicl Environment
Investment Climate1 Private Sector Assessment
Financial Sector Assessment
Human Development Assessment
Monitor: Economicl Social

72.
AAA w i l l emphasize more collaborative approaches and stronger implementation, policy
linkages, consensus-building, and dissemination within the new multi-year framework being instituted
in the East Asia and Pacijic region of the Bank. AAA will stress collaboration with the Government
and other donors, and involve local research institutes, academia, civil society, and the private sector.
Major tasks will support the C A S themes: a Public Expenditure Reviewhtegrated Fiduciary
Assessment and a Public Expenditure Tracking Survey (PETS) will inform the public sector reform
agenda; an Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) and Supply Chains Study, the mid-term Financial
Sector Review, and the PSD Strategy will provide critical data and analysis to design Bank support to
strengthen the environment for PSD; a Poverty Assessment, the Public Expenditure Tracking Survey
(PETS), and a Decentralization Study will update the information o n the dimensions o f poverty and
service delivery in rural and urban areas; the Country Economic Memorandum will focus on
consolidating the ongoing work on sources o f growth (such as mining, cashmere trade, ICT); the
Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) and Supply Chains Study along with a Regional Development
Policy Note will form the basis for the dialogue o n regional development issues, where the Bank has
misgivings with regard to cost-benefit and macroeconomic implications o f proposed interventions. The
collaborative development o f agreed strategies for the key sectors (infrastructure, social sectors, natural

- 29 resource use) will be necessary for identifying investment priorities and the design o f possible SWAPS.
Analytical w o r k will fill knowledge gaps and update information in such areas as livestock services,
legal reforms, civic engagement, and human development, and the Bank will continue to produce
regular topical monitors and updates.

C. Portfolio Management

73.
Ongoing projects w i l l be aligned more closely with the objectives of this CAS. Mid-term
reviews will assess the need for restructuring to align project development objectives with the new CAS
priorities, enhance linkages to AAA, and implement M&E systems to monitor outcomes. Most attention
will be given to the six (out o f nine projects) that are not currently near completion and which will
likely have the greatest impact on outcomes during the C A S period. These six projects are: Transport
Development (reducing isolation o f remote regions), Sustainable Livelihoods (addressing rural
vulnerability and local capacity building), Legal Reform (core reforms in the legal and judicial area),
Energy (restructuring, privatization, and development o f the regulatory system), Financial Capacity
Development (institutional capacity building o f the banking sector), and Economic Capacity Technical
Assistance (improving budgetary and public expenditure management). O f these, the reviews o f the
Energy and Transport Development projects will thoroughly assess the need for any restructuring; for
the others the focus will be o n the intended sector results.
74.
Supervision activities w i l l continue to receive the highest priority in the allocation of the
administrative budget and managementfocus. The field-based QPPRs are proving beneficial in spotting
generic and project-specific problems early o n and will be conducted jointly with the Government (and
the ADB). The QPPR performance benchmarks will be monitored for early diagnosis and remedies.
Other priority measures include: (i)use o f project readiness filters to reduce start-up delays by
addressing key issues during project preparation rather than after implementation has begun; (ii)
support to the Government (together with the ADB and Japan) to develop and implement a common
training program for project counterparts on key implementation s k i l l s (procurement, financial
management, disbursements, safeguard policies, and M&E]; (iii)
collaboration with the ADB to assist
the Government in amending the procurement process to streamline and harmonize various
requirements; and (iv) assistance to the Government and implementing agencies to improve their
financial management and control procedures and skills, in l i n e with Bank financial reporting
requirements (this measure should also support the goal o f enhancing project implementation
mechanics and safeguards against corruption in Bank-financed projects).

75,
While portfolio risk and performance remains acceptable, there are generic implementation
issues related to delayed start-ups, project readiness, slow procurement, and disbursements. The CAS
proposes to improve portfolio management by addressing each o f these issues. The Bank has adopted
the CPPR recommendation to use project readiness filters to ensure that projects are set for
implementation by testing such key elements as project management, fiduciary aspects, counterpart
funding, M&E, and social and environmental assessments. Along with the ADB, the Bank will support
implementation o f the revised Public Procurement L a w o f Mongolia (an IDF grant i s in place). The
Bank will also provide assistance to strengthen weak areas o f financial management, audit compliance,
and project M&E.
D. Monitoring Implementation

76.
The Bank w i l l regularly monitor the implementation of the CAS. The results fi-amework
outlined in the tables in Section IV.A establishes the priority outcomes-and the intermediate indicators
to track implementation-that the Bank expects to influence through i t s interventions. This framework
further links the expected C A S outcomes to the higher order development objectives o f Mongolia and
the key constraints related to these results. This will serve as the basis for monitoring and evaluating the

-30Bank’s performance and help to adjust the strategy as needed during the four-year implementation
period. Along with strong monitoring o f the portfolio, annual reviews will be held with the Government
to take stock o f CAS implementation progress.

77.
The Bank will strengthen its field presence to better implement and monitor the CAS. T o
enhance i t s capacity to implement the new CAS-including
institutional capacity-building, policy
dialogue, and donor coordination-the Bank will continue to reinforce i t s regional and country office
capacity. Beginning in FY05, responsibility for Mongolia will be transferred from the present South
East Asia Country Management Unit to the China Country Management Unit. In addition to logistical
advantages, this transfer will facilitate increased Bank efforts to engage at the sub-regional level. The
Bank will also continue to build and strengthen the capacity o f the country office to support the
portfolio by expanding and strengthening national staff and strengthening office information systems.
The Bank will pay particular attention to building national staff and partner capacities related to donor
coordination and to managing for results-including greater emphasis o n outcome-oriented indicators,
project M&E systems aligned to national results, and results-based QPPRs.
E. Scenarios and Triggers
78.
The Bank proposes a base case lending scenario of about US$88 million over FY05-FY08
consistent with current I D A allocations. Mongolia i s currently considered to be in the base case which
includes annual PRSCs and two additional investment and capacity-building operations every year.
However, to remain in the base case, certain requirements would need to be fulfilled and several actions
taken. These monitorable triggers (table 8) encompass sound performance o f the macro-economy,
prudent financial sector management, steady EGSPRS implementation, satisfactory implementation o f
the public sector reform program, good governance, and a well-performing IDA portfolio.
79
I n a low case scenario, about US$50 million in IDAJlows are envisaged for the four-year CAS
period. The program will shift to the l o w case in the event o f major deteriorations in economic
performance and the policy environment. The Bank will form a judgment o n such slippages through
assessments on the basis of the triggers specified for the base case. In the l o w case scenario, there will
be n o adjustment (PRSC) lending, but continued support to poverty-reducing activities and capacitybuilding. However, any slippages o f the PRSCs could also mean that related lending (such as the
Judicial and Public Sector Reform TA or the Social Sector TA) could be deferred to synchronize with
the associated policy lending. Furthermore, as noted, the development o f and consensus around sector
strategies would be prerequisite for investment lending.
80.
The CAS also provides for a high case scenario where up to 30 percent more (over base case)
I D A resources would become available. For this scenario to occur, all base case triggers must be met
continuously; in addition, there will be indications o f a faster pace o f reforms through the early
implementation of several o f the more complex EGSPRS policies in public sector management (the
public investment program, pensions) and financial sector (regulations for holding companies). The
CAS specifies the following additional triggers for the high case: (i)
preparation and adoption o f
adequate cost-benefit analysis o f the public investment program to guide and i n f o r m projects; (ii)
adoption o f the pension reform strategy and implementation o f key recommendations o n increasing the
retirement age and specifying mechanisms for transition from the pay-as-you-go system to the Notional
Defined Contribution scheme; and, (iii)
putting in place the legal and regulatory framework for
financial holding companies. The additional resources could be made available through modulated
PRSC amounts, andor, given the extent o f cofinancing available for the PRSCs, through larger
investment projects. The faster pace o f reforms (such as o n pensions) would have costs associated with
them and would require more budgetary support.

- 31 Table 8: CAS Triggers
Trigger areas
environment

e
Financial sector

Implementation

reforms

Govemance
0

Public sector
management

Financial sector

Trigger/(Timing)
To stay in the base case
Satisfactory and sound macroeconomic
performance with prudent fiscal and
monetary stances and avoidance o f
prolonged inflation above single digits
(Continuous)
At least 90 percent o f the banks (in terms
o f share o f assets) are liquid and in
compliance with Bank o f Mongolia
prudential norms (Continuous)
Satisfactory implementation o f the
EGSPRS; regular reporting o n progress
and M&E (Continuous)
Adoption o f rolling multi-year MTEFs
based o n credible macroeconomic
projections (starting 2004)
Adoption and the initiation o f the
implementation o f Civil Service Reform
Strategy (Mid-2005)
Adoption and implementation o f the
Public Procurement L a w (2004)
Annual release o f audits o f budget
execution (Continuous)
Annual publication o f detailed budgets
with sector and aimag-level
disaggregation (starting 2005)
Absence o f non-transparent quasi-fiscal
activities and contingent liabilities
(Continuous)
Unsatisfactory ratings o f procurement and
financial management in less than 30
percent o f projects (Continuous)
Adequate cost-benefit analysis o f the
public investment program
Adoption o f pension reform strategy and
implementation o f k e y recommendations
o n (i)
increasing the retirement age for
m e n and women; and (ii)
specification o f
the transition mechanism f r o m the pay-asyou-go system t o the Notional Defined
Contribution Scheme
Legal and regulatory framework for
financial holding companies in place

V.

Means of verijication
Regular monitoring and reviews in
collaboration with the IMF’s
review o f the PRGF program
Regular monitoring and reviews

Review o f progress and M&E
reports; JSAs
~

Review and assessments within
the context o f the PRSCs

Assessment in the context o f
PRSCs; IDF
NewspapersiGazettes
NewspapersiGazettes
Surveillance in collaboration with
IMF

QPPRs; Supervision

Review and assessments within
the context o f the PRSCs

Assessment o f l a w passed

RISKS

81.
Implementing the CAS faces various risks, both internal and external. The risk that the
Government’s commitment to the poverty reduction strategy enunciated and embraced in the EGSPRS
will change i s minor, given the wide consultations, participation, and ownership. The political risks are
also small, because both the MPRP and opposition groups are expected to stay the course on reforms
and poverty reduction strategy. The Bank will maintain a dialogue with key elements within the MPRP

- 32 and with main opposition parties. But implementing the EGSPRS poses major challenges, and the
Bank’s CAS, along with other donor assistance programs, i s geared toward overcoming them. Several
other risks and downside scenarios could materialize and require mitigating measures from the Bank,
where feasible.

82.
Macroeconomic risks. Current hard-earned, macroeconomic stability remains fragile, as
pressures to increase wages and pensions and other social welfare programs continue. The contracting
of recent loans and other liabilities (some on nonconcessional terms) as part o f the Russian debt
settlement has also burdened the Government with short-term repayment obligations. These
developments underscore the need for prudent macroeconomic policies, particularly for holding the line
on expenditures and fiscal management. The Bank will remain fully engaged with the Government on
these issues, in close collaboration with the IMF and other partners, and will regularly monitor
developments. The ongoing E C T A C and proposed PRSCs-which
will focus initially on public
expenditure management and budget execution as well as on civil service reforms-will
squarely
address this risk. The Bank-supported debt management system will continue to be helpful in
undertaking debt management and analysis. The joint financial sector work with the ADB will help
identify any r i s k s arising from what i s considered an over-banked system. Maintaining a stable
macroeconomic environment i s also a trigger for staying in the base case and for continued access to
quick-disbursing resources under the PRSCs.
83.
External risks. Given Mongolia’s undiversified economic and export base and i t s geographical
location, severe external shocks in the form o f terms-of-trade deteriorations or “dzuds” may well
materialize. In both cases, herders and rural dwellers generally are particularly vulnerable. The price
prospects for Mongolia’s major exports and imports are projected to be stable. Assisting the
Government to address vulnerabilities o f the rural and urban poor (such as pastoral risk management
and pilot livestock insurance) and strengthening public sector management to increase efficiency o f
expenditures and improve service delivery (including social safety nets) are major objectives o f the
CAS. The lending program, A A A s , and the policy dialogue are designed around these goals. The Bank
will work with i t s CG partners to mobilize additional resources if external shocks severely affect
incomes.

84.
Governance risks. It i s possible that increased instances o f corruption and deteriorating
governance could emerge (unreported quasi-fiscal/contingent liability operations, or fiduciary
malfeasance at the macro or project levels). The C A S strongly supports the EGSPRS emphasis on
addressing governance issues. This includes greater emphasis o n government effectiveness,
accountability, and transparency to target sources o f corruption, as well as monitoring (with the IMF)
the implementation o f laws and guidelines by the Bank o f Mongolia and the Ministry o f Finance and
Economy. The PRSCs are designed to focus o n improving public sector transparency and
accountability and access to fiscal information, audits, and expanded budget coverage. The Bank will
encourage participatory M&E o f EGSPRS implementation, and the PETS should bring resource
leakages t o light. The C A S program will strengthen institutions and capacity-building, giving particular
emphasis to improving processes and systems. The Bank’s support to legal reforms and i t s integrated
fiduciary assessments go beyond ensuring that the IDA portfolio adheres to international accounting
and procurement standards. With the IMF, the Bank will jointly monitor fiscal and debt developments
for instances o f quasi-fiscal activities. Several o f the base case triggers directly tackle governance.
85.
EGSPRS implementation risks. The greatest challenges and risk stem from the Government’s
limited capacity to implement the policies and reform program envisioned in i t s ambitious poverty
reduction and growth strategy by translating them into prioritized and funded action programs. There i s
also concern that interventionist central planning tendencies, evident in the EGSPRS, may lead to
costly, unsustainable investments. As noted earlier, the Bank intends to remain fully engaged in this
dialogue with the Government and others and bring to bear i t s analytical work and international cross-

- 33 country expertise. The CG process will also be used to receive progress reports on EGSPRS
implementation and provide a forum for donor alignment and identification o f resource needs. But the
greatest mitigation o f this risk will stem from support to the Government and other stakeholders
through a range o f vehicles: dialogue, policy advice, outreach and communication, PRSCs, investment
lending, U s , and TA. These vehicles will build capacities, institutions, and systems-and
incorporate participatory processes into implementing and monitoring the EGSPRS.

VI.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

86.
The coming years are both promising and challenging for Mongolia as it embarks on
implementing i t s EGSPRS program and strives to move to a higher growth path to reduce poverty. The
CAS, designed to align the Bank Group’s support to this effort, i s proposing a results-based framework
to evaluate the attainment o f these objectives and i t s own performance. Mongolia will continue to need
concessional assistance from i t s international partners. This CAS provides the basis for the continuing
support through IDA and other resources.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Shengman Zhang
Washington, D.C.
April 5,2004

Attachment 1
Page 1 o f 9

Attachment 1
Page 2 o f 9

Attachment 1
Page 3 o f 9

Attachment 1
Page 4 o f 9

L.

Attachment 1
Page 5 o f 9

Attachment 1
Page 6 o f 9

Attachment 1
Page 7 o f 9

.-C

Attachment 1
Page 8 o f 9

Attachment 1
Page 9 o f 9

.-M

3

4-3

E
8

I

e,

v)

U
U
U

Attachment 2
MONGOLIA: PHASES OF TRANSITION
Four economic phases have characterized the Mongolian economy since the transition began. These
phases have been influenced by political instability, external conditions, and commitment to economic
reforms.
e

Transition (I990-1993). Mongolia’s macroeconomic transition to a market economy was resolute.
During 1990-1 992, the country’s Coalition government was headed by the Mongolia People’s
Revolutionary Party (MPRP). The collapse o f the Soviet Union and breakdown o f monetary and
trade relations among the Comecon states resulted in a sharp contraction o f real GDP, which fell by
about 23 percent between 1989 and 1993, and high inflation, which peaked at 321 percent in late
1992. T o arrest the decline in macroeconomic fundamentals, the Government moved quickly to
liberalize the exchange rate, trade and prices, and open up the financial sector, including the
establishment o f a two-tiered banking system and privatized the livestock sector.
Stabilization, reforms, and growth (1994-1996). The 1994-1996 period was one o f stabilization and
significant economic recovery; the MPRP remained in power through 1996. T h e recovery was
buoyed by increasing livestock production and favorable international prices for copper and gold;
GDP growth averaged 3.6 percent. However, the scope and pace o f reforms slowed-insufficient
attention was paid to the institutional framework required to build an internally competitive economy.
The financial sector collapsed, following the bankruptcy o f Mongolia’s two largest banks; and the
Government continued to subsidize state-owned enterprises, particularly in the agriculture sector.
With increasing stability, donor assistance shifted the emphasis from emergency support to
rehabilitating essential infrastructure, macroeconomic stability, and policy and legal reforms.
Poor external conditions, poor performance, and political gridlock (1997-2000). The 1997-1 998
East Asian and Russian crises exposed Mongolia’s underlying structural inefficiencies. Export prices
o f i t s main commodities fell sharply: gold prices fell by 42.5 percent, copper by 28 percent, and
cashmere by about 12.5 percent. Large revenue shortfalls resulted, as corporate income-tax
contributions and dividend payments from major state-owned enterprises dried up. By late 1998,
revenue collection had dropped by more than 5 percentage points o f GDP, while expenditures during
1997-1998 increased by more than 17 percent. In 1998, the deficit reached an all-time high o f 14.3
percent. T o maintain public confidence and protect the vulnerable from further income erosion, the
Government increased public employment and cash transfers to the population. However, the deficit
was reduced to 7 percent o f GDP in 2000, mainly because o f the Government’s enhanced revenue
mobilization efforts. This period was also marked by political turbulence (three successive
governments between 1997 and 2000), which crippled the reform agenda.
Political stabiliv, sound structural performance, but climatic shocks (2000-2003). During this
period, the Government launched a renewed effort to restore macro balances with mixed results.
Inflation dropped to 5 percent; the deficit was reduced to about 6 percent o f GDP; and the post-199 1,
debt-to-GDP level decreased to 88.9. However, the current account deficit worsened to 14 percent o f
GDP, while overall government expenditures increased to more than 45 percent o f GDP. The pace
and scope o f the structural reform agenda accelerated and deepened over this period, as evidenced by
the adoption o f the Public Sector Management and Finance L a w (PSMFL) and the privatization o f
large state-owned enterprises, such as the Trade and Development Bank. L o w growth during 20002002, which reflected large losses in the livestock sector due to three consecutive harsh winters, has
since accelerated. Throughout the period, Official Development Assistance (ODA) focused
increasingly o n policy reforms.

Attachment 3
Page 1 o f 2
MONGOLIA: DEBT ANALYSIS

1.
At the end o f 2003, Mongolia’s total stock o f public debt was estimated at US$1.4
billion, o f which US$1.2 billion was external debt equivalent to 103 percent o f GDP and 147.3
percent o f exports o f goods and services. This includes debt o f USS212 million contracted to
settle Transferable Ruble debt obligations as part o f the December 2003 debt settlement
agreement with Russia to close Mongolia’s pre-1991 debt, estimated at US$11.4 billion or the
equivalent o f about 10 times Mongolia’s GDP. The agreement provided for a writing o f f o f 97.8
percent o f Mongolia’s pre-1991 debt, with the remaining US$250 m i l l i o n (about 20 percent o f
Mongolia’s GDP) to be paid in full by the end o f 2003. While the settlement o f the Russian debt
i s a welcome event as it provides international investors more certainty regarding Mongolia’s
credit standing, further information on the nature o f the transaction i s needed to assess the full
impact on short-term macro-sustainability. The total external debt-to-GDP ratio in N e t Present
Value (NPV) terms rose from 59.4 percent in 2002 without the Russian debt to 70.1 percent after
the Russian debt settlement. With strong growth projected over the medium-term, the external
debt-to-GDP ratio in NPV terms i s expected to decrease incrementally t o about 58 percent by
2008.
2.
Multilateral debt i s estimated at US$735.3 million (62 percent o f GDP), o f which 31
percent i s owed to the W o r l d Bank, 59 percent to ADB, and 7 percent to the IMF. Bilateral debt
accounts for 36.7 percent o f total external loans (US$ 433 million). Japan i s the largest bilateral
creditor (US$264 million in 2003). The total scheduled external debt service in 2003 reached an
estimated 3 percent o f GDP and 4.8 percent o f exports o f goods and services.
Impact of Pre-TransitionRussian Debt Settlement on External Debt Indicators

1

Debt stock to GDP
N e t present value o f debt
N P V o f debt to GDP
N P V o f debt to exports o f GNFS
N P V o f debt to govt revenues
Debt service
In percent o f exports o f goods and services
In percent o f GDP
Net official reserves (US$M,end-period)

Source: Ministry of Finance and StaffEstimates 2004

88.9

103.0

59.4
92.9
65.3

70.0
100.3
57.4

4.5
2.9
225.9

34.0
23.8
129.0

3.
The US$250 m i l l i o n needed as cash payment for the Russian debt settlement was raised
by the Government in the following manner: USS25 m i l l i o n was drawn from accumulated
government reserves; US$lOO million was borrowed from the Bank o f Mongolia, drawing down
o n Net International Reserves to be repaid within 10 years; USS13 m i l l i o n was obtained as an
advance on tax payments from Erdenet (state-owned copper mine); US$37 million was borrowed
from the Bank o f Mongolia t o be repaid within the first quarter o f 2004; US$50 m i l l i o n was
generated by selling one-year maturity T-bills to the copper mining company Ivanhoe Mines; and
US$25 million was raised by selling T-bills to the Trade and Development Bank. On post-1991
Russian debt ( U S 8 4 . 9 million), agreement has been reached between the Russians and the
Mongolians to postpone payments o n any arrears until next year.

Attachment 3
Page 2 o f 2
4.
While the resolution of the Russian debt issue i s a positive development, the settlement
weakened Mongolia’s short-term macroeconomic position. N e t international reserves dropped
from 16 weeks o f imports in November 2003 to 10 weeks in January 2004. N e t credit to the
Govemment from the Bank o f Mongolia has exceeded authorized limits; net foreign assets o f the
central bank have decreased substantially as a result o f the US$lOO million interest-free
borrowing by the Govemment; and finally, the US$50 million loan (external debt) from Ivanhoe
mines and the US$25 million credit from the Trade and Development Bank were contracted o n
nonconcessional terms, substantially increasing the short-term debt burden o f the Govemment.
5.
In the short-term, the Government will need to repay US$112 m i l l i o n to both the Bank o f
Mongolia and Ivanhoe Mines. The Government i s exploring two options: (i)rescheduling the
short-term debt; or, (ii)
borrowing concessionally from the international community to meet i t s
obligations.
Medium-term Prospects (2006-2008)
I t i s expected that the economy would be able t o maintain a sustainable growth o f about
5.5 percent in the long-term provided that Mongolia maintains prudent macroeconomic policies
and the momentum for reforms in the areas o f trade, public enterprises, and the financial sector.
Such a growth rate would need to be supported by investment o f around 28 percent o f GDP, o f
which 23 percent would be from the private sector. Continued foreign savings (about 11 percent)
would be important to attain the growth objectives.

6.

In the medium-term, export growth i s projected to be about 6 percent per year. Import
7.
growth would remain at about 5 percent a year, reflecting good investment activities. Debt
service as a percent o f exports o f goods and services would average around 4.8 percent and i s
projected to remain at the same level in the outer years. This development reflects the inflows o f
loans and foreign direct investment in the past several years.

In order to satisfy extemal financing needs and build up international reserves equivalent
8.
to about 18 weeks o f imports, while maintaining a manageable debt service burden, continued
international support in the form o f disbursements from concessional loans and grants in the
range o f 10- 15 percent o f GDP would be needed annually.
The baseline medium-term outlook described above i s based on the government’s MTEF
9.
projections and i s sensitive to the assumptions made o n domestic macroeconomic and structural
policies and the regional environment. In particular, weaker export performance would reduce
both exports and growth.
T o test the sensitivity o f the outlook presented above to changes in export performance,
10.
the alternative scenario assumes that annual growth o f exports will be lower to about 4.8 percent.
With lower investment and export growth, the real GDP growth rate i s expected to be at about 3.5
percent. Imports are expected to grow on average at about 2.7 percent, reflecting weaker
investment activities. The sensitivity analysis shows that in the long-run, prolonged weaker
export performance could adversely affect overall economic growth and lead to further import
compression, and the need for additional extemal financing.

Attachment 4
Page 1 o f 2

MONGOLIA: COUNTRY ASSISTANCE EVALUATION: SUMMARY
1.
Mongolia i s a former socialist country, land-locked between Russia and China. With 2.5
million inhabitants and an area almost the size o f Mexico, it i s the most sparsely populated
country in the world, and with a 1999 per capita income o f US$390, among the poorest countries
in East Asia. Assets include gold and copper deposits; some 30 million livestock, which provide
r a w materials for cashmere, wool, meat, and leather products; and proximity to large potential
markets in China and Russia. Major development constraints include a lack o f market-oriented
institutions resulting from 70 years o f isolation; a small domestic market; distance from a seaport;
protective barriers to key markets; and a highly dispersed rural population, a rugged terrain, and
severe weather, which together contribute to the high costs o f public service and infrastructure
provision.
2.
Mongolia’s transition experience since 199 1 has been positive, but difficult. Significant
progress was made toward the goal o f replacing the command economy with a market-driven
one, although considerable challenges remain in furthering the policies, institutions, and
behaviors required to achieve broad-based and sustainable growth. During the decade, Mongolia
stabilized the economy in the face o f a series o f external shocks and implanted a range o f reforms
including removal o f most price controls, privatization o f small and medium industries, and
changes in laws and regulations to enable private sector activity. A positive supply response to
these reforms was seen by 1995 in the form o f increased investment in gold, greater livestock
production, and an increase in small-scale service and trading activities in urban areas. Along
with significant public infrastructure investments, these activities contributed to an average
annual GDP growth o f 3 percent a year since 1994 and a rise in GDP per capita from US$330 in
1995 to US$390 in 1999. However, the sources o f growth have remained narrow, yielding only
limited public revenues and employment and they have not reduced Mongolia’s vulnerability to
shocks. Since 1995, the percent of poor has remained constant at 36 percent o f the population,
while income inequality increased. Limited urban employment opportunities and declining
public social services have yielded apparent public discontent with social and economic
conditions.
The Bank made a positive contribution to progress in the 1990s, although i t s influence in
3.
several important areas was limited. Among i t s positive impacts were: an easier transition and
avoidance o f a collapse in key public services and industries in the early 1990s; improved
macroeconomic management; an improved legal and regulatory framework; and income support
to a large number o f poor. At the same time, efforts to help remove some key policy and
institutional impediments to sustainable growth met with less success: key elements o f the
enabling environment for private investment are s t i l l lacking; interventions in energy, direct
transfers, and public transport conferred immediate benefits but did not stimulate broader
sustainable changes in the respective sectors; assistance in banking and enterprises proved
inadequate to address extensive underlying problems. The outcome o f Bank assistance i s thus
rated as partially satisfactory, institutional development as modest, and sustainability as unlikely.
Factors underlying the Bank’s positive contribution include a strong commitment at
4.
senior government levels to the general direction o f reforms; timely Bank responses to an
uncertain and difficult environment in the early 1990s; and good collaboration with the IMF to
support macro-economic stability. The Bank practiced selectivity by not engaging in areas well

Attachment 4
Page 2 o f 2
covered by other donors; i t s E S W was o f good quality and well-received by the government and
other donors; and it played an important role in mobilizing external donor aid. Factors inhibiting
a greater Bank contribution include (i)
a delayed shift away from emergency support in i t s
assistance strategy; (ii)
limited linkage between the lending program and policy recommendations
in ESW; (iii)
inadequate agreement with other donors o n strategic frameworks in some sectors;
(iv) frequent changes in government after 1996, which adversely affected continuity; (vi) political
sensitivity and anticipated adverse short-term consequences, which caused hesitancy to
implement some reforms; and (vii) several significant adverse external shocks.

5.
The Bank accounts for only 10 percent o f total aid flows to Mongolia, but i t offers a
unique perspective o n many o f Mongolia’s problems because o f i t s worldwide experience on
transition economies. OED recommends that future Bank assistance remain selective and that i t
focus o n improving the private investment environment and strengthening fiscal management. At
the same time, the Bank should collaborate with the government and other donors to develop
strategic frameworks in each key sector, even if direct lending i s not planned.
Gregory K. Ingram
Director-General
Operations Evaluation

Attachment 5
Page 1 o f 2

MONGOLIA
CLIENT SURVEY: SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
The Mongolia Client Survey was conducted to gather the opinion o f key stakeholders towards the
W o r l d Bank and i t s role in development in Mongolia. The survey was undertaken by an
independent consultant in January and February o f 2003 using the standardized Bank Client
Survey questionnaire (with a few questions modified to fit the Mongolian context). Out o f the
483 mail-in questionnaires sent out, 282 responded (58 percent response rate). The survey
solicited the opinions o f a cross-section o f clients and stakeholders including senior government
officials, staff in the ministries, local government officials, staff o f bilateral and multilateral donor
agencies, individuals from the private sector, international and national non-governmental
organizations, the media, and members o f academia. W h i l e the majority o f respondents were
employees o f ministries, there were also a large number o f respondents from the private sector
and non-government organizations. Because o f the small number o f respondents from academia
and the media, responses from these groups can be considered suggestive at best.
The survey measured attitudes towards:
0
The general economic environment in Mongolia;
0
Perceived overall value o f the Bank;
0
The Bank’s overall effectiveness in Mongolia;
0
The Bank’s programs;
0
The Bank’s day to day operations in Mongolia;
0
The Bank’s effectiveness at donor coordination;
0
The Bank’s effectiveness at resource mobilization; and,
0
The Bank’s effectiveness at working with others in the country.

Summary o f Key Findings
The Client Survey findings provide insight into the stakeholders’ views o f the Bank’s work in
Mongolia as well as their overall assessment o f the current environment in the country. Overall,
the views are quite positive about the work o f the Bank. Below are some o f the main findings:
0

0

0

0

Stakeholders report that the primary challenges in Mongolia are the economy,
corruption, and poverty, followed by education. These are reported as challenges
uppermost o n the minds o f stakeholders.
Stakeholders identify the greatest development priorities as: corruption, strengthening
the financial sector, followed by infrastructure development, and education. Poverty
reduction appears to be quite l o w on the development priority l i s t o f stakeholders.
Respondents identify infrastructure along with economic growth as the two areas that
are important for Bank involvement in Mongolia. These are followed closely by helping
to strengthen the financial system, strengthen the private sector, and helping to
reduce poverty. Other than poverty reduction, these closely mirror the areas that
stakeholders in Mongolia consider their greatest development challenges.

Within this environment, stakeholders report that the Bank’s greatest value i s i t s policy
advice. When asked about the second greatest value brought by the Bank, financial
resources and donor coordination emerge fairly consistently. This i s an interesting
finding in an IDA country like Mongolia where one might expect the Bank to be most

Attachment 5
Page 2 o f 2
valued for i t s financial resources (as i s the case in nearly all other Client Surveys
conducted in IDA countries.)
0

I t i s interesting to note that familiarity with the Bank i s fairly low in Mongolia. Other

studies show that the more experience and exposure stakeholders have with the Bank, the
more positive they are about the institution. Hence, it would probably be t o the Bank’s
advantage in Mongolia to have a greater presence and more exposure with i t s
stakeholders.
0

0

0

0

0

The Survey indicates a range o f views toward the Bank’s overall effectiveness. Members
o f academia and local government officials appear to be quite positive, whereas, NGOs,
bilateral and multilateral donors, and representatives o f private sector organizations
appear to be less sanguine about the Bank’s effectiveness giving an overall average rating
score below 7 o n a 10 point scale.
Specifically, the Client Survey shows that in the areas that stakeholders believe the Bank
should be focusing i t s work, the views are quite positive. The highest mean effectiveness
scores go to the Bank’s support t o strengthen infrastructure development, helping to bring
about economic growth, and helping to strengthen the financial system.
The Survey findings show clearly that stakeholders enjoy workmg with Bank staff.
Stakeholders report that for the most part they consider Bank staff accessible and
respectful.
The responses indicate that there are two areas where the Bank i s seen less positively, and
may want to explore in further detail: building capacity at the community level and
including local communities and civil society in strategy development.
The Bank’s advice and knowledge i s considered useful and sound according to the
findings. In addition, stakeholders report that the Bank makes available i t s studies and
analyses. However, the mean score drops slightly when asked whether the Bank i s able
to “adapt i t s knowledge to Mongolia’s needs.” This may be worth further exploration to
identify ways that the knowledge could be better adapted. This finding regarding the
adaptability o f Bank’s knowledge emerges in nearly every Client Survey done recently in
other countries.
The findings indicate that the Bank i s perceived very positively in terms o f i t s work in
donor coordination. Stakeholders believe that it i s important for the Bank to be involved
in donor coordination and their view o f the Bank’s effectiveness in this area i s very
positive. The analysis o f the responses indicates that the Bank should stay involved.
This i s the same case for resource mobilization.

Attachment 6
Page 1 o f 4

MONGOLIA: TOWARD ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Since Mongolia’s transition and loss o f Soviet subsidies, rapid economic changes
generated new pressures on the country’s fiagile and unique ecosystems exacerbated by lack o f
coordination among ministries and agencies concerned with environmental management, and
inconsistent monitoring o f natural resources and environmental quality parameters.
T o address these challenges, the Government o f Mongolia (GOM) has enacted a series o f
environmental laws, expanded i t s system o f nature reserves, and invested in energy efficient
technologies and pollution abatement schemes. In addition, GOM started the revision and
updating o f the 1995 National Environmental Action Plan, mainstreamed environmental concerns
into i t s official Good Governance for Human Security Programme, and began working with
international organizations and civil society to promote the understanding o f the fundamental
contribution that natural resources and a healthy environment can make t o the country’s
economic growth and development for current and future generations.
Three environment and natural resources management issues continue to stand out as
critical challenges for Mongolia for the short-to medium-term:

(i)Institutional capacity for environment and natural resources management is weak.

Coordination among ministries and government agencies remains limited without either a
systematic dialogue or a formal feedback system o n sectoral issues. In spite o f 3,900
employees currently working for the Ministry o f Nature and Environment (MNE) at the
national and local levels, human and financial capacity seem to be inadequate for the
existing implementation, monitoring, and enforcement responsibilities o f MNE.
Moreover, environmental agencies at aimag, soum and bag levels have weak
administrative structures, and coordination with national authorities on overall policy
direction i s carried out o n an ad-hoc basis. The transition to a free market economy may
have brought prices closer to the market equilibrium but challenges in addressing market
failures remain and depend o n adequate design and implementation o f environmental
regulations.

(ii)
Pollution-related and other urban environmental challenges pose considerable pressure
on people’s health and natural resources. Air quality i s under threat due to increasing
pollution from urbanization, motorization, and power generation and heating; high level
o f SO2, NO2 and particulates are responsible for a sharp increase o f the number o f
children under the age o f five suffering from respiratory diseases over the past five years.
Poor solid and hazardous waste management i s degrading land, air and water,
contributing to flooding and also having adverse impact on human health. Sewerage
coverage i s one o f the lowest in Asia, and this i s causing widespread contamination o f
surface and groundwater both in Ulaanbaatar and secondary cities.

(iii)
Forest and other natural resources are under pressure. The forestry sector i s rapidly
approaching a crisis for which it seems largely unprepared. The present estimated levels
o f forest harvesting are unsustainable. Between 36 and 80 percent o f total harvest i s
illegal, and if alternative sources o f domestic fuel are not developed, and current levels o f
forest depletion continue unabated, serious fuelwood shortages will be experienced in
urban areas by the end o f this decade. The existing forestry industry i s unable to attract
the capital it needs to modemize for greater efficiency. The Government has tended to

Attachment 6
Page 2 o f 4
focus on peripheral issues, such as an outmoded forest inventory system, fire control,
insect and disease control, instead o f dealing constructively with the primary problem o f
unsustainable resource exploitation and lack o f consistent enforcement o f regulations.

Environmental Linkages to CAS Objectives and Proposed Approach to Environment and
Natural Resources Management
Long-run economic growth and poverty reduction can be significantly undermined by the
over-exploitation and degradation o f the natural resource base; the Bank thus recognizes the
environment=
(Natural Resource Management) theme as containing key cross-cutting issues
crucial to addressing the challenge that Mongolia faces in pursuing sustainable growth and
poverty alleviation as embedded in all three objectives o f i t s assistance strategy.

Objective 1: Consolidating the Transition
Revision and updating o f existing institutional and legislative frameworks would improve
environment and natural resources management capacity at national and local levels. The
forestry, water resources management, mining and urban sectors would benefit particularly
from such an improvement.
One o f the pre-conditions for increasing private sector investments and promoting
competitiveness i s clarity o f environmental regulations and standards, and their consistent,
predictable enforcement. Environment, thus, would be one o f the many dimensions o f the
proposed reforms o f the public sector, civil service reform and financial management.
Malung information on environmental trends accessible to decision-makers and civil society
i s essential to an informed public debate o n the environment. The Government should
improve access to and disclosure o f information o n environmental quality and management
(i.e. Environmental Impact Assessments, air and water quality standards), natural resources
management, and biodiversity conservation. In addition, public participation o f civil society
and local governments in decision-making processes pertaining to environment and natural
resources management use and conservation would be encouraged.

The above would be dealt with through (i)
addressing environment and natural resources
management concerns in AAA, TAs; and lending operations (both investment and programmatic
lending); and (ii)
completing the implementation o f the on-going IDF Grant to MNE; and (iii)
developing self-standing analytical pieces.
Objective 2: Reducing Vulnerabilities
e

Laws and regulations governing use and management o f natural resources were originally
enacted with primary emphasis o n simple exploitation rather than the sustainable use of
natural resources. Short-term revenue maximizing behavior and the lack o f transparency in
the allocation o f property rights to natural resources are leading to rapid depletion o f the
overall resource base. The Government needs to promote the understanding o f the
fundamental contribution that natural resources and a healthy environment make to the
country’s economic growth and development agenda.

The above would be dealt with o n the following fronts: (i)
ensuring that environmental and
social impacts (from projects) are minimized, and that effective mitigation and compensation
measures are built into project design (e.g. through the safeguards process); (ii)exploring
synergies in project design by using GEF funds associated with energy projects to reduce

Attachment 6
Page 3 o f 4
emissions, andor to promote biodiversity conservation and protection; (iii)
developing standalone lending operations centered on the sustainable management o f natural resources such as
forestry; and (iv) enhancing institutional capacity as stand-alone projects and policy advice or
components o f projects in the overall macroeconomic and regulatory framework and specific
sectors and regions where investments are likely to take place.

Objective 3: StrengtheningAlignment o f Policies and Resources Around Results
0

0

Improving MNE ability to prioritize among issues and costing needed to implement effective
environmental intervention, and to coordinate with the international donor community.
Strengthening MNE capacity to use environmental data to improve decision-making and
implementation o f environmental programs and projects, and increase i t s responsiveness to
public concerns on environmental issues.

The above would be dealt with through addressing environment and natural resources
management concerns in AAA, TAs and lending operations (both investment and programmatic
lending).

EnvironmentalIndicators
In the case o f Mongolia, reliable data for environmental indicators are generally scarce,
scattered across different sources, and not necessarily available ,for the entire country. The table
o n the next page has been drawn from the 2003 Little Green Data Book.

Attachment 6
Page 4 o f 4

Environmental stralegylaction

I

GROUP DATA

,SdS
-I1

53

80
353
77

30
2

48
78

6,4120
81
76
67
93

463
30

72
44

90
76
70
90

4.4
33
72
12%

Attachment 7
Page 1 o f 2

-

E
2
a
8
8

P

B

Q

t:

i

i

!E
C

z

:
4

i
6

E

E
!
f
v

v

c

L

9

8

v
2 €

$e

6

3

Attach1

U

i
;
c

i
P

5
EC
5
W

e

E

E
E
f
W

:
W

Annex A2-1

Mongolia at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2002

Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ millions)

Mongolia

East
Asia&
Pacific

Lowincome

2.4
440
1,088

1,836
950
1,740

2,495
430
1,072

1.3
1.6

1.o
1.2

1.9
2.3

36
57
63
30
13
60
2
97
95
99

38
69
33
15
76
13
106
105
106

30
59
81

8120103

Develoment diamond'

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1998-02
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest Year available, 1996-02)
Poverty (% of population below nationalpoverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition(% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% ofpopulation)
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-agepopulation)
Male
Female

76
37
95
103
87

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1982

1992

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmenVGDP
Exports of goods and SeNiCeS/GDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP
Gross national savingsiGDP

70.2
26.3
32.0
23.3

Current account balancelGDP
Interest DavmentsiGDP
Total external debtiGDP
Total debt serviceiexports
Present value of debtiGDP
Present value of debtiexports
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

32.6
36.8
23.2
24.7

17.3

2001

2002

1.o

1.1

35.8
62.6
5.7
29.7

29.0
63.9
4.1
19.6

-6.1
0.9
87.6
5.3
57.7
91.7

-9.5
1.o
90.6
4.5
59.4
92.6

1982-92

1992-02

2001

2002

2.5
0.5

1.4
0.0

1.o
-0.4
2.2

3.9
2.6
0.5

5.1
6.8
10.1

1982

1992

2001

2002

15.8
34.3

30.2
33.9

49.9

35.9

24.9
22.0
8.1
53.1

20.7
22.5
6.3
56.5

64.5

46.2

81.5

65.4

1982-92

1992-02

2001

2002

2.6
2.9

-2.7
1.9

2.0

4.0

-16.5
16.2
31.6
8.2

-10.7
5.4
22.1
12.2

2.6

14.3
16.8
-1.1
2.5
1.1

14.8
8.0
-19.0
6.6
1.2

Access to an
improved water
source

I

Economic ratios
Gross domestic
investment

ExwRs Of
goods and
services

Total debt
IGDP

Gross domestic
savings

2002.08

I -Mongolia -Low income 1

~

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDPJ
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

io

A
-GDI

Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

t

l5T

Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services
Gross national QrOdUCt

3.6

Note 2002 data are preliminePyeslimates
Thls table was produced from the Development Economics central dalabarie

.The diamonds $how four key indiCstDIE ~nthe coun1w On bold) compared With its incomegroup averqe If data we m m n g the diamond will

I

+GDP

10

5
0
5

2

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1982

2.0

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overaii surplus/deficit

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Copper
Meat
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1982

1992

2002

325.5
176.4

6.3
5.8

0.9
6.2

29.3
-1.1
0.0

37.7
4.8
-5.4

38.1
4.4
-6.0

1992

2001

2002

356
160
11

523
147
18

524
140
20

418
13
88
137

693
53
138
215

753
57
123
210

-12
-2
-10

-5
2
-7

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995:lOO)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

2001

1982

1992

2001

2002

568
1,394
-826

39 1
479
-88

637
829
-192

709
947
-238

-20
0

-28
-3

-2
25

-5
64

-90

-169

-178

13

-15

-66

6

-20

-66

5

160
1,102.0

226
1,125.0

1992

2001

2002

355
0
27

902
0
155

986
0
181

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

68
0
0

34
0
1

32
0
2

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Porifoiio equity

37
86
19
2
0

92
66
2
43
0

53
74
29
78
0

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

0
27
0
27
0
27

64
24
0
24
1
23

29
14
1
13
1
12

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

-4

Memo:
Net Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, /oca//US$)

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

1982

Note: This table was produced from the Development Economics central database.

1

350

T

1992

I

2001

-rDi

750

500

250
0
98

97

98

99

Exports

00

01

02

Imports

1

l5

-10

1

1

2002 Data

I

G 44

A - IBRD

B - IDA
C-IMF

D. Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G Short-term

.

Annex B2
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of March 29, 2004

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementationa
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum Items
Projects Evaluated by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amount (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2001

2002

2003

2004

8
2.9
12.5
2.6
12.5
2.6
34.1

9
1.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
13.2

10
2.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
13.1

9
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
23.5

No
453,417
56,677

Yes
608,555
67,617

No
657,352
65,735

Yes **
670,000
67,000

Since FY 80
8
138.9
12.5
7.0

Last Five FYs
4
72.8
0.0
0.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which closed during the fiscal year.
** Quarterly Portfolio Performance Reviews (QPPR) started in FY04.

zzz

Y

u
e,

2

.T

E
t-

E E E Z

Annex B3

-

Mongolia IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2001-2003

IFC approvals (US$m)

0.40

0

0

0
0

Sector (YO)

FINANCE & INSURANCE

Total

100

0

100

0

100
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0

0

0
0
0
0
0

0

0

0

Investment instrument(%)
Loans

Equity
Quasi- Equity

Other

Total

MIGA guarantees (USJm)

Annex 8 4

-

Mongolia Summary of Nonlending Services
Product

Completion FY

Recent completions

Mongolia Energy Strategy
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Public Expenditure Review
Trade Policy Study: Cashmere
Municipal Finance Study
Mongolia CPAR
Consultative Group Meeting
Environment Monitor (1 and 2)

FY02
FY02
FY02
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03

Underway
Energy Study (Phase 2)
Mining Study (input to CEM)
Rural Policy Note
Financial Sector Work
Gender Assessment
Civil Society Assessment
Consultative Group Meeting

FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04

Planned

Poverty AssessmenUPublic Expenditure Tracking Survey
PSD Strategy (Investment ClimatelSupply Chains)
Integrated Infrastructure Strategy
Social Sector Strategy
Regional Development Note
Financial Sector Review
EconomiclEnvironment Monitor
Consultative Group Meeting
CEMlDPR (Sources of Growth)
Decentralization Study
Livestock Support Services Study
Social Sector AAA
Civic Engagement Assessment
Country ProcuremenUFinanciaIAssessments (CPAWCFAA)
EconomiclSocial Monitor
Consultative Group Meeting
Public Expenditure Reviewllntegrated Fiduciary Assessment
Natural Resource Use Strategy
ICT Strategy
Infrastructure AAA
Social Sector AAA
Regional Trade Study
Environment and Social Development AAA
EconomiclEnvironmental Monitor
Consultative Group Meeting
Investment ClimatelPrivate Sector Assessment
Human Development Assessment
Financial Sector Assessment
Infrastructure AAA
Environment and Social Development AAA
Economic/Social Monitor
Consultative Group Meeting

FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08

Annex 65

Mongolia Social Indicators
Latest single year

East
Asia 8
Pacific

income

1,822.5
1,l
37.3
2.1

2,505.9
1.9
30.8
3.5

900

430

4.6
2.3
7.2

i.a
2.3

1.1
2.8

102
102
103

93
92
93

60
77
30

76
93
67

76
90
70

ao

ia

95
95
9

76
77
15

60
61

55
54
57

60
59
62

67
65
69

69
67
71

59
58
60

9a
145

a7
124

30
76

34
44

121

391
331

320
273

280
199
65
97

184
129

312
256

1970.75

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (Oh of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same regionlincome group

1.4
2.0
48.7
5.6

1s8o-a5 1996-2001

1.9
2.8
55.0
5.0

2.4
1.3
57.6
2.5

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

35.6
39.4
32.6

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

428
241
1a4

LOW.

INCOMUCONSUMPTIONDISTRIBUTION
Share of income or consumption
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintiie (YOof income or consumption)

35.0
5.6
51.2

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (Oh of GDP)
Education (%of GDP)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)

10.9

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% under 12 monfhs)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition(Oh under 5 years)

Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

100

ao

ao

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97; ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies between the estimates of school-age population
and reported enrollment data.
Source: 2003 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Mongolia - Key Economic Indicators
Indicator
National accounts (as % o f GDP)’
Gross Domestic product
Agriculture
Industry
Services

1999

Actual
2000

2001

Estimate
2002
2003

2004

Projected
2005

2006

100
37
21
42

100

100
2s
22
53

100

29
22
49

21
23
56

100
20
22
58

100
26
17
57

100
26
18
56

100
25
18
51

Total consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Govemment investment
Private investment

85
37
15
22

86
36
12
24

83
36
17
19

93
29
11
18

91
27
11
16

89
27
11
16

87
28
11
17

87
28
10
18

Exports (FOB)
Imports (CIF)

so
63

57
71

51
68

47
68

53
69

56
70

51
64

so

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsb
Memorandum items:
Gross domestic product
(US$million in current prices)
G N I per capita (US$,Atlas method)

15
30

10
30

6
30

4
20

8
18

11
20

12
21

13
22

906

946

1016

1109

1193

1282

1406

1524

3 90

390

410

440

460

500

540

580

3.2
3.2

1.1
1.1

1.o
1.o

3.9
9.5

5.0
4.0

5.3
5.0

5.5
5.2

5.5
5.6

Real annual per capita growth rates (“A, calculated from 1986 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
-5.4
Total consumption
-1
Private consumption
0.4

3.9
-3.2
-5.5

5.8
3.6
2.8

7.5
1.4
2.1

6.4
4.3
4.2

3.8
2.0
1.o

3.9
3.9
4.3

4.1
3.1
3.3

Balance o f Payments (US% millions)
Exports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)
Merchandise CIF
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

555
454
675
567
-121
5.9
-127

640
536
789
676
-149
8.0
-1 53

637
523
829
693
-192
25.0
-169

709
524
947
753
-238
64.4
-178

834
627
1069
827
-235
68.7
-181

938
721
1164
90 1
-22s
74.4
-167

902
711
1119
907
-217
70.0
-164

964
763
1197
973
-233
77.0
-175

34
97
13
-3 1

40
81
99
-35

43
69
77
-20

78
102
73
-66

113
-141
52
97

110
22
55
-67

75
69
61
-36

79
72
59
-2 9

-13.3

-15.7

-18.9

-21.5

-19.7

-17.6

-15.6

-15.4

-1.8
-2.6

18.0
19.2

-2.4
2.5

0.1
8.6

19.7
9.9

14.9
8.9

Real annual growth rates (“h,calculated from 1986 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Other capital (net, incl. errors &omissions)
Change in reserves‘
Memorandum items:
Resource balance (% o f GDP)
Annual growth rates
Exports, f.0.b. (annual growth)
Imports, c.i.f. (annual growth)

64

7.3
8.7
7.3
6.3
(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 o f 2

Mongolia - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)
Actual

Estimate

Proiected

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Public finance (as % o f GDP at market prices)d
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Overall balance (including capital grants)

26.5
26.7
-0.2
12.7
-12.2

34.0
30.8
3.2
10.6
-7.0

37.7
32.9
4.8
11.0
-5.4

38.1
33.7
4.4
11.0
-6.0

35.7
32.8
2.9
11.1
-5.9

37.5
32.6
4.9
11.5
-5.9

36.9
32.2
4.1
10.8
-5.5

36.9
31.6
5.3
10.4
-4.5

Monetary indicators
M2lGDP
Growth o f M2
Private sector credit growth
Total credit growth (%)

23.8
31.7
-34.6
-16.3

25.4
17.4
44.9
-16.9

29.7
28.1
152.3
101.5

38.2
41.9
77.4
70.3

51.6
49.6
91.4
87.3

-7.0
-2.4
-4.8
109

13.6
2.5
10.8
113

-11.6
-2.3
-9.5
118

-4.1
2.3
-6.9
114

6.6
5.4
1.1
107

8.4
2.8
5.4
100

2.1
-0.2

0.3
1.2

100

100

7.6
9.7

11.6
11.6

6.3
5.8

0.9
6.2

5.0
5.5

5.0
5.0

5.0
5.0

5.0
5.0

Indicator

e?)

Price indices
Export price index change
Import price index change
Terms o f trade (percent change)
REER, period average (1995=100)e

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

GDP at market prices.
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use o f IMF resources.
* Consolidated central govemment.
e An increase denotes appreciation.
a

Annex B7
Mongolia - K e y Exposure Indicators

Indicator

1999

Actual
2000
2001

2002

Estimate Proiected
2003
2004

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

860

879

902

985

1416

1487

Net disbursements (USSm) a

12

13

69

94

91

84

Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)b

32

24

34

32

36

38

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDOKGS~
TDO/GDP~
TDS/XGS~

154.9
94.9
5.7

137.4
92.9
3.8

139.9
87.6
5.3

143.0
90.6
4.5

169.8
118.7
4.8

142.4
91.8
4.6

IDA TDO (us$mId

130.0

137.0

155.0

181.0

192.0

214.0

0.4
0.4

0.4
0.4

0.4
0.4

0.4
0.4

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equitye
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSm)
Note:

Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use o f IMF credits and net shortt e r m capital.
Excluding Russian rescheduled debt service for 2003 and 2004.
“XGS” denotes exports o f goods and services, including worker’s remittances.
Includes present value o f guarantees.
e Includes equity and quasi-equity types o f b o t h loan and equity instruments.
a

h

YS

6

W

E

m

a

P

a
p!
m

-.-

v

0

0

n
u)

.-0

E

C

m

x
i
0
..

-.-0m

0
E

0

E

m

Annex B8
MONGOLIA
Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio
(Amounts in US$ Millions)

FY Approva Company
1997
SEF G&M Leather
2001
SEF XacBank

Total Portfolio

Loan
All
Loan
All
committed Committed Outstanding Outstanding
IFC
Participants
IFC
Participants
0.00
0
0.00
0
0.40
0
0.40
0
0.40

0

0.40

0

Approvals Pending Commitment

Loan
0

Equity
0

Quasi
0

Participants
0

Annex B9
Country Program Matrix

This Annex has been replaced by Attachment 1: CAS Matrix

Annex B10
Mongolia - CAS Summary o f Development Priorities

Network area

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction

Country
performance

Major issue

Country
priority

Bank
p riority

Fair

Widespread poverty; higher in rural areas
and aimags; increasing inequality;
monitoring improving

High

High

Economic policy

Good

Low inflation; budget deficits decreasing;
open trade regime

High

High

Public sector

Fair

Public sector reform law passed, being
implemented; civil service reforms
underway

High

High

Gender

Fair

Low enrollment rates for boys;
women disproportionatelyaffected by
poverty

Moderate

Moderate

Fair
Fair

Increase efficiency and access
Increase efficiency and access

Moderate
Moderate

Moderate
Moderate

Fair

Long-run sustainability under threat

Moderate

Moderate

Fair

Vulnerability and pastoral risks

Moderate

High

Fair
Fair

Land degradation; urban air pollution
Inequalities: urban-rural

Moderate
Moderate

Moderate
Moderate

Human Development
Department
Education
Health, nutrition & population

Social protection
Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development

Environment
Social development
Finance, Private Sector &
Infrastructure
Financial sector
Private sector

Fair
Good

Strengthen financial sector; access to credit
Enabling environment; regulations and laws,
taxes, clarity of public-private roles,

High
High

High
High

Energy & mining

Good

Implementationof laws; artisanal mining

High

High

Infrastructure

Fair

Weak infrastructure; arrears; public-private
partnerships; low efficiency; maintenance
and recurrent costs

High

High

Reconciliation of
country and Bank
priorities

Increased emphasis on
risk management in next
project; AAA

MAP SECTION

