Document of
The World Bank Group
For Official Use Only

Report No. 35718-PAK

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR
THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN

FOR THE PERIOD FYO6-09

April 4,2006

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed without World Bank authorization.

The last Country Assistance Strategyfor Pakistan (Report No. 24114-PAK) was discussed on June 11, 2002 and a
Country Assistance Strategy ProgressReport (Report No. 28262-PAK) was discussed on April 20, 2004
CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS

Currency Unit = Pakistan Rupee
US$1 = PKR 59.40
FISCAL YEAR
July 1 - June 30
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADB
ADR
AIDS
AJK
BMOs
CAE
CAS
CAS-PR
CBR
CFAA
CGA
CWIQ
DCC
DFID
DPL
EAD
EBP
ERRA
FSAP
GDP
GEF
GoP
GTZ
HIES
HIV
IBRD
ICR
IDA
IEG
IFC
IMF
IPO
IPP
JBIC

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Asian Development Bank
Alternative Dispute Resolution
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Azad Jammu Kashmir
Business Membership Organizations
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report
Central Board of Revenue
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Controller General of Accounts
Core Welfare Indicators Questionnaire
Donor Coordination Cell
Department for International Development (UK)
Development Policy Loan
Economic Affairs Division
Enterprise Benchmarking Program
The Earthquake Reconstruction and
Rehabilitation Authority
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Government of Pakistan
German Agency for Technical Cooperation
Household Income and Expenditure Survey
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Implementation Completion Report
International Development Association
Independent Evaluation Group
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Initial Public Offering
Independent Power Producer
Japan bank for International Cooperation

IDI
LL
MDG
MIGA
MTBF
MTDF
NBP
NEPRA
NEAS
NGOs
NWFP
PDF
PEP-MENA
PFM
PIFRA
PIHS
PPAF
PPPS
PRSC
PRSP
PSCB
PTCL
PSLSM
QAG
SAC
SME
TATF
TMAs
USAID
WAPDA
WEF
WHO
WTO
WSS

Long Distance and International
LocalLoop
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium Term Budget Framework
Medium Term Development Framework
National Bank of Pakistan
The National Electric Power Regulatory Authority
National Education Assessment System
Non-Governmental Organizations
North West Frontier Province
Pakistan Development Forum
Private Enterprise Partnership for Middle
East and North Africa
Initial Public Offering
Project to Improve Financial Reporting and
Auditing
Pakistan Integrated Household Survey
Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund
Public-Private Partnerships
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Public Sector Capacity Building
Pakistan Telecommunications Limited
Pakistan Social and Living Standards
Measurement Survey
Quality Assurance Group
Structural Adjustment Credit
Small and Medium Enterprise
Technical Assistance and Trust Funds
Tehsil Municipal Authorities
United States Agency for Int'l Development
Water and Power Development Authority
World Economic Forum
World Health Organization
World Trade Organization
Water Supply and Sanitation

The World Bank
Vice President
Country Director
Task Manager
The International Finance Corporation
Vice President
Country Director
Task Manager

Praful Patel, SARVP
John W. Wall, SACPK
TormBuckley, SACPK
e
Declan Du CIOVP
Michael Essex, CMERC
Torek Farhadi, CMEHQ

TABLE OF CONTENTS

...............

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES...............................................1

A.
B.
C.
D.

..................
Political and Social Context...............................
...........
Social Progress and Poverty Profile................2........
.............................................
Development Challenges
..........
........................
Economic Developments and Outlook
PAKISTAN'S POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY ............................................................

II.
A.
III.

A.
B.
C.

The PRSP Strategy.....................................

...........

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY .....................................................................

1
2
2
7
10

10
12

Implementation of the Last CAS and Lessons Learned..........................12
......... 15
..........................
Context and Engagement Principles
17
World Bank Group Program Priorities .................................
DELIVERING THE WORLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM.................................................33

IV.

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.

The World Bank Program..........................................33
The IFC Program................................................38
MIGA Portfolio and Program.......................................40
Partnerships and Harmonization.....................................40
Communications and Outreach......................................41
Monitoring and Evaluation.........................................
Managing Risks................................................

41
42

TABLES

Table 1: Progress on Selected Social Indicators................................3
Table 2: Competitiveness Rankings.........................................3
Table 3: Medium Term Outlook - Key Indicators................................9
Table 4: Pakistan's PRSP Targets and Alignment with Millennium Development Goals.........11
13
......
Table 5: Bank Portfolio Indicators...................................
........... 293.........
..................
Table 6: Selected Health Indicators
31
..............................
Table 7: Public Spending on Select Safety Net Programs
....... 35
Table 8: Key Policy Performance Benchmarks for RD Lending ............
a......36
ih.o.....................
Table 9: Pakistan Credit Rating by Standard & Poor's
37
.......
.........................
Table 10: Maximum Projected IBRD Exposure
37
...........................
Theme
by
CAS
Outputs
Key
Indicative
Table 11: AAA -

FIGURE
Figure 1: Recent Economic Performance

8

.........................................

Box
.............

Box 1: Impact of the October 8 Earthquake

ANNEXES

Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex
Annex

I: CAS Results Framework
II: CAS Completion Report
III Private Sector Strategy
IV: Country Financing Parameters
V: Other Donor Activities
VI: CAS Consultation Process
VII: Guidelines for EBRD Lending
B 1: Country at a Glance
B2: Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Mgt
B3: IBRD/IDA Program Summary
B3: IFC/MIGA Program Summary
B4: Summary of Non-lending Services
B5: Poverty and Social Development Indicators
B6: Key Economic Indicators
B7: Key Exposure Indicators
B8: Operations Portfolio (TBRD/IDA and Grants)
B8 (IFC) Statement of IFC Held and Disbursed Portfolio

............ 66.........

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The FY06-09 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) has been prepared at a time of great
i.
opportunity for Pakistan. Since the beginning of the new millennium, Pakistan has managed a remarkable
turnaround. During the 1990's Pakistan's progress in reducing poverty and improving the welfare of its
people was not very encouraging as economic growth slowed and progress in improving social indicators
stagnated. Beginning in 2000, the Government initiated a wide-ranging and ambitious reform program
resulting in a dramatic turnaround. The FY03-05 CAS period witnessed the consolidation and
acceleration of this turnaround with sustained implementation of a program of stabilization and wideranging structural reforms. Yet Pakistan's development challenges remain formidable. While provisional
poverty estimates suggest that poverty declined between 2001 and 2005, the proportion of the population
below the poverty line remains high. And despite recent indications of improvement, social and living
standards remain well below countries with similar incomes and growth rates.
Development Challenges
The key challenge for Pakistan is now to sustain its recent growth performance in order to
ii.
generate significant poverty reduction. Sustained growth will require continued sound macroeconomic
management along with further improvements in the investment climate. Pakistan's infrastructure
platform needs significant investment in order to support Pakistan's growth and service delivery goals.
For the poor to participate in and benefit from growth Pakistan needs to accelerate human development.
While Pakistan is making progress, analysis suggests that it will be challenging to achieve the MDGs for
infant mortality, child malnutrition, primary completion, and elimination of the gender gap in primary
enrolment. Looking beyond the MDG's, enhancing competitiveness in an increasingly globalized and
technology driven world economy will require a growing pool of workers with leading edge skills
pointing to the need for increases in the level and quality of secondary, vocational and higher education.
Thus, continued concerted efforts to address poor human development outcomes are important not only to

improve equity but also as an integral part of achieving Pakistan's growth objectives.
Pakistan's Poverty Reduction Strategy
Pakistan's poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) sets forth a broad-based strategy for
iii.
addressing poverty in its various dimensions including human development, governance, and
vulnerability and builds on the economic program first articulated in the fall of 1999 and further
elaborated in the I-PRSP of 2001. The PRSP emphasizes policies to sustain rapid growth as the main
vehicle for poverty reduction and is grounded on four pillars: (i) achieving and sustaining a high growth
rate while maintaining macroeconomic stability, translating this higher growth into lower poverty, and
bridging the social gap; (ii) improving governance and consolidating devolution, both as a means of
delivering better development results and ensuring social and economic justice; (iii) investing in human
capital, with a renewed emphasis on effective delivery of basic social services; and (iv) targeting the poor
and vulnerable to bring marginalized sections of the population and backward regions into the mainstream
of development, and to make marked progress in reducing existing inequalities. The PRSP's targets are
fully aligned with the MDGs.
Bank Group Assistance Strategy
In line with Pakistan's recent performance and the Government's request for increased Bank
iv.
Group support, this CAS proposes a substantial increase in the volume of lending to Pakistan during the
next four years.' The immediate priority will be to assist in addressing the impact of the October 2005
earthquake - up to US$1 billion in IBRD/IDA commitments will be used to support reconstruction and
recovery (US$840 million in new commitments have already been approved). In addition, based on the

1In this report, the "Bank Group" refers to IBRD, IDA, IFC, and MIGA while the "Bank" refers to IBRD/IDA.

- ii -

Government's priorities for sustaining growth and accelerating poverty reduction, the CAS envisions an
expansion in lending in infrastructure (primarily energy, water, and transport) and human
development. Bank Group program priorities will retain considerable continuity with the FYO3-05 CAS,
focusing on the areas which are most critical for poverty reduction. The three inter-linked and mutually
reinforcing pillars of the CAS correspond to the strategic priorities of the PRSP: (i) sustaining growth and
improving competitiveness; (ii) improving government effectiveness and service delivery; and (iii)
improving lives and protecting the vulnerable.
Pillar I: Sustained Growth and Improved Competitiveness
v.
The focus of this pillar of the CAS will be to support the investments and reforms needed sustain
rapid, private sector-led growth. To help maintain the hard-won benefits of macroeconomic stability the
Bank will provide support to help the Government strengthen economic management through improving
the composition and effectiveness of public expenditures and supporting tax reforms. In agriculture, the
focus of the Bank's work will initially be to support the preparation of a rural strategy, integrating issues
related to agriculture, natural resource management, the rural non-farm economy, infrastructure, rural
finance and the need for targeted interventions. In irrigation the Bank will support a combination of
institutional reforms and investments throughout the system including major investments in rehabilitation
of critical assets and reforms to improve the quality, efficiency, and accountability with which irrigation
services are delivered. Recognizing that sustaining the current high rates of economic growth requires
globally competitive production in an increasingly demanding world market, the Bank Group will also
support reforms to improve the business environment.
vi.
Infrastructure bottlenecks pose a significant threat to Pakistan's ability to sustain rapid growth. In
the power sector the Bank Group will support further strengthening of sector governance to improve
performance and attract private investment while at the same time helping to address a significant backlog
in investment, particularly to address technical losses. In telecommunications the Bank will support
adoption of measures to strengthen the policy and regulatory environment and possible investment
support for accelerating the provision of rural telecommunication infrastructure. In transport, the Bank
and the government will adopt a strategic approach focusing first on the National Trade Corridor linking
Pakistan's major ports in the south with its major cities and trade corridors to the North. The key outcome
sought would be significant reductions in the time and cost of moving goods through the Indus corridor.
Investment and policy-based lending for highways, trade facilitation, ports and railways will be
considered, with an emphasis on increasing private sector participation in operation and management. In
the financial sector, the Bank Group will support further financial sector reforms to increase access to
finance (especially for microcredit borrowers) and support further reforms with the aim of increasing the
availability of longer term savings instruments.
Pillar II: Strengthened Governance and Service Delivery
vii.
Improving government effectiveness is a central theme of the PRSP. Priorities in this area will be
to support further reforms and investment to increase efficiency, transparency and accountability in the
use of public resources. In public financial management, full implementation of the Project for Improved
Financial Reporting and Auditing (PIFRA) will be the focus along with analytical support to assist in
defining the agenda for further reforms in financial management at the federal and provincial levels. The
Bank will also support the achievement of transparent and efficient public procurement through
development policy lending, policy dialogue and capacity building. Working across sectors, the Bank
Group will continue to support cross-cutting reforms to increase capacity and accountability of those
responsible for service delivery; empower communities and clients through enhanced access to
information on finances and performance; and build the capacity of both communities and governments.
Work will also include support to further civil service reform and devolution as well as a stepped-up
engagement in the urban sector to improve municipal service delivery, especially in the larger cities.

- i1 -

Pillar III: Improved Lives and Protection of the Vulnerable
The PRSP recognizes that increased investment in human capital leading to significant
viii.
improvements in education and health will be necessary to build the skilled, healthy work force necessary
to sustain recent growth performance. The Bank strategy in education will continue to be focused on the
provinces, using development policy credits to support policy and systemic changes as well as the other
areas linked to education reform including decentralization and governance reforms. In health, at the
national level, the Bank will concentrate on encouraging the Government to focus on public health
functions (such as surveillance, quality control, monitoring and evaluation, and public information) while
supporting the development and implementation of program and management reforms in the Lady Health
Worker program as a way of expanding access to primary health care and family planning. The Bank
Group will also support the piloting and evaluation of new approaches for service delivery and demand
side interventions. Recognizing that a major focus of efforts in health must be at the provincial and local
level, we will support major system reforms through planned provincial Development Policy Credits,
beginning in NWFP.
The PRSP recognizes that protection for the poor and vulnerable is a cornerstone of any poverty
ix.
reduction program. The Bank's assistance for social protection will include support for safety nets that
help the chronic poor cope with and, where possible, escape poverty, and help families and individuals
cope with seasonal shocks and natural disasters. The Bank will also provide support for social security via
improving formal sector pensions and consider innovative approaches to micro-insurance to address life
cycle risks. Pakistan's PRSP recognizes that while rapid growth will be the main driver of poverty
reduction, targeted interventions and community-based approaches to rural development are also required
to address the immediate needs of the poor and vulnerable, especially in drought prone and flood stricken
areas, and help them share in economic growth. The Bank will continue to support implementation of the
Community Investment Programs in NWFP and AJK and look for possible expansion and replication
opportunities. The Bank will also support the Government's newly announced program for rural poverty
alleviation through social mobilization.
Delivering the World Bank Group Program
x.
IBRD/IDA Lending. Pakistan's demand for World Bank financial support has grown to meet the
needs of its growth and poverty reduction strategy and to address the impact of the October earthquake.
To meet this demand a flexible IBRD/IDA lending program of up to US$6.5 billion (approximately
US$3.1 billion IDA and US$3.4 billion IBRD) is proposed in order to support implementation of the
PRSP. Pakistan's IDA allocation has been increased under IDA 14, with the three-year envelope set at
SDR 1.5 billion (equivalent to about US$725 million per year). In addition Pakistan will have access to
additional IDA on hard terms estimated at SDR 130 million. The scale of IBRD financial support will be
determined by the strength of the GoP's policy performance and macroeconomic management. The upper
bound of the proposed IBRD lending range for FYO6-09 is $3.4 billion of which up to $1.3 billion could
take the form of development policy loans. Annual lending could increase to as much as $1 billion per
year with up to $500 million in DPLs within this envelope.
xi.
The IFC and MIGA Programs. In the upcoming CAS period, IFC will be increasing its
investment with the target range of US$500-600 million for the period. IFC will also explore
opportunities in pre-privatization investment. It furthermore plans to make more equity investment and
intends to be a catalyst for and mobilize private equity in the country. IFC activity will focus on three
main sectors: financial, SME and infrastructure. With the recent creation of Private Enterprise Partnership
for Middle East and North Africa region (PEP-MENA), IFC has initiated a substantial TA program in
Pakistan to build capacity and address constraints of the SME, infrastructure and financial sectors.
MIGA's outstanding portfolio in Pakistan consists of 10 contracts of guarantee with a total gross exposure
of US$136.8 million and a net exposure of US$106.8 million. An application seeking coverage for a
US$20.8 million equity investment in a hydropower project in Pakistan is currently pending.

- 1v -

Partnerships and Harmonization. The Bank Group's work in Pakistan is coordinated with and
reinforced by the efforts of other donors in a wide variety of areas. The international response to the
October earthquake has also served as an opportunity to substantially deepen donor harmonization and
coordination. The Government leads coordination of policy dialogue and donor support within the
framework of the PRSP, using the Pakistan Development Forum (PDF), held annually in Islamabad, as
the principal forum for discussion with and among donors. A Donor Coordination Cell (DCC) has been
created in the Economic Affairs Division (EAD). Formal donor group meetings are also held, at least two
to three times a year, to discuss implementation of the government's PRSP. Under the leadership of the
Government of Pakistan, the Bank Group is increasing efforts to strengthen partnerships and improve
harmonization of activities among donors in line with the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. During
the next four years we expect an increasing share of analytical activities to be carried out jointly with
partners.
xii.

Managing Risks
xiii.
The proposed CAS program poses a number of risks, the greatest of which is that of possible
policy reversal due to shifting priorities or political changes. There are also implementation risks
relating to both the Bank and Pakistan. The Bank will seek to pro-actively manage these risks by actively
addressing capacity constraints while seeking to build and sustain support for further reforms. We will
continue to rely on the self-regulating nature of the programmatic approach wherein the volume and pace
of lending will match the pace of reforms.
Issues for Board Discussion
xiv.

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:
a)

Does the proposed program adequately support Pakistan's strategy for poverty reduction and
achievement of MDGs?

b) Is the planned increase in the scale of World Bank Group support for Pakistan appropriate?
c)

Is mix of instruments and activities consistent with the focus of the strategy?

I.
A.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

Political and Social Context

The FYO6-09 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) has been prepared at a time of great
1.
opportunity for Pakistan. Since the beginning of the new millennium, Pakistan has managed a remarkable
turnaround. During the 1990's Pakistan's progress in reducing poverty and improving the welfare of its
people was not very encouraging. Economic growth slowed and progress in improving Pakistan's social
indicators stagnated. Successive governments initiated reforms, but with only modest results. Beginning
in 2000, the Government initiated a more wide-ranging and ambitious reform program resulting in a
dramatic turnaround. The FYO3-05 CAS period witnessed the consolidation and acceleration of this
turnaround with sustained implementation of a program of stabilization and wide-ranging structural
reforms. Economic growth accelerated from the average of 3.3 per cent during 1997-2002 to 6.4 per cent
in 2003/04 and 8.4% in 2004/05. Public debt fell to 61% of GDP from almost 90% in 2000/01. Improved
fiscal performance and growing fiscal space resulting from savings on interest expenditures, generous
external support and improved revenue administration have enabled the government to exceed targets for
education spending. In short, Pakistan moved from crisis to growth, laying the groundwork for sustained
growth and significant poverty reduction.
Yet Pakistan's development challenges remain formidable. While provisional estimates for
2.
2004-05 suggest that poverty has declined compared with 2000-01, the proportion of the population
below the poverty line remains high. And despite recent indications of improvement, social and living
standards remain well below countries with similar incomes and growth rates. For example Pakistan's
gross female primary enrolment rate is 33 percent below and its infant mortality rate is 27 per thousand
above that of countries with the same per capita income. Moreover, there remain substantial disparities in
opportunity, particularly for the rural poor and women.
Politically, Pakistan is benefiting from a period of relative stability compared with the turmoil of
3.
the last decade. The past six years have been marked by consistent policies and sustained implementation
of the government's reform program. Elections in 2002 restored the National and Provincial Assemblies
and despite occasional slowdowns in implementation, the reform program has been carried forward under
the elected government. The prospects are good for continued stability and maintenance of the
government's pro-reform orientation. General elections are due to be held in 2007. The decentralization
initiative has started the process of transferring responsibility and resources for public service delivery to
local governments, laying the groundwork for more responsive and accountable government at the local
level as well as improved services. Recent local government elections in 2005 were an important
milestone in the institutionalization of the new local government system.
4.
Internationally, relations with India have steadily improved over the past two years, although the
conflict in Afghanistan and international terrorism continue to have serious repercussions for Pakistan.
Relations with India have improved markedly under the comprehensive dialogue launched in early 2003
and trade between the two countries is growing strongly, although from a low base. President Musharraf
visited India in late April 2005, and he and the Indian Prime Minister, Manmohan Singh, agreed to
increase transport links between the divided parts of Kashmir. The response to the October 8 earthquake
has served as an opportunity to expand peaceful interaction across the divided territory, demonstrating the
potential for cooperation and constructive engagement in the region. However, Pakistan's efforts to deal
with the spillover of post-9/11 conflict in Afghanistan and to cooperate in international efforts to combat
terrorism continue to bring it into conflict with militant groups, particularly in remote border region.
Clashes between law enforcement agencies and militants-many of them foreign-have resulted in
significant casualties.

-2-

B.

Social Progress and Poverty Profile

5.
The most recent household survey from which poverty estimates can be derived is now 4 years
old, dating from 2000/01, when economic growth was depressed and much of the country's rural areas
were suffering severe drought conditions. A definitive evaluation of whether the economic turnaround of
the past few years has translated into lower poverty will have to await the release and analysis of the
results of the Household Income and Expenditure Survey which is expected in 2006; however,
provisional estimates released by the Government indicate that the incidence of poverty which rose above
30% in 1998/99, and rose further in 2000/01, fell to below 30% in 2004/05.2 The results of the 2000/01
Pakistan Integrated Household Survey (PIHS) convey the characteristics of poverty in Pakistan and
highlight the challenge of attaining the Millennium Development Goal of halving the proportion of
population below the poverty line between 1990 and 2015.
Based on the PIHS, disaggregated poverty headcounts by province (using the official poverty
6.
line) show that NWFP and Balochistan are the poorest provinces and that poverty is far more widespread
in rural areas. Poverty is highest among unskilled labor in the informal sector and their condition became
worse between 1998-99 and 2001-02. Ownership of livestock and agricultural land are also closely
associated with rural incomes. While the poorest quintile of the rural population accounted for only 10
percent of the total estimated value of livestock in 2001-02, the top quintile accounted for 36 percent.
Households with no land constituted 60 percent of the rural population in 2001-02, but accounted for 76
percent of those in the bottom quintile; and poverty incidence among landless households actually
increased from 1998-99 to 2001-02. Vulnerability is a key feature of poverty; approximately 41 percent of
the population is concentrated in a small range of 75 to 125 percent of the poverty line implying that, for a
very large share of Pakistan's population, unanticipated shocks such as illness/disability, death, or natural
disaster can result in poverty.
7.
Poverty is also characterized by low level of human capability, manifested in poor outcomes in
education, health and lack of connectivity to basic services and facilities. Here there is recent data to
suggest that Pakistan's reform program is beginning to pay off. Preliminary findings from the recently
completed Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement survey, measuring outcomes as well as
access, satisfaction and usage of public services both at the household and facility level, are encouraging.
The preliminary results show significant improvement in a range of indicators including primary
enrolment and immunization coverage (See Table 1). Nevertheless, across a range of indicators,
Pakistan's social indicators continue to lag behind those of similar countries.
C.

Development Challenges

The key challenge for Pakistan is now to sustain its recent growth performance in order to
8.
generate significant poverty reduction. Pakistan's recent growth performance is encouraging, but its
continuation is by no means assured. Sustained growth will require continued sound macroeconomic
management along with further improvements in the investment climate. Notwithstanding the economic
recovery, investment rates are insufficient to sustain high rates of growth needed to reduce poverty.
Foreign direct investment, while recovering from the very low levels of the late 1990's remains low
compared to more dynamic economies in Asia. Sluggish rates of investment reflect continued weaknesses
in the investment climate; despite the recent successes in reducing state intervention in the economy and
improving the regulatory framework for private business, firms continue to face significant policy,
regulatory, and infrastructure constraints. Security concerns and political uncertainty have also combined
to deter investors, both foreign and domestic. The impact of these constraints is reflected in the results of
The government has established a joint committee made up of donors, experts and officials to evaluate and analyze
the most recent data and carry out a detailed analysis of poverty incidence. The provisional estimates are subject to
change based on the results of this analysis.
2

-3-

the World Economic Forum's (WEF) 2005-2006 Competitiveness Report which indicate that in 2005, of
the 116 countries covered, Pakistan ranked 66th in 'business competitiveness' (see Table 2).
Table 1: Progress on Selected Social Indicators
Indicator

1998-99

Reported data
2001-02
2004-05

Poverty
32.1
30.6
Poverty incidence (%)
Demographics
141
135
Population (millions)
Education
43
43
Adult literacy rate: 15+ years (%)
51
48
Female literacy rate as percent of male literacy (%)
51
50
Net enrollment rate (NER): grades 1-5 (%)
79
75
Female NER as a percent of male: grades 1-5 (%)
Health
64
Life expectancy at birth (year)
82
90
Infant mortality rate 0-12 months (per 1000 live births)
114
116
births)
live
Under-five mortality rate (per 100,000
53
49
Fully immunized children, age 12-23 months (%)
35
31
Percentage of pregnant women using pre-natal care
Sources: PIHS 1998-99, 2001-02, Preliminary estimates from PSLM 2004-05.
* Provisional estimate.

infrastructure
Pakistan's
9.
significant
needs
platform
investment in order to support

investmnts
Pakistan's

inwh
growth

ad
and

evc
service

Infrastructure
goals.
delivery
services including electricity, paved
roads, municipal services, and
telecommunications

reach

a

relatively low proportion of the
population. Moreover, inefficient
operations in key sectors, like
power and transport, adversely
affect competitiveness. The power
sector is characterized by high
losses and unreliable supply, forcing
many large firms to invest in

151
50
57
60
85
65
na
na
77
50

Table 2: Competitiveness Rankings
Business Competitiveness Index
2003
2004
2005
Countries

(116 countries)

(103 countries)

(102 countries)

Singapore
India
Thaia

5

10

8

3
37

3

37

Turkey

51

37
52
47

31
52
46

57
China
75
73
66
Pakistan
65
70
69
Philippines
57
68
72
SriLanka
91
95
100
Bangladesh
Source: World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report. 20052006; World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report. 20032004

captive generators. Much of the
road network is in poor condition and the railways are carrying only a small fraction of the nation's
freight due to inefficiency. Delays at Pakistan's ports are also hurting cost competitiveness of Pakistan's

exports. Each day of delay in shipment is currently raising unit costs, on average, by over 0.5 percent of
f.o.b. prices of exports .4 At the same time, improvements in basic infrastructure are critical to improving
WEF's 'Business Competitiveness'

index incorporates indicators of the 'quality of the national business

environment' and of the 'company operations and strategy'. For details, see: World Economic Forum, Global
Competitiveness Report 2005-2006.

"The World Bank, Global Economic Prospects:-Trade, Regionalism, and Development- 2005, page 80.

-4-

human development outcomes. Approximately 40 percent the population lacks access to power and about
75% of all rural health, education and market facilities are accessible only by earth tracks. Similarly,
water and sanitation services which are critical to achieving human development outcomes suffer from
poor quality and limited availability.
The infrastructure challenge is particularly acute with respect to water as Pakistan relies on the
10.
largest contiguous irrigation system in the world for 90% of food production and 25% of GDP.
Agriculture is the single most important source of employment and irrigation represents more than 95%
of the total consumptive use of water. However, this massive infrastructure is deteriorating and in need of
rehabilitation along with reforms to improve the allocation of water as well as the efficiency of its use.
The capacity of existing reservoirs is diminishing as the result of siltation and no new reservoirs have
been built since 1976. Moreover, competition for water is growing among the provinces and across the
varied needs for irrigation, industrial and domestic use, and the environment. Pakistan has already begun
ramping up its investments, beginning with the urgent rehabilitation of barrages. Yet there remains a need
for significant new investment, not only in irrigation but in other uses of water as well, including power
generation and urban-industrial and domestic supplies (50% of the population is not served by a formal
supply system and sanitation and water treatment reaches less than 10% of the population). At the same
time there is uncontrolled pollution of surface and groundwater from agriculture, industry and rapidly
growing cities.
11.
For the poor to participate in and benefit from growth Pakistan needs to accelerate human
development. International experience suggests that no country can hope to compete in the global
economy without an educated and healthy work force. Indeed, the lack of skilled manpower and lower
labor productivity are often cited as constraints to raising productivity, strengthening competitiveness, and
achieving sustained high economic growth by both business leaders and policymakers in Pakistan. While
Pakistan is making progress, analysis suggests that it will be difficult to achieve the MDGs for infant
mortality, child malnutrition, primary completion, and elimination of the gender gap in primary
enrolment.5 Looking beyond the MDG's, enhancing competitiveness in an increasingly globalized and
technology driven world economy will require a growing pool of workers with leading edge skills
pointing to the need for increases in the level and quality of secondary, vocational and higher education.
Thus, continued concerted efforts to address poor human development outcomes are important not only to
improve equity but also as an integral part of achieving Pakistan's growth objectives.
12.
Pakistan's poor social indicators are not due solely to poverty or lower rates of economic growth;
Pakistan significantly underperforms when compared to other countries at similar levels of per capita
income, and when compared to countries at similar levels of development. For example, Pakistan has 36
percent fewer births attended by trained personnel, an infant mortality rate that is 27 per thousand higher,
and a gross primary enrollment rate that is 20 percent lower than countries with similar income levels.
Similarly, growth in Pakistan appears to have less of an impact on social indicators than in other
countries-between 1960 and 1998, as per capita GDP more than doubled in Pakistan, infant mortality
declined by 43 percent, as compared to a decline of 73 percent in a group of low income countries that on
average grew at the same rate.
13.
Pakistan's relatively slow progress in improving human development reflects both low public
expenditures on education, health, water and sanitation and other key sectoral expenditures as well as
weaknesses in public service delivery which limit the effective use of scarce resources. As a result of the
debt burden, which reached a peak in the late 1990's, social sector spending was squeezed, with education
and health expenditures declining from 2.2 and 0.7 percentage of GDP in 1987/88 to 1.7 and 0.5
percentage of GDP by 1999/00. Despite having risen since then, public expenditure on health and
education remain low by international standards. Within sectors, resources have been poorly allocated
World Bank, Attaining the MDGs in Pakistan (Washington, DC, 2005).

-5-

with emphasis on spending for new hiring and facilities at the expense of providing resources for
operations and maintenance. Weaknesses in management of public services also stem from capacity
constraints and in some cases lack of clarity about the roles and responsibilities of various levels of
government. Moreover, social services are subject to, inter alia, high absenteeism rates of service
professionals (25 percent for teachers), poor quality of inputs and materials, low community involvement
and limited participation of the poor.
It is also important to note that a number of factors weaken the link between growth and poverty
14.
reduction in Pakistan. One such factor is the skewed structure of ownership and access to factors of
production (land, water and credit) in rural Pakistan, which limits the impact of agricultural growth on the
incomes of the rural poor. Landless agricultural laborers and non-agricultural rural poor households
account for 61 percent of the rural poor (and nearly 30 percent of the rural population). Another factor is
the ineffective targeting and delivery of government programs which reduces the benefits of increased
government spending. Strong social and cultural norms restrict access to public services and reduce the
economic opportunities of women and girls. Together these factors create obstacles for the poor and
vulnerable to partake in the benefits of economic growth, highlighting the importance of interventions
that address chronic poverty and vulnerability, and help the disadvantaged groups, including women,
participate in economic growth.
Large gender inequalities represent a critical constraint to improvements in human development
15.
outcomes. Since the late 1990s, the Government of Pakistan has launched programs designed to increase
girls' school enrollments, enhance female access to health care, and facilitate women's participation in the
public arena. Some progress has been made, but much more is needed. For example, legislation
mandating reservation of seats for women in local governments, as well as in provincial and national
assemblies, has substantially increased women's political representation. However, although more girls
are in school, a substantial gender gap in enrollment remains and worsens significantly as girls transition
from primary to middle school. Although gender differentials in child immunization have declined,
considerable gender differentials persist in other aspects of health care. The use of reproductive health
services is low, and maternal mortality ratios remain high. In the labor market, lower educational
attainment coupled with social norms that restrict mobility confine women to a limited range of
employment opportunities and low wages. The achievement of Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
will require significant reductions in these gender gaps. Policy interventions directed specifically at
gender inequality in these public domains are needed.
16.
Pakistan's population is predominantly rural and dependent on agricultural lands, rangelands and
forests. Natural resources and their sustainable management are therefore central to Pakistan's economic
growth and to people's livelihoods. Salinization and waterlogging of land, increasingly polluted
agricultural drainage (partly due to excessive pesticide use), and loss of important ecosystem functions
from diversion of flows and from pollution are reflected in disappointing development outcomes and
compromised agricultural yields. Degradation of rangelands continues and the rate of deforestation is
relatively high (although the level of remaining forest cover is already low). The poorer rural dwellers
suffer most from these trends. Urbanization is increasing at a rapid rate and the provision of basic
environmental services in these areas has not matched the pace of growth. In both rural and urban areas
there are problems of public health related to the lack of water, sanitation and other services and also to
high levels of air pollution (in rural areas, this is related mainly to indoor air from use of poor quality
fuels). Addressing these problems is a necessary adjunct to a sustainable growth and poverty alleviation
strategy.

-6-

Box 1: Impact of the October 8 Earthquake
The October 8, 2005 earthquake left widespread destruction in its wake, killing at least 73,000 people, severely
injuring another 70,000, and leaving 2.8 million people without shelter. The affected areas suffered extensive
damage to economic assets and infrastructure, with social service delivery, commerce, and communications either
severely weakened or destroyed. Beyond the human toll, the overall costs associated with the earthquake are
significant. A Joint Damage and Needs Assessment put the value of the direct damage sustained due to the
earthquake at US$2.3 billion while resulting indirect losses are estimated at US$576 million. The estimated costs
for relief, livelihood support for victims, and reconstruction cost are estimated at approximately US$5.2 billion.
The earthquake is expected to have an adverse impact on the economy, most notably on the fiscal deficit. The
impact on economic growth will be modest as the affected regions account for a very small part of the country's
GDP; growth at the national level is expected to decline by 0.4 percentage points in 2005/06. However, a large
share of reconstruction costs, including restoration of social and physical infrastructure and government
assistance to households to rebuild livelihoods and homes, will fall on the Government. Fiscal deficits during
FYO6-08 are expected to increase by 0.5 to 0.9 percent of GDP per year. While the impact on exports is projected
to be limited, relief and reconstruction needs have increased import demand due to higher demand for fuel and
steel.
These pressures could pose difficulties for Pakistan's macroeconomic balances and have the potential to
compromise the achievement of its long-term development goals. Whether and to what extent this occurs will
depend on the response of the Government and the international community. The Government intends to absorb a
part of the budgetary impact of the earthquake by making cuts in low-priority expenditures and by raising
additional domestic revenue while protecting priority expenditures needed to improve health, education, and
public infrastructure. The decision to delay the purchase of new military aircraft indicates the Go%ernmenCs
seriousness in this regard. Implementation of outstanding revenue and spending measures also need to be
accorded high priority. However, even with such measures (which are needed in any case), given the magnitude
of resources needed for rehabilitation of earthquake-affected areas, it is unlikely that the government will be able
to fully absorb the fiscal impact of the earthquake without significantly affecting public sector development
activities. Moreover, it is important that the poor in areas not affected by the disaster (the vast majority) not lose
out due to increased allocation of public resources to the earthquake-affected areas at the expense of the rest of
the country. Ensuring the dual objectives of rehabilitating and rebuilding earthquake affected communities and
accelerating Pakistan's development will require additional resource mobilization by Pakistan and the
international community.
For the country assistance strategy, the main impact is on the lending program, particularly the use of IDA
resources. While Pakistan's long-term development challenges and poverty reduction strategy have not been
fundamentally changed by the earthquake, its immediate financing needs have greatly increased. To help meet
these needs while protecting implementation of the PRSP reform program, the Bank has already made available
$740 million in new IDA commitments and $100 million in IBRD lending. Overall earthquake-related financing
may reach $1 billion. This has significantly front-loaded the use of IDA 14 resources with expected FY06 IDA
commitments totaling over half of the three-year IDA allocation. In consultation with the Government, the CAS
lending program has been re-prioritized accordingly; some planned IDA operations have been reduced in size and
additional IBRD lending is planned, consistent with creditworthiness considerations. To the planned AAA
program we have added dialogue and advisory activities to assist the Government in the development of a
comprehensive hazard risk management strategy.
17.

Addressing governance challenges and combating corruption are critical for improving the

investment climate and strengthening the delivery ofpublic services. Public institutions delivering social
services, law and justice and economic services suffer from inadequate capacity and ineffective internal
and external accountability. Moreover, while reliable data is scarce, surveys cited in the Government's

-7-

National Anti-Corruption Strategy indicate that corruption is a serious challenge. 6 The civil service
suffers from weak capacity as a result of many years of rapid turnover, patronage-based employment at
lower levels and inadequate compensation at senior levels. Accountability has been further weakened by
lack of effective client voice, made worse by the over-centralization of power at higher levels of
government. Together these weaknesses represent a major impediment to improving service delivery and
the investment climate.
18.
Improving governance and combating corruption is one of the pillars of Pakistan's poverty
reduction strategy. Key elements of the strategy include: (i) reducing opportunities for corruption by
redefining and refocusing the role of the state through privatization and de-regulation; (ii) reforming the
civil service; (iii) establishing local government as an effective system of governance, participation and
accountability; (iv) supporting reforms in public financial management and procurement in order to
promote prudent and accountable management of public resources while reducing opportunities for
corruption; and (v) strengthening enforcement mechanisms and the administration of justice.
19.
Significant progress has been made in these areas. Local governments have been created to
increase responsiveness and accountability for provision of key public services. The tax administration
system has been redesigned to reduce interaction between taxpayers and tax officials. The Government's
privatization program accelerated during the previous CAS period; over the last two years the government
realized US$4.35 billion in proceeds through 27 transactions compared with US$600 million during the
previous three years. Privatization of state-owned banks coupled with stronger regulation under a
revitalized State Bank of Pakistan has reduced politically-motivated lending and non-performing loans.
Progress has been made in improving public financial accountability through modernization of financial
reporting systems and auditing, while the institutions of accountability like the Auditor General and the
Parliamentary Public Accounts Committees have been revitalized. The national power utility is being
unbundled to de-monopolize the industry, improve its transparency and efficiency and prepare for
privatization. The National Accountability Bureau was created, successfully prosecuting cases of highlevel corruption. Nevertheless while this progress has been encouraging, most observers believe that a
great deal more needs to be done to address the deep governance challenges faced by Pakistan.
D.

Economic Developments and Outlook

Recent Economic Developments and Prospects
20.
Since the last CAS, Pakistan's economy has continued its strong recovery. Growth has
accelerated from 3.1 percent in FY2001/02 to 8.4 percent in 2004/05. The recovery was driven by a
strong rebound in exports of manufactures and, more recently, favorable weather conditions leading to a
strong pick up in agricultural production. Large scale manufacturing grew by 18.2% in FY2003/04 and by
15.4% in 2004/05. Fiscal performance has been sustained, despite limited progress in improving revenue
collections and reducing power sector losses. Due primarily to increases in non-tax revenues and savings
on the interest bill, the overall fiscal deficit (excluding grants) declined from 6.6 percent of GDP in
1999/2000 to about 3 percent of GDP in 2004/05. Moreover, despite this rapid fiscal adjustment, socialand poverty-related expenditures were raised by over 1 percentage point of GDP over the last three years,
or by over 30 percent in real per capita terms, although they remain low in comparison with other
developing countries.
21.
The balance of payments turned around with strong export growth and sizable remittances, and
international reserves were rebuilt to cover about five months of imports of goods and nonfactor services
and over 250 percent of short term external liabilities (up from 11 percent in 1999/2000) at end 2004/05.
Government
of Pakistan,
National Anti-Corruption
(http://www.nab.gov.pk/Downloads/Doc/NACS.pdf).
6

Strategy,

Islamabad

Pakistan,

2002

-8-

However, the external situation has deteriorated somewhat over the past 18 months. Exports and workers'
remittances have performed well, but with imports growing even faster, the current account moved into
deficit in 2004/05. The trade deficit during FY05 rose sharply to US$ 4.3 billion and is projected to
increase further to over US$7 billion in FY06. This reflects the rapid increase in imports which rose by
nearly 38% to US$18.8 billion due to strong import demand for a wide range of consumer and investment
goods (including automobiles and machinery), agricultural and chemical goods (fertilizer), and to high oil
prices. Exports increased by 13.8% to US$14.1 billion. Gross reserves fell by about US$800 million in
2004/05 to US$9.8 billion at end-June 2005. The current account deficit is projected to reach 3.9% of
GDP in FY06.
Figure 1: Recent Economic Performance
Balance of Payments and Reserves

Economic Growth

%
90-

50

8.0 -40Geoss
70 60
5.04.0

2080
10

1997/98

-.5 00er

-

13.0
-10
060
20
-3 0
1999/00

2001/02

2003/04

1999/00

Fiscal Trends
----------------

-

25.0
Crosspablic debt (% ofGP)

80

70
60

20. 0.

15,0

Revenue

10.0
4

05..

Total public & publicely guaranteed external debt

-0.0

.50

.

Budget balance (excl grats)

-100
1999/00

2000/01

20
40

Current accoun t excluding official transfer (%of GDP)20
00
2000/01
2001/02
2002/03
2003/04
2004/05

Total and External Debt

%
100..Expenditure
90

5050
40
30
20
10
0

1-

Real GDP at factor cost

capital GDP-

-2.0-40
1995/96

---------------

int'l reserves in billions

00

-2 0
-- 0

-

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

1999/00

2000/01

2001/02

2002/03

2003/04

2004/05

22.
Pakistan's public debt burden has declined sharply in the past four years. Although the stock of
debt remains high, it has declined faster than expected, and its net present value has been reduced. Thanks
to rapid growth, availability of grants and concessional finance, debt cancellation and fiscal consolidation,
total government debt as a percent of GDP declined from 80% in 2001/02 to 61% in 2004/05. Total
external public and publicly guaranteed debt declined from 296 percent of exports of goods and services
in FY2001/02 to 203 percent in FY2004/05 while debt service fell from 34 to 19 percent of exports of
goods and services. Interest payments have fallen from 5.6% of GDP in 2001/02 to 3.2% in FY2004/05.
23.
The response to the October earthquake-arguably the most debilitating natural disaster in
Pakistan's history-is expected to have an impact on fiscal outcomes during the current fiscal year and
for at least the next 3 years. The deficit, which had already been projected to grow as the result of
increases in civil service salaries and a growing public investment program, is expected to rise further,
reflecting the costs of rebuilding infrastructure and government services and of subsidies to restore
livelihoods and housing in the earthquake-affected areas. The FY06 fiscal deficit before grants is
expected to increase by around 0.6% of GDP, to 4.4% of GDP (see Table 3), which remains consistent
with a stable macroeconomic framework and the Fiscal Responsibility and Debt Limitation Law.
However, the increase in public expenditures due to the earthquake may result in a slowdown in the pace
of debt reduction. The extent to which it does depends not only on the Government's efforts to reprioritize

-9-

expenditures, but also the pace at which grants pledged at a November 2006 donors' conference
materialize. The government has indicated that it is reprioritizing expenditures and strengthening revenue
efforts so as to minimize the impact of the earthquake on fiscal balances. The latter is particularly
important since revenue performance suffered in FY05 due to a reduction in petroleum taxes (a move
designed to cushion consumers from the impact of rising international oil prices), reductions in customs
duties and special regimes for particular sectors. Some administrative reforms also may have contributed
to a temporary dip in collections. However, collections during the current fiscal year are improving
markedly.
Table 3: Medium Term Outlook - Key Indicators

2002/03
Output and Prices
Real GDP at factor costs (percent change)
Consumer prices (period avg. percent change)
Consolidated Government Budget Balance
Excluding grants
Net ofEarthquake Impact
Public Debt
Total government debt
Domestic debt
External debt

Projections
2003/04
2004/05
2005/06
2006/07
2007/08
(in percent of GDP, unless indicated otherwise)

2008/09

4.8
3.1

6.4
4.6

8.4
9.3

6.3
8.2

6.5
6.5

6.6
5.5

6.8
5.0

-3.8

-2.3

-3.3

-4.4
-3.6

-4.4
-3.5

-3.9
-3.3

-3.6
-3.1

74
39
35

68
36
31

61
33
28

57
32
25

54
28
26

51
25
26

49
23
26

External Sector
Current Account Balance
5.1
2.0
-1.3
-3.9
-4.3
-4.3
Gross Reserves (US$ millions. IMF definition)
10,251
10,621
9,985
10,549
12,157
13,117
Reserve cover to imports of GNFS (months)
6.9
5.0
3.7
3.4
3.4
3.2
Sources: 2002/03 to 2004/05 - Government of Pakistan; 2005/06 to 2008/9 projections - World Bank Staff estimates.

-4.1
14,079
3.0

24.
The Government's fiscal policy aims to contain the deficit and continue to reduce the debt
burden while increasing public investment and social spending. These commitments are embodied in
the Fiscal Responsibility and Debt Limitation Bill approved by the National Assembly and subsequently
passed into Law in 2005. The Law specifies that the revenue deficit be reduced to zero by June 30, 2008,
and a surplus maintained thereafter; that total public debt be reduced by 2.5% of GDP per year; that PRSP
expenditures be at least 4.5% of GDP in any year; and that debt guarantees be limited to 2 percent of
GDP. An additional important clause introduced in the Law by the Assembly is the requirement that
education and health expenditures, as a percentage of GDP, be doubled over the next ten years. Meeting
these targets will depend in large part on the government's ability to improve revenue collection while
continuing to reduce the losses of state-owned enterprises, particularly in the power sector. The
Government fiscal framework for 2006 through 2009 is expected to remain consistent with the Fiscal
Responsibility and Debt Limitation Law.
25.
Prospects for rapid growth to be sustained over the next 3 years are good, provided that political
and macroeconomic stability are maintained, that the momentum of structural reforms and investments to
reduce the cost of doing business is sustained, and that domestic savings and public and private
investment continue to increase The Government is targeting a more ambitious growth path than the
Medium Term Outlook table estimates, with growth projected to rise gradually to 7.8% of GDP by 2009.
Emerging risks on the external sector can be mitigated by gradually reducing demand pressures. The
Medium Term Outlook presented above assumes that the measures necessary to reduce inflationary
pressures and the growing external and fiscal imbalances will be taken by the central bank and the
Government of Pakistan. Economic growth for FY06 is projected to remain strong and broad-based. Led

-

10

-

by strong domestic demand, industrial growth remains strong in the automobiles and consumer durables
sub-sectors. The textile sector continues to perform well, in spite of the end of the Multi-Fiber
Agreement, and exports of textile products have remained strong. Agricultural output in FY06 is
projected to be average, below last year's record-breaking levels. Foreign Direct Investment is continuing
to increase, as investor confidence is strengthening.
II.

PAKISTAN'S POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY

The positive developments outlined above have set the stage for accelerating poverty reduction in
26.
Pakistan. Pakistan's poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP), which was presented on December 31,
2003, sets forth the broad-based strategy for addressing poverty in its various dimensions including
human development, governance, and vulnerability and builds on the economic program first articulated
in the fall of 1999 and further elaborated in the I-PRSP of 2001.' Since the PRSP was prepared, the
Government has continued to develop and refine its program for implementing the PRSP agenda which is
embodied in the five-year Medium Term Development Framework 2005-2010 (MTDF), adopted along
with the FY2005/06 Budget. While the PRSP continues to serve as an overall framework for the poverty
reduction strategy, the MTDF refines the strategy, taking into account recent developments, and updates
the targets while providing further details on implementation strategies. The Government is also in the
process of preparing a new PRSP which is expected to be finalized in 2006.
27.
Taken together, the PRSP and the MTDF constitute a comprehensive poverty reduction and
growth strategy. The PRSP emphasizes policies to sustain rapid growth as the main vehicle for poverty
reduction and is grounded on four pillars: (i) achieving and sustaining a high growth rate while
maintaining macroeconomic stability, translating this higher growth into lower poverty, and bridging the
social gap; (ii) improving governance and consolidating devolution, both as a means of delivering better
development results and ensuring social and economic justice; (iii) investing in human capital, with a
renewed emphasis on effective delivery of basic social services; and (iv) targeting the poor and vulnerable
to bring marginalized sections of the population and backward regions into the mainstream of
development, and to make marked progress in reducing existing inequalities. The PRSP's targets are fully
aligned with the MDGs (see Table 4:).
A.

The PRSP Strategy

28.
Pillar One: Accelerating economic growth while maintaining macroeconomic stability. The
PRSP focuses on accelerating poverty reduction and improving social indicators through rapid, privatesector and export-led growth and more effective and equitable delivery of health, water and sanitation,
and education services. The PRSP also emphasizes enhancing competitiveness in the era of globalization
through higher investment and knowledge inputs. It recognizes that, while a great deal has been
accomplished in terms of restoring growth and addressing external vulnerabilities, considerable
challenges remain to improve the efficiency of resource use and raise factor productivity. The key source
of poverty reduction and employment is expected to be rapid growth and job creation in the
manufacturing and service sectors, which are already responding well to economic reforms. The PRSP
projects a substantial increase in private sector investment and the continued expansion of private sector
activity in order to sustain growth. To increase private investment, the PRSP outlines a set of structural
reforms to increase productivity and reduce the cost of doing business in Pakistan. Overall, the strategy
aims to expand the role of the private sector in the development process by the strengthening the enabling
role of the government through policy direction and creation of a supportive regulatory environment.

7The Bank-Fund Joint Staff Assessment (JSA), discussed by the Board on March 11, 2004, endorsed the PRSP and
indicated it provides a good policy framework for the implementation of a strong reform program. Pakistan, Joint
StaffAssessment of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper,Report 27625-PK, February 12, 2004.

- 11 -

Pillar Two: Improving governance. The PRSP recognizes that continuing to improve governance
29.
in Pakistan matters critically for economic growth and the development of human capital. The MTDF
reinforces this emphasis. Key elements of the Government's strategy include accelerating civil service
reform, furthering devolution, improving access to justice, police reforms, accelerating improvements in
public procurement and financial management, and additional measures to accelerate progress on fiscal
and financial transparency and reduce opportunities for corruption. In addition to these areas, the MTDF
also highlights the importance of strengthening corporate governance, enhancing the quality and coverage
of data and statistics, and making greater use of participatory approaches in order to improve program and
project outcomes. Regarding civil service reform, the government's strategy highlights a flatter structure,
merit-based recruitment and promotion criteria, performance based compensation, and incentives to
innovation. There is also a proposal to restructure the civil services in order to break free of some of the
structural rigidities resulting from the current cadre system. The government also indicates its intention to
implement further pay and pension reforms.
Table 4: Pakistan's PRSP Targets and Alignment with Millennium Development Goals
Goals and Indicators

1990-91
2000-01
actual

2005-06

2011

2015

1. Eradicate Poverty and Hunger
- Overall poverty level (% of population)
- Poverty gap ratio

26.1
4.53

32.1
6.84

28

22

16

2. Achieve Universal Primary Education
- Literacy rate of 15-24 years old (%)
- Gross Enrollment*

49
73

58
87

59.5
104

78
104

86
100

0.61

0.65

0.65

0.9
1.0

21
17
33

4. Reduce Child Mortality
- Infant mortality rate
- Proportion of fully immunized children 12-23 months
- Under five mortality rate

120
25%
140

77
53%
105

63
82%
80

50
90%
65

40
>90%
52

5. Improve Maternal Health
- Maternal mortality rate/100,000
- Total fertility rate
- LHW coverage of target population

550
5.4
n/a

450
4.1
45%

350
4.0
77%

180
2.5
90%

140
2.1
100%

6. Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Other Diseases
- Incidence of TB/100,000

n/a

177

133

7. Ensure Environmental Sustainability
- Sustainable access to safe water
82%
- Population with access to sanitation
Source: Government of Pakistan, Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, 2003.

86%
28%

90%
51%

3. Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women
- Ratio of literate females to males of 15-24 years (%)
- Proportion of Seats held by women in the Parliament:
National Assembly (%)
Senate (%)
Local Councils (%)

0.93

45
93%
55%

*A sub-committee headed by Director, PIDE is engaged in reconciling PIHS and NEMIS data.

30.
Pillar Three: Investing in human capital. In Pakistan, social development lagged even when
growth was robust and the incidence of income poverty declined. The Government's PRSP acknowledges
that without a considerable improvement in social indicators, especially for women, Pakistan will be
unable to sustain high rates of economic growth. Education is seen as the most important factor

- 12

-

distinguishing the poor from the non-poor. The PRSP, therefore, includes increased allocations for
education, health, water and sanitation, and rural infrastructure. The MTDF reflects a large increase in
resources for education with the total public allocation for education expected to increase to 3.6 percent of
the GDP by 2010 with private sector expenditure adding another 1.5 percent.
In health, the PRSP recognizes the need to increase financing and enhance efficiency of spending
31.
through organizational and management reforms. Furthermore, the PRSP focuses on reorganization of
district health structures, strengthening of district and tehsil hospitals, improving hospital administration
through greater autonomy, and regulation of the private sector. On the programmatic front, the strategy is
to continue and strengthen the shift from curative services to preventive and primary health care. The
strategy prioritizes control of communicable diseases, reproductive health, child health and nutrition. In
health, the Federal Ministry would focus on development of a public health surveillance system and on
gradually devolving preventive care programs, which would increasingly be designed and not only
implemented by provincial and local governments. The PRSP acknowledges that the achievement of key
PRSP goals in health depends also on policies and developments outside of the health sector such as
literacy, access to drinking water and adequate sanitation.
Pillar Four: Targeting the poor and the vulnerable. Targeting the poor and the vulnerable
32.
through social protection programs is one of the integral pillars of the strategy. There are several social
protection programs in Pakistan, which have as their objective improving the welfare of the poor and
vulnerable groups. The programs include cash transfers through the Zakat and Bait-ul-Maal programs,
in-kind assistance through, for example, the school meals pilot program (Tawana Pakistan), and programs
to reduce the prevalence of child labor (stipend/schools for working children and their families). In
addition to cash and in-kind transfers, Khushali Bank and a number of NGOs provide microfinance to
low-income households. There is also a social security system for workers in the formal sector. A modest
number of facilities provide institutionalized care or special education to specific vulnerable groups such
as the disabled or child laborers.
III.

A.

BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Implementation of the Last CAS and Lessons Learned

FYO3-05 Actual lending, portfolio management, and IFCprogram
While new lending slowed during FY03 following the October 2002 elections, it picked up
33.
thereafter and overall CAS lending volume was close to that envisioned in the high-case lending scenario
of the FYO3-05 CAS. New lending commitments during the CAS period totaled US$2.033 billion,
including US$404 million of IBRD, or 15% below the CAS high case lending scenario of US$2.4 billion
including US$600 million in IBRD borrowing. The shortfall in IDA commitments was due in large part to
delays in development policy lending for the provinces of Sindh and NWFP as well as a shortfall in
overall IDA 13 resources. Total EBRD commitments were one-third less than the high-case scenario total.
A detailed comparison of planned and actual lending is included in the CAS Completion Report. Just over
half of IDA and IBRD commitments were fast disbursing development policy loans, compared with the
65% share projected in the CAS, again reflecting the delay in planned development policy lending for the
provinces.
With respect to the ongoing portfolio, performance throughout the CAS was generally good (see
34.
Table 5). Starting from a low point at the beginning of the CAS period, the portfolio has grown from 12
to 16 projects reflecting the increase in lending over the previous CAS. Despite the growing volume of
lending, the portfolio remains relatively small, a reflection of the substantial proportion of single tranche
development policy credits in the program (about one-third of the operations approved during the CAS
period). Performance indicators showed sustained strong performance with 100 percent realism and

- 13 -

pro-activity and a disbursement ratio well above regional and Bank-wide averages. The percentage of
projects at risk remained low, although it rose somewhat in FY05. This increase is being watched closely
in
intensively
managed
and
consultation with the GoP (see
Table 5: Bank Portfolio Indicators
para. 106).

35.

The

CAS

.

emphasis

on

Indicator

FY02

FY03

FY04

FY05

16
18
12
15
Number of Projects
knowledge transfer was reflected in
12.5
5.6
6.7
8.3
Projects at Risk (%)
the AAA program. Core diagnostic
7.2
19.6
23.2
0.0
Commitments at Risk (%)
reports completed include a Public
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
(%)
Realism
Expenditure Review (rated highly
satisfactory by QAG), a Poverty
Proactivity (%)
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Assessment, CFAA (complemented
Disbursement Ratio
37.0
28.0
24.7
40.7
financial
provincial
by
three
accountability assessments), an FSAP, and a Country Gender Assessment. Customized, high impact
informal AAA such as the trade policy notes and power sector policy notes were used to support high
level policy dialogue and catalyze implementation of reforms. A series of in-depth provincial economic
reports was launched, beginning in FY04 with the Punjab Economic Report, followed by the NWFP
Economic Report in FY05. By design, the AAA program has put less emphasis on delivery of discrete
outputs and teams have been encouraged to transfer knowledge through policy dialogue and non-lending
TA. Major (or flagship) ESW Reports have been limited to no more than three a year to ensure quality
and adequate managerial attention.
36.
The IFC Programover the previous CAS period included investments and significant increases in
technical assistance and advisory service. Commitments during the three year period totaled US$187
million. Total exposure now stands at US$314 million in 32 companies including US$62 million in
equity, down from US$442 million in 48 companies at the time of the CAS. Liquidity in the local
financial markets led IFC to reassess its approach and provide more value-added instruments and put
greater emphasis on TA. The focus during this period was on the financial sector, SMEs infrastructure,
and targeted industrial interventions. IFC's investments supported expanded container capacity in
Karachi's port, the first investment in information technology, Islamic financing in the leasing sector, and
a linkage initiative in the textiles sector. TA included initiatives in all major pillars of the Private
Enterprise Partnership for the Middle East and North Africa (PEP-MENA) facility: financial sector,
SMEs, business enabling environment, and privatization or public-private partnerships. IFC's TA
program in Pakistan included a corporate governance program for banks, institution building in housing
finance, and SME and microfinance, training in alternative dispute resolution, support for business
membership organizations, and advice in the water sector. Moreover, during the last CAS period, IFC
Technical Assistance and Trust Funds Program (TATF) completed a feasibility study in the health sector
as well an analysis of the competitive positions of the country's leasing companies and investment banks.
IFC's Environmental Opportunities Facility (EOF) completed a study to help optimize a wastewater
treatment facility in the textile manufacturing industry.
Lessons learnedfrom IEG evaluations, client survey, and the CAS Completion Report
37.
The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for FY2006-09 builds on the lessons learned during
implementation of the FYO3-05 CAS and the messages heard during consultations with stakeholders as
well as the results of a client survey. In addition, recent formal reviews of the Bank's work in Pakistan
include (i) the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) Country Assistance Evaluation covering
FY94-FYO3; (ii) the FYO3-05 CAS Completion Report; (iii) Recent IEG Project Performance Assessment
Reports; (iv) ICRs of projects closed during the CAS period; and (v) a QAG review of AAA work.

- 14 -

Results of the Client Survey. The survey of 351 stakeholders drawn from government, national
38.
and provincial assemblies, the private sector, media and academia yielded a number of insights on the
Bank's contribution to Pakistan's development. Stakeholders reported that the greatest development
challenges are poverty reduction, education and law/justice, with education emerging as a critical issue
consistently throughout the survey-and an area where respondents believe the Bank can play a more
profound role. In addition, stakeholders emphasized infrastructure as an area that is critical for successful
development-and an area where the Bank's work receives some of the highest ratings from stakeholders.
The Bank's role as a provider of knowledge was also particularly valued. The Bank's greatest weaknesses
were considered to be imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities and not
exploring alternative policy options. A consistent and important message from both the survey and
consultations is that the Government of Pakistan values its partnership with the World Bank.
Lessons from the CAS Completion Report. The CAS Completion Report (Annex 2) reviews the
39.
Bank Group's effectiveness over the past three years and indicates that the Bank's strategy was
appropriate and succeeded in making a significant contribution toward the achievement of some of the
outcomes targeted in the FY03-05 CAS. In particular, targets for macroeconomic stabilization (including
debt reduction) and increases in poverty-related expenditure were met and milestones in governance
reforms in financial management and tax administration were achieved. While outcomes in several areas
were not met, the Bank program helped in the development and implementation of reform programs to
which the government remains committed, even if the pace of reform has not been as rapid as envisioned
in the CAS. With respect to development outcomes, there is now preliminary data to suggest that the
reforms of the past three years are beginning to yield measurable improvement, although in some cases
less than targeted in the CAS. Taken together these reviews and feedback suggest that while the Bank has
made a valuable contribution to Pakistan's development, there is significant potential to increase our
development impact. The chief lessons relevant to formulation of the CAS are:
*

A programmatic approach provides the flexibility to support reforms while managing risk. The
use of annual single tranche adjustment operations at both the provincial and national level helped
to support reforms while providing a mechanism to adjust the lending program to match the pace
of reforms. This approach strengthened the link between borrower performance and the Bank
lending program.

*

Projects need to be focused and scaled to fit the capacity of the implementing agency, in terms of
both project scope and the pace of implementation. While reinforcing the emphasis on the key
role of "client pull," the experience of a number of projects that closed during the CAS, especially
the multi-province umbrella projects, highlights the need for focused projects that are readily
"implementable" with realistic schedules and clear ownership. In particular, governance reforms
often took longer than planned. Realistic assessment of technical and political implementation
challenges need to be reflected in project designs which should exhibit a strong bias towards
simplicity.

*

Greater attention to capacity building is needed. As indicated above, weak implementation
capacity is a widespread concern affecting project design and implementation. The Bank has
begun to increase its capacity building programs with the approval of the Public Sector Capacity
Building (PSCB) project in FY04 and the designation of Pakistan as a focus country for WBI
programs beginning in FY05. The Bank will also continue its support for civil service reforms
through policy dialogue, the PSCB project and PRSCs. During the coming CAS, projects will
have a greater emphasis on building institutional capacity.

*

The program needs to continue to strengthen its focus on results. To address weak M&E systems
and capacity within the GoP and implementing agencies, the Bank needs to support the
strengthening of statistical capacity and monitoring and evaluation as part of institution
strengthening. At the same time, the Bank needs to do a better job of focusing on developing

- 15

-

solid project-level results and indicators and incorporating the monitoring of these results into the
supervision process. The results-based CAS offers an opportunity to identify and focus on key
strategic outcomes at the country level and provide a framework for joint monitoring and
evaluation of the overall country program with the Government.
40.
The IEG Country Assistance Evaluation. IEG's Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) rates the
overall outcomes of the Bank's assistance program as moderately unsatisfactory. 8 During the period
covered by the IEG review (1994-2003), IEG found that the outcomes of Bank support for
macroeconomic management and growth achieved success, especially in the last few years. However,
outcomes of the Bank's assistance were found to be unsatisfactory in poverty reduction and social sector
development, governance, agriculture and natural resource management, fixed infrastructure, and revenue
mobilization and expenditure management. Taken together, therefore, IEG rated the overall outcomes of
the Bank's assistance program as moderately unsatisfactory. Although the CAE primarily covers the
decade prior to the beginning the FYO3-05 CAS, some of its findings and recommendations are applicable
to the new CAS and have been discussed by the Country Team and are reflected herein. The key
recommendations of the CAE are: (i) the Bank should continue its strong support of analytical work while
translating analysis into implementable actions taking into account political economy constraints; (ii)
Bank interventions should have a greater focus on building sustainable institutional capacity; (iii) projects
should be more focused and scaled to fit the capacity of implementing agencies; and (iv) the Bank should
invest additional effort into improving donor relations.
41.
A more recent IEG Project Performance Assessment 9 drawing lessons from the provincial
development policy loans for Sindh and NWFP has also informed the development of this CAS. In
particular, the PPAR notes that sub-national development policy lending can make a significant
contribution in terms of improving service delivery. In the context of devolution, the PPAR also notes the
importance of clarifying the respective roles and financial relationships of various levels of government.
Finally like the CAE, the PPAR notes the importance of taking capacity constraints into accountespecially at the local level-and recommends greater attention to capacity building in future operations.
B.

Context and Engagement Principles

42.
While highlighting areas in need of strengthening, the review of our assistance and lessons
learned outlined above also confirm the value of the Bank's strategic partnership with Pakistan. The Bank
has come to be seen by the Government as a trusted development partner, valued not only as a major
source of development finance but also as a source of global knowledge based on international
experience. At the same time, the Bank has gained significant credibility as a catalyst for reform through
its willingness to exercise selectivity, lending only in the presence of strong ownership of, and
commitment to, reform and where there is clear evidence that the Bank adds significant value. The Bank
is therefore uniquely positioned to play a key role in helping Pakistan to sustain its recent strong
performance and accelerate poverty reduction. Moreover, in light of its recent successes, Pakistan is well
positioned to make real progress in poverty reduction and has requested a significant increase in the scale
of Bank financial support. For the Bank, this represents an important opportunity to increase the impact of
our work in Pakistan by significantly scaling up our program over the FY06-09 period.
43.
In this context, the Bank's work will continue to be guided by the following strategic engagement
principles:

Pakistan - Country Assistance Evaluation (CODE2005-0058; /1), June 29, 2005. The Pakistani authorities agree
with the CAE's analysis in some areas, but note that the report did not emphasize adequately recent improvements
and was too critical of outcomes in agriculture and privatization.
9IEG, Project Performance Assessment Report. Report No. 33612, December 19, 2005.

-

16-

*

The Bank will commit resources only in the presence of strong "client pull" to ensure that scarce
resources are applied only where there is a high probability of success. Evidence of client demand
for Bank support will include the leadership of committed reform champions who have
demonstrated the willingness and ability to carry out needed reforms. At the project level, client
demand will be reflected in the establishment of adequate institutional arrangements and
readiness for prompt implementation.

*

The Bank's program will reflect strategic selectivity, targeting Bank resources where they can be
most effective. A principle consideration will be demonstration of client pull as outlined above. In
addition, while the program will span a wide range of instruments and sectors, we will maximize
impact by seeking replicate or scale-up approaches that have already been shown effective. We
will continue to maintain a close dialogue with the Government and other partners to harmonize
and reinforce our efforts and to target our activities in the areas where the Bank has the greatest
comparative advantage.

*

This new CAS will have an even greater focus on outcomes. The Bank's program for Pakistan
will be guided by the CAS results framework (Annex 1) which identifies: (i) long-term national
development goals; (ii) associated CAS outcomes that the Bank can directly help to realize; and
(iii) the mix of Bank Group products and services that best contributes to these CAS outcomes.
An integral part of the shift toward a results-based CAS will be the strengthening of the CAS
M&E architecture. The CAS results framework also identifies indicators to monitor progress
toward the achievement of CAS outcomes as well as implementation of World Bank Group CAS
programs and will therefore serve as a mechanism for monitoring progress in CAS
implementation.

*

Programmatic approaches will continue to form the core of the Bank program. The experience
of the FYO3-05 CAS supports the continued used of a programmatic approach to provide
sustained, flexible, and predictable support to medium-term reform programs. Experience has
also shown that programmatic approaches are effective in strengthening ownership while
accommodating the uncertainties inherent in medium-term reforms. Increasingly we will provide
a range of services-a combination of dialogue, capacity building, expenditure review and
technical assistance along with IDA resources-aimed at building effective service delivery
systems at the local government level. Programs will seek to link inputs to outputs, be integrated
into medium-term budget frameworks and include an effective monitoring system.

In line with Pakistan's recent performance and request for additional Bank support as well as
44.
application of the strategic principles outlined above, the Bank will seek to deliver a substantial increase
in its volume of lending to Pakistan during the next four years. The immediate priority will be to assist in
addressing the impact of the October 2005 earthquake; up to US$1 billion in IBRD/IDA commitments
will be used to support reconstruction and recovery (US$840 million in new commitments have already
been approved). In addition, based on the Government's priorities for sustaining growth and accelerating
poverty reduction, the expansion in lending will be primarily in infrastructure (primarily energy, water,
and transport) and human development. Cross-cutting reforms, both at the national and provincial level
will remain a key focus and a substantial share of IDA lending will take the form of PRSCs and
provincial development policy credits to support, inter alia, fiscal/financial management improvement,
transparent and efficient public procurement, power sector reforms, actions to improve the investment
climate and cross-cutting initiatives to improve service delivery. Investment lending devoted to
strengthening and reform of the key governance institutions (e.g., tax administration, financial
management, land records, and statistics) will also continue to make up a significant portion of the
lending program.

-

17 -

While the Government's request for additional financing for infrastructure will lead to an increase
45.
in investment lending, policy-based fast disbursing lending will continue to account for a significant share
of total lending. Policy-based lending instruments are well-suited to supporting the Government's poverty
reduction strategy which emphasizes second generation policy and institutional reforms. The experience
of the FYO3-05 CAS has demonstrated the effectiveness of flexible, performance-based assistance in
supporting policy reforms and crosscutting actions needed to improve service delivery. Annual PRSCs
will form the core of the Bank's support for implementation of Pakistan's poverty reduction strategy at
the national level. Province-level development policy operations will feature prominently where mediumterm reform programs have advanced to the stage where Bank support can assist in their implementation.
As in the previous CAS province level development policy operations will couple fiscal and financial
management reforms to improve financial sustainability with actions to improve the effectiveness of
service delivery. IBRD development policy lending will be considered to support reforms in urban
management, irrigation, and transport, in conjunction with investment lending, policy dialogue and
technical assistance. In each case, the choice of development policy instruments will be driven by the
strength of medium-term reform programs and the capacity and track record of counterparts.
The proposed assistance program will be aligned with the respective responsibilities of national
46.
and provincial governments in Pakistan and tailored to meet the needs of the individual provinces.
Provinces and local governments bear most of the responsibility for delivering public services including
irrigation, education, health, and water supply and sanitation, but have very limited "fiscal space" to
provide these services. In the FYO3-05 CAS, the Bank's strategy was to focus on those provinces-Sindh
and NWFP-that had embarked upon comprehensive reform programs to support those programs through
a series of development policy credits. In addition the Bank provided programmatic support for education
reforms in Punjab, beginning in FY04. Provincial reform programs in Punjab and Balochistan were
supported through the Asian Development Bank's Resource Management Program loans. During the
coming CAS period we will continue to support provincial reform programs in these provinces and
maintain a dialogue with all provinces based on in-depth provincial economic reports for each province.
We will seek a balanced approach with lending and analytical services geared to the specific challenges
and unique opportunities (e.g., the mineral sector in Balochistan) in each province.
At the national level, policy-based and investment lending will focus on areas that are the
47.
mandate of the federal government. The PRSC program will focus on the critical policy and institutional
reforms to improve governance and the investment climate. Much of the planned increase in investment
lending will be for national-level programs, including national highways, ports, railways, power, and
water.
C.

World Bank Group Program Priorities

The Strategic Framework
The Bank Group' program priorities will retain considerable continuity with the FYO3-05 CAS.
48.
The World Bank program for FYO6-09 will support the continuation and consolidation of many of the
reforms initiated in previous years including cross-cutting governance reforms initiated in current and
earlier CASs (financial management, procurement, tax administration, devolution and civil service
reform). We will also assist in strengthening the institutions governing the market economy and continue
to encourage reforms in the incentive and regulatory regimes for infrastructure, finance, trade and
manufacturing to further improve the business climate. Working with the federal government and the
provinces we will seek to improve the quality of and expand access to basic services for the poor,
including health, education and safety nets.
The Bank Group will focus its program on the areas which are most critical for poverty reduction.
49.
The three pillars of the CAS correspond to the strategic priorities of the PRSP: (i) sustaining growth and

- 18-

improving competitiveness; (ii) improving government effectiveness and service delivery; and (iii)
improving lives and protecting the vulnerable. The pillars of the CAS are inter-linked and mutually
reinforcing. Sustaining high and broad-based growth is necessary to create employment and incomegenerating opportunities. Addressing poor human development outcomes is a critical element of the
strategy to enable the poor to take part in and benefit from growth. Improving governance cuts across the
entire strategy - it is important both to improving the investment climate to support growth and to
strengthening the delivery of services to the poor. Within the three pillars of the CAS, the Bank has
identified a selected number of outcomes that will be pursued during the CAS period. The rest of this
section explains the main issues and constraints in the areas of the CAS pillars and how the proposed
outcomes to be supported by the Bank Group program will assist Pakistan in tackling these constraints.
Pillar I: Sustained Growth and Improved Competitiveness
Strengthened macroeconomic management and allocation of resources. Maintaining the hard50.
won benefits of macroeconomic stability will be critical to sustaining growth during the CAS period.
While recent performance has been good, particularly with respect to growth, rising inflationary pressures
and limited progress in improving revenue mobilization represent challenges. With the increased
spending made necessary by the costs associated with earthquake recovery, there is an even more acute
need for further prioritization of expenditures to maximize the benefit of available fiscal space. Key
priorities include reducing the drain on the budget caused by losses of state-owned enterprises, improved
management of the public investment program, and strengthened debt management.
With the conclusion of the IMF poverty reduction growth facility program, the Bank's
51.
macroeconomic monitoring and advice will occupy a more central role in our dialogue 0 In addition, the
Bank will continue to provide support to help the Government strengthen macroeconomic management
through (i) improving the level and composition of expenditure; (ii) improving the effectiveness and
impact of public expenditures through the preparation of a Medium Term Budget Framework (MTBF)
and the formulation of sector strategies and sector investment programs; and (iii) continuing ongoing tax
reforms aimed at improving tax payer services while increasing the tax-to-GDP ratio. PRSCs and
province-level development policy lending will help to bolster these reforms while planned AAA will
include reviews of the Public Sector Development Program, a Public Expenditure Review, technical
assistance in pension reform, and analytical support for tax policy reforms.
Improving Pakistan's low tax-to-GDP ratio will continue to be a major focus of our work aimed
52.
at addressing weaknesses in the current system including: (i) inefficient tax administration; (ii) a narrow
tax base - only 1.53 million taxpayers out of 39.4 million employed; (iii) a complex and cumbersome tax
system; and (iv) corruption and tax evasion. Recent reform initiatives have had a positive impact on tax
management and in improving revenues - for the first time over the last two years, the Government was
able to achieve its revenue targets, although this cannot be attributed to tax administration measures alone
as strong growth has also contributed to rising revenue. Successful implementation of the FY05 Tax
Administration Reform project will be the centerpiece of our efforts. The main challenges will include
implementing organizational and management reforms, re-engineering of operational processes that are
likely to affect staffing levels and introducing automated risk-based systems that reduce contact between
tax payer and tax officials to minimize corruption. In addition, with the end of IMF program, ad-hoc and
inconsistent tax policy changes have started to constrain expansion of the tax base. Tax policy support,

10A 3-year PRGF arrangement was approved in November 2001 and concluded in December 2004. All PRGF
disbursements were made available upon completion of program reviews although the GoP elected not to draw the
final tranche in light of its improved external position. Compliance with structural performance criteria and
macroeconomic conditionality was better than average for Fund-supported programs. See, IMF, Pakistan 2005
Article IV Consultationsand Ex Post Assessment of Longer-Term ProgramEngagement,November 2005.

- 19-

including a Tax Policy Study, is planned and PRSC III will support tax policy measures to increase
revenue mobilization.
53.
Increased diversification and exports in agriculture. The Government intends to accelerate
agricultural growth by promoting the diversification of agricultural production into high value products
(including crops, livestock and fisheries) and agro-processing, improvement in factor productivity, and
better integration of supply chains. The Government has made good progress over the last couple of years
with respect to liberalization of the domestic wheat trade (removing restrictions on transport), liberalizing
wheat imports and maintaining a reasonable level of strategic reserves. However, the Government
remains involved in the procurement of some 20% of local production at a heavy cost. Long-term
agricultural growth and poverty reduction are constrained by the structure and performance of key rural
factor markets including land, water, and credit as well as a degrading resource base, in particular soil and
water. Given the constraints on land and productivity, the poor will benefit from agricultural growth only
if the increase in productivity is translated into lower real prices of food and higher employment-to
include the rural non farm poor, who together account for 61% of the rural poor-and higher rural wages.
54.
The focus of the Bank's work in this area will initially be to support the preparation of a rural
strategy, integrating issues related to agriculture, natural resource management, the rural non-farm
economy, infrastructure, rural finance and the need for targeted interventions. The strategy will also
include analytical work on supply chains and World Trade Organization (WTO) issues, to understand the
potential market access for agriculture through the opening up of international markets and agribusiness
networks. It will analyze and discuss the potential for increased public support through agricultural
research, extension services, and technology transfers with an emphasis on adapting technology for
rainfed areas and livestock. The Bank will also support policy and institutional reforms in land
administration beginning with the Punjab Land Records Management Project. In addition we will seek to
support reforms in the research and extension system to introduce more demand-driven participatory
approaches based on public-private partnership.
Irrigation and drainage. Pakistan's extensive irrigation system is under growing stress as the
55.
result of growing demand, deteriorating infrastructure and poor governance. Building on the recently
completed water strategy, the Bank will support a combination of institutional reforms and investments
including: (i) major investments in rehabilitation of critical assets (including barrages), and will help put
in place Asset Management Plans which will set priorities for asset rehabilitation and maintenance, make
explicit the requirements for public and user financing, and develop institutional arrangements for
rehabilitating and maintaining this infrastructure; (ii) development of capacity at the provincial and
federal levels for improving water and associated natural resource management; (iii) efforts to improve
the quality, efficiency, and accountability with which irrigation services are delivered; and (iv)
investments in on-farm services (land leveling, watercourse lining, introduction of new technologies) for
increasing the productivity of water use. Bank support will be provided through a range of instruments
including development policy lending in support of key reforms as well as through investment lending to
finance infrastructure and institutional development. Governance and communication improvements will
be a central theme as poor governance and low trust are among the key underlying factors behind the poor
performance of the irrigation system and low productivity. Finally, given the major scientific, policy and
implementation challenges ahead, the Bank, with support from the Government of the Netherlands, will
provide analytical and technical support to the federal and provincial governments.
56.
While Pakistan recognizes the importance of improving the efficiency of water use, the
Government's water strategy also assigns high priority to augmenting water storage capacity, both to
offset the declining capacity of existing reservoirs (due to siltation) and to meet growing demand. Indeed,
compared with other countries Pakistan has relatively little water storage capacity and substantial
untapped hydropower potential, indicating a potentially high payoff from new reservoirs. The GoP has
recently announced a Presidential initiative under which it intends to build up to five new dams by 2016.

-

20

-

Given the importance of such an investment for addressing long-term water issues, the Bank will consider
providing technical assistance for this work. Looking further ahead, should the proposed project prove
technically and economically sound, the Bank would be prepared to respond favorably to a government
request to help finance construction, provided the project is designed and implemented in conformance
with international standards for social and environment safeguards.
Improving the business environment for trade and investment Recognizing that sustaining the
57.
current high rates of economic growth requires globally competitive production in an increasingly
demanding world market, policy makers are focused on strengthening international competitiveness
through rising productivity to support higher wages, a strengthened currency and increased returns to
capital. Macroeconomic stability and the removal of price distortions have eliminated impediments to
productivity growth but will only translate into rising productivity if accompanied by a more conducive
business environment. There is consensus among policy makers, academics and the business community
that improvement in Pakistan's competitiveness derives in part from success in three "second generation"
areas which impact firm-level productivity and thus have become important priorities for Pakistan. First,
economic governance to instill market discipline and provide certainty in investment returns poses a
particular challenge, encompassing such entrenched factors as efficiency and effectiveness of government
and autonomous institutions, quality of regulation, policy uncertainty, and the rule of law. Second,
efficiency of factor markets to foster flexibility and fluidity represents a major constraint to good resource
allocation and ease of entry, particularly in the case of land and labor. Third, the degree to which
entrepreneurs find it easy to do business has a major impact on international competitiveness. Many
reforms were initiated in these areas in recent years, and a number of indicators of 'doing business' have
improved as a result.
58.
During the CAS period, the Bank Group will support the following: (i) strengthening the
institutions and legal/regulatory frameworks in support of a competitive market economy by updating
corporate law and building the capacity of courts and monopoly control authorities; (ii) lowering the
burden of government bureaucracy and regulation to ease entry and business operations, particularly for
SMEs; (iii) improving labor market flexibility through legislative reform (employment and industrial
legislation is currently being revised); (iv) improving tax administration; and (v) further reduction of trade
protection. In addition, as provincial governments have a role in improving their local investment climate,
the Bank Group will work with provincial authorities to address areas within their domain such as
improving management of industrial estates and improving the functioning of land markets.
59.
Ongoing analytical work in this area includes studies on 'Growth and Competitiveness', 'Value
Chain Analysis', and 'The Labor Market.' This work will be followed by National and Sub-national
Doing Business & Investment Climate Assessments and additional Provincial Economic Reports. The
Public Sector Capacity Building Project (PSCBP) will be implemented along with an IDF grant for the
Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan. Capacity building for other institutions charged with
government markets will also be deployed, such as efforts to strengthen the framework for fair and open
competition. Annex 7 outlines in greater detail the World Bank Group Private Sector Strategy.
60.
Improved infrastructure to Support Rapid Growth. Infrastructure bottlenecks pose a significant
threat to Pakistan's ability to sustain rapid growth. During the next CAS period the Bank will focus on
three areas: (i) supporting reform processes, including privatization and private sector participation in
public utilities, technical assistance and capacity building to strengthen institutions in specific sectors; (ii)
working closely with the IFC and MIGA to increase private investment in infrastructure; (iii) developing
the legal and institutional framework to encourage private-public partnerships and (iv) undertaking IBRD
investment operations where reforms have advanced sufficiently to make public investment effective.
61.
At present, the power sector is not up to the challenge of meeting growing electricity demand
efficiently and reliably and extending service to underserved areas and poorer segments of the population.

-21 -

Challenges include high technical and commercial losses (over 20 percent in a number of distribution
companies and in some cases as high as 40 percent), bottlenecks in transmission and distribution,
substandard quality of supply, underinvestment, high costs, and inadequate tariffs. About 30 percent of
population has no access to power. There are large cross-subsidies in the tariff structure, with industrial
and commercial consumers subsidizing residential ones. Government subsidies to the sector total about
US$1 billion annually.
62.
In recent years the Government has made significant progress in implementing its power sector
program first initiated in the late 1990s. The reform program includes unbundling, corporatization,
commercialization, and privatization of the industry," establishment of an independent regulatory agency;
institutional strengthening in policy, governance, and corporate management; and mobilization of
resources from the private sector to meet the power sector's technical, financial and human resource
needs. Although much remains to be done, progress has been made: a new legal framework for the sector
was adopted, an independent regulatory agency (NEPRA) established, WAPDA was unbundled,
privatization of several companies in generation and distribution has been completed or is underway, and
a Policy and Implementation Cell in the Ministry of Water and Power established.
63.
The Bank has been deeply engaged in the power sector. Strategic and policy advice, supported by
development policy lending including SAC II and PRSC I, was instrumental in restructuring the sector.
Although progress in improving financial performance has been disappointing, implementation of the
overall restructuring strategy for the sector has laid the groundwork for improved performance and
opened the way for investment lending. Further strengthening of sector governance is required to improve
performance and attract private investment. There is a significant backlog of investment, particularly in
reducing the high technical and commercial losses in the distribution systems. In addition to continued
support for policy, governance and regulatory reforms through the PRSC, planned investment lending
includes support for distribution and transmission, investment in hydropower (including possible largescale hydropower), and the expansion of rural access. A programmatic approach is planned, with a
sequence of investment loans and guarantees to address investment priorities as implementation of the
reform program proceeds. In the context of expanding rural access, there is good potential for the
mobilization of Global Environment Facility (GEF) and carbon finance to support "low-carbon" growth
in the sector. In developing options for affordable and sustainable provision of power in rural areas-and
in particular in NWFP and Balochistan where grid penetration is currently limited-the Bank will
consider alternative investment and institutional approaches to rural electrification, including options for
decentralized autonomous grids.
64.
During the previous CAS period, the Bank supported Pakistan's telecommunication reforms
through policy dialogue and lending, including PRSC I and the Telecommunication Regulation and
Privatization Support project. As a result of the reforms, sector performance has begun to improve
markedly as indicated by the increase in aggregate telecommunications density (fixed and mobiles) from
4.6 telephones lines per 100 inhabitants in June 2003 to about 17.8 by December 2005. Key reforms
included (i) strengthened institutional and regulatory arrangements under the Ministry of IT and
Telecommunications and the Pakistan Telecommunications Authority; (ii) full liberalization of the local
loop (LL) and long distance and international (LDI) markets resulting in numerous new companies
providing services at competitive rates; (iii) approval of a new cellular mobile policy in January 2004
leading to licensing two new additional cellular mobile operators, rapid growth in penetration, and a
dramatic reduction in prices; (iv) successful privatization of Pakistan Telecommunications Limited
(PTCL) generating US$2.6 billion in proceeds and leaving the telecommunications sector fully managed
1 The Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA) has been responsible for electricity generation,
transmission, and distribution in all areas of Pakistan with the exception of Karachi, where Karachi Electricity
Supply Company (KESC) has played that role. The unbundling and restructuring elements of the reform program
applied to WAPDA only, as the dominant monopoly; the other elements of the reform applied to the entire industry.

-

22

-

by the private sector. IFC made a very successful investment in TRG, (a call center company), with a
strong demonstration effect.

65.
In spite of this success, telecommunications services fall well short of their potential compared to
comparator countries. One important gap is between rural and urban users; as of March 2005 about 50%
of Pakistan's 50,000 villages have no access to telecommunications services and very few villages have
access to the Internet. The Bank will support over the CAS period (i) adoption of additional measures to
strengthen the policy and regulatory environment, including establishing pro-competitive licensing,
interconnection and tariff regimes, addressing quality of service and other consumer issues, and
improving the management of limited resources such as the radio spectrum and numbers; (ii) policy
dialogue and advice; and (iii) investment support for accelerating the provision of rural
telecommunication infrastructure including e-services and broadband connectivity. In addition, IFC will
support the expansion of services by the private sector.
66.
Pakistan's transport sector is inefficient, imposing additional costs on Pakistani business and
threatens to become a serious obstacle to sustained growth, as well as an impediment to achievement of
the MDGs. It is estimated that this inefficiency already costs 4-6% of GDP per annum, constrains
economic growth and diversification, reduces export competitiveness, and hinders social development.
Key issues are: (i) poor rural mobility with 75% of all rural health, education and market facilities
accessible only by earth tracks; (ii) urban congestion and inadequate public transport which are raising the
cost of doing business, crowding out the urban poor, and increasing the health and safety hazards faced by
passengers, pedestrians and residents; (iii) Pakistan Railways' financial and operating performance
remains weak and as a result it carries barely 5% of total cargo traffic, far less than its potential; (iv)

costly port systems and inadequate trade facilitation are imposing high costs and delays on shippers.
67.
Reflecting the high priority assigned to supporting growth and competitiveness, the Bank and the
government are in the process of developing a strategic approach to the transport sector focusing first on
the National Trade Corridor linking Pakistan's major ports in the south with its major cities and trade
corridors to the North. Together the ports, road and railways along this corridor handle 95 percent of
external trade and 65 percent of total land freight serving the regions of the country which contribute
80-85% of GDP. Corridor utilization is more than 80% of existing capacity and projected growth will
double demand by 2015, and require much higher levels of service. The objective is to develop an
integrated approach to planning, investing and managing the National Trade Corridor transport logistics
system. The key outcome sought would be significant reductions in the time and cost of moving goods
through the Indus corridor. The GoP has already initiated reforms, reducing entry fees at Karachi port
while seeking to reduce port dwell times. The Government is also targeting improved trade and transport
connectivity with China, Central Asia and Western Europe as a means of promoting economic activity
throughout the region and is seeking World Bank support in this endeavor. The Bank has provided and
will continue to provide analytical support to develop the frameworks to guide sub-sector policies (for
highways, railways, ports and trade facilitation), including pricing, regulation and enforcement, medium
term budgetary frameworks, restructuring and progressive commercialization of public entities and

strengthening of institutions (NHA, Pakistan Railways, etc.). An ongoing transport competitiveness study
will help highlight priorities for investment lending and institutional reforms.
68.
Pakistan's investment needs in transport are enormous. There is a significant maintenance
backlog and current government investment in the sector is as much as 5 times less (as percent of GDP)
than countries in East Asia. It is estimated that modernization of the Indus Trade Corridor alone will
require investment of about US$1 billion per year over the medium term. In addition, critical road links
were destroyed or damaged in the October earthquake and their repair is an urgent priority. The Bank is
currently supporting rehabilitation of the national highway network through the Highways Rehabilitation
Project (with additional financing to address the effects of the earthquake) and assisting in modernizing
trade and transport facilitation under the Trade & Transport Facilitation Project. There is strong demand

-

23

-

from government for increased lending in the transport sector during the coming CAS period. Follow-on
investment lending for highways and trade facilitation is expected along the Indus Trade Corridor with an
emphasis on increasing private sector participation in operation and management. In railways, a
combination of development policy lending and investment projects may be considered should the
government commit to a medium term reform program to revitalize Pakistan Railways by creating a
separate, professionally managed, commercial freight business with its own rolling stock and staff. In the
port sector the Bank will support a move towards port corporatization and professional management
combined with a modem institutional and legal framework for port operations that would open the way
for investment lending to upgrade port infrastructure.

While the emphasis is on supporting growth, the Government also recognizes that transport,
69.
especially in rural areas is important to improving development outcomes. Surveys have shown that
healthcare for all, and above-primary educational opportunities for girls are particularly hard hit by
mobility constraints. During FY03-05 the Bank prepared a Rural Access and Mobility Study focusing on
options for the sustainable provision of a core rural access network at the district level under the country's
devolution framework. During the coming four years we will continue to explore options for providing
assistance to this sub-sector including possible implementation of pilot projects through the Pakistan
Poverty Alleviation Fund.
Support for reform and development of the oil and gas sector has been a strategic priority for the
70.
World Bank assistance program since 1999. During the last CAS, the Bank continued to provide policy
advice and technical assistance supported by development policy lending (SAC II and PRSC I). Good
progress has been made in the deregulation of the petroleum market, pricing and regulation of natural gas,
conversion of power plants from fuel oil to natural gas, and acceleration of exploration activities.
However, gas tariffs continue to be distorted by cross subsidies among different classes of consumer
(particularly the very large and poorly targeted "lifeline" tariff slab and the low cost of gas for the
fertilizer sector) and implementation of the gas price adjustment mechanism has been erratic. Similarly, in
2004 the government elected only partially to adjust domestic petroleum product prices to reflect
international oil prices, resulting in a fiscal cost of Rs. 8 billion (US$130 million).
Looking ahead, a key priority is to address looming gas shortages; while all gas is currently
71.
domestically produced, given the combination of rapid growth in demand and depleting reserves, gas
imports will become necessary, possibly as soon as 2009. With this in mind, the Bank will continue to
provide policy and technical advice and encourage further appropriate de-regulation and privatization in
the industry while helping the government to build necessary capacity to engage in international gas
import transactions. Possible investment lending or guarantees would support the expansion of
infrastructure for the importation, storage and distribution of gas. In addition, IFC is expected to support
private participation in the oil, gas and mining sectors.
72.
can be
(PPPs)
access

Pakistan's infrastructure investment needs are as high as US$3.5 billion per year, far greater than
financed by the public sector. The Government recognizes that public-private partnerships
can play a key role in increasing resources and improving efficiencies by helping the country
not just finance, but also managerial expertise, new technology, better project design and

implementation, and more efficient use of resources. Past efforts to attract private investment, in

particular in the power sector, have shown both that these investments can be realized, but also that strong
oversight is needed to ensure that these are priority projects and that consumers and the government have
the capacity to pay for them. 12 Regardless of sector or level of government, PPPs should be pursued
where they represent priority projects, are affordable to the government and consumers, and represent
value-for-money, i.e. a better approach than would be delivered through public procurement.
12 Fraser, Julia M. Lessons from the Independent PrivatePower Experience in Pakistan. Energy and Mining Sector
Board Discussion Paper No. 14. May 2005.

-

73.

24

-

The Bank Group will support the government's efforts to encourage PPPs through: (i) advisory

support in developing the national PPP policy and, where needed, provincial policies and legal
frameworks for PPPs; this would also cover strengthening oversight of the fiscal costs of PPPs; (ii)
technical assistance for the development of the institutional framework (including financial and subsidy
support to PPPs) and to develop pilot PPPs ready for procurement and implementation within the next 1218 months; and (iii) lending to support subsidies to address affordability issues for PPPs and for longterm finance for PPP service providers.
Improving access to market-based finance. Pakistan has undertaken major reforms in recent
74.
years in the financial sector that have resulted in a sound and more efficient system. A major achievement
has been the transformation of a pre-dominantly state-owned and weak banking system into a healthier,
market-based system, owned primarily by the private sector (nearly 80% percent of sector assets are now
under private ownership compared with 34 percent in 1999, and just 8%percent in 1990). This has been
facilitated by the restructuring of major banks, ongoing consolidation of the sector, strengthening of
regulatory capacity, and improvements in transparency, corporate governance, and credit culture. This has
helped improve access, and credit to the private sector has grown significantly over the past three years.
These achievements have been endorsed by the findings of a joint Bank-IMF Financial Sector Assessment
that was concluded in 2004.
75.
Despite these impressive accomplishments, important reforms remain to be done, and a large
segment of the economy continues to operate with little formal credit. A significant number of financial
institutions are still under government control including the National Bank of Pakistan (NBP), State Life
Insurance, the largest open end mutual fund, and a few large specialized banks. The legal framework
needs to be strengthened to address banking laws, the Public Debt Act, the Insurance Ordinance, as well
as laws pertaining to insider trading and take over of companies, bankruptcy/insolvency, payments
systems, credit information and Anti-Money Laundering. Enforcement of financial contracts remains
weak pending clarification of the Financial Recoveries Ordinance 2001. While there have been extensive
reforms of capital markets, under-development of contractual savings has inhibited development;
insurance penetration remains very low relative to other countries at Pakistan's income level, reflecting
weak consumer protection and awareness. The pension system is also weak - both civil service system
and Employees Old Age Benefits Institution are fiscally unsustainable. Finally, the stock market has
performed well but it remains shallow and narrow with inadequate investor protection systems. Leveraged
financing of share transactions coupled with weak supervision of market intermediaries pose a threat to
systemic stability.
76.
During the next CAS period the Bank Group will support further financial sector reforms in the
following areas: increasing the number of microcredit borrowers (especially in rural areas), restructuring
and privatization of the remaining state owned financial institutions, non-bank financial companies and
other specialized institutions; continuing the revision of the legislative framework to facilitate effective
regulation and enforcement; aligning rates on National Savings Scheme (NSS) instruments more closely
with market yields; strengthening and further deepening capital markets (including equities, bonds and
swaps) with the aim of increasing the availability of longer term savings instruments, e.g. by establishing
a comprehensive legal and regulatory framework for private pensions, reviewing the role and strategy for
state owned insurance companies; and improving financial markets infrastructure and legal framework.
New areas of involvement will include expanding financial services-consumer financing, mortgage
loans, SME financing, agriculture credit-through expansion of banks' retail. Following on the recent
Financial Sector Assessment and the approval of the Banking Sector Development Policy Credit, future
work will center on policy dialogue, and technical assistance, particularly to provinces as well as
economic and sector work on access to finance. Lending operations to support technical assistance for the
State Bank of Pakistan and for capital market development will also be considered. The IFC will

-

25 -

selectively invest in the financial sector to support the development of housing finance, SME finance and
microfinance, in addition to providing TA through its PEP-MENA facility.
Pillar II: Strengthened Governance and Service Delivery

Improving government effectiveness remains a hallmark of the Government of Pakistan's reform
77.
program. As discussed earlier, inadequate and poorly targeted government spending on services and
investment are only part of the problem; delivery of government services is hampered by the weak
capacity and lack of accountability of service providers. Addressing these weaknesses is critical for
achieving most if not all of the Government's poverty reduction goals. Far reaching reforms to improve
the performance of key government institutions including financial management, tax administration, and
the civil service are underway in parallel with the government's decentralization initiative. Many of these
have been and will continue to be supported by the Bank Group.
78.
Greater efficiency transparency and accountability in use ofpublic resources. The government
has been pursuing far-reaching reforms in public financial management since 1996. The Bank has been
deeply engaged in this process and significant progress was made during FY03-05 CAS period. Under the
Bank-funded Project for Improved Financial Reporting and Auditing (PIFRA), a new computerized
accounting system and a new chart of accounts is being implemented nationwide. The new systems being
introduced under PIFRA will eventually allow for the automated consolidation and reconciliation of all
the civil accounts of the government, thereby greatly improving the timeliness, comprehensiveness, and
accuracy of financial data. Legislative oversight has improved with the re-establishment of Public
Accounts Committees at the federal level (a PRSC 1 prior action), as well as in the provinces. The federal
Public Accounts Committee has made good progress in reviewing audit reports, and in tracking and
monitoring cash recoveries from public officials in government departments and other public institutions.
The Controller General of Accounts (CGA) organization has been strengthened, and the timeliness of
reporting and reliability of public accounts and audit reports has improved substantially.
79.
Remaining challenges include full implementation of the PIFRA system. In addition, the backlog
in the review of audit reports and audited accounts remains substantial, due in large part to the poorer
quality of the older audit reports that resulted in a large number of audit paragraphs being placed before
the Committee. In the case of accounting, the Government needs to clarify the roles, responsibilities and
reporting relationships of various players (e.g., Controller General (Accounts), Provincial Accountant
Generals, District Accounts Officers and Treasury Officers) in the light of devolution. Support for these
reforms will continue to be a priority. The follow-on PIFRA-2 project, which was approved in September
2005, will extend the computerization to remaining sites across the country. An IDF Grant has recently
been approved to strengthen the capacity of the Public Accounts Committee at the federal level. The Bank
will also work on supporting the improvement of the accounting and auditing oversight arrangements
following up on the Accounting and Auditing ROSC exercise, conforming corporate accounting and
auditing practices to international standards. IFC's PEP-MENA facility will launch a comprehensive
corporate governance project in Pakistan to support private sector companies.
80.

Building on the 2003 CFAA, the Bank will continue to provide analytical support to assist in

defining the agenda for further reforms in financial management. The Bank will work with the

Government and international partners (including DFID and ADB) to carry out public financial
management and accountability assessments based on the PEFA PFM performance measurement

framework approved in 2005. A similar exercise, using the December 2004 PEFA Consultative Draft was
conducted in FY 2005 for Punjab. The assessments will be carried out at the federal and provincial levels
in order to identify the strengths and remaining weaknesses in the accountability framework and provide
the basis for drawing up comprehensive action plans that focus on areas most in need of action to mitigate
shortcomings. The action plan will not only aim at further improving public financial management but
will also support transparency, competition, value for money and controls in procurement.

-

26

-

Procurement irregularities have been a significant problem in Pakistan, in large part due to a
81.
weak regulatory framework that discouraged due diligence in contract awards and stifled open
competition. Specific problems have included inadequate bidding documents, inadequate response time
to bidders, prequalification as a means of restricting competition, price negotiations, lack of independent
complaints handling process, and irregularities in inspections or measurements. During the CAS, the
Bank will support the achievement of transparent and efficient public procurement at federal and
autonomous bodies levels. The Bank will support the Government in: (i) developing a implementing
regulations for the recently notified public procurement rules; (ii) developing credible complaints
handling process; (iii) developing rules for the selection of consultants; (iv) introducing reporting
requirements and a credible enforcement mechanism; and (v) capacity building for the Pakistan Public
Procurement Regulatory Authority; and (vi) harmonizing audit and procurement procedures. Procurement
will also be an integral part of the PFM Performance Measurement assessments planned during the CAS
period.
Enhanced service delivery. The need to dramatically improve service delivery to Pakistan's
82.
citizens-with particular attention to programs in health, education, water and sanitation, and safety
nets-is essential to the achievement of Pakistan's poverty reduction goals. Working across sectors, the
Bank Group will continue to support reforms to increase capacity and accountability of those responsible
for service delivery; empower communities and clients through enhanced access to information on
finances and performance; and build the capacity of both communities and governments.
Improving the quality of public administration is critical for making public expenditures more
83.
effective, and for improving service delivery. While the size of the civil service in Pakistan is not
problematic, improving its performance is recognized by the Government as a key challenge for
improving service delivery. The key problems are: (i) systemic rigidities that make it difficult to recruit
and move staff between departments as needed; (ii) compensation is insufficient to attract skilled entrants
at the higher levels but may be too generous at lower levels; (iii) inadequate training which has led to an
erosion in the quality of civil service and critical gaps in technical skills. Implementation of a
comprehensive civil service reform is proceeding slowly, although there are very important pieces of the
reform going forward. The best progress has been made on merit recruitment, training, pay and pensions
and capacity building of selected government line and regulatory agencies. However, improvements in
overall public service delivery require progress across a broader front in the civil service program as well
as in the devolution agenda. Over the coming CAS period, the Bank will continue to support development
and implementation of a long-term strategy for public sector employment, which would include: further
implementation of merit-based recruitment and promotion; structural changes to support devolution;
further pay and pension reforms; and continued capacity building through effective national and
international training.

Pakistan's devolution initiative is a cornerstone of the government's strategy for improving
84.
service delivery by making the public sector more accountable to citizens and more efficient at delivering
basic services. Creation of the political structure for devolution began in 2001 with the creation of a new
local government structure consisting of over 6,400 new elected local governments. New local
governments were sworn in following local government elections in August 2005. However, while
political devolution has moved rapidly, fiscal and administrative devolution have not advanced as well,
creating obstacles for local governments and weakening incentives of local government staff to improve
service delivery. Local governments are also facing a number of problems linked to capacity constraints,
including lack of strategic planning, poor financial management, lack of skills and finance.
Decentralization reforms need to be completed through a meaningful devolution of administrative and
fiscal powers and supported with capacity building assistance. This needs to include a greater share of
resources going to the provinces through National Finance Commission (NFC) awards-and to the
districts-through the Provincial Finance Commissions and, to a lesser extent, conditional grants;

-

27

-

reassignment of tax bases from the center to local governments (e.g. agriculture income tax); and the
transfer of functions and administrative authority to local governments. Pakistan's PRSP also recognizes
that devolution will not be complete until there is some transfer of responsibility from the federal to the
provincial governments as well. The January 2006 Amendment to the NFC award was a positive step in
this regard as it increased the provinces' share of revenues and should alleviate some of the fiscal
pressures being faced by provincial and local governments.
85.
The Bank has worked to support of devolution, both at the provincial and local levels, through
analytical and capacity building support. A major study on progress in implementing devolution was
undertaken jointly with the ADB and DfID. During the next four years, Bank support for devolution,
much of which will be provided in the context of ongoing operations, will feature: (i) analytical support to
assist in the rationalization and clarification of roles and responsibilities under the devolved framework;
(ii) support for citizens participation through social mobilization, community driven approaches, and
other mechanisms to strengthen the linkages between local governments and communities in order to
increase their responsiveness and accountability; (iii) capacity building support for local governments.
We will also ensure that the design of lending operations reinforces the local government system.
86.
With over a third of its population living in urban areas, Pakistan is currently the most urbanized
country in South Asia and urbanization growth rates are twice the rate of the overall population increase.
But cities suffer from severe infrastructure bottlenecks, service deficiencies (roads, water, and waste
removal), poor local governance, and distortions in land and housing markets. While the urban sector was
an area of limited engagement during the previous CAS, devolution has created opportunities for deeper
engagement and the Government of Pakistan has accorded greater priority to urban development with a
particular focus on the "mega-cities" of Karachi and Lahore. Devolution has transferred to municipalities
(Tehsil Municipal Authorities - TMAs) the responsibility for services such as water supply, sewerage,
sanitation, waste collection, urban transport and land management.
87.
The Bank's strategy is to assist the Government's urban reform agenda by helping to address the
weaknesses in policies and administrative structures that undermine service delivery in cities. Recent
analytical work has highlighted the fragmentation of service provision, weak financing and management
of urban service delivery, especially water and sanitation, and dysfunctional land and housing policies.
Two projects are currently being prepared. The Punjab Municipal Services Improvement Project (PMSIP)
will build capacity and provide for grants for investments to improve service delivery in the smaller
municipalities of the Punjab Province. The Punjab Large Cities Development Policy Loan (DPL) will
support implementation of reforms to improve the functioning of the Punjab's seven large cities. Reforms
will focus on four broad areas: (i) governance and institutional reform; (ii) municipal finance and service
delivery; (iii) urban planning and land management; and (iv) urban transport. The Bank is also conducting
economic and sector work to help shape our future involvement in the urban sector. With the support of
PPIAF/GPOBA financing, the Bank is undertaking a detailed study of eight major cities in Punjab to
investigate options for improving the efficiency of WSS service providers. A variety of alternatives are
being considered, including public-private contractual mechanisms (management contract, concession),
financial incentives, and regulatory reform with possible downstream Bank and IFC project financing. A
similar investigation of solid waste management issues is also underway. Finally, building on preliminary
work carried out with the support of the Italian Government through the Italian Trust Fund for Culture
and Sustainable Development, the Bank will support development of Pakistan's cultural heritage and
tourism.
88.
Experience in Pakistan has shown that there is considerable potential for improving access to and
quality of public services through the adoption of alternative service arrangements and by empowering
communities to monitor providers and influence resource allocation. In health, Pakistan has begun to
experiment with contracting of public services to private providers to circumvent weak administrative
capacity of the public sector and expand coverage. Initial results of contracting out management of

-

28

-

primary health facilities in twelve districts of Punjab to an NGO (the Punjab Rural Support Program)
indicates significant improvement in utilization of services. The Punjab education program has begun to
expand public-private partnerships to tap into low cost private schools while strengthening School
Councils to increase parental involvement and influence. In Balochistan, the planned Primary Education
Project will focus on strengthening community-run schools. During the CAS we will continue to pilot and
scale up such initiatives.
89.
Policy makers have also fostered private provision of services in Pakistan in order to allow
greater provider choice (and competition) to the population, and this has enabled the better off (but also
the poor) to bypass the low quality public system. In education, the private sector has already
demonstrated its potential with private schools accounting for a growing share of total enrolments, in
many cases with higher quality and lower costs than government schools. However, private sector
providers need to be held accountable to particular standards (e.g., in education) and may need to be
regulated (e.g., in the case of health).
Pillar III: Improved Lives and Protection of the Vulnerable
90.
During the next 5 to 10 years, in addition to the measures outlined below, improving social
indicators is likely to require strong economic growth, effective public sector management, a motivated
and well managed civil service, increased pro-poor spending and more effective allocation of resources.
At the same time increased investment in human capital leading to significant improvements in education
and health will be necessary to build the skilled, healthy work force necessary to sustain recent growth
performance.
Improved delivery of health and education services
91.
The achievement of universal primary education, with a particular emphasis on promoting girls'
schooling, has been a government priority since the early 1990s. Resources for education have increased
by over 60% over the past four years and a range of programs to increase enrolments, especially for girls,
have been put in place. These efforts appear to be starting to bear fruit; preliminary results of a national
household survey are encouraging and show an increase in the net primary enrolment rate from 42% in
2001/02 to 52% in 2004/05. Nevertheless, meeting Pakistan's goal of increasing the net primary
enrolment rate to 100% by 2015 remains a major challenge. The issues affecting the performance of the
sector include inadequate resources, systemic weaknesses in public service delivery including overcentralization and weak public sector management, and poor performance of the education system in
terms of access, governance and quality.
92.
Reflecting the lessons of the Social Action Program of the 1990s and the requirements of
devolution, the Bank strategy has focused efforts at the provincial level using development policy credits
to support policy and systemic changes as well as the other areas linked to education reform including
decentralization and governance reforms. Under the Punjab Education program the Bank is supporting

free tuition and books, upgrading school facilities, stipends for girls in backward areas and public funding
of the rapidly growing non-government-independent low-cost private-education sector. Results so far
have been promising. The Bank will continue to support these reforms through education development
policy credits in Punjab with annual tranches linked to outcomes; annual Development Policy Credits in
other provinces, beginning in NWFP, with a special focus on education; and investment projects for
regions where sector investment projects are a more viable option such as Balochistan. Gradually the
focus of reforms will shift from primary to higher levels of education.
93.
At the national level, policy dialogue on financing, governance, demand side interventions,
improvements in quality of learning, inclusive education for the disabled, and service delivery issues, will
be backed by analytical work, including an education sector review and evaluations of the impact of

-29-

different education sector reforms and policies. Annual PRSCs will continue to support reform in
education. The ongoing National Education Assessment System (NEAS) project will develop a baseline
and monitoring system for measurement of learning outcomes. We will also provide advice and technical
support to the government's vocational/technical and higher education reforms which are needed to
provide the skilled labor force needed to support sustained growth.
Given its far-reaching importance for reaching all of the MDGs, gender equity in education will
94.
remain a high priority. Building on the findings of the recent Gender Assessment, the Bank will assist the
government in developing strategies to address gender gaps in education. Recent analysis suggests that
the practice of restricted female mobility plays a large role in perpetuating gender gaps in school
enrollments. As a result, school attendance for girls is very sensitive to school proximity. Girls are much
more likely to attend school if a school is available within the settlement they reside in. This sensitivity to
school proximity worsens as girls grow into adolescence. Qualitative studies suggest that concerns over
safety and norms of female seclusion are the primary factors behind the precipitous drop in enrollment
beyond age 12. This concern is also evident in the rising expenditure on transportation to school reported
for older girls. A similar concern makes it difficult to attract female teachers to schools in remote areas.
While Pakistan has made
95.
some progress in improving health

Table 6: Selected Health Indicators
Child
Infant
Fertility

Maternal

mortality
Mortality
rate 2003
outcomes for the poor, the pace has
2000
2003
been slow. Poor health outcomes and
77
103
500
4.1
high fertility remain obstacles to Pakistan
69
380
2.9
46
economic growth and contribute Bangladesh
540
87
63
2.9
significantly to high levels of poverty. India
92
15
13
2.0
In particular reducing fertility rates SriLanka
Sources: World Development Indicators (2005), except MM: WHR 2005.
would contribute to: (i) improved
women's health and reduced overall maternal mortality by reducing the number of high order births; (ii)
reduced infant mortality rates by increasing the time between births; (iii) helping empower women by
providing them choices about when and how many children to have; and (iv) providing a necessary
condition for sustained and rapid economic growth. Recent research has found quite a large impact on
economic growth from lower dependency ratios brought about by lower adult mortality and fertility rates.
There is a continuing burden of malnutrition and increasing burden of hepatitis infections. Utilization of
essential maternal health services is low, especially in rural areas. Pakistan also faces a real threat from
AIDS; recent assessments found HIV epidemic among certain populations; for example, 27% of injecting
drug users and 7% of male sex workers in Karachi were found to be HIV-positive. The government is
committed to increasing public health expenditure and has taken steps in that direction but the overall
strategic allocation of public resources should be focused towards achieving better health for the poor and
addressing the most urgent priorities, such as maternal and child health. In addition key constraints to
effective utilization of increased resources include: (i) limited management capacity; (ii) lack of high
quality data and program impact evaluation for decision making; (iii) lack of a well-developed human
resource development strategy; (iv) inadequate use of the private sector for national goals; (v) lack of
focus on quality of care; and (vi) lack of clarity on the roles and responsibilities of the three levels of
government.
Mortality
2003

96.
During the past three years, IDA lending to the health sector consisted of an H /AIDS
Prevention Project and US$41 million to support polio eradication. Multi-sectoral policy-based loans (a
PRSC and provincial structural adjustment credits) have supported HNP policy reforms as well. Recent
analytical work has highlighted the potential for public-private partnerships (e.g. contracting with NGOs
to deliver services) to improve basic health services. For example, one district in the Punjab (Rahim Yar
Khan) contracted the management of its 104 health units to an NGO and witnessed a doubling in the
number of outpatient visits and increased client satisfaction. Such successful efforts must be scaled up.

-

30

-

Looking ahead, at the national level, the Bank will concentrate on: (i) encouraging the
97.
Government to focus on public health functions (such as surveillance, quality control, monitoring and
evaluation, and public information), through analytical support and national level development policy
lending; (ii) supporting the development and implementation of program and management reforms in the
Lady Health Worker program as a way of expanding access to primary health care and family planning;
(iii) supporting increases in overall health expenditures as envisioned in the PRSP; and (iv) supporting the
piloting and evaluation of new approaches for service delivery and demand side interventions.
Recognizing that a major focus of efforts must be at the provincial and local level, we will support major
system reforms through planned provincial Development Policy Credits, beginning in NWFP. Initially,
the focus of these credits will be on increasing access and coverage of maternal health services,
improving the functioning and utilization of first level care facilities, and targeting underserved areas.
Overall, Bank lending and analytical support in health will be guided by the following principles: (i) a
focus on the poor and underserved areas; (ii) promoting testing and rigorous evaluation of innovations by
local governments; (iii) increased accountability, particularly at the district level; and (iv) increased
integration of services at the grassroots level.
Improving the health outcomes of the poor will also depend on complementary interventions
98.
outside of the health sector. Recent research has highlighted the strong effects on infant and child
mortality from improved maternal education and basic infrastructure services, such as access to
sanitation, piped water, clean cooking fuels and electricity. The Government has recently announced a
major initiative to expand access to clean water by building water treatment facilities at the local level. In
light of this, water supply and sanitation will continue to feature in the Bank's lending and analytical
work, in both the urban sector and through support for community infrastructure, especially in rural areas.
Current analytical work on the health and economic costs associated with air and water pollution
99.
has confirmed the high impacts, with losses estimated to be more than 2% of GDP. The Bank is
deepening its engagement with the Government on environmental management to address these issues.
The recently approved National Environment Policy provides the framework and the Bank is supporting
the Government at federal and provincial levels in the identification and preparation of priority
interventions. Key areas for action in relation to health issues will be urban air quality in the major cities,
protection of water supplies and management of increasing amounts of industrial and hazardous waste.
Reducing vulnerability and poverty through effective safety nets and targeted programs to reach the
poor
The PRSP recognizes that protection for the poor and vulnerable is a cornerstone of any poverty
100.
reduction program and Pakistan has a range of programs which aim to improve the welfare of the poor
and vulnerable including microfinance, old age security, public works, cash and in-kind transfers, and
programs for child laborers, the disabled, and other highly vulnerable groups. However, these programs
are severely under-funded, covering only a very small fraction of the poor and vulnerable (see Table 7 for
details). Total spending is equivalent to 0.5% of GDP, substantially lower than the levels found in other
developing countries. Moreover, there are severe shortcomings in the existing safety net programs: (i)
there is no program (such as workfare) to help the rural poor cope with chronic or seasonal underemployment; (ii) formal social security covers only the small minority employed in the formal sector; (iii)
existing programs do too little to protect the human capital of the vulnerable--efforts to use safety net
measures to support health, nutrition, and education of the poor are in their infancy; and (iv) the size of
benefits is often negligible. Other issues include the weak administration, targeting, and delivery
mechanisms, lack of coordination between agencies, and poor monitoring and evaluation.

-31 -

101.

The

assistance

Bank's

Table 7: Public Spending on Select Safety Net Programs

social
for assitane
soialBudget
fo

/ spending Number of
Beneficiaries
(in Rs. Billion)
protection will include
support for safety nets
Wheat subsidy
8.00
(untargeted)
1,250,000
4.50
Bait-ul-Mal (Food Support and other)
that (i) help the chronic
0.70
530,000
poor
(e.g.
widows,
Tawana (mid-day meals for girl students)
1,733,000
5.86
Zakat (cash transfers and other)
disabled, and the elderly
850,000
1.74
of Employees Old Age Benefits (EOBI)
no
means
with
4,363,000
20.80
Total
with
cope
livelihood)
poverty, and, where possible, (ii) help the poor escape poverty, e.g., via conditional cash transfers and
other demand side interventions, (e.g., inclusive education) aimed at increasing access to basic social
services for the poor and marginalized; and (iii) help families and individuals cope with seasonal shocks
and natural disasters (e.g., via workfare). We will also provide support for social security which helps

mitigate risks, via improving formal sector pensions, and consider innovative approaches to microinsurance to address life cycle risks. Building on ongoing analytical work and policy dialogue, the Bank
is helping the government develop a comprehensive social protection strategy to guide policy reform in
this area over the medium and long term. Reforms will be supported through the PRSCs, a stand alone
Social Protection operation, support for persons with disabilities in the earthquake affected areas as well
as social protection components in provincial DPCs and emergency operations. Technical assistance will
include support for strategy development, design of new social protection interventions (workfare,
demand-side incentives for health and education, etc), program implementation, e.g. improved targeting
methods, administration, and evaluation. The Bank will also broaden its work on pensions to cover oldage security mechanisms in their entirety, and continue and deepen its work on inclusive education that
seeks to mainstream disability in the education sector.
102.
Pakistan's PRSP recognizes that while rapid growth will be the main driver of poverty reduction,
targeted interventions and community-based approaches to rural development are also required to address
the immediate needs of the poor and vulnerable, especially in drought prone and flood stricken areas and
help them share in economic growth. The Bank is supporting the Government through a series of
analytical and advisory services in the definition of a rural development strategy that would look in an
integrated way at farm and non-farm opportunities as well as policy and institutional issues. The
Government has announced a major increase in its pro-poor public works program and has asked for
Bank's support for the continuation of a drought/flood assistance program (DERA). The Bank will
continue to support implementation of the Community Investment Program in NWFP and AK and look
for possible expansion and replication opportunities. A major focus of these efforts will be to strengthen
the partnership between communities and local governments by supporting citizen participation in
identifying priorities for public investment and by building the capacity of local governments. At the
same time, the Bank would support the Government's newly announced program for rural poverty
alleviation through social mobilization. Such program would be critical in fostering organizations of the
poor and their access to income generating activities as well as in enhancing accountability mechanisms
and the effectiveness of Government programs. These investments yield not only better project outcome
but also help in the longer term to build communities that are better organized and in control of their own
development. The Bank will seek to build on the successful experience of the Pakistan Poverty
Alleviation Fund (PPAF) which has already reached 6,500 communities through micro-credit and
community driven physical infrastructure projects. The experience of the PPAF has also shown that the
impact of targeted interventions is enhanced through up-front investments in social capital formation that
build ownership and increase sustainability.

-

32

-

Reducing Pakistan's Vulnerability to Natural Disasters
103.
The Government, with support from the international community has responded capably to the
October earthquake and its aftermath. The Army, with support from UN agencies and bilateral donors, led
a massive and largely successful relief campaign to provide shelter and food for the displaced. Despite the
extremely difficult conditions with many affectees in inaccessible regions subject to severe winter a
feared "second disaster" of mass freezing and starvation did not materialize. By mid-February the
government had managed to provide immediate cash relief to some 543,000 households (over 90 percent
of those declared eligible), with payments made through individual bank accounts to reduce potential for
leakage. Arrangements for assisting households with housing reconstruction are progressing with
government partnering with local NGOs to mobilize assistance and inspection teams to administer relief
and provide technical support. Reconstruction of major highways commenced in mid-March with the
onset of favorable weather. Donors pledged a total of US$6.5 billion at the November 19th donor's
conference. Of this total, US$3.1 billion has been committed and US$1 billion disbursed as of midFebruary. A key challenge now is to complete institutional arrangements linking The Earthquake
Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Authority (ERRA) with local and provincial governments and to
complete detailed reconstruction strategies in some sectors, particularly for education, health and public
administration.

104.
The October earthquake highlighted the vulnerability of the poor to natural disasters and the
importance of hazard risk management. This is an issue of continuing concern since in addition to being
in an earthquake prone area, Pakistan frequently experiences weather-related hazards, resulting in
significant economic losses from localized and seasonal floods, landslides and droughts. Pakistan has
been identified as being among the more vulnerable countries in the world on the basis of mortality and
economic risks induced by such hazards. " Lack of enforcement of building codes, unsafe land use
patterns, and poor construction practices contribute to high economic and human losses. To address such
issues, hazard prevention and mitigation strategies are relevant and integral to Pakistan's national
development framework.
105.
Effective hazard risk management should be mainstreamed as part of Pakistan's poverty
reduction strategy with the purpose of reducing future losses of lives and livelihoods, protecting
infrastructure and investments and promoting a stable foundation for private sector investment. At
present, Pakistan has an ad hoc approach to hazard risk management. Interventions are primarily focused
on relief and response with insufficient ex ante mitigation measures. Given its social and economic
vulnerability to natural disasters, it is essential that Pakistan improve its approach to hazard risk
management. Following the relief period, Pakistan needs to develop a strategic approach to hazard risk
management based on five key pillars: risk identification, risk reduction, capacity building, emergency
preparedness, and risk transfer mechanisms, to achieve a sustainable recovery program and build
in-country capacity for hazard risk management. Beginning with the ongoing Emergency Recovery Credit
the Bank will assist in the process of developing Pakistan's hazard risk management strategy. The Bank
plans to continue to work with government and other partners to develop the capacity to carry out this
strategy and to integrate risk management into development programs.

13 Dilley,

Bank.

Maxx and others. 2005 NaturalDisasterHotspots: A Global Risk Analysis. Washington, D.C: The World

- 33

IV.
A.

-

DELIVERING THE WORLD BANK GROUP PROGRAM

The World Bank Program

Portfolio management strategy
106.
The key to maintaining strong portfolio performance will be continued attention to good quality
at entry and timely attention to implementation issues through joint portfolio monitoring. The planned
increase in investment lending, especially in large-scale infrastructure projects, will pose a challenge in
sustaining current good portfolio performance. To meet this challenge we will continue to closely
scrutinize new lending and apply "readiness filters," screening new projects for ownership, adequacy of
institutional and policy frameworks, and implementation capacity. This is being reinforced by Regional
management by requiring a formal "decision meeting" prior to project appraisal in order to institutionalize
a formal review of project readiness. For projects that have already been approved, we will jointly
establish with the GOP key portfolio indicators for each year (e.g., portfolio riskiness; disbursement etc.)
which will be jointly monitored on a regular basis. Quarterly joint portfolio review meetings will continue
to serve as a forum for discussing portfolio performance and for elevating and resolving project issues.
The CAS results framework will also serve as the foundation for monitoring the portfolio for outcomes.
Starting in FY07, we will undertake a yearly joint review of progress in achieving CAS outcomes and
adjust the lending and AAA programs accordingly.
107.
Portfolio Fiduciary Risk Management. Taking into account the result of reforms implemented
over the past five years, including recommendations from the CFAA and provincial financial
accountability reviews and implementation of PIFRA, overall Bank portfolio fiduciary risk has fallen
from an average rating of 'substantial to high' during the 2002-05 CAS to an average of 'moderate to
substantial'. The strategy for managing this risk will emphasize project design and capacity building.
Projects will be designed with increased participation of beneficiaries in projects (e.g., CDD projects and
enhancing the role of school management committees in education projects) and generation and public
dissemination of project performance information including information generated through third party
validation exercises. Project readiness filters will include assessment of the adequacy of fiduciary
arrangements. A risk-based approach to financial management and procurement will guide the Bank's
fiduciary team, both in project design and supervision. Intensive supervision and enhanced procurement
arrangements will be put in place in selected projects where fiduciary risks are deemed to be highest.
108.
Continued strengthening of government financial management and audit capabilities will be a key
element of the strategy. The Bank recognizes the Supreme Audit Institution (Office of the Auditor
General of Pakistan) as the independent auditor for Bank-financed operations implemented by most
government entities. 14 Bank financing is fully integrated into federal and provincial budgets and
disbursements for Bank-financed operations flow through the State Bank of Pakistan to the nominated
account of the projects and programs to ensure that Bank funds are accounted as part of the overall funds
flow of the Government. Successful roll-out of PIFRA to the provinces will enable the timely preparation
of reliable and comprehensive financial reports as well as timely, high quality audits, not just for Bank
projects but also for the entire government. We will also continue to work with government to strengthen
procurement practices at the federal and provincial level (see paras. 78-81). Supporting the improvement
of country systems and the overall control environment will support planned development policy lending
and enable mainstreaming of investment lending operations using government PFM systems. While over
90% of project financial statements are received on time, due to uneven quality of presentation and
content of the statements, about 25% of the statements are unacceptable at first submission. Capacity

14 Bank-financed

projects that are implemented by corporatized entities are audited by independent firms of
Chartered Accountants whose acceptability will continue to be assessed by the Bank on a case-by-case basis.

-

34

-

building of project financial management teams in financial reporting will therefore also be an important
area of Bank intervention during the CAS.
FY05-09 lending scenarios and triggers
IBRD/IDA Lending. As indicated above, Pakistan's demand for World Bank financial support
109.
has grown to meet the needs of its growth and poverty reduction strategy and to address the impact of the
October earthquake. To meet this demand a flexible IBRD/IDA lending program of up to US$6.5 billion
(approximately US$3.1 billion IDA and US$3.4 billion IBRD) is proposed in order to support
implementation of the PRSP."s In light of the extraordinary demands posed by the earthquake and the
need to protect implementation of the PRSP program, the Government of Pakistan is seeking additional
concessional financing from the donor community. The proposed program is consistent with Pakistan's
financing requirements, IDA allocation, debt management strategy, and the Bank's exposure guidelines.
110.
IDA will account for about half of Bank Group support to Pakistan. Pakistan's IDA allocation has
been increased under IDA 14, with the three-year envelope set at SDR 1.5 billion (equivalent to about
US$725 million per year). In addition Pakistan will have access to additional IDA on hard terms
estimated at SDR 130 million. 6 Annual IDA availability is therefore expected to be in the range of an
average of $785 million per year. It is expected that the full IDA allocation would be utilized provided
Pakistan continues to maintain a policy environment conducive to growth and PRSP implementation
while making further progress in implementing reforms. A dramatic deterioration in performance
including, for example, failure to maintain a sound macroeconomic framework, reversal of governance
reforms in public financial management and procurement, and inappropriate reductions in poverty-related
expenditure would warrant a review of the overall strategy and could preclude full utilization of the
IDA 14 allocation. In assessing performance, the Bank will focus on progress in achieving key outcomes
tied to PRSP reforms and CAS program priorities.
111.
Priorities for IDA resources include support for second generation structural reforms to facilitate
private sector growth, improve governance and continue to expand PRSP-related expenditures. In
addition, the demands placed on IDA have risen dramatically as a result of the October 8 earthquake with
incremental IDA commitments of $740 million already approved. As a result, utilization of IDA will be
front loaded; over half of the three year IDA allocation will be committed by end-FYO6 and the full IDA
allocation could be exhausted by end FY-07. Other priorities for IDA support include support for policy
reforms and institution building to help reach MDG targets as well as financing for pro-poor targeted
programs such as micro-credit, social protection and community-driven infrastructure. Annual Poverty
Reduction Support Credits will serve as the foundation of our support for PRSP implementation at the
national level. These will be complemented by development policy lending for the provinces to support
service delivery and improve human development outcomes. IDA will also continue to be used to finance
governance-related institution building (tax administration, financial management, land administration).
112.
The scale of IBRD financial support will be determined by the strength of the GoP's policy
performance and macroeconomic management. Continued good policy performance and sound
macroeconomic management leading to continued improvements in IBRD creditworthiness would form
the basis for IBRD lending of up to $400 million per year, of which no more than $200 million would be
in the form of development policy loans. The upper bound of the proposed IBRD lending range for
FYO6-09 is $3.4 billion of which up to $1.3 billion of IBRD lending could take the form of development
policy loans. Annual lending could increase to as much as $1 billion per year with up to $500 million in
1 Four-year IDA access is estimated on the basis of IDA 14 allocation.
16 IDA hard-term lending allocations are additional to regular allocations under
IDA14. The hard-term IDA
allocation for Pakistan in FY06 is SDR 62 million. The allocation for FYO7/08 is indicative and subject to change
based on implementation of the IDA 14 grant component.

-

35 -

DPLs within this envelope. Reaching this upper bound would take place only in the context of strong
performance as demonstrated by reaching the key benchmarks set forth in Table 8. In the event of policy
reversals resulting in the macroeconomic framework going off-track, the Bank would seek to limit its
exposure by suspending IBRD lending. Although recent macroeconomic performance has been good,
rising inflation, earthquake-related increases in the fiscal deficit, and a growing current account deficit
reflect increased pressure and the need for continued vigilance.
Table 8: Key Policy Performance Benchmarks for IBRD Lending
Lending

Macroeconomic
Management and
Debt Reduction

Promoting
privatehsectorb

IBRD lending up to $1.6 billion
($400 million per year)
* Maintenance of a sound
macroeconomic framework and no
substantial decline in fiscal discipline.
[as demonstratedby public debt to
GDP ratio at or below FY05 level and
foreign exchange reserves equivalent
to at least 3 months offollowing fiscal
year's projected imports of Goods and
Non actor Services]
No substantial deterioration in the
business environment,
[as evidenced by no substantial movesby
toward protectionistor interventionist
or reversal offinancialsector
reforms]

e Continued improvement in fiscal
performance and debt management as

demonstrated by achieving in each
year all targets for the revenue deficit
and debt reduction in the Fiscal
Responsibility and Debt Limitation
Act of 2005.
* Continued improvement in the
ahrough
business environment t
enn
ofeFsl
t b governmin
a
and e mpoimtiont
legstions
Rpolicies

ervices]

" Continued conmmitment to financial
Promotcapturing
aeene

* Implementation of modernized
accounting and auditing systems
65% of the federation's
expenditure budget by June 2007 and
80% by June 2009

Governance
of regulations to support
Notification
t
implementation of the national

procurement rules.

113.

Total IBRD lending up to $3.4 billion
(up to $1 billion per year)

* Satisfactory implementation of

national procurement rules to reduce

procurement irregularities.

The level of IBRD lending will also reflect the extent to which sectoral policies and governance

arrangements are conducive to effective Bank engagement. The Government of Pakistan's priorities for
IBRcD financing are in infrastructure, primarily water, power, transport and urban development. In each of

these areas the viability of investment lending will depend on the establishment of a policy environment
conducive to project implementation and to the achievement of targeted outcomes. In some cases, the

conditions necessary for increased lending have already been met while in others key policy actions are
required before expanded investment lending can take place. Reaching the upper end of the proposed
lending range would require strong progress across the board in implementing the sector reforms
necessary to ensure that IBRD investments lead to the achievement of GAS outcomes. Annex 7
summarizes key sector reforms that would serve as indicators to guide IBRD lending.
114.
Actual lending amounts will also depend on the ability to prepare high quality operations as well
as continued satisfactory portfolio performance. As indicated in the GAS Progress Report, work has
already begun to meet the demand for stepped-up IBRD support and the pipeline of IBRD projects is

growing. Nevertheless, given the fact that this new lending is in sectors where Bank has lending has been
limited in the recent past, the scale-up will take some time. At present, with concerted effort on the part of
both the Bank and GoP counterparts, we expect IBRD lending to reach US$850 million in FY07.

-

36

-

However, reaching this level would require a considerably strengthened pace of project preparation and
strong implementation capacity.
115.
The level of policy based lending will depend on several factors. Continued sound
macroeconomic management will continue to be a pre-condition for development policy lending as will
satisfactory implementation of PRSP reforms. Similarly, development policy operations at the province
level will take place in the context of fiscal and financial management reforms aimed at increasing fiscal
space and ensuring sustainability of reform programs. Within the context of a sound macroeconomic
environment, the use of DPOs will be driven primarily by the appropriateness of the DPO instrument visA-vis alternatives (see para. 45). In addition, the share of IDA-funded development policy lending in the
overall IDA lending program will be managed in the context of commitments on the Bank-wide share of
policy-based lending under the IDA 14 agreement.
116.

Due to its rapid economic turnaround, Pakistan is far more creditworthy than at the time of the

last CAS. Total government debt outstanding is 61 percent of GDP in 2004/05 (compared with 74 percent

in 2002/03) and is projected to decrease to 47 percent by 2008/09. Debt service has fallen from 26 percent
of exports of goods and services in 2002/03 to 15 percent in 2004/05. Recent debt sustainability analysis
suggests that public and external debt are projected to continue to decline over the medium term and
sensitivity analysis indicates that this downward trend is not likely to deteriorate significantly under a
variety of shocks to the baseline scenario. Pakistan's improved creditworthiness is also reflected in
improved ratings on its sovereign bonds (Table 9), although the country's rating remains several grades
below minimum investment grade.
The Government of Pakistan's first

Table 9: Pakistan Credit Rating by Standard & Poor's

international Islamic 'Sukuk' bond
Local Currency
offering (this is the GoP's second
Date
Sovereign Credit
Rating
bond offering, following last year's
B/Stable/B
JulY 9, 1999
Eurobond US$500 million issue)
B+/Stable/B
Dec.21,1999
attracted subscriptions worth US$1.2
billion for a bond issue of US$600
Dec.12,2002
BB-/Stable/B
million on January 18, 2005. TheBB-/Positive/B
Sa r & PorS.
Sou.
authorities have also indicated that
they intend to initiate further bond

Foreign Currency
Sovereign Credit
Rating
SDNM/SD
B-/Stable/B
B/Stable/B
B/Positive/B

offerings on an annual basis.

117.
IBRD lending of up to the maximum of US$3.4 billion over the FY06-09 GAS period would
increase total 11BRD exposure to Pakistan from the current US$2.5 billion, or 2.3% of the portfolio to
US$3.3 billion in FY10, about 3% of the IBRD portfolio. Bank Group exposure guidelines limit the ratio
of IBRD debt service to public debt service to no more than 20%, and the ratio of IBRD debt service to
exports of goods and services to no more than 4%. Even if total IBRD lending reaches US$3.4 billion
over the CAS period-the upper end of the proposed range-neither of these limits would be breached.
Pakistan does have a high share of external debt owed to preferred creditors and the preferred credit ratio
(debt service to preferred creditors as a percent of total public debt service) is above the 35%
recommended by IBRD exposure guidelines. But this risk is mitigated by bilateral debt rescheduling and
Pakistan's debt reduction strategy which has emphasized the retirement of expensive short term debt and
increased reliance on multilateral concessional debt, including IDA. In combination these factors have

served to reduce both the stock of external public debt and the associated debt service.

-

37

-

Table 10: Maximum Projected IBRD Exposure
FY05

FY06

Projected
FY08
FY09
FY07

FY10*

2,571
2,835
3,293
2,464
2,149
2,192
IBRD Debt Disbursed and Outstanding
45.6
42.8
52.7
60.4
57.1
61.3
Preferred creditor ratio
3.0
2.7
2.5
2.2
2.1
2.3
Share of Total IBRD Portfolio (%)
11.6
10.8
15.1
16.5
19.9
17.7
IBRD Debt Service as % of Total Debt Service
1.0
0.8
1.2
1.6
1.3
1.8
IBRD Debt Service as % of Exports of GNFS
* FY10 Exposure projected on the basis of continued lending at the upper end of the FYO6-09 CAS lending range.

Knowledge Services: AAA and Building Capacity
AAA and capacity building will be integral to the Bank Group program. Consistent with our
118.
focus on outcomes, ESW and TA will be programmed on the basis of their contribution to achieving CAS
outcomes, recognizing that knowledge transfer, often without financing, can be instrumental in achieving
results. The AAA program will also provide the analytical underpinning of the lending program. Based on
the FY04 QAG review of the Pakistan AAA program, we will invest more in dissemination and outreach.
Table 11: AAA - Indicative Key Outputs by CAS Theme

Sustained Growth
and Improved
Competitiveness

Strengthened
Governance and
Service Delivery

Improved Lives
and Protection of
the Vulnerable

Crosscutting/Core
Diagnostic

FY06

FY07

FY08

FY09

* Sindh Economic
Report
* Growth and Export
Competitiveness
* Rural Development
Report
* Transport
Competitiveness
* Provincial
Procurement
Assessment
* Urban NLTA
* Civil Service
Pension Report
* Safety Net Report

* Balochistan Economic
Report
* Investment Climate
Assessment
* Poverty Update
* Tax Policy Study

* Banking Sector
NLTA
* Development
Policy Review
* PPP for Agric.
Technology and
Services

a Access to Finance

* Monitoring and
Evaluation NLTA

* Land Market
Administration
NLTA
* Devolution TA

* Statistical
Strengthening TA

* Public-Private
Partnerships in
Education
* Health Sector Review

* Education Sector

* Education TA

* Strategic Country

Environment
Assessment

* Skill
Development &
Labor Market TA

Review
* Pension Reform
NLTA
* Integrated Public

Financial
Management and
Accountability
Assessments
(CFAA/CPAR/P
ER)

* Poverty

Assessment

119.
Based on the lessons learned in implementing the last CAS as well as the recommendations of the
CAE, the FYO6-09 CAS has been designed with greater emphasis on capacity building and ensuring that
capacity constraints are adequately addressed in project design. The Public Sector Capacity Building

-

38

-

project, approved in May 2004, is revitalizing civil service training and building the capacity of key
ministries and regulatory agencies that are in the forefront of design, implementation and monitoring of
reforms. With the designation of Pakistan as a focus country, the World Bank Institute will also play a
greater role in building capacity in support of operations. For example WBI has provided training in
municipal management feeding directly into the capacity building component of the Punjab Municipal
Services project. The partnership between WBI and country operations has been strengthened with the
appointment of regional coordinator located in Dehli. WBI activities are expected to focus primarily on
governance, including decentralization, urban management and parliamentary oversight of spending.
At the project level, projects will have a stronger emphasis on building institutional capacity.
120.
Projects will be designed with capacity issues in mind and capacity considerations will play a greater role
in appraisal of projects' readiness with an explicit requirement that projects not proceed to negotiation
unless institutional issues are resolved and project management capacity is in place. The proposed
guidelines for IBRD lending address capacity constraints as well as policy reforms and therefore will help
serve as a "capacity filter" for judging project readiness. Capacity building will also increasingly be
incorporated in project design with provision for associated technical assistance included in projects.
Country FinancingParameters
The country financing parameters pursuant to the Bank's policy OP-BP 6.00, Bank Financing
121.
in November 2004, and reviewed during the preparation of this CAS (see Annex IV).
established
were
This framework allows the Bank to finance expenditures needed to meet the development objectives of
the operations it supports within a framework that addresses country risks related to fiscal sustainability
and appropriate use of Bank resources. The policy has added flexibility in the use of Bank financing for a
number of expenditures. To implement this policy, the Bank and Government have agreed upon country
financing parameters for Pakistan. Under these financing policy parameters, the Government of Pakistan
will have flexibility in allocation and management of resources in the following areas: overall cost
sharing; local cost financing; recurrent expenditures; and financing of taxes and duties. Application of the
policy is not expected to have an adverse impact on fiscal sustainability. The above policy is based the
Government's five-year track record of stable and prudent fiscal management and debt reduction coupled
with a sound medium term fiscal framework, approval of a Fiscal Responsibility and Debt Limitation
Bill, and commitment to implement its development program with all donor assistance fully integrated
into the budget.
The financing parameters for cost sharing, local and recurrent costs, and taxes and duties will be
122.
applied on a project-by-project basis, depending upon the type of operation, to ensure efficient
implementation and sustainability after project closure. This will not impact the overall cost sharing of the
Bank, and the magnitude of financing in any individual project would be limited by the total available
IDA and IBRD resource envelope; the flexible financing arrangements in some projects will be offset by
other projects, depending upon the nature, type and sectoral intervention. Periodically, the financing
parameters and cost sharing for individual projects, will be reviewed with the Government and the Bank
to ensure that overall Bank financing remains within the total IDA/IBRD envelope and funding is
consistent with the Government's PRSP and availability of local resources. Details can be found in
Annex IV.
B.

The IFC Program

123.
Over the last CAS period, IFC helped existing clients to restructure and strengthen their financial
position and provided financing for new projects in infrastructure, manufacturing, and the financial sector
to support small and medium enterprises (SMEs). IFC committed a total of US$187 million in 16 projects
in Pakistan from FY03 to FY05. IFC's committed portfolio in the country as of July 31, 2005 was
US$314 million in 32 companies, including US$62 million in equity. The largest exposure is in the power

-

39

-

sector, representing 37% of the portfolio in five independent power producer (IPP) projects, with the
remaining portfolio spread across the financial and industrial sectors.
During the previous CAS period, local banks became active providers of longer term financing at
124.
competitive rates, driven by strong liquidity inflows and the increased efficiency of the recently privatized
commercial banks. The business environment in the country also benefited from recent government
private sector policies (visible in the improvements in the Doing Business indicators), which have spurred
investment activity. Therefore, IFC was selective in its investments during this period and did not
compete with local banks.
In the upcoming CAS period, IFC will be increasing its investment with the target range of
125.
US$500-600 million for the period. IFC will also explore opportunities in pre-privatization investment. It
furthermore plans to make more equity investment and intends to be a catalyst for and mobilize private
equity in the country. In addition EFC will increase technical assistance (TA) activity in Pakistan. IFC
activity will focus on three main sectors; financial, SME and infrastructure. With the recent creation of
Private Enterprise Partnership for Middle East and North Africa region (PEP-MENA), EFC has initiated a
substantial TA program in Pakistan to build capacity and address constraints of the SME, infrastructure
and financial sectors.
In the financial sector, opportunities include: microfinance; SME lending; support for recently
126.
privatized banks and those expected to consolidate; and long term lending and securitization for housing
finance. IFC will also continue to support the expansion of trade finance for SMEs, and expansion of the
asset management sector where it has played a pioneering role in the country. TA will complement the
investment program. PEP-MENA will focus on strengthening financial markets and on expanding access
to finance for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, improving corporate governance practices, and
expanding access to affordable housing for low and middle-income citizens. PEP-MENA will launch a
training and advisory project for the housing sector and will work with individual banks to improve
internal credit and risk systems, policies and procedures to promote affordable housing finance.
IFC expects to support innovative financing to promote funding to SMEs from local banks and to
127.
help meet the funding needs of SMEs, specifically in health and education. To help enhance the country's
business enabling environment, PEP-MENA is supporting commercial dispute settlement through its
alternative dispute resolution (ADR)/mediation pilot project in Karachi. The project will establish a pilot
mediation center for SMEs to provide training on mediation for judges, lawyers and the private sector. It
is expected that the pilot will result in a decline in court litigation, which is particularly burdensome for
SMEs, and could eventually be replicated in other provinces. PEP-MENA is also providing support to
business membership organizations (BMOs) to improve services and support to their SME members.
PEP-MENA will also launch its business management training tool, Business Edge, in Pakistan to support
business development service providers through train-the-trainer workshops. This management training
tool is to provide SMEs greater access to business development, management training and advice.
IFC intends to increase its investments in infrastructure and housing finance activities in order to
128.
address financing gaps in these sectors. In the infrastructure sector, the country is addressing constraints
in power generation and distribution. IFC is developing a number of investment proposals to address

these challenges. IFC is pursuing opportunities to further develop the country's natural gas resources,
where clients value IFC's political risk mitigation. In addition, IFC lending and advisory services are
expected to support the expansion of the private telecom industry, which is growing strongly after the

privatization of Pakistan Telecommunications Limited (PTCL) and after the rapid expansion in mobile
telephony and value added telecommunication services.
As to the development of housing finance sector, a key driver for stimulating the growth in the
129.
mortgage market would be for originators to have access to long term local currency financing. This

-

40

-

would be led by the development of the local capital market, via securitizations and other capital market
instruments, which mobilize domestic capital to support funding for mortgage finance. Some legal and
regulatory framework needs to be changed to ensure that the environment for securitization is enhanced.
PEP-MENA is exploring ways to support the GoP to enhance the legal regulatory framework. IFC will
explore ways to support pilot securitization efforts with some local financial entities that could be
developed in tandem with some of the changes in the legal and regulatory infrastructure.
130.
In privatization and public-private partnership (PPP) development, PEP-MENA will support the
GoP's regulatory bodies and its infrastructure privatization efforts. IFC currently has two advisory
mandates in Pakistan: (i) structuring a PPP for Lahore Water and Sewerage Agency; and (ii) privatization
of Faisalabad Electric Supply Company. IFC is working with Global Partnership on Output Based Aid
(GPOBA) and Infrastructure Department of the Bank on other PPP-related transactions and on the
institutional framework in support of PPPs.
C.

MIGA Portfolio and Program

131.
MIGA's outstanding portfolio in Pakistan consists of 10 contracts of guarantee-four in the
financial sector, five in the infrastructure sector and one in the services sector-with a total gross
exposure of US$136.8 million and a net exposure of US$106.8 million. An application seeking coverage
for a US$20.8 million equity investment in a hydropower project (Laraib Energy Ltd.) in Pakistan is
currently pending. In FY07 MIGA intends to implement an Enterprise Benchmarking Program (EBP)
Survey in South Asia, and Pakistan is expected to be one of six or seven countries that will participate.
The EBP will provide detailed investor-focused information to assist Pakistan's investment promotion
efforts.
D.

Partnerships and Harmonization

132.
The Bank Group's work in Pakistan is coordinated with and reinforced by the efforts of other
donors in a wide variety of areas. The Government leads coordination of policy dialogue and donor
support within the framework of the PRSP, using the Pakistan Development Forum (PDF), held annually
in Islamabad, as the principal forum for discussion with and among donors. The PDF has allowed the
Government (federal and provincial) to actively participate and present their policy reforms to the donor
community. This has enabled the development partners to learn first hand from key policy makers and
implementers, about the country's economic reforms and to experience the ownership of the program at
all levels of the government. To follow-up on the PDF in a systematic manner, a Donor Coordination Cell
(DCC) has been created in the Economic Affairs Division (EAD). Formal donor group meetings are also
held, at least two to three times a year, to discuss implementation of the government's PRSP. Provincial
governments have also continued to engage development partners in the implementation of their
provincial reform programs. Building on the positive experience of the provincial development forum
meetings in Sindh and NWFP, a Punjab development Forum was held in 2005, and another NWFP
Development Forum is planned in 2006.
133.
Under the leadership of the Government of Pakistan, the Bank Group is increasing efforts to
strengthen partnerships and improve harmonization of activities among donors in line with the Paris
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. Analytical activities are increasingly being prepared jointly; during the
last CAS five ESW reports were prepared as joint products with the support and participation of the Bank,
IMF, ADB, the EC and the UK Department for International Development. During the next four years we
expect an increasing share of analytical activities to be carried out jointly. A comparison between the
World Bank's and ADB procurement rules was undertaken in 2004 as part of the harmonization exercise
and as a result, harmonized procurement documents are available for use. A similar exercise is underway
in the area of financial management where DFID and ADB will be working jointly together on the
planned PFM Performance Measurement assessments for the federal government, Punjab and NWFP. A

-41-

similar PFM assessment for Punjab was carried out jointly by the World Bank, DFID, and the EC in
2005. Discussions are underway with a number of donors including the US, UK and EC to harmonize
program support and we will continue to seek opportunities for harmonization of budget support, both at
the national and provincial level, under common policy frameworks. Details of partner activities can be
found in Annex V.
The international response to the October earthquake has served as an opportunity to substantially
134.
deepen donor harmonization and coordination. The Preliminary Damage and Needs Assessment was the
product of a multi-agency mission led by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the World Bank
including experts from the government as well as international organizations, including the European
Union, the United Kingdom's Department for International Development (DFID), the German Agency for
Technical Cooperation (GTZ), the German KfW, the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC),
the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID), the World Health Organization (WHO), and UN Agencies." A core group of
seven donors including the ADB, DFID, the European Union, Japan, UN, USAID, and the World Bank
has continued to meet on a near-weekly basis to coordinate activities by designating lead agencies and
develop common approaches, including assisting in development of sector reconstruction strategies to
guide government and donor efforts over the coming months. During the CAS we will seek to build on
this mechanism to institutionalize and deepen donor coordination.
E.

Communications and Outreach

135.
An important complement to partnership and coordination efforts is the Bank Group's overall
outreach. Accordingly, the Bank has increased its interactions with the different levels of government, the
media, civil society, and business community to establish partnerships based on a shared vision for
Pakistan's development. The Bank Group has intensified efforts to build the local media's capacity, and
will continue to conduct training programs for business and economic journalists in collaboration with
local universities and WBI. In keeping with the Bank's goal of sharing knowledge, increasing
transparency, and enhancing accountability, the Bank Group's web site not only provides information
about Bank operations in Pakistan but also provides real time access to stakeholders allover the world on
annual events like the Pakistan Development Forum. The web site and other web-based communications
channels like virtual meeting rooms and discussion space have played a great role in donor coordination
during the recent earthquake in Pakistan. Additional efforts will be made to extend the Bank Group's
outreach through more periodic dialogue with stakeholders. This will be done through wider
dissemination of the Bank Group's reports and disclosure of project documents (especially in local
languages), greater engagement with civil society organizations and opinion makers. The Bank will
continue also its highly effective consultative process in the preparation of specific projects.
F.

Monitoring and Evaluation

136.
Successful implementation of the results-based CAS will require further improvements in
monitoring and evaluation. At the level of the country program, the CAS results framework establishes
the specific results which the Bank Group aims to assist the Government to achieve (Annex 1). Progress
toward the achievement of these objectives will be monitored and jointly reviewed on an annual basis.
This process will be supported by activities to improve government systems to collect, analyze and
disseminate data. To supplement the data available from household surveys, beginning in 2005, the
Federal Bureau of Statistics (FBS) has begun conducting a Pakistan Social and Living Standards
Measurement Survey (PSLM). This survey consists of a Core Welfare Indicators Questionnaire (CWIQ),
which for the first time is gathering data at the district level, and a Household Income and Expenditure
1 Pakistan: 2005 Earthquake Preliminary Damage and Needs Assessment. SecM2005-0585/IDA/SecM2005-0588,
November 18, 2005.

-

42

-

Survey (HIES), which is provincially representative. Together with household surveys, the CWIQ and the
HIES provide information on intermediate and final development outcomes as well as on satisfaction with

government services and provide decision makers with annual feedback on the results of government
programs which can be used to assess effectiveness and make needed adjustments. The Bank will also
support the strengthening of administrative reporting systems with independent cross-checks provided by
third party validation surveys, an approach that is already being implemented in the Punjab Education
program.
Like several other South Asian countries, Pakistan boasts a strong statistical system with a long
137.
time-series of household surveys with extensive data on economic, demographic, and social trends.
Already a participant of the General Data Dissemination System, the GoP has announced its intention to
adopt the Special Data Dissemination Standard. Further, as the country moves forward in implementing
its poverty reduction strategy, increasing information demands are being placed on its statistical system.
Recognizing the importance of timely and reliable statistics for policy analysis and public debate, the GoP
has embarked on an ambitious plan to restructure existing statistical agencies and develop a long-term
plan to strengthen its system of official statistics to meet these challenges. The World Bank is providing
technical assistance to the GoP to help prepare a strategic plan for the merger of the various statistical
agencies into one organization, to help draft a new statistical law specifying the respective roles and
responsibilities of various actors in the revamped statistical system, as well as to develop an
implementation plan to strengthen the overall system, including training and motivation of staff and the
strengthening of the statistical infrastructure. In addition, the Bank has also helped the Federal Bureau of
Statistics carry-out the CWIQ survey in 2004/05.
138.
Improvements in monitoring and evaluation will also be a focus of efforts at the project and
portfolio level. Based on the results of a recent portfolio monitoring and evaluation review, there is scope
for improving the M&E focus of projects by enhancing projects-level results frameworks, strengthening
the selection of measurable outcome indicators, and strengthening M&E information channels at the
project level. We will continue to build the capacity of the Planning Commission for evaluation and
monitoring of development projects. Further support, including lending and technical assistance for
implementation of the statistical restructuring plan, will also be considered during the CAS period.
G.

Managing Risks

139.
The greatest risk faced in the new CAS is the risk of policy reversal due to shifting priorities or
political changes. While the government has shown itself able to sustain its reform program over an
extended period, the period leading up to elections in 2007 could bring greater uncertainty. In this
context, a slowdown in decision making is possible as are shifts in government policies and priorities.
While the Bank's ability to mitigate this risk is limited, we will seek to build and sustain support for
further reforms, using our AAA work as appropriate to help make the case for reform in public and to
strengthen the hand of reformers in policy debates. The government is also sensitive to this risk and has
launched a variety of initiatives which aim to spread the benefits of growth and reform as widely as
possible, particularly among the poorer regions in the country. In this way, the government seeks to build
popular support for continued reform. We will support these efforts. Finally, we will continue to rely on
the self-regulating nature of the programmatic approach: the volume and pace of lending will match the

pace of reforms.
140.
Recent macroeconomic developments including rising inflation and a growing current account
deficit suggest an increase in the risk of macroeconomic slippage. On the fiscal front, expenditure
pressures are evident due in part to the October 2005 earthquake and associated claims on the federal
government's finances. Disbursement of grant donor funding pledged at the November 19, 2005
Conference in Islamabad has been slower than planned. There is also a risk of increased external
vulnerability as shown by the rapid increase in the current account deficit during FY05 and the first half

-

43

-

of FY06. These risks are offset to some extent by the Government's track record over the past five years
in managing the economy coupled with its strong commitment to sound macroeconomic management as
embodied in the Fiscal Responsibility Law. The Bank will seek to further mitigate this risk through its
engagement in macroeconomic policy dialogue and in the context of the PRSCs and other development
policy operations, as well as technical assistance and capacity building.
141.
Despite some favorable trends over the past several years, Pakistan will remain vulnerable to
security risks which may affect implementation of the strategy. While the peace process with India
remains on track, the threat of violent conflict persists. Some episodes of violence in Balochistan and in
the border regions near Afghanistan over the past year have caused disruption in project or program
implementation. Moreover, it is likely that security concerns have acted as a constraint on the
effectiveness of Pakistan's reform program by dampening somewhat the private sector's response to the
rapidly improving investment climate. While the Bank cannot address security issues directly, its
engagement can have a demonstration effect and help to "crowd in" private investment. We will mitigate
the security risk to Bank operations by continuing to closely monitor developments and by responding
quickly to safeguard staff while maintaining our engagement.
The October earthquake has highlighted Pakistan's vulnerability to exogenous shocks, including
142.
natural disasters. Pakistan is subject to earthquakes as well as weather-related hazards including floods,
landslides and droughts, all of which were experienced during the last CAS period. The response to the
earthquake has also demonstrated Pakistan's capacity to weather such shocks, as well as the need to
improve hazard risk management practices in Pakistan. This risk will be mitigated by ensuring the Bank's
readiness to provide necessary support-resources, AAA and leadership-to assist in responding to
emergencies. In addition we will work with the Government to strengthen hazard risk management
strategies and capacity.
143.
The IBRD exposure risk is deemed to be acceptable based on Pakistan's improving debt
sustainability indicators and growing access to international financial markets. Nevertheless, IBRD
lending at the upper end of the proposed range will take place only in the context of further improvements
in creditworthiness. In consultation with the IMF, the macroeconomic situation will be monitored closely
and I3RD lending adjusted accordingly. Moreover, application of the guidelines for IBRD lending will
serve to modulate the lending program based on policy performance at the sector level.
144.
There are implementation risks relating to both the Bank and Pakistan. As outlined earlier
technical and institutional capacity constraints, particularly at the local level, could delay implementation
of reforms or slow the preparation of new projects. On the Bank side, the planned increase in
infrastructure lending poses risks related to the timeliness and effectiveness of Bank support as we
re-engage in sectors where there has been little or no lending during the previous CAS. Portfolio risks
will also be more prominent as we scale up infrastructure lending. As outlined above, we will aim to
increase our support for capacity building, both through stand-alone operations and as an integral part of
new activities. We will also apply a "capacity filter" to new operations to ensure that projects proceed

only with adequate capacity in place or with a clear strategy for building it. To address the environmental
and social risks associated with scaling-up and programmatic support, particularly in the infrastructure
and water/irrigation sectors, the Bank will increase efforts, working with our clients, to identify at an
early stage the critical issues affecting the potential sustainability of the programs and to put in place
appropriate mechanisms to address them. To mitigate the implementation risks on the Bank side will
require a concerted effort to streamline project preparation and ensure timely attention to implementation
issues on the part of both the Bank Group and GoP.

Page I of 8

ANNEX I: PAKISTAN FYO6-09 CAS
RESULTS FRAMEWORK
World Bank CAS

Pakistan's Development Agenda

Pillar 1: Sustaining High and Broad-based Growth and Improving Competitiveness
1. Strengthened Macroeconomic Management and Utilization of Resources
* Poverty incidence reduced
from 32% in 2001 to 28%
in 2005-06 and 22% in
2011
* Average real GDP growth
rate of 6.5% from 2006-

2009.
* Macroeconomic stability
maintained
* Stock of public debt
reduced to 50% of GDP

by 2008-09

Macroeconomic
vulnerabilities: (i) low
revenue mobilization, (ii)
high costs of power sector,
(iii) pension liabilities

Inefficient tax
administration, narrow tax
base, skewed tax structure,
and evasion
* High debt and low

below 4.5%; Tax-to-GDP ratio
increased to at least 11.5% by
2008-09
* Improved organizational

a Satisfactory implementation of the Fiscal
Responsibility and Debt Limitation Bill
e Progress in restructuring CBR and
implementing improvements in
management, HR and revenue operations

efficiency and effectiveness of

9 The share of pro-poor expenditures rises

* Fiscal deficit (before grants) at or

the Central Board of Revenue
* Strengthened capacity for
macroeconomic, poverty and
social monitoring

creditworthiness
eLow savings, and public
and private investment
insufficient to support
sustained high growth

Lending:
* PRSCs
9 Provincial DPCs

e Public Sector Capacity
from 4.8% in 2004/05 to 6.8% in 2008 with
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to
track progress
* Adoption of a strategic plan for

reorganization of statistics function under a
new statistical law.

Bidn

rjc

AAA
* Tax Policy Study
* TA for pensions reform
*

Growth and Competitiveness
report

e Poverty Assessmnt

*increased exot leas no1.%nb

b Statistical strengthning TA
*

Monitoring and evaluation

(TA)

2. Increased Diversification and Exports in Agricultural
"

Increase in agriculture
productivity/competitiven

ess (including livestock)
" Improved functioning of
rural factor markets:
Water, Land, Credit

9 Distortions due to
subsidies on inputs and

some commodity prices
Stagnant yields and limited
access of small farmers to
improved technology
Shallow land, credit and
water markets hinderm
access by the poor

9 increased productivity and
diversification at the farm level

o Better functioning of land
* markets
e Increased horticulture production
9 nrae xoto o-AAA
* traditional crops.

High transaction costsrevenueoperati

Preparation of an action plan for the
revamping of the Ag. R&D system

9 Automated land records management
system implemented in Punjab province.

LENDING
OFWMP in NWFP and

Sindh
Punjab Land Records Mgt
(07)
* Rural DPR (06)

restructuringiCBR
m

Page 2 of8

World Bank CAS

Pakistan's Development Agenda
Isue

Ban

Iitnc,.'

an Costait

Gru

* Livestock review (07)

facing small scale farmers
and inefficiencies in the

TA

marketing chains

* Workshops/TA on land

markets administration
3. Efficient and Sustainable Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructureand Service Delivery
* Efficient, transparent and
accountable water and
irrigation sector
supporting increased
agricultural production

e Inefficient water use and
water shortages
e Supply-driven system non
responsive to farmers'
needs

o Improved management of
irrigation and drainage
infrastructure
9 Improved irrigation service
delivery through increased

cost recovery in irrigation

infrastructure degradation
* Lack of transparency and

* Transparent and more equitable

water allocation and distribution
of water

equity in the water
allocation and monitoring
system

* Asset Management Plans prepared with
increased funding provided for maintenance
and rehabilitation
e Number of FOs created and at least 40% of
abiana collection is transferred to them in

* Punjab Barrage
Rehabilitation and
Modernization (07)
* Sindh Water sector
improvement (07)

(07)

and modernized and an action plan for
water infrastructure development is

prepared
* Drainage master plan and drainage accord
concluded among provinces

* Punjab Irrigation DPL

(annual beginning FY06)
9 Workshops/TA on irrigation
sector institutional reforms
(05)

*CompetitionmLawgamproved w Inter-provincial water allocation agreement
and related monitoring system in place
* Reduced water losses in irrigation system in
OFWM canal commands
4. Improving the Business Environmentfor Trade and Investment
Strengthened

competitiveness ,
increased productivity and
improved investment
climate

9 Enhanced labor market flexibility
* Strengthened legal framework for
competition

* Labor market rigidities

hinder enterprise
adjustment and factor
mobility the water
* Inadequate legal and

nCompetition

Existing labor laws amended

- Increases in DB index of hiring and firing
flexibility

* PRSC

* Labor Market Study
Competition Policy TA

Li annoued

institutional arrangements
to promote competition.M
Government regulations
pose barriers to entry and
business operations

Modernized Legal and
Regulatory Framework

e Underdeveloped
framework for private

investment in exploration

*

Established and operational
Mineral Rights Cadastre

Policy dialogue; Capacity
building reform using PHRD

New laws, regulations, and procedures
introduced
Ia

Page 3 of8

World Bank CAS

Pakistan's Development Agenda
Long Term GOP-MDG
Goals

.
issues and Constramts

for the mineral sector

and development of
minerals

Outcomes the Bank expects to
influence during the CAS period

Intermediate milestones/indicators to track
implementation towards CAS outcomes
* Functional Cadastre with trained staff

I
Grant, PSRCs

* Basic geo-information used to promote
exploration and develop investment

* Mineral Sector TA Loan (FY

* Transmission and

5. Improved Delivery and Efficiency of InfrastructureServices
A financially selfsustaining power sector
capable of supporting
economic growth and
providing reliable services
to existing and new
consumers

* Expanded use of
telecommunications
services

* Poor technical and

* Power sector corporatized into

* Notification of tariffs for individual

commercial efficiency,
service quality, and
reliability
* Inadequate tariffs with
substantial cross subsidies

independent generation,
transmission and distribution
entities by region
* Improved performance of the
regulatory framework

corporate entities; transfer of assets,
liabilities and staff; adoption of trading
rules and mechanisms for independent
financial flows
* Investment in transmission and distribution

* Under-investment and lack
of maintenance

* Reduced fiscal costs of the sector.

* Reduced technical and commercial losses

* Poor sector performance as

* Increased fixed, mobile, and rural

* Develop and implement the Universal
Service Strategy by using private operators
to deliver services
* MOITT policy-making capacity and PTA's
regulatory regime strengthened

evidenced by: (i) limited
access especially in rural
areas, where teledensity is
less than 1%; (ii) long
waiting time for telephone

connection and (ii) poor
......
... ....
........
.....
* A more efficient, safe and
reliable transport system

moving people and goods
more effectively and

safely

performance of PTCL and
the cellular operators

.......-..........

teledensity
* Strengthened legal and policy
framework and improved
performance of the regulatory
regime

......-........... .......... .....
-..........

..... ...

Improved Traffic Flow on
National Trade Corridor as

*

e Limited access and poor

measured by operating costs and

e Road Maintenance Account operational and

* Inadequate investment in
system maintenance.

Prvtsetrpriiainn

P
road transport increased

* Support to

Telecommunications
Regulator (PTA) through the
PSCB Project
* Rural Telecom project
(FY08)

...............

Rehabilitation of highways under the
National Highway Improvement Program

9 Long travel times and
congestion
condition of netork

* PSCB

* IFC/MIGA support to private

* Increase in delivery of e-services
for citizens

travel times

Distribution Improvement
Loan (FY07)

financing Annual Maintenance Program

e National Trade Corridor
Project
* Transport Competitiveness
Study

Satisfactory progress in implementing
agreed NHA institutional reform program
9 Reduction in communities lacking basic
access to transport services: 10%

* Lack of private sector
participation in road

transport sector
A competitive Oil and
Gas sector, providing
quality products in an
efficient and costs

* Government intervention

and price controls
e Mis-targeted and non-

Percentage of households using
gas as cooking fuel increases
from 30% to 40%

* implementation of pricing regimes for oil

* Policy dialogue

and gas
* P0 and NRL privatized by FY07

* Analytical work on open
access, strategic storage,

Page 4 of 8

World Bank CAS

Pakistan's Development Agenda

uneconomic
scarce resources

allocation of through imports

FY

o7

* Advice on gas imports
* IFC support to private mining
and gas field dev. operators

6. Improving Access to Market-BasedFinance
syste, DIt
of financial in ing aents
oA strong and diversiiedatcot
financial
sector withand
aMd improved
equitable
access operatingin the give
*
t r or eve
d
eled
under
sound regulation controlGoeraneen
Srve DeNvedy
* Under-development of
* Strengthened public
e n
to cerdasctr
l
numer ofPadNBF
*ifraewnt
a
covered u ne
oouanaemntereitofetansato
contractual savings has
fmiinstitutiondlglsk
reotng
adudit
i
cdernizedinan
I
e
inhibited capital markets
developmentity
of financial
Ti ine a de lo ani
* Gaps in the legislative
framework pose
(B
n
IA)eHuigFnneT
*ddtoofaa
Repoiing astasured banks reoni
instii
D

f*

m
c
m
a
c e b
audisSe
f gtoenmiden
* NtinaSvigsSchmeretrctr
ofrdt subivtzed wihnoeya

fiania
governmentn
inomaindusotimelins
legalfavew
Strengthened

for

AM

Debt Act,cInsurance O i
Public
f*

n

law

Nce o

* PRC

va

capit Market Tr
* B

ai

sect or A

HuigFnneT
pial
. TA
PIF
P a
o IF foruFede

* PRSC

nWP DPc

*re
*

MFaamety andot o
Provinedcial FaAtisrmn
Cpita lty

TAs

S
riskspotn overign htn public expenditure
instituta andsegal
s and
f co rcniitinP
over smesrdb
p eran n to
fe i
(00%by
209)* IFCegtchn bic asitanca
weakesss inimpovedquaity ndimelnes benhmaks
*ccountable Isefpbli goerntm e c* Role of trainct,dp
nt Offies ndi
*IFAC
ae1f
reconcilPillar
2: Strngteneadit Goenne
nd%
Servi Delie
ihnoeyar
Mngmnn
m Weakened
ia amtitutise
l
v
Trery
fic clarii
*
udelite
evelopt edra
u
* Tracklog pogras
7. GraerEfcinylTasanys inanAcouabilityeintteed ePublie esourcescoutbiiysssmet
n A
in7ia
FYo
mi and a y e n
s ( elifDsrctAcutOfcsan
r oe
CA/PRPR
andcepniue
*eCredible,otransparent
* Weaked capailt v nauyOfce
lrfe
overnmet accounting-eie
edpstfeealaui

reconciliationby

nd Y0

Page 5 of 8

World Bank CAS

Pakistan's Development Agenda
Outcomes the Bank expects to
influence during the CAS period

Long Term GOP-MDG
Goals
* Efficient and transparent
public procurement

Intermediate milestones/indicators to track
implementation towards CAS outcomes

9 Improved transpareney and
efficiency in public procurement
at Federal, Provincial, Municipal
and Autonomous bodies level

a 100% of federal procurement eondueted
under modernized regulation by FY 2007.
. Establishment of appeals procedure

* Provincial Procurement

* Lack of implementing
Regulations and clear

e Improved credibility of bidding

e Procurement Regulations for implementing
Procurement rules notified. Procurement

* Punjab Education SAC

for public procurement

9 Alignment between PPRA and

o Monitoring and reporting mechanism

* Sindh SAC 11and Ill (FY06,

* Non- transparent

procedures at Federal,
Provincial, Municipal and
Autonomous bodies level

ragmns
intttoa
arrangements
institutional

Law enacted

process

akofefrcmn,Auditor Generals Of Pakistan
" enforcement,
* Lack of

established to provide statistics on public

Assessments
* PSCB capacity building

e PRSC 11, 111(FYs 06,07)

9 NWFP SAC Ill (FY06)
07

procurement
o Engagement of Auditor Generals Office in

monitoring and appeals
handling process

the development and implementation of

* Weak capacity of

Procurement Rules, Regulations and

procurement officials

Procedures; conduct of annual audit

8. Enhanced Capacity for Service Delivery and Public Sector Management
e Efficient, accountable
civil service staffed by
highly qualified

individuals

* Low levels of competence

in policy and operational
management
* Weak accountability

Professional qualifications of
civil servants increased
* Civil service compensation

reformed to reflect market

* FPSC capacity strengthened and

responsibility for recruitment process
reaffirmed

PRSC
Devolution TA/Policy Notes
PSCB project

e National Executive Service created
District and Local Government Services

realities

* Civil service restructured to
further devolution
e Civil service pensions reformed

created
iPay compression ratio reduced from 1:10
* Increased proportion of senior civil servants
with internationally recognized training
* HRMIS system made operational

*Accountable and efficient
local governments,

*Incomplete

fiscal and

administrative devolution
SLack of clarity about roles
and responsibilities of

*Increased

transfer of national

fiscal space to provincial and
local governments
Administrative and Fiscal

various tiers of

devolution completed

government

Strengthened links between local

" Fiscal imbalances among
tiers

governments and community
organizations (COs)

" Limited capacity of local

Increased capacity of COs to

*Districts

given full APT authority over all

staff at grades 19 and below
*Share of overall government resources
to provinces/districts
e
provided
* Greater Federal/Provincial and
* Provincial/District tax reassignments.

e TA
CIP Projects
Capacity building for lucal
government through the

Devolution Trust

eIncreased utilization of local development
resources

Number of Community OrganizationsP

* P

Page 6 of 8

World Bank CAS

Pakistan's Development Agenda
Long Term GOP-MDG
Goals

Issues and Constraints
sseanCosrms

Outcomes the Bank expects to
influence during the CAS period
participate in development

governments

Intermediate milestones/indicators to track
implementation towards CAS outcomes

,

created

planning

* Weak links between
communities and local
governments

9. Improved Municipal Service Delivery
* Improved quality of life in
the urban areas and
increased contribution of
urban areas to growth and

poverty reduction

Improved quality, efficiency and
access to urban services in
selected municipalities
improved urban planning and

* Rapid urban transition

e Weak urban service
delivery as a result of
fragmented

responsibilities, weak
capacity and limited
accountability of public
sector institutions
* Uneconomic pricing and
inefficient public service
delivery mechanisms.

* Poorly performing land
markets
o Inadequate regulation and

management frameworks
implemented in selected
municipalities
*Increased
access to water,
sanitation, transport and other
urban services in selected
municipalities

9 improved urban land management system
implemented in 6 TMAs
e Adoption of clearly articulated vision and
policy framework for urban development

e Urban Non-lending TA
* Punjab Municipal Services
Improvement Project
(PMSIP)

by provincial governments
* Implementation of capacity building
activities and development grants through
the Punjab Municipal Development Fund

e Punjab Large Cities
Development Policy Loan
(DPL)
a IFC support for municipal

Company

water and sewer operators

quality and condition
of intra-city roads and
transportation

*Improved

enforcement
and...
effiienc
.....
ove quaity
the Vulnerable
. 3:Imp
.....
and Protecting
Lives
Improving
Pillar

~ ~~
~~~~~~~~~~
...
_-.......
--~

..

10. Improved Delivery ofHealth and Education Services

Education
" Increased leaning
achievement of primary

school students
" Gender gap in literacy
reduced: ratio of literate
female/males increases
from 65 percent in 2005
to 93 percent by 2015

itray
ea o * ae
rasief 5-4
58% in 2001 to 78% in
2011

*Limited

client voice in

*Gross

primary enrolment

improving the quantity and
quality of service delivery

increases from 72 to 104 percent.
* Gross enrollment rate for middle

management,
including lack of focus on:
(i) information-outcome
based policy making, (ii)

school increases from 41 percent
in 2001-02 to 52 Percent in 2009
e Increase in gross enrollment of
girls in primary school from 61 in

standard setting regulation;
(iii) monitoring and

2001-02 percent to 85 percent in
2009

*Weak

evaluation
icenti
eiin
providers that link
autonomy with

o

* Increase gross enrollment of girls

middle school from 35 in
2001-02 percent to 45 percent in
2009

e National Learning Assessments conducted
twice during the CAS period
Improved teacher attendance

9 Results of annual survey based assessments
of providers show marked increase in
quality of service provision
- Increased non-salary recurrent expenditures

LENDING
Provincial DPCs
a Punjab PEDPC
* Balochistan Ed. Loan (06)

e IFC support for private
education
e Higher Education Reforrm

in education

* Successful implementation of education
stipend program for girls in selected
districts

a Education Sector Report
Private Sector Participation
in Punjab
Higher Education Policy

Page 7 of 8

Pakistan's Development Agenda
Issues and Constraints
Long Term GOP-MDG
Goals
Improve post-primary
access and quality

accountability
* Limited opportunitiesfor

public-privatepartnership

World Bank CAS
Outcomes the Bank expects to
influence during the CAS period

Intermediate milestones/indicators to track
implementation towards CAS outcomes
Note

* Increase enrollments in Higher

Education (particularly for
bottom 20 percent of the
population)

*

TA
Skill development/Labor
market TA

* HD Monitoring and
Evaluation TA
Weak management:
compounded by (i) poor

Improved Health
Outcomes

accountability of service

* Under 5 mortality rate

reduced from 103 to 60

providers and managers,

(per 1,000 live births)

(ii) limited autonomy, and

* Maternal mortality rate
reduced from 450 to 250
(per

(iii) lack of performancebased incentives
Lack of focus on

* Polio eradicated

information-outcome

10,00liv
(pebrts)months)

based policy making, (ii)

monitoring and evaluation
* Spread of HIV infection
reduced
c
aiitstabilizes
securiaeptiy
assistance andinstrumeninrease
social

and responsibilities for

different levels of
government

Contraceptive prevalence rate
increased from 28% to 34% by

e Increase in LHW (and skilled birth
attendants) from 84,000 to 110,000 by

9 Partnership for Polio
Eradication (FY06)

FY09

FY09
* Timely availability of polio vaccines and
increased SIA coverage of targeted children
to at least 80% in polio endemic provinces

e Lady Health Workers (FY07)

*Proportion

of births attended by

skilled health personnel rises
from 31% to 38%
Pn/

increased from 77% to 85%
9 HIV prevalence remains below
5% of female sex workers and
among
male sex
ppvalncerat
fo 2%
o inmates
34%r
(byto
jail
workers, truckers,

project (FY03)
* National Public Health

contracted to deliver services to high-risk

fully immunized

e National HIV/AIDS Control

groups rises from 7 to at least 26

Surveillance and Monitoring

System (08)
e Health sector review

including assessment of the
oio

rgasipoeA

and IDUs

* IFC support for private
providers

through effective safety nets, targeted interventions; and hazard risk management
Improved livelihoods of poor communities
vulnerability and Uncleerar
offiaftyinetsfncroles
11. Reducedadminiteredsocia
Vulnerability reduced

* Lack of national strategy

through implementation
of well targeted,

for social protection
e Limited, ad hoc, and

financially viable, and
well

seuiyporm

unevaluated use of safety
nets and social security

Existing safety net
programs not designed to

help poor cope with

Increased school attendance

e SP strategy and approved by Government

Lending

among poor children (bottom 2
quintiles) and among disabled

e Pilots for safety net reforms (CCTs)
implemented and scaled up

* Social Protection (FY08)

children

2 quintiles)
the civil service pensions
p

f

design ed/agreed, and reforms initiated

e PRSCs, Provincial DPCs,
Emergency Recovery
Operations (06-09)
* Safety net Report (FY06)

(FY06)rvc Pnio

* Pension Report/ TA (FY07-

e Micro-insurance Report
(FY08)

low/poor coverage
*HIVpreval

epr

rise

308)

are under-funded and have

* Weak implementation

reforms of other formal/informal pensions

safetinesinpndgonovrytgeted

or build human capital
Social Protection programs

e Civil service pension reforms enacted;

* Reduction in fiscal liabilities of

shocks/natural disasters

Safety net targeting mechanism developed
and administrative capacity to deliver and

Page 8 of 8

World Bank CAS

Pakistan's Development Agenda

capacity leading to
inefficient administration
*Improved livelihoods and
services for poor
communities and drought
prone areas

*Areas affected by October
2005 earthquake
rehabilitated
to hazards

reduced through increased
preparedness

LiieacestbaiInraecomnt
services and infrastructure
hinder opportunities for
economic activities and
income generation for the
rural poor

participation in the decision
making process and partnership
between municipalities and
CBOs on service delivery
Improved delivery of services,

* Weak community based
organizations and rural
institutions

and productive and social
infrastructure
Increased access to credit,

* The poor (esp. in rural
areas) lack access to credit

including microcredit

e High risk of natural
disaster including
earthquake, floods and
drought

e Ad hoc approach to
dealing with Hazard Risk
Management (HRM)
Undeveloped institutional
framework and limited
capacity for disaster
response and
limited

*Vulnerable

populations provided

livelihood support during postearthquake period
CVulnerability
services and public
* Basic

InraereitainoComntBsd
Organizations (CBOs) (from 120 in June
2004)
* Number of community infrastructure
projects launched and number of rural
communities reached.

adII

* Kushall Pakistan/Social

Mobilization
9 NWFP CIP 1
* AJK CIP

* Number of active microcredit borrowers.

e Number of houses restored/rebuilt to
earthquake resistant standards.
Number of communities/households
benefiting from livelihood support

infrastructure restored in

payments

earthquake affected area
Owner driven housing

Development of National Emergency
Management Plan

ireconstruction complete in
selected areas
* Strengthened GoP capacity to
manage and minimize the impact
of future disasters

*PAF

rRM

* Earthquake Emergency
Recovery Credit
Earthquake Emergency
Response package

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 1 of 30

ANNEX II: CAS COMPLETION REPORT

Country: Pakistan

Date of CAS: June 24, 2002

Date of CAS Progress Report: April 28, 2004

Period covered by the CAS Completion Report:

July 2002 - June 2005

CAS Completion Report completed by:

Thomas Buckley, Senior Country Officer

Date: May 27, 2005

1.

This CAS Completion Report evaluates the effectiveness of the World Bank's Country

Assistance Strategy for Pakistan (FY2003-2005). It is a self-evaluation by the country team of the extent
to which expected CAS outcomes were achieved and the extent to which Bank performance was

satisfactory in helping to design and implement the CAS toward outcomes, with a view toward longer
term strategic goals. The purpose of the report is to identify the lessons relevant to the design and
implementation of the new results-based CAS. Completion of this report coincides with the completion
by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) of a Country Assistance Evaluation covering FY1994-2003
which, although it covers a different period, offers additional lessons relevant to the new CAS.
2.
This report evaluates the CAS against the outcomes established in the FY2003 CAS. The report
assesses: (i) the alignment of the CAS with Pakistan's goals and expected development results; (ii) the
degree to which CAS outcomes were achieved during the CAS period; and (iii) the Bank's performance
during this period. Since the CAS was presented to the Board in June of 2002, a CAS Progress Report
was discussed in April 2004. Progress in achieving CAS outcomes is summarized in Annex-1 while
annexes B and C compare planned and actual deliveries of lending and non-lending support over the CAS
period.

Overview
3.
From independence through the 1980s, Pakistan's economy grew at a respectable rate - always
over 5 percent after the 1950s and in the 1980s over 6 percent per year. In the 1990s, however, growth
slowed while public debt accumulated rapidly and poverty increased. The imposition of sanctions
following the 1998 nuclear tests exposed the vulnerability of the economy, leading to severe balance of
payments difficulties, spending cuts, import restrictions, tax increases and external debt service arrears.
4.

The government which assumed power in 1999 succeeded in turning this situation around;

Pakistan's macroeconomic performance has improved significantly and more rapidly than expected.
Sustained implementation of the Government's stabilization and economic reform program, along with
the generous support from the World Bank and other donors, has resulted in macroeconomic stability and
accelerating growth, laying the foundations for poverty reduction. Economic growth has increased from
the average of 3.3 per cent during 1997-2002 to the average of nearly 6 per cent during 2002-04. Against
the target of 5.3% for FY04, GDP growth was recorded at 6.4%, the highest rate in 8 years. For FY05,
despite the impact of rising oil prices, growth reached 8.4%.
5.

There has been significant progress in implementing a wide ranging program of structural

reforms with deep World Bank engagement.

The banking sector has been strengthened through

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 2 of 30
privatization, a strengthened legal and regulatory environment, and significant improvements in
transparency, corporate governance, and credit culture. There has also been progress in de-regulating the
economy so as to reduce the cost of doing business in Pakistan. The regulatory and policy framework for
the telecommunications sector has been improved to establish a competitive telecommunications market.
There has been progress in implementation of the oil and gas reform agenda, in particular in the
petroleum downstream sector. Governance reforms have continued to advance including: (i) reforms in

public financial management and public procurement to increase fiscal transparency, accountability, and
value for money; (ii) restructuring of the Central Board of Revenue to strengthen tax administration; (iii)
a devolution initiative aimed at improving the delivery of public services by creating more accountable

local governments; and (iv) reform of the civil service to improve incentives and accountability.
A.

Longer Term Strategic Goals

6.

The 2002 CAS and June 2001 CAS Progress Report reflected and supported the program which

the government had formulated starting in 1999. Soon after the military coup, the new government issued
a seven-point agenda to revive the economy, address endemic corruption, depoliticize state institutions,
devolve power to the grass-root level, and improve checks and balances and democratic processes in

society. In December 1999, following national consultations, the government announced its development
strategy which focused on: (i) strengthening governance and the integrity of the civil service; (ii) creating
opportunities through accelerating growth of agriculture, small and medium scale industries, information
technology, and oil and gas sectors; and (iii) reducing poverty through revival of growth and re-orienting
public expenditure towards human development and poverty reduction.
7.
Later, these goals became the basis of the government's Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper which was completed in November of 2001. The CAS outlined a Bank program in support of the
I-PRSP.I The I-PRSP specified five main goals: engendering growth, reforming governance, creating
income generating opportunities (specifically for the poor), improving human development, and reducing
vulnerability to shocks (at the microeconomic level). While not explicitly linked to the MDGs, the
I-PRSP was closely aligned to them. The full PRSP (discussed in greater detail below), which was
completed in December 2003, went on to make the link between the MDGs and Pakistan's poverty
strategy explicit, setting targets for poverty reduction, education, health, and gender equality that are fully

aligned with the MDGs. In addition, both the I-PRSP and the PRSP included M&E frameworks to track
progress toward the MDGs as well as intermediate indicators to guide policymakers and program
managers.
During the CAS period, the government's longer term objectives underwent a process of
8.
refinement and elaboration, but remained fundamentally unchanged. Parliamentary elections were held in
October 2002 leading to the formation of a government under the leadership of an elected Parliament and

Prime Minister. The civilian government has largely adhered to the policy priorities of the military
government. Many key ministers have remained in place and President Musharraf has continued to
exercise considerable influence on policy matters. Mr. Shaukat Aziz has remained Finance Minister
throughout the CAS period while also being elevated to Prime Minister in 2004.
9.
The PRSP prepared in December 2003 outlined a policy which continued and built upon the
I-PRSP. Pakistan's PRSP is grounded on four pillars: (i) achieving sustained high and broad-based
economic growth, focusing particularly on the rural economy, while maintaining macroeconomic stability
(ii) improving governance and consolidating devolution; (iii) investing in human capital; and (iv)
targeting the poor and vulnerable.
The I-PRSP and Joint Staff Assessment were discussed by the Board on December 4, 2001. Pakistan: Interim Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paperand Joint IDA-IMF StaffAssessment, Report 23189-PAK, November 15, 2001.

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 3 of 30

Overall, Pakistan has made substantial progress towards the longer term goals set in the I-PRSP.
10.
As outlined above, growth has resumed, macroeconomic stability has been restored, and fiscal adjustment
has been successful, creating fiscal space for increased spending on poverty-related programs.
Governance reforms were launched including the devolution initiative, financial management

improvements and tax administration reforms. Some progress has been made in each of these areas and
there are early indications of success as shown by increasing timeliness and accuracy of government
financial reporting, and improved customer satisfaction by the Central Board of Revenue. With respect to
devolution, the new devolved political structure is fully in place, but the fiscal and administrative aspects
of devolution have yet to be fully implemented creating obstacles for local governments seeking to

improve delivery of public services. There has been less progress in civil service reform. Nevertheless,
given the long term nature of governance reforms this is a respectable track record, even though in some

respects it falls short of the goals set in the CAS.
11.

Public expenditure has been reoriented toward human development, a shift made possible by a

dramatic reduction in interest expenditures brought about by successful implementation of a debt

reduction strategy. Poverty related expenditures have increased substantially, exceeding in some cases
the targets set in the I-PRSP. However, public spending on health and education remains low by
international standards and it is too early for a full assessment of whether additional expenditures have led
to significant increases in the quality and availability of services, let alone outcomes. Nevertheless, there
are examples of increased access in several areas. Improvements in the effectiveness, as well as the level,
of social spending will be necessary to reach the MDGs. Consequently, the government's governance
reform agenda is a key ingredient of a strategy for improving human development outcomes. Additional
resources have been targeted toward social safety nets, but here too the government recognizes the need

to improve the targeting and efficiency of these programs and has launched efforts, supported by the
World Bank, to do so.
B.

CAS Outcomes

12.

The CAS was designed to support Pakistan's pursuit its I-PRSP goals through a Bank program

organized around three pillars corresponding to major areas of the government's reform program: (i)

strengthening macroeconomic stability and government effectiveness; (ii) improving the business
environment for growth; and (iii) improving equity through support for pro-poor and pro-gender equity
policies. For each of these pillars, a set of country outcomes and associated indicators or milestones were

identified in the CAS program matrix. The CAS triggers also included specific performance criteria for
assessing progress in the main areas of the CAS.
The results framework established in the 2003 CAS program matrix has some weaknesses when
13.
compared to the approach now developed for use in a results based CAS. Some objectives, such as
improved performance of CBR lack specificity, although milestones in the CBR reform program are
reflected in the CAS and these are expected to lead to improved performance. Other objectives, such as
higher private investment represent longer term country goals and don't have a clear link to the CAS
program, representing instead a medium-term outcome expected to come about as the result of the overall
government reform program to strengthen the environment for private sector investment. In some cases,

performance indicators were identified without baselines or targets. Nevertheless, despite these
limitations, the CAS and its program matrix together present an adequate monitoring and evaluation
framework for assessing progress toward CAS outcomes. The CAS Progress Report updated the program
matrix and assessed progress against the objectives in the program matrix as well as the CAS triggers.
Progress in achieving CAS objectives is discussed in the following sections.

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 4 of 30

MACROECONOMIC STABILITY AND GOVERNMENT EFFECTIVENESS
14.

This pillar of the CAS embodied two key elements of the I-PRSP: consolidating recovery from

the macroeconomic crisis of the late 1990's while reversing the long term deterioration in governance.

The I-PRSP and CAS were based on two premises: first, the economic growth essential for poverty
reduction required in the first instance correction of macroeconomic imbalances and maintenance of a
sound macroeconomic framework. Second, that low growth and rising poverty were in part a reflection
of poor governance requiring concerted efforts to improve government performance and restore
confidence in state institutions.

Macroeconomic Stability
15.
Upon coming to power in 1999, the Musharraf government moved quickly to stabilize the
economy and restore confidence. By the time of the 2002 CAS, considerable progress has been made and
for the first time in its history Pakistan had successfully concluded an IMF Stand-by arrangement.
Nevertheless, the macroeconomic situation remained perilous and the outlook was made more uncertain

by the impact of 9/11. The I-PRSP set targets for further fiscal consolidation, accelerating growth, and
management of debt. The CAS incorporated these targets as well as the targets in the PRGF arrangement
with the IMF. Overall, progress has been impressive, particularly with respect to restoration of growth
(see table 1). With respect to the PRGF program, targets were mostly met or exceeded and structural
reforms measures were largely followed through, though in some cases with delays. 2 All PRGF
disbursements were made available upon completion of program reviews although the authorities elected
not to draw the final tranche in light of the improved external position.
Table 1: Key Indicators: I-PRSP vs. Actual
Real GDP Growth

I-PRSP Target
Actual/proj.
Inflation
I-PRSP Target
Actual/proj.
Budget Balance (excl. grants) I-PRSP Target
Actual/proj.
Development Expenditure
I-PRSP Target
Actual/proj.
PRSP Expenditure
I-PRSP Target
*

2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
2.7
3.7
5.0
5.3
5.8
2.2
3.4
5.1
6.4
8.4
4.4
5.0
5.0
4.0
4.0
4.4
2.5
3.1
4.6
9.3
-3.9
-5.3
-4.1
-3.2
-5.2
-5.2
-6.7
-4.6
-2.9
-4.1
3.9
4.1
2.7
3.4
3.6
2.6
3.5
3.2
3.6
4.3
3.4
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.2

Actual/proj.
3.6
3.7
4.2
For comparability with I-PRSP targets, figures above do not reflect 2005 GDP re-basing.

4.7

4.7

16.
The instruments employed to support Pakistan's stabilization program consisted of a series of
one-tranche development policy credits to the federal and provincial governments. These supported
policy reforms while assisting in the restoration of financial equilibrium. This strategy was carried out in
partnership with the IMF which took the lead in assisting in the adoption of supportive monetary and
exchange rate policies. A 3-year PRGF arrangement was approved in November 2001 and concluded in
December 2004. Other donors also provided significant budget support. The Bank development policy
lending program constituted a multi-year commitment of budget support tied to fiscal and governance
reforms keyed to the pillars of the I-PRSP. The first of these, SAC I, was approved in 2001 while the
2 IMF,

StaffReport for the 2004 Article IV Consultations,Ninth Review Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility, and Requestfor Waiver ofPerformance Criteria,November 16, 2004

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 5 of 30

second, SAC II was approved along with the CAS in June of 2002. SAC III, which was expected to be
approved in FY03, was delayed as a result of a slowdown the reform program following the elections and
political transition in late 2002. Reform accelerated in 2003 and 2004 opening the way for resumption of

development policy lending which came in the form of a Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC I)
which was approved in September 2004.
17.
The CAS recognized that there were acute fiscal imbalances at the provincial as well as the
national level. The provinces and local governments in Pakistan bear most of the responsibility for
delivering public services including education and health, but have very limited fiscal space to provide

these services. Therefore, the CAS initiated a program of single tranche development policy credits to
provide performance-based budget support to enable the provinces restore financial equilibrium while
undertaking reforms. The resources provided an immediate means to address the imbalance between the

provinces' responsibilities and their fiscal capacity while the fiscal management reforms supported under
these credits were designed to improve fiscal sustainability through increased revenue mobilization at the
provincial level. The provincial credits also supported governance reforms and service delivery
improvements to address the governance problems that historically limited the effectiveness of spending
increases.

A first round of provincial development policy credits-for Sindh and NWFP-was approved in
18.
FY03. As in the case of the federal government, the elections in 2002 and resulting political transitions
slowed implementation of the provinces' reform programs. As a result, planned follow-on credits were
delayed. In the case of NWFP, a second NWFP credit was approved in June 2004. A principal objective
in the CAS for provincial development policy lending was to restore the provinces fiscal space and allow
them to increase spending on social services by undertaking reforms. In this respect, the provincial SACs
were effective, allowing the provinces to re-profile their debt and reduce interest costs while re-orienting
expenditures, including very large increases in development spending on education and health. As a
result the government of NWFP has been able to increase the share of PRSP spending from 29% to 38%.
Provincial tax revenue has grown by 14%. In Sindh, the SAC-supported provincial reform program
resulted in substantial increases in provincial revenues and development spending as well as an increased
share in the budget for health and education. However, given the provinces' overwhelming reliance on
fiscal transfers from the federation, sustainability of these fiscal reforms and maintenance of adequate

fiscal space at the provincial level depends in large part on the (still pending) outcome of the National
Finance Commission which will establish the formula for allocating federal revenues among the
provinces and federal government.

19.
The development policy lending program was complemented by policy dialogue and economic
and sector work. The CAS was based on a Development Policy Review, a Poverty Assessment, and a
Country Procurement Assessment. During the CAS period the Bank completed work on a Public
Expenditure Review, Country Financial Accountability Assessment and an FSAP and the Bank annually
conducted reviews of the Government's Public Sector investment program. A series of trade policy notes
was prepared during FY04. The Bank also worked closely with the Fund, providing advice and technical
support in the implementation of the I-PRSP/PRSP program.
Governance Reforms
20.
The Bank's support for improving the effectiveness and accountability of state institutions
focused on the following areas: (i) reforms in public financial management and procurement to increase
fiscal transparency and accountability; (ii) restructuring of the Central Board of Revenue to strengthen tax
administration; (iii) a devolution initiative aimed at improving the delivery of public services by creating
more accountable local governments; and (iv) civil service reforms.

The specific CAS outcomes

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 6 of30
supported by the Bank took the form of milestones in the institutional reform processes as well as, in
some cases, indicators of improved performance.
21.
In public financial management and procurement, the focus of the CAS was on improvements
in government accounting, auditing, and legislative oversight along with the adoption and implementation
of modern public procurement laws and regulations. The strategy was to assist in modernization and
computerization of the government accounting system coupled with strengthening of the audit function
and revitalization of the external oversight process. The centerpiece of the Bank's support was the

Project to Improve Financial Reporting and Auditing (PIFRA) which was approved in FY97 and closed in
FY05. SAC II and PRSC I also supported these reforms with prior actions related to expenditure
reconciliation targets and establishment of the Federal Public Accounts Committees as well as the
notification of new Public Procurement Rules. Non-lending assistance took the form of policy dialogue, a
Country Financial Accountability Assessment, and provincial financial accountability assessments for the

Sindh, NWFP and Punjab provinces.
22.

Overall, there was steady advance in the government's financial management reform program.

The CAS Progress Report described substantial progress as demonstrated by improvements in timeliness
and reliability of financial statements as well as progress in launching of computerized accounting sites

under PIFRA. The CAS Progress Report also described improvements in the timeliness of audits, the
launch of an Annual Audit Program, and recruitment of qualified auditors to develop district level
auditing capacity. Nevertheless, in several areas progress fell short of the benchmarks set in the CAS.
The CAS targeted extension of PIFRA reforms to the district level which ultimately was delayed as
overall PIFRA implementation proved slower than anticipated, with PIFRA reforms extended to 30 of a

planned 56 districts. Full Roll-out of PIFRA systems to the district level will be completed in the next
generation PIFRA II project which will be approved in FY06. The CAS also set an ambitious target for
the public accounts committees to eliminate the backlog of unreviewed audit reports and remain current

in the review of audits under the new government. This could not be achieved as a result of delays in
reconstituting the PACs following the October 2002 elections. In procurement, adoption of new
procurement rules did not take place until July 2004 and implementation remains a concern.

23.
The CAS identified improvements in tax administration as critical for improving the business
climate and enhancing revenue mobilization. The government's two-pronged strategy-approved in
November 2002--called for changes in tax policy coupled with tax administration reform to improve the
efficiency of tax collection. Both the Bank and the Fund provided advice on tax policy reforms supported
through policy lending and PRGF performance benchmarks. The CAS also targeted Bank support toward
the restructuring of the Central Board of Revenue over a three-year period. CAS outcomes were keyed to

achievement of key milestones in this process, including organizational changes, adoption of revised HR
policies, and measures to increase transparency. The Bank supported the CBR reform process through
both development policy and investment lending. Approval of the reform program was a prior action
under SAC II and the Bank financed preparation of the detailed reform program, leading to approval of
the Tax Administration Reform project in December 2004. Additional support to CBR was also provided
under the Public Sector Capacity Building TA project.
24.
The restructuring program for the Central Board of Revenue (CBR) progressed well during the
CAS, although more slowly than anticipated. A new recruitment policy has been put in place for key staff
in order to attract specific skills while incentive and merit based remuneration and promotion mechanisms
have been adopted on a pilot basis. The improved organization structure for tax collection has been
piloted in the form of a Large Taxpayers Unit and a Medium Taxpayer Unit and similar pilots are
underway in the area of customs administration and sales tax. Performance indicators including revenue

targets and changes in policies are published on a quarterly basis and are also available on the CBR
website. While some measures to broaden the tax base were implemented, including the withdrawal of

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 7 of 30
tax exemptions and extension of sales tax to additional categories, a significant widening of the tax base
has yet to be accomplished and the revenue-to-GDP ratio remains low by international standards.
25.
Pakistan's devolution initiative is an integral part of the GOP's strategy for improving service
delivery by making the public sector more accountable to citizens and more efficient at delivering basic

services. The Bank supported devolution by providing analytical support focused on areas where the
Bank had a comparative advantage; a number of Pakistan's development partners were also supporting
the devolution program.

The targeted outcomes related to devolution represented key milestones in

implementing the initiative, especially those that affected the ability of the districts to deliver public
services. These included promulgation of Provincial Finance Commission awards transferring resources
to districts, and implementation of capacity building programs at the district level. Provincial DPLs
targeted fiscal reforms designed to increase resources for basic service delivery.
26.

A major ESW report on devolution was completed in FY04 which outlined the progress and

remaining challenges facing

Pakistan in implementing its devolution strategy.

The provincial

development policy credits for NWFP and Sindh (3 of the planned 6 operations were approved) included
prior actions related to enhanced transfers of resources and responsibilities to district governments
through formula-based provincial finance commission awards. Assistance in financial management

improvements through PIFRA and development policy lending also aimed at strengthening local
government capacity. By providing performance-based conditional grants to district governments willing

to commit to reforms in education, the Punjab Education Sector Adjustment Credits (approved in FY04
and FY05) also served as a means of helping to increase financing for local government delivery of

education.
27.
The CAS Progress Report reported that Pakistan's progress in implementing devolution was
substantial with respect to putting in place the new local government political structure. However local
government autonomy, both financial and managerial remains limited.

District governments face

significant obstacles caused by incomplete administrative and fiscal devolution as well as severe capacity
constraints. In some cases these constraints are exacerbated by political rivalries.

28.

Civil Service Reform.

The I-PRSP recognized the importance of improving the quality of the

civil service in order to increase the effectiveness of its poverty reduction programs and set out an agenda
of restructuring, recruitment reform, enhanced training, and pay and pension reform. The CAS outcomes

for civil service reform were to (i) strengthen merit recruitment and promotion; (ii) launch pay and
pension reforms; (iii) implement a civil service training plan; and (iv) improve the composition of the

workforce which is highly skewed toward lower grades. The instruments to support civil service reform
were the federal and provincial development policy operations which supported recruitment and pay and

pension reforms. In addition, the Public Sector Capacity Building (PSCB) TA project is financing civil
service professional development and capacity building in key agencies, ministries, and regulatory bodies.
29.
The government has made some progress in implementing these reforms. The Federal and
provincial public service commissions (responsible for civil service recruitment) have been strengthened
and changes in the promotion system have been introduced to make evaluations more objective, increase
transparency in promotion, and to link promotion to higher grades to required training. Pay reforms were

instituted in January 2002 which restored about 75 percent of the lost purchasing power of wages (which
had not been increased since 1994) and introduced important structural reforms in pension and pay scales.
Further pay increases were implemented in July 2003 and July 2004 in the form of interim across-theboard salary increases.

This has improved compensation somewhat but the wage structure remains

severely compressed. The compression ratio (of top to bottom salaries) is 1:10. It was 1:46 in the 1960's.
As a result, the higher echelons of public servants have significantly lower compensation than
comparators, making it difficult to recruit high-caliber staff. Options for further pay reforms designed to

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 8 of 30
tighten the link between compensation and responsibility are under discussion as are proposals for
structural changes in the civil service. Civil service training is being revamped under the PSCB project,
but this process is still at an early stage. There has been a modest improvement in the ratio of
professional to support staff. Taken together, these reforms represent a promising start, but are only the

beginning of the more far reaching reforms needed to address the challenge of developing a strong civil
service in Pakistan.
Assessment/Lessons Learned
30.

In retrospect, the mix of instruments in the CAS was appropriate to support the reform program in

this pillar of the CAS.

The use of development policy operation supported both macroeconomic

stabilization and a broad array of structural reforms targeting the key weaknesses in government

effectiveness. The government's macro strategy called for rapid fiscal adjustment; sizable external
financing on concessional terms was a key ingredient in its debt reduction strategy, allowing it to reprofile high interest debt. Given the severity of the debt problem, this emphasis was appropriate.
Complementary investment lending was used when government reforms had progressed sufficiently and
where targeted assistance was needed to reinforce reforms. Investment lending advanced institutional
modernization and capacity strengthening, as in the case of public financial management, (PIFRA) tax
administration reform (Tax Administration Reform Project) and government capacity building (Public

Sector Capacity Building TA). The use of a series of single tranche operations was appropriate to take
into account Pakistan's uneven track record and the uncertain political and security environment, enabling

the Bank to match its support to the pace of the reform program - when the pace of reforms slowed, so
did Bank financial support.
With respect to macroeconomic stabilization, the government reform program, supported by the
31.
Bank, the IMF and other donors effectively supported the government reform program and made
significant progress with respect to engendering growth. Improvements under SAC II and PRSC I include
a continued acceleration in growth, from 3.1% in FY01/02 to over 8% in FYO4/05, and major
improvements in the fiscal and current accounts. Fiscal outcomes improved significantly in FY03 and
FY04. The fiscal deficit fell from 6.7% of GDP in FY02 to 4.6% of GDP in FY03, falling below 5% for
the first time in more than 25 years. It fell further to less than 3% of GDP in FY04 despite continued low
levels of revenue mobilization and high losses by public sector enterprises before rising to 4.1% in FY05.
Pakistan's debt service burden has fallen significantly from 34% of export earnings in 2001/2002 to 25%
in 2004/05. With respect to governance, results have been more modest; the government has launched
ambitious reforms in tax administration and devolution, but implementation has been slower than
expected and the expected results are not likely to be seen until the next CAS. Implementation of
ongoing financial management reforms was also delayed.
32.

Exogenous factors had significant impacts, both positive and negative, on the achievement of

CAS objectives under this pillar. Throughout the CAS period, security concerns were prominent as a
result of events both inside and outside of Pakistan including the war in Afghanistan and its effects, the
war in Iraq, and the confrontation with India in 2002. On the negative side, risk perceptions and
increased defense expenditures were a negative factor for the investment climate and fiscal balance, while
rising oil prices put significant pressure on the budget and balance of payments. On the positive side,
Pakistan's geopolitical role led to increased grant aid, debt restructuring on highly concessional terms,
and expanded textile quotas. The post-9/1 1 tightening of money-laundering regulations resulted in largescale repatriation of holdings abroad and growing remittances, accelerating the accumulation of reserves.
The growing rapprochement with India, beginning in 2003, has greatly reduced tensions and over the
longer term holds the prospect for increased trade and economic integration.

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 9 of 30
Pakistan's performance contributed significantly to meeting CAS objectives. As reported in the
33.
CAS Progress Report, Pakistan's performance in implementing reforms put it in the high case and the
macroeconomic turnaround was dramatic. On governance reforms, there were areas where the pace was
slow such as in financial management, procurement and civil service reform. In some cases this reflected
challenges in implementing a complex modernization and reform program while in others, proposed

reforms faced formidable institutional and political obstacles, making the pace of change foreseen in the
CAS too optimistic.
STRENGTHENING THE ENABLING INVESTMENT CLIMATE
34.

This pillar of the CAS was aligned with the I-PRSP which emphasized the importance of creating

a favorable environment for trade and investment. The PRSP continued this emphasis, outlining
measures to deregulate and open additional sectors to private sector activity and competition while
increasing public sector investment, for example to address infrastructure bottlenecks. The CAS was

designed to support the achievement of the following objectives: (i) improving the incentive and
regulatory regime, (ii) privatization, (iii) financial sector reform, and (iv) accelerating rural growth. CAS
performance benchmarks related to adoption of measures to modernize trade and industrial regulations
and enforcement practices; complete selected privatization transactions; undertake reforms in power, oil,
gas and transport; and implement reforms in water management and irrigation. The CAS also targeted

improvements in related indicators such as growth in FDI, trade, and private investment, although
baselines and specific levels were not targeted.
35.

These outcomes were supported through development policy lending at both national and

provincial levels as well as investment lending and AAA. SAC II and PRSC I supported actions in
privatization, adoption of trade and regulatory reforms, and reforms in power, oil and gas. The provincial
adjustment credits also set targets for the adoption of regulatory and other reforms designed to improve
the business climate for growth in Sindh and NWFP. Banking Sector reforms were financed with
development policy lending and investment lending including the Banking Sector Restructuring and
Privatization project, the Technical Assistance to the Banking Sector project and the Banking Sector
Development Policy Credit. In infrastructure, the Ghazi Barotha Hydropower project and the
Telecommunications Regulation and Privatization Support Project were completed and closed during the
CAS period while the National Highways Rehabilitation project was approved in FY04. AAA support
included an Investment Climate Assessment and the Doing Business surveys, as well as policy dialogue
and IDF support to the Committee on Reforms in Regulatory Legal and Policy Environment. A Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) report was prepared in FY04. In trade, the Trade and Transport
Facilitation Project (FY01) was completed while trade policy notes were prepared in FY04 and FY05.
36.

With respect to rural growth, the CAS strategy was to target next generation reforms to address

the unequal opportunity and capacity to access assets and markets - land, water, credit, technology and
output markets. The instruments to support these reforms included both lending and AAA. Lending in
water and irrigation consisted of the National Drainage Program project (FY98-05) and On Farm Water

Management projects in NWFP (FY01) and Sindh (FY04). PRSC I also supported agriculture and water
sector reforms including further liberalization of wheat and sugar markets and further development of
national water and drainage policies. Ongoing policy dialogue was supplemented by ESW reports on
Rural Factor Markets and a Water CAS. The Public Expenditure Review also dealt extensively with
irrigation and water issues. A planned Rural Development Policy Review originally planned for FY03 is
now planned in FY06.

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 10 of 30
Incentive and Regulatory Environment
37.
The Government implemented a range of measures to improve the incentive and regulatory
environment. A number of laws and regulations governing industrial relations were consolidated and

promulgated in the Industrial Relation Ordinance 2002. In addition, the Drug Act 1976, long considered
to be a deterrent to the healthy development of a pharmaceutical industry, was revised with input from

stakeholders and promulgated as the Drugs Ordinance 2002. Additional reform of laws concerning
industrial relations and labor protection is also proceeding and revised legislation is expected to be
presented in 2006 including: (i) Amendment to Industrial Relations Ordinance 2002; (ii) Conditions of
Employment Act; (iii) Wages Act; (iv) Occupational Safety and Health Act; (v) Human Resource
Development & Control of Employment Act; and (vi) Labor Welfare and Social Security Act. Reforms to
business registration procedures were undertaken in 2002 cutting the time for business start-up by more

than half, from 53 to 22 days while provincial authorities in Sindh and NWFP reformed factory and
business inspections to reduce harassment.
38.

In trade, the CAS targeted increased exports, lower levels of effective protection and improved

trade facilitation. Pakistan is one of the more open countries in South Asia. The maximum tariff rate is
25% and the number of tariff bands is four. The Government has eliminated quantitative restrictions,

regulatory duties, para-tariffs, and several other measures that restricted trade in the past (with the
exception of trade with India). During the CAS period, the government sustained the momentum of tariff
reductions and weighted average tariffs continued to decrease from 14.2% to 13.4%. Agriculture has the
lowest tariff rates in the region (13.1 %, down from 13.9% last year). In the FY05 budget, duties on cars
were reduced from the range of 75%-150% to 50%-100%. The Trade and Transport Facilitation Project
was completed satisfactorily in 2005, having contributed toward bringing Pakistan's traditional trade and
transport practices in line with international best practices.

39.
FinancialSector Reforms. The FSAP conducted in FY04 concluded that banking sector reforms
have been effectively implemented and have significantly improved the soundness and efficiency of the
financial system by reducing state intervention and improving the environment for banking. Privatization
of large state-owned banks during the CAS period (Habib Bank and United Bank Limited) substantially
changed the structure of the banking sector and nearly 80 percent of sector assets are now controlled by

private banks as compared with 34 percent in 1999, and just 8 percent in 1990. As a result access to
finance has improved and credit to the private sector has witnessed significant growth during the past
three years. Last year alone private sector credit showed an increase of over 30 percent. A large part of
the success of the reforms stems from the improved legal and regulatory framework and enhanced
corporate governance as a result of the reduced role of the government and the enhanced role and capacity

of the regulators, especially the State Bank of Pakistan which is being supported through the Banking
Sector TA loan (FY03). Profitability and liquidity indicators for the commercial banks have shown a
marked improvement. The banking sector has also become considerably more competitive and
responsive. Efforts by the SBP are also underway to further strengthen the payment system to enhance its
transparency and efficiency.
40.
Power Sector Reforms. The CAS made improvement in the performance of the state-owned
power sector a major focus. In part this reflected recognition that Pakistan needed expanded, more
reliable supplies of power at reasonable costs to support its growth objectives. At the same the sector's
considerable drain on the budget was seen as a threat to successful fiscal adjustment. In coordination with
the Fund PRGF program, SAC II supported sector reforms and set targets under a financial improvement
plan. However, progress in improving the financial performance of the main power utilities, WAPDA
and KESC, fell short of expectations. The financial improvement plan agreed under SAC II was not fully
implemented as the tariff increase approved was smaller than forecast and electricity rates were

subsequently reduced despite continued high losses. Moreover, little progress was made in reducing

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 11 of 30
public sector arrears and technical losses. Nevertheless, the program achieved a number of positive steps,
particularly in laying the groundwork for the corporatization and eventual privatization of the sector. In
addition, a top priority-the privatization of KESC-has moved ahead with successful bidding in January

of 2005.
41.

Reforms in infrastructure. The I-PRSP and PRSP identified telecommunications reform as a key

element of the reform program because of its linkages to other sectors. Progress in reforms has been
strong, emphasizing enhanced competition within a supportive regulatory framework. In January of 2004,
Pakistan de-regulated the sector, allowing free entry of new fixed-line private operators to compete with

the state-owned Pakistan Telecommunications Company Limited (PTCL). PTCL was privatized in 2005.
A new mobile telephone policy was also been approved to introduce further competition and additional
cell phone licenses have been issued under a competitive bidding process.
42.

Progress in implementation of the reform agenda in oil and gas was mixed as the Government's

success in privatizing state-owned assets, increasing supplies, and improving regulation was offset by

inability to adjust consumer prices as foreseen in the CAS.

In FY05 the Government temporarily

suspended its policy of automatic fortnightly petroleum price adjustments based on global oil prices, a
setback which had a significant cost to the budget. Even though overall gas tariff collections met policy

goals, implementation of the six-monthly gas price adjustment mechanism was also inconsistent and the
government did not make progress in rationalizing the abnormally low gas tariffs maintained for the
fertilizer industry.

Accelerating Rural Growth
43.
There was only incremental progress in achieving the CAS outcomes targeted in this area, namely
improved land and water markets and improved efficiency of institutions in irrigation and drainage.
Moreover, agricultural growth has been disappointing, averaging 1.7 percent per annum during the last
seven years, though this is in large part attributable to drought; with favorable weather conditions, FY05
agricultural growth rebounded strongly, reaching 7.5%. The National Drainage Program (NDP) was the
centerpiece of Bank projects to support implementation of institutional reforms in water, including
decentralization and management transfer of irrigation and drainage systems in the Provinces. The NWPF
On-Farm Water Management project (approved in FY01) and the Sindh On-Farm Water Management
project (approved in FY04) also targeted enhanced water management and agricultural productivity
through improved governance and investment in secondary and tertiary irrigation infrastructure.
Implementation of the Sindh On-Farm Water Management project is in its earliest stages, progress in

implementation of the NWFP On-Farm Water Management project has been slow.
44.
Relative to its stated objectives and program targets the achievements of NDP were disappointing
and its overall performance unsatisfactory, although there is now much greater ownership for its reform
objectives. Notwithstanding its overall unsatisfactory rating, the project yielded several positive
outcomes. First it helped clear the backlog of deferred maintenance of the existing irrigation and drainage
system. Second although the institutional reform component has had mixed performance, the need,
strategy, and decision to carry out the reforms have been endorsed at the highest levels of the GOP and
Provinces. Third it was instrumental in the completion of key policy and sector studies that have paved
the way for introduction of a National Water Policy and a drainage sector strategy for the country. Fourth
the project improved the knowledge base by financing research, learning and international advice. Fifth,
the project organized 223 farmer organizations covering an area of approximately 2 million hectares in
which farmers are now responsible for the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system. Finally the
project provided the studies, technical discussions, and the general forum for the discussion of long-term
options for the sustainable development of the Indus river basin and as a consequence has raised
awareness of the importance of sound environmental planning and management.

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 12 of30

Assessment/Lessons Learned

The mix of lending and non-lending activities for this pillar of the CAS was satisfactory and
45.
contributed to the achievement of some of the outcomes sought. Policy dialogue and AAA were
successful in helping the government to refine and articulate its reform vision and contributed to the
adoption of a variety of measures. In particular, the use of development policy lending was well suited to
supporting the very wide range of reforms that the Government of Pakistan was trying to implement.

Development policy lending also provided financial incentives to undertake reforms and helped reformers
advance their agenda within Pakistan. In areas where results fell short of expectations as in the power
sector and in irrigation, the reforms sought were perhaps overly ambitious and resistance to adopting them
was underestimated. An additional challenge, relevant to the water sector, was the difficulty in

implementing a national level program in an area of provincial responsibility and where the provinces
have adopted alternative approaches.

However, as noted by IEG with respect to the FY94-03 period, the range of activities in the rural
46.
sector could have been broader. The Bank's agenda for rural growth was limited mainly to policy
dialogue on removing distortions in pricing trade and taxes (most of which had been removed by 2002)

and work on reforming the irrigation system.

Consequently there was a lack of strategic focus on

agriculture and therefore key constraints to agricultural growth were not addressed.

Exogenous factors played an important role in determining CAS outcomes. Drought conditions
47.
which prevailed during 2000-2002 reduced agricultural output while significantly worsening the financial
situation of the power sector due to the need to import oil to make up for diminished hydropower

availability. The rapid run-up in oil prices in 2004 clearly made it difficult for the government to
continue to implement the oil pricing policy as originally envisioned.
Borrower performance in the Investment Climate pillar was generally satisfactory with a few
48.
exceptions. The Government's reform program was high quality and had the attention and support of the
President, Prime Minister (once in place) and Finance Minister. Significant achievements were made in
implementing reforms-particularly in the financial sector-and their impact in terms of increased
exports and investment is now apparent. However, it is likely that these early results are in large part the
result of the macroeconomic turnaround rather structural reforms. Further, second generation reforms,

will be needed to maintain higher rates of growth and investment.
49.
In some areas the pace of reform did not match the timelines envisioned in the CAS. This was
principally due to an overall slowdown following the elections of 2002 and the lengthy transition
thereafter. There were also delays in implementing investment projects, for example NDP. In some areas,
particularly energy pricing, the Government found itself unable to carry out pricing measures that turned
out to be more politically difficult than anticipated. In addition, some of the assumptions behind the
government's reform program (for example with respect to reducing technical losses in the power sector)
proved unrealistic. Nevertheless, in view of the accomplishments, the summary judgment is that
borrower performance was satisfactory.
SUPPORTING PRO-POOR AND PRO-GENDER EQUITY POLICIES
This pillar of the CAS reflected two elements of the I-PRSP and later the PRSP: (i) investing in
50.
human capital, and (ii) targeting the poor and the vulnerable. Recognizing the urgency of addressing the
challenge posed by Pakistan's lagging social indicators, the I-PRSP outlined a strategy for improving
delivery of health and education services through a combination of additional expenditure and improved
governance to increase the effectiveness of social sector spending. The PRSP maintained this emphasis,

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 13 of 30
noting that without considerable improvement in social indicators, including for women, Pakistan will be
unable to sustain growth and poverty reduction. Since health and education are primarily sub-national
concerns, with the bulk of expenditure taking place at lower levels of government, the GoP's devolution
strategy represented the core policy action to address weaknesses in governance and improve the
effectiveness of spending. At the same time, the provincial governments implemented other measures to
strengthen management while scaling up promising approaches in health and education.

51.
The Bank's strategy in Education was to support implementation of the Government's Education
Sector Reform (ESR) program which was designed to improve access to and quality of education through
investments in: (i) infrastructure; (ii) curriculum and textbook revision; (iii) teacher training; and (iv)
establishment of a national education assessment system. The CAS aimed at a few intermediate outcomes
including meeting the I-PRSP targets for increased expenditure on education, successful transition to
district based delivery of education, and launching of the National Education Assessment System
(NEAS), a sample-based national assessment of student learning, with standardized tests conducted at

grades 4 and 8. The CAS indicated that these intermediate outcomes were intended to move Pakistan
toward the MDG goal of universal primary education by 2015 with a goal of reducing the gender gaps in
primary and secondary education by 2005. The latter goal was not met and no intermediate target was set
for primary education outcomes.
52.

The Bank program targeted both the federal and provincial governments recognizing their

respective roles and responsibilities. At the federal level, engagement focused on supporting increased
education expenditure in line with the I-PRSP and launching of the NEAS. Initially, the broad-based
provincial DPLs in NWFP and Sindh were key instruments to support the provinces' education reform

programs by opening up fiscal space at the provincial level to increase financing while supporting the
implementation of reforms. However, the CAS also envisioned a more targeted instrument in the form of
sector adjustment lending. This took the form of the Punjab Education Reform DPC, the first in a series
of one-tranche education DPCs which was delivered in FY04 and which also supported devolution by
strengthening incentives for improved service delivery at the local government level. A second credit was
approved in FY05. The Northern Education project (approved in FY98) closed in FY04. The AAA
program in support of education included a study of public and private partnerships in education and an
MDG assessment, outlining the critical constraints and strategies for achieving the MDGs in Pakistan.
53.
The CAS outcomes targeted for education were partly achieved. Financing for education has
increased in line with I-PRSP targets with consolidated federal and provincial education spending rising
from 1.5 percent of GDP in FY2001/02 to 1.8 percent of GDP in FY2003/04. The FY05 education sector
allocations in the budget are consistent with the PRSP targets at 2.1% of GDP. The NEAS initiative was
launched with Bank support in the form of a TA loan approved in FY03 and pilot testing of Grade 4
students in Language and Mathematics was conducted throughout the country in April 2004, although
overall the NEAS project is behind schedule.
54.

At the provincial level, reforms have moved forward at different speeds in the various provinces.

In Sindh and NWFP a variety of education initiatives were supported through the provincial DPCs.
Despite delays in follow-on rounds of these loans, budget allocations for education have been increased,
additional teachers recruited, facilities rationalized and enrolments have increased. In Punjab, most
targets under the education reform program have been exceeded. Education spending in FY04 was in line
with program targets and the FY05 budget projects a further 15% increase. Free textbooks were
distributed on time to 90% of primary school students and approximately 175,000 girls have received
regular installment of monthly stipends to encourage retention and to increase enrolments in elementary

grades. Preliminary school census data suggests significant increases in enrollments during the first year
of the program.

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 14 of30
55.
Pakistan continues to make progress in improving key health and population outcomes, but the
pace of progress has been slow. The health status of Pakistan's population remains well below countries
in the region with similar or lower levels of income. The fertility rate remains much higher than its South
Asian neighbors and a serious impediment to sustained economic growth. The PRSP recognizes the need
to further increase financing and enhance the efficiency of spending and calls for the doubling of
resources for the health sector over the next three years. The Government's priorities in health are to
strengthen public health programs-immunization, communicable diseases, maternal and child health and

family planning-while improving the quality of care at district and sub-district hospitals.
56.
The CAS outcomes related to health included strengthening of key public health programs
including Lady Health Workers, tuberculosis control, the Expanded Program of Immunization, polio
eradication, malaria control, HIV/AIDS, and family planning and reproductive health. In line with the
I-PRSP, increased expenditure on health was targeted along with an increased share of non-salary

expenditures. Indicators to measure improved service delivery included increases in the percent of births
attended by trained providers, access to Lady Health Workers, coverage of pre-natal care, contraceptive
prevalence, and immunization coverage. Country outcome indicators for reductions in infant and child

mortality and total fertility were drawn from the I-PRSP.
The Bank's strategy in health was to support reforms in health through a combination of
57.
development policy and investment lending as well as AAA. Both SAC II and PRSC I included actions
related to increasing expenditure on health while implementing reforms to increase the effectiveness of

spending, including expanding service delivery through NGOs and developing demand side interventions.
Similarly, the provincial DPLs in Sindh and NWFP targeted increased health spending and improved
management of health care facilities. An HIV/AIDS project was approved in FY03. Under an innovative
partnership with the Gates Foundation, an IDA credit of $20 million was approved in FY03 to finance
polio vaccine procurement for use in subsequent rounds of vaccination aimed at eradicating polio in
Pakistan by 2005. Supplemental funding of $21 million was approved in FY05. AAA instruments
included the MDG Assessment and a report on the public health surveillance system to assist in the
development and implementation of a Public Health Surveillance and Response System.
The CAS outcomes targeted in the area of health were only partly achieved. Public health
58.
expenditures have increased, but not as rapidly as foreseen in the PRSP.
Consolidated health
expenditures have increased by 18% from Rs 22.4 billion in FY03 to 26.6 billion in FY04. However, as a
percentage of GDP expenditures (using old GDP numbers) are estimated to have increased from 0.56% in
FY03 to 0.59% in FY04, well short of the target of at least 0.7% of the GDP set in the PRSP.
Strengthening of the immunization program for children has been launched and immunization coverage

for children has increased from 49 percent in (1998/99) to 77 percent in (2004/05). Good progress was
made towards polio eradication through supplemental immunization campaigns with the number of polio
cases decreasing from 119 in 2001 to 53 in 2004. In 2005, only nineteen cases were reported through
September. Pakistan has made significant progress in expanding TB DOTS program to 93% of the
population with treatment success rate of 78%. However, the TB case detection rate is only 43%,
indicating the need for enhancing demand for services. The Lady Health Workers (LHW) Program has
been expanded to 92,000 LHWs, covering 56% of the population against a target of 70% mainly in rural
areas. It is apparent that the program is having an effect on some important indicators but there is still
significant room for improvement in many important areas, such as immunization and family planning.
The national HIV/AIDS control program was launched in 2004. The Government has started to contract
NGO to provide services to vulnerable populations; however the process has experienced delay.
59.
Pro-Poor Targeted Programs. Targeting the poor and the vulnerable was an integral pillar of the
I-PRSP and remains so in the full PRSP. The government's strategy was based primarily on expansion of
safety net programs such as microfinance, public works programs, and transfer programs like Zakat and

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 15 of 30
food support. The PRSP recognized the need to improve the targeting and delivery of these cash and
in-kind benefit and other poverty alleviation programs in order to increase their coverage and reduce the
leakage of benefits. The CAS also aimed to bring about strengthened governance and improved delivery
of basic infrastructure services at the local level along with a deepening of the rural asset base. No
specific indicators were identified for assessing progress in achieving these outcomes.

60.

The CAS focused the Bank's role in this area toward a strategy of directly targeting rural poverty

through rural community-based infrastructure projects and micro-credit, building on approaches which
had been introduced in the previous CAS. At the same time, SAC II and PRSC I supported measures to
scale up and strengthen existing safety net programs. The NWFP Community Infrastructure Project was

underway at the time the CAS was prepared and a follow-on project was approved in FY04. The AJK
Community Infrastructure Project (CIP) was approved in early FY03. Similarly, the Pakistan Poverty
Alleviation Fund project was underway and a $238 million credit was approved in FY04 to extend
additional support to this highly successful project which supports NGO-implemented infrastructure and
micro-credit schemes. To help the government develop a strategy for strengthening safety net programs,

the Bank prepared a detailed study of existing programs proposing reforms to improve their effectiveness
and targeting, as well as enhancing the monitoring and evaluation of programs.

The outcomes in this area of the CAS are being achieved, though in some cases more slowly than
61.
anticipated. To date, the PPAF has surpassed most project targets and its poverty reduction programs
have helped more than 2 million poor in all four provinces, extending loans to 122 thousand clients with
an estimated average recovery rate of around 95 percent. Implementation of CIP projects has progressed

somewhat more slowly than planned. The government has formed a Social Protection Working Group to
discuss the progress of the work on social safety net reform in Pakistan.
62.

The Bank assistance program in this pillar of the CAS reflected the trade-offs inherent in trying to

improve delivery of social services in Pakistan in the context of devolution. The use of development
policy lending was appropriate as a means to support the needed fiscal, policy and systemic changes.
However responsibility for implementation rested with local governments having limited capacity and
thus broad based federal and provincial development policy lending was less effective in supporting
sector reforms. The more focused approach of using a sector DPC as in Punjab seems to have been more

effective than the broader approach taken with the Sindh and NWFP SACs, although other factors,
including an extraordinary degree of high-level commitment and ownership were also at work. In
retrospect, greater use of TA to complement development policy lending might have been useful to help
the authorities, especially at the provincial and local level to implement and monitor reforms adopted
under the SACs. More in-depth analytical work at the provincial level might also have been helpful to
strengthen the provincial reform programs. With completion of the Punjab Economic Report in FY04,
and initiation of Economic Reports for Sindh and NWFP in FY05, this need is now being addressed.
Borrower performance under this pillar of the CAS was hampered by shifting responsibilities and
63.
capacity constraints. Specifically, provincial governments need to strengthen their policy formulation
capabilities to ensure that well crafted departmental policy proposals, together with their financial
implications are submitted for cabinet review and discussion during budget formulation. Similarly, the
ongoing transition to district based service delivery has been accompanied by some hiccups such as
delayed release of funds to districts. Some investment projects including HIV/AIDS, NEAS, and
community infrastructure projects have experienced slow or delayed implementation.

SUMMARY ASSESSMENT OF CAS PERFORMANCE
During the FYO3-05 period, the Bank program in Pakistan was for the most part successful in
64.
either achieving or making substantial progress toward the achievement of the outcomes set in the CAS.

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 16 of 30
As described above and in summary table in Annex 1, many of the intermediate outcomes representing
milestones in implementation of the reform program were met. While a number of outcomes were not
met, the underlying reform programs are in place and government commitment appears strong, even if the
pace of reform has not been as rapid as envisioned in the CAS. To the extent that data is available, final
outcome indicators show some promising trends toward improvement.

65.

Sustainability. The sustainability of the CAS outcomes is likely, although Pakistan's longer-term

track record as an intermittent reformer suggests that this cannot be taken for granted. The CAS is well
aligned with Pakistan's own reform agenda and continued commitment to the reform program appears

likely. President's Musharraf's tenure in office will continue until at least 2007. The Prime Minister, Mr.
Aziz, is a strong reformer. There is a high level of support from the international community. Despite
occasional slowdowns, the government has shown the ability to sustain reforms in the face of significant

challenges and political pressures.
66.
Institutional impact. Bank assistance under the 2002 CAS has contributed to institutional
development but this is an area where additional attention is needed. Key government institutions were

targeted for modernization including the Central Board of Revenue, State Bank of Pakistan, Controller
General, Auditor General, regulatory bodies, and key economic ministries. Capacity building assistance

has been provided through investment lending and most have demonstrated improved performance.
However, as observed in the CAE, institutional capacity is a widespread concern. Recognizing that
institutional development and capacity building represent a cross-cutting challenge for Pakistan, a Public
Sector Capacity Building Project was developed and approved in FY04 to support institutional
development and capacity building in key ministries and regulatory bodies.
C.

Measuring Bank Performance

Quality of Products and Services
67.

IEG's FYO3-05 performance ratings for Pakistan show that of the eleven projects that exited

during the CAS period which were reviewed by IEG, one had a highly satisfactory outcome, four had
satisfactory outcomes, three had moderately satisfactory outcomes, two had moderately unsatisfactory
outcomes and one was rated unsatisfactory (see Table 3, page 20). The latter project, the highly
ambitious Social Action Program project, approved in FY1998, was the subject of an intensive learning
Implementation Completion Report (ICR) which identified key lessons which are being used to guide the
formulation of future Bank interventions in the social sectors.3

A QAG panel carried out a Quality at

Entry Assessment for the FY03 Sindh Structural Adjustment Credit. The panel rated the operation
satisfactory overall, citing specific aspects as highly satisfactory including implementation arrangements,

the degree of borrower ownership during preparation, and the quality of the Task Team. The panel also
gave a rating of Satisfactory for Bank inputs and processes
68.
In early FY04, the Quality Assurance Group (QAG) carried out a Country AAA Assessment for
Pakistan. The report assessed the quality of a sample of AAA products from FY01-03 as well as the
overall AAA program within the context of the strategic framework. While part of the sample related to
work undertaken prior to the FYO3-05 CAS, several FY03 tasks were evaluated and the overall
conclusions are applicable to this completion report. Overall, QAG found the Pakistan AAA program to
be satisfactory. Of the sample reviewed, four tasks were completed during the CAS period and of these
two were rated highly satisfactory and two were rated satisfactory. However, QAG also noted the strong
emphasis of the program on macroeconomic management and recommended further work on other,

growth-related, sectors including rural development, trade, and infrastructure as well as more attention to
Implementation Completion Report, Second Social Action ProgramProject, Report No: 26216, June 25, 2003.

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 17 of 30
the sub-national level. QAG also found that greater attention is needed in the areas of dialogue and
dissemination in order to increase the impact of the AAA program.
Portfolio Performance. The World Bank's active portfolio in Pakistan, on June 30, 2005,
69.
comprised 16 projects with loans/credits amounting to $990 million (net of cancellation). Also included
in the portfolio are two Grant projects-GEF- Protected Areas Management ($10 million); and the

Montreal Protocol Phase-Out of Ozone Depleting Substances ($13 million). About $561 million remained
undisbursed. The disbursement ratio remained well above the target of 18 percent throughout the CAS
period (see Table 2).4
Table 2: Portfolio Indicators
Indicator
Number of Projects
Projects at Risk (%)

Actual Performance
FY04
FY03
FY02
18
15
12
8.3

6.7

5.6

FY05
16
11.8

0.0

23.2

19.6

6.5

Realism (%)

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

Proactivity (%)

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

67.1

28.0

24.7

40.6

Commitments at Risk (%)

Disbursement Ratio

Portfolio Management. The portfolio has grown somewhat over the CAS period after reaching a
70.
low at the end of FY 02 (the beginning of the CAS). The earlier reduction reflected the results of an
aggressive portfolio improvement program under which 32 projects were closed. This trend has since
been reversed as lending has picked up although the substantial proportion of single tranche development
policy credits in the program (about one-third of the operations approved during the CAS period) has
meant that the size of the portfolio has grown only modestly. Portfolio management has continued to
emphasize good "quality at entry" and close collaboration with the Government of Pakistan to ensure
project readiness and adequate management attention to emerging issues. To avoid delays in project startup, new projects have been subjected to close scrutiny to ensure that they exhibit strong client ownership
and are ready for implementation prior to approval. Over the past three years, 100 percent pro-activity

has been maintained. This process has been facilitated by country office leadership of project teams (50
percent of projects in the active portfolio are managed in the country office) and decentralization of many
of the regional core services functions to Pakistan and regional hubs in the South Asia region.
71.

Despite these efforts, a number of portfolio issues have begun to reemerge. Several projects in

the current portfolio are slow moving and facing implementation issues; most of these relate to: (a)

delayed project start-up, which has often led to slower progress subsequently during implementation; and
(b) weak capacity to effectively implement projects according to agreed plans. Besides project specific
implementation issues, key generic factors contributing to slow implementation include lack of adequate
staff and funds for start-up activities, delays in obtaining routine clearances for loan negotiation/signing
as well as opening of accounts, and delays in initiating the procurement process. These issues are being
addressed intensively with the GoP in order to prevent a deterioration in portfolio performance. As it
relates to Bank performance, these findings indicate that there is room for improvement on the part of
Bank teams in developing simpler, more readily "implementable" projects with realistic timetables that
reflect the time consuming nature of institutional reforms and decentralized approaches.

4 Disbursement ratio represents disbursements as a percentage of undisbursed balances at the beginning of the fiscal

year, for investment lending only.

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 18 of 30
72.
There is also a need to improve the results focus of the portfolio. The Bank recently undertook an
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Review of (i) its on-going portfolio; and (ii) Government systems for
project M&E. The report found that due to weak M&E systems and inadequate capacity within GoP and
implementing agencies, there is limited focus on monitoring of outcomes and results in many projects. At
the same time, Bank teams need to do a better job of focusing on developing project-level results and
indicators and incorporating the monitoring of these results into the supervision process.

Country Dialogue and Aid Coordination
The Government has taken the lead in donor coordination under the leadership of the Economic

73.

Affairs Division (EAD), under the Ministry of Finance, which is responsible for development assistance
coordination.

Donor meetings resumed in 2001 and the Pakistan Development Forum (PDF) has been

held on an annual basis since then, with all but one meeting taking place in Islamabad. Civil society and
private sector representatives have participated in the PDF.

The Bank's strategy has been to play a

facilitating role in the government-led coordination process by supporting the PDF and actively sharing
information and facilitating partnerships among donors and the GoP.
These efforts have been paying off as external partners have been increasingly aligning their
74.
strategies to the PRSP and making greater use of cooperative approaches in their assistance programs.
For example, the UK and the US have begun to align their budget support with the Bank's PRSCs. In
addition, the Bank has undertaken more joint analytical work in partnership with the Government and
other donors. In 2003 the World Bank, DFID, and ADB completed jointly a CFAA. Two economic
reports-- the Devolution in Pakistan (DistrictAssessment) Report and the PunjabEconomic Report-- were

prepared as joint products of the World Bank, ADB, and DFID. The upcoming NWFP Economic Report
is being prepared in collaboration with DFID and the Sindh Economic Report is being prepared in
collaboration with the ADB. Nevertheless, IEG found that a number of donors expressed dissatisfaction
with their interactions with the Bank. Among issues raised were inadequate consultation; lack of
continuity of Bank staff interacting with donors; intermittent participation of senior staff at donor
meetings; and poor information flow to donors and NGOs.
There are now strong efforts to harmonize with country systems, with a large percentage of

75.

development assistance disbursed as budget support once a year following the approval of the national
budget. There have been efforts to improve the procurement and financial management systems of some
line ministries and at the provincial level. A comparison between the World Bank's and ADB
procurement rules was undertaken in 2004 as part of the harmonization exercise and as a result,
harmonized procurement documents are available for use. A similar exercise is underway in the area of

financial management. In addition, external partners have agreed to put together a joint "Portfolio Issues
Paper" focused on key generic portfolio management issues faced by externally financed projects, for
discussion with the Government.

Key Lessons for the Next CAS

D.

76.
Based on the preceding analysis and the 1994-2003 CAE, the following are the key lessons
learned and recommendations for the next CAS.
*

Projects should be as simple and realistic as possible. The experience of a number of projects
that closed during the CAS, especially the multi-province umbrella projects, highlights the need
for focused projects that are readily "implement-able" with realistic schedules and clear
ownership. In particular, governance reforms often took longer than planned. In the context of

development policy lending, there is a need to guard against over-optimism as the difficulty of

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 19 of 30
implementing reforms, especially those with wide impact and high visibility was at times
underestimated.
*

The CAS program should give greater emphasis to capacity building. The CAE and a number of
ICRs completed during the CAS identify weak implementation capacity as a critical constraint,
especially at the local government level. This will require more TA in the program and in

projects, building on the Public Sector Capacity Building Project approved in FY04. Civil service
reform and institution building should continue to receive attention. Projects will also have to be
designed to take capacity constraints into account, being realistic about both the scope and pace

of implementation given those constraints.
*

A programmatic approachprovides the flexibility to support reforms while managing risk. The
use of annual single tranche adjustment operations at both the provincial and national level helped
to support reforms while providing a mechanism to adjust the lending program to match the pace

of reforms. This approach strengthened the link between borrower performance and the Bank
lending program.
*

The program needs to continue to strengthen itsfocus on results. To address weak M&E systems

and capacity within GoP and implementing agencies, the Bank needs to support the strengthening
of statistical capacity and monitoring and evaluation as part of institution strengthening. At the
same time, the Bank needs to do a better job of focusing on developing solid project-level results
and indicators and incorporating the monitoring of these results into the supervision process. The
results-based CAS offers an opportunity to identify and focus on key strategic outcomes at the
country level and provide a framework for joint monitoring and evaluation of the overall country
program with the Government.

Pakistan:CAS Completion Report
Page 20 of 30

Table 3: Projects Closed During the CAS Period
IEG Rating for:

ICR Rating for:

Social Action Program 11
Structural Adjustment Credit II
Sindh Structural Adjustment Credit

Closing
Date

Approval
FY

Jun-02

1998

Outcome

Institutional
Dev

Sustainabili

L

Unsatisfactory

Modest

Non-Evaluable

L

Moderately
Satisfactory

Modest

Likely

Outcome

Institutional
Dev

Sustainability

U

M

Dec-02

2002

S

M

S

M

L

Moderately
Unsatisfactory

Modest

Unlikely

Dec-02

2003

L

Moderately
Satisfactory

Modest

Likely

NWFP Structural Adjustment Credit

Dec-02

2003

S

M

1996

S

M

L

Modest

Likely

Jun-03

Satisfactory

Telecom Regulation & Privatization

Moderately
Unsatisfactory

Modest

Unlikely

June-03

1996

S

SU

L

1998

S

SU

L

Satisfactory

Substantial

Likely

Sep-03

Moderately
Satisfactory

Ghazi Barotha Hydropower Project

L

Likely

1996

M

Modest

Oct-03

S
S

SU

L

Likely

2004

Substantial

Sep-04

Satisfactory

Punjab Education Sector Adjustment Credit
National Drainage Program

Dec-04

1998

##

NWFP Community Infrastructure
Northern Education

--

--

--

L

Highly
Satisfactory

Substantial

Likely

Satisfactory

Substantial

Likely

Poverty Alleviation Fund

Dec-04

1999

S

SU

Banking Sector Restructuring and Privatization

Dec-04

2002

HS

#

HL
M

--

S

--

2005

--

Dec-04

L

Pakistan PRSC I

L

--

S

--

2004

--

Dec-04

M

NWFP SAC II

May-05

1997

S

SU

L

Improving Financial Reporting and Auditing

Unsatisfactory, MU=Moderately Unsatisfactory,
S=Satisfactory, MAS=Marginally Satisfactory, MS=Marginally
Satisfactory,
MS=Moderately
SU=Substantial, P=Partial, N=Negligible,
H=High;
Satisfactory,
HS=Highly
Unlikely, HU=Highly Unsatisfactory,
HUN=Highly
UN=Unlikely,
L=Likely,
Likely,
U=Unsatisfactory; HL=Highly
NRT=Not Rated, UNC=Uncertain

Pakistan:CAS Completion Report
Page 21 of30

ANNEX

Key issues/ Diagnostic
Macroeconomic Stability
Despite good macroeconomic
management, the external and

domestic public debt are both

quite large and hence there are
still concerns over the fragility of
the external position and future
growth prospects. The
September 11 shock has also
increased the risks to the

balance of payment position by

making more uncertain an early
resumption of long-term private
capital inflows as well as
increased access to
international capital markets

A: PAKISTAN COUNTRY PROGRAM RESULTS MATRIX (FYO3-05)
Status at FY04 CAS Progress Report

CAS Strategic Objectives &
Outcome Indicators
Macroeconomic Stability as
demonstrated by achieving targets trom

Achieved; external balances have met or exceeded PRF
targets, inflation remains subdued and foreign exchange

Update at end-CAS

PRGF successfully concluded with quantitative targets met
Economic growth has continued to accelerate and external

reserves have risen to a comfortable level

and domestic imbalances have been brought to sustainable

o Higher Tax/GDP ratio

Tax1GDP ratio has risen from 12.9% inFY01 to 13.6% in
FY03.

Limited progress overall. FY03104 Tax1GDP ratio was 13.6%,
FY04105 programmed at 13.8% ("old" GDP).

e Reduced Fiscal DeficitYGDP

Fiscal deficit (excluding grants) declined from 6.7% to 4.5%

FY03104 fiscal deficit 4.0%of GDP,- FY04105 fiscal deficit was

I-PRSP for fiscal consolidation,

domestic savings, debt

of GDP.
* Sustainable current account deficits
* Provinces fiscal space restored

SContinued tight management of
external borrowing

> Achieved; FY03 current account surplus of 4,4% of GDP.

levels. However inflationary pressures have grown

4.1% of GOP which is broadly consistent with the PRSP fiscal
framework.
Achieved. FY03u04 current account balance was 1.4 percent
of GDP surplus; FY0405 balance was - 1.e6%

Provinces have expanded own revenue collection while

Provinces, particularly NWFP and Punjab have substantially

costs. The upcoming National Finance Commission Award

increased revenue collection. However inability to reach

using donor resources to re-profile debt and reduce interest

increased fiscal space through debt management and

isexpected to include asubstantial increase inthe
provinces' share inoverall revenue,

agreement on NFC award leaves provinces' share of
resources unresolved and makes sustainability uncertain.

Evident inprimary surplus and progress indebt reduction.
)o>
Pre-payment of high cost debt and increased reliance on
concessional financing have reduced interest expenses
from 37% to 31% of government expenditure. A4Debt

External government debt has fallen from 35% of GOP in

2002/003 to 28.2%% in20042005. New external borrowing
has been weighted toward official sources on soft terms.

Policy Coordination Office has been established to sustain

implementation of strict controls.
Sound financial position of WACDA

c

While there has been some progress in sector restructuring
this has yet to result ina significant improvement in WAP A
finances

Pakistan:CAS Completion Report
Page22 of 30

Key issues/ Diagnostic
Restoring the Integrityand
Accountabilityof State
Institution
*At the core af the poor
governance problem in
Pakistan is the leadership's
abuse of state institutions,
widespread corruption, and
disregard for the separation
of powers and respect for the
rule of law

CAS Strategic Objectives &
Outcome Indicators

ingovernment
effectiveness at federal, provincial, and
district levels

*Improvement

Status at FY04 CAS Progress Report

>Difficult to assess comprehensively, but promising steps in
civil service reform and in key reforming agencies apparent.

* Promulgation of a Procurement
Ordinance National Procurement
Authority established

* Improved CBR performance

* Ad-hoc Public Accounts Committees
botte
(PACs) have cadtlevelsh
the

FedAs hand Pcal
Federal ofit Repors tye
followreviewedofAnditaeaport
acion
up ifederal

Freel
accutabrilit tro
futo
Iccunformaiit, etih
omm ies,
Ac n, ctve
Publrmtic
the
s
Pubic
Agreement

of te
ofthe

Reforms ate still being developed. Further rest ructutingan

pay/pension reforms are being developed to improve
efficiency and support devolution

MTBF is still in a pilot phase with expansion to cover the entire
federal budget not expected until 2010/2011

Transparent budgetary processes and
improvement inoverall quality of
financial management thru the MTBF
"Improved public sector, accounting,
auditing, and reporting capacity,

Update at end-CAS

Substantial progress. Expenditure reconciliation increased
to 99% in FY03 Modernized chart of accounts and
automated accounting system being introduced, though at
a slower pace than envisioned. Timeliness and quality of
audits improving.

Though less than planned, there was substantial progress in
introducing modernized systems under PIFRA I (closed in
FY05), laying the groundwork for further improvement under
PIFRA (FY06). About 40 percent of financial and fiscal
transactions of government expenditures are covered by
PIFRA-modernized systems.

Progress has been slow. GoP has created a procurement
of
regulatory authority (the PPRA), but is still inthe process
preparing revised guidelines. The NWFP government has
approved a modern procurement ordinance and isinthe
process of issuing regulations to implement it,
Functional reorganization of CBR underway. Pilot Large

Government notified new procurement rules conforming to
international best practice in2004. However, implementing
regulations, monitoring systems and enforcement
mechanisms remain to be established

and Medium Taxpayer units functioning with improved
customer satisfaction ratings.

Medium Taxpayer units have been established. Tax
Administration Reform Project approved in FY05

oLimited progress. Ad-hoc PACs reduced, but did not
to
eliminate the backlog. These have now been disbanded
be replaced by regular PACs under the auspices of elected
national and provincial assemblies. However, while the

The Federal PAC has now been established along with the
Provincial PACs. Ithas made good progress in reviewing audit
reports and tracking and monitoring cash recoveries from
public officials. It is still devising astrategy for addressing the
backlog of audit reports with capacity building assistance
under an F grant and with WI support. The backlog is due
in part to the poor quality of the audit reports resulting ina
very heavy volume of audit findings

of the ad-hoc federal and provincial PACs
se
Proceedings
CFAA was published in
were open to the public. Phase 1M
December 2003; implementation plan is being developed.
NAB organization and legal basis are under review

See above on functioning of PACs. Federal PAC proceedings
are open to the public and a Freedom of Information
Ordinance was enacted in October 2002 and implementing

Progress continues to be satisfactory. Additional Large and

inroucd thugea
automated acontn syste beingn

provincial governments have reconstituted PACs, the
govement has yet to constitute its PAC. The new
PACs will need time to address the remaining backlog of
reports.

rules were passed inJune 2004. The Ordinance provides a

Pakistan:CAS Completion Report
Page 23 of'30

CAS Strategic Objectives &
Outcome Indicators
outcomes of the second phase of the
CFAA, and the establishment of a
lasting institutional basis for the
National Accountability Bureau.

Key issues/ Diagnostic

* Better performance evaluation, meritbased promotions, and training
programs, as well as the
implementation of the reforms of the
pay and pension systems

Strengtheningthe Enabling
Investment Climate

a Heavy burden of tax

*Low

* Unstable, distorted industrial
policies
* Anti-export policy bias
* limited availability of financing
from weak financial sector to
the particular disadvantage of
the SME sector
a High regulatory and policy
risks for private investment in
extractive industries and
infrastructure

tax and regulation compliance

costs Lower compliance costs reported
in business environment surveys,

administration and regulation,
and related corruption

*

Status at FY04 CAS Progress Report

legal right to access public records. NAB organization and
legal basis are still under review.

> Reforms inthe promotion system have been introduced to
make evaluations more objective, increase transparency in
promotion, and to link promotion to higher grades to
required training. Two rounds of pay increase have been
implemented but pay scales remain highlycompressed.

Government has appointed a Pay and Pensions Committee to
develop recommendations to reform civil service
compensation. Its recommendations were issued in2005.
Civil service training is being revamped under the Public
Sector Capacity Building Project.

>Investment Climate Survey carried out and results

According to the 2005 Doing Business indicators, the cost to

disseminated through workshops. Business registration
procedures reformed, cutting the time for business start-up
in half, from 53 to 24 days. The GoSindh has streamlined
business inspections from 23 to 7, with all to be done on
one day.

start a business fell from 70 percent of gross per capita
income in2002 to 47 percent in 2003 and further to 36 percent
in 2004. Government is inthe process of revising labor
legislation to improve labor market flexibility and reduce
discretion of government inspectors. Administrative Barriers to
investment study has been completed, identifying turther
actions.
Credit to private sector increased from 107 Rs.B (July02Mar03) to 362 Rs B (JulyO43-AprO5)

Increased availability of domestic
financing for private investment

orderlto
ptne n
regulatory framework for public-private
These
infrastructure.
encourage greater private provision of
efforts are starting.

9 Greater private provision of
infrastructure
* Development of extractive industries

* Lower levels of effective protection

Update at end-CAS

Good progress instreamlining tariff schedule and reducing
barriers to trade. The simple average tariff rate declined
from 51 percent in1995 to 17 percent in2004. Numerous

Pakistan continues to liberalize the trade regime. The
2004/05 budget reduced tariffs on capital goods and lowered
the average customs duty to 14.9%.

quantitative restrictions, regulatory duties and other paratariffs eliminated. Statutory regulatory orders and related
exemptions also reduced.

* Higher FDl

> FDremains low, but is increasing, rising to $800 million in
FY03, vs. $485 million in FY02.

FD grew by 60% in FY05 to reach $1.5 billion

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 24 of 30

Key issues/ Diagnostic

CAS Strategic Objectives &
Outcome Indicators
* Higher exports

low agricultural productivity
* Weak link between rural
growth and reduction of rural
poverty

Exports grew 19 percent in 2003.

:

Update at end-CAS
Continued strong growth; Pakistan's exports reached $ 14.4
billion in FY05, growing by 15.9 percent over the FY04.

* Higher private investment

> Private investment has started to increase, but remains low
by historical standards.

Investment has risen, but further improvements in
microeconomic fundamentals are needed to encourage
additional increases in investment.

* Increase in output and employment in
SMEs

>

Data not yet available.

SME sector contributed 30% to GDP and generated 25% of
manufacturing sector export earnings.

* WAPDA corporatization completed

> Corporatization complete "on paper" by end December

Further progress achieved. NEPRA has issued cost reflective
tariff determinations, however notification is still pending and
the newly independent entities have not yet been made
financially autonomous.

* Effective regulation thru NEPRA

> Performance of NEPRA (the power regulator) continues to

Difficulties in completing the tariff determination process
indicate that NEPRA needs further strengthening to fully
assume its role.

* KESC Privatized

> Not done. Brought to point of sale but limited investor

Met. Kanooz Al-Watan of Saudi Arabia/ Siemens consortium
successfully bid to acquire 73% of shares in early 2005

e Rehabilitated highways, improved NHA

> Bank supported Highways Rehabilitation Project underway.

Highways Rehab project isprogressing satisfactorily. Trade

Rual Gowt
Acceerat
HgherRurl GrwthRural

2003, but this has not yet resulted inmanagerial and
financial independence needed to give the newly formed
entities the incentives to improve service
improve as reflected in the timeliness and quality of tariff
determinations and support to the corporatization and
privatization processes through the timely issuance of
operating licenses.
interest prevented sale.

financial management, and improved
trade facilitatnion.

Accelerate Rural Growth
* Skewed land distribution and

Status at FY04 CAS Progress Report

Improvements inNHA financial management include
adoption of Medium-Term Budgetary Framework and
operation of a Road Maintenance Fund to help ensure
sustainable delivery of aproductive and efficient national
highway network. IDA supported Trade and Transport
Facilitation program under implementation.

growth increased from -0.1 % inFY01 to 4.2%. Average
GAS period isprojected to be 4.3% vs. -0/9% for previous

e

Rural Growth
*" Higher
Skwedlanddisribuionandfor
Improved efficiency of institutions in
irrigation and drainagerelative
__________________Irrigationan
Smrv dainxagdedirgtoan
* Improved and expanded irrigation and

facilitation reform has not yet streamlined the systems; it still
takes an average of 17 days to clear an import container
through customs.

GAS period, due mainly to drought
Irrigation and drainage infrastructure remains underdeveloped
to Pakistan's needs and water markets are

*

drainage infrastructure

Additional water storage capacity isalso
neemainsficincyderdevelopedslow
undeveloped.

Pakistan:CAS Completion Report
Page 25 of 30

Key issues/ Diagnostic

CAS Strategic Objectives &
Outcome Indicators

Status at FY04 CAS Progress Report

Update at end-CAS
Community/farmer organizations have been strengthened in
some areas. Overall institutional reforms are still inearly
stages, and advancing inselect areas.

* Strengthened community/farmer
organizations
* Full implementation of institutional and
physical rehabilitation reform in 1major
canal command (Nara Canal).

> Irrigation reforms in the Nara Canal are well advanced.

Institutional reforms have been fully put in place and physical
rehabilitation begun. These efforts will be deepened and
expanded inthe follow-on Sindh Water Sector Improvement
Project

* Improved land and water markets

> Reforms in water markets are advancing ina limited area
and will need to be implemented more broadly to increase
efficiency of water use. Land markets reforms ininitial
stages

Institutional reforms in water management are being extended
and deepened inSindh while similar reforms have begun in
Punjab. The Bank is supporting improvements in land
registration systems to improve land market functioning.

* Reduced vulnerability to drought.

> Some progress through DERA project implementation

Improved hazard risk management being pursued

* Update knowledge on rural
development

> Rural Factor Markets Study underway

Rural Factor Markets Study completed. Rural DPR underway

* Devolution and Delivery of Rural
Services

> Too early for comprehensive assessment Rural services

The legal framework and administrative structures for
devolved delivery of rural services are in place but funding and
administrative capacity are lacking at the local government
level and links between local governments and communities
need to be strengthened.

devolved, but transitional issues are affecting delivery.
NWFP CIP/l project will support rural service delivery while
addressing local government capacity.

Education
* Education service delivery
system in crisis

mproved access to, quality of, and
equity in primary education, moving

Primary net enrolment reported to have reached 60 percent in
2004 vs. 43% in 2001/02. Nevertheless, it appears unlikely

* Low enrollment, poor
achievements, poor quality of
education
Very poor governance

primary enrollment by 2015

completion by 2015.

that the country will achieve the MDG of full primary

towards the MDG goal of universal

Female enrolment as a percent of male enrolment rose from
79% to 85% from 2001/02 to 2004. With sustained efforts it is
possible to eliminate gender disparities inprimary enrolments
by 2007

Closing of the gender gap in primary
* and secondary education by 2005

* Implementation of Education Reform
Strategy

The federal ESR program is under imp/ementation and its
elements are reflected in the full PRSP and in the federal

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 26 of 30

CAS Strategic Objectives &

Status at FY04 CAS Progress Report

Update at end-CAS

Outcome Indicators

Key issues/ Diagnostic

budget. A remaining challenge is to ensure that ESR
priorities are fully reflected inprovincial and local education
programs.
* Development of a reliable monitoring
system for HD outcomes.

> Largely achieved with poverty outcomes monitored through

The first results from the CWIQ Survey were released in
December 2005 and the results of a full household survey are
expected in2006

* Successful implementation of district
based delivery of education services

> Under devolution districts have assumed responsibility for

National and provincial governments' sector reforms are
increasingly aligned to the devolved delivery system.

* Improved governance insocial service
delivery

strengthened Pakistan Integrated Household Survey.
Intermediate outcomes are monitored through a CWIQ
survey. Full PRSP outlines comprehensive monitoring
system under Federal PRSP Secretariat.
delivery of education but more work is needed to
strengthen their capacity and ensure their fiscal and
administrative autonomy inorder to fulfill their role.

Too early to tell. Some promising early signs of improved
governance resulting from provincial education reforms

under devolution, but comprehensive assessment isnot yet
possible.

Health, Nutrition and
Population
* Low public spending and poor
value for money because of
governance and management
weaknesses

*

MR has decreased from 83 per 1000 live births to 76 per
1000 live births in2003 (Pakistan Demographic Survey) TFR
of 4.1 meets I-PRSP target; MR target likely not met

Country Outcomes inthe IPRSP, tobe
achieved by 2003-04 include: to reduce
the MR to 65/1000, to reduce child
mortality to 17/1000, to reduce the TFR

to 4.1 children per woman, The I-PRSP
also sets targets interms of improved
coverage of water and sanitation,

* Weak capacity inthe public
sector for policy formulation,
programming,
implementation, and M&E

0 Strengthened and expanded key public
health programs, including Lady Health

Increased resources have been provided for each of these
TB Dots
programs. Progress mixed with LHW, Polio and
program

The programs have been strengthened and expanded
although overall spending has increased by less than planned.

lack of education especially of

- Increase inthe %of births attended by

>Likely to be achieved, FY01102 actual was 24% increasing

Achieved. Skilled birth attendance has increased to 31 %,up

women, environmental
factors, and many
households lacking access to
safe water and sanitation

trained providers to 25% by 2003-04

from baseline of 19%

from 23% in2001 and 18% in 1998

Increase inthe %of fully immunized
children to 85% by 2003-04

Modest progress; FY01102 coverage was 53%, rising from

Immunization coverage reached 77% in2004/05

" Poor quality of private health
care services and consumer

Workers, TB-Dots, EPI, polio
eradication, malaria, HIcVAIDS, and
family planning/reproductive health.

abuse
* Important factors outside the
health sector include poverty,

*

making significant progress and immunization
showing modestly positive results, although significant
challenges remain.

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 27 of 30

Key issues/ Diagnostic

Pro-Poor Rural Infrastructure
and Services and Social
Protection
* Very poor rural infrastructure
and social service delivery
systems

Status at FY04 CAS Progress Report

CAS Strategic Objectives &
Outcome Indicators

Update at end-CAS

* Increase inthe coverage of prenatal
care to 50% by 2003-04

> Modest progress; FYO1/02 coverage increased from 31% to
35%.

Achieved. Pre-natal care coverage has increased to 50%

* Increase in the %of population with
access to Lady Health Workers (LHWs)
to 90% by 2003-04.

> 56% of population has access to LHWs, increasing from

Not met: 65% coverage achieved in FY003/04. The LHW
program continues to expand and improving access to PHC
and FP services as envisaged inthe PRSP. The program has
expanded to 92,000.

* Increase inthe CPR to 39% by 200304

> Updated data since last CAS not yet available. (Projected

* Increase in public expenditure on
health and nutrition as a percentage of
GDP.

> Increases achieved inline with 1-PRSP targets from 0.5% of
GDP to 0.6% of GDP. Further increases programmed
under full PRSP.

* Increase inthe share of non-salary
expenditures in total government health
expenditure

> Data not yet available

* Increase inthe share of government
subsidy in health services accruing to
the poor

>

*

baseline of 40%. - target revised to 70% of population
targeting mainly rural population. Revised target likely to be
achieved by end FY05.

Data not yet available.

Public health expenditures have increased, but not as rapidly
as foreseen inthe PRSP. Budget allocations have been
increased, but utilization has lagged. While health
expenditures increased in nominal terms by on average 18%
annually, as a percentage of GDP they grew only marginally
from 0.44% in FY02 to 0.48% in FY05.
Data not yet available

Data not yet available

Implementation of PPAF and Community Infrastructure
Projects has resulted in improvements in project areas, but
there is a need to scale-up these efforts through enhanced

Community driven development of local
service provision

* High vulnerability of rural poor
to idiosyncratic shocks
* Strengthened governance and
improved delivery of basic
infrastructure services at the local level,

Latest estimate: 32% in 2003

CPR estimated at 32%)

>

Comprehensive assessment not yet possible.
Improvements in governance and service delivery at the
local government level are beginning to show, but further

Progress varies across provinces and sectors, but overall
there are signs of improvement.

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 28 of 30

CAS Strategic Objectives &
Outcome Indicators

Key issues/ Diagnostic

Update at end-CAS

Status at FY04 CAS Progress Report
progress in adapting to the devolved local government
framework is needed for widespread improvement.

* Rural asset base deepened through
rural community-based infrastructure
projects and spread of micro-credit.

> Bank supported community infrastructure project (CIP)
underway inAJK. Recently completed CIP in NWFP
delivered community infrastructure projects in90
communities. PPAF project supported over 3,000 smallscale infrastructure projects in 2000+ villages.

* National Resettlement Plan Policy

> A Resettlement Ordinance has been prepared, but awaits

Pro-Poor and Pro-GenderEquity Policies
* Significant gender gaps in
both literacy and health status
* Institutional and attitudinal
discrimination against women

*

Resolution of outstanding Resettlement
cases

action.
Satisfactory progress inaddressing outstanding cases.

* National Gender Policy

> Government issued a National Policy for the Development

inLaws to promote gender
SChanges
ein

system has been instituted,
> Electoral reservation
expanding women's political participation. Little

equity

No further progress
Resettlement cases associated with Bank projects resolved

and Empowerment of Women in 2002.

dramatically
progress in amending discriminatory statutes.

Changes inlaws to promote gender equity have been
proposed, but not acted upon by Parliament

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 29 of 30
Annex B: Pakistan - Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries
CAS Plans (May 15, 2002)

Progress Report (March 26, 2004)
Status
$(
IBRD

S(M)
FY
2002

Project
Drought Emergency Recoverye
Banking Sector Restructuring/Privatization
AJK Community Infrastructure
Banking Sector TA
Structural Adjustment Credit II
Sindh Structural Adjustment Credit (SAC)
Total

IBRD

IDA
130.0
300.0
20.0
26.5
500.0
100.0
947.0

2003
90
100
20
5
150
100
110

NWFP Provincial Adjustment Credit
Highways Rehabilitation
HIV/AIDS Prevention
National Education Assessment System
Education Reform SAC
Tax Administration Reform
Provincial Adjustment Credits (Sindh,
NWFP)
Economic Reform TA

Actual
Actual
Forwarded to 2003
Forwarded to 2003
Actual
Forwarded to 2003
Total
AJK Community Infrastructure
Banking Sector TA
Sindh SAC
Actual
Forwarded to 2004 (now actual)
Actual
Actual
Forwarded to 2004f
Forwarded to 2005
NWFP forwarded to 2004 (now actual);
Sindh dropped

500.0
800.0
20.0
26.5
100.0
90.0
37.1
3.6

25

600.0

Total

AdditionalActual Projects:
Partnership for Polio Eradication
Total

20.0
297.2

Completion Report

Progress Report (March 26, 2004)

M)

$(MS
FY
2004

Project
Poverty Alleviation Fund II
Highways Rehabilitation
Punjab Education Sector Reforms
Public Sector Capacity Building TA
Sindh On Farm Water Management
NWFP Community Basic Infrastructure
Poverty Reduction Support Credit

Total

IBRD
50.0

50.0

IDA
238.0
150.0
100.0
52.0
61.0
37.0
350.0

988.0

2005
Improving Financial Reporting and
Auditing
Tax Administration Reform
Balochistan Irrigation
Infrastructure Development

80.0
100.0
25.0
100.0

Banking Sector Adjustment Credit
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
NWFP SAC II

175.0
175.0
90.0

Status

100.0

645.0

IBRD

Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Forwarded to 2005
Additional Actual Projects
NWFP SAC II
Total
PRSC I
Forwarded to 2006

50.0

Actual
Forwarded to 2006
Actual (Changed to Taunsa Barrage
Rehabilitation)
Actual
Forwarded to 2006
Approved in 2004
Additional Actual Projects
Partnership for Polio Eradication II
Punjab Education Development

Total

IDA
130.0
300.0

Total

Reallocation from already committed IDA resources - not counted as new commitments.
Project changed to Punjab Education SAC

IDA
238.0
150.0
100.0
55.0
61.1
37.1

50.0

90.0
731.2
300.0

24.4

78.5

130.0
200.0

100.0

21.5

II

100.0

354.4

600.0

Pakistan: CAS Completion Report
Page 30 of 30

Annex C: Pakistan - Non-Lending Services: Planned and Actual Deliveries
(FYO3-05)

FY
2003

FYO3-05 CAS Plans
Product
Investment Climate
Provincial Economic Reform
Policy Note to New Government
JSA - PRSP
CFAA II
CPAR II
Oil & Gas Sector Review
Financial Sector Assessment
CAS Progress Report
Public Expenditure Review
Rural Development Policy Review
Power Sector Review
Sindh Rural Development Policy Review
Social Risk Assessment

Type
Rpt
Rpt
Pol
Rpt
Rpt
Rpt
Rpt
Rpt
CAS
Rpt
Rpt
Rpt
Rpt
Rpt

Status: CAS Progress Report
Status
Completed
Forwarded to FYO4-06
Completed
Completed
Completed
Dropped
Completed
Forwarded to FY04
Forwarded to FY04
Completed
Forwarded to FY06
Forwarded to FY05
Dropped
Dropped
AdditionalActual Products:

2004

2005

FYO4-05 CAS Progress Report
District Assessment/Devolution
Punjab Economic Report
Poverty Update
Trade Policy Notes
Rural Factor Markets
Power Policy Notes
Textile & Clothing Policy Note
Financial Sector Assessment
Urban Development Non-Lending TA
Mineral Sector Development

Rpt
Rpt
Rpt
Pol
Rpt
Pol
Pol
Rpt
TA
Pol

Completed
Completed
Completed
Completed
Completed
Completed
Completed
Completed
Forwarded to FY06
Ongoing

Water Sector Strategy
NWFP Economic Report
Country Gender Assessment
Public-Private Partnership in Education
Pakistan MDG Assessment
JSA - PRSP Progress Report
Labor Market Policy Note
Social Protection NLTA
Pakistan-India Trade Study
Sindh Economic Report
Agriculture Output Market

Rpt
Rpt
Rpt
Rpt
Rpt
Rpt
Pol
Rpt
Pol
Rpt
Rpt

Completed
Completed
Completed
Forwarded to FY07
Ongoing
Completed
Forwarded to FY06
Changed to Report/Forwarded to FY06
Dropped
Forwarded to FY06
Dropped

Page I of 16

ANNEX III: PAKISTAN PRIVATE SECTOR STRATEGY

1.
This note describes progress in implementation of the World Bank Group's (WBG) Private
Sector Strategy for FYO3-05, reviews the current challenges and outlines a Bank Group Private Sector

Strategy for FYO6-09 taking into account changing market conditions and the evolving agenda emanating
from the continuous process of multi-level economic reform.
Economic Context
2.
Following some of the lowest growth, highest debt and fastest growing poverty in South Asia
during the 1990s, the early part of the new millennium represented a key period of transition in Pakistan's
recent economic history. At the beginning of the decade, policy makers fundamentally adjusted the
development policy toward unleashing the power of the private sector. Reforms which addressed
macroeconomic imbalances, opened the economy to trade, reduced regulation and began transforming the
role of the state as an owner/operator were complemented by a buoyant world economy, significant
capital and remittance inflow and improved market access. Macroeconomic stability was achieved, debt
dynamics reversed and policy credibility was re-established leading to a positive economic response of
higher output, more predictable market signals and a growing confidence within the business community.

Economic growth returned to over 6 percent 2003-04 and, helped by a strong agricultural season
accelerated to over 8 percent in 2004-5.
3.
Despite this early success investor response has so far been muted as investment's share in GDP
has fallen from 16 to 13 percent over the last few years. Rapidly increasing competition in global markets
for Pakistan's traditional exports has added uncertainty to long term growth prospects and sustained the

economy's dependence on lower value added activities. There is growing awareness among stakeholders
of the need for entrepreneurial dynamism, technology adoption and a business-friendly policy
environment to raise productivity growth and improve international competitiveness. The challenge is
enormous, given Pakistan's historical legacy of stagnant world market shares concentrated in low value
added products (Box 1). The World Economic Forum's competitiveness benchmarks capture the myriad
influences on national productivity and show Pakistan's relatively low, but increasing position in global

and regional rankings.'
Progress Since the Last CAS
4.

The Government's interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Program, was operationalized in the

FY2002-2005 Country Assistance Strategy.

For private sector development, the CAS emphasized

Government undertaking near term actions to foster a more favorable business environment while

embarking on the long, difficult process of converting the State's role as owner operator to business
facilitator and regulator. This conversion required stable policies, improved infrastructure, modernization
of business regulations, improved tax administration, trade liberalization, privatization of public sector
enterprises, reduced barriers to entry by new and smaller entrepreneurs, deepened financial sector reform,
and expanded access to finance for new and under-served sectors. Specifically, the private sector strategy
envisioned (i) building the knowledge base in PSD; (ii) strengthening Pakistan's investment climate, (iii)
conversion of the role of government; and, (iv) adequate provision of infrastructure services. Good
progress was achieved in many of the strategic areas as described below.

1 Pakistan's 2004 rankings in the Growth Competitiveness, and Business Competitiveness indicators were 91 and 75
respectively out of 104 countries while the Heritage Economic Freedom Index placed Pakistan at 153 out of 176. In
2005, these ranking rose significantly, with the Growth and Business Competitiveness indicators at 83 and 66,
respectively and the Herigage Economic Freedom Index improving to 110 out of 153.

Page 2 of 16

Box 1: Pakistan's Starting Point: The Challenge of Growth in a Global Economy
(GOP, Towards a ProsperousPakistan. A Strategyfor Rapid IndustrialGrowth, March 2005)
Industrialization and export orientation outcomes over recent years reveal the challenge Pakistan faces
in moving to a more globally competitive and dynamic set of economic activities. Key facts cited below
underscore the challenges inherent in Pakistan's starting point.
*

Lagging industrialization. Over the past three decades, the share of manufacturing value added in GDP
increased from 14 percent in the 1970s to around 18.4 percent today while the share of exports to GNP
increased from 8 to 17 percent over the same period (with 3 percentage points added in the past three
years) - a much lower supply response to globalization than that witnessed in East Asia.

*

Stagnant global market share. Pakistan's share of world exports has been stagnant over the past 25
years while the share of manufacturing exports from Malaysia, Mexico and Thailand have doubled and
the share from China has tripled.

*

High concentration of low value added production. Two thirds of manufacturing value added is
accounted for by textiles, leather, sugar, food, beverages and tobacco, pharmaceuticals, industrial
chemicals, minerals, and basic metals while three quarters of exports derive from 5?? product groups:
cotton based yam, textiles and garments, rice, leather and leather products and sports goods. Within
cotton based textiles, fabrics, knitwear, bed wear and cotton yam account for half.

*

Low share of dynamic exports. In 2002, 31 percent of exports were considered "dynamic" where
Pakistan achieved an increasing market share of a growing world market. In 40 percent of products,
Pakistan is losing market share.

*

Technological sophistication is low. With much lower resource based exports over the past two
decades, the share of low technology products increased from 54 to 76 percent of total exports while
medium technology products increased from 7.8 to 8.4 percent. High tech products remained negligible
at 0.6 percent of total exports in 2002.

Note: Low tech products have stable, well diffused technologies, and include textiles, garments,footwear, other
leather, simple metal and plastic,furniture andfootwear. Barriers to entry are low and competition is based on
price. Medium tech products are heavy products like autos, industrial chemicals, machinery and standard
electrical goods. These products require complex, stable technologies with moderate R&D but advanced
engineering and design skills, and large scale production. Barriers to entry tend to be high due to capital
requirements and strong learning effects in operation and design. High tech products are complex electrical,
pharmaceuticals, aerospace, precision instruments, and fine chemicals. These products have fast-changing
technologies and complex skill needs and therefore have the highest barriersto entry.

*

Building the knowledge base in PSD. Two important firm level surveys took place during the
period which underscored the 'micro-level' impediments that have constrained Pakistan from
fully enjoying the benefits of global integration.2 A number of policy notes assessed the
effectiveness of trade reforms and encouraged stronger export-oriented growth. Finally, an IDF
grant implemented by the Ministry of Industry and Special Initiatives (MOI&SI) examined a
range of areas in support of economy wide regulation and strategy formulation.4

The Investment Climate Assessment (PK-ICA, 2003) demonstrated that productivity can be enhanced by
improving key elements of the country's investment climate. The Administrative and Regulatory Cost Survey Study
(ARCS, 2004) examined the official and unofficial costs associated with administrative barriers.
3 These include a TariffRationalizationStudy and Implications ofAbolition of the Textile and Clothing Quotas.
' The areas studies included, labor legislation, the Drug Act, regulation at the level of SMEs, anti-competitive
behavior and company registration studies in support of an industrial strategy.
2

Page 3 of 16

*

Strengthening the enabling Investment Climate. Based on the initial analytical work, the key
areas of reform initially address focused on the business-Government interface in the areas of
labor, tax, customs and business entry. The investment climate agenda was mainstreamed into

federal and provincial level policy based operations, including the NWFP and Sindh SACs as
well as the PRSC. Implementation support in the areas of tax and customs was supported by
capacity building for the Central Board of Revenue while the revision of the labor code was
initiated with the deregulation grant.
*

Conversion of state's role from owner/operator. The enormous challenge of fundamentally
transforming the state's role from owner-operator to facilitator-regulator across many key
economic activities was accelerated. Privatization of finance, utilities, and industrial enterprises
made great progress, the opening of controlled markets in telecommunications, media and ICT
was initiated and has been accelerating, and legal and regulatory frameworks along with

independent regulatory oversight have been strengthened. Policy reforms and performance
triggers were supported under SAC II and PRSC I while directed support has been provided to
government and independent agencies carrying out new roles.'
*

Infrastructure. In addition to ownership, regulatory and governance improvements attention to
other challenging areas of infrastructure in power, telecom, and gas and transport, including tariff

policies in power and gas, the financial viability of key public sector entities like WAPDA and
the elimination of losses throughout the power system. Transport issues include poor rural

mobility, urban congestion, inadequate financial and operational performance of Pakistan
railways and costly port systems and inadequate trade facilitation. Bank operations in power,
telecommunications and oil and gas have been focused on strategic and policy advice supported
by development policy lending through SAC II and PRSC I and in telecommunications,
complemented by the Telecommunications Regulation and Privatization project. In addition to a
strong program of analytical work, the Bank is supporting rehabilitation of the highway network
(through the Highways Rehabilitation Project) and assisting in modernizing trade and transport
facilitation under the Trade and Transport Facilitation Project.

*

Access to finance. Similarly, ownership, soundness and regulatory strengthening in the financial
sector will go far to expand access to finance for formalized commercial activities. A Banking
Sector Adjustment Credit approved in 2005 is supporting sustained soundness of the newly
privatized banking sector while the Banking Sector TA in providing continued support for

operational strengthening of the State Bank of Pakistan. In addition, along with commercial
banking reforms, efforts to widen access were supported by the Bank under PPAF and other
banking operations, including expanding micro-finance to the bankable poor, widening prudential

regulations to cover SME, consumer, and micro-finance lending and establishing private credit
information services
*

IFC's program during the last CAS period. Over the past three years, IFC introduced new
financial products and a greater focus on key strategic sectors, including financial markets, small

and medium-sized enterprises and infrastructure. IFC has also put greater emphasis on technical
assistance and advisory services in addition to traditional investment operations.
o

Investment operations. During the period, US$187 million in sixteen new investments were
committed in infrastructure, information technology, the financial sector, textiles, and pulp
and paper. Particular examples of groundbreaking investments include:

Including through the Telecom Regulation and Privatization project, the Banking Sector Adjustment and Technical
Assistance Loans and the Public Sector Capacity Building Project.

Page 4 of 16

*

Pakistan International Container Terminal to upgrade the port of Karachi, including civil
works, container handling equipment and expansion of capacity in the-container yard.

*

TRG, which demonstrated the viability of Pakistan as a location for call centers. The
company became the largest of its type in the country and is expanding operations
throughout the region.

o

*

First UDL Modaraba where an Islamic financing product was used in the leasing sector.

*

Dewan Salman Fibre Limited where the introduction of preference shares, the provision
of a local currency product and a linkage program with its small suppliers complemented
an investment to expand its production capacity and restructure its balance sheet.

TechnicalAssistance Trust Funds (TA TF) During the period, two studies were completed: (i)
a feasibility study on the country's private health care industry, including an assessment of

the market for general and specialized services; and (ii) an analysis of the competitive
positions of the country's leasing companies and investment banks. Foreign Investment
Advisory Service (FIAS) completed a private sector development strategy for the Northwest
Frontier province.

o

PEP - MENA.

An extensive technical assistance and ramped up advisory program focused

on supporting (i) improvements in the business enabling environment (BEE), (ii) financial

sector, (iii) SMEs and (iv) challenging advisory assignments addressing privatization issues
and public-private partnerships. Particular examples include:
*

Financial markets support covering a range of activities, such as corporate governance,

institution-building in housing finance, women's banking, and micro and SME finance.
*

Business enabling environment including (i) assistance to the Pakistani Securities and

Exchange Commission in efforts to de-mutualize the countries three stock exchanges, (ii)
the introduction of alternative dispute resolution to promote mediation for SMEs.
*

General support to SMEs in the form of work with business membership organizations to
assist them in supporting SMEs in their industries including work focused on the
automotive supplier sector and the introduction of its "Business Edge" program, which

provides a platform for Training of Trainers for SMEs.
*

Advisory and Public-private Partnerships including the initiation of a program to
(i) advise on the privatization of the Faisalabad Electric Supply Company, and (ii) bring
private sector operators into the water sector through work on the Lahore Water publicprivate partnership.

Strategic Objectives
The Government's objectives for private sector development are based not only replacing the

5.

state in commercial activities, but on becoming globally competitive through cost minimization and
innovation. As Pakistan moves from a focus on macroeconomic stability and restoring growth to one of
productivity growth and sustained private investment, innovation through FDI and technology
development will be needed to enable further gains and economic diversification. To accomplish this, the
economy will require lowering the cost of doing business, stronger domestic competition with easier entry
and exit, better infrastructure and wider access to finance, including equity, fixed income and project
based. Therefore, PSD objectives seek:
*

An environment which fosters a dynamic manufacturing sector and entrepreneurial activity
within an export-oriented policy framework based on improved competition in product and factor

Page 5 of 16
markets, innovation and skills upgrading, greater diversification and participation in global

supply chains;
*

An investment-friendly policy stance for all enterprises, large and small, through continued
reorientation of the state's role, strengthened economic governance, improved infrastructure and
better law and order;

*

Improving the financial sector environment for intermediation,the legal framework andjudicial
process for enforcing financial contract, the depth of capital markets, the quality of financial
infrastructureand access to financialservices,-and

*

Development of rural areas where most of the poor live based on productivity gains in agriculture
and non-farm activities from improvements in policies and rural infrastructure.

Current Policy Challenges
6.
Policy makers increasingly recognize that sustaining the current high rates of economic growth
requires globally competitive production in an increasingly demanding world market. Therefore, based
on considerable progress in stabilizing and reorienting the economy, policy makers are focused on
strengthening international competitiveness through rising productivity in order to support higher wages,

a strengthened currency and increased returns to capital. Macroeconomic stability and the removal of
price distortions have eliminated impediments to productivity growth but will only translate into rising
productivity if accompanied by a conducive business environment.
7.
Notwithstanding Pakistan's notable policy achievements and company level strengths, there is a
consensus among policy markers, academics and the business community that improvement in Pakistan's
competitiveness derive from success in three "second generation" areas which impact firm level
productivity. First, economic governance to instill market discipline and provide certainty in investment
returns poses a particular challenge, encompassing such entrenched factors as efficiency and effectiveness
of government and autonomous institutions, quality of regulation, political uncertainty, corruption and the

rule of law. Second, efficiency of factor markets to foster flexibility and fluidity represents a major
constraint to good resource allocation and ease of entry, particularly in the case of land and labor. Third,
physical infrastructureand transport logistics have a major impact on international competitiveness and
have become important priorities for Pakistan.
8.

In addition to these, two specific areas are of interest to Pakistan's policy makers, concerned with

ensuring that growth is sustainable and broad based.

First, issues reflecting technology adaptation

represents the new frontier for Pakistan business in an increasingly globalized market.
Second,
sub-national differences are particularly poignant in Pakistan as a federation of four vastly different
provinces with growing urban - rural divide.

Economic Governance. A driving force behind firm-level productivity is an environment of
9.
open and fair competition which encourages low costs, high efficiency and innovation to survive.
Minimized cost of regulatory compliance, ease of entry, expedient exit and institutional protection of
property rights and fair competition are key components of a supportive policy regime. Not surprisingly,
institution building is a long, difficult process for the executive, judiciary and independent regulators. As
a result, the consistency, certainty, and predictability of the economic governance framework - including
the laws and regulations, the adjudication mechanisms and their enforcement agencies - still fall short of
minimal standards as reflected in a recent deterioration in governance indicators.6
In 2004, Pakistan ranked in the bottom 20 percent in four of six indicators with the other two in the bottom third
During the 2000 - 2004, the ratings fell for three of the six indicators and did not change for two others (Kaufmann,
Kraay Mastruzzi, Governance Matters IV. Governance Indicators for 1996 - 2004, The World Bank, May 2005.
6

Page 6 of 16

Entry and Post - Entry Regulation. Starting and running a business in Pakistan has become
10.
easier in recent years due to concerted effort across a range of regulatory processes, but key challenges
remain in terms of land acquisition, site development, construction licensing, and utility hook up, all of
which carry a high degree of administrative burden and are governed by provincial and local authorities.
A significant source of government-business interface stems from compliance processes involved with
tax, customs and labor regulation.' In all of these areas, the Government is undertaking comprehensive

programs with the explicit objectives of lowering the compliance burden while improving the
effectiveness of government oversight. Legislated efforts are being driven at the federal level and a range
of implementing agencies are undergoing capacity building and process re-engineering to ensure better
government - business interface, focusing initially on federal tax administration, customs facilitation and
labor protection.9

11.
Court Efficiency. Without the credible threat of an efficient and effective insolvency,
adjudication and dispute resolution mechanism, risk taking by businesses is suppressed and innovation
forgone. Court processes, judicial capacity and supporting institutions (advocates, registries, accountancy
and related professions) have been notoriously ineffective in enforcing contracts and protecting property

rights in Pakistan. Just over a third of businesses surveyed in 2002 expressed confidence in the judiciary
as commercial parties increasingly use the courts to delay and or stop transactions through stays and
continuances. Case backlog-around half of which concern cases of commercial nature-in the High

Courts of Sindh and the Punjab number over a hundred thousand, and for the lower courts, in the millions.
When cases do go forward, it takes, on average, 46 steps, more than a year and almost a third of the
contract value to enforce a contract.10 Standardized indicators comparing the average time (2.8 years) and
cost (4 percent of the estate), to close a firm are not excessive by international standards, but legislated

restrictions in labor law, the company law and its associated insolvency procedures are cumbersome and
inadequate. Adjudication of commercial cases, already a lower priority in the courts, will become even
more inadequate as new legal frameworks are introduced for foreign investment, insolvency, monopoly
regulation, anti-money laundering, insider trading and corporate governance.
12.

Competition Policy. Pakistan lacks effective legal framework to govern fair competition and an

associated institutional framework to promote competition within the domestic market. At a time when
privatization, utility deregulation and economic restructuring are radically changing the competitive

landscape, the extent of domestic competition, industrial concentration and barriers to entry in the
economy is not well understood in Pakistan.. However, with the opening of previously uncontestable
markets, large scale privatization and anecdotal evidence citing concentration in primary sectors such as

cement and fertilizer, Pakistan has recorded low rankings for local competition." At the same time,
sectors such as power, oil and gas, telecommunications and electronic media are opening to private sector
competition and are experiencing some of the natural challenges associated with rapidly transforming
regulatory landscape in technically difficult areas.

Cite Pakistan's 2006 DB Rankings. Recent surveys detail the process of business start-up, demonstrating that the
process to initiating business operations can take more than a year. Accordingly, the World Economic Forum's
indicator, "Administrative Burden for Startup," fell from 7 2nd in the world in 2003 to 9 2 nd in 2004.
An indication of the regulatory impact on formal firms' cost of doing business is that Pakistani managers, on
average, spend 10 percent of their time dealing with Government regulation; higher than other comparator countries
apart from China and India, (The World Bank, Investment Climate Database).
9 For example, federal tax and customs authorities are undergoing institutional restructuring and process reform.
For labor inspections, provincial governments are experimenting with different approaches, including combining
visits and pre-announcing (Sindh), self-regulation (Punjab) and exemptions for low risk firms (NWFP).
10 The high number of steps to enforce a contract may be a contributor to the perception that the judiciary is one of
the most corrupt institutions in the country.
" For example by The World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report.

Page 7 of 16
13.
Factor Market Conditions. Well functioning markets for land, labor and capital enable optimal
resource allocation and maximum factor productivity growth. Pakistani authorities have taken bold steps
to improve the banking sector, but deficient labor and land markets continue to be viewed as major
constraints in Pakistan's investment climate.
14.
Labor Market and Skills. Pakistan's labor market efficiency ranks low by international standards
due, in part, to antiquated and restrictive regulations governing maximum hours, overtime conditions,
length of temporary contracts, remuneration rates, welfare contributions and retrenchment procedures
which impact bilateral market relationships and cause real wages to diverge from productivity levels,

preventing efficient resource allocation and harming competitiveness. The discretionary approach of
provincial inspectors, labor tribunals and wage authorities in enforcing requirements and adjudicating
disputes adds considerable uncertainty to labor market outcomes. The result is that many, if not most,
firms circumvent labor laws to some degree, most often by using contracted or piece rate labor on a very
short term basis and often hired through intermediaries, suppressing investment in labor skills1 2 and
sustaining concentration on low value added activities.
15.

Land Market and IndustrialEstates. Access to land markets and the use of land as loan collateral

is fraught with difficulties, involving a multitude of public agencies at the federal, provincial and state
level which own, manage, tax and regulate commercial land. For transactions which do occur in the
private sector, the inherent weaknesses of the system of registering prevent certainty of property rights.

These include the multiple agencies involved in land registration, complex and opaque records keeping
and sale transactions taking place without valid conveyance documents. These legal inadequacies and
procedural deficiencies prevent indisputable land title and is one of the primary causes of the case backlog
in the courts. Moreover, without clear property rights, lenders will not consider collateral as loan security
without an original sale deed in the bank's possession. The resulting "dead capital" and lack of site
access, hinders leveraged investment, firm level entry and efficient resource allocation. The rapid rise in

land prices throughout Pakistan has made the situation even more constrained as hoarding is encouraged,
underreporting for tax purposes is rising, and a new cadre of speculative players has entered the market.
16.

Federal and provincial governments have countered problems with land access and site

development by making available plots on government owned land in industrial estates with mixed

success.13 Reason include (i) inappropriate selection of location; (ii) poor quality of infrastructure and
support services; (iii) insufficient land in prime business locations; (iv) rigid government rules regarding
eligibility of investment; and (v) inadequate stakeholder participation in estate management. The Federal
Government is piloting new models of public-private partnerships to locate, develop and manage new
industrial estates, drawing on the Sundar experience in Punjab.
17.
FinancialMarkets. The past
privatization in the financial sector.
public sector in the late 1990s, almost
initiated to strengthen the regulations

five years witnessed considerable deregulation, liberalization and
Starting from three quarters of banking assets controlled by the
80 percent of assets are now under private control. Reforms were
and the regulator, reform the National Savings Scheme (NSS) to

rationalize interest rates, strengthen enforcement of financial contract; rationalize the tax structure and

foster greater disclosure and transparency. Still, the supply of longer term finance and capital market
development remains limited. Among other implications, this constrains the development of nascent
financial markets such as housing and leasing which depend on the availability of long term funding in
the banking sector. The insurance and pension system is small, dominated by public institutions, invests

Pakistan's basic education and skills indicators are at the lower end of global rankings and have been falling.
A survey of the 35 principal industrial estates across the country reveals a stock of more than 17,000 plots, two
thirds of which have been allotted. The survey also reveals the low occupancy rate for most estates apart from 100
percent occupancy in SITE in Sindh, and Raiwind and Kot Lakhpat in Punjab Ministry of Industry, Production and
Special Initiatives, A Prosperous Pakistan, 2005.
12

Page 8 of 16
in government assets, and is highly taxed. The 700 companies listed on the Karachi stock exchange4 are
capitalized at around 24 percent of GDP as compared with 50 and 130 percent in Mumbai and Kuala
Lumpur, respectively. The legal system for enforcement of financial contracts is partly untested and is
faced with problems at the execution level,1 5 and credit bureaus are at an early stage of development. The
lack of a tested secured transaction regime as well as the nascent private credit information system limits
access.

Infrastructure Development. In addition to low penetration density and coverage ratios, the
18.
performance.of infrastructure services has been relatively poor, particularly in the area of power. At the
same time, the conditions of the roads, railways and ports hinder Pakistan's competitiveness by
preventing adequate logistical linkages among firms and with their customers
Power. The principal infrastructure issue facing the business community, particularly larger
19.
established firms, is access to reliable power both at the business start-up phase, in terms of obtaining

electricity connections, and during business operations, in terms of having reliable supply. In
the sector's pricing structure involves cross-subsidization with the burden falling particularly
industry, adversely impacting investment decisions and competitiveness enhancement.
challenges include (i) the high technical and commercial losses in the system, increasing from

addition,
hard on
Current
23 to 27

percent of total output between 1995 and 200216 and in some cases reaching as 40 percent; and (ii) the

extension of services to underserved areas as estimates indicate that almost of third of the population has
no access to power.

20.

Telecommunications.

In the global

market with

growing

connectivity

requirements,

telecommunications represents a key determinant of the country's investment climate. Pakistan has taken

significant steps to (i) end the state monopoly for fixed lines resulting in numerous companies providing
services at competitive rates; (ii) privatize the public telephone company leaving the sector fully managed
by the private sector; and (iii) approve a cellular mobile policy in January 2004 leading to two additional
cellular mobile operators being licensed. These initiatives have led to a complete liberalization of the
sector and significant foreign investments. Low penetration rates are increasing rapidly, as telecoms
density has increased from 4.6 to 9.8 lines per 100 inhabitants between 2003 and 2005 and the sector as
seen a dramatic reduction in prices. Connection time is improving and the sector now has the potential to

be a strength in Pakistan's investment climate. However, there is a significant lag in rural
telecommunications access, as the positive developments and impact in the sector are mostly
confined to the urban and semi-urban areas. The difference in penetration between rural and urban
users is quite high , as half of Pakistan's 50,000 villages have no access telephones or the internet. This is
primarily due to its lack of commercial viability and penetration is at a meager 1 percent. Facilitating
rural telecommunications access will enable e-government and e-services to be delivered to rural areas
and assist in overall economic development of the country.

21.
Oil and Gas. Representing 41 and 36 percent, respectively of the total commercial energy
consumption, the Government's long-term goal for Oil and Gas is to institute a largely privatized sector.
Beginning with a fundamental policy shift in 2000, the Government began to focus more on policy issues,
state enterprises were slated for privatization and natural monopolies were entrusted to an autonomous
regulatory body. Progress in the reform agenda has been mixed. The movement toward Government

divestment and improved regulation has proceeded relatively well. On the demand side, the domestic
price mechanisms continue to be distorted by cross subsidies among different classes of consumers and
the mechanism for adjusting gas price has been erratic. In 2004, petroleum prices were prevented from
KSE lists all companies on the Lahore and Islamabad stock exchanges apart from five companies listed in
Lahore.
15 The Financial Recoveries Ordinance 2001, has been effective for several years but has been used sparingly due to
recent judicial challenges. It will only become fully effective once it is upheld by the supreme court of the country.
16 The World Bank, World Development Indicators,
2005.
14

Page 9 of 16
adjustmenting to reflect world market conditions, creating pressure on private suppliers and distortions in
consumption and investment patterns.
22.
Transport: Roads, Railways, Ports. Pakistan's potential competitive position is highly dependent
on the quality and cost of its internal and external transport systems. However, the sector is inefficient
and so far has been unable to overcome the competitiveness disadvantages of both long sea and land
transport links. Major markets are located at considerable distances from Pakistan and the location of its
main production center is over 1,000km from the sea. The sector faces further cost disadvantaged in
terms of scale, since total import/export flows are relatively small. Key sector issues are: (i) poor rural

mobility;" (ii) urban congestion;" (iii) ineffective state railways monopoly carrying 3 percent of the total
cargo traffic; and (iv) costly port systems and inadequate trade facilitation.
23.
Innovation, Globalization and FDI. Policy makers and the business community recognize that
improved processes and increased efficiency at the firm level will require appropriate technology
adoption and a drive for innovation. Effective demand for new technology by commercial enterprises
will rise as they participate in vibrant competitive markets exposed to global prices and driven by

sophisticated consumer demand. The adaptation process also requires (i) an educated workforce; (ii)
positive incentives for risk-taking; (iii) integration between academic/government sponsored research and

business applications; and (iv) a spillover of knowledge transfer which comes from participation in the
global economy, through integration with inward FDI and participation in global supply chains requiring

producing to world standards of price, quality and delivery time.
24.

Though a rapidly developing ICT infrastructure, is undoubtedly having a positive impact on

telecommunications and innovation, the challenge for Pakistan to develop into a more knowledge based
economy are morebasic, given the education and labor skill outcomes described above.

In addition

inadequate technical expertise to support innovation,19 a limited amount of risk capital along with a low
degree of globalization 20 and low levels of inward FDI, despite one of the more liberal regimes in the
world 21 is limiting Pakistan's ability to capture productivity gains emanating from innovative ways to do

business.
25.

Provincial Role in the Investment Climate.

As a highly diverse federation, significant

differences in the investment climate are seen across provinces, attributable in part, to variances in
political, security, and economic management issues.22 Due to the increasing importance of vertical

integration and inter-firm linkages in the global marketplace, such regional differences become an issue
of national competitiveness. While inter-provincial competition can be healthy for reform, the creation of

policy induced location advantages and differences in perceptions of security, crime and political stability
can adversely affect efficient resource allocation. Moreover, as provincial governments and increasingly
local authorities are responsible for much of the business interface with regard to labor and other type of

business inspections, tax administration, license approval, land and site development issues and judicial
enforcement, the nature of a firm's investment climate depends on good implementation and coordination

with Federal policies.
Particularly as 45 percent of unpaved roads are mostly in rural areas.
1 Particularly in Karachi and Lahore, which support close to a third of Pakistan's GDP.
19 Science and technology indicators as well as higher education outcomes have fallen over the past decade and
currently lag most other comparator countries (The World Bank, Knowledge Assessment Database, 2005).
20 Pakistan's ranks in the bottom ten out of 62 countries for four globalization
dimensions economic, personal,
technological and political (AT Kearney / Foreign Policy Globalization Index, 2004),and ranks 144 out of 163
countries in FDI as a share of GDP for the period 1998-2003 (World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2005).
21 The government liberalized the foreign investment regime in the 1990s by opening strategic sectors to foreign
ownership, reducing required approvals, expanding profit repatriation and providing national treatment and legal
protection. Seedy dispute resolution and a further opening of the service sector was legislated in 2005.
22
Pakistan ranks 81s in the world according to the WEF indictor "Regional Disparities in the Business
Environment".
17

Page 10 of 16

26.
Public-PrivateDialogue. By establishing close connections to the local business community,
provincial governments have mobilized private sector initiative to play an important role in activities
traditionally considered exclusively as within the public sector's domain. Areas where the private sector
is increasing getting involved include strategy formulation and policy advice (Sindh, NWFP), industrial
estate management (Punjab, Sindh, NWFP), vocational training (NWFP), and privatization transactions

(Sindh). Increasingly, the private sector will be able to play more substantive roles in providing public
services through more sophisticated public-private partnerships in municipal services particularly water

and sewage, road building, information technology and knowledge development.
Entry and Post-Entry Regulation. To achieve a favorable impact from reforms addressing
27.
business start-up, labor regulation, and tax administration, federal reforms require complementary
implementation efforts at the provincial level. In addition, there are other pre- and post entry regulations
solely within the purview of provincial governments that need to be reviewed to ensure that barriers to

entry are minimized and the cost of doing business is comparable with other countries. Implementation
should be at a harmonious pace across Pakistan to avoid perceptions of permanent policy induced location
advantages.23
28.

Factor Markets. As market mechanisms for land, labor and capital, are only starting to be

addressed, provincial governments have an important responsibility in the development of land markets
which in turn will support improved access to finance. In the interim, improved management of industrial

estates can provide increased access to publicly held land and utilities In addition, as they are responsible
for enforcement of labor legislation, provincial governments have a key role in breaking long standing
market rigidities. As Federal legislation is being reformed, provincial governments will need to re-tool
their implementation mechanism to enable real wages to better reflect productivity, supporting
competitiveness and improving resource allocation.
29.
Judicial Efficiency. Property rights are weak in Pakistan generally, with contract enforcement
and land disputes based more on negotiated settlements than rule of law and judicial enforcement.
Provincial governments can directly contribute to improvements in judicial processes in three ways. First,
improved governance and better performance of government officials in implementing regulations would

lessen the crowding out of purely commercial disputes. Second, efforts to improve the functioning of
land and labor markets would remove a second source of taxation on court time. Finally, ensuring
adequate capacity and a rational structure at lower court levels while simultaneously working toward

filling vacancies and improving procedures for commercial cases at the High Court, would significantly
contribute to the certainty and predictability of property rights.
Security and Crime. Issues outside the normal parameters of economic management have been
30.
shown to significantly affect investment climates around the world,24 but are perhaps more important for

Pakistan than for other economies. Perceptions of security risks as well as local crime, though hard to
quantify, have clearly had an adverse impact on investment and growth. Perception of political instability
at the regional political arena, even if constrained to the local region, has been a clear deterrent to
investment throughout Pakistan, as well. Together local issues of crime and political stability, can infect
the entire country and contribute to a short term corporate view and suppresses investment by the business
community.

Doing Business Pakistan, 2004 shows significant regional differences in the legislated cost and time associated
with a number of business procedures, including opening a business, contract enforcement, and property and
collateral registration.
24 For example, Ayyagari, Demirgtig-Kunt and Maksimovic, How Important Are FinancingConstraints? The Role
of Finance in the Business Environment, (Forthcoming)shows that "maintaining political stability, keeping crime
under control, and undertaking financial sector reforms are likely to be the most effective routes to firm growth."
23

Page IIof 16
The Way Forward
31.
Economic Governance. As the economy increasingly opens up to international trade and
investment, attention has turned to regulatory and institutional reform to create a more certain and
predictable environment for commercial transactions. Good progress is being made in tax, customs,
financial, labor and utility regulation as the first areas to be tackled with the next round focused on:
*

Risk based approaches emphasizing self-assessment will be deepened through tax and customs
administration reform and will be expanded to labor inspections under the planned new labor

code and prudential regulation of the financial sector under Basel II.
*

Business laws will have their own program of modernization, particularly in areas covering
insolvency, corporate governance, and competition law. In addition the Securities and Exchange

Commission of Pakistan (SECP) will be strengthened and complemented by an activation of a
credible competition authority.
*

Expeditious adjudication of commercial cases is being actively pursued. Implementation of the

pending legal reform bill will limit procedural delays (stays, continuances, etc.) and introduce
formalized alternative dispute resolution. More fundamental reform is under consideration
including a commercial court, commercial benches, streamlined and summary procedures, and

systems of registries, accountancy, and enforcement.
*

In all areas the principal of strengthening enforcement agencies to implement strengthened legal

frameworks, along with a credible system of operational rules, procedures and monitoring
systems will be pursued.
*

Process reengineering would be a central part of capacity building efforts with an expansion of
existing pilot e-government initiatives to improve the business-government interface.

Efficient Factor Markets. Efforts to improve the functioning of factor markets are a central
32.
pillar of Pakistan's drive for economic restructuring. Deepening financial sector reforms, expanding
efforts to improve labor markets and initiating a more rational approach to land markets will involve:

*

Codifying, rationalizing and liberalizing antiquated legislation governing labor compensation,
industrial relations, working conditions, health and safety requirements and human resource
development.2 5

*

Initiating a two tracks system to develop land markets: (i) develop a new, clean system of land
titling for new transactions to ensure sovereign backing, easy transferability, and rational
taxation; and (ii) begin carrying out the complex and delicate parallel activity to establish
property rights in the face of ownership disputes.

In the interim, in order to feed and provide

credibility to the new land titling system, federal and provincial authorities would inventory
underutilized land to be auctioned and transferred according to the newly introduced system.
*

In the interim, provincial governments will observe implementation of the various models of
public-private partnership in industrial estate development and management such as SITE, Ltd in
Sindh and Sundar in Punjab to formulate "best practice" guidelines for estate management.

Laws are being redrafted to replace 30 - 40 federal and provincial laws and regulations covering employment
conditions, labor welfare, health and safety and human resource development. The first act, Services and
Employment, recognizes piece-rate contract workers in the legislation, expands the weekly hours and overtime
hours, particularly for women and reduces the compliance cost on business.
25

Page 12 of 16
*

To deepen financial sector reforms and improve term transformation, the remaining large public
sector commercial bank, specialized financial institutions and insurance companies will be
privatized, regulatory constraints on investments by insurance and pension/ provident funds will
be rationalized and corporate governance will be strengthened. Further deepening of the financial
sector through analytical and advisory assistance and operational investment in key finance
sectors such as housing finance, leasing, SME finance and microfinance will have positive
spillover effects on the rest of the economy by spurring household and entrepreneurial savings

and investment spending.
*

Access to credit will increase with improvements in the legal framework and judicial processes
for enforcement of financial contracts (such as a modem secured transactions regime for movable
collateral) and an expansion of private credit registry coverage.

33.
Infrastructure. Government efforts to provide better infrastructure have been intensive in recent
years and characterized by successes in telecommunication and oil/gas and slow progress in power sector
reform. Therefore, the near term agenda in infrastructure includes:

*

In power, strengthen implementation of the Government's Sector Recovery Plan, which aims at
(i) completing the unbundling of Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA) into
separate transmission and distribution companies; (ii) accelerated privatization in generation and
distribution; (iii) aggressive cost and loss reducing measures throughout the system; and (iv)

improved tariffs and subsidies, for distribution companies to enable better targeting of subsides
and enhance operational and financial performance. Implementation delays are causing more
losses in the system, further complicating the challenge. Based on the investment backlog in the
sector, investment lending would support distribution and transmission, hydropower and rural
access.
*

In telecommunications, continue to implement the 2003 deregulation policy and 2004 mobile
cellular policy by (i) strengthening the policy and regulatory environment for licensing,
interconnection and tariff regimes; (ii) completing the privatization of the state-owned monopoly
as an integrated company; (iii) continue opening the cellular market to further competition by

selling additional licenses; and (iv) accelerating rural telecommunication and broadband
connectivity. Under this new competitive, open regime, capacity enhancement is needed both for
the Ministry as a policy making body as well as the regulator.
*

In oil and gas, domestic prices should reflect fully world market conditions. Gas tariffs, are
priced close to long run costs on average but are still below opportunity costs for households and
for the fertilizer industry.

Over time, pricing decisions will be made by the Gas Regulator

(ORGRA) rather than the Cabinet, but with rising demand and depleting reserves, imports will
begin in the coming y ears. On the oil side, efforts to unbundle and privatize the large enterprise
(Pakistan State Oil, Oil and Gas Development Company and Pakistan Petroleum Limited) will be
strengthened as world petroleum prices are increasingly passed through to the consumers.

*

In transport and trade logistics, develop a strategic approach to the sector focusing first on the
Indus trade corridor linking the major ports with the major city and corridors in the North with an
objective of developing an integrated approach to planning, investment and managing the Indus

transport logistics system. There is a significant maintenance backlog in the sector requiring
maintenance of $1 billion per year. Continued high-level commitment and support will help
accelerate reform initiatives in the Pakistan Railways. Capacity constraints at the National
Highway Authority of Pakistan will be addressed to avoid delays in new highway construction.
Finally, delays in finalization and adoption of laws, rules, and procedures that were developed

Page 13 of 16

under the trade and transport facilitation program will be eliminated. As a particular emphasis,

transport in rural areas will be pursued under the country's devolution framework.
*

The institutional framework for Private Public Partnerships (PPP) in infrastructure needs

immediate attention to attract private financing to transport, urban services, energy and other
infrastructure areas. The immediate steps will be to prepare and issue a PPP policy to identify
sectors, the institutional framework (PPP unit) and funding mechanism while in tandem pilot
projects are pursued to demonstrate the viability of the PPP framework, for example with
highways or municipal services.
Innovation, Technology Improvement and FDI. To help capture productivity gains from
34.
advances in business processes, improved techniques and increased technology content of production,
public and private initiatives will aggressively seek competitive markets at home, participation in the
global economy and development of the human and financial resources required for innovation,
including:
*

A globalization driven, outward-orientation is needed in firm level business strategy to benefit
from a broader set of markets, resources and technologies. However, to participate, domestic
firms require a competitive operating environment at home which rewards firm-level innovation,

investment in skills, improved industrial organization and risk taking.
*

Pakistan needs to offset perceived risks of foreign direct investors stemming from perceptions

regarding security, stability, and corruption with an aggressive program to attract foreign
investors. Recognizing the lingering reputation risk from high profile disputes with private
companies, passing legislation to recognize international arbitration would be a strong and a
positive signal to foreign investors concerned with unpredictable contract enforcement.
*

Government's role in knowledge development is to focus on the basics, including (i) improved
education outcomes and coverage, (ii) better telecommunications infrastructure; (iii) programs to
subsidize connectivity for disadvantaged sectors of society; and (iv) improving science and
technology at home through support for basic R&D; and (v) leveraging the Pakistan Diaspora to
foster linkages between business, research institutions and academia.

35.
Provincial Role in Determining the Investment Climate. As the Federal government deepens
its reform agenda into institution building, regulatory reform and legal modernization, and as devolution
restructures economic relationships, provincial governments will play an increasingly active role in a
number of key areas, including,
*

Establish public-private policy and reform-related dialogues - create institutions to encourage
dialogue, e.g. investor council, consultative mechanisms, etc. Contributing to greater publicprivate activity, but also helping to raise the level of awareness and understanding of the private
sector amongst ministries and staff. and ultimately will develop a PPP Framework

* The new coordinating body in the Federal Government will encourage provincial governments to
implement reforms through active consultation, monitoring and domestic benchmarking, to
encourage a unified and competitive approach to implementation of provincial regulations.
*

The high level of business sophistication and large numbers of specialized business associations
and chambers around the country can be leveraged through public-private partnerships to
strengthen inter-firm supply chains.

Page 14 of 16

Role of the Bank Group
The World Bank Group has provided support to the Government's objectives through a number
36.
of avenues, grouped into analytical work, non-lending technical assistance, policy support and investment
operations.

Analytical Work. As policy makers develop comprehensive plans for the next round of strategic
37.
policy decisions, contemporaneous, rigorous and informed analysis will assist in directing efforts toward
the binding constraints to improved microeconomic efficiency. The previous CAS sought the building of
a strong analytical basis to advise the Government on various dimensions of private sector development.
Since then a number of studies were launched. The Growth and Competitiveness flagship report sets the
integrates microeconomic factors into growth modeling in order to provide an in depth analyses of
constraints to sustained rapid economic growth. The yearly benchmarking of Pakistan at the global,
regional and sub-national levels using the Doing Business methodology provides insight and monitoring
for economic governance issues. Studies covering administrative barriers, labor markets, access to
finance, and transportcompetitiveness will examine specific dimensions of the investment climate. Sector
studies on retail, construction and tourism will look at sector specific issues. Four provincial economic

reports and the rural growth strategy will shed analytical light on sub-national dimensions and a value
chain study of particular products will provide specific case studies to illustrate competitiveness issues.
Finally, investment climate assessments at the federal and provincial level will synthesize this body of
work and complement it with international benchmarking and productivity analysis.
Lending Support for Policy Reform. Supporting one of the pillars of the PRSP, key elements
38.
of the Government program of private sector led growth have been supported by policy lending at the
federal and provincial levels during the previous CAS and will continue for the coming CAS period. At
the Federal Level, the PRSC dialogue has supported reforms in infrastructure, particularly power, a new
labor code, privatization transactions and financial sector reform. Future policy lending in the private
sector will continue to focus on regulatory reform, infrastructure and privatization and will expand to

further development of institutions for a market economy. The Development Policy Creditfor NWFP is
supporting an emerging private sector orientation by the provincial government.
Small scale capacity building support to regulatory
Non-Lending Technical Assistance.
39.
agencies will assist in strengthening regulatory and oversight agencies. A World Bank IDF grant was
approved to support the Securities and Exchange Commission. In cooperation with DFID the Bank is
also providing technical assistance to help government design a new competition policy, law and agency.

In terms of promoting new foreign investment, MIGA is willing, if requested by the government, to
provide practical capacity building support for the Board of Investment and is seeking to build the South
Asia Enterprise Benchmarking Program, an example of an operational diagnostic study with key outputs
being marketing profiles, outreach and promotion activities and product development to assist each
participating country to promote itself more effectively for foreign investment.
Public Investment Lending. Lending in areas which support private sector development has
40.
generally taken the form of technical assistance and capacity building, or large infrastructure investments.
The Tax Administration Reform Project, a major program aimed at improving federal tax and customs

administration will be implemented during the CAS period and may require a repeater activity.
Components of the Public Sector CapacityBuildingprogram are aimed at strengthening utility regulators
and will help with infrastructure services. A series of projects aimed at infrastructure development,
particularly the power sector are being developed. In the future, projects will be pursued which focus on
institutions for a market economy and combine public investment with technical assistance to enhance
internationalcompetitiveness and develop capital markets. In the financial sector, future lending by the

Page 15 of 16
Bank will build on first generation reforms and focus on term transformation investments that increase
access to long term funds for household and entrepreneurial activities such as housing, leasing and
domestic capital investments.

41.

IFC Priorities for FYO6-FYO9.

In the coming CAS period, IFC will build upon the efforts to

support strategic sectors, particularly the financial sector, SMEs and infrastructure. IFC will also look for

opportunities to provide value-added to industrial clients.

IFC will broaden the scope of technical

assistance and advisory work, both linked to investment and on a stand-alone basis. The focus of IFC

efforts will be to provide a package of services and financing aimed at addressing the specific needs of
our clients.

42.
During the upcoming CAS period, IFC expects to increase its investment with the target range of
US$500-600 million for the period. IFC will also explore opportunities in pre-privatization investment.
It furthermore plans to make more equity investment and intends to be a catalyst for and mobilize private

equity in the country. In addition IFC will increase technical assistance (TA) activities through the PEPMENA program. The two pronged approach of investment and TA will allow for synergies between the
programs. For example, in the financial sector, IFC can provide TA to develop microfinance institutions,
while at the same time providing investment for nascent institutions, which in turn provides such funds to

entrepreneurs. Work to support the microfinance sector is seen as a particularly effective way to spread
the benefits of development to a broader segment of society. Microfinance institutions are set up outside

the reach of traditional financial institutions and therefore can support entrepreneurs in more remote
areas. Also in the financial sector, PEP-MENA TA to banks will be aimed at the next size of enterprises
- efforts to help banks develop their ability to assess risks of SMEs can be accompanied by credit lines.
Other priority areas in the financial sector include housing finance, leasing, and trade finance. Housing
finance efforts can help increase the availability of affordable housing, and improve the opportunity for
people of middle income and even lower income to buy their own homes. IFC's efforts in this sector can
include institution building TA and investment to provide long-term lending and securitization for
housing finance. Work with banks and other institutions will include TA to improve internal credit risk
systems, policies and procedures, and upgrade training of staff. IFC through PEP-MENA will work with
banks to develop Corporate Governance practices.

43.
In the SME sector, beyond the financial component, IFC will continue to provide TA support
through "Business Edge" and work with business membership organizations to improve services for the
support of their SME members. IFC believes that there are opportunities to support SMEs in strategic
sectors such as health and education, both with TA and investment.
44.

In infrastructure, IFC will focus on the energy sector, including power, gas and utilities, and

telecommunications through investment operations supporting the Government's strategy.

There is a

particular need to improve the physical infrastructure in the country to allow for the efficient flow of
goods, people and energy. Without improvements in this vital area, the long-term benefits of Pakistan's
liberalization will be stifled. IFC expects to have an investment program in infrastructure where it is open
to the private sector. IFC will also put emphasis on advisory work for privatization and will support
public-private partnerships to improve the management of these facilities.

IFC's recent efforts in the

water and sanitation sector will continue in the upcoming CAS period. IFC could consider new
investments in power, building upon its extensive experience in the sector. Advisory mandates will also
be pursued, particularly those which address constraint in power generation and distribution. IFC can
assess opportunities to invest in the development of the country's natural gas resources, where clients
look for political risk mitigation. In the telecommunications sector, IFC could consider opportunities
following privatization in the sector and the expansion of mobile networks as well as value-added
services. IFC will focus on efforts to improve the business enabling environment to ease constraints and
address needs of the private sector. This will include work to improve the legal and regulatory
environment.

Page 16 of 16

45.

On the industrial side, IFC will look for niche opportunities, including supporting Pakistani

corporations as they embark on south-to-south expansions. IFC will also look for ways to support the
development of linkage programs to involve local SME suppliers to larger companies. IFC's ability to
provide innovative financing tailored to the needs of clients will be pursued selectively where there is
clear value-added.

46.

Political Risk Insurance.

MIGA will advance its marketing and promoting for foreign

investment in key sectors, working with key public agencies and private sector bodies (Chambers, etc.) to

identify opportunities for using political risk insurance to support FDI into Pakistan. In addition,
subnationalrisk mitigation has become an important aspect of the MIGA political risk insurance product
and it is considered important in the breach of contract coverage. MIGA's new Small Investors' Program
(SIP) offers a streamlined, simplified and more cost effective political risk insurance program to support
foreign investment into SMEs.

Page] of I

ANNEX IV: PAKISTAN - COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS

Item

Parameter

Explanation/Remarks

Cost Sharing: Limit on the proportion of
individual project costs that the Bank may
finance

Up to 100%

The Bank's financing percentage in each project would be
determined on a case-by-case basis, depending upon project
type, sector, etc. In many projects, the practice of requiring
government counterpart funding would continue. In
general, low to moderate contribution by Government
(federal/provincial), beneficiaries and others are expected
in CDD-type projects and water sector projects. Moderate
contribution by Government (federal/provincial)
is
expected in infrastructure projects. 100% Bank financing
could occur in pro-poor projects, such as social sector
projects and projects in poor and remote areas. 100% Bank
financing may also occur in capacity building projects with
moderate to high in-kind contribution by the Government
(such as staff time, office space and equipment).

Recurrent Cost Financing: Any limits
that would apply to the overall amount of
recurrent expenditures that the Bank may
finance

No countrylevel limit

In determining Bank financing of recurrent costs in
individual projects, the Bank will take into account
sustainability issues at the sector and project levels.
Financing of recurrent costs will be carefully assessed,
particularly financing of Government staff salaries, which
the Bank will only finance for specific purposes. For

example, where our support is primarily programmatic
(such as in the education sector), there may be need to
finance recurrent costs and for a longer duration (as long as
program continues) to support achievedent of program
objectives. Recurrent cost financing may also be allowed to
support cost of managing project implementation and to

ensure sustainability of project activities.
Local Cost Finance: Are the requirements
for Bank financing of local expenditures
financing
(i)
that:
namely
met,
country's
the
for
requirements

Yes

The two criteria are met. Therefore the Bank may finance
local costs in any proportion needed in individual projects.

No

Taxes and duties in Pakistan are generally reasonable. Also
taxes and duties are not discriminatory against Bankfinanced projects. At the project-level, the Bank would
consider whether taxes and duties constitute an excessivel
high share of project cost.

development program would exceed the
public sector's own resources (e.g., from
taxation and other revenues) and expected

domestic borrowing; and (ii) the financing
of foreign expenditures alone would not
enable the bank to assist in the financing of
individual projects
Taxes and Duties: Are there any taxes and
duties that the Bank would not finance?

z

rr-

7l

Partner
fF5

Growth and Investment
Financial Sector
Energy
Transport
-Agriculture & Rural Dev.
XHealth, Nutrition
Education
Environment
Water & Sanitation
Social Protection
Public Sector Management
Judicial & Legal Reform
Devolution

Page] of 3

ANNEX VI: CAS CONSULTATION PROCESS

1.
Preparation of the CAS benefited from consultations with Federal and Provincial governments,
the private sector, donors and civil society. Consultations were carried out using a two stage process
consisting of: (i) a two-part client survey to solicit input on Pakistan's development challenges and the
role of the World Bank in Pakistan, and, (ii) stakeholder consultations with provincial governments, the

private sector, and civil society to obtain feedback on the proposed strategy. Highlights of the feedback
given during the consultation process are summarized below.
Client Survey
The Client Survey was carried out in October 2004 through February 2005. About 800
2.
stakeholders of the World Bank in Pakistan were asked to fill out a mail-in survey. Respondents were
asked to indicate: (i) their overall attitudes toward the Bank; (ii) which of the broad areas of the World
Bank's economic and social development activities bring the greatest value to the country; (iii) the

importance of specific areas of the Bank's work and the Bank's effectiveness in those areas; and (iv) their
level of agreement with a series of statements about the way the World Bank does business. Respondents
were also asked to indicate which of a list of general development issues facing Pakistan was of highest
priority and the level of impact a variety of challenges have on development. In addition, respondents

were asked about the Bank's communication and outreach efforts in Pakistan.
Survey participants were drawn from the federal government, members of Parliament, provincial
3.
government officials, members of provincial assemblies, district/Tehsil Municipal Administration (TMA)
government offices or staff, union councilors, bilateral and multilateral agency staff, private sector
businesses or organizations, civil society organizations, the media, and members of academia. The
majority of respondents were federal government officials, indicating that the results of the survey reflect
primarily the views of the Bank's government counterparts.
4.

In sum, the Client Survey results show that the World Bank's work is appreciated on a number of

levels, as are certain aspects of the Bank's relationships with clients and stakeholders in Pakistan.
However, there are certain areas of the Bank's efforts that may require additional focus and attention.

5.

Respondents overwhelmingly (80 percent) indicated that they felt that Pakistan was headed in the

right direction. Poverty reduction emerged as the top development priority with over half of all
respondents identifying it as either the most important or second most important development priority.
Respondents also cited education, government effectiveness, and improving the effectiveness of the law

and justice system as priorities for Pakistan.
Respondents were also asked to assess the impact of various development challenges. Inadequate
6.
access to quality education and inadequate infrastructure development were considered to have the most
significant impact on development in Pakistan. Health issues were considered to have the least impact on
development.
7.

Across all respondents, the Bank's overall effectiveness in Pakistan received a 5.6 rating on a 10-

point scale, with 1 being very unfavorable and 10 being very favorable. Respondents from local
government, federal government officials, and provincial government officials gave the highest
favorability ratings of the Bank. In contrast, respondents from academia, other organizations, and the
media gave significantly lower favorability ratings. Respondents saw the Bank as most effective in
helping to develop physical infrastructure, helping to develop water resources, and helping to improve the
performance of the energy sector, all receiving mean ratings of 3.3 on a 5-point scale with 1 being not
effective at all and 5 being very effective. The Bank's role as a financier of development projects was

seen as most important. Respondents felt that the Bank's greatest weakness was imposing technocratic
solutions without regard to political realities. Stakeholders' views of the Bank's effectiveness in some

Page 2 of 3

areas considered top priorities by stakeholders
effectiveness and growth.
8.

were not terribly positive: poverty,

government

Across all respondents, there was a solid level of agreement that the Bank is a good source of

knowledge; the Bank's effectiveness in producing knowledge (studies, analyses) that is useful and
technically sound both received the ratings of 3.9 on a 5-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 5

being very effective. There was less agreement, however, that the Bank was able to adapt its knowledge
to Pakistan's needs, receiving a mean rating of 3.2.
9.
Overall relationships are somewhat strong; stakeholders perceive the Bank as relatively
accessible, straightforward, and responsive. However the survey revealed that usage of the Bank's
website is lower in Pakistan than in other SAR countries surveyed last year. This finding is being
examined with a view to developing strategies to increase usage. Usage of the Public Information Centers
is also low in Pakistan, due in large part to security requirements limiting access to the Bank office in
Islamabad. As PICs and websites are important tools for engagement with broader audiences-including
"tomorrow's leaders" (e.g., students)-following up on these finding will be a priority. As a first step, full
public access to the PIC in Islamabad was restored in March 2006.
10.
The initial quantitative survey was followed by a qualitative survey using more focused, in-depth
interviews with a subset of respondents in order to probe survey responses and get a better sense of the
views and opinions behind the results of the quantitative survey. These follow-up interviews were carried
out by an independent opinion research firm to provide assurances of anonymity.
11.
Results of the qualitative follow-up reinforced the relevance of the Bank's poverty reduction
mission while highlighting the importance of demonstrating results. Respondents unanimously ranked
poverty as the greatest challenge facing Pakistan. At the same time some, particularly in the media,
expressed skepticism about the benefits of the recent economic turnaround which they believed was
benefiting only a narrow segment of society. A clear message was that economic growth is not by itself
an adequate measure of success and respondents want to see clear indications of concrete improvement in
the lives of the poor. These findings highlight the importance of targeted interventions that reach the poor
as well as the continuing need to strengthen capacity to generate reliable, timely data on development
outcomes both to guide policymakers and to help build support for poverty reduction programs.
12.
On the role of the Bank, the in-depth survey showed that a majority held a positive view of the
Bank's effectiveness. However there was a range of views about the areas where the Bank is most
effective. There was a strong consensus that the Bank should play a supporting role, allowing the
Government to set the agenda and providing support as requested. A majority felt that such a supporting
role is especially important in the areas of governance and corruption where the government must be in
the lead. A critical role of the Bank in this regard is to monitor the use of resources. A majority of
respondents appreciated the role of the Bank in generating and disseminating knowledge, but they urged
greater attention to dissemination. A number of respondents highlighted the need for the Bank to simplify
its procedures and reduce the administrative burden of Bank lending.
Stakeholder Workshops
13.
A series of consultation meetings were held in Islamabad and the four provincial capitals during
January 2006. Meetings were held with provincial governments, the private sector, Parliamentarians
donors and civil society groups. On the whole, there was endorsement of the general thrust of the CAS,
especially of its strategic principles and program priorities. In particular, there was strong support for the
renewed emphasis on infrastructure lending. The CAS was also endorsed by provincial governments
which endorsed the overall thrust of the CAS and welcomed the proposed World Bank engagement at the
provincial level. Each of the provinces urged the Bank to take into account their respective unique
challenges and accomplishments and to tailor the Bank program accordingly. There was specific

Page 3 of 3

endorsement of the move away from umbrella multi-province projects in favor of provincial lending. A
common theme among the provinces was the need to be mindful of capacity constraints at the local
government level.
Consultations with representatives from the private sector were held in Lahore and Karachi. The
14.
private sector representatives welcomed the emphasis on infrastructure, especially transport and power.
Education was also mentioned as a priority by the private sector with representatives citing the difficulty
of finding literate workers for manufacturing work. They voiced strong support for targeted poverty
programs and governance, citing problems related to land titling and litigation and the need for stronger
regulatory agencies. Financial sector development also emerged as a priority with representatives
concerned about access and interest rate fluctuations. There was strong support for an enhanced role for
IFC.
A civil society stakeholder consultation workshop was held in Islamabad and attended by
15.
representatives of various organizations from throughout Pakistan. While participants agreed with the
thrust of the CAS, they expressed concern that the benefits of growth are not yet reaching the poor and
that the Bank should emphasize activities directly targeting the poor. They urged the Bank to use its
influence to help ensure that the needs of the poor are reflected in Government priorities. They also
stressed the importance of timely accurate demographic and social data and urged the Bank to give
priority to ensuring that accurate data is publicly available. Finally, several representatives mentioned the
importance of addressing gender issues.

Page] of 2

ANNEX VII: GUIDELINES FOR IBRD LENDING
The following guidelines for IBRD lending in various sectors set out key sector-specific reforms
that would be needed to establish conditions necessary for successful scaling-up of Bank lending.
Sector
Power

Water/irrigation

Highways

Railways

Guidelines for New Lending
In addition to support for power sector reforms in PRSCs, investment lending in the
power sector will be accompanied by the following key reforms:
*
Satisfactory progress on corporatization of the Water and Power Development
Authority with establishment of legally and financially independent distribution
companies operating under competent and stable management
* Establishment of a fully functional and institutionally properly placed Central
Power Purchase Agency (CPPA), operating under transparent and efficient rules
for power trading and financial settlement;
* Well defined and sustainable government subsidy policy
* Well performing regulatory framework, with independent regulator (NEPRA) and
separation of the regulatory, policy, and ownership functions.
At the provincial level, investment and development policy lending in the water and
irrigation would require commitment to and in some cases up-front actions to:
* Increase transparency of water allocations and entitlements;
*
improve the quality of irrigation service delivery though greater user participation,
and formal contractual arrangements between bulk water providers and users; and
*
enhance on-farm productivity and water use efficiency.
At the national level, investment lending for major new Indus Basin storage
infrastructure would require:
* Consensus among the provinces
* an explicit, transparent agreement for implementing the 1991 Water Accord and
sharing the benefits equitably
* an agreed Environmental Flow allocation to the Indus Delta
* Commitment to institutional reforms and investments at the provincial, canal
command and farms levels to ensure more equitable, efficient use of water
Scaled-up investment lending in the highways will require commitment to increase
private sector orientation and enhance management and implementation capacity in the
National Highways Authority (NHA) as demonstrated by:
* Increased private sector membership on NHA Executive Board;
* induction of adequate professional staff in the Planning, Design and Procurement
sections;
*
introduction of project management consultants under Project Directors
In addition, satisfactory progress in the implementation of existing projects including
the Highway Rehabilitation Project, including progress in fulfilling financial covenants
would also be necessary.
Lending in the railways sector would require government commitment to a medium
term reform program to revitalize Pakistan Railways (PR) as demonstrated by:
*
Appointment of a professional, private sector CEO to head PR reform, with
support of a dedicated reform team in PR;
* GOP endorsement of a medium term reform program which would, inter alia,
create a professionally managed, commercial freight business with its own rolling
stock and staff and transfer non core activities and businesses to a separately
managed holding company outside PR;
* Restructuring the governance of PR (possibly as a state corporation) under an
autonomous and restructured Board;
* Separation of policy function (to be carried out by the Ministry of Railways) and
operational functions (to be carried out by the restructured PR).

Page 2 of 2

Sector
Ports

Urban

Guidelines for New Lending
Enhanced investment lending would support a government commitment to move
towards port corporatization and professional management combined with a modem
institutional and legal framework for port operations as demonstrated by:
* Induction of port management specialists;
* Commitment to abolish the Karachi Dock Labour Board and right-size port labor
levels;
* Updating of the National Ports Master Plan;
* Progress in port corporatization;
* A reduction in port tariffs of at least 15%.
Lending in the Urban sector will take place in the context of provincial and local
government commitment to develop and implement action plans in the following areas
of urban local government management:
* policy, institutional and regulatory reforms necessary to improving service
provision, and notably water service provision in urban centers, in terms of
affordability, reliability, and sustainability (environmental and financial);
* enhancing the municipal revenue bases through, for example, improving property
tax collection; applying formula-based transfers in a timely, predictable manner;
and aligning local government revenues with service delivery responsibilities
* improving local planning capacity, including preparation of multi-year capital
investment programs by local governments and establishment of mechanisms to
ensure consistency between land-use planning and development regulations.

Annex B]
Page 1 of 2

Pakistan at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2005
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Pakistan

South
Asia

inC
income

155.8
690
107.3

1,447
590
859

2,343
510
1,188

2.4
3.0

1.7
2.1

1.9
2.2

33
34
64
74
35
90
47
68
80
57

29
63
66
49
84
61
103
108
97

31
58
79
43
75
61
100
105
94

4/4/06

Development diamond*
Delpmndion

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1999-05
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1999-05)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000/ive births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Literacy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

ros
primary
enrollment

per
capita

Access to improved water source
Pakistan

-

Low-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1985

1995

2004

2005

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross capital formation/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

31.1
18.3
10.4
5.9
22.7

60.6
18.5
16.7
15.8
21.0

96.1
17.3
16.0
18.4
23.0

110.7
16.8
15.3
12.2
18.0

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

-4.1
1.7
43.2
24.5

-4.0
2.0
49.9
27.6

-1,3
0.7
31.8
12.3

.

2.0
0.8
37.1
22.3
29.8
149.3

..

,.

Economic ratios*

Trade

Domestic
savings

Capital
formation

Indebtedness
1985-95

1995-05

2004

2005

2005-09

5.2
2.6
9.8

3.7
1.2
6.5

6.4
3.9
-1.5

7.8
5.2
7.6

6.5
4.6
15.5

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

1985
28.5
22.5
15.9
49.0

1995
26.1
23.8
16.3
50.1

2004
22.3
24,9
17.6
52.7

2005
21.6
25.1
18.2
53.3

Growth of capital and GDP (%)

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Imports of goods and services

82.0
12.1
22.8

72.4
11.7
19.4

73.3
8.4
14.9

80.0
7.8
19.9

-is

1985-95
4.1
6.3
5.7
5.2

1995-05
2.7
4.4
5.9
4.3

2004

2005

2.2
12.0
14.1
6.0

7.5
10.2
12.5
7.9

4.3
3.9
4.3
3.4

3.5
2.4
0.8
1.4

8.2
2.1
-3.2
-8.6

16.8
2.3

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

-

Pakistan
Low-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(average annualgrowth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
Imports of goods and services

1.7
44,1

5
-.

00

03

01

GCF

---

GOP

xports and imports (%)
of eGroth
oT
4o
20o

x

01

t2

03

-20-

-

Exports

-0-Imports

Note: 2005 data are preliminary estimates. Group data are to 2004.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

os

Annex B1
Page 2 of 2

Pakistan
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
1985

1995

2004

2005

..

4.5

13.0
13.9

46
78

9.3
9.8

Current revenue

16.4

17 1

151

14.3

Current budget balance

-1.3

-2.5

1.1

-0.1

Overall surplus/deficit

-7.8

-6.7

-1.8

-3.0

1985
2,460
279
222
1,922
6,009

1995

2004

2005

7,759
62
454
4,627
10,296

12,395
48
634
7,568
13,607

..

1,627

1,398

1,722

659

3,066

4,534

117
107
110

115
118
98

124
131
94

1995

2004

2005

Domesticlprices
(% change)
Consumer pnces
Impiicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)

Inflation (%)

201
o
-

03

02

01

00

05

04

-*--CPI

GDP deflator

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Cotton
Rice
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food

Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export pnce index (2000=100)
Import pnce index (2000=100)
Terms of trade (2000=100)

14,371
111
933
8,268
18,724
706

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
20,000
0
0

5,000

..
..
..
.

00

99

01

OExports

02

03

04

05

COImports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millions)

(U$mlin)1985

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

3,247
7,106
-3,859

9,628
13,023
-3,396

15,123
17,714
-2,591

17,725
25,557
-7,832

Net income
Net current transfers

-506
3,090

-1,729
2,709

-2,207
6,684

-2394
8,819

Current account balance

-1,275

-2,416

1,886

-1,407

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

227
1,048

2,647
-231

-809
-1,077

2,019
-612

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DC, locallUS$)

1,190
15.2

3,534
30.8

11,395
57.6

10,722
59.1

1985
13,467
352
1,312

1995
30,229
3,581
3,340

2004
35,687
2,601
6,020

35,208
2,464
6,61

1,435
1R258
19

3,216
413
56

4,285
386
141

,
2,407
161

257
443
-169
131
0

312
932
318
442
1,280

574
-685
152
752
156

5, 379
905
-389
1,162
465

678
152
37
115

706
691
235
456

781
304
385
-81

847
984
431
554

40
75

233
222

143
-224

130
424

FCurrent account balance to GDP (%)
T
2

12

04

03

05

_2

.4

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
ID
IDA
Total debt service
IDA
Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Pnvate creditors
Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

2005

Composition of 2005 debt (USSmill.)
1,245 A:2464
F: 2,054

e:04

0 1,521

12,505

D 7,367

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Prncipal repayments
Net flows

Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

4/4/06

Annex B2

Page 1 of I
Pakistan
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As of March 21, 2006

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e

2003

2004

2005

2006

15
3.1
6.7
23.2
6.7
23.2
28.0

18
2.7
5.6
19.6
5.6
19.6
24.7

16
2.5
12.5
7.2
12.5
7.2
40.7

18
2.8
16.7
6.3
16.7
6.3
33.2

Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
*

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
18
141
11,030.4
3,237.6
22.0
16.7
25.2
11.2

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex B3
Page 1 of 3

Pakistan - FYO6-09 Lending Program Projects Under Consideration
(as of April 2006)
Fiscal
Year

Strategic
Rewards d

Implementation
Risks

100
84
440
400
47
65
90
20
100
50
300
35
1,731

M
M
H
M
M
M
H
M
H
M
H
H

H
M
H
H
M
L
H
H
H
H
H
H

300
100
130
50
100
140
25
200
200
300
50
200
1,795

H
M
H
H
H
H
M
H
M
H
H
M

H
H
H
H
L
H
H
H
M
H
M
M

H
M
H
H
H
M
M
L
M
H
M
H
M
H
H

H
H
H
H
H
H
H
M
M
M
H
M
M
H
H

b

Project Name
IDA

US$(M)
IBRD

Total

FY06
Punjab Education DPC II
PIFRA II
Earthquake Response - Additional Financing e/
Earthquake Emergency Recovery Credit
Polio Eradication II
National Highways Rehab - Additional Financing
NWFP DPC I
Balochistan Primary Education
Punjab Irrigation DPL I
Punjab Municipal Services Improvement
PRSC II
Punjab Land Records Management
Result

100
84
340
400
47

100

65
90
20
100
50
300
35
1,416

315

FY07
PRSC III
Punjab Education DPC III
NWFP DPC II
Sindh Education DPC I
Punjab Irrigation DPL II
Sindh Water Sector Improvement
Balochistan Small Scale Irrigation
Electricity Transmission and Distribution
DERA II/Kushaal Pakistan
National Trade Corridor I
Water Investment TA
Lady Health Workers
Result

300
100
130
50

PRSC IV
Punjab Education DPC IV
NWFP DPC III
Sindh Education DPC II
Punjab Irrigation DPL III
Earthquake Recovery Credit II
Higher Education
Punjab Barrage Rehabilitation
Balochistan Mineral Sector Development
Punjab Large Cities Improvement DPL I
Social Protection
Kushaal Pakistan/social mobilization
Health Surveillance System Improvement
National Trade Corridor II
Sindh Fiscal DPC
Result

100
100
130
50

100
140
25
200
200

945

300
50
200
850

FY08

FYO6-08 Expected Total Commitments

200

100
605

1,300

300
100
130
50
100
125
100
200
50
100
50
150
50
300
100
1,905

2,365

2,465

4,830

25

100
125
100
200
25
100

50
150
50
300

Annex B3
Page 2 of 3

Pakistan - FYO6-09 Lending Program Projects Under Considerationl
(as of April 2006)
Fiscal
Year

b/

Strategic
Rewards

c/

Project Name
IDA

US$(M)
IBRD

Implementation
Risks

Total

FY09
PRSC V
Punjab Education DPC V
NWFP DPC IV
Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund III
Sindh DPC
Punjab Large Cities Improvement DPL II
Electricity Transmission and Distribution II
Rural Telecom
Capacity Building II
National Trade Corridor III
Provincial Irrigation Infrastructure
Federal Water Infrastructure
Result
FYO6-09 Expected Total Commitments

350
100
130
200
150

1,030

300
100
300
1,030

350
100
130
200
150
100
200
30
100
300
100
300
2,060

3,090

3,400

6,490

100
200
30
100

H
H
H
M
H
H
H
M
M
H
M
H

H
H
H
M
H
H
H
M
M
H
M
H

a/ This table presents possible projects under consideration for the four-year CAS period. Depending upon evolving
country needs and priorities, additional projects may be added and others may be dropped. Type of financing (IBRD, IDA or blend)
may also be adjusted. Overall lending will remain within limits set by IDA availability (estimated at S3.1 billion) and IBRD
lending envelope (up to S3.4 billion).
b/ Project titles are subject to modification as project details are further refined.
c/ All amounts are indicative
d/ Indicates whether Strategic Rewards and Implementation Risks are expected to be High (H), Moderate (M), or Low (L).
e/ Includes additional IDA financing under PRSC I ($150 million), NWFP SAC II ($50 million), PPAF II (S 100 million),
AJK Community Infrastructure and Services Project ($30 million) and NWFP On-Farm Water Management ($10 million),
and IBRD lending ($100 million) under National Highways Rehabilitation project.
f/ Reflects expected total commitments based on IDA 14 availability and IBRD lending at the upper end of the proposed range

Annex B3
Page 3 of 3

Pakistan - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2003-2006

IFC approvals (US$m)

2003

2004

2005

2006

84.3

80.7

41.4

150.0

1
56
6

12

47

Sector (%)
Collective Investment
Finance & Insurance
Information
Pulp & Paper
Textiles, Apparel &
Transportation and
Total

42
11
100

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total

45
1
7
47
100
141.0

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

38
73

37
100

14
99

62
100

8

14
25

90
10

92
100

60
99

100

138.5

0.0

0.0

Annex B4
Page] of 2

Pakistan - Summary of Nonlending Services
As of April 2006
Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$000)

Audience

a

Objective b

Recent completions
Water Sector Strategy
NWFP Economic Report
Country Gender Assessment

2005
2005
2005

210
355
490

B, D, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P

PD, PS
PS
KG, PD, PS

Disease Surveillance Policy Note

2005

65

G, D, B, P

KG, PD, PS

Pakistan Trade Policy Notes 1
Earthquake Preliminary Damage and Needs Assessment
Growth and Export Competitiveness

2005
2006
2006

70
150
300

G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P
G, D, B, P

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

Sindh Economic Report

2006

390

G, D, B, P

KG, PD, PS

KG,
KG,
KG,
KG,

Underwav/Planned
Disability TA/Action Plan
Pension Reform Strategy
Provincial Procurement Assessment
Rural Growth and Poverty Reduction

2006
2006
2006
2006

G,
G,
G,
G,

Safety Net Report
Higher Education Policy Note
Social Protection TA

2006
2006
2006

G, D, P, B
G, D, P, B
G, D, P

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
PS

Labor Market Study
Strategic Country Environment Assessment
Trade Policy Notes

2006
2006
2006

G, D, P, B
G, D, P, B
G, D, P, B

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

Gap Analysis of Public Accounting and Auditing
Urban non-Lending TA

2006
2006

G, D, B
G, D, P, B

KG, PS
KG, PD, PS

Transport Competitiveness

2006

G, D, P, B

KG, PD, PS

Balochistan Economic Report

2007

G, D, P, B

KG, PD, PS

Public Sector/Judicial Study

2007

G, D, P, B

KG, PD, PS

Poverty Update
Private Sector Education in Punjab
Tax Policy Study

2007
2007
2007

G, D, P, B
G, D, P, B
G, D, P, B

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

Education Sector Report

2007

G, D, P, B

KG, PD, PS

Competition Policy TA
Investment Climate Assessment
Health Sector Review

2007
2007
2007

G, D, B
G, D, P, B
G, D, P, B

PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

Livestock Policy Note
Local Government Civil Service Reform TA

2007
2007

G, D, P, B
G, D, B

KG, PD, PS
PS

Oil & Gas Non-Lending TA
Public Financial Mgt/Accountability Assessments
Monitoring and Evaluation TA

2007
2007
2007

G, D, B
G, D, P, B
G, B

PS
KG, PD, PS
PS

Pension Reform TA

2007

G, B

PS

Development Policy Review
Provincial Public Financial Accountability Assessment

2007
2007

G, D, P, B
G, D, P, B

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

Public-Private Partnership in Education

2007

G, D, P, B

KG, PD, PS

Wheat Policies and Food Security

2007

G, D, P, B

KG, PD, PS

Access to Finance

2008

G, D, P, B

KG, PS

Capital Mkt. TA

2008

G, D, B

KG, PS

Devolution TA/Policy Note
HD Monitoring and Evaluation TA
Sindh Education
Statistical Strengthening TA
Fisheries Policy Note

2008
2008
2008
2008
2008

G,
G,
G,
G,
G,

D, P
P
D, P, B
D, P, B

D,
D,
D,
D,
D,

P,
P,
P,
B
P,

B
B
B
B

KG,
KG,
KG,
PS
KG,

PS
PS
PS
PD, PS

PD, PS
PD, PS
PD, PS
PD, PS

Annex B4
Page 2 of 2

Pakistan - Summary of Nonlending Services
As of April 2006
Audience a

Objective b

Land Markets Administration TA

2008

G, D, P, B

KG, PD, PS

Policy Notes for New Government
Micro-insurance Report

2008
2008

G, D, P, B
G, D, P, B

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

PPP for Agriculture Technology and Services

2008

G, D, P, B

KG, PD, PS

Skill Development/Labor Market TA

2008

G, D, B

KG, PD

Statistic Strengthening TA
Housing Finance
Debt Market Development
Access to Finance

2009
2009
2009
2009

G, D,
G, D,
G, D,
G, D,

KG,
KG,
KG,
KG,

Banking Sector TA
Education TA

2009
2009

G, D, P, B
G, D, P, B

Product

Completion FY

a. Government (G), Donor (D), Bank (B), Public Dissemination (P)
b. Knowledge Generation, (KG), Public Debate (PD), Problem-Solving (PS)

Cost (US$000)

B
P, B
P, B
P, B

PD
PD, PS
PD, PS
PD, PS

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

Annex B5
Page 1 of ]

Pakistan Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Social security and welfare (%of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same region/income group

1975-80

1985-90

1999-05

South
Asia

Lowincome

82.7
3.0
28.1
7.0

108.0
2.6
30.6
5.8

155.8
2.4
34.5
4.5

1,447.7
1.7
28.3
3.0

2,338.1
1.8
30.7
3.6

..

..

..

..

32.6
24.2
35.9

330

420
..

..

..

670
185

..

..

..

..

..

..

33.0
8.8
42.3

590

510

1.3
3.1

1.5
3.2

59
68
50

87
89
85

78
82
76

..

83
95
78

90
95
87

84
93
80

75
89
69

1
2
53

50
54
49

61
67
35

67
71
48

66
67
44

53
53
54

59
58
60

64
63
65

63
62
64

58
57
59

105
156

96
138

74
98

66
92

79
122

283
291

232
230

..

..

..

..

221
198
500
23

249
199
534
36

317
266
538
38

..

..

1.1

2.0
0.2

2.7

..

..

0.2

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age.

04/06/06

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Pakistan - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)

2001

Actual
2002
2003

2004

Estimate
2005

2006

Projected
2007
2008

2009

100.0
24.4

100.0
23.6

100.0
23.6

100.0
22.3

100.0
21.6

100.0
21.0

100.0
20.5

100.0
20.0

100.0
19.4

Industry

23.1

22.9

23.0

24.9

25.1

25.8

26.8

27.7

28.3

Services

52.5

53.4

53.4

52.7

53.3

53.2

52.8

52.3

52.3

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

83.9
15.8
5.7
10.2

83.3
15.5
4.2
11.3

82.5
15.3
4.0
11.3

81.6
15.6
4.8
10.8

87.8
15.3
4.4
10.9

91.5
16.5
2.7
13.8

90.7
17.8
3.4
14.4

89.5
18.9
3.6
15.3

88.7
19.4
3.8
15.6

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

14.8
15.9

15.4
15.5

16.9
16.3

16.0
14.9

15.3
19.9

16.5
26.1

17.9
27.9

19.5
29.5

21.7
31.3

Gross domestic savings

16.1

16.7

17.5

18.4

12.2

8.5

9.3

10.5

11.3

Gross national savingsc

17.7

19.7

23.1

23.0

18.0

14.1

15.0

16.1

16.8

71496

71485

82350

96115

110732

125514

134880

145209

156626

480

490

520

600

670

730

810

870

920

3.2
3.1

5.0
2.8

6.4
6.0

7.8
7.2

6.3
4.0

6.5
6.3

6.6
6.1

6.8
6.0

2.5
-1.2
-1.9

3.9
4.9
5.6

5.2
12.5
14.0

4.3
5.2
5.0

4.5
3.9
3.8

4.6
3.5
3.4

4.8
4.1
3.7

Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (USS, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 2000 prices)
1.9
Gross domestic product at market prices
0.8
Gross Domestic Income
Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption

from 2000 prices)
-0.6
0.8
-2.8
0.4
-2.2
-0.9

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB

10284
8934

11056
9140

13686
10889

15123
12395

17725
14371

20755
16764

24094
19846

28381
23857

33935
29116

Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

12535
10202
-2251
3299
-1112

11646
9432
-590
4500
1591

14047
11333
-361
6775
4204

17714
13607
-2591
6684
1886

25557
18724
-7832
8819
-1407

32713
23967
-11958
9623
-4918

37570
28255
-13475
10182
-5800

42768
32735
-14386
10508
-6237

49054
38223
-15119
10904
-6396

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, inc. errors & ommissions)

322
-489
747
-1236
2560

368
-1490
781
-2271
2807

612
-868
-147
-721
1731

752
-1531
-685
-846
-30

1162
-1885
905
-2790
2742

3080
1983
1185
798
619

5019
1788
1235
553
670

4081
2504
1458
1046
770

4780
2013
1620
393
770

Change in reservesd

-1282

-3276

-5679

-1077

-612

-764

-1677

-1118

-1167

-3.1

-0.8

-0.4

-2.7

-7.1

-9.5

-10.0

-9.9

-9.7

11.9
7.3

5.6
-5.1

8.1
8.0

2.7
9.3

7.9
23.6

13.2
18.6

16.1
17.3

19.0
16.1

21.1
16.6

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YROO prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Pakistan - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

2001

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
14.3
Current revenues
15.5
Current expenditures
-1.3
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
1.7
Capital expenditure
1.9
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth ofM2 (%)
Private sector credit growth!
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YROO =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

Actual
2002
2003

2004

Estimate
2005

2006

Projected
2007
2008

2009

16.3
15.9
0.3
2.9
1.2

17.5
16.6
0.8
1.8
-0.5

15.1
14.0
1.1
3.3
-0.7

14.3
14.4
-0.1
3.9
1.7

14.0
14.1
-0.1
3.8
1.8

14.7
14.0
0.6
4.5
1.5

14.8
13.6
1.2
4.7
1.9

15.1
13.5
1.6
4.9
1.4

36.7
9.0
1318.9

40.0
15.4
125.8

43.1
18.0
1852.9

44.9
19.6
81.8

45.3
19.3
101.1

46.1
17.0
60.6

46.8
15.1
81.8

48.0
15.3
86.1

49.3
15.2
87.5

91.9
96.4
95.3
4.4
7.7

89.0
93.9
94.8
2.7
2.4

98.1
104.4
93.9
3.1
4.4

108.8
114.7
94.8
4.6
7.8

116.8
127.8
91.4
9.3
9.8

120.4
137.9
87.3
8.9
8.2

122.7
138.6
88.5
6.2
6.5

124.0
138.3
89.6
5.2
5.5

125.0
138.5
90.2
4.8
5.0

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central government.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Page] of]

Pakistan - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

2001

Total debt outstanding and

Actual
2002
2003

Estimate
2005

2004

Projected
2007
2008

2006

2009

31706

33675

35885

35687

35208

37032

38668

40991

42777

554

341

43

230

261

1871

1636

2324

1786

2996

2850

2936

2907

2780

2438

2703

2900

3651

TDO/XGSb

276.1

248.4

198.3

186.1

158.4

144.5

132.3

121.3

107.9

TDO/GDP

44.3

47.1

43.6

37.1

31.8

29.5

28.7

28.2

27.3

TDS/XGS

26.1

21.0

16.2

15.2

12.5

9.5

9.2

8.6

9.2

Concessional/TDO

61.9

64.5

67.2

..

.,

..

disbursed (TDO) (USSm)a
Net disbursements (USSm)a
Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators (%)

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public

DS (%)c

IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (USSm)d

17.6

15.8

14.5

10.4

17.7

19.9

16.5

15.1

11.6

61.9

61.9

69.2

70.7

61.3

60.4

57.1

52.7

42.8

3.5

2.8

2.0

2.0

1.8

1.6

1.3

1.2

1.0

3043

2943

2813

2601

2464

2149

2.5

2.4

2.4

2.4

2.3

2.1

2.2

2.5

2.7

4123

5097

5604

6020

6651

7309

8013

8674

9583

193.0

168.0

136.0

100.0

100.0

150.0

50.0

80.0

2192

2571

2835

IFC (US$m)
Loans

332.2

305.4

252.9

Equity and quasi-equity /e

76.2

84.5

71.8

62.0

57.0

46.0

50.0

Guarantees

64.5

88.4

75.9

116.0

105.0

135.0

..

97.0

154.0

128.0

142.0

129.6

129.6

..

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.
f. Represents maximum IBRD exposure based on lending at the upper end of the proposed CAS lending range.

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Pakistan - Status of Bank Group Operations
21-Mar-06
IBRD/IDA
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

375.44
0.00
13,214.58
5,201.13
13,590.02
5,201.13
1,279.71
0.00
1,279.71

Project ID Project Name

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last ISR

Active Projects

Supervision Rating
Implementation
Development
Progress
Objectives

Disbursements al

Original Amount in US$ M
Fiscal
Year

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

P071454

AJK Community Infrastructure & Services

S

S

2003

50.0

42.1

9.2

P074797

Banking Sector Technical Assistance

S

S

2003

26.5

13.1

7.9

P035823

GEF-Protected Arcas Management Project

U

MS

2001

P010556

Highways Rehab

S

S

2004

P074856

HIV/AIDS Prevention Project

MS

MS

P082621

NWFP Community Infrastructure

U

U

P071092

NWFPOn-FarmWaterManagementProject

S

P077288

National Education Assessment System

S

P034301

Phase Out of ODS Pre

P076872

PIFRA 11

P083370
P099110
P097402
P082977
P056213

Sindh On-Farm Water Management

P056213

Trade & Transport

P088994

Taunsa Barrage Emergency

P077306

Tax Administration Reform

Overall Result

7.9

2.4

150.0

236.3

20.4

2003

37.1

27.9

9.9

2004

37.1

33.8

2.4

S

2001

31.4

22.7

11.3

S

2003

3.6

3.1

1.5

S

S

1997

S

S

2006

Public Sector Capacity Building

S

S

2004

55.0

38.3

Pakistan Earthquake ERC

#

#

2006

400.0

313.4

Second Partnership for Polio Eradication

#

#

2006

46.7

47.2

Second Poverty Alleviation Fund Project

S

S

2004

338.0

191.5

-5.1

MS

U

2004

61.1

49.6

20.6

S

S

2001

S

MS

2005

S

S

2005

10.1
150.0

3.4

13.0
84.0

3.0
123.0
24.4

78.5

297.4

1,402.0

23.1

3.4

5.1

0.5

71.1

-10.0

7.2
5.6

0.6

4.7

0.1

0.1

92.8

23.2

96.8

26.4

1,292.5

125.2

13.4

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

International Finance Corporation
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Amounts in US Dollar Millions
As of: 02/28/2006
Country: Pakistan
Approval Fiscal
Year

Institution
LN
ET
Short
Cmtd-IFC CmId-IFC
Name

2001

ABN AMROPAK

1995

AES Lal Pi,

1996

QL+QE
Cmtd-IFC

GT
Cmtd-IFC

RM
All
Cmtd-IFC Cmtd-Part

LN
Out BalIFC

ET
Out-FC

QL+QE
Out-IFC

GT
Out-IFC

RM
Out-IFC

All
Out-Part

0.00

000

0.00

6.00

000

000

000

0.00

0.00

600

0.00

0.00

14.94

950

000

0.00

0+00

0.00

14.94

9.50

0.00

0.00

0.00

000

AES Pak Gen

920

950

000

0.00

000

537

920

950

0.00

0.00

000

5.37

1995

AbamcoMgmt

0.00

0.20

00

0000

0000

0000

00

029

0.00

000

000

000

2001

Askarn
Bank

0.00

000

000

4.00

0.00

000

0.00

0.00

000

4.00

0.00

000

19911199411995

BRRIM

0.00

0.27

0.00

0.00

0.00

0

000

027

000

0.00

000

000

199311997/2001

CrescentBahuman

0.00

301

0.00

314

0 00

4.40

0.00

291

0.00

3.14

000

250

2004

Dewan SME

200312004

Dewan Salman

19911199511997

EngroChemical

2001

Eni Pakistan

1990/1992/1996

0.00

0.99

000

000

000

000

0.

00

0.00

000

0.00

0.00

27.50

0.00

5.00

0

0.00

0.00

27.50

000

400

0.00

0.00

000

0.00

1.95

0 00

000

000

000

000

1 95

0.00

000

0.00

000

15.00

0 00

0.00

000

000

0.00

15.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

FIlB

000

0.07

0.00

0.00

0.00

000

0.00

067

0.00

000

0.00

0.00

19931199412002

Fauji Cement

000

0

0.00

000

0.00

36.07

000

000

0

0.00

0.00

0.00

1995/2004

First UDL

0.00

0.00

000

7.00

000

0.00

0.00

0 00

0 00

0.00

0.00

0.00

2006

GTFPMetmpolita

0.00

0.00

000

1 38

0.00

000

0

0 00

000

0.92

0 00

000

1996

Gul Ahmed

8.10

410

0.00

000

000

522

8.10

4.10

0 00

0.00

0.00

S.22

2003

KCT

6.89

0.00

1 50

0.00

0.00

000

6.89

0.00

1 50

0.00

0.00

000

1995

Kohinoor

625

6.30

0.00

0.00

0.00

2.03

6.25

630

0.00

0.00

0.00

2.03

2003

MetropolitanBnk

0.00

000

000

3.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3.00

000

0.00

2002

Micro Bank

0.00

2.43

000

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

243

0.00

0.00

000

000

2004

NBFI Ciedd

6.50

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

6.50

000

0.00

000
Dn

2002

Network Leasing

.00

0.00

0 00

1.95

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

199412006

Orix Leasing

17.00

0.00

000

0.00

000

000

0

000

0

0 00

0.00

000

2000/2006

P/CT

14.00

0.00

0.00

0.030

0.00

0.00

0.00

000

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

1983/198411094/119952002

PP.

000

&6.0

0.030

0.00

0.0

0.0

0.0

6.04

0.00

0.00

000

000

1965/ 1980/ 1982/ 1987119911
1994/1995/2005
1993/11996/2001

Packages

0.00

5.78

0.00

25.00

0.00

000

0 00

1 83

0.00

000

0.00

000

SarahTest/les

1.12

0.00

0.00

0.48

0.00

0.00

1.12

0.00

0.00

0.48

0.00

0.00

2001

SoneriBank

0 00

000

30

0.00
000

0.00

200T

T

0.00

420

0.0

000

000

000

2006

TameerSBank

0.00

1.St

0.00

0.00

0.00

000

1004

UhOPnw-r

1360

0.00

0.0

0

16.00

0.00

2003

UnionnBank-PAK

0.00

000)

200

0.00

0.00

00.42

0.00

08.94

-TOtWPortforw

Pak/stan

000
140-10

1053~f.09

0 00

3.00

0.00

000

420

0.00

00

0.00

00

i.oi

000

000

0.0

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

6.00i

0.0

0000
aOo
amD
1360
000
109.10

00o0

0.00

000

2.00

0 00

000

5.37

0.00

22.53

6"0

15.12:

