Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No.: 37280-HN

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS

November 30,2006

Central America Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise to be disclosed without World Bank Authorization.

The last Country Assistance Strategyfor Honduras (Report 25873 HO) was discussed on June 24,2003

-

HONDURAS GOVERNMENT
FISCAL
YEAR
January 1 - December 31

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective as o f September 1,2006)
Currency Unit
US$l.oo

AAA
ADEL
CABEI
CAHDA
CAS
CCERP
CEM
CFAA
CNA
CPAR
CPME
CPPR
DSA
DPR
DPT
DR-CAFTA
EFA
ENEE
ERSAPS
FDI
FIDE
FHIS
FSDP
GDLN
GDP
GEF
GNI
GoH
GPOBA
HDI
HIPC
HONDUTEL
IBRD
ICR
IDA
IDB
IDF
IFC
INE

Lempira
18.89

ABBREVIATION AND ACRONYMS
Analytical and Advisory Activities
Local Development Association
Central American Bank o f Economic Integration
Honduran Insurance Chamber
Country Assistance Strategy
Consultative Council for the Poverty Reduction Strategy
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
National Anti-Corruption Council
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Presidential Commission for the Modernization o f the State
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Development Policy Review
Diphtheria-Pertussis-Tenatus
Dominican Republic and Central America Free Trade Agreement
Education For All
Public electric utility company
Regulating Entity for Water & Sanitation Services
Foreign Direct Investment
Investment & Export Development Fund
Honduras’ Social Investment Fund
Financial Sector Development Policy Credit
Global Development Learning Network
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Fund
Gross National Income
Government o f Honduras
Global Partnership for Output-Based Aid
Human Development Index
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Public telecommunications utility company
International Bank o f Reconstruction and Development
Implementation Completion Report
International Development Association
Inter-American Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
National Statistics Institute

IHSS
IMF
IS0
JSAN
LDP
LSMS
MCA
MDG
MIGA
MDRI
MOE
MOF
MOH
MSME
NGO
NPV
OBA
OECD
PER
PHRD
PIC
PPIAF
PPP
PRGF
PROHECO
PRS
PRSC
PRS-TAC
ROSC
SANAA
SDR
SETCO
SIAFI
SIERP
SMEs
SOPTRAVI
TSC
UN
UNAT
UNDP
USAID
WB
WBI
WTO

Honduran Institute o f Social Security
International Monetary Fund
International Standard Organization
Joint Staff Advisory Note
Letter o f Development Policy
Living Standards Measurement Study
Millennium Challenge Account
Millennium Development Goal
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Ministry o f Education
Ministry o f Finance
Ministry o f Health
Micro-, Small- and Medium-Enterprises
Non-Governmental Organizations
Net Present Value
Output-Based Aid
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Public Expenditure Review
Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Trust Fund
Public Information Center
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
Public-Private Partnerships
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (IMF)
Community Education Program
Poverty Reduction Strategy
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Technical Assistance Credit
Report on the Observance o f Standards and Codes
Public water & sanitation utility
Special Drawing Rights
Technical Cooperation Ministry
Financial Management Information System
PRS Information System
Small & Medium Enterprises
Public Works, Transport & Housing Ministry
Supreme Audit Authority (Tribunal Superior de Cuentas)
United Nations
Technical Support Unit o f the Ministry o f the Presidency
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International Development
World Bank
World Bank Institute
World Trade Organization

TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i

I.

INTRODUCTION

1

11.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

1

A.
B.
C.
D.
'

111.

Political and Governance Context
Economic Developments and Outlook
Poverty, Access to Services and Social Concerns
External Assistance Management

HONDURAS - WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP FY2007-2010

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.

Country Vision and Government Program
Progress under the FY2003-06 CAS
K e y Features o f the FY2007-10 CAS
Strategic Objectives and Bank Assistance FY2007- 10
I F C and MIGA Support Going Forward
Bank Instruments and Lending Strategies
Partnerships and Outreach
Results-Based Monitoring and Evaluation
Risks, Risk Mitigation and Response

1
3
8
11
12

12
14
17
18
26
26
29
29
30

TEXT BOXES
B o x 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:
Box 4:
Box 5:
Box 6:
Box 7:

Addressing Corruption
Mitigating the Impact o f External Shocks
Benefiting from DR-CAFTA
Progress against PRS Targets and the MDGs
Updating the Poverty Reduction Strategy
Lessons Learned from Recent Bank Experience
Strengthening Transparency, Accountability and Demand for
Good Governance as a Cross-Cutting Issue

2
4
6
9
12
15
22

FIGURES and TABLES
Figure 1:
Figure 2:
Figure 3:
Figure 4:
Table 1:
Table 2:

Real GDP Growth
Public Expenditure on Salaries
Child Malnutrition Rates
FY2007-10 CAS Objectives
IDA Active Portfolio and Proposed Assistance Program FY2007- 10
Proposed Lending Program FY2007- 10

3
5
8
18
20
21

ANNEXES
Annex A:

Country at a Glance and Millennium Development Goals

31

Analytical Annexes

Annex B:
Annex C:
Annex D:
Annex E:
Annex F:
Annex G:
Annex H:
Annex I :

FY2007-10 CAS Results Matrix
FY2003-06 CAS Completion Report
Disaster Mitigation and Response
CAS Consultations
IEG Country Assistance Evaluation: Recommendations and
Management Response
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Country Financing Parameters
Summary o f Development Priorities

34
43
79
84
92
95
99
100

Statistical Annexes

Annex J:
Annex K:
Annex L:
Annex M:
Annex N:
Annex 0 :
Annex P:
Annex Q :
Annex R:
Annex S:

Donor Partners in Honduras
Social Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRDDDA and Grants)
Summary o f Non-Lending Services
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRDDDA Program Summary
IFC and MIGA Program Summary
Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio

Vice-president Pamela Cox
Country Director Jane Armitage
Task Manager Adrian Fozzard

101
102
103
105
106
107
108
109
110
111

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
The FY2003-06 CAS supported and followed the structure of the Honduras’ Poverty
Reduction Strategy (PRS). During this period, macro-economic stability was restored, significant
progress was made in improving the business climate and the performance o f the financial sector,
and a sound framework for public sector financial management was put in place. These
achievements allowed Honduras to reach HIPC Completion Point in April 2005 and benefit from
the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) in July 2006. Despite these achievements, little
progress has been made in poverty reduction and key structural constraints on growth have s t i l l to
be addressed, notably as regards the poor performance o f public utilities and the poor quality o f
public services, particularly education. In recent months, an agreement with teachers awarding
significant pay rises over a four year period and the mounting losses o f the electricity utility have
intensified fiscal pressures. This creates uncertainty regarding the macro-economic outlook for
FY2007-10 CAS period and raises concerns regarding the sustainability o f debt r e l i e f gains
achieved under HIPC and MDRI.

2.
The key development challenges for Honduras are to accelerate i t s recent growth
performance and to translate growth into poverty reduction. Four interventions are critical for
accelerating growth:
increased educational attainment; improved provision o f economic
infrastructure; development o f financial markets; and improved governance.
Progress in
reducing red-tape, tackling corruption and strengthening the r u l e o f law are needed to boost
investment and benefit h l l y from the opportunities offered by Dominican Republic-Central
America Free Trade Agreement with the United States (DR-CAFTA). Growth will have to be
broad-based if i t i s to have a significant impact on poverty reduction. This requires
improvements in targeting o f spending, concentrating resources on programs used by the poor
and in the regions where the poor reside, notably through investments in basic education,
nutrition and early-childhood development and interventions aimed at improving rural
productivity and diversifying sources o f income. Governance reforms are needed to improve the
performance o f public services.
3.
Honduras’ development vision i s laid out in i t s Poverty Reduction Strategy, originally
prepared in 2001, and subsequently endorsed by President Maduro in 2003 and by President JosC
Manuel Zelaya Rosales shortly after taking office in 2006. The Government i s currently updating
the PRS to reflect President Zelaya’s government program by giving greater attention to public
sector transparency, employment generation, environmental protection and a stronger results
orientation across the public sector.

4.
The FY2007-10 CAS has been aligned with the broad framework o f the PRS and the
priorities identified by President Zelaya. Owing to a substantial ongoing portfolio the Bank’s
support under the new CAS continues to be broad in scope, though new lending and analytical
work will be focused o n a narrower range o f policy reforms and sector investments.
Bank
assistance i s structured according to four pillars. The first pillar, Equitable Economic Growth for
Employment Generation, supports the Government’s efforts to maintain macro-economic
stability, improve the performance o f economic services (notably the energy and transport
sectors) and promote competitiveness, particularly in rural areas. The second pillar, Good
Governance through State Modernization and Civic Participation, supports the Government’s
public sector reform agenda, focusing on improvements in transparency and public expenditure
management at the central and local levels, as well interventions aimed at strengthening
competition and the judiciary. The third pillar, Environmental Protection and Risk Management,
continues the Bank’s support to the management o f the protected areas system and the
implementation o f disaster risk mitigation strategies at the national and local level with grant

i

funding. The fourth pillar, Development of Human Capital, includes Bank support to education,
health and social protection.
5.
Indicative IDA allocations for the four year period amount to USD260 million.. A PRSC
series will provide the framework for Bank policy dialogue during the CAS period, addressing
the immediate threats to the Government’s fiscal program as well as structural constraints to
growth and poverty reduction. The PRSCs will support improvements in: the performance o f
utilities, notably in the energy sector; public sector performance, transparency and accountability;
the quality o f education; and economic governance, N e w investment lending will favor flexible,
programmatic instruments and w i l l be concentrated in fewer operations than under the previous
CAS. Bank analytical work w i l l support the policy dialogue and debate on key reform issues,
whilst focusing on poverty and expenditure monitoring, recognizing that this analysis i s used b y
key stakeholders to monitor progress in poverty reduction, assess fiduciary risks and track the
application o f debt-relief funds.

6.
The Bank’s assistance will be structured in line with performance. The timing o f PRSCs
will be adjusted and level o f financing modulated in line with progress in implementing the
Government’s reform program. Should progress o n reforms stall or the macro-economic
situation deteriorate significantly, financing will be reallocated from the PRSC series to
investment projects.
7.
The Bank w i l l coordinate closely with other development partners, collaborating where
feasible through joint analytical work and by channeling its support together with other partners
in support o f Government-led sector programs. The Bank will build on the strong partnerships
with external partners in the design and implementation o f its operations and analytical work,
with a view to optimizing the use o f Bank financing, consolidating financing around a common
development agenda and reducing transaction costs for Government. The Bank will also expand
i t s outreach efforts, improving access to information and strengthening communication with key
national stakeholders.
8.
The proposed CAS faces a number o f risks, notably: risks to macro-economic stability
and debt sustainability arising from fiscal pressures; and risks that interest groups could
undermine the Government’s efforts to advance key reforms. These risks will be addressed
through on-going policy dialogue with Government and the adjustment o f PRSC financing in line
with performance. Natural disasters pose a significant risk, which i s likely to materialize to some
degree during the CAS period. In the case o f a devastating natural disaster, the Bank will review
the portfolio in consultation with Government to assess the feasibility o f mobilizing resources to
support reconstruction.

Proposed Issues for Board Discussion
0

0

0

Does the proposed CAS adequately support Honduras’ strategy to accelerate broadbased growth and poverty reduction?
I s the increased selectivity for Bank assistance appropriate, in line with its
comparative advantage and that o f other donors?

Are the m i x o f PRSC and investment lending and the proposed arrangements for
adjusting the structure o f lending in line with performance appropriate?

11

I. INTRODUCTION
1.
The last Country Assistance Strategy for Honduras was discussed by the Board on
24 June 2003. The FY2003-06 CAS supported and followed the structure o f the Honduras’
Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS). During this period, macro-economic stability was restored,
significant progress was made in improving the business climate and the performance o f the
financial sector, and a sound framework for public sector financial management was put in place.
These achievements allowed Honduras to reach HIPC Completion Point in April 2005 and
benefit from the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) in July 2006. However, progress in
poverty reduction has been disappointing and key structural constraints on growth have s t i l l to be
addressed, notably as regards the poor performance o f public utilities and the poor quality o f
public services, particularly education. In recent months, an agreement with teachers awarding
significant pay rises over a four year period and the mounting losses o f the electricity utility have
intensified fiscal pressures. This creates uncertainty regarding the macro-economic outlook for
FY2007-10 CAS period and raises concerns regarding the sustainability o f debt relief gains
achieved under HIPC and MDRI.
2.
I n this challenging environment, the FY2007-10 CAS has been aligned with the
broad framework o f the PRS and the priorities identified by President JosC Manuel Zelaya
Rosales, whilst retaining the flexibility needed to adjust the Bank’s assistance in line with
performance. The four pillars identified o f the FY2007-10 CAS are: equitable economic
growth for employment generation; good governance through state modernization and civic
participation; environmental protection and risk management; and development of human capital.
The CAS w i l l address measures to strengthen transparency, accountability and the demand for
good governance as a cross-cutting issue. A PRSC series will provide the framework for Bank
policy dialogue during the CAS period, addressing the immediate threats to the Government’s
fiscal program as well as the structural constraints to growth and poverty reduction identified in
Bank analytical work. The PRSCs and related projects will support improvements in: the
performance of utilities, notably in the energy sector; public sector performance, transparency and
accountability; the quality o f education; and economic governance. The Bank’s lending profile
will be structured in line with performance in these areas. Specifically, the timing o f PRSCs will
be adjusted and level o f financing modulated in line with progress in implementing the
Government’s reform program. Should progress on reforms stall or the macro-economic
situation deteriorate significantly, financing will be reallocated from the PRSC series to
investment projects. New investment projects will be concentrated in the equitable economic
growth pillar, aimed primarily at increasing incomes for the rural poor and improving the
performance o f economic services. Bank assistance will be channeled through fewer projects
than under the previous CAS, favoring the use o f flexible, programmatic instruments.
11. COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES
A.

POLITICAL AND GOVERNANCECONTEXT

3.
Honduras has undergone a successful transition from an authoritarian military
regime to a pluralistic democracy. The seventh consecutive elections, held in November 2005,
resulted in a transition from a National Party administration to a Liberal Party administration led
by President Zelaya with 3 -7 percent margin over the National Party presidential candidate, albeit
on the basis o f a turnout o f just 53 percent o f registered voters. Successive reforms have
introduced internal primaries for the selection o f leaders o f the major parties, separated elections
for the presidency, congressional deputies and mayors and, from 2005, allowed voters to choose
between voting for individual deputies or party lists. Progress has also been made in
strengthening independence o f the judiciary. In 2002, the number o f Supreme Court justices was

1

Box 1: ADDRESSING
CORRUPTION
Corruption was identified as the most important constraint on growth by firms in the
2004 Investment Climate Assessment. Firms noted that they expected to pay an average o f
4.6 percent o f the value o f public sector contracts in bribes, with the burden falling heaviest on
smaller f i r m s . Honduras’ performance on Transparency International’s corruption perception
index has shown l i t t l e improvement in recent years, hovering around 2.7 with a slight increase
in ranking (from 114 to 107) from 2004 to 2005. Recent Latino-Barometro surveys suggest
that recent efforts to target corruption are having some impact: while only 26 percent of
respondents in 2005 believed that progress i s being made in tackling corruption, the
proportion o f persons reporting that they or a family member have experienced corruption has
dropped steadily from 24 percent in 2001 to 16 percent in 2004 and just 8 percent in 2005.
Progress has been made in the control and transparency of public financial
management, administrative simplification and establishing the institutional framework
for tackling corruption. An Audit Court was established in 2003 and i s gradually expanding
coverage o f audits, which are now published. Implementation o f the 2004 Organic Budget
L a w has led to significant improvements in internal controls and transparency: a single
treasury account and payment system using direct transfers i s now in operation; an integrated
financial management information system (SIAFI) provides on-line access to budget
execution reports; budget execution reports are now published on the Ministry o f Finance
(SEFIN) website. Administrative simplification has led to significant reductions in business
registration times and the transfer o f the mercantile register to the Chamber o f Commerce.
Congress passed legislation establishing an independent Anti-Corruption Commission in
March 2005 and ratified the UN Convention Against Corruption in M a y 2005. The
Commission i s n o w staffed, has received a budget allocation o f US$0.5 million in 2006 and
has recently approved a strategic plan. Following the passage o f a Competition L a w in early
2006, a Competition Institute i s being established to address anti-competitive practices and
facilitate market entry and exit.
Notwithstanding these developments, governance concerns figured prominently in the
CAS consultations. Further work i s needed in professionalizing state institutions, cutting
red-tape, improving transparency in procurement and the regulatory environment for the
private sector and - perhaps most important o f all - strengthening enforcement.
increased to fifteen, their term o f appointment was extended to seven years - as compared with
the four year political cycle - and political influence in appointments was reduced by involving
congressmen, lawyers and c i v i l society representatives in the selection process. Political rights
and civil liberties are generally respected. There i s a relatively free press, expanding civil society
and an active trade union movement.
4.
However, state institutions are fragile and the governance framework i s weak.
Symptoms o f weak governance include: the replacement o f large numbers o f managerial,
technical and administrative staff across the public sector following elections, with appointments
o f party activists often made on the basis o f political allegiance rather than technical competence;
the lack o f transparency in decision-making; corruption; and the difficulties encountered in
holding public institutions and officials to account (see B o x 1). Overall, opinion surveys reveal
that citizens recognize that democracy and private enterprise are indispensable for Honduras’
development, but have little confidence in state institutions or that the market economy functions
effectively. There i s widespread frustration regarding the lack o f improvement in the quality o f
l i f e and skepticism regarding the impact o f public sector and economic reforms. President Zelaya

2

has put governance reform at the center o f his Government program, focusing o n issues o f public
sector transparency and performance management as a tool for strengthening accountability. A t
the same time, the implementation o f DR-CAFTA (Dominican Republic and Central America
Free Trade Agreement) mandates a broad program o f economic governance reforms aimed at
leveling the playing field for investment and trade and enhancing competition.

5.
While recent changes in the electoral process have strengthened accountability of
elected officials, they have also weakened the administration’s control over the legislative
agenda. Although the minor parties’ share o f the vote has not increased significantly over the last
fifteen years, it was sufficient to deny the winning party a simple majority in Congress in both
2001 and 2005. To date, the Liberal Party - with 62 o f the 128 deputies - has been unable to
establish a working coalition in Congress. The elimination o f party l i s t s has allowed voters to
hold elected officials directly accountable for their performance, resulting in many party stalwarts
losing their places to a new generation o f deputies: 80 percent o f deputies are new to Congress
and 30 deputies are women, as compared with 8 in the previous legislature. Similarly all but 32
o f the 298 mayors were replaced in the 2005 elections. Direct election has encouraged deputies
and mayors to assert their authority. Congress has taken the initiative in amending legislation,
including the budget law, to allow the legislature to intervene in decisions that were previously
the preserve o f the executive. W h i l e these trends may have strengthened the democratic process,
they have made i t difficult for the Government to implement a coherent legislative program. It i s
unclear whether the Government can count on Congress’ support in implementing key structural
reforms, particularly where these run counter to the interests o f public sector unions, or measures
aimed at professionalizing the public sector that run counter to the interests o f the political parties
themselves.
B.

ECONOMICDEVELOPMENTS
AND OUTLOOK

Honduras i s a lower middle-income country, with an open economy and a poor
6.
record o f growth, The population i s estimated at 7.2 million and per capita income at US$ ,170
(Atlas methodology) in 2005.
Honduras i s the most open
Real GDP Growth
economy in Central America, with
(Annual percentage change)
exports and imports accounting for
I
around 40 and 50 percent o f GDP
respectively. I t i s also the slowestgrowing country in the region.
Annual per capita growth was just
0.8 percent over the period 1960 to
4v(,ro~~
2000, less than half the average for
IFYfJ-2002
Latin America.
Growth has o o
fluctuated markedly, with marked - l , o ,
slowdowns in periods o f macro- -2,0 I , , ,
,
,
,
, , , , , ,
,
,
economic instability following
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006

’.’

1

,

v

~

elections;
following
natural
11 Projection for 2008
disasters, notably Hurricane M i t c h
in 1998 and droughts in 2001 and
2002; and during the decline in commodity prices in 1999 and 2000 (see Figure 1). External
shocks, both from trade shocks and natural disasters, constitute significant risks to Honduras’
future perfonnance (see B o x 2 and Annex D).

7.

From 2003 macro-economic stability was restored and the pace of growth pickedup. Growth accelerated to an average o f 4.6 percent in 2004-05, 2.3 percentage points higher than

3

BOX

2: MITIGATINGTHE IMPACT OF EXTERNAL
SHOCKS

Natural disasters have had a significant impact on Honduras’ growth and poverty
reduction performance, not least because poor are at higher risk and more adversely
impacted. Honduras i s susceptible to both hurricanes and droughts. Hurricane M i t c h in
1998, resulted in 5,750 dead, nearly half a million displaced persons, agricultural losses o f
around 70-80 percent o f production and damage amounting to nearly 40 percent o f GDP.
Asset losses averaged 18 percent among the poorest fifth o f Honduran households, compared
with 3 percent amount the richest quintile. Climate change i s causing a significant increase in
hurricane risks (the number o f category 4 and 5 hurricanes in the Caribbean doubled during
the past thirty years), while their impact i s aggravated by continued deforestation and
uncontrolled settlement in high risk areas. Interventions since Hurricane Mitch, supported by
the Bank, have focused on strengthening land use management to reduce risks, as well as
strengthening disaster mitigation and response capacity at the local level.
Honduras i s also susceptible to trade shocks. The agricultural sector has lost about onethird o f its purchasing power in the past two decades, largely due to the decline in prices for
export crops, particularly bananas and coffee. The impact o f the coffee crisis, from 1997 to
200 1, was particularly severe. Although coffee output was little affected, export earnings
dropped by nearly a third from 1999 to 2001. Small farmers (accounting for 90 percent o f
coffee producers and 45 percent o f production) were hardest hit. The combined impact of
M i t c h and the commodity crisis contributed to a surge in migration to the USA.
Measures to mitigate the impact of these shocks at the household level are primarily
geared to strengthening ex-ante risk management and developing effective safety nets. A
stable macro-economic environment, coupled with a flexible labor market, helps soften the
blow o f an economic shock. At the household level, the priority i s to improve economic
adaptability through investments in education as well as improvements in access to finance,
markets and information. Development o f weather-based insurance and market based risk
management mechanisms may also help some farmers. Well-targeted safety nets are also
needed. These are best built on existing programs. These interventions apply equally for
helping farmers adjust to the implementation o f DR-CAFTA (see B o x 3).
in 2001-02. Growth i s expected to reach 5.1 percent in 2006, thanks to an exceptional year for
coffee, sustained growth in exports and a boost in tourism and construction. Core inflation has
stabilized below 10 percent (8.8 percent in 2005), though the prices o f non-core components
(energy, fuels and perishable foods) have proved much more volatile. The external position has
also improved, with the current account deficit (before grants) declining from 7.5 percent o f GDP
in 2003 to 5.5 percent in 2005. International reserves have increased rapidly, keeping up with
the acceleration o f import growth to maintain a ratio o f between 4.5 and 5 months import
coverage. At the same time, the real exchange rate has remained fairly stable. These
improvements are largely attributable to the continued growth in remittances, as well as strong
export performance. Over the last five years inflows o f remittances have increased by around 30
percent a year. In 2005 remittances amounted to US$1.77 bn - becoming the largest source of
foreign exchange - and are expected to top US$2 bn in 2006.

8.
There has been a gradual shift away from traditional exports which have been
superseded by the rapid growth in maquila exports. The share o f the three main traditional
export commodities (coffee, bananas and shrimp) has fallen from over 50 percent in the early
1990s to around 20 percent at present, in part owing to declining commodity prices but largely
due to the rapid growth o f maquila (mainly textile) exports. Maquila value added grew from 9
percent o f exports in 1995 to 25 percent in 2005. This has been accompanied by a shift in trading

4

partners, since traditional exports have largely been destined for European markets whereas the
maquila industry has stronger links with USA. Honduras’ maquila industry has continued to
grow despite the end of WTO quotas in early 2005 and the intensified competition from low-cost
Asian producers. Foreign direct investment (FDI) has helped finance the shift in production and
exports. Between 1994 and 2004, FDI grew by almost 400 percent as a percent o f GDP.

9.
Changes in structure of production mirror the evolving composition of exports,
Agriculture’s share o f GDP in current prices has declined from 22 percent in the mid-1990s to
less than 14 percent in 2005, while the share o f services increased from 42 percent to 55 percent
and manufacturing from 16 to 20 percent. In constant prices, however, the share o f agricultural
production has fallen only slightly - from 28 to 24 percent o f GDP over fifteen years - and the
workforce employed in agriculture has remained constant at around 39 percent. This suggests
that there has been limited opportunity to shift labor and capital from agriculture to other sectors.
Despite rapid growth in maquila exports, the sector s t i l l only employs about 5 percent o f the
workforce. Increasing access to education and deepening o f the financial market will be essential
for improving factor mobility.
10.
The financial sector in Honduras i s gradually recovering from the external shocks
that have hit the economy since 1998. The combined effects o f Hurricane M i t c h in 1998
followed by the decline in commodity prices, resulted in sharp increase in the portfolio o f nonperforming loans and deterioration in financial sector performance. Since 2002, progress has
been made in strengthening the regulatory framework and supervision, as w e l l consolidating the
banking sector (reducing the number o f banks from 20 to 16), increasing capitalization in relation
to risk weighted assets (from 12.9 percent in 2002 to 14.6 percent in 2005) and loan provisioning
(from 39 percent to 67 percent over the same period). Nevertheless, the financial sector i s s t i l l
fragile, losses arising from non-performing loans have yet to be distributed, credit growth has
been slow and primarily geared to services and export-oriented maquila: credit to the agricultural
sector has stagnated since 2002.
11,
Fiscal balances have improved significantly over the past three years. There has been
a marked electoral cycle in Honduras’ fiscal balances, with surges in spending prior to elections
in 1993, 1997 and 2001. Between 1999 and 2003, the combined public sector fiscal deficit
increased from 0.2 percent of GDP to 5.1 percent. Growth in spending over this period was
driven by increases in the central government wage bill, which increased from 7.5 percent o f
GDP in 1997 to nearly 11 percent in 2003, largely due the introduction o f special pay regimes for
teachers and health workers. In 2004, the Government managed to bring the fiscal deficit under
control and by end-2005 the fiscal deficit had been cut to under 2 percent of GDP. This was
achieved through a combination o f revenue and expenditure measures. On the revenue side,
Government broadened the
Government’s Salary Expenditures
sales tax base, removed some
45
corporation tax loop-holes and
strengthened tax administration,
leading to an increase in 40
revenues from 18.3 percent o f
GDP in 2002 to an estimated 35 19.4 percent in 2005. On the
expenditure
side,
the
Government
managed
to 30
contain wage pressures by
enacting a new public sector 25 ,
pay framework in December
1990
1992
1994 1996
1998 2000
2002
2004 2006
2003. By 2006, the central

5

government wage-bill had fallen to an estimated 9.7 percent o f GDP. Breaking with previous
experience, there was no surge in spending prior to the 2005 elections: indeed, the pre-election
period was marked by fiscal restraint.
12.
Although the share of public spending allocated to PRS spending has increased
steadily in recent years, there are significant leakages in the targeting of these programs.
PRS spending increased from 7.8 percent o f GDP in 2003 to an estimated 8.9 percent in 2005 and
i s programmed to increase further to 9.4 percent o f GDP under the 2006 budget. Analysis based
on the 2004 LSMS reveals that 24 percent o f PRS spending i s assigned to the poorest quintile and
allocations drop steadily as the level o f affluence rises. However, the non-poor - the top two
quintiles - s t i l l benefit from around 30 percent o f PRS spending. The pattern o f more broadly
defined social spending i s even less pro-poor: the poor benefit from 46 percent o f social spending,
although they account for 51 percent o f the population. There are also concerns regarding the
BOX 3: BENEFITING FROM DR-CAFTA

Honduras’ accession to DR-CAFTA in April 2006 offers the opportunity to expand
trade, boost investment and growth and make progress in poverty reduction. The
agreement provides a permanent framework for trade relations, granting rights and obligations
for market access, which consolidate and expand Honduras’ privileged status under the
Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act. Benefits include relaxation o f rules o f origin for
textiles and non-tariff barriers for non-traditional agricultural exports. Equally important, DRC A F T A strengthens the domestic reform agenda: opening previously protected sectors including telecoms, financial services and energy - to competition and requiring
modernization o f regulations related to government procurement, intellectual property rights
and the treatment o f foreign investors.
Realization o f these benefits requires the implementation of policies that will support
growth, with investments in transport infrastructure, administrative streamlining and
improvements in standards identified as particular priorities. The 2004 Business Climate
Assessment reveals that businesses consider short-comings in transport infrastructure the main
constraint in benefiting from CAFTA. In this context, private investment in the development
and operation o f Puerto Cortes i s a priority. Elimination o f bureaucratic hurdles i s important
both to facilitate investment and to reduce opportunities for corruption. Similarly progress w i l l
need to be made in establishing standards and implementing quality control systems. At
present, only 5 percent o f f i r m s have I S 0 quality certificates as compared with half o f Chinese
f i r m s*
DR-CAFTA will generate benefits for consumers and for producers in areas where
Honduras enjoys a comparative advantage, while the phased reduction o f tariffs will
allow some time for producers o f sensitive agricultural products to adjust. Likely winners
under DR-CAFTA are products that benefit from improved access to US market, based on
revealed comparative advantage, including the maquila sector and a range o f agricultural
products (among them beans, palm oil, sugar and conserved vegetables). Poverty reduction
impacts w i l l likely vary across sectors depending on s k i l l mix and the extent to which
producers are able to adapt to changing market conditions. A minority o f farmers who are netproducers o f sensitive agricultural products may be adversely affected, though the impact will
be delayed by the phasing in o f tariff reductions over a period up to twenty years. Policy
measures that can mitigate these impacts include improvements in education, improved access
to markets, technical assistance and support to promote improvements in agricultural
productivity and diversification, and public information to ensure that producers understand
the likely impacts o f DR-CAFTA.

6

effectiveness of social spending, in part because personnel costs have crowded out investment
and other operational expenditures and in part due to concerns regarding sector governance and
institutional capacity.

13.
HIPC and MDRI have contributed to a significant decline in Honduras’ external
debt, which i s expected to remain sustainable over the medium-term if fiscal deficits and
rates of growth are maintained at their current levels. Honduras reached HIPC Completion
Point in April 2005 and benefited from the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative in 2006. As a
result, Honduras’ external public debt in nominal terms fell from 7 1 percent o f GDP in 2003 to a
projected 28 percent in 2006, while external debt service f e l l from 10.3 percent o f exports o f
goods and services (including remittances) in 2003 to a projected 2 percent in 2006. A debt
sustainability analysis (DSA) conducted in September 2006 concludes that Honduras’s debt and
debt-service burdens are sustainable under the baseline scenario, which assumes that the
authorities maintain sound fiscal policies and a growth rate o f 4 percent over the medium-term.
However, the risk o f debt distress would increase significantly if fiscal management i s allowed t o
deteriorate. Reducing the risk o f debt distress will depend critically on maintaining sound policies
consistent with a prudent borrowing strategy for the medium and long-term (see Annex G).
14.
Honduras’ medium-term growth outlook continues to be positive. Assuming a benign
external environment and continued progress o n economic reforms, growth i s expected to average
4 percent over the CAS period, as compared with the average o f 3.3 percent achieved over the
period 1995 to 2005. Export growth i s forecasted at around 8 percent over the period 2006-11,
driven by the implementation of first phase of DR-CAFTA and expanding activity in the maquila
and tourism sectors, Imports are forecasted to grow at a marginally faster rate over the same
period, with demand fuelled by domestic growth and further increases in remittances to maintain
their share o f 25 percent o f GDP. Over the longer-term, DR-CAFTA i s expected to provide
further opportunities to expand and diversify investments and exports o f non-traditional products,
though continued reform efforts and investments in infrastructure, education, financial sector
strengthening and improved governance will be needed if Honduras i s to fully exploit these
opportunities (see B o x 3). Following the M a y 2006 Vienna Summit, Honduras announced that it
would initiate discussions on a free trade agreement with the European Union together with i t s
Central American neighbors.
15.
However, Honduras’ fiscal position i s fragile and in this context the Government
will have to contain pressures on the wage bill, curtail ENEE’s losses and continue efforts to
increase revenues, The August 2006 pay agreement negotiated with teachers, following violent
demonstrations, i s expected to increase the central government wage bill from 9.7 percent o f GDP
in 2006 to around 11 percent in 2009, though the cost o f the pay agreement may be mitigated by
retiring some teachers and improvements in personnel management. The agreement potentially
reverses key elements o f a prior action for the first PRSC which was fully disbursed in 2004. The
overall fiscal impact o f the pay agreement will depend on the Government’s success in
implementing compensatory revenue measures and containing other pressures on public
spending. ENEE’s commercial and technical losses, currently running at about 25 percent o f
production, are o f particular concern. ENEE’s operating losses amounted to 2 percent o f GDP in
2005 and have continued to increase in 2006. In response, ENEE has prepared an emergency plan
to address the utility’s precarious financial position, focusing on loss reduction measures. At the
same time, Government will need to compensate for revenue losses associated with the
implementation o f DR-CAFTA and the expiration o f HONDUTEL’s (the public
telecommunications utility) monopoly from 2005. These trends add urgency to measures to
improve tax policy and administration, including: progressive elimination o f tax exemptions,
increasing the number o f audits o f large tax payers, improving coordination between tax and
customs services and measures to ensure professionalization o f the revenue services,

7

c.

POVERTY, ACCESS
TO SERVICES AND SOCIAL CONCERNS

16.
There has been little progress in poverty reduction or in addressing inequality in
recent years. The results o f the 2004 Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS), using
consumption-based measures, show that the poverty headcount declined from 53 to 51 percent
between 1998/99 and 2004, while extreme poverty declined from 25 to 24 percent. Income
inequality i s unchanged. The consumption-based Gini coefficient i s 46, around the median for
Central American countries. The top 20 percent o f Hondurans account for more than half o f
overall consumption, while the bottom quintile accounts for just 5 percent. Lack o f progress in
poverty reduction i s largely attributable to the slow pace o f economic growth. Moreover, recent
growth has not been particularly pro-poor. Headcount poverty fell by just 0.27 percentage points
for each one percentage point o f growth in GDP per capita in the period 1998/99 to 2004.
However, since Honduras was recovering from M i t c h during this period, and growth was in part
linked to replacing assets, future growth may prove to have a greater impact on poverty.
17.
Poverty i s particularly acute in rural areas and among indigenous groups. About 74
percent o f the poor and 86 percent o f the extreme poor reside in rural areas, comprising
approximately one-half o f the national population. The greatest concentration o f poverty i s in the
rural central region, home to one quarter o f the population but almost one third of poor.
However, poverty and extreme poverty rates are highest in the rural western region, at 88 and 56
percent respectively. Poverty rates are also higher among indigenous peoples than the other
population groups: 71 percent live below the poverty line, with the level to proportion o f those
living in poverty rising to 85 percent for those that self-identify as Lencas, the largest ethnic
group.
18.
The poor and extreme poor are mostly engaged in agriculture. In 2004, 81 percent o f
the heads o f extreme poor households were engaged in agriculture, as compared with just 35
percent o f the non-poor, whose sources o f income are much more diversified. The poor and
extreme poor are mostly engaged in low-input, rain-fed agriculture on small hillside plots that are
distant from markets. Lack o f security and access to basic resources, particularly land and forests,
i s a key determinant o f inequality and poverty. The majority (72 percent) o f land holdings are less
than 5 hectares, but these account for just 11.6 percent o f farm land. In contrast, holdings o f 500
hectares or more account for 1 percent o f holdings and 23 percent o f farm land, often in the most
fertile areas. The rural poor are disproportionately concentrated in the country's public forest
lands where uncertain land tenure hinders the development o f agriculture and forestry as an
effective poverty exit strategy and contribute to the degradation o f the forest, soil and water
resources.
19.
Poverty i s associated with child malnutrition and lack of access to health services.
Among the extreme poor 47 percent
Malnutrition Rates for Children Under Age 5
o f children are stunted, as
(ENCOW 2004)
compared with 24 percent among
5o
the moderately poor and 9 percent
45
rn Extreme Poor
0 Moderately Poor
among the non-poor. Limited use
40
0 Non poor
i s made o f health services. O f
those that reported a sickness or
25
injury during the household survey
20
only 31 percent o f the poor
consulted a medical service
5
provider as compared with 58
0
Stmtiog (height-for-age)
Wasting (wight-for-height)
Uodenreight (Height-forqe)
percent o f the non-poor. Although
most women receive ante-natal care
(89 percent on average), almost two-thirds o f extreme poor women deliver at home and more than

:i

{:

8

BOX 4: PROGRESS AGAINST PRS TARGETS
AND THE MDGs

I f current trends continue Honduras will attain only three Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). Progress i s on-track against MDGs for: universal primary enrollment;
reducing maternal mortality by three-quarters; and reducing the share o f the population
without access to improved water source by half. However, current trends fall short in four
areas: reducing extreme poverty by half, reducing under five malnutrition by half, and
reducing under five and infant mortality by two-thirds. The evolution o f MDGs in Honduras
has been slower than the Latin America regional average, which shows good progress against
five out o f seven MDGs (with the exception o f extreme poverty and maternal mortality).
Making further progress in achieving the MDGs in Honduras will require improved
quality of PRSP spending and an acceleration in economic growth to at least 5 to 6
percent accompanied by productivity growth in all economic sectors. Estimates for
Honduras suggest that an 8 percent GDP growth rate from 2005 to 2015 would be needed
(without changes in the income distribution) to reduce extreme poverty by half. If there i s an
improvement in the income distribution that reduces the Gini by 10 percent, then a 6 percent
growth rate would be required. Accelerated growth must be accompanied by productivity
growth in all economic sectors, and particularly in the rural sector where much o f the
country's poor i s located, if growth i s to have a significant impact on poverty reduction.
half are attended by midwives. Fertility rates also show marked differentials between income
groups: women in extreme poverty aged 15-49 averaged 4.7 births, compared with 3.7 for those
in moderate poverty and 2.7 for the non-poor. O n a more positive note, coverage o f vaccination i s
near universal: 99 percent o f children receive polio and D P T (diphtheria-pertussis-tenatus)
vaccines. Taking a longer-term view, there have been improvements in infant and child mortality
(infant mortality has dropped from 62 per 1,000 live births in the early 1980s to 31 in 2000)
though the rate o f improvement in these indicators has slowed in recent years. Moreover,
U N A I D S estimates HIV adult prevalence at 1.5 percent (65,000 people are living with the virus).
AIDS i s a leading cause o f death among women, though the epidemic i s s t i l l concentrated in
high-risk populations such as men who have sex with men and commercial sex workers.
Although there has been improvement in pre- and primary school enrolment in
20.
recent years, there i s limited access to secondary schooling and the quality o f education i s
poor. N e t enrolment rates for primary education increased from around 85 percent in 2002 to 89
percent in 2005 and the enrollment gap between urban and rural primary schools i s gradually
closing. However, net enrollment rates fall o f f sharply following primary to 39 percent in presecondary (7th -gfh grades) and just 23 percent at secondary level (10th-12" grades). Standardized
test scores in Spanish and Mathematics at third and sixth grade have shown no improvement
since 1998: in 2005, the median percentage o f correct response in Spanish in third grade was just
39 percent and for mathematics 44 percent. Primary school completion rates improved from 68
percent in 2000 to 78 percent in 2004, but repetition rates - which are high in the early grades at
16 percent in first grade and 9 percent in second grade in 2004 - remained constant over the same
period. Introduction o f a new primary school curriculum, expansion o f the school feeding
program to near universal coverage in rural areas, and the introduction o f bilingual primary
education for ethnic groups should help to improve educational performance. However, the most
important measure to improve education quality in the short-term would be to ensure that students
receive lessons throughout the mandated 200 day school year. M u c h o f the school year i s lost to
teachers' work-stoppages and the situation has deteriorated in recent years, with primary schools
receiving just 89 days o f lessons in 2005.

9

21.
While progress has been made in expanding access to water, sanitation and
electricity, there are m a r k e d inequalities between rural areas and among socio economic
groups. Currently, about 80 percent o f the population has access to water supply services. While
urban networks have expanded in recent years, the quality o f service i s in general very poor, with
86 percent o f the urban population being affected by service interruptions and 76 percent
receiving water considered o f a regular or bad quality. Poor families in peri-urban areas who
often rely on water from expensive private vendors (paying up to 25 times more than those served
by network systems), are the most affected by lack o f access and poor quality o f the services. In
rural areas, only 13 percent o f households have access to piped water. Nearly one-third o f rural
extreme poor gather water from open water sources, compared to just 9 percent o f the rural nonpoor. The picture with regard to sanitation i s similar to that for water. W h i l e Honduras has made
progress in improving coverage o f sanitation services, reaching 82 percent o f households in 2004,
the expansion o f rural coverage has mainly been through “latrinization” which has a limited l i f e
and which must be accompanied by improved hygiene information and practices to realize the
full health benefits. Coverage o f electricity services has expanded significantly since the early
1990s, rising from 33 percent o f households in 1989 to 65 percent in 2004. Again, coverage i s
much greater in urban areas (93 percent as compared with 40 percent in rural areas), and varies
markedly by poverty status, with half o f the urban extreme poor and 13 percent o f the rural
extreme poor having access to electricity. In the telecommunications sector, coverage has also
increased: fixed lines from 4.8 lines per 100 persons in 2000 to 6.7 lines in 2005, owing to the
“Telephony for All” program, which allowed private operators to install services under
commercialization agreements with the public utility, HONDUTEL: mobile lines increased from
2.5 per 100 habitants to 15.5 over the same period, as a result o f competition from a new private
operator. However, penetration in rural areas remains extremely limited (with 1.1 percent o f rural
households having a fixed l i n e service as compared to 32 percent o f urban households).
22.
Migration has emerged as a n important coping strategy for poor households leading
to concerns about the social and long-term economic consequences. Data from the LSMS
suggests that about 12 percent o f households have a former member living abroad while a slightly
larger proportion (16 percent) have received remittances from abroad in the previous three
months. Migrants’ households tend to be less poor, with headcount poverty rates about half the
level o f non-migrant households. However, migration also has significant social impacts.
Migration i s largely responsible for the high proportion o f female-headed households in
Honduras, now amounting to nearly one in four. Around 60 percent o f migrants are from urban
areas and migrants tend to be slightly better educated than the population as a whole - 57 percent
have primary education and 35 percent secondary education - leading to concerns that migration
i s depriving Honduras o f many o f those who show the greatest potential.
Insecurity, in particular gang and drug related crime, has significant economic and
23.
social impact. In recent years the reported homicide rate has dropped slightly, from 53 per
100,000 in 2003 to 45 in 2005, but remains high even by Latin American standards, surpassed
only by Colombia and Jamaica. The self-reported incidence o f crime i s highest among the urban,
wealthier socio-economic groups, but criminality i s not an exclusively urban phenomenon. The
economic impact i s significant: f i r m s consulted in the 2004 Investment Climate Assessment
identifying criminality as the second most important constraint o n growth. Around one third o f
f i r m s reported being the victim o f crime, with losses amounting to 4.5 percent o f sales
compounded by a further 3.6 percent o f sales being spent on security measures. The incidence
and cost o f criminality i s higher among small and medium-sized firms. Under the Maduro
administration, the Government adopted a hard-line approach to crime and gang violence,
introducing legislation that made gang membership illegal. President Zelaya has sought to
combine strengthened enforcement with a more conciliatory stance aimed at addressing the root

10

causes o f gang membership. This approach has been welcomed by c i v i l society which had voiced
concern that the hard-line approach was leading to human rights abuses.

D.

EXTERNAL
ASSISTANCEMANAGEMENT

24.
Honduras’s benefits from substantial external assistance inflows and the World
Bank i s a major contributor. External assistance averaged 9 percent o f GNI from 1994 t o 2004,
peaking at 16 percent of GNI following Hurricane M i t c h and then falling to 9 percent o f GNI in
2005. Over the period, 1994-2004 the World Bank has been the main financing partner, followed
by IDB, USA, Japan, Spain and the EU. SEFIN (the Ministry o f Finance) reports that the
external financing available as o f June 2006 amounts to US$1.8 billion, o f which 27 percent i s
assigned to infrastructure (mostly transport at 21 percent o f the total), 18 percent to productive
sectors, 27 percent to the social sectors (of which health and education each account for about 6
percent), and 12 percent to state modernization. Although there are over 450 active projects, the
largest 75 projects account for about 80 percent o f available external financing.
25.
The Poverty Reduction Strategy provides the strategic framework for external
assistance in Honduras, supported by formal coordination arrangements through the G16.
Originally established with five members in 1999 following Hurricane Mitch, the G16 has grown
to integrate all resident external partners. The G16 provides a forum for monitoring PRS
implementation as well as coordination on policy priorities and operational issues through
meetings and working groups at the technical and policy level. All G16 partners use the Poverty
Reduction Strategy as the basis for their country strategies.
26.
Further work i s needed to clarify institutional arrangements for aid management
and build the requisite management systems. At present, responsibility for aid management i s
divided between the Ministry o f Finance (primary counterpart o f the development banks), the
Presidency (which provides strategic direction and manages the Poverty Reduction Strategy) and
the Ministry for Technical Cooperation (the primary counterpart for bilaterals and the UN
system). Although the Ministry o f Finance’s information systems manage to capture most
external assistance (according to Ministry estimates, 85 percent o f external assistance i s reflected
in the budget), information sharing and coordination between the key institutions and the line
agencies i s often poor. Concerns about the fragility o f Government systems have led most
partners to use project implementation units, usually staffed by national consultants reporting
directly to agency senior management and on significantly higher salaries than agency
counterpart staff.
27.
The Government intends to improve the policy alignment and harmonization of
external assistance through a gradual shift towards a more programmatic approach.
Government recently issued new instructions for sector working groups, expanding membership
to include civil society and providing guidelines for the development o f sector strategies, multiyear sector expenditure plans and supporting results-based monitoring frameworks. In the water
and sanitation sector, significant progress has been made in developing a shared vision and sector
plan. The Education For All (EFA) initiative, supported by twelve external partners, five o f
whom finance a pooled fund executed by the Ministry o f Education, constitutes best-practice in
donor harmonization. The World Bank has contributed to this process by providing technical
support. Significant progress has been made in recent years i s the development o f an integrated
financial management system, which has been rolled out to line agencies. This provides a nucleus
from which to gradually strengthen and expand the use o f national systems in external assistance
management.

11

111. HONDURAS - WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP FY2007-2010

A.

COUNTRY VISION AND GOVERNMENTPROGRAM

28.
Honduras’ development vision i s laid out in its Poverty Reduction Strategy,
originally prepared in 2001. Initially prepared under a Liberal Party administration in 200 1, and
subsequently endorsed by President Maduro in 2003 and by President Zelaya shortly after taking
office in 2006, the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) provides continuity in policy orientation
between administrations. The PRS has become the focus o f policy dialogue with c i v i l society. As
currently conceived, the PRS provides an umbrella for a wide range o f policies and programs in
support o f the broad objective reducing poverty by 24 percentage points by 2015. The strategy i s
structured around six pillars: (i)
accelerating economic growth; (ii)
reducing poverty in rural
areas; (iii)reducing urban poverty; (iv) investing in human capital; (v) strengthening social
protection for specific groups; and (vi) ensuring the sustainability o f the strategy. In each o f these
areas, the PRS outlines policy measures, programs and specific projects supporting
implementation o f the strategy. Three overarching themes cut across these six pillars: gender
equity, environmental sustainability, and decentralization. The Government i s currently updating
the PRS to reflect President Zelaya’s government program by giving greater attention to public
sector transparency, employment generation, environmental protection and a stronger results
orientation across the public sector (see B o x 5).
29.
Honduras has sought to institutionalize the PRS process and ensure continuity
through the creation of formal consultative arrangements and by linking the PRS to the
state budget and local planning initiatives.
An executive decree o f 2002, subsequently
updated in 2004, provides for a Consultative Council o f the PRS (CCERP), comprising
Government and civil society representatives from twelve broad constituencies, with a mandate to
advise on the allocation o f PRS spending and monitor PRS implementation. PRS spending i s
allocated through a virtual fund, which tags programs and expenditures that are considered to
have a significant poverty reduction impact as PRS spending within the overall budget. HIPC
and other debt-relief funds must be allocated to PRS programs and expenditures, complementing

BOX 5: UPDATING THE POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY
The Government has requested that the Bank proceed with the presentation of the
FY2007-10 CAS, pending the finalization o f and consultations on an updated Poverty
Reduction Strategy scheduled for early 2007. The Bank and Government teams working
on the CAS and PRS Update have worked in close collaboration to ensure consistency in
approach, the definition o f priorities and the selection o f performance indicators. The
proposed PRS update draws on the Poverty Assessment to inform refinements in the overall
strategy. These include: a stronger focus on the creation o f assets, including capacity,
opportunities, protection and infrastructure used by the poor; improved geographical targeting
and integration o f programs; and greater emphasis on results, participation and program
management. As part o f this process, the PRS pillars will be brought more closely in line with
the budget’s programmatic structure and poverty reduction spending will be reclassified,
taking into account the results o f the beneficiary impact analysis prepared as part of the
Poverty Assessment. Further refinements in the strategy may be expected during 2007 as the
Government proceeds with the preparation o f sector strategies with the support o f tripartite
(Government, civil society, donor) working groups. The Bank and IMF will submit a Joint
Staff Advisory Note on the revised PRS. If necessary, the CAS Progress Report, scheduled
for early 2008, will adjust the Bank’s assistance strategy to reflect refinements in the PRS and
sector strategies.

12

the national resources and external assistance. The PRS Information System (SIERP) provides a
framework for compiling data on PRS indicators and monitoring progress in implementation.
The PRS has also provided a framework for local planning. There are n o w five regional Poverty
Reduction Strategies, promoted b y non-governmental organizations working with associations o f
municipalities. Most o f the 298 municipal corporations have development plans which, to
varying degrees, adapt the PRS to local conditions and priorities. Under the 2006 budget,
Congress approved changes in PRS implementation arrangements providing for the transfer o f
part o f debt relief funding to municipalities to finance locally-identified projects in support o f the
PRS.
30.
President Zelaya’s Government Program acknowledges the importance o f
accelerating economic growth, whilst recognizing the need to expand employment if the
benefits of growth are to be shared equitably and growth i s to have an impact on poverty
reduction. The Government has reiterated i t s commitment to macro-economic stability as a key
element o f the PRS. In order to accelerate growth, and realize the benefits offered by DRCAFTA, the Government intends to expand investments in infrastructure, particularly in energy
and the modernization o f port infrastructure. The Government i s currently investigating options
for public private partnerships, including concessions for large hydro-electric projects and new
port infrastructure. Public investments in infrastructure will be focused on the road network and
social housing. Completion o f the logistical corridor between El Salvador and Puerto Cortes i s a
priority, complemented by further investments in upgrading secondary roads in areas o f
agricultural potential. Public investments in social housing will be designed to facilitate private
participation and upgrading o f basic infrastructure in poorer neighborhoods. Building on the PRS
strategy for expanding economic opportunities for the poor, the Government also intends to
promote micro, small and medium-sized enterprises as a means o f increasing employment
quickly, consolidating support currently provided through a range o f NGOs, finance institutions
and training programs. The Government will expand the scope o f this PRS component to address
the needs o f small-scale businesses to rural areas, providing opportunities for integration o f the
agricultural sector into supply chains and expanding opportunities for off-farm employment.

31,
The second priority of President Zelaya’s program i s to improve governance and
strengthen citizen participation. President Zelaya campaigned under the slogan “Citizen
Participation ” and i s committed to opening up government and providing space for citizens to
participate in decision-making and the oversight o f public institutions. O n taking office, the
President quickly took steps to implement this agenda by presenting a draft Transparency and
Access to Information L a w to Congress, The Government has signaled i t s support for social
monitoring and auditing, which i s seen as a tool for ensuring the effectiveness o f both the PRS
and the process o f decentralization. Both the Government and Congress have promoted
improvements in PRS implementation arrangements by transferring some o f the funds made
available through debt r e l i e f to municipalities. A t the same time, the Government intends to
accelerate the pace o f public sector reform under the PRS, notably through the development o f a
results framework for monitoring the performance o f public institutions and improvements in
public financial management. Work on the administrative simplification will also continue, both
at the central and municipal level, with a view to putting in place a one-stop shop for investors
and expanding the scope o f e-government. With regard to the critical issue o f professionalization,
the Government i s currently reviewing how best to make progress without introducing new
legislation. Also under the PRS governance agenda, the Government has affirmed its commitment
to improving security for citizens, In this context, the Government took steps early on to expand
the number of police, whilst advocating the expansion o f crime prevention and rehabilitation
activities for high risk groups, notably gang members.

13

32.
The third priority o f President Zelaya’s administration i s to strengthen
environmental protection and risk management as a cross-cutting theme under the PRS.
The President signaled his concern at the pace o f environmental degradation by assigning the
military to guard protected areas and then carrying out a widely publicized visit to the Rio Patuca
Reserve in the second month o f the administration. Progress has been made in defining the scope
and institutional arrangements for a Protected Areas Fund, which would provide for civil society
oversight and channel funds to local organizations managing protected areas. The Government
will also strengthen PRS programs aimed at river basin management as part o f a broader strategy
to mitigate the impact o f natural hazards.
The fourth priority of President Zelaya’s administration i s to expand and
33.
consolidate PRS programs supporting the development of human capital, focusing on basic
education, primary health care and social protection for vulnerable groups. In the education
sector, the Government intends to proceed with the gradual expansion o f basic education from the
current focus on grades 1 through 6 to a system including one year o f pre-basic education to ninth
grade. Shortly after taking office, the Government eliminated matriculation charges for all state
schools in an effort to facilitate expanded access. In the health sector, the Government has
reiterated its commitment to the expansion o f primary health care, focusing on the expansion o f
maternal and child care services. In the area o f social protection, the priority i s to rationalize and
improve the targeting o f the existing array o f social safety net programs under the PRS, focusing
o n two broad programs: “Honduras Solidaria”, aimed at the most vulnerable groups, and
“Iniciando Bien la Vida”, aimed at pregnant women and children.

B.

PROGRESS UNDER THE FY2003-06 CAS

34.
The FY2003-06 CAS was aligned and structured following the Poverty Reduction
Strategy published in 2001. The Bank’s assistance strategy included support, in varying
degrees, to all six o f the PRS pillars and many o f the pillars’ sub-components. PRS progress
reports prepared in 2003 and 2005 maintained overall strategic direction while giving greater
emphasis to interventions aimed at employment generation and supporting small enterprise,
improvements in economic services to take advantage o f DR-CAFTA and measures to tackle
corruption. These issues were addressed through adjustments in project design rather than
restructuring o f the portfolio. The CAS Completion Report attached in Annex C provides a
detailed assessment o f Bank performance in the period FY2003-06.
35.
Although the CAS’S core goal of reducing extreme poverty was not achieved,
progress was made across the program, warranting an overall moderately successful rating,
with the strongest performance related to improvements in the macro-economic
environment, business climate and financial sector. The prospect o f substantial debt relief
under the HIPC initiative was undoubtedly one o f the key factors behind measures to control the
growth in public sector pay and the restoration o f macro-economic stability in 2003-04. The
PRSC, approved in June 2004, supported this process by providing a framework for prioritizing
and monitoring reforms as well as budget support financing. Honduras finally reached HIPC
Completion in April 2005. HIPC and the prospect o f accession to DR-CAFTA also provided
incentive for Honduras to make progress in improving i t s business climate. The time and cost o f
businesses registration has been cut in half, passage o f a Competition L a w provides an
institutional framework for addressing anti-competitive practices and reducing barriers to f i r m s ’
entry and exit, while legislation and subsequent work on a unified property register and land
regularization pave the way for a transparent, secure national land administration system. The
Bank has also supported the Government’s financial sector reforms, notably through
improvements in the regulatory framework and banking supervision. These measures contributed,

14

in some degree, to the continued improvements in provisioning for non-performing assets and
increased capitalization o f the Banking sector.

36.
Significant progress has also been made in strengthening the public financial
management system, supporting decentralization initiatives and developing participatory
mechanisms for delivering basic education and health services. A comprehensive public
financial management reform program was launched in 2004, following passage o f a new Budget
Law, with the support o f the PRSC, HIPC and the Economic and Financial Management
Technical Assistance Credit. These reforms established a single treasury account and

BOX 6: LESSONS
LEARNED
FROM RECENT BANKEXPERIENCE
Bank assistance should focus on a narrower range of sectors and reform objectives.
Policy discussions with Government have been too broad, making it difficult for the
Government to focus on a manageable reform agenda. Similarly, projects have been dispersed
around a large number o f sectors, making it difficult to deliver tangible results. Future Bank
assistance should address the key constraints to growth and poverty reduction identified in
analytical work notably: improvements in rural productivity, infrastructure provision, the
quality o f education, and governance and institutional performance.
The Bank should take political constraints into account when supporting reform
programs and encourage the authorities to build constituencies for reform. Pressures
from narrow vested interests have managed to stall some o f the most pressing reforms. The
Bank will need a more effective communication strategy to stimulate public debate and inform
key stakeholders - Congress in particular - about policy options if the reform agenda i s to
succeed. Political factors may be relevant when selecting the instruments for achieving
program objectives.
Linking policy reform, investment projects and analytical work tends to bring the best
results. The PRSC instrument has proved a much more effective instrument for sustained
policy dialogue than the alternative o f standalone projects and analytical work. Technical
assistance provided through a flexible instrument (the PRS-Technical Assistance Credit) has
facilitated implementation o f reforms. Where significant investments are required, these may
be delivered more effectively through related investment projects.
Institutionalization and continuity are critical for achieving development objectives.
Development o f sector strategies would improve policy continuity between administrations,
provide a more coherent, country-led framework for the delivery o f Bank assistance and
permit a shift over to the use o f more programmatic instruments. A t the same time, measures
are needed to improve the continuity o f staffing in government agencies and in Bank-financed
projects.
Projects tend to be more effective where there i s close coordination across Bank sector
teams and projects build on the results o f other interventions. A notable success in this
context has been FHIS V’s investment in municipal planning which has provided a foundation
for the Bank’s work on decentralization across the portfolio. There i s potential for greater
integration o f project team working on the competitiveness, rural development and
infrastructure agendas.
Bank performance monitoring systems should use and support national systems. The
National Statistics Development Strategy provides a framework for structuring Bank
assistance in this area. At the project level, attention should turn to strengthening executing
agencies’ information systems to improve monitoring o f sector performance.

15

restructured the budget, accounting and payments systems. A new financial management
information system became operational for the 2006 budget exercise. At the local level, the FHIS
V project supported the introduction o f Municipal Development Plans, which now provide a
framework for project planning and broader participation in municipal decision-making.
Complementing this initiative, the Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project has strengthened
municipal capacity in disaster mitigation and response in the sixty highest risk municipalities,
while PPIAF financing has been instrumental in developing the legal and supporting regulatory
framework for the decentralization o f water and sanitation services from SANAA, the national
utility, to municipal administrations. In the health and education sectors too, the Bank has
supported the development and expansion o f decentralized service delivery and governance
models. Service contracts for maternal-child health care financed under the Health Sector
Reform Project have been applied in seven clinics through private sector, NGOs and public
providers, leading to a significant improvement in service coverage, quality and overall costeffectiveness. In education, PROHECO schools financed under the Community Based Education
Project have expanded access in remote communities, delivering services o f a quality comparable
to better resourced public schools, largely because the schools are managed and teachers hired by
parents' associations. The Government has guaranteed the fiscal sustainability o f both the
contracted clinics and the PROHECO schools by bringing them on budget.
Progress has been disappointing in those areas of the program which supported
37.
restructuring of public utilities and institutional strengthening in the public sector.
Separation o f the electricity utility's accounts, as the first step in a restructuring process, was
approved in 2005, but was not implemented. Draft legislation clarifying institutional
arrangements for the management o f Puerto Cortes and providing for private participation met
with opposition in congress, largely due to resistance from the business community. A draft civil
service law, aimed at professionalizing public institutions, also stalled in Congress. Progress in
restructuring the health and education ministries has also proved much more difficult than
originally anticipated, as suggested by the limited improvement in education and health
indicators. These reforms are s t i l l considered critical if Honduras i s to achieve i t s poverty
reduction objectives and are prominent on the agenda for the FY2007-10 CAS.
38.
The FY2003-06 CAS' proposed lending program was delivered in a timely manner
and the quality of lending was satisfactory. The CAS Base case scenario planned ten new
investment projects, two technical assistance projects and two PRSCs (in addition, a HIPC Debt
Relief Project not envisaged in the 2003 CAS was approved in April 2005). All but one o f these
projects began within the CAS period: the exception, financing for the Education for All program,
was replaced by Bank assistance in the form o f advisory services. Projects that closed during the
CAS period were rated satisfactory or positive in all measures and these ratings were confirmed
for the two projects evaluated by the Independent Evaluation Group (see Annex F). The number
o f problem projects was reduced from two to zero over FY2003-05, even as the portfolio grew
from 13 to 22 projects. Over the same period, the disbursement ratio increased from about 19
percent to about 30 percent - disbursements drop sharply following changes in Government when
staff are replaced and then gradually pick-up as staff are trained and gain experience - and the
pro-activity index reached 100 percent, suggesting strong lending flows and quick resolution o f
project difficulties. At the end o f FY2006, two projects were classified as "potential problem
projects", largely due to the slowdown in implementation during the elections and during the
early stage o f the administrative transition.
39.
Bank analytical work has informed the design of the Bank's program and served a
wider Government and donor audience. All planned core diagnostic ESW was delivered
within the CAS period, including the Development Policy Review, Poverty Assessment, a
Country Financial Accountability Assessment and update and Country Procurement Review (both

16

prepared in collaboration with IDB). Core fiduciary diagnostics, prepared in collaboration with
the IDB, have provided the framework for the Government’s expenditure management and
procurement reform agenda. The Development Policy Review, the Investment Climate
Assessment and Drivers of Rural Growth studies (all delivered FY2005) studies provided the
analytical underpinning for the PRSC and the FY2006-2010 CAS. The Poverty Assessment,
delivered in FY2006, identifies the priorities for future poverty reduction efforts and establishes
the benchmark for monitoring progress. The Bank also assisted in the development o f a water
and sanitation strategy through a PPIAF grant and prepared a decentralization note to support the
design of projects implemented at municipal level. These country studies were complemented by
regional analytical work, notably a study on the impact and opportunities presented by DRCAFTA, and regional studies on education, health and the response to the coffee crisis. The
Bank’s analytical work i s influential in framing policy dialogue in Honduras. Recognizing the
importance o f these inputs, civil society has argued that much greater efforts need to be taken to
disseminate not only the final products but also the early drafts o f the Bank’s analytical work so
that these can be subject o f debate and help break up the Bank’s perceived “intellectual
monopoly”.

40.
The recommendations of the CAS Completion Report and the IEG’s Country
Assistance Evaluation are consistent. The CAS has benefited from an evaluation o f the Bank’s
assistance to Honduras in the period FY1995-05 which was made available during the early
stages o f CAS consultations. The IEG argues that the Bank should concentrate i t s assistance in
fewer areas, more closely related to the growth objective. Priorities for Bank assistance identified
in the IEG are: decentralized delivery o f quality education services; transforming the electricity
utility into a reliable l o w cost provider; generation o f agricultural growth by improving access to
credit and support services for low-income farmers and improving rural roads; strengthening of
expenditure and revenue control systems, procurement, and professionalization o f the c i v i l
service. With regard to the delivery o f assistance, the IEG recommends that the Bank should
focus on the development o f efficient line-ministries, rather than special purpose institutions, and
assume a leading role in improving the quality o f statistical information. IEG’s recommendations
and management’s response are attached as Annex F.

c.

K E Y FEATURES
OF THE FY2007-10 CAS

41.

The CAS priorities are informed by recent Bank analytical work which identifies
the constraints that Honduras will need to address in order to accelerate the pace o f growth
and poverty reduction. The Bank’s Development Policy Review identifies four interventions
that are critical for accelerating growth: increased educational attainment; improved provision o f
economic infrastructure; development o f financial markets; and improved governance. The
Bank’s Investment Climate Assessment and studies on C A F T A point to similar priorities, but
give greater prominence to improved governance, in particular the reduction o f bureaucratic
burdens and tackling corruption. The Drivers o f Rural Growth Study demonstrates the
importance o f investing in assets that help households adjust to changing circumstances (rather
than in particular livelihoods), including investments in education, roads and market-related
infrastructure and services. The Poverty Assessment argues that growth i s the key determinant o f
the pace o f poverty reduction. The Poverty Assessment goes on to demonstrate the need for
improvements in the targeting o f spending, concentrating resources on programs used by the poor
and in the regions where the poor reside. Programs identified as having a strong poverty
reduction impact include: primary and early secondary education; maternal and child health care;
nutrition and early-childhood development; and interventions aimed at improving rural
productivity and diversifying sources o f income.

17

42.
Whilst recognizing the PRS as the framework for external assistance in Honduras,
future Bank assistance will be selective, focusing on a few priority areas within PRS’ broad
development agenda. The Ministry o f Finance and the Presidency have taken the lead in
prioritizing the Bank’s assistance. The selection o f priorities for Bank financing and analytical
work have also been informed by consultations w i t h the political parties and focus groups
representing civil society and the private sector o n the CAS results framework (see Annex E).
K e y considerations in determining the areas for future Bank support are: (i)the Bank’s
comparative advantage as an institution providing quality policy advice, leading to the Bank’s
focus on pressing reform issues (including utility restructuring, governance reforms and
improvement in the quality o f education); (ii)the recommendations o f the IEG Country
Assistance Evaluation and the CAS Completion Report to focus a narrower range o f priorities
directly supporting the growth and poverty reduction agenda; and (iii)the overall allocation o f
external assistance and the division o f labor with key partners, particularly IDB, leading to the
focus o n rural development in future lending, which i s currently underfinanced relative to other
sectors. Following, a joint prioritization exercise with the Government, i t was agreed that new
lending IDB would support the Government’s program in housing, micro-enterprise development,
the financial sector and health (the latter through programmatic financing), while the Bank would
focus o n rural development (business development, environment and land administration). The
Bank and IDB will continue to collaborate closely in state modernization, energy, roads, water,
education and disaster mitigation.

43.
The Bank’s results-oriented CAS complements the Government’s efforts to define
and monitor the results it intends to achieve during its mandate. The results framework
outlines the medium-term objectives articulated in the PRS and the Government program, the
measurable results supported by the Bank that contribute to the achievement o f these national
objectives, and the Bank-supported activities contributing to these results. The results framework
provides a more strategic and flexible framework for allocating Bank resources and determining
the appropriate mix o f assistance to achieve development objectives. In this context, the results
framework should be seen as setting the strategic direction rather than serving as a blueprint.

44.
The Bank will coordinate closely with other development partners, collaborating
where feasible through joint analytical work and by channeling its support together with
other partners in support of Government-led sector programs. The Bank w i l l build on the
strong partnerships with external partners in the design and implementation o f its operations and
analytical work, with a view to optimizing the use o f Bank financing, consolidating financing
around a common development agenda and reducing transaction costs for Government. The key
external partners for Bank activities are presented in the results matrix (see Annex B).
D.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES AND BANKASSISTANCEFY2007-10

45.
Within the broad framework of the PRS, the proposed FY2007-10 CAS has been
aligned with the priorities identified in President Zelaya’s Government Program. The
proposed program has four pillars: first, equitable economic growth for employment generation;
second, good governance through state modernization and civic participation; third,
environmental protection and risk management; and fourth, development o f human capital (see
Figure 4). The Results Matrix links the proposed Bank program to the objectives for PRS pillars
and sub-components, integrating the proposed Bank program w i t h Honduras’ longer-term
development vision.

46.
Owing to a substantial on-going portfolio the Bank’s support for FY2007-10 CAS
period continues to be broad in scope, though new lending and analytical work will be
focused on a narrower range of policy reforms and sector investments. A PRSC series w i l l
provide the framework for Bank policy dialogue during the CAS period, addressing the

18

Figure 4: CAS Obiectives

CAS Strategic Objective 1:
ACCELERATE EQUITABLE
ECONOMIC GROWTH
AND

CAS Strategic Objective 2:

CAS Strategic Objective 3:

STRENGTHEN
GOVERNANCE
THROUGH

STRENGTHEN

GENERATION

AND PARTICIPATION

A

A

Maintainingmacroeconomic stability and a
sustainable fiscal
framework
* Strengthening the
competitiveness and
resilience of the
financial sector
Improving the performance o f and access to
economic services
* Expanding investment
and exports
* Improving security o f
access to land
Improving rural
competitiveness, agroforestry and off-farm
employment

4

ENVIRONMENTAL

STATE MODERNIZATION

EMPLOYMENT

CAS Strategic Objective 4:
DEVELOP
HUMAN
CAPITAL

PROTECTION AND RISK

MANAGEMENT
~~

* Fostering transparency

Improving the viability
o f protected areas
Reducing the impact of
natural disasters

and access to
information
Improvingthe
effectiveness and
transparency of public
spending
Fostering
decentralization
Professionalization o f
the public sector
Strengthening
competition and
combating anticompetitive practices
Improving access,
efficiency and
accountability in the
judicial sector

4

4

Improving the quality of
Basic Education
Improving the quality
and coverage o f basic
health services
Improving the impact o f
social assistance
Strengtheningthe
capacity of AfroHonduran and
indigenous peoples to
manage their
development.

4

r

Strengthening accountability, transparency, and demand for good
governance across the portfolio

immediate threats to the Government’s fiscal program as well as the structural constraints to
growth and poverty reduction identified in Bank analytical work. PRSCs will support
improvements in: the performance o f utilities, notably in the energy sector; public sector
performance, transparency and accountability; the quality o f education; and economic
governance. The on-going and follow-up PRS Technical Assistance Credits, the Utility
Restructuring Project and the Bank’s support to the Education Program w i l l assist the
Government in implementing i t s reform agenda. New investment lending i s concentrated under
the CAS’ Equitable Economic Growth pillar, aimed at increasing incomes in rural areas and
improving the performance o f key economic services (see Table 1 and 2). Investment lending will
favor flexible, programmatic instruments, including adaptable program credits. Financing will be
concentrated in fewer operations than under the previous FY2003-06 CAS.

47.
The Bank’s lending profile and the composition of lending will be structured in line
with performance. K e y considerations in assessing performance include the sustainability o f the
macro-economic framework and progress in improving governance, the quality o f education and
the performance o f the electricity utility. The level o f Bank financing will be determined by
Honduras’ relative performance in the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment. The degree
to which the program i s front or back-loaded will reflect progress in implementing the

19

0
N

. ....... .

..

Table 2: Proposed New Lending FY2007-FY2010 (at SDR = USD$1.4)
New Lending

PRSCs
Equitable Economic Growth
Rural CompetitivenessI& I1 / APL
Land Administration I1/ APL
Utility Restructuring Project
Water & Sanitation Program
Good Governance
PRSC TAC I1
Human & Social Development
Education Program

FY2007
10-25

FY2008
15-30

FY2009
15-30

FY2010

40

30

30
30

20
10
15
70

60

70

60

Note: The lending projections are indicative only for FY2008 and beyond

Government’s reform program. The timing o f PRSCs and level o f financing w i l l be modulated
on the same basis. Should the Government’s reform program stall or macro-economic conditions
deteriorate significantly, Bank financing w i l l be reallocated from the PRSC series to support the
Rural Competitiveness A P L and the Bank’s assistance to sector programs, notably education, if
warranted by progress, and water and sanitation.

48.
The FY2007-10 CAS supports good governance across a broad front, focusing on
reforms that build on past successes. The key elements o f the governance strategy supported by
the Bank are: strengthening o f financial management systems, accountability for performance and
oversight arrangements in central and local government; the professionalization o f state
institutions; strengthening competition and combating o f anti-competitive practices; and
reinforcing the independence and transparency o f the judiciary. However, improved governance
i s critical for achieving the objectives for Bank assistance across the program, for instance: the
decentralization o f responsibility for service delivery closer to clients i s critical for improvements
in the performance o f the health and education sectors; the Bank’s support to the protected area
systems promotes arrangements allowing c i v i l society a greater voice in the management o f
resources.
The Bank i s finalizing a Governance Strategy Note (FY2007) to support
implementation o f the CAS. As part o f this strategy, the FY2007-10 CAS will address measures
to strengthen transparency, accountability and the demand for good governance as a cross-cutting
issue (see B o x 7). An Institutional and Governance Review (FY2008) i s intended to pull the
various strands o f the governance agenda into a broader longer term strategy and inform dialogue
on politically challenging reforms.
Pillar I .Equitable Economic Growth for Employment Generation

49.
Maintaining macroeconomic stability and a sustainable fiscal framework.
Progressive reductions in central government expenditures on personnel and the operating losses
o f public utilities, improvements in revenue performance, and maintenance o f a sustainable fiscal
deficit and debt exposure will be critical to achieving this outcome. The Bank will support this
agenda through policy dialogue centered on the PRSC series and related investment projects,
focusing on governance reforms, expenditure management and utility restructuring. IDB, U S
Treasury and the IMF provide complementary assistance focused on tax reform and
administration.
50.
Strengthening competitiveness and resilience o f the financial sector. The Bank
supports the financial sector reform through its Financial Sector Development Policy Credit and

21

BOX 7: STRENGTHENING TRANSPARENCY,
ACCOUNTABILITY AND DEMAND
FOR GOOD
GOVERNANCE
AS A CROSS-CUTTING I S S U E
The FY2007-10 CAS proposes a shift in the Bank's focus on governance issues from the
project to the sector level, whilst taking steps to strengthen fiduciary management
standards for all Bank operations. There are three key elements o f this strategy: first, a sector
level focus for institutional and fiduciary assessments; second, strengthening o f national
management systems for project financial management, procurement and monitoring; and third,
measures to strengthen transparency, accountability and demand for good governance.
The focus of institutional and fiduciary assessments currently undertaken for all Bank
projects will shift from the project to the sector so as to support the Government's
governance reform agenda, pave the way for sector programs and promote the use of
national systems for managing and monitoring Bank assistance. These assessments will be
undertaken in close coordination with the SEFIN, implementing agencies, and oversight
institutions. Input from the intended project beneficiaries will be sought with a view to
strengthening governance close to the field level. Assessments w i l l i d e n t i f j the risks and
opportunities at both the sector and the project level. The Bank and Government will develop a
set o f governance indicators for projects aimed at monitoring progress in strengthening
implementing agencies' management and monitoring systems. These w i l l initially be applied o n
a pilot basis with a view to gradually improving the formulation o f indicators and expanding
their application systematically. The governance indicators will be incorporated into the overall
results framework o f selected projects and will be monitored in their respective Implementation
Status and Results reports. The impact o f these indicators in terms o f promoting goodgovernance w i l l be assessed during the mid-term reviews o f those selected projects. Project
fiduciary supervision will follow-up on the development o f sector-level financial management
and procurement systems. The status o f agency systems will be taken into account when
assessing project-level risk.
Reduced fiduciary risk and good-governance at the sector level will require the continued
improvement of the national systems at the cross-government, sector and local levels. The
Bank will support the development o f sector and local level systems through i t s selected
projects, complementing support to cross-government systems under the on-going and
follow-up PRS-TAC and the P H R D for Aid Coordination. There are three priority areas:
financial management, using S I A F I as a platform for sector and project management systems;
procurement, focusing o n the development o f the e-procurement system, Honducompras; and
monitoring, where the priority i s to strengthen national and agency level information
systems. The ultimate goal i s to strengthen these national systems to the point where they meet
the Bank's and other external partners' fiduciary requirements.
Complementing these selected sector-level initiatives, the Bank will seek to strengthen
overall governance, such as in transparency and accountability across the portfolio. In line
with this objective the Bank will: continue to facilitate extensive disclosure o f project
procurement information; strengthen partnerships with c i v i l society and beneficiaries in project
design and social monitoring; undertake regular risk assessments and enhance supervision where
needed; address the continuity o f project staffing; and continue to strengthen the role o f the
Field Office in portfolio supervision.

the Financial Sector Technical Assistance Credit (both closing June 2007). These operations,
implemented in collaboration with IDB and the IMF, are aimed at strengthening of the
institutional framework for banking sector regulation and supervision. During the FY2007-2010
CAS period, IDB will take the lead in providing financing to support reforms and n o further Bank
lending i s scheduled for the financial sector.

22

51.
Improving the performance of and access to economic services. The Bank’s support
in the energy sector will be informed by an Energy Sector Study (scheduled FY2007)’ to be
prepared jointly with IDB, Through the Utility Restructuring Project (scheduled FY2008) the
Bank will collaborate with IDB in efforts to reduce ENEE’s operational losses. The Utility
Restructuring Project w i l l also support development o f the telecommunications sector by
strengthening private sector participation. Investments in water and sanitation will be supported
through a grant from the Global Partnership for Output-Based Aid (scheduled FY2007) and by
programmatic financing for the sector’s Strategic Plan (scheduled F Y 2 010). In the transport
sector, the Bank’s financing i s primarily directed to the development o f the logistical corridor
linking Puerto Cortes to El Salvador. A joint Memorandum o f Understanding signed in July 2006
provides a framework for the management o f the Bank, CABEI, IDB and M C C financed projects
which will complete the road corridor. The Bank’s assistance on institutional issues w i l l be
continued under the road infrastructure component o f the Rural Competitiveness APL (scheduled
FY2007), with infrastructure investments concentrated in the APL’s second phase (scheduled
FY2010). Complementing these initiatives, the Rural Infrastructure Project (closing June 2010)
finances improvements in access to roads, water and sanitation and rural electrification in line
with locally identified priorities in six Mancomunidades (associations o f municipalities).
52.
Expansion o f investment and exports.
The on-going Trade Facilitation and
Productivity Enhancement Project (closing September 2008)’ supports the Government’s efforts
to improve the competitiveness o f Honduran f i r m s as part o f a National Competitiveness
Program, with complementary financing from USAID and IDB. MIGA collaborates in the
program through i t s technical assistance on investment promotion and the I F C through technical
assistance on administrative simplification at the municipal level. Follow-up activities, focusing
on administrative simplification and enhancing competition, will be financed under the second
PRSC Technical Assistance Credit scheduled for FY2009.
Improving security of access to land. The first phase o f the three-stage Land
53.
Administration Program APL has supported the establishment o f a decentralized national
property rights system. The second phase o f the Program (scheduled for FY2008) will expand
the geographical coverage o f land regularization and consolidate the institutional framework. This
project will be implemented in close coordination with the Forestry and Rural Productivity
Project (closing January 2010), which addresses the demarcation o f national forest lands, and
complementary activities financed by the MCC, EU and G T Z K f W .

54.
Promoting rural competitiveness, agro-forestry and off-farm employment. The
proposed Rural Competitiveness A P L (first phase scheduled FY2007, second phase in FY2010)
w i l l promote and support small and medium-scale rural businesses including agribusiness, access
to credit, agricultural supply chain development, and rural services. The project will build on the
Bank’s experience in working with the micro-enterprises under the Regional Development in the
Copan Valley (closing March 2008), the Pilot Land Access Project (closing December 2007) and
the Forestry and Rural Productivity Projects (closing January 2010).
Pillar 2: Good Governance through State Modernization and Civic Participation

55.
Fostering transparency and access to information. The Bank will support this agenda
at two levels. First, by promoting the Transparency and Access to Information L a w and
supporting implementation when the law i s passed. Second, by promoting social monitoring o f
PRS implementation, building on initiatives launched at the local level to develop a national
social monitoring system, coordinated with the Supreme Audit Court. Bank assistance to this
agenda will be provided through the on-going and follow-up Poverty Reduction Support
Technical Assistance Credits (PRS-TAC) and complimentary grant financing. Results indicators

23

for this objective will be formulated following approval o f the Transparency and Access to
Information Law.
56.
Improving the effectiveness and transparency of public spending. The Poverty
Assessment demonstrates that progress in poverty reduction can be accelerated by improving the
targeting o f public spending. In support o f this objective, the Bank will undertake a Public
Expenditure Review in FY2007 and a follow-up Public Expenditure Tracking Survey in FY2008.
Under the on-going and follow-up PRS Technical Assistance Credit (ending June 2008, followup scheduled FY2009), the Bank will support: the continued roll-out o f SIAFI; the development
o f a Government-wide e-procurement, human resource management and statistics systems; and
the implementation o f a medium-term plan for the National System for the Control o f Public
Resources. A complementary PHRD for Aid Coordination (scheduled FY2007), focuses o n
expenditure planning and the management o f external assistance by the Ministry o f Finance and
four priority sectors.
57.
Fostering decentralization. There has been a clear shift in the policy environment in
favor o f decentralization following President Zelaya’s election. The Rural Infrastructure and
Barrio Ciudad projects (closing June 2010 and June 201 1 respectively), support improvements in
transparency and financial management at the municipal level, as well as financing investments in
infrastructure. These initiatives are complemented by other Bank projects working on forestry,
land administration, disaster mitigation, decentralized education and health services and business
development issues with municipalities. Under the Regional Decentralization Study (scheduled
FY2009), the Bank will draw on these experiences in order to develop the framework for a more
comprehensive decentralization policy.
58.
Professionalization of the public sector. Although the administration recognizes that an
updated and improved legal framework to govern human resource management in the Honduran
public sector i s needed, the administration argues that passage o f new legislation may not be
feasible. Progress may be possible through executive measures focusing on pilot institutions
(such as the Tax Directorate) and key functions (such as financial management, procurement,
personnel management and planning). The Bank will support agenda through policy dialogue
under the PRSC series and by providing technical assistance through the on-going and follow-up
PRS Technical Assistance Credits.
Strengthening of competition and combating of anti-competitive practices. The on59.
going Trade Facilitation and Productivity Enhancement Project (closing September 2008) will
support implementation o f the Competition Law. A private sector accounting and auditing study
(scheduled FY2007) will contribute to this agenda by laying out a path for harmonizing
accounting standards within the region. Follow-up activities in these areas will be financed
through the second PRSC Technical Assistance Credit (scheduled FY2009) and grant funds.
Improving access, efficiency and accountability in the judicial sector. The Judicial
60.
Branch Modernization Project (closing date September 20 10) supports the implementation of the
sector plan for 2004-09 aimed at improving transparency, facilitating access and improving the
efficiency o f judicial services. The Bank project i s part o f a broader package o f external
assistance to the judiciary, including financing from IDB, U N D P and bilateral partners.
P i l l a r 3: Environmental Protection and Risk Management

61.
Ensuring the viability of protected areas. The Forests and Rural Productivity Project
(closing January 20 10) and the recently approved GEF-financed Coraz6n Transboundary
Biosphere Reserve Project (launched FY2007) both support improvements in the management o f
protected areas. The Coraz6n Project, implemented by C C A D in coordination with the
Governments o f Nicaragua and Honduras, targets the largest remaining contiguous area o f humid

24

tropical forest north o f the Amazon. Alongside these projects, the B i o Carbon Fund-financed
Pic0 Bonito Sustainable Forests Project (scheduled FY2007), i s designed to provide long-term
support to reforestation initiatives on the border o f the Pic0 Bonito National Park. Further
opportunities for carbon finance will be explored during the CAS period. A Country
Environmental Assessment (scheduled FY2008) will provide baseline information and policy
guidance on key environmental issues, including deforestation.
62.
Reducing the impact of natural disasters. The Honduras Natural Disaster Mitigation
Project and related JSDF Grant for Tegucigalpa (both closing January 2007) have put into place
successful models for decentralizing disaster risk mitigation in the sixty high risk municipalities.
Follow-up project activities will expand municipal coverage, financed through a GEF grant for
Adaptation to Climate Change (scheduled FY2007) and a proposed IDB investment project. A
related grant-financed regional project seeks to promote the agricultural insurance against
meteorological risks. A regional disaster mitigation study (scheduled FY2009) will provide
guidance on future priorities.
Pillar 4: Development of Human Capital

63.
Improving the quality of basic education. The Community Based Education Project
(closing June 2007) has supported the expansion o f pre-school and lower basic education using a
community management model and through the introduction o f bilingual education for AfroHonduran and indigenous groups. While these initiatives helped expand access, the overall
performance o f the education sector has seen little improvement. Follow-up work in the
education sector (scheduled FY2007) will support the development o f a sector strategy aimed at:
gradually introducing a 0-9 grade basic education system; strengthening sector governance,
notably through increased parental involvement, strengthened personnel management and
improved performance monitoring; and improvements in educational practices. Incorporation o f
these measures into the pay agreement reached with teachers unions in August 2006 i s expected
to facilitate implementation o f reforms. The Bank will continue to collaborate closely with other
external partners in the context o f the Education for All initiative.
Improving the quality and coverage of basic health services. The ongoing Health
System Reform Project (closing June 2007) finances improvements in the performance of the
Honduran Institute for Social Security and the development o f decentralized, performance
contract models for the delivery o f maternal and child health services. The IDB and bilateral
partners will take the lead in financing on-going sector reforms during the period FY2007-10.
Follow-up Bank assistance in the health sector will be delivered through PRSCs, focusing on the
rollout o f the successful decentralized health service models. The A I D S Strategy & Action Plan
(ASAP) service, hosted by the Bank on behalf o f UNAIDS, will support Honduras’ efforts to
develop a well-prioritized, evidence-based, results-focused, costed AIDS strategy and action plan.

64.

65.
Improving the impact o f social protection. The Nutrition and Social Protection Project
(closing June 2010) addresses the main risks facing children and youth: malnutrition and lack o f
access to employment. The project finances the expansion o f the community-based nutrition
program to 1,000 new communities and the piloting o f a work-oriented training intervention to
benefit about 6,000 youths. Policy dialogue will focus on the integration o f social protection
mechanisms, with technical support provided under the Nutrition and Social Protection Project.
The Bank will also provide on-going support to the “Innovation Fund for Social Assistance”,
implemented by FHIS, with grant funding that aims to improve the condition o f children and
youth affected by HIVIAIDS and those living with a disability in conditions o f extreme poverty.
66.
Strengthening the capacity of Afro-Honduran and indigenous groups to manage
their development. The Bank-financed Nuestras Raices Project (closing June 2008) supports
ethnic groups’ participation in decision-making by helping develop sustainable ethnic and

25

community organizations, preparing them to participate actively in the municipal planning
process, as w e l l as the financing o f community and cultural subprojects. The Bank will also
support the development and institutionalization o f bilingual education for all ethnic groups
(Community Based Education Project and follow-up Education Project) and employment
generation in areas with indigenous populations (Rural Infrastructure Project, Copan Valley
Development and the scheduled Rural Competitivenes Project). The Bank will continue to work
w i t h Afro-Honduran and indigenous communities on the protection o f indigenous land rights and
the environmental assets on which their lifestyles depend (Land Administration Program,
Forestry and Rural Productivity Projects and Corazon Transboundary Biosphere Reserve Project),
recognizing that this i s a sensitive issue and that Bank engagement in this area has recently been
the subject o f an Inspection Panel Request.

E.

IFC AND M I G A SUPPORT GOINGFORWARD

67.
IFC will continue to take a regional approach in providing support to Central
America, while exploring opportunities for investments and providing advisory services
aimed at strengthening private sector competitiveness at the country level. The regional
approach allows I F C to promote better resource mobilization through economies o f scale and
recognizes that regional integration and standardization related to investments and business
transactions can accelerate cross-border investments. First, as part o f the regional strategy, I F C
will continue to help improve access to finance through technical assistance and/or investments,
especially in areas with social development components such as housing finance and
microfinance. Second, again as part o f the regional strategy, IFC will seek opportunities to
support infrastructure modernization, including public-private partnerships (PPPs) and
concessions, in such areas as water and telecommunications. Third, I F C w i l l look to support the
export and manufacturing sectors, including regional chains and agro-exporters, through
investment instruments and/or technical assistance, complementing the Bank’s program aimed at
fostering rural business opportunities. Lastly, I F C w i l l build o n its work in the area o f
simplification o f municipal business registration procedures in Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula
and scale up this technical assistance to cover an additional four to five municipalities that are
main economic centers in the country. This complements the Bank’s ongoing support on
administrative simplification at the national level through the Trade Facilitation and
Competitiveness Project. Additionally, to strengthen SMEs to better prepare for increased
competition as a result o f the DR-CAFTA, other areas such as tourism, and textile and apparel
sectors are being looked into for I F C technical assistance.
68.
MIGA i s currently seeking viable projects for guarantees and i s providing technical
assistance to support investment promotion. MIGA guarantee exposure for infrastructure
projects underwritten in the early 1990s expired in FY2005. While there are no projects in the
pipeline for the next fiscal year, MIGA stands ready to support foreign investors seeking to enter
the Honduran market. MIGA’s principal engagement at present i s through technical assistance to
FIDE, the national investment promotion agency o f Honduras, in conjunction w i t h the Bank’s
Trade and Competitiveness Project. Technical assistance aims to diversify FDI flows into
Honduras through proactive promotion o f higher value-added export-oriented sectors that match
the competitive advantages o f the Honduran investment environment. The primary sources o f
FDI being evaluated include light manufacturing, tourism, services, agribusiness and forestry.
F.

BANKINSTRUMENTS AND LENDING
STRATEGIES

Analytical Work

69.
Poverty and expenditure monitoring have been given high priority in Bank
analytical work, recognizing that Bank analytical work i s used by key stakeholders’ to

26

monitor progress in poverty reduction, assess fiduciary risks and track the application o f
debt-relief funds. The key tools to support this work include: a follow-up poverty assessment
(scheduled FY2009), based on a second LHMS; a public expenditure review (scheduled
FY2007); public expenditure tracking surveys (scheduled FY2008); and PER update (scheduled
FY20 10). Core procurement (CPAR) and financial management assessments (CFAA) w i l l be
integrated into the public expenditure reviews, extending coverage from core institutions to the
management systems at the sector and decentralized levels. These products will be prepared in
collaboration with external partners and the sector working groups, thereby contributing to the
development o f a common policy agenda. Complementing these studies, the Bank will continue
to support and monitor progress in improving the private sector governance and business
environment through a ROSC on accounting and auditing standards and an Investment Climate
Assessment (scheduled FY2008).
70.
Selected country specific studies and regional studies with a comparative
perspective will be used to support policy dialogue and promote debate on key reform
issues.
Country studies include: an Energy Sector Study to support the design o f a
comprehensive energy strategy, to be prepared in collaboration with IDB; a Country
Environmental Assessment; and a Governance Study. A Country Economic Memorandum and
Poverty Assessment scheduled for FY2009 will provide the basis for policy discussions with the
next administration and subsequent CAS, following elections at the end o f 2009. Additional
sector analysis will be prepared through regional studies, following the model adopted for the
comparative studies on education and health policy under the previous CAS. These include
studies on: the financial sector; disaster mitigation; service delivery; and decentralization.

71.
Analytical work has been integrated into the results framework in order to focus
attention on policy relevance and impact. To this end, task teams will be asked to identify h o w
products contribute to CAS outcomes, to integrate local institutions into teams, providing
technical support as needed, and provide adequate funding for stakeholder participation and
dissemination throughout the product cycle. K e y audiences for the Bank’s dissemination include
government, the legislature and civil society.
Debt Relief

72.

Honduras’ will benefit from the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative and has
committed to using these resources for poverty reduction spending. During the CAS period,
the expected debt service r e l i e f from IDA under the MDRI i s around SDR10-12 million per year.
As a “gap country”, Honduras will not benefit from IDA reflows. However, Honduras will
benefit from greater flexibility offered by debt-relief financing. Honduras has committed to using
funds released through MDRI to finance poverty reduction spending. In this context, the priority
given to poverty and expenditure policy and monitoring and continued efforts to strengthen
management systems under the CAS will be critical for achieving MDRT’s development
objective. During the CAS period, the Bank will continue to monitor Honduras’ debtsustainability and policy dialogue will support the maintenance o f a sustainable macro-economic
and debt framework.
Lending
73.
Bank lending to Honduras i s expected to remain on hardened IDA-terms for the
CAS period. A reclassification from IDA-only to blend IDA-IBRD status i s based o n a
creditworthiness assessment conducted by the Credit Department. The Credit Department would
be prepared to conduct a creditworthiness assessment for Honduras at the mid-term o f the CAS
cycle, provided the Government maintains a stable macro-economic framework and makes
further progress in improving long-term debt sustainability. Access to non-concessional finance
will be gradual and directed at appropriate investment operations. The overarching goal will be to

27

ensure that the impact o f HIPC relief and MDRI i s not undermined and Honduras’ debt levels
remain sustainable over the long term.

74.
Development policy operations will support the Government’s reform agenda, with
analytical work and investment projects aligned to facilitate reform implementation. Given
the time elapsed since Board approval o f a first PRSC in June 2004 and the recent change in
administration a new series o f up to three PRSCs has been programmed. The PRSCs will
continue to address key structural reforms identified under the first PRSC, including measures to
strengthen: the performance o f utilities, focusing on the energy sector; private sector
competitiveness and competition; the quality o f education; and public sector performance,
transparency and accountability, particularly as regards public expenditure management,
procurement and the professionalization o f key functions in the administration. However, the
PRSC results framework w i l l be streamlined, focusing on the priorities identified by Government.
Emphasis will shift from legislation to the implementation o f policy measures. The on-going and
follow-up PRS Technical Assistance Credits, the Utility Restmcturing Project and the Bank’s
support to the Education Program will assist the Government in implementing reforms.

75.
The blend of development policy and investment lending will be determined by
progress in the reform agenda and macro-economic conditions. K e y PRSC milestones are
incorporated in the CAS results framework and progress will be assessed in annual CAS reviews.
Should the reform program slow, the timing o f PRSCs may be delayed and the level o f financing
scaled back. Should the reform program stall or macro-economic conditions deteriorate
significantly; the Bank will reprogram assistance from PRSCs to support the Rural
Competitiveness A P L and the Bank’s assistance to sector programs, notably education (if
warranted by progress) and water and sanitation. The Bank w i l l assess the continued feasibility
o f the PRSC series in the CAS progress report scheduled for early 2008, prior to the second
PRSC operation.
76.
The Bank will support sector-level strategic planning and the development of
national financial management, procurement and information systems through its projects.
The Government has recently launched a planning exercise in key sectors with the formation of
tripartite (government-civil society-external partner) working groups. Sector strategic plans will
gradually be put in place during the CAS period, including a sector-results framework and a
medium-term expenditure plan, incorporating external assistance. Sector plans and coordination
arrangements will also provide an opportunity to improve operational harmonization o f external
assistance, building on experience under the Education-for-All initiative. A PHRD Aid
Coordination grant, executed by SEFIN, was recently approved to support the sector planning
exercise and external assistance harmonization in four key sectors. The Bank’s assistance will be
aligned with the sector plans as these instruments are developed, starting with the education and
water and sanitation sectors where the sector planning exercise i s most advanced. These efforts
will be complemented by efforts to strengthen national systems, systematically expanding the use
o f S I A F I and e-procurement systems at the project level and ensuring that monitoring systems are
designed to make use o f and support the development o f national information systems. The CAS
Progress Report, scheduled for early 2008, will assess progress in this work.

77.

New country financing parameters introduced in early 2005 provide a flexible
framework for determining eligible expenditures for investment projects. These parameters
allow the Bank to finance: all reasonable taxes and duties related to investments; local costs of
investments in amounts appropriate for achieving project development objectives; recurrent costs
to the extent that these are sustainable; and, as warranted, up to 100 percent o f project
expenditures (see Annex H). Counterpart funding w i l l be encouraged in order to leverage Bank
resources and to strengthen ownership. Project financing contributions will be agreed with

28

Government during project preparation and programmed and monitored during periodic portfolio
reviews.

G.

PARTNERSHIPS AND OUTREACH

78.

The Bank will continue to work closely with development partners through formal
coordination structures and joint analytical and operational work. As part o f the CAS
preparations, the Bank has held consultations with all major development partners to identify
potential areas for joint analytical and operational work as reflected in the CAS Results Matrix,
Particular attention has been given to coordination with the IDB. Initial discussions on the CAS
were conducted jointly by the Bank, IMF and IDB through a Tripartite Meeting with Government
and subsequently through a joint programming exercise where the Government identified i t s
priorities for Bank and IDB financing and areas for collaboration in investment lending and
analytical work. The Bank will continue to play an active role in the G16 and the sector and
thematic working groups chaired by Government. The Bank i s taking a lead in the G16’s work in
the area o f transparency and social accountability and has hired a Social Accountability Specialist
to manage this agenda with co-financing from Sweden.

79.
The Bank will also expand its outreach efforts, improving access to information and
strengthening communication with key national stakeholders. A Public Information Center
was established in 2004, jointly financed with CABEI, UNDP and USAID. The PIC will
continue to expand i t s activities, providing a platform for dissemination o f Bank analytical work
and a forum for debate on development issues. The feasibility o f establishing satellite PICs with
other partner organizations i s currently under review. The CAS process has provided a
framework for regular consultations with civil society organizations, both through the PRS
Consultative Council and through focus group consultations with national and international
NGOs, the private sector, academics and Congress (see Annex E). An on-going program o f
consultations has been prepared to follow-up on CAS implementation. Given the politically
challenging reform agenda supported by the Bank, i t i s critical that the Bank assists the
Government in building constituencies for reform by actively communicating the objectives and
likely impacts o f the reform agenda. In this context, the Bank will implement a communication
strategy aimed at stimulating debate on reform issues, improving understanding o f policy options
and building constituencies for reform.

H.

RESULTS-BASED
MONITORING
AND EVALUATION

80.
The CAS Results Framework will provide the basis for monitoring Bank
performance and program adjustments. Results Based Portfolio Reviews will be undertaken
on an annual basis, in order to assess progress towards the achievement o f the objectives for Bank
assistance. Following these reviews, the Bank and Government may adjust the proposed
program, in line with the alternative lending strategies laid out in Section F and changing
Government priorities. The results and monitoring frameworks for individual Bank interventions
will be aligned with the CAS Results Framework so as to facilitate portfolio monitoring. A midterm review scheduled for January 2008, half-way through the administration’s term, w i l l provide
an opportunity to assess and, if necessary, reallocate resources in the outer years o f the program.
Any changes in the Bank’s program would be reflected in the CAS Progress Report scheduled for
early 2008.
8 1.
Priority will be given to the development of national information systems. President
Zelaya has sought to strengthen the results orientation in the public sector, requiring agencies to
identify key performance indicators. However, this results orientation will prove difficult to
implement without significant improvements in statistical information systems, particularly at the
agency level. The National Statistics Institute, established in 2001, i s currently developing a

29

National Statistics Development Strategy that seeks to develop a national system, through
interagency agreements that w i l l allow INE to oversee the preparation o f administrative statistics,
complementing the censuses and periodic surveys which currently provide the bulk o f statistical
information. Development o f this national system i s financed by a consortium o f external
partners led by IDB. The World Bank will continue to support this strategy under the PRS
Technical Assistance Credit, complemented with grant financing, and w i t h improvements in
administrative statistics at the sector level financed from the project portfolio.

I.

RISKS, RISK MITIGATION
AND RESPONSE

82.
Macro-economic stability and debt sustainability are threatened by fiscal pressures.
The immediate risk arises from the award o f significant pay rises for teachers over a four year
period and ENEE’s mounting losses. These risks could be exacerbated by continued wage
pressures in the public sector and fbrther increases in petroleum prices should these not be passed
through to consumers. The proposed Bank program addresses these risks through i t s policy
dialogue under the PRSC series and investments aimed at reducing ENEE’s losses under the
U t i l i t y Restructuring Project. The timing and level o f financing under the PRSC series w i l l be
adjusted in line with performance. Should the macro-economic situation deteriorate significantly
financing will be reallocated from the PRSC series to investment operations.
83.
Interest groups could undermine the Government’s efforts to advance key reforms.
Many o f the issues that figure prominently in the reform agenda are already controversial.
Mobilization o f broad political support around a common agenda i s likely to be particularly
difficult for initiatives aimed at: professionalizing key functions in the public sector, since this
reduces the scope for political appointments within the administration; restructuring o f regressive
subsidies, notably in the energy sector; and restructuring the main public enterprises, especially
in electricity and telecommunications. The Bank will assist the Government mitigate these risks
by strengthening dialogue with key stakeholders and, through access to information, help build
constituencies in favor o f reform.
84.
As a small, open economy Honduras i s particularly susceptible to trade shocks. The
decline in commodity prices in 1999 to 2001 had a significant impact o n rural incomes and
caused an overhang o f bad debt in the financial sector which curtails agricultural credit to this
day. More recently, concerns have been raised regarding the country’s dependence on imported
petroleum products. While DR-CAFTA should help mitigate risks by providing an opportunity
to expand and diversify exports, Honduras will need to make considerable progress in improving
productivity if this opportunity i s to be realized. The proposed CAS addresses these risks by
supporting reforms and investments needed to improve competitiveness, diversification o f rural
production and the economic adaptability o f rural households.

85.
Honduras will suffer natural disasters during the CAS period, with potentially
devastating impact. Evidence points to increasing frequency and intensity o f storms in the
Caribbean. The impact o f these events i s aggravated by deforestation and uncontrolled settlement
in high risk areas. Interventions since Hurricane M i t c h have focused o n strengthening land use
planning, disaster mitigation and response capacity in the sixty highest risk municipalities. The
response o f these municipalities during the 2005 hurricane season demonstrates the effectiveness
o f this approach. During the CAS period, the intention i s to expand these interventions in
collaboration with a proposed IDB project. W o r k i s also underway on the development of
appropriate insurance instruments to mitigate risks in the agricultural sector. Should Honduras
suffer a devastating natural disaster during the C A S period, the Bank w i l l review the on-going
and programmed portfolio in consultation with Government to assess the feasibility o f mobilizing
resources to support reconstruction. Natural disaster risks, mitigation and response measures are
reviewed in greater detail in Annex D.

30

Annex A.l: Honduras at a Glance
Key Development Indicators
Honduras

Latin
America
& Carib.

Lower
middle
income

Age distribution, 2005

(2005)

Female

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

7.2
112
2.2
46

551
20,418
1.3
78

2,475
39,946
1.o
49

8.0
1,120
2,900

2,210
4,008
8,111

4,746
1,918
6,313

4.0
1.8

4.4
3.1

6.9
5.9

70-74
60-64

50-54
40-44
30-34
20-24
10-14

04

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

I

15

10

5

0

5

10

15

percent

(most recent estimate, 2000-2005)

Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, %:
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP, %:
Life expectancy at birth (years:
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births:
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

9
23
72
27
7

70
33
12

80
80
113
113

91
90
121
117

93
85
115
113

87
69

91
77

82
57

21 a
44 a
68
31
17

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older:
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group:
Access to an improved water source (% of population]
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

I 751

1990

0 Honduras

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2004):
United States
Spain
Japan
Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1980

1990

2000

2005

103

449

450

642

19
7

215
6
85

110
35
50

112
54
31

4.2
29

16.1
92

7.8
70

9.1
91

18.1
13.2

23.3
21.2

11.1
9.7

8.8
10.3

2.0

4.1
129

15.0
100

19.0

i

1995

2000

2004

Latin America & the Caribbean

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
10,

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$:
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

1980-90 1990-2000
2000-05
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

3.6
2,566

4.9
3,049

6.4
5,956

7.2
8,291

3.1
2.7

2.8
3.2

2.3
3.6

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

23.7
24.3
15.0
52.0

(% of GDP)
22.4
16.2
26.4
31.6
16.3
19.6
51.2
52.2

13.9
31.4
20.1
54.6

2.7
3.3
3.7
2.5

2.2
3.6
4.0
3.8

3.4
3.6
4.2
4.3

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

69.4
12.7
24.8

66.8
12.9
23.0

70.6
12.5
30.7

76.9
13.7
29.9

2.6
3.3
3.0

3.0
2.0
6.9

5.0
4.1
2.2

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

37.2
44.1
13.2

37.2
39.9
21.7

41.3
55.2
26.8

40.9
61.4
29.5

1.I
1.2

1.6
3.8

6.0
7.4

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2005 data are preliminary estimates.
a. Country poverty estimate is for 1999. b. Aid data are for 2004
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

31

.. indicates data are not available

Annex A.2: Honduras at a Glance
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2005

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2004

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

1,436
2,856
-840

1,761
4,484
-1,793

Voice and accountability

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

416

I ,142

Regulatory quality

Current account balance
as a % o f GDP

-232
-3.9

-67
-0.8

Rule of law

Reserves, including gold

1,319

2,339

Political stability

Control of corruption
0

Consolidated Non-Financial Public Sector Finance
(% of GDP)
Revenue
Tax revenue
Expenditure and Net Lending

29.2
17.3
30.0

28.1
17.0
32.0

Overall surplus/deficit

-0.8

-3.9

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

25
15

25

50

75

100

132004

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

0 2000

higher values imply better raUngs

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

25
25

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

20.4

2004

71

153

0.3

2.2

26
48.5

26
41.5
6.4

..

13,610
0.9

0.79

0.88

5.3

4.9

469

522

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

152
0
27
15

0
0
70
3

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

838
38
8

1,353
151
23

42
27
9

13
13
0

26

8

16
0

0
0

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
HlPC and MDRl debt relief (expected; flow:

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area, 2000 and 2005:
Nationally protected areas (% of land area:

5,570
390
1,053

6,332
333

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

93.5
12.3

84.9
7.7

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters:
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources:

Foreign direct investment (net inflows]
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

282

293

C 0 2 emissions per capita (mt)

0

0

GDP per unit of energy use
(2000 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

Composition of total external debt, 2004

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent]

(US$ miiiions)

US$ millions

Other muitilateral, 2,043

Private Sector Development

2000

2005

Time required to start a business (days]
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita:
Time required to register property (days:

-

62
64.1
36

Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed:
Corruption
Crime, theft and disorder

..
..

62.8
60.9

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank branches (per 100,000 people)

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own accounl
Disbursements for IFC own accouni
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own accouni
MlGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

8.8
0.7

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2005 data are preliminary estimates
indicates data are not available. - indicates observation is not applicable

..

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

32

9/8/06

Annex A.3:Millennium Development Goals
With selected targets to achieve between 1990 a n d 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Goal 1: halve the rates for $1 a day poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, % ofpopulation)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (“ho f population)
Share o f income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (77)
Prevalence o f malnutrition (% o f children under 5)

1990
37.8

1995
25.0
47.0

2000
20.7
48.0

18

25

17

2004

3.4

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% o f relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% o f people ages 15-24)

89
65
33
80

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio o f girls to boys in primary and secondary education (“h)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% o f nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

88

91
79
65
89

71

108
48
IO

45
8

50
9

107
51
6

Goal 4: reduce under4 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion o f one-year olds immunized, %

59
44
90

49
37
89

43
33
98

41
31
92

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)

45

55

1I O
56

47
120

50

62

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIVlAIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence o f HIV (% o f population ages 15-49)
Contraceptive prevalence (% o f women ages 15-49)
Incidence o f tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (“h)

1.5
77
83

63

Goal 7: halve the proportion o f people without sustainable access to basic need!
Access to an improved water source (% o f population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% o f population:
Forest area (% o f total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% o f total land area)
C 0 2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit o f energy use (constant 2000 PPP $ per k g o f oil equivalent)

84
50
66.0

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)
Internet users (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Youth unemployment (% of total labor force ages 15-24)

0.5
5.0

0.7
4.9

0.8
5.3

87
69
41.5
6.4
0.9
4.9

18
0

29
0
3
5.2

71
9
11
7.2

153
32
16
7.9

48.5

7.4

Measles immunization (% of I-year oids)
100,

ICT indicators (per 1,000 people)
12001

0

100 -

_____h
75 504

,

,

1998

,
2000

,

,

,

2002

,

,

2004
1990

+Primary
*Ratio

1995

2000

2004

2000

2002

2004

net enrollment ratio

of girls to boys in primary 8
secondary education

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.

0 Honduras 0 Latin America 8 the Caribbean

.. indicates data are not available

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG)

33

0 Fixed + mobile subscribers

Internet users

9/8/06

x

9

L

8

c

A

P

i3

W

m

x

0

d

0

m

B

I

3
?

E-

A
1

.-M
3

ANNEXC : CAS COMPLETIONREPORT
Country: Honduras
Date o f CAS: May 29,2003
Date o f Progress Report(s): N o n e Required
Period Covered by the CAS-CR: FY2003 - 2006

A.

INTRODUCTION

1.
This CAS Completion Report assesses the effectiveness o f the FY2003-07 Country
Strategy for Honduras in achieving the expected results and highlights the lessons learned. The
report constitutes a self-evaluation by the Bank’s country team. The CASCR takes into account
consultations on earlier drafts o f the report, in December 2005, shortly after elections, with members
o f the outgoing administration and representatives o f civil society. Following these consultations, the
reports conclusions and recommendations were discussed with members o f the Honduras country
team. Further consultations on the Bank’s performance took place during consultations for the
FY2007-10 CAS and these have also been reflected in the final report. The conclusions o f this report
have been taken into account in the design o f the FY2007-10 CAS.
The country team has also benefited from a detailed evaluation o f the Bank’s
2.
performance in Honduras over the period FY1995 to FY2005 prepared by the Independent
Evaluation Group. IEG consulted the Bank’s country team during the preparation o f their report and
has participated in country team meetings on the CAS and subsequent R O C reviews. These exchanges
have helped the country team view Honduras’ development challenges and the Bank’s performance in
a longer-term perspective. This has been particularly important in identifying areas where progress has
been made and the interventions that have been more successful, as w e l l as the structural challenges
that Bank interventions have failed to address effectively. The analysis and recommendations
undertaken by the IEG has informed the preparation o f the FY2007-10 CAS.

B.

HONDURAS’
DEVELOPMENT
OBJECTIVES

3.
The 2003 CAS was designed to support Honduras’ development objectives as outlined in
the Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) Paper presented in October 2001. The PRS’s objective i s
to reduce poverty by 24 percent over the period 2001 to 2015. Linked to this overall objective, the
PRS also presents 11 targets related to the achievement o f the Millennium Development Goals. The
PRS presents a coherent and credible strategy to bring the country out o f i t s position as one o f the
poorest countries in Latin America. The strategy i s structured around six pillars: (i)accelerating
economic growth; (ii)reducing poverty in rural areas; (iii)reducing urban poverty; (iv) investing in
human capital; (v) strengthening social protection for specific groups; and (vi) ensuring the
sustainability o f the strategy. In each o f these areas, the PRS outlines policy measures, programs and
specific projects supporting implementation o f the strategy. Three overarching themes cut across
these six pillars: gender equity, environmental sustainability, and decentralization.
4.
The Bank’s assistance strategy included support to all six of the PRS pillars and many o f
the pillars’ sub-components. The CAS document provides a detailed assessment o f each o f the PRS
pillars, detailing the current status and proposed policy initiatives. The program implemented under
the CAS provided assistance, including lending and advisory services, to all six o f the PRS pillars.
Assistance was concentrated under the “reducing rural poverty pillar”, accounting for more that one
third o f programmed lending. Approximately one sixth o f the Bank’s assistance was programmed
through cross-cutting interventions, notably through a PRSC, supported by a PRS Technical
Assistance Credit.

43

5.
The Bank adapted individual operations to adjust to the refocusing of priorities in
successive PRSP Progress Reports. Adjustments to the PRS were presented in Progress Reports
prepared after approval o f the CAS in June 2003: the f i s t progress report in December 2003 and the
second in January 2005. Progress reports maintained continuity in the PRS whilst slightly shifting
emphasis to meet changing policy needs: (i)focusing more attention on employment generation and
small-scale productive activities as a means o f accelerating both growth and poverty reduction; (ii)
striking a better balance between longer term human capital investment and measures aimed at
improving the quality o f life for the poor; (iii)
addressing spiraling crime and personal security issues,
particularly the rise o f juvenile gangs (maras); (iv) strengthening transparency and crack down on
corruption; and (v) improving competitiveness and economic services to take advantage o f CAFTADR. These revised priorities could be accommodated by adjustments in the design o f the proposed
portfolio and so no revision o f the strategy was required for the CAS period. For example, the final
design of the Barrio Ciudad project included a component on crime and violence prevention aimed at
improving safety in poor marginal neighborhoods and the Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness
Project included investments in port services.
The selection of Bank lending was appropriate, though there are two areas where the
6.
Bank could, perhaps, have focused greater attention: addressing structural problems in the
energy sector and supporting rural business development. In the case o f the energy sector, the
CAS acknowledged the structural problems facing the energy sector but underestimated the fragility o f
the utility. The Bank’s assistance in this sector was limited to providing policy support aimed at
restructuring the utility through the PRSC, with limited technical assistance through the associated
PRS TAC, while IDB provided the investment funds. Supporting the utility restructuring agenda with
Bank investment lending may have proved more effective (this i s the approach adopted under the
FY2007-10 CAS). In the case o f rural business development, the Bank has provided assistance
through several projects, though the assistance has been o n too small a scale and too dispersed to have
had any significant impact. A Rural Competitiveness Project has been included in the FY2007-10
CAS to promote improvements in productivity and employment generation in agro-forestry and offfarm activities for the rural poor.
7.
I n the case o f Bank analytical work, the selection of analytical work was appropriate but
the sequencing of work could have been improved, particularly as regards the Poverty
Assessment and the Public Expenditure Review. The Poverty Assessment constitutes a key tool for
monitoring progress in poverty reduction and informing poverty reduction policy. Scheduling the
LSMS and Poverty Assessment early in the CAS period would have provided a baseline to measure
progress in PRS implementation as well as an input to the PRS updates prepared during the CAS
period. A follow-up LSMS and Poverty Assessment are now scheduled for FY2008 and FY2009
respectively. A follow-up to the 2002 Public Expenditure Review was originally programmed for
FY2006, but has been rescheduled in FY2007. A PER would have provided valuable input to the
incoming administration in preparing i t s program and expenditure plans in early 2006. Under the
FY2007-10 CAS, a follow-up PER w i l l be prepared in FY2007 and an update early in FY2010 so as to
be available to the new administration following the 2009 elections.

C.

PROGRESS
AGAINST CAS OUTCOMES

8.
This assessment focuses on the country-level key results indicators identified in the
FY2003-06 CAS. These indicators are closely linked to the outcome indicators for the PRS.
Attribution o f the Bank’s contribution to the achievement o f outcomes at this level i s difficult. This i s
particularly so in the case o f Honduras, where the PRS has become an organizing framework for
principle for assistance and various external partners have contributed assistance in each area o f the
program. Table C-1 presents a summary o f progress against the key results indicators, which are
analyzed in the remainder o f this section. Readers should note that the team has used these indicators

44

I

Table C-1: K e y Benchmark Indicators for Evaluating FY2003-FY2006 CAS Results
Area

1

Indicator and or Performance
Criterion for End of CAS Period

1

,

Outcome Indicators
reduced from 45% (2002)

Poverty

............................................

siness Climate

.---I.

._..._._.-._._.-_..I-I

Progress to 2006

;

I

47.1% (2005)

i...................................................
'
1 I O days (2002) 44 days (2006)

........................

stablish new businesses
* r e d u c m at least 50%.
-..........",._"........................................_I
.....
.-.
Non-farm rural employment increased by at j 32% rural households have off-farm employment in 2004, no
comparator data.
basic education increased from
2o05: 89.4%
_
............
........
..........
~

. Employment

Education
........

Health

I

~

I
1

Deceleration observed in the rate of spread

'

15.3/100,000 in 2002 ; 11/100,000 in 2005

Intermediate Zndic, 9rs
: Growth: 2.7% in 2002,4.2% in 2005

Sustainable macro framework established
and maintained

Macroeconomic
program
._

1

--

sustained

Inflation:
7.7% in 2o03 8,7% 2o05
Interest
rates:
22.1% i n 2002 18.4% in 2005
.
.
.-_1._1_.____1____.__(_____.____^_______----.----

deceleration
achieved in theo f growth o f central government spending

Fiscal Management

Central Government personnel expenditure: 10.7% in 2002,

.I..----.-_.

.

Poverty spending increased in line with
benchmarks in the PRSP-PR.
Improved operational public finance mgmt
sllstem~~!?k!!$hed
(&!LEW&!!!!~CFAAL.
System established for enhanced disclosure

Poverty spending

Governance

sf Pl-!b!ic

exP?Pditure!!g!%!!ts

1 PRS spending from 7,8% in 2003 to 8.9 in.2005.

I

systems under SIAFI, 100% of central
......................

..

......

Tribunal Superior de Cuentas fully operational with qualified

__.._I___._.
!..,k?erso""e!......................................................................................................... ................................

More accessible court system, with at least a
5% increase in caseload

I

Too early to measure. Project was declared effective on

28,2006.
.February
_..__._I

~

".."l ...

1 Progress in establishing property register (30% titles issued

1 to women). Property Law recognizes special land tenure
Improvement
in the
Of
and
indigenous households
including Ownership
o f legal assets, access to services and
income-earningopportunities.

Vulnerable Groups

Ij category
for indigenous land rights: participatoryprocess
with indigenous peoples undernay to regulate relevant
1

sections o f Law. Modest improvementsin access to health

j services. Progress in access to income generating

i

__

~

ojportunities
...
cannot be assessed.
Financial sector law has been enacted containing an adequate
banking resolution framework. Operational procedures for
j the resolution process have been finalized and the fund has
1 been established
.
.
:
....
.
-..... ........
1_..........
i New regulatory framework design finalized, lender o f last
i resort mechanism in operation. Payments between system
j members, including checks and payments mechanisms
i contemplatedunder the LBTR system, processed in less than
:_.48 hrs.
-. ..
"

^

~

Modem bank resolution system designed
and implemented.
. .-

.... ..-

Modem payments system established.

__

"

_
_
I
_
_

At least 100,000 land parcels registered in
an integrated registry & cadastre system.

Rural land

i

I

52,000 registered land parcels in 2o05

Portfolio
Indicators
1

At most 2 projects in portfolio rated
Portfolio
Performance

I
j

....u!-??tisfactory._

..__
l. Il,.l.l

-.

.

l l l.l

.......

Commitments in problem projects below

1 ........
1 at risk end FY2005 & 2 at risk end FY2006.
..........
..... .......... ....
..
.
,

9,6% at end of FY2006,

2 ! ? % , o f I ~ t a ! _ c ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~" A
n........................
,.C.~SEe~io!!

1-Multi-donorsector-wide approach fully
j operational in at least one sector

'

45

"

...................
"

"

EFA multi-donor program based (pooled fund) fully
operational in Education sector

for evaluating performance as proposed in the CAS document’ even though these indicators do not
follow the six pillars used to structure the CAS. The team has consolidated information regarding
program performance under the relevant indicators so as to ensure that the report covers Bank
activities undertaken during the CAS period. Table C-5, presented at the end o f this report, provides a
more detailed assessment o f progress against the progress indictors presented in the FY2003-06 CAS
Program Matrix. This assessment i s handicapped by the limited use o f quantitative indicators and lack
o f information on baselines for most o f the progress indicators (the FY2003-06 CAS was prepared
before the introduction o f a results-based methodology). The FY2007-10 CAS presents a results
framework which - within the limitations o f the information constraints - includes quantitative and
verifiable benchmarks and targets for each outcome and intermediate indicators that the Bank intends
to support.

9.
Although the core goal of the CAS was not achieved, progress was made across the CAS
program warranting an overall moderatelv satisfactory rating. The CAS’S core goal was to
support Honduran efforts to shift to a sustainable and inclusive higher-growth trajectory as a means o f
reducing poverty and inequality in line with PRS and MDG targets. While Honduras did accelerate
growth during the CAS period, the data available to 2004 show that there has been little progress in
poverty reduction or inequality. Otherwise, performance against CAS outcome indicators i s generally
positive. The strongest performance related to improvements in the macro-economic stability, poverty
spending, business climate, financial sector and in public financial management. Although progress in
these areas was driven by the prospect o f reaching HIPC completion point and accession to DRCAFTA, the Bank’s interventions, notably policy dialogue supported by technical assistance, have
contributed significantly to success. Notable progress has also been made in establishing a sound
system o f property registration, an area where the Bank has assumed a leading role. While the Bank
can point to successful pilot programs in education and health that suggest a possible direction for
future reforms, progress has been disappointing as regards efforts to improve education and health
outcomes, largely due to institutional constraints in these sectors. Similarly, efforts to address
structural constraints such as civil service reform, the restructuring o f the energy and
telecommunications utilities and promote private participation in the port, have stalled owing to a lack
o f consensus on the appropriate strategy at a political level.
Poverty

10.
The benchmark indicator for the CAS to reduce extreme poverty from 45 percent in
2002 to 42 percent has not been met; indeed, using this indicator the incidence o f extreme
poverty increased over the CAS period. The CAS target was defined using a headcount income
based measure o f poverty from the annual National Survey on Household Income and Spending
(ENIGH). On this basis the headcount rate o f extreme poverty deteriorated during CAS period, with
rate o f extreme poverty reported as 47.1 percent for 2005. Consumption based poverty data i s only
available for 2004, when the Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS) was conducted. Data
from the 1998/99 ENIGH survey and the LSMS have been adjusted to generate a set o f comparable
consumption estimates. This consumption based data confirms the overall trend seen in the ENIGH
data set: l i t t l e progress has been made in the reduction o f poverty or extreme poverty in the period
1998/99 to 2004, with extreme poverty falling slightly from 25.1 percent to 23.7 percent. Inequality
showed no improvement over this period, with the Gini coefficient stable at around 46. The Bank
supported the L S M S and subsequent analysis through an IDF Grant and analytical work leading to the
Poverty Assessment.

‘

Page 38, paragraph 97 states that “Table 9 lays out the key outcome, program and portfolio indicators which
should be used to assess the impact o f the CAS”. Memorandum ofthe President on a Country Assistance
Strategy for the Republic of Honduras, M a y 29,2003.

46

11.
The Poverty Assessment suggests a number of explanations for this poor poverty
reduction performance. First, economic growth was modest, averaging less than 2 percent in per
capita terms from 2003 to 2006, with growth accelerating towards the end o f the period. Second, rural
households, where poverty i s concentrated, were still suffering from the impact o f Hurricane M i t c h
and the reduction o f commodity prices which had a significant impact on small farmers per capita
income and consumption. Third, public spending on social and poverty reduction programs i s poorly
targeted, with significant leakages to the non-poor.
12.
Bank analytical work during the CAS period has provided a sounder framework for
understanding and addressing poverty reduction under the FY2007-10 CAS. The Bank’s
Development Policy Review (delivered 2004) identifies four interventions that are critical for
accelerating growth: increased educational attainment; improved provision o f economic infrastructure;
development of financial markets; and improved governance.
The Bank’s Investment Climate
Assessment and DR-CAFTA: Challenges for Central America (both delivered 2005) point to similar
priorities, but give greater prominence to improved governance, in particular the reduction o f
bureaucratic burdens and tackling corruption. The Drivers of Rural Growth Study (delivered 2004)
demonstrates the importance o f investing in assets that help households adjust to changing
circumstances rather than investing in particular livelihoods, including investments in education, roads
and market-related infrastmcture and services. The Poverty Assessment argues that growth i s the key
determinant o f the pace o f poverty reduction. The Poverty Assessment goes o n to demonstrate the
need for improvements in the targeting o f spending, concentrating resources on programs used by the
poor and in the regions where the poor reside. Programs identified as having a strong poverty
reduction impact include: primary and early secondary education; maternal and child health services;
child nutrition and early-childhood development programs; and interventions aimed at improving rural
productivity and diversifying sources o f income. Based on the conclusions o f analytical work, the
FY2007-10 CAS will focus attention on the growth agenda, particularly the expansion o f opportunities
in rural areas and improving the performance o f economic services, improving the quality o f education
and improving effectiveness and transparency o f public spending.
Business Climate
13.
The benchmark indicator of cutting the time needed to register businesses in half has
been achieved: according to Doing Business 2007, the time for business registration has been cut
from 110 days to 44 days. Progress has also been made in the streamlining o f other licensing and
registration requirements, notably in relation to property registration. The Government has also passed
a Competition Law, providing an institutional and regulatory framework for reducing barriers to entry
and exit and consumer protection. This process has been supported by the Trade Facilitation and
Competitiveness Project (effective July 2004) within the context o f an overall National
Competitiveness Program. Complementary technical assistance was provided through an IDF for
Promoting Trade Participation in Small and Medium Enterprises. Administrative simplification was
supported under the HIPC Initiative (completion point April 2005), where passage o f appropriate
legislation was a floating completion point trigger, and Poverty Reduction Support Credit (approved
June 2004), which identified passage o f the Competition L a w as a trigger for PRSC 11. Alongside the
technical assistance financed by the Bank and I F C advisory services, the Bank has contributed to this
agenda through i t s Investment Climate Assessment (delivered 2004), which highlighted excessive
bureaucracy as one o f the principal constraints facing businesses in Honduras. The Bank’s regional
study DR-CAFTA: Challenges for CentraI America (delivered 2005), further highlighted the need to
address improvements in the business climate - including administrative simplification - if Honduras
i s to take advantage o f the opportunities offered by the regional trade agreement.
14.
The Bank’s support has proved effective owing to the engagement of the private sector
and other partners. The Government was committed to the implementation o f reforms required by
DR-CAFTA, including measures to facilitate competition and the modernization o f regulations related

47

to government procurement, intellectual property rights and the treatment o f foreign investors.
Honduras’ put DR-CAFTA into effect in April 2006. Engagement o f the private sector has been
critical in supporting this agenda. This was reflected in the design o f the Trade Facilitation and
Competitiveness Project, which i s implemented by the autonomous Trade and Investment Fund
(FIDE), a body with strong private sector participation in i t s board o f directors. FIDE has worked in
close collaboration with the relevant Government agencies, notably the Ministry o f Commerce and
Industry, and local authorities. These arrangements have been controversial, since the division o f
responsibility between the autonomous FIDE and the Government has not always been clear. Program
implementation arrangements have permitted close coordination between external partners. World
Bank Group institutions have collaborated in the administrative simplification agenda, with the Bank
focusing on administrative reforms at the central level, I F C on reforms at the municipal level and
MIGA on investment promotion. The Bank’s support has been complemented by parallel IDB and
U S A I D projects supporting the National Competitiveness Program. Under this program, the Bank has
focused on addressing competitiveness related to cross-cutting issues in the business environment and
at the firm level: IDB has focused o n competitiveness issues in specific economic sectors. These
coordination arrangements will continue under the FY2007- 10 CAS.

15.
The Bank has also supported efforts to improve the business climate by improving the
performance of economic services, though progress in this area has proved disappointing where
Bank support has primarily been delivered through policy dialogue focusing on legislative
measures. The Bank’s assistance to the roads sector through the Road Reconstruction and
Improvement Project (effective November 200 1) has financed investments in rural roads (103 km
completed) and the main trade corridors (133 km completed and 129 km on-going), complemented by
measures to strengthen institutional arrangements for road maintenance. Policy measures aimed at
increasing financing for road maintenance under the project were supported by dialogue under the
PRSC. Similarly, the PRSC measures aimed at improving port services, were supported by technical
assistance from the Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness Project. A notable success in this area has
been the certification o f Puerto Cortes by U S Customs Administration. Measures supported by the
PRSC and the Economic and Financial Management Project (effective April 2001) related to the
passage o f a ports law facilitating private participation and restructuring o f the telecommunications
and electricity utilities stalled owing to lack o f political support in Congress. In the case of the
electricity utility, performance deteriorated significantly towards the end o f the CAS period and i s now
considered a significant threat to Honduras’ future economic performance. Whilst recognizing the
political constraints to significant restructuring o f the utilities, the Government has requested that a
Utility Restructuring Project should be included in the forthcoming CAS focusing on the investments
and institutional reorganization in the energy sector.
Emdovment.
16.
Owing to the lack of data, it i s not possible to assess progress in achieving the benchmark
indicator of increasing non-farm rural employment by 5 percent. Data from the Living Standards
Measurement Survey o f 2004 reveals that 32 percent o f rural households had income from off-farm
employment. There i s no comparator information available.

17.
The Bank has directly supported off-farm rural employment generation through its
investments in road maintenance and micro-enterprisedevelopment, though much of the Bank’s
investment in rural employment during the CAS period was directed at small scale agro-forestry
businesses. Under the Road Reconstruction and Improvement Project (effective November 200 l),
the Bank has supported the development micro-enterprises to undertake routine maintenance. A total
o f 70 enterprises have been established - 36 o f which are funded by the credit - generating 889 jobs.
The Sustainable Coastal Tourism Project (effective October 200 1) and Regional Development in the
Copan Valley Project (effective January 2003) have supported employment generation through a
Prosperity Fund, financing small-businesses in areas with tourism potential (see B o x 1). The Access

48

Box 1: THEPROSPERITY
FUND
The Prosperity Fund provided a flexible instrument for supporting small scale businesses,
providing opportunities for the poor to benefit from the development o f tourism. Launched in
2004, under the Sustainable Coastal Tourism Project (effective October 200 l),
the fund provided
grant-financed seed capital, technical assistance and training to micro-enterprises and community
enterprises on the north coast. The Fund was implemented with support through an NGO. A total
o f 95 investments were made, 55 percent o f which benefited women and 42 percent benefited
G a r i f h a communities, creating direct employment of 426 individuals. Projects included artisan
groups, recycling, bed and breakfast, restaurants, and tour and transport operators. The ICR
reported that all o f the projects were operating well in June 2006, about a year after the grants were
awarded. Following this success, the Prosperity Fund was included as a component under the
Regional Development in the Copan Valley Project (effective January 2003). The f i r s t grants for
the Fund under the new project were awarded in August 2005.
to Land Pilot Project (effective August 2001) has supported the formation o f sustainable farm

enterprises by self-organized landless and land-poor farmers. The project has supported a total o f 100
enterprises, o f which 49 are group enterprises, benefiting 75 Ifamilies. Under the Forests and Rural
Productivity Project (effective December 2004) attention has focused on the development o f
community forestry initiatives that are geared to the improving rural incomes. A total o f 2,700 families
were engaged in these activities under the project by end o f FY2006. Despite these promising
initiatives, the Bank’s assistance to supporting the growth o f rural off-farm employment was too
modest and dispersed to have any impact on national level outcomes.
18.
The importance o f expanding off-farm employment in rural areas has been highlighted
in recent Bank analytical work, while initiatives supported by the Bank and other partners
provide the basis for a more strategic approach to addressing this issue under the FY2007-10
CAS. The Drivers of Rural Growth study (delivered in December 2004) and the regional Shocks and
Social Protection study (delivered December 2005) stressed the importance o f off-farm employment
as a means o f boosting rural incomes and reducing vulnerability to external shocks. The Poverty
Assessment (delivered June 2006), reinforces these arguments, demonstrating that the poor are largely
dependent on agriculture and rural households with diversified sources o f incomes and employment in
non-agricultural activities tend to have higher incomes. Under the FY2007-10 C A S the design o f the
Bank’s Rural Competitiveness Project draws on this analytical work, the Bank’s and other partners
experience in developing a program that will support a range o f agro-forestry and off-farm rural
businesses. In particular, the project will draw on the lessons o f the Access to Land Pilot Project, the
Prosperity Fund and USAID’s agricultural marketing program, particularly as regards linking rural
businesses to commercial financing, markets and business and technical services.
Education

19.
The benchmark indicator for increasing the coverage of basic education from 85 percent
in 2002 to 90 percent has almost been achieved, with primary education net enrollment reported
as 89.4 percent in 2005. The Bank’s assistance in support o f this objective has focused o n expanding
coverage and improving the quality o f basic education in rural areas under the Community Based
Education Project (effective February 2002). This project has financed: (i)the expansion o f
PROHECO schools in rural areas (an additional 790 PROHECO schools have been established mostly
in remote rural communities, bringing the total number o f PROHECO schools to 2,130 attending
103,000 children, about 10 percent o f total enrollment); (ii)the development o f Intercultural and
Bilingual Education system for indigenous and Afro-Honduran communities;
and (iii)the
development o f a new National Basic Education Curriculum and the purchase o f texts for the primary

49

education system. Complementing this assistance, the Bank has supported the development o f the
Education for All program (see B o x 2). Education has also figured prominently in the Bank’s policy
discussions, notably in the context o f the Poverty Reduction Support Credit (approved June 2004).
Under the PRSC (approved June 2004) attention has focused on the expansion o f Local Development
Associations (ADELs) providing a framework for parental involvement in public schools (a total o f
6,422 ADELs are now in place, receiving transfers o f US$l,OOO for school maintenance and other
functions), the establishment o f rural school networks and strengthening o f personnel managements
systems, including a progressive program o f post reviews aimed at improving the allocation o f
teaching staff and addressing problems o f ghosting. Under the HIPC Initiative (completion point
reached April 2005), the Bank focused more narrowly on the roll-out o f the PROHECO schools.
These project and policy interventions have been supported by the Central America: Education
Strategy Paper (delivered November 2005), which highlights the key challenges for the education
sector and proposes policy responses.
20.
While the initiatives supported by the Bank have undoubtedly had an important impact
in expanding the coverage of basic education, there has been little improvement in education
quality. Standardized Test Scores have shown little improvement during the CAS period: the
percentage o f correct responses in Spanish at 3rd grade have increased from 38 percent in 2002 to 39
percent in 2004, in mathematics they have remained at 43 percent, with similar trends at 6th grade.
This reflects underlying structural problems, including the l o w levels o f attendance by teaching staff
(with lessons provided in only 89 out o f 200 days in the 2005 school year) and inadequate preparation
and supervision o f teaching staff, Data available for 2003 and 2004 does point to a reduction in
school drop out rates, with drop out rats in lst
grade falling from 8 percent to 4 percent over this
period. This may be linked to expansion o f school lunch program, with nearly comprehensive
coverage in rural areas, which has provided a strong incentive for children to remain in school.
Concerns have been raised that the PROHECO schools supported by the Bank offer lower quality
education than the “traditional” public schools, since teachers generally have lower level
qualifications, are paid less, multi-grade teaching predominates and school infrastructure i s often

BOX 2: PROGRESSUNDER EDUCATION FORALL

Education for All provides a framework for donor support to a sub-sector plan aimed at
achieving universal primary education by 2015. EFA has adopted a partial sub-sector wide
approach, following the principles o f sub-sector wide planning and financing, country leadership
and harmonization o f external assistance.
Twelve external partners participate under a
Memorandum o f Understanding signed in 2005. Five partners channel their assistance through a
pooled fund, disbursing against an agreed annual workplan and budget, using common financial
management arrangements and procurement procedures. The Bank has assisted in the design of
financing and reporting arrangements and has continued to provide technical advisory services to
EFA. The Bank-financed Community Based Education Project covers some EFA-eligible
expenditures. The Bank has also administered a Trust Fund for Government o f Sweden
contributions to the EFA program.
While significant progress has been made in donor harmonization under EFA, the program
has been hampered by the lack of a strategic vision for the sector and the limited engagement
with key stakeholders. In the absence o f a strategic framework it has proved difficult to link the
EFA initiative to the institutional and governance reforms needed to improve performance in the
education system. Progress in developing institutional development plan has been slow.
Consequently, attention and dialogue has tended to focus on annual operational plans and budgets
rather than the key policy issues facing the sector. There has been little dialogue with civil
society, parents and teachers on the future direction o f education reforms.

50

rudimentary. Recent evaluations suggest this i s not the case: children in PROHECO schools show
slightly higher levels of attainment in Spanish and a significantly higher level o f attainment in
mathematics, despite the fact that they come from generally poorer communities than the “traditional”
public schools. I t i s too early to assess the impact of bilingual education on education attainment.
21.
Moreover, little progress has been made in implementing the structural reforms in the
education sector and the sustainability of some of the achievements to date i s at risk. The
PROHECO schools introduced a new governance model in the education, with teachers’ paid by a
school board, thereby strengthening parental involvement in school management and oversight o f
teachers’ performance. Financing for PROHECO schools has been transferred to the state budget,
thereby ensuring the sustainability o f the schools already in place. However, the substantial
differentials in the pay and benefits between PROHECO teachers and those paid directly by the
Ministry of Education and direct contracting by school boards continue to be a source o f friction with
the teaching profession. Efforts to strengthen the involvement o f the parents in the management o f
public schools through the ADELs have proved much less effective in improving performance.
Following the announcement o f free schooling, the Government did not provide the funding needed
for transfers to ADELs in i t s 2006 budget and it i s unclear whether this program can be sustained.
Other reforms supported under the PRSC and the Economic and Financial Management Project aimed
at strengthening personnel management in the sector, notably the systematic post reviews have had
little impact owing to the poor follow-up on recommendations for reassignment o f staff.
22.
The Bank’s experience in the education sector under the FY2002-06 CAS demonstrates
the need for a more programmatic approach to education reform grounded in a participatory
sector strategy. I t has proved difficult to address the fundamental problems o f the education system
through isolated reforms and pilot initiatives. W h i l e PROHECO can be considered a success in terms
o f expanding coverage and strengthening governance, the governance reforms have had l i t t l e impact
on the broader public education system. A comprehensive strategy for the education sector, defined
through a broad participatory strategy involving all stakeholders - the teaching profession, parents, the
private sector and civil society - i s needed to guide future reforms. Bank support under the FY200710 CAS will support and follow this agenda.

Health

23.
The benchmark indicator of reducing child mortality from 45/1000 to below 42/1000 has
been achieved - the child mortality rate reported for 2005 by the WDI 41/1000 - though the
quality of data used for this assessment i s questionable. The most recent data available f r o m
Government systems on infant and child mortality dates from 2000. The Government relies o n
surveys, notably the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) and Reproductive Age Mortality Survey,
to monitor progress in key health outcomes. These surveys were originally scheduled to take place in
2004 but have since been rescheduled. Little progress has been made in improving the quality o f vital
statistics, which would provide an alternative source o f information. The FY2007-10 CAS will
include additional financing aimed at strengthening the quality o f information from administrative
sources in key sectors, including health, to address these constraints.
24.
The Bank’s assistance to the health sector under the FY2006-06 CAS focused on
strengthening regulation of the health system, management of the Honduran Institute for Social
Security and the development of innovative methods for decentralized service delivery. The
Bank’s assistance was designed taking into account other partners support, with IDB taking the lead in
financing hospital improvements and institutional reforms in the Ministry o f Health. Under the Health
System Reform Project (effective February 2003), the Bank has financed institutional strengthening of
the Honduran Institute for Social Security (IHSS), focusing on financial management and information
systems. These measures have contributed to a significant expansion o f coverage from 376,000 in
2002 to 450,000 by early 2006. The project has also established regulatory framework for public and

51

Box 3: DECENTRALIZINGHEALTH
SERVICE

DELIVERY

Pilot decentralized service delivery models developed under Health Sector Reform Project in
collaboration with USAID suggest a path for future reform. Local authorities contract services
from local health service providers, including NGOs, the private sector and most recently public
sector clinics. Service providers are paid per capita allocations and fees for each institutional birth,
with bonuses for the provider when the performance goals stated in the contracts are met and for
traditional birth attendants when patients are referred to the clinics. As a result, the number of
institutional births has increased by 30 to 55 percent and performance in the referral system has
improved. User satisfaction surveys report quality improvement from 85 to 95 percent, largely
because the clinics keep regular schedules - some are open twenty-four hours a day - have
qualified staff in attendance, keep patient records and are well stocked with medical supplies.
Overall performance i s significantly better than traditionally managed public clinics with
comparable costs. This innovation has contributed not only to expanded access o f health services,
but also to local development and empowerment. A total o f seven clinics have now been
established, providing services to 235,000 people. Contracts originally financed under the project
have gradually been transferred to Government to ensure sustainability.
private health providers, including provisions allowing the Ministry o f Health to contract health
services. This has provided a basis for a quality improvement plan leading to the upgrading of
hospitals and health facilities, including rehabilitation o f six clinics and refurbishment o f two more, to
bring them up to the required standards. The Project has also supported implementation o f pilot
models for decentralized management o f maternal and child health services (see Box 3). Project
activities have been supported by the Poverty Reduction Support Credit (approved June 2004), which
addressed the roll-out o f the contracting model, implementation o f rehabilitation program to upgrade
clinics to their licensing requirements, and measures to strengthen personnel management, including
the implementation o f post-reviews.
These policy initiatives were followed-up under the HIPC
Initiative which included I H S S reforms as floating completion point conditions. Other programmed
assistance to the health sector (the Nutrition and Social Protection Project, effective February 2006;
and the Regional Health Sector Reform Study, delivered June 2006) was delivered late in the CAS
period and had no impact on CAS results.
25.
Although significant progress has been made in restructuring the I H S S and developing
effective models for decentralized service delivery, the Bank’s assistance has had limited impact
on overall health sector performance. The Bank’s assistance might have been more effective if it
had been designed and implemented within the framework o f a comprehensive health sector strategy.
Some progress was made in this direction: a strategic framework for the sector finalized in late 2005,
though this i s not an operational instrument and had little ownership with the new administration. At
the Government’s request, the Bank has not programmed a follow-up health project in the FY2007-10
CAS, since the IDB will continue to take the lead in this sector, with financing delivered through
programmatic instruments.The Bank will remain engaged through i t s PRSCs and technical assistance
in support o f the development o f sector program, financed in part through the PHRD Aid Coordination
Grant. One o f the issues to be addressed through these instruments, in collaboration with other
partners, will be the continued roll-out o f the decentralized service delivery model.
26.
Progress has been made in reducing the incidence o f HIV/AIDs, incidence rates reported
by the Ministry o f Health declined from 15/100,000 in 2002 to 12/100,000 in 2005. Given the
substantial hnding from the Global Fund for AIDS, TB and Malaria, the Bank’s support to the health
sector has not focused on this issue. Grant support has been provided to strategic planning,
communications initiatives and small-scale projects implemented by NGOs aimed at preventing the
spread o f HIV/AIDS among mobile populations.

52

Macro-economic Stabilitv and Fiscal ManaPement

27.
Notable achievements during the CAS period were the establishment and maintenance
of a sustainable macro-framework and a reduction in the share of central government spending
on wages as a share o f GDP. During the period 1998-2002, Honduras' macroeconomic performance
was affected by external shocks, notably Hurricane Mitch and the decline in commodity prices. Public
spending increased unsustainably, largely driven by the growth o f public sector pay, particularly the
salaries of teachers and health workers benefiting from a privileged pay regime, and a surge in
spending prior to the 2002 elections. The incoming Maduro administration faced a public sector wage
bill of 13.2 percent o f GDP and a combined public sector deficit of 5.1 percent o f GDP i n 2003 (see
Table 2). In December 2003, the Government secured passage o f a Public Salary Law through
Congress, restoring executive control over pay policy and bringing pay rises broadly in line inflation.
By the end o f 2005, public sector pay had fallen by 1 percent o f GDP and the consolidated public
sector deficit had fallen to 1.9 percent o f GDP. There was no surge o f spending prior to the 2005
elections, indeed to pre-election period was marked by its fiscal constraint. Total external public debt
f e l l from around 71 percent of GDP in 2000 to 50 percent in 2005 while external debt service f e l l from
10.3 percent of exports o f goods and services (including remittances) in 2003 to an estimated 7.2
percent in 2005. Macro-economic performance improved from 2004, growth accelerated to over 4
percent, despite a generally benign external environment (while there were no natural disasters, low
commodity prices in the early part o f the period and rising oil prices in 2005 limited the expansion o f
the economy). The external balance improved significantly, largely due to resumed growth in growth
in exports and rapid increases in remittances, and inflation stabilized in 2005 following a sharp
increase the previous year driven by oil prices.
Table C-3: Honduras Key Macroeconomic Indicators, 2000-05
2000

2001

2002

2004

2003

Annual growth rates

I%)
5.0
8.2
-0.8

4.0
8.8

27.9
23.2

23.7
21.6

28.4
31.4
12.9
-3.0

29.4
32.0
12.5
-1.9

19.6
25.7
10.5
-6.1

20.5
24.0
10.1
-3.5

21.2
24.4
9.9
-3.2

7.4
9.1
-7.5
-4.2
4.5

14.3
18.3
-7.7
-4.7
4.5

9.5
14.9
-5.5
-2.1
4.8

2.7
7.7
-3.7

3.5
7.7
-7.8
Shares of GDP f%)
22.1
21.7
19.0
17.5
Shares o f GDP f%)
26.9
27.4
30.5
32.5
13.5
13.2
-3.6
-5.1

Real GDP
Inflation (eop)
Real Effective Exchange Rate (eop)

5.7

2.6

10.1

8.8

7.9

4.2

Fixed Capital Formation
Gross National Savings

26.1
22.2

23.6
18.9

Combined Public Sector Revenues and Grants
Combined Public Sector Expenditures
olw wages and salaries
Overall Combined Public Sector Balance

28.8
29.5
11.4
-0.3

28.9
32.0
12.8
-3.2

Central Government Revenues and Grants
Central Government Expenditures
olw wages and salaries
Overall Central Government Balance

18.7
24.4
8.9
-5.7

20.0
26.1
10.1
-6.1

19.4
24.7
10.8
-5.3

Export of goods and services (% change)
Imports o f goods and services (% change)
BOPCA Balance before grants ( ? ?o f GDP)
BOPCA Balance after grants (% o f GDP)
Gross International Reserves (months o f imports)

11.5
9.3
-8.8
-3.8
4.4

-2.7
4.4
-10.4
-4.1
4.9

-3.5
1.1
-7.2
-3.1
5.2

2005"

__

28.
The restoration of macro-economic stability was driven by the Government's
commitment to securing HIPC debt relief and the need to ensure a stable macro-economic
environment in the run up to Honduras' accession to DR-CAFTA. A three-year Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility was approved by the IMF in February 2004, supporting a program
designed to lower the fiscal deficit and growth in the share of resources allocated to poverty reduction

53

and investment. While the I M F has taken the lead in policy dialogue on macro-economic stabilization
and the reduction o f the public sector wage bill, Bank support has been closely aligned with this
agenda. Key areas o f Bank-Fund collaboration have included: financial sector reform, strengthening
o f public sector financial management, poverty monitoring and the assessment o f poverty spending,
and the restructuring o f public utilities. The Bank supported this agenda with its Poverty Reduction
Support Credit (approved June 2004). Progress in macro-economic stabilization and the reform
agenda ultimately led to the approval of the HIPC Initiative for Honduras in April 2005.
Povertv Spending
29.
The results indicator o f increasing poverty spending in line with PSR Progress Report
benchmarks has been met: poverty reduction spending has increased from 7.5 percent of GDP
in 2002 to 8.9 percent in 2005, with a target o f 9.4 percent in 2006. During the CAS period, the
Government implemented wide-ranging reforms in the financial management system to improve
transparency and the linkage between expenditures and PRS programs. An executive decree of 2004,
replaced the “real” poverty reduction fund with a “virtual” f i n d which tags programs and expenditures
that are considered to have a significant poverty reduction impact as PRS spending within the overall
budget. HIPC and other debt-relief finds must be allocated to PRS programs and expenditures,
complementing national resources and external assistance. PRS spending i s defined in an annex to the
PRS Progress Report. The 2006 budget makes changes in PRS arrangements that seek to strengthen
the role o f municipal authorities in PRS implementation.
30.
While poverty spending has increased, a significant share of this spending benefits the
non-poor. A beneficiary incidence analysis undertaken in the Poverty Assessment (delivered June
2006) has highlighted the need to improve targeting if spending i s to have a significant impact on
poverty reduction. The poor, who account for 5 1 percent of the population, benefit from 54 percent o f
PRS spending. Twenty four percent of PRS spending benefits the poorest quintile, with the share
dropping steadily as the level o f affluence rises. However, the fourth and fifth quintiles receive 30
percent of PRS spending, equivalent to approximately US$58 per capita annually. The Poverty
Assessment ranks PRS programs in terms o f their concentration indices, identifying PROHECO as the
program that most benefits the poor, and including primary education, immunization, social transfers
under PRAF as programs that are pro-poor.
Given the prominence of the share of poverty spending as a results indicator, the Bank
31.
should have allocated more resources to expenditure monitoring and tracking during the CAS
period. Policy advice on the composition of spending was provided in the context o f the PRSC
(approved June 2004), the HIPC Initiative (completion point reached in April 2005) and Bank
advisory work on the preparation o f the second PRS Progress Report, as reported the Joint Staff
Advisory Note (delivered March 2005). This advice was informed by the June 2001 study Public
Expenditure Management for Poverty Reduction and Fiscal Sustainability. Timely updating and
further analysis of the beneficiary incidence, efficiency and effectiveness o f the PRS programs
(drawing on a poverty assessment and an updated expenditure review) would have helped strengthen
policy discussion on these issues during the CAS period. Since the poverty reduction impact of
spending continues to be an issue o f concern, notably in the context of the Multilateral Debt Relief
Initiative (effective July 2006), public expenditure analysis figures prominently in the FY2007- 10
CAS,
Governance
32.
Significant progress has been made in the first o f three governance performance
indicators:
improving the public financial management system in line with the
recommendations o f the Country Financial Accountability Assessment. Box 4 outlines the
progress made in strengthening public expenditure management systems during the CAS period. The
Bank and IDB collaborated in the preparation o f a Country Financial Accountability Assessment

54

(delivered June 2003) and a Country Procurement Assessment Report (delivered September 2004).
Both o f these studies have been commended in a recent IEG review for their presentation o f well
structured, operational action work plans. A CFAA Update was delivered in June 2006, again in
collaboration with IDB, highlighting progress in public expenditure management reforms and the next
steps on the reform agenda. Support to the implementation o f the reform program has been provided
through the Economic and Financial Management Project (effective March 2001) and follow-up
Poverty Reduction Strategy Support Credit (effective July 2005).
33,
Successful implementationof the public expenditure management reforms owes much to
the collaboration between the Bank and other partners, IDB in particular, and their prominence
in the HIPC agenda. The Bank collaborated closely with IDB in the development o f SIAFI and
USAID in its support to the Audit Court. IDB has continued to take the lead o n procurement reform,
supporting the newly established State Procurement and Contracting Office. Bank and partner
financing for reform implementation has been complemented by policy dialogue through the H I P C
Initiative (establishment o f the Audit Court and the State Procurement and Contracting Office were
both floating point conditions for HIPC) and the Poverty Reduction Support Credit (approved June
2004). Under the PRSC, the Bank supported improvements in the budget structure, the approval o f a
legislative framework for public financial management, the strengthening o f the Audit Court,

Box 4: STRENGTHENING

PUBLIC FINANCIALMANAGEMENT

There has been significant progress in public financial management since early 2004, when
the Government launched a comprehensive program to reform public financial management
following the approval of a new Finance Law. Budget classifications are now aligned with the
IMF Code (Global Financial Statistics Manual). The budget includes an indicative medium-term
expenditure framework and provides for a programmatic structure, linking resources to results.
The Accountant General (CG) has redesigned the chart o f accounts to facilitate accounting entries
automatically at the time o f expenditure execution. Development o f an integrated financial
management information system (SIAFI) has provided on-line access to budget execution reports.
A single treasury account has been put in place. Treasury i s n o w able to generate monthly account
reconciliations and quarterly cash forecasts, Expenditure ceilings for spending ministries and
agencies are routinely monitored and revised. A National Payment System has been put in place,
allowing Treasury to manage a large portion o f payments to civil servants, vendors and service
providers o f goods and services to government through direct deposit and electronic transfers
(through electronic payment orders in SIAFI), instead o f issuing volumes o f negotiable checks.
From the 2006 fiscal year, all payments will be made through electronic transfers through the
banking system. This has not only increased the efficiency o f treasury operations, but has also
greatly improved the Treasury ability to reconcile government accounts and has eliminated a
serious security weakness.
At the same time, the Ministry of Finance has improved the quantity and quality of publicly
available information, while the oversight functions of the Audit Court have been
strengthened. Information published on the Ministry’s website includes: semi-annual and annual
budget execution reports and quarterly personnel reports for decentralized entities; semi-annual
reports on public debt; quarterly financial out-turns for the public sector; quarterly publication o f
public investment execution; the Ministry’s annual report; and semi-annual publication o f
decrees, resolutions and laws. Established in 2003, the TSC has a modem regulatory framework
and has made recent progress in completing annual reports o f the central government as well as
over 70 municipal financial audits. TSC has prepared a medium-term plan for develop a National
System for the Control o f Public Resources (SINACORP) which will provide a framework for the
Bank’s assistance in this area.

55

presentation o f annual audit reports to Congress, and the implementation o f a program o f procurement
audits by the State Procurement and Contracting Office.
34.
Some progress has also been made against the second governance results indicator:
establishment o f a system for the enhanced disclosure of public expenditures and results.
Alongside the improvements in transparency o f the public expenditure management system (see B o x
4), the Government introduced a PRS Information System (SIERP) in 2004 as a framework for
compiling data o n PRS global and intermediate indicators. The system was intended to provide access
to regularly updated information, with some information disaggregated geographically to allow
regional monitoring o f the PRS. Development o f SIERP has been led by IDB with co-financing from
range o f bilateral partners. An executive decree o f 2002, subsequently updated in 2004, provides for a
Consultative Council o f the PRS (CCERP), comprising Government and c i v i l society representatives
from twelve broad constituencies, with a mandate to advise on the allocation o f PRS spending and
monitor PRS implementation. Pilot initiatives in social monitoring o f PRS programs, notably in
education, have been implemented.
35.
The Bank has supported PRS monitoring and civil society engagement, with a particular
focus on poverty monitoring and analysis. The Bank supported the development o f SIERP and the
engagement o f civil society in PRS monitoring under the Poverty Reduction Support Credit (approved
June 2004). Implementation o f the Living Standards Measurement Survey was supported, in part,
through an IDF Grant and regional grant-funded Program for the Improvement of Household Surveys
and the Measurement of Living Standards. The Poverty Assessment (delivered June 2006) was
prepared in close collaboration with the Technical Support Unit in the Presidency drawing on the
LSMS data. The Bank, with co-financing from bilateral partners, has also worked closely with the
Technical Unit in preparing Poverty and Social Impact Analyses on key policy issues, including the
impact o f tax reforms, the rise in o i l prices, and the beneficiary incidence o f spending (incorporated
into the Poverty Assessment).
36.
Results monitoring i s handicapped by the poor quality of statistical information in key
PRS sectors, an issue which merited greater attention under the FY2003-06 CAS. While SIERP
i s a potentially powerful tool for the disclosure o f information on progress in PRS, the quality and
timeliness o f information available depends on administrative information systems and surveys.
Administrative information systems are generally weak, particularly so in the health and education
sectors that absorb a substantial share o f poverty spending, as evidenced by the data gaps and
inconsistencies in these sectors. In this context, the lack o f attention given to support to administrative
statistics systems across the Bank’s portfolio represents a missed opportunity. Under the Community
Based Education Project, for instance, funding was provided for monitoring o f the PROHECO
schools but provided little assistance to strengthening the overall education monitoring system. The
monitoring framework for the Health Sector Reform Project relied on survey instruments - which
were not financed by the project and were ultimately delayed - but provided no funding for
strengthening the sector monitoring system. Recently the regional Program for the Improvement of
Household Surveys, has provided support to the National Statistics Institute aimed at developing a
more comprehensive strategy for the strengthening o f the statistics system. The FY2007-10 CAS
places greater emphasis on the development o f national information systems and seeks to align project
monitoring with the needs o f these systems.
37.
I t i s premature to assess progress against the third governance indicator, improvement
in the accessibility of the court system, since the project supporting this objective has only
recently become effective. The Bank supported the development o f a Judicial Branch Modernization
Plan for the period 2004-09 through a broad consultative process, so as to build understanding and
ownership within the judicial system and with the broader public. The strategy aims to bring justice
closer to the people, improve efficiency and transparency. The Judicial Reform Project (effective
February 2006) i s designed to support the implementation o f the modernization plan.

56

3 8.
The Bank program supported the decentralization efforts across the portfolio. The Fgth
Honduran Social Investment Fund Project (effective July 200 1) supported the development o f
Municipal Development Plans using a participatory model, the gradual decentralizing responsibility
for the management o f small-scale investment projects and the development o f social monitoring
mechanisms at the local level. By end o f FY2006, half o f the municipalities had assumed
responsibility for managing the project cycle and all but one o f the 298 municipalities had municipal
plans. The Nuestras Raices Project (effective January 2005) has sought to strengthen the engagement
of indigenous and Afro-Honduran communities in these decentralized planning and project
implementation initiatives. Building on this experience, the Rural Infrastructure Project (effective
July 2006) and Barrio Ciudad Project (effective February 2006) w i l l finance investments identified
and implementedby municipalities and municipal associations, as well as hrther efforts to strengthen
capacity to manage resources transparently and effectively. Complementary activities have been
financed through: the Disaster Mitigation Project (municipal risk mitigation planning and
investments); the Land Administration Project (municipal property registration); the Forestry and
Rural Productivity Project (municipal land use planning and forest management); Trade Facilitation
and Competiveness Project and IFC technical assistance (municipal administrative simplification);
Sustainable Coastal Tourism and Regional Development in the Copan Valley Projects (municipal
tourism planning and management); the Health System Reform Project (decentralized management o f
health facilities); and the Community Based Education Project (decentralized management o f
schools); and advisory services and technical assistance in the water sector (development o f a
decentralization strategy). Although the CAS did not explicitly identify decentralization as a key
element o f the strategy, there was a marked shift in the Bank’s assistance during the CAS period
towards this goal. In the absence o f a clear Government o f Bank strategy it has proved difficult to
coordinate these initiatives. Under the FY2007-10 CAS decentralization has been identified as an
objective and the Bank will take a more active role in policy dialogue o n this agenda.
39.
Efforts to professionalize the civil service have stalled, warranting a reassessment of the
Bank’s strategy for engaging on this issue. W h i l e acknowledging the need to address political
interference in the civil service, the CAS and subsequent policy dialogue through the PRSC focused
on civil service reform as a means curtailing growth o f the public sector wage bill. Presentation of a
civil service law consistent with these objectives was identified as a trigger for PRSC Iand passage o f
the law as a trigger for PRSC 11. Although legislation was submitted, there was limited political
commitment from Government and within Congress, largely because the establishment o f a civil
service would run counter to the interests o f the political parties by limiting the scope for rewarding
political activitists with appointments following changes in administration. Reform efforts have
stalled. Government i s currently reviewing the feasibility o f a professionalization strategy for key
fimctions (such as planning and financial management) and agencies (such as tax administration)
implemented through administrative measures.
40,
Some progress was made in strengthening anti-corruption oversight arrangements
towards the end o f the CAS period. Policy dialogue on the HIPC and PRSC and Bank financing
through the Economic and Financial Management Project focused on strengthening o f the Audit
Court (see above). The Government o f Honduras established an Anti-Corruption Council in
November 2001 by executive decree. An anti-corruption strategy was approved in November 2003,
complying with a HIPC floating completion point trigger. Follow-up support was to be provided
through the Poverty Reduction Strategy Technical Assistance Credit. The Council was successful in
raising the profile o f corruption issues. However, it proved more difficult for the Council to follow-up
on the implementation o f i t s recommendations. In early 2005 the institutional arrangements for anticorruption initiatives were revamped through the passage o f legislation establishing an independent
Anti-Corruption Commission. The Commission i s now staffed, has received a budget allocation o f
US$0.5 million in 2006 and has recently approved a strategic plan. Under the forthcoming CAS, the
Bank will work with the Commission on promoting transparency and social auditing initiatives.

57

Vulnerable Groups
41.
Information constraints prevent an assessment of the benchmark results indicator for
improvements in the status of women and indigenous groups, including ownership of legal
assets, access to services and income-earning opportunities. The Poverty Assessment reveals that
poverty rates are higher among indigenous peoples than the other population groups: 71 percent live
below the poverty line, with the level to proportion o f those living in poverty rising to 85 percent for
those that self-identify as Lencas, the largest ethnic group. Indigenous groups suffer from insecure
access to land, with their communal lands threatened by incursions by ladino families and commercial
interests, and their access to health, education, water, electricity and other services i s generally limited
when compared to other rural communities. Nearly one in four households are headed by women.
Consumption levels o f female-headed households tended to be higher than other households, largely
because they are concentrated in urban areas and some receive remittances from migrants abroad.
Female labor force participation i s extremely l o w reflecting social and cultural factors, though labor
force participation tends to increase following economic shocks. Gender differentials in school
enrollment have narrowed in recent years, and girls educational attainment tends to be higher than for
boys. Nevertheless, girls access to education i s s t i l l hindered by the long distance to school and
demands for sibling care. Although most women receive ante-natal care, almost two-thirds o f the
extreme poor deliver at home. Fertility rates are s t i l l very high among the extreme and moderately
poor, at 4.7 and 3.7 births compared to 2.7 births for the non-poor.
42.
The Bank’s support to the Government’s strategy for promoting gender equality during
the CAS period focused on improving property-rights, access to maternal-child care and income
generating opportunities. Under the Land Administration Project the Bank has supported efforts to
strengthen land security rights for women, both by ensuring that property held by couples i s registered
jointly and facilitating the registration by women. Surveys have indicated that women are satisfied
with the services provided. In the health sector, the Bank’s assistance has focused on the expansion
and improvement o f maternal-child health services, both under the Health Sector Reform Project and
through policy dialogue under the PRSC and HIPC. The Bank’s support to employment generation
has promoted female participation. Under the Sustainable Coastal Tourism Project’s Prosperity Fund,
for instance, over half the beneficiaries were women. While gender issues are addressed in many
project monitoring frameworks, progress against these indicators i s not monitored systematically
through projects’ Implementation Status and Results reports.

43.
The Bank has supported initiatives in community empowerment, education and land
security aimed at addressing the concerns of indigenous and Afro-Honduran communities.
During consultation for the FY2003-06 CAS, indigenous communities’ representatives underlined the
importance o f the Nuestras Raices Program, implemented by FHIS, and requested further Bank
support. A follow-up Nuestras Raices Project (effective January 2005) promotes the strengthening of
communities’ capacity to build sustainable organizations, community and cultural subprojects, and
planning instruments that will help communities participate actively in the Municipal Strategic
Development Plans. Important indirect effects include temporary employment and enhanced human
capital through training for communities, ethnic federations and local facilitators. The Community
Based Education project has supported the development and institutionalization o f bilingual education
for all ethnic groups, with 250 schools currently implementing under this modality. Recognition and
protection o f indigenous land rights, and protection o f the environmental assets on which their
lifestyles depend, figures prominently in the Forestry and Rural Productivity Project (closing January
2010). In addition to the participatory consultation framework to regulate the Property L a w already
under way, cadastral surveying and titling activities for Garifuna and Misquita communities are
expected to start soon under the Land Administration Project (closing April 2008). These activities are
expected to be scaled up for those communities wishing to participate in a follow-up project.

58

Indigenous communities have also benefitted from employment generation programs under the
Regional Development in the Copan Valley and the Coastal Tourism Projects.

44.
Progress has been made in reducing vulnerability to natural disasters by focusing the
Bank's support on the most vulnerable municipalities and engaging local authorities in disaster
mitigation activities. The Natural Disaster Mitigation Project (effective February 2001) and related
JSDF Grant for Tegucigalpa have developed and put into place successful models for decentralizing
disaster management and promoting disaster vulnerability reduction in 60 high risk municipalities.
Early warning forecasts are now available in 60 percent o f the national territory, participating
municipalities have prepared disaster mitigation plans and regulations that include measures to control
land use in high-risk areas and local disaster response capacity has been strengthened. These
municipal arrangements proved successful in reducing the impact o f hurricanes during the 2005
season. A follow-up GEF-funded project i s scheduled under the FY2007-10 CAS. Measures to control
forest fires have followed a similar decentralized approach under the Forests and Rural Productivity
Project (effective December 2004). The Bank supports forest fire prevention and suppression
activities in 38 municipalities in Yoro, Olancho, El Paraiso and Francisco M o r a z h constituting the
"center o f mass" o f the country's economically important coniferous forests. These activities are
undertaken by municipal authorities and local communities, generating employment for community
and women's groups.
Financial System

45.

Progress has been made towards the benchmark results of establishing a modern bank
resolution system and a modern payments system as part of a broader program of financial
sector reform. The Bank's assistance to financial sector reform was informed by a Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP) report delivered in January 2003. The report revealed the fragility o f the
financial system and the risks posed by exogenous shocks, which had led to an accumulation o f nonperforming loans following Hurricane M i t c h and the subsequent coffee crisis. The report went on to
argue for a comprehensive process o f financial reforms in order to improve disclosure and reduce
future risks, including measures aimed at strengthening prudential regulation and supervision,
improving the regulatory framework for resolving banking crises, and improving risk management.
Consistent with the FSAP recommendations, a Financial System L a w was passed in 2004, together
with the amendment o f related legislation and regulations. Subsequently loan provisioning and
classification has improved; capital adequacy has been brought in line with Basle principles; and
additional powers have been granted to the supervisory authorities, notably the National Banking and
Insurance Commission (CNBS). A lender o f last resort mechanism i s now in place. CNBS has
strengthened supervision and data flows from the banking system have improved. Implementation o f a
modernized payments system i s currently underway. Over the CAS period there has been a gradual
consolidation o f the banking sector (reducing the number o f banks from 16 to 20) and improvement in
the banking sectors' financial position (see Table C-4).
Table C-4: Banking Sector Indicators
2002

2003

2004

2005

Regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets

12.9

13.0

14.5

14.6

Nonperforming loans (NPLs) to total loans

11.3

8.7

6.4

6.6

Provisions to NPLs

38.7

38.2

64.6

66.8

Return on assets (ROA)

0.8

1.2

1.2

1.6

Return on equity (ROE)

8.2

11.8

14.9

19.0

Source: Comision Nacional de Bancos y Seguros.

59

46.
The Bank’s package o f advisory services, policy based lending and the financing o f
technical assistance proved to be an effective way o f promoting and supporting financial sector
reforms. The Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) Report helped focus attention on the
need to strengthen the banking sector and address systemic risks. Progress in the implementation o f
the financial sector reform program was identified as a HIPC Initiative floating completion point
condition, expressed in terms o f application o f the Basle Core Principles (BCP). This provided a
strong incentive for the launch o f politically challenging reforms. At completion point in April 2005,
Honduras’ was found to have largely complied with 3 o f the 25 BCP, materially complied with 20
BCP and not complied with 2 BCP, for which a waiver was approved. Policy dialogue on the
financial sector reform has been followed up through a Financial Sector Development Policy Credit
(approved February 2005), which seeks to implement hrther regulatory reforms (notably as regards
banking resolution, creation o f the capitalization fund, bankruptcy and corporate governance);
strengthen controls against money laundering and the financing o f terrorism; supervision and risk
control; and implementation o f the payments system. The first tranche under the Credit was disbursed
in January 2006. Implementation o f the reform program has been supported through a Financial
Sector Technical Assistance Credit (effective March 2007), which has provided access to technical
services and financed upgrading o f key information systems. The Bank’s support in this area has been
complemented by financing from the IDB and IMF policy dialogue and technical assistance. A
follow-up regional financial sector study has been scheduled for FY2009, this will provide a basis for
assessing the Bank’s future role in the sector. Additional financing to support the financial sector
reform program during the FY2007-10 CAS period will be provided by IDB.
Rural Land
47.
Significant progress has been made towards benchmark indicator of registering 100,000
parcels in a consolidated property and cadastral register. The Property L a w passed in 2004
established a unified property register and provided a framework for regularizing land rights. The
Land Administration Project (effective December 2004) has supported implementation o f the law
through the establishment o f a decentralized National Property Administration System (SNAP),
comprising a territorial information system, a registry o f norms and a computerized unified registry
system (SURE) operated by both public and private entities. The project has financed substantial
investments in development o f technical plafoms, aerial photography, field surveying, validation,
conflict resolution, regularization, registration and titling. SURE i s n o w operational in five registries,
nearly 220,000 parcels have been surveyed and regularized and 52,000 land parcels in the project area
have been registered. Property registration times have been cut from around 90 to just 7 days. The
project has also supported a participatory consultation framework to develop the regulations and
procedures for regularizing, titling, and registering indigenous and Afro-Honduran communities land
rights.

48.
While efforts to strengthen synergies between Bank projects supporting the land
administration program through a project coordination unit were effective, these institutional
arrangements proved unsustainable. Building on the experience o f the Rural Areas Administration
Project, a project coordination unit executed three related projects, subordinate to two separate
ministries; the Land Administration Project and Natural Disasters Mitigation Project under the
Ministry o f Governance and Justice, and the Forestry and Rural Productivity Project under the
Ministry o f Agriculture. While this arrangement facilitated functional linkages between the projects,
such as joint work planning and collaboration in field operations, the arrangements gradually
marginalized the responsible Ministries, hindered effective capacity building and - far from generating
efficiency - led to huge overhead costs. At the end o f the CAS period, the Government proposed to
transfer responsibility for implementation o f the Land Administration Project to the Property Institute
and the other projects to the parent ministries. This proposal i s currently being evaluated by the Bank

60

to assess whether these arrangements w i l l provide a sound basis for institutionalizing the land
administration program under the FY2007-10 CAS.

D.

IFC SUPPORT DURING THE FY2003-06 CAS PERIOD

49.
The FY2003-06 CAS was prepared as a joint CAS: the IFC strategy at the regional and
country levels was closely aligned with the CAS priorities. IFC’s priorities in Honduras as outlined
in the CAS included: (a) helping the growth o f export-oriented SMEs (through financial intermediaries
andor technical assistance); (b) supporting internationally-competitive f i r m s with inadequate longt e r m finance access; (c) helping to strengthen the business environment (through technical assistance);
and (d) supporting the financial sector. These priorities were identified within the broader strategy in
Central America, which focused on: physical infrastructure; strengthening and deepening the financial
sector; supporting competitive f i r m s in agriculture and industry; and promoting investments into
Central America from other Latin American and emerging market economies. Throughout the C A S
period IFC provided support to Honduras through technical assistance and regional investment
projects, with an overall emphasis on the areas identified in the CAS.

50.
Growth o f export-oriented SMEs. I F C assisted with a portfolio shrimp exporter. With
donor support, I F C also undertook a study in the flower and ornamental plants sector as part o f the
four preliminary diagnostics and market studies carried out by the L A C Technical Assistance Facility
in order to determine the areas o f focus for the intervention. I t did not lead to a project in the export
sector as the studies showed that I F C could make greater impact in another area (municipal
simplification) in Honduras.
5 1.
Supporting internationally-competitive firms. IFC prepared a regional project with an
internationally-competitive group to support its South-South operations in countries, including
Honduras (approved by the Board in FY2006). The sponsor i s a leading regional company but has
limited access to long-term financing, In Honduras, the project will support the development o f a new
shopping mall, with possible technical assistance where capacity building would be provided for local
SME tenants.
Strengthening the business environment. I F C has embarked on the municipal simplification
52.
project o f business procedures in the Municipalities o f Tegucigalpa and San Pedro de Sula.
Replicating the pilot projects carried out in Bolivia, the project aimed to cut transaction costs for the
formalization o f f i r m s by reducing cost, time, and requirements for operating licenses. I t i s currently
in the initial stage o f implementation. In addition, aiming at increasing awareness o f needs and
usefulness of municipal simplification reforms, I F C launched a municipal scorecard study for the LAC
region, in which i t s application has begun in Honduras. By disseminating this information, I F C will
create national networks, which will constitute an important engine to continue driving and advocating
for reform.

53.
Supporting the financial sector. IFC’s activities in this area have focused on four issues.
First, through investments made in FY2003 and FY2005, I F C continued to assist through financing
and technical assistance with the establishment o f a private credit bureau in Honduras, which i s part o f
the first credit bureau operational throughout Central America. The operation in Honduras has grown
the largest credit bureau in the country. Second, as part o f the regional study, IFC has also undertaken
a trust-funded gap analysis o f the housing needs in Honduras to understand market structure and
identify support needs for primary market housing institutions. I F C continues discussions with other
partners to facilitate the development o f housing finance market in these countries. Third, IFC has
been working with a regional bank with presence in Honduras to support an asset-backed
securitization with a guarantee instrument. Lastly, IFC undertook a study in the leasing and
microfinance sectors in Honduras as part o f the preliminary diagnostics carried out by the Facility in

61

order to determine the areas o f focus for the intervention. The study pointed to administrative
simplification as a higher priority for I F C assistance.

E.

BANKPERFORMANCE

Portfolio Assessments and Oualitv o f Products and Services

54.
By the end o f FY2006, thirteen o f the fourteen lending operations scheduled under the
CAS base case scenario had been approved. The base case scenario planned ten new investment
projects, two technical assistance projects and two budget support projects. All but one o f these
projects were prepared and approved by the Board during the CAS period. The Bank did not provide
financing for the one remaining project, Education for All, in view o f the substantial grant-financing
available from other sources. However, the Bank did continue to provide advisory services and
managed a Trust Fund directly supporting the program. The average processing times were: nine
months for preparation (from concept note to Board approval); three months for signing o f agreements
(for legislative approval); and four months to reach effectiveness. Three projects were delivered on
significantly longer schedules (the Rural Infrastructure Project; the Barrio Ciudad Project, and the
Judicial Reform project), largely due to IDA envelope limitations. The projects finally presented for
Board approval were closely aligned with the objectives for these operations outlined in the CAS
document. In addition to the programmed operations, the Bank approved assistance under the
Enhanced HIPC Initiative in April 2005.
55.
The quality of IDA lending was rated satisfactory. This status was achieved despite all
projects in Honduras inheriting a "country record" flag from the comprehensive program restructuring
after Hurricane Mitch. Internal reporting systems (ISRs and CPPRs) generally rated projects
satisfactory or above, and the four projects that closed during the CAS period (Rural Land
Management, PRSC I,HIPC Debt Relief, PROFUTURO, FHIS V and Sustainable Costal Tourism)
were rated satisfactory or positive in a l l measures according to project ICRs. Both projects evaluated
by the Independent Evaluation Group, the Rural Land Management and PRSC I,also received
satisfactory ratings from the Independent Evaluation Group.
56.
The number of problem projects was reduced from t w o to zero over FY2003-06, even as
the portfolio grew substantially from 13 to 22 projects. Over the same period, the disbursement
ratio increased from about 19 percent to about 30 percent, and the pro-activity index reached 100
percent, suggesting strong lending flows and quick resolution o f project implementation constraints. In
FY2006, two projects were classified as "potential problem projects": the First Programmatic
Financial Sector Development Policy Credit (FSDP) and Trade Facilitation and Productivity
Enhancement Project. In the case o f the FSDP, the progress on the financial sector reform agenda
slowed during elections and the administrative transition, In the case o f the Trade Facilitation Project,
delays reflect the complex design and multiple agencies engaged in implementing project activities.
These difficulties have been aggravated by the change o f key personnel in the partner agencies
following the change o f administration. The implementation o f Portfolio Reviews every six months,
chaired by the Ministry o f Finance, with the participation o f all executing agencies and project
implementation units provided an opportunity to review and address implementation constraints on a
timely basis.
Results monitoring needs to be improved. The quality o f Implementation Status and
Results reports (ISRs) i s patchy. W h i l e some projects provide detailed information against each
project outcome and intermediate outcome indicators, others provide only selected and summary
information. The information on results at the service delivery level i s generally weaker than the
information provided on provided on projects' institutional strengtheningactivities. Some realignment
o f the project level results frameworks may be needed to monitor the Bank's FY2007-10 CAS.
Improvements will also be needed in the coverage o f monitoring information provided by

57.

62

implementing agencies so that this data can be verified during project supervision. Ideally, project
monitoring should include periodic performance assessments by the intended beneficiaries o f the
project activities.

58.
Stakeholders rated Bank supervision and performance as generally satisfactory. During
consultations, stakeholders considered the FY2003-06 Bank program reasonably well aligned with
PRS priorities. Stakeholders suggested that greater attention needs to be given to delivering results o n
the ground, questioned the level o f financing allocated to studies and argued that follow-up was
needed to ensure that studies contribute to actions. The Bank was given high marks for the quality o f
its advisory services. Project supervision and implementation was generally considered efficient,
though some stakeholders argued that implementation was hindered by the complexity o f Bank
procedures and the lack o f harmonization between development partners.
59.
Bank analytical and advisory work has informed the design of the Bank’s assistance
program, whilst also serving a wider Government and donor audience. All planned core
diagnostic ESW was delivered within the CAS period, including the Development Policy Review,
Poverty Assessment, a Country Financial Accountability Assessment and update and Country
Procurement Review (both prepared in collaboration with IDB). A study on Drivers of Rural Growth,
regional studies on education, health and the response to the coffee crisis and a note o n
decentralization were also delivered. The Bank also assisted in the development o f a water and
sanitation strategy through a Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility grant. The Development
Policy Review, delivered in 2004, provided the analytical underpinning for the PRSC and the FY20072010 CAS. Core fiduciary diagnostics, notably the C F A A and CPAR, prepared in collaboration with
the IDB, have provided the framework for the Government’s expenditure management and
procurement reform agenda. More recently, the Government has used the Poverty Assessment,
delivered in June 2006, to establish the benchmark for monitoring future progress in poverty reduction
and guide the updating o f the PRS. The Bank’s analytical work i s influential in framing policy
dialogue in Honduras, Recognizing the importance o f these inputs, civil society has argued that much
greater efforts need to be taken to disseminate not only the final products but also the early drafts o f
the Bank’s analytical work so that these can be subject o f debate and help break up the Bank’s
perceived “intellectual monopoly”.
Program disbursements have been adversely affected by the replacement of personnel
60.
following changes in administration and counterpart funding constraints. Disbursements drop
sharply following each change o f administration and gradually pick up as the staff are trained and gain
experience in the administration o f Bank-financed projects. In early 2006, following the change in
administration, the Bank procurement and financial management specialists undertook a week-long
training event with agency and project implementation unit staff in an effort to familiarize newlyappointed staff with Bank procedures. Counterpart funding has also proved a constraint on project
execution. New Country Financing Parameters were introduced in February 2005 to address this
issue. These parameters allow the Bank to finance: all reasonable taxes and duties related to
investments; local costs o f investments in amounts appropriate for achieving project development
objectives; recurrent costs to the extent that these are sustainable; and, as warranted, up to 100 percent
o f project expenditures. Procurement and financial management post-reviews have also been used as
an opportunity to deliver additional training.
61.
Bank projects are not immune to risks of politicization and corruption that impact on
the public administration as a whole. The replacement o f project personnel and appointments
following changes in administration are sometimes motivated by party allegiance rather than technical
considerations. This adversely affects project performance and increases fiduciary risk. W h i l e
procurement post-reviews have generally been satisfactory, ratings tend to deteriorate following
administrative transitions when new staff are unfamiliar with Bank procedures. Regular risk and
governance assessments will be undertaken across the portfolio and measures to further improve the

63

transparency o f procurement will be implemented under the forthcoming CAS (see Governance
Annex). A more detailed assessment o f assessment o f the PIUs i s needed to determine their costeffectiveness. There i s room for savings in program delivery through streamlining, integrating PIUs
more fully into implementing agencies, and striving for more judicious use o f consultants, including
local talent.
Countrv Dialopue, Aid Coordination and Outreach
62.
Country dialogue has focused on PRS implementation, notably through the discussions
on the design and implementation o f the policy issues supported under the HIPC Initiative and
the Poverty Reduction Support Credits. From 2003 to 2005 attention focused on the measures
needed to restore macro-economic stability and the launch o f a program o f reforms in public
expenditure management, civil service reform, the financial sector, the business climate, education and
health sector service delivery and PRS monitoring. Agreement o f a three-year PRGF with the IMF in
February 2004 paved the way for the approval o f a Poverty Reduction Support Credit in June 2004
and the Financial Sector Development Policy Credit in February 2005. Honduras reached HIPC
completion point in April 2005. The prospect o f debt relief provided a strong incentive for
Government, congressional and broader c i v i l society support for the reform program. Progress on the
reform agenda slowed as the 2005 elections approached, particularly as regards the more controversial
elements o f the program requiring the passage o f legislation (notably as regards legislation on the civil
service, ports, forestry and the restructuring o f the telecommunications and electricity utilities), though
a Competition L a w was passed in the closing months o f the administration. In the early months o f
2006, dialogue has focused on the preparation o f the FY2007-10 CAS. Analytical work has helped
supported dialogue o n development priorities and, in the case o f fiduciary work, helped the design o f
the reform program. However, the PRSC instrument i s clearly a much more effective instrument for
sustained dialogue on policy priorities and for assisting the Government address the challenges o f
reform implementation than standalone projects and analytical work. The Country Office has played
an important role in sustaining policy dialogue across the range o f policy issues addressed by the Bank
in close coordination with Bank sector specialists and external partners.
63.
The Poverty Reduction Strategy provided the strategic framework for external
assistance in Honduras, supported by formal coordination arrangements through the G16.
Originally established with five members in 1999 following Hurricane Mitch, the G16 has grown to
integrate all resident external partners. The G16 provides a forum for monitoring PRS implementation
as well as coordination on policy priorities and operational issues through meetings and working
groups at the technical and policy level. The Bank has participated actively in the G16 arrangements
through its Country Office and assumed presidency o f the G16 working group on Transparency and
Governance at the very end o f the CAS period. All G16 partners - including the Bank - use the
Poverty Reduction Strategy as the basis for their country strategies.
64.
Complementing the G16 arrangements, the Government established working groups
comprising representatives of external partners and Government. Some o f these groups focused
on single sectors, others were intended to be multi-sectoral. The effectiveness o f these working groups
varied, depending largely o n the proactivity o f the lead government agency. Little progress was made
in the development o f sector strategies. The strategies prepared in education and health were
consultant driven with little engagement from agency staff and c i v i l society and have had limited
follow-up. The exception i s the Water and Sanitation Modernization Plan, supported by the Bank
through a Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility grant, which was prepared through a broad
consultative process led by the respective Government agency. Limited progress has been made
towards the development o f sector wide approach, with the EFA program the most advanced (see B o x
2). Concerns about the fragility o f Government systems have led most partners to use project
implementation units, usually staffed by national consultants reporting directly to agency senior
management and on significantly higher salaries than their agency counterparts.

64

65.
The Bank has been successful in mobilizing co-financing for its activities and
collaborated closely with other external partners during project preparation and
implementation, though there i s s t i l l room for improvement. K e y Bank operations have mobilized
co-financing to support project implementation, notably the Poverty Reduction Support Credit
(Sweden) and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Technical Assistance Project (Sweden and United
Kingdom). The Bank has worked closely with parallel projects financed by other external partners in
the implementation o f much o f the portfolio. Particularly notable i s the Bank’s collaboration with
partners in the following projects: Community Based Education Project (all EFA partners), Health
System Reform Project (USAID and IDB), Forestry and Rural Productivity (IDB and GTZ), Trade
Facilitation and Competitiveness (IDB and USAID), Land Administration (EU and Nordic Fund).
Further work i s needed to increase the proportion o f joint missions (just 11 out o f 112 missions fielded
in 2005). Furthermore, external partners have expressed frustration that the Bank consults closely
during project preparation, but tends to give insufficient attention to keeping external partners
informed about progress during project implementation. K e y partners have been invited to portfolio
reviews to help address this issue and the proportion o f joint-missions i s expected to increase in the
forthcoming CAS period. During the CAS period, the Bank collaborated with IDB in the preparation
o f fiduciary reviews and with FA0 in the preparation o f the Drivers o f Rural Growth study but there
was little collaboration in preparation o f other analytical work. External partners have expressed an
interest in taking a more collaborative role in the preparation o f key Bank analytical work under the
forthcoming CAS.
66.
Engagement with civil society and outreach improved during the CAS period. The
FY2003-06 CAS consultations engaged a broad spectrum o f c i v i l society. While civil society
appreciated the opportunity to comment o n the strategy, some expressed frustration regarding the
limited information provided beforehand, and argued that the consultations should have been followed
up during CAS implementation. Responding to these concerns, consultations with the Consultative
Council for the PRS were held in December 2005 to discuss an early draft o f the CAS Completion
Report. This has been followed by an extended consultation process around the FY2007-10 CAS (see
Annex F). Annual meetings to review progress in CAS implementation have been proposed for the
forthcoming CAS period. Efforts have been made to strengthen outreach during the CAS period,
notably through the establishment o f a Public Information Center in collaboration with C A B E I and
U N D P in 2004. Attendance at the PIC has increased steadily to around 800 visitors a month by the end
o f FY2006. The Bank has also taken a more active role in dialogue with the media and there has been
a significant increase in press-coverage o f the Bank during FY2006. These efforts will continue under
the forthcoming CAS.
F.

KEY CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE FY2007-10 CAS

67.
Bank assistance should focus on a narrower range o f sectors and reform objectives.
Policy discussions with Government have been too broad, making i t difficult for the Government to
focus on a manageable reform agenda, Similarly, projects have been dispersed around a large number
o f sectors, supporting the PRS on too broad a front. Dispersion o f the Bank’s assistance has hampered
coordination efforts and led to the Bank intervening in areas that are not closely linked to the Bank’s
comparative advantage. Dispersion o f the Bank’s financing has also limited the Bank’s capacity to
bring a critical level o f resources to bear to address constraints in Honduras’ development. That said,
the pilot initiatives supported under the Bank - notably as regards Pilot Land Access Project and
health service decentralization - have had an important demonstration effect by showing h o w
investments in these areas could have a significant impact if applied systematically. Furthermore, the
Bank projects have provided a vehicle for policy advice as well as financing which has been
recognized by the Bank and other stakeholders as an important element o f Bank assistance. Following
this assessment, the Bank’s FY2007-10 CAS will focus on a narrower range o f policy issues and
projects. Future Bank financing will be focus address the key constraints to growth and poverty

65

reduction consistently identified in Bank analytical work notably: improvements in rural productivity,
infrastructure provision, the quality o f education, and governance and institutional performance.

The Bank should take political constraints into account when supporting reform
68.
programs and encourage the authorities to build constituencies for reform. Pressures from vested
interests have managed to stall some o f the most pressing reforms. The Bank will need a more
effective communication strategy to stimulate public debate and inform key stakeholders about policy
options if the reform agenda i s to succeed. At the same time, policy dialogue should take into account
political constraints. The PRSC relied on legislative instruments t o advance many o f the key reforms.
This may not always be the most effective means o f supporting reform in Honduras. Political factors
may be relevant when selecting the instruments for achieving program objectives.

69.
Linking policy dialogue, investment projects and analytical work tends to bring the best
results. I t has proved easier to make progress in the reform agenda where reforms have been
grounded in well-disseminated analytical work, policy dialogue has been focused on a well-defined
program, such as the PRSC, and implementation i s supported by technical assistance and investment
lending. The PRSC instrument has proved a much more effective instrument for sustained dialogue on
policy priorities and for assisting the Government address the challenge o f reform implementation
than the alternative o f standalone projects and analytical work. Other external partners appreciate the
opportunity for structured policy dialogue provided by the PRSC. Implementation o f the reform
program has required significant technical assistance inputs. In this context, the PRSC-TAC has
proved a flexible tool for delivering technical assistance to support reforms. Where there are
significant investments required to implement reforms, these may be delivered more effectively
through related investment projects.

70.
Institutionalization and continuity are critical for achieving development objectives. A t
the cross-government level, the PRS has ensured policy continuity, not least because the strategy has
been based on extensive consultations. A t the same time the PRS offers sufficient flexibility to
accommodate Government’s changing priorities and lessons learned. Limited progress has been made
in developing such instruments at the sector level. Development o f sector strategies would provide a
more coherent, country-led framework for the delivery o f Bank assistance. This i s an area where the
Bank will need to collaborate with Government, c i v i l society and other external partners in the
forthcoming CAS period. Progress in this area w i l l also provide an opportunity to gradually align
Bank assistance with sector plans and programs. At the same there i s a need to ensure continuity in
Bank projects. O f particular concern i s the replacement o f project staff following changes in
administration, contributing to implementation delays and increasing fiduciary risks. At the project
level, measures should be taken to improve continuity o f staffing through the administration transition.

71.
Projects tend to be more effective where there i s close coordination across Bank sector
teams and projects build on the results of other interventions. A notable success in this context
has been FHIS V’s investment in municipal planning which has provided a foundation for the Rural
Infrastructure, Barrio Ciudad, Disaster Vulnerability and Forestry and Rural Productivity Projects.
There i s potential for greater integration o f project team working on the competitiveness, rural
development and infrastructure agendas.
Bank performance monitoring systems should use and support national systems. The
outcome indicators o f the 2003 CAS should have been linked more clearly to Bank interventions to
facilitate performance evaluation. The future CAS should explicitly link target indicators and baseline
data to the Bank interventions. The Bank should support the development o f national statistical
information systems. A t the project level, attention should turn to strengthening executing agencies’
information systems to permit monitoring o f sector performance rather than simply building
standalone project monitoring systems.

72.

66

2

MI

6

u
b

?
(rl
0
0

ccrr
8

5
pa
S

.I

Y

E
E
8

3

a

E

Y

S

.I

VJ
VJ

8
L

ba

E

..

a

9

u
m
a2

a

I

a

I

II

I

c

b

i

9

k

*

P

*

2

x

.C

v)

a

B

e
a

v)

E
e
a

M

L.

I

Table (2-2. Honduras: Planned Lending Program vs. Actual Deliveries
(FY03-06)

CAS Plans (2003)
FY

03

Program
Financial Sector TA
Regional Development Copan Valley

CAS Review ( July 200
US$
(M)
9.0
12.0

Actual
Active
Active

Financial Sector Adjustment Credit
Trade Facilitation & Competitiveness*
Land Regularization* *
Forestry & Rural Productivity
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction TAC
Education for All
Judicial Modernization Project
Nuestras Raices

05
Urban Services (Barrio-Ciudad)
Nutrition & Social Protection
Nuestras Raices

06

Rural Infrastructure

25.0 Delivered FY05
25.0 Active
25.0 Active
20.0 Active
45.0 Active
10.0 Active
5.0 Advisory Services Provided
15.0 Delayed to FY06
0 Active (Adv. From FY05)
170

*

0
9.9
12.0

0.0
28.1
25.0
20.0
58.8
8.0
0.0
0.0
15.0
154.9

Financial Sector Adjustment Credit
Debt R e l i e f Credit (HIPC)
15.0 Delivered FY06
20.0 Delivered FY06
10.0 Advanced to FY04

25.0
67.5
0.0
0.0
0.0

45.0

92.5

60.0

Active
Judicial Modernization Project
Nutrition and Social Protection
Urban Services (Barrio-Ciudad)

296.0

47
15
20
15
97

60.0

CAS Period Total Planned

US$

21.9

21.0

04

L

CAS Period Total Actual

Now called the Trade Facilitation and Productivity Enhancement Project.

366.3

** Now called the Land Administration Project
*** The Education for All project w i l l be funded by a SWAP; IDA funds will be included in the event o f a
financing gap.

76

Table 3. Honduras: Planned vs. Actual Non-lending Service Deliveries (FY03-06)

CAS Plan (May, 2003)

FY

I

CAS Review (July 2006)

Product

Status a/

o3 IESW:

PRSP Progress Report
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA)
CA: Social Impact o f Coffee Crisis
Pro-poor Water Transactions

4ctual
?orwarded to F Y 0 4
?orwarded to F Y 0 4
4ctual
3ropped

-l:omotni g
- Trade Participation in Small and Medium
Enterprises
IDF: Anti-Corruption
JSDF: Tegucigalpa Disaster Mitigation

Forwarded to F Y 0 4

-1

3ropped ( h d e d from PRS-TAC)
Forwarded to F Y 0 4
CIA - Institutional Strengthening o f AfroDescendant Community Organizations and the
Development o f Local Capacities in C A (delayed
From FY2002)

04 ESW:
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Forwarded to FY05
C A F T A : Challenges for Central America
Drivers O f Sustainable Rural Growth And Poverty Reduction Forwarded to FY05
in Central America
Forwarded to F Y 0 6
Central America: H I V / A I D S Review
Forwarded to FY05
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Forwarded to FY05
Decentralization o f Rural Water and Sanitation Services
Forwarded to FY05
Investment Climate Assessment
Country Economic Memorandum
Forwarded to FY05 as D P R
Forwarded to FY05
Central America: Education Policy Note
Actual
Central America: Shocks and Social Protection

Grants:
IDF: Promoting Trade Participation in Small and Medium
Enterprises
JSDF: Tegucigalpa Disaster Mitigation
GEF Biological Corridor I1
GEF Indigenous Management o f Natural Areas
Sustainable Sanitation Solutions
Youth At-Risk
Indigenous People Sustainable Development

77

Actual

(Forwarded from FY03)

Actual
Forwarded to FY05
Forwarded to FY05
Dropped
Dropped
Dropped

(Forwarded from FY03)

CAS Review (Julv 2006)

CAS Plan (Mav. 2003)
FY

I

Status a/

Product

C A F T A : Challenges for Central America
Drivers Of Sustainable Rural Growth And Poverty Reduction
in Central America
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Decentralization or Rural Water and Sanitation Services
Investment Climate Assessment
Central America: Education Policy Note
Youth At-Risk
Poverty Assessment
Central America: Decentralization
Central America: Health Reform Study
Central America: Rural Infrastructure Study
Central America: Disaster Prevention Management
Development Policy Review
Grants:
GEF Biological Corridor I1
GEF Indigenous Management o f Natural Areas

06

4ctual
Actual

(Forwarded from FY04)
(Forwarded from FY04)

Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Actual
Dropped
Dropped
Actual

(Forwarded from FY04)
(Forwarded from FY04)
(Forwarded from FY04)
(Forwarded from FY04)
(Forwarded from FY04)

Actual
Actual

(Forwarded from FY04)
(Forwarded from FY04)

[n Preparation

(Forwarded from FY04)

(Forwarded from FY04)

ESW:
-

Central America: H I V / A I D S Review

Grants:

HIV/AIDS (Global Program for AIDS)

Additional Actual Product

a/ Actual, Dropped, or Forwarded tolfrom a different FY

78

ANNEX

D: DISASTER
MITIGATION
AND RESPONSE
A.

CONTEXT

1.
A recent Bank assessment concluded that 62 percent o f Honduran territory and 92
percent o f the total population was at risk of t w o o r more hazards, putting Honduras in the top
ten o f natural disaster hot spots worldwide'. Major disaster risks arise from tropical cyclones and
associated flooding a n d landslides,
though Honduras' i s also susceptible
Figure 1; Hydrometeorological events affecting
to droughts (unlike its Central
Honduras have increased since 1974
American neighbors Honduras has
not suffered significant damage f r o m
earthquakes in the past). Recent
studies confirm that hurricane
intensity has increased markedly as a
result o f climate change and the rise
in sea surface temperature o f tropical
oceans2. The frequency o f category
4 and 5 hurricanes affecting
Honduras has doubled during the
197419791984198919941999past 30 years and i s expected to
1978
1983
1988
1993
1998
2003
continue rising (see Figure 1). At an
estimated
US$4.7
billion,
Honduras's
financial
losses
to
Figure 2: Population in Tegucigalpa who suffered
disaster
events
during
the
last
thirty
physicial damage due to floods or landslides
yo
years are approximately 50% o f the
total
for
Central
America.
Hurricane M i t c h in 1998, the most
20
devastating natural disaster in recent
15
history, resulted in 5,750 dead,
nearly
h a l f a million displaced
10
persons, agricultural losses o f around
5
70-80 percent o f production and
damage amounting to nearly 40
0
percent
o f GDP.
3
4
5
Income Quintile

2.
The potential impact o f
disasters i s compounded by the
increased
vulnerability
of
settlements and infrastructure, particularly in poor neighborhoods, resulting from massive rural
to urban migration and unplanned settlements. Hazardous locations, poor housing quality and
lack o f savings put low-income groups at particularly high risk o f natural disasters. Asset losses
averaged 18 percent among the poorest fifth o f Honduran households affected by Hurricane Mitch,
compared with 3 percent amount the richest quintile. In a study conducted in 2003, about one fifth o f
the poor in Metropolitan Tegucigalpa reported having suffered from landslides in the previous five
years and 17 percent from floods, with the proportion affected dropping steadily by income group (see
Figure 2).
I

W o r l d Bank, Natural Disaster Hotspots: A Global Risk Analysis, Disaster Risk Management Series, No. 5,
2005.
2
Webster, P.J. et. al. Changes in Tropical Cyclone Number, Duration, and Intensity in a Warming Environment.
Science Journal, September 2005.

79

3.
Recent IEG assessments of Bank performance in disaster prone countries and
evaluations of Honduras’ response to Hurricane Mitch, highlight the need for adequate
mitigation measures and forward planning. The remainder o f this brief annex outlines the Bank’s
strategy for disaster risk mitigation and response in case Honduras i s affected by a major disaster
during the CAS period.
B.

BANKSTRATEGY FOR DISASTERRISK MITIGATION

4.

The Bank’s assistance has focused on strengthening land use planning and risk
mitigation activities at the local level. The Honduras Natural Disaster Mitigation Project, an IDA
Credit (US$l0.5 million) and the related JSDF Grant for Tegucigalpa (US$2 million) developed and
put into place successful models for decentralizing disaster management focusing on the 60 highest
risk municipalities while also developing capacity in national agencies to gather, analyze and
disseminate information, and provide technical assistance to local governments. Both projects will
close during FY2007. The effectiveness o f this approach was demonstrated during the 2005 hurricane
seasons, where north-coast municipalities were able to respond quickly and effectively to flooding,
reducing potential impacts and loss o f life. Key achievements under these projects include:
0

Strengthening of national hazard warning system. Notably, the projects have financed an
increase in coverage o f hydrometerological forecasts from 30 percent o f the national territory
to 60 percent, with a target o f 80 percent by end o f 2006, and 70 percent o f municipalities
currently connected to the early warning system and with a target o f 100 percent connectivity
by end o f 2006. In addition, the project has helped strengthen the capacity o f the national

disaster response agency (COPECO).
0

At present, 80
percent o f municipalities have adopted risk reduction regulations - including measures
regarding land use - within the framework o f their municipal development plans. By end
2006, 61 municipalities will have put in place a comprehensive risk reduction plan and
installed local flood warning system. Priority risk mitigation works, including river control,
drainage and land stabilization, are now being implemented.

Implementation of risk reduction measures in highest risk municipalities.

5.
The challenge for follow-up operations i s to mainstream disaster management by
encouraging adequate planning and preventive measures in health, education, infrastructure
and land management. Future Bank support will seek to mitigate the increased impact o f hurricanes
as part o f an on-going government program to reduce vulnerability to all disasters through a US$7
million grant from the GEF-SCCF fund for Adaptation to Climate Change. The proposed project
supports the mainstreaming o f risk reduction measures to reduce the disastrous outcomes and impacts
o f catastrophic events. In this case, adaptation to the increased hurricane impacts requires effective
planning to avoid the creation o f new risks o f flooding and landslides. Where settlements or
infrastructure are already at risk, or where risks cannot be avoided, then structural, non-structural
(educational) and environmental measures to reduce the impact o f disasters must be applied. The
Bank, together with partners such as IDB and JIC, will explore ways to leverage these funds as
matching grants to stimulate increased investment in risk analysis and mitigation measures at local
government and sector levels. The Bank will continue i t s dialogue with Government, in conjunction
with partners, to explore ways to support national government’s efforts to promote and also to monitor
these investments.
6.
The Bank’s country program will be closely linked to the Bank’s regional disaster
management strategy and the work of other partners. This includes support for CEPREDENAC,
both an IDF and a SCCF grant to develop new instruments and methods for risk identification and
environmental prevention. The Bank team i s also working on a study by PPIAF on private sector
participation (with infrastructure concessions) and a possible regional program led by the Norwegian
Government to identify landslide risks and mitigation measures. The Bank’s support on disaster

80

mitigation will be developed with key external partners notably UNDP and IDB. IDB i s currently
developing a large sector investment program focusing on disaster management, which will build on
the experience of the Bank’s Disaster Mitigation Project.

7.
The Bank, in collaboration with IDB, has been studying risk financing strategies and
possible instruments for making disaster insurance more accessible for both the public and
private sectors. Affordable products for the Honduran government have not yet been identified.
However, a regional probabilistic risk analysis i s programmed during the CAS period and may
propose some remedies. In the meantime, the Bank insurance team i s working o n developing
parametric insurance instruments that can offer insurance to the agriculture sector and others
influenced by catastrophic events. The Bank will provide technical assistance to insurers, proposed
b y the Honduran Insurance Chamber (CAHDA), in the identification, design and development o f
innovative agricultural insurance pilot projects, and on issues related to the regulatory framework o f
the new products aiming at achieving public protection and industry sustainability. Pilot projects will
be selected in agricultural areas that are meteorologically homogeneous, preferably with large number
of small and medium producers with exiting l i n k s to financial intermediaries, and farmers that clearly
recognize climatic risks associated with yield losses. Based on the evaluation o f the pilot projects,
CAHDA will be in a position to start up scaling agricultural insurance with other insurance companies
and to different regions and crops, In a related vein, the Bank and I F C FIAS group on Corporate
Social Responsibility will continue to study the feasibility o f insurance products for employees o f
multinational f i r m s threatened by job loss following disasters.
At an operational level, the Bank will continue to ensure that infrastructure investments
8.
are designed to adequate disaster proof standards and ensuring that land use planning
regulations are applied. Some progress has been made in developing appropriate flood-proofing
standards for construction o f infrastructure, SOPTRAVI’s manuals were updated and the requisite
training provided to staff. These standards have been applied in the construction o f bridges under the
Bank’s Road Rehabilitation project, However, further work i s needed to ensure that these standards
are applied consistently, across all projects.

c.

BANKRESPONSE TO NATURAL DISASTERS

9,
The Bank’s response to Hurricane Mitch i s instructive of the kinds of interventions that
can be undertaken in response to future disasters. The Bank participated in damage and
reconstruction needs assessments coordinated by the UN immediately following M i t c h in October
1998. In response, the Bank approved a US$200 million Hurricane Emergency Project aimed at
maintaining macro-economic stability within two months o f the hurricane. The project financed a
positive l i s t o f imports, including construction materials and equipment, agricultural, medical and
school supplies as well as equipment for private sector operations. The project disbursed quickly,
closing by end- 1999. A parallel Bank-administered Central America Emergency Trust Fund was
established to receive bilateral contributions to cover Honduras’ debt service obligations. A total o f
US$69 million was disbursed through this mechanism in the following six years. The Bank also
restructured five on-going operations within the existing credit amounts to finance about US$80
million o f rehabilitation-related expenditures. In addition, a total o f US$30 million in supplemental
funding was approved for on-going health and transport projects. In consultation with Government,
the Bank’s follow-up FY2000-02 CAS focused on development o f human capital, safety nets and rural
development. A Road Rehabilitation Project and financing for the Social Investment Fund were
included, but the contribution to reconstruction needs was relatively modest owing to the substantial
inflows o f bilateral assistance. B o x 1 highlights some o f the lessons learned from post-Mitch recovery
efforts, which should help guide the Bank - and other partners - disaster recovery efforts.

81

BOX I: LESSONS
FROM POST-MITCH
RECOVERY EFFORTS

While existing development plans may need to be reviewed following a disaster, they should
be the starting point for any recovery efforts, K e y elements o f complementary post-disaster
recovery planning include clear criteria to identify who should benefit from post-emergency
assistance and for deciding whether to opt for interim or permanent solutions, be it for restoration
o f road access, energy, water and housing.
Coordination and harmonization help reduce duplication and transaction costs, as well as
strengthening national control over decision-making. Clear priorities for the allocation o f
external resources and selectivity in the kind o f assistance to accept provide a framework for
coordination: the “all aid i s welcome” approach that followed M i t c h led to a supply-driven
response. Measures for strengthening harmonization proposed include: joint financing for major
reconstruction projects; establishing joint donor-government monitoring and control units; using
flexible instruments during post-emergency phase; avoiding time limitations on the application o f
recovery funds, since recovery projects may take longer than three years to implement.
Municipal and community participation i s critical to effective recovery efforts. Mayors and
community leaders were often able to provide practical assistance and guide relief and
reconstruction efforts so that they meet locally identified needs. Local authorities can respond
quickly and mobilize participation. Support to and participation o f local authorities and community
organizations are indispensable elements in priority setting, monitoring, accountability and
financial control activities. Continuity o f support through recovery and back to development helps
strengthen local capacity, bringing longer-term benefits.
Measures are needed to ensure that recovery assistance i s provided in fair, transparent and
balanced manner. The public should be aware o f recovery program entitlements and procedures
for accessing support. This should be complemented by social monitoring and audit o f recovery
efforts.
World Bank, Learning Lessons f r o m Disaster Recovery: The Case of
Management Unit, Working Paper Series, N0.8, June 2004.

Honduras, Hazard

10.
Emergency response and damage assessments in the wake of a disaster are generally
coordinated by other UN agencies and international NGOs which specialize in emergency rescue
and assistance operations. Post-disaster damage assessments are best carried out by agencies with
expertise not linked to financing institutions, whose recommendations to government can, therefore,
be seen to be objective. In previous natural disasters in Central America these assessments have often
been conducted by ECLAC. I t i s recommended that in the case o f Honduras the Bank and the IDB,
which w i l l be working closely together on a mutually supportive disaster management program, agree
to jointly finance such damage assessments by a third party that would be chosen by a mutually agreed
process.
11.
Following a major disaster, the Bank and Government will review the on-going and
programmed portfolio to determine appropriate support for recovery.
This review would
include:
b

O n g o i n g and pipeline investment projects. The feasibility and priority o f on-going and
pipeline investment projects will need to be assessed in the light o f the post disaster situation.
Where the disaster has rendered the implementation o f a project or project component
irrelevant or impracticable, there may be scope for reallocating resources. Since existing
projects may provide a framework for rapid response to infrastructure rehabilitation

82

requirements, additional finding for recovery activities can be made available through
supplemental credits.
0

Short term emergency recovery pnancing. Where there are clear financing requirements to
cover critical import requirements, foreign exchange needs and public spending on short-term
recovery, this can be mobilized through an Emergency Recovery Loan, which i s a fast-track
instrument described in OP/BP 8.50 usually providing additional financing to government in
two to six months time.

0

Medium and long-term reconstruction financing. Longer-term rehabilitation requirements can
be addressed through investment projects. These can be fast tracked to speed up access to
financing.

12.
Perhaps the most important lesson learned from Hurricane Mitch i s that recovery
efforts should take account of and continue to address Honduras’ longer-term development
needs. Pressure for improved aid coordination, greater public sector transparency and progress in
decentralization increased in the wake o f Hurricane Mitch, resulting in reforms with a lasting impact.
The Bank’s assistance to post-disaster recovery efforts should be responsive to these opportunities.

83

ANNEXE: CAS CONSULTATIONS
A.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The FY2007-10 CAS has been prepared through a broad participatory process involving
representatives of a wide range o f government and non-governmental organizations. The CAS
Consultations in Honduras were carried out over an extended period (see B o x 1). This annex provides
a summary o f the issues raised during consultations, concentrating on the discussions during the final
round in August 2006. Consultations were carried out using a focus group rather than a conference
format. The objective was to keep the process as simple as possible to facilitate dialogue. Participants
were selected in consultation with Government. In each o f the consultation sessions, the Bank
presented a brief summary o f the rationale and objectives o f the CAS, the purpose and scope of the
consultations. Following the presentation, sessions were given over to a moderated discussion. The
separation o f the participants into broad interest groups permitted an exchange o f views and helped
focus discussion on issues o f interest to all participants, whilst allowing different sectors o f c i v i l
society (such as the private sector and representatives o f small-scale producers) to exchange views.
2.
Participants in the consultations were universally supportive o f the consultation Drocess
and appreciated the quality of the information shared in advance, but argued that follow-up
consultations would be needed to monitor implementation. The consultation process was
considered much more systematic and open than participants had experienced in previous Bank
consultations. Participants particularly appreciated the fact that the draft Results Matrix was made

Box 1:THECONSULTATIONPROCESS
December 2005. The first round o f consultations took place shortly after the elections, when the
Bank presented the preliminary results o f the CAS completion report to representatives o f the
outgoing administration and c i v i l society representatives o f PRS Consultative Council.
February and March 2006. Preliminary discussions were held with the incoming administration
on priorities for the lending program and Bank analytical work based on a brief Policy Note. A
joint programming exercise was conducted with IDB to define a preliminary division o f labor
between the two largest external partners. Discussions were held bilaterally with external partners
to identify potential areas o f collaboration.
June 2006. The second round o f consultations were held with the representatives o f the Executive
Branch o f Government, Congress, non-governmental organizations, the donor community and the
private sector on the broad outline o f the forthcoming Bank strategy and its lending program.
July 2006. During the third round o f consultations, the Bank team worked closely with the
Technical Support Unit o f the Presidency and representatives o f key line agencies in preparation of
the CAS Results Matrix and finalizing the Bank’s lending and analytical work program.
August 2006. The final round o f consultations comprised a series o f half-day workshops with
different interest groups: the social sector o f the PRS Consultative Council; economic sector o f the
PRS Consultative Council; c i v i l society technical organizations, academia and international
NGOs; representatives o f local government and PRS regional organizations; and lastly, the
National Congress and senior representatives o f all the political parties. While consultations were
held in Tegucigalpa, participants included representatives from other regions.

This iterative consultation process has helped build understanding o f the Bank’s work and the
purpose o f the CAS. Familiarity with the material has allowed participants make specific
recommendations regarding the Bank’s work in Honduras

84

available prior to the final round o f consultations, since this allowed a more focused discussion and
gave a much clearer idea o f the Bank’s future support to Honduras. Various participants provided
written comments on how to improve the selection o f performance indicators presented in the matrix.
Several participants indicated that i t would have been helpful if drafts of the CAS documents could
have been shared so that they could also comment on the rationale and analysis supporting the
proposed Bank program. Participants also stressed the importance o f adequate follow-up, so that they
could be informed and comment on progress towards the achievement of the performance indicators
presented in the Results Matrix. A summary o f follow-up on recommendations i s presented in B o x 2
at the end o f the section on the development context and B o x 3 at the end o f the section on the Bank’s
program.
B.

PARTICIPANTS’ VIEWS ON THE DEVELOPMENT
CONTEXT

3.
An issue emerging in each of the consultations was the need to develop a long-term term
development plan, which would provide continuity between administrations and a framework to
guide investment decisions. This reflects, in part, the strong representation o f former staff o f the
State Planning Commission across all the interest groups. W h i l e the Poverty Reduction Strategy i s
acknowledged to provide a guiding framework, some participants argued that this did not provide a
sufficiently concrete, operational structure to serve as a useful guide to public investment. These
participants also voiced concern that the current trend towards the development o f sector-level
strategic plans would lack coherence without a more robust national planning instrument. That said,
there i s general agreement that there i s a need to strengthen planning at both the sectoral and local
levels, not least as a means o f ensuring national leadership o f the development process. Participants
were adamant that the Bank and other external partners’ assistance should be delivered within the
framework o f national, sectoral and local plans. Terms such as consensus and continuity were
commonly used by participants from all interest groups
when discussing the future o f the planning system.
“Those of us that are in the regions

4.

Representatives of civil society, regional and the
know that considerable amount of money
private sector voiced particular concern regarding the has been invested in the PRS and it has
allocation and application of povertv reduction really had no impact whatsoever. Not
spending. Participants referred both to the recent Poverty because we are hearing about that but
Assessment and their own experience in arguing that
because we see, wefeel that it has had
poverty spending does not reach the poor and has little no impact whatsoever. Consultations
impact on poverty reduction. Their concerns relate to the with Regional PRS Committees and
allocation o f poverty spending and institutional Local Authorities
arrangements. Private sector participants noted that much
o f the poverty reduction spending was allocated to personnel expenditures and insufficient resources
were allocated to investment. The PRS was frequently described as paternalist, with a strong bias
towards social spending and insufficient resources allocated to the productive sectors, agriculture in
particular. Participants argued that the current definition o f poverty reduction spending has not been
the subject o f adequate consultations and required revision. Concerns regarding the institutional
arrangements were primarily related to the difficulty in tracking poverty reduction spending and the
risk that poverty spending could be diverted to other programs. Several participants argued for the
establishment o f a real fund, rather than the present virtual fund, which they viewed as providing
additional safeguards in the use o f funds and allowing the public identify how poverty reduction funds
had been applied.
I’

5.
The Bank’s assessment that macro-economic stabilitv and accelerated growth was a
significant achievement was questioned by some as being of limited value without progress in
poverty-reduction,while others voiced concern regarding the fragility o f the economic situation.
In several sessions, discussion turned to the apparent contradiction between the recent progress in

85

stabilizing the macro-economic situation and improvement in economic performance and lack of
progress in poverty reduction. M a n y participants argued that growth has been driven, in large
measure, by the surge in remittances and questioned the sustainability o f these resource inflows and
the long-term social and economic impact o f massive migration. Several participants mentioned the
recent pay agreement with teachers and poorly targeted subsidies as a potential source o f fiscal
instability. Others voiced concern that, following the condemnation o f much o f Honduras’ external
debt, the Government would increase domestic debt to finance unsustainable increases in public
spending.

6.
Both civil society and the private sector regard DR-CAFTA as a threat as much as an
opportunity. W h i l e some acknowledged that D R - C A F T A offered benefits by opening up export
markets for Honduras, there i s broad concern that the
private sector i s not ready to take advantage o f these
“The Bank always refers to DR-CAFTA
opportunities and that the direct and indirect costs o f the
agreement has been underestimated in Bank analytical as i f i t were an opportunity but we need
work. In terms o f opportunities, attention i s focused on to view DR-CAFTA as a threat,
access to the US markets, notably as regards maquila and especially in relation to agricultural
products that have protection for the
agricultural products: only one participant mentioned the
nextJifieen to twenty years, and the best
potential benefits arising from access to markets within way to manage the threat is ... to use
Central America. Both the private sector and c i v i l society
this period to reactivate the agricultural
argued that there was limited understanding o f the terms o f sector, as part of the competitiveness
the agreement and its potential impacts, particularly among program. Consultations with Economic
small-scale enterprises. Others argued that the institutional Sectors
and regulatory framework was not yet in compliance with
the agreement, particularly as regards ensuring competition
and standards. -Many interventions argued that the-private sector, especially the small-scale private
sector, needed greater support in terms o f access to services and technical know-how to be able to
compete on an equal footing with trading partners. In the session with advocacy groups, academia and
international NGOs, concerns were raised regarding the direct costs o f DR-CAFTA, particularly as
regards the application o f intellectual property requirements to public procurement in the health sector.
Various participants argued that small-scale farmers o f
staple products were the least able to take advantages
offered by DR-CAFTA and most likely to be adversely
“It’s important to have a career civil
affected. In this context, small-scale farmers merited service because that reduces the risk of
unquali3edpeople joining the
particular attention from Government and external partners
administration
and the temptation of
in order to assist them in adjusting to the changing market
people
using
the
public sector to
circumstances.
”

7.
Concerns regarding the governance framework
were raised in all of the sessions. There was a broad
consensus on the need to professionalize the public sector including during discussions with the political parties and
Congress - in order to improve the performance o f public
institutions, bring greater continuity in the implementation
o f public policy and reduce the risks o f corruption. There

a

appropriate wealth for themselves. Lack
of a civil service is part of the reason
that there is such a lack of continuity in
policies and resources are sometimes
wasted away. ” Consultations with
Advocacy Groups, International NGOs

and Academia

was also broad consensus o n the root cause -of the problem: the clientelism o f the political parties
arising from the expectation o f party activists that they will be rewarded with public employment
following a change in administration. There i s less agreement o n the solutions, w i t h some arguing that
a change in political culture would be difficult to bring about without massive employment generation
by the private sector, others suggesting that reforms to party financing might help address the problem.
Participants expressed little confidence that the problem could be addressed through a c i v i l service
law. Some c i v i l organizations voiced particular concern that the politicization o f the public

86

instructions extended to the oversight bodies, thereby undermining their capacity to fulfill their
fbnctions impartially. M a n y expressed frustration at the perceived lack o f commitment to addressing
corruption and bringing cases o f corruption to trial. Corruption was seen by some as a corollary o f the
politicization of public institutions, by others as a consequence o f the undue influence o f powerful
economic interests in politics. Both civil society and the private sector noted that the regulatory
environment was unable to ensure open and fair competition. Indeed, there was a broad perception
that regulation has often been used to protect particular economic interests by hindering competition.
DR-CAFTA was identified as the instrument that likely to be most effective in opening up domestic
markets. There i s general agreement that the key to addressing corruption i s to improving
transparency. In this context, there are high expectations o f the proposed Transparency and Access to
Information Law, currently before Congress, together with concerns that the legislation may be
watered-down during legislative review.

8.
There was a consensus that the process of decentralizationcould facilitate improvements
in the quality of services, tempered by concern that decentralization should proceed as
management capacity and mechanisms to ensure transparency are put in place. All o f the interest
groups pointed to decentralization as a process that could help communities address development
challenges in the manner that best addressed their needs. Indeed, discussions touching on the theme o f
decentralization were rarely expressed as such, rather the focus i s on participation. The development
o f municipal development plans i s seen as significant step forward, particularly where these have been
prepared in through an open and participatory process. Similarly, progress in establishing
BOX

2: SUMMARY FOLLOW-UP
ON COUNTRY CONTEXT

Long-Term Planning. The Bank will support the Government’s efforts to strengthen planning
fimctions at the cross-governmental level, through i t s support to the PRS process and UNAT under
the PRS Technical Assistance Credit; and, at the sector level, through i t s support to the sector
working groups and participation in sector planning exercises under Bank sector credits and the
PHRD for Aid Coordination.
Poverty Reduction Spending. The Bank will conduct a Public Expenditure Review and
Expenditure Tracking exercises under the proposed CAS, focusing on the targeting o f spending o n
the poor and the institutional arrangements for achieving this objective.
Macro-Economic Stability. The Bank will continue to engage the Government in dialogue on
macro-economic policy in the context o f i t s Poverty Reduction Support Credits. A Debt
Sustainability Analysis has been conducted, including an assessment o f domestic debt.
DR-CAFTA. The Bank will continue to support efforts to improve readiness for DR-CAFTA
under the Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness Project. The Rural Competitiveness Project will
address adjustments in rural production.
Governance. The Bank will continue to support efforts to professionalize key functions in the
public sector and strengthen public expenditure management through the PRSCs and PRS
Technical Assistance Credit. The Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness Project will support the
implementation o f the Competition Law. The Bank w i l l undertake governance review o f high risk
projects in i t s portfolio and strengthen oversight arrangements.
Decentralization. The Rural Infrastructure, Barrio Ciudad and Nuestras Raices Projects provide
support to local planning and management, as well as financing for local initiatives led by
communities and local authorities.
Education. The Bank’s assistance to education will focus on the strengthening o f education
governance and management arrangements within the framework o f a sector strategy.

87

participants noted that local authorities were subject t o
political agendas and clientelism and were not always
committed
to
strengthening
transparency
and
accountability. The capacity constraints o f local authorities
- particularly in critical areas such as financial management
- are universally acknowledged as the principal constraint

C.

don’t achieve real
decentralization this country w i l l make
no real progress because development is
based on local solutions to local
with
Problems. ”
Sectors

PARTICIPANTS’ VIEWS ON THE BANK’SPROGRAM

10.
There was broad agreement on the priorities identified for the Bank program,
particularly the proposed focus on rural development, but participants sought assurance that
the Bank’s assistance would be targeted to the rural poor and small-farmers in particular. Some
participants were concerned that the proposed focus o n “rural businesses” would end up excluding
those most in need, arguing instead that the poorest farmers needed support in increasing productivity
o f staple crops before diversifying into higher risk, more input intensive market-oriented agriculture.
Other participants endorsed a business-oriented approach to support increases in rural incomes but
pointed out that special measures would need to be taken to ensure that the rural poor had access to
credit and technical assistance. Representatives from the organized small-scale producers and other
groups pointed to various attempts at revitalizing the agricultural sector in Honduras’ recent history,
particularly agricultural modernization programs implemented in the early 1990s. These groups argued
that the Bank should take into account the lessons learned from this experience.

11.
Participants encouraged the Bank to continue programs related to improving access to
land and land securitv, which are seen as major constraints to the rural poors’ efforts to escape
poverty. Participants from a wide range o f c i v i l society organizations and from Congress highlighted
the importance o f improving access to land and ensuring security o f land tenure both to continued
growth, to poverty reduction and to achieving a measure o f social justice. In this context, participants
underlined the importance o f the Bank-financed Land Administration Program, arguing that this
program should be accelerated and extending i t s reach into rural areas. Participants also noted that the
regularization o f land tenure was not enough to redress the inequality in land access. The Pilot Land
Access Project was referred to as one o f the few projects to address this problem, by assisting the
landless purchase land as part o f a package o f investments that assisted beneficiaries establish smallbusinesses.

88

without access to the banking sector often resort to moneylenders offering exorbitant rates o f interest. Participants
argued that fbture Bank support to productive sectors
should include measures to facilitate access to credit.
Again, the Pilot Land Access Project was referred to as a
model that the Bank could build on in the fkture. For some
participants, improved access to the commercial banking
sector would not resolve the problem o f agricultural credit,

concessions had not been awarded transparently and where
the quality o f services had deteriorated and cost increased.
Of particular concern i s the expansion of private
participation in services that are used by the poor, such as
water and sanitation, health and education.
Some
participants also pointed out the risks of privatizing access
to natural resources, particularly as regards the ConCeSSiOn
o f national forest lands and mining operations, where i t was

89

“What is certain is that ifwe get
involved with the private banking system
the mechanisms available to thepoor
are
to zero, nhepoor have no
access to credit... it is not enough to
have land,,,farmers also need technical
assistance andfinancing. ” Consultations
with Economic Sectors

“We’refrom the Private sector and we’d
really like to see many state institutions
privatized, but after the negative
experiences we t e seen in this c o u n t q it
to
really worries us that when it
it js the groups with political
the
influence who bene& the most”
Consultations with Economic Sectors

as a more public advocate for improved transparency in the
public sector, particularly as regards the publication o f
financial and performance information that can facilitate
monitoring o f PRS implementation.

“We’dlike to Propose that when the
is completed~
we choose three Or
four elements of the strategy and carry
out a social audit of them. The Bank
would then set a good example showing
that it is accountable. ” Consultations

16.
There were two themes that were identified as
being inadequately addressed in the Bank’s program,
with Advocacy Groups, International
several civilsociety
ineauality and gender.
representatives argued that poverty reduction was hampered NGOs and Academia

90

BOX 3: SUMMARY FOLLOW-UP ON THE BANK’S ROLE AND PROGRAM
Small-Farmers.Broad consultations with civil society will be scheduled during the preparation o f
the Rural Competitiveness Project, focusing on the definition o f the target population and the
appropriate mechanisms for delivering assistance.
Land Access and Land Security. The Land Administration Project provides on-going support to
improvements in property registration. The planned second-phase o f the project will focus on
priority rural areas. The Forestry and Rural Productivity Project provides complementary support
to the regularization o f property rights in forest areas.
Access to Credit. Building on the experience o f the Pilot Land Access Project the proposed Rural
Competitiveness Project will seek to improve access to credit for small-scale producers in the
project target area.
Private Participation. The proposed Utility Restructuring Project and support to the Water and
Sanitation program will seek to improve transparency where the private sector participates in the
delivery o f services.
Social Monitoring. The Bank will support the implementation o f social monitoring arrangements
for key projects in i t s portfolio as well as the development o f social monitoring instruments
focused on the application o f poverty reduction spending.
Gender. Owing to information constraints, particularly as regards the appropriate targets, it i s not
possible to include gender dimensions systematically across the CAS results matrix. The
feasibility o f strengthening the gender dimension o f program performance indicators will be
reassessed in the CAS mid-term review.
Portfolio information and dialogue. The Country Office will provide project level performance
information in i t s Spanish website. An annual meeting with c i v i l society will be scheduled to
review progress in implementing the Bank’s program.
Analaytical Work. The Country Office will promote consultations with c i v i l society on proposed
Bank analytical work at the concept review stage and encourage their participation in the
implementation o f studies where feasible.
External Partners. The Bank will continue to work closely with external partners in the context
o f the GI6 and the sector working groups. Efforts will be made to increase the number o f joint
missions. A mission information system will be implemented to improve communication.
nationally-owed sector strategies. The development banks are seen as critical in this process, given the
substantial financing and the large number o f standalone project implementation units they finance.
Partners appreciated the efforts by the Bank and IDB to undertake a joint prioritizing exercise together
with Government and prior consultations on potential areas o f collaboration. However, several
external partners expressed frustration that i t has proved difficult to keep track o f the Bank’s activities
and participate in missions, particularly when these are scheduled at short notice.

91

ANNEX F: IEG HONDURAS
COUNTRYASSISTANCEEVALUATION
FY1994-05 RECOMMENDATIONS
& MANAGEMENT
RESPONSE

IEG Recommendations Requiring a

Management Response (June 2006)

Response

(1) The greatest focus should be on
decentralized delivery o f quality education
services. This will require restructuring
the teacher employment regime (estatuto)
to achieve greater accountability for
performance and establish a sustainable
sector pay policy

Management agrees that improvements in
educational achievement are essential for long-term
growth and poverty reduction. Management
advocates a sustainable and long-term solution to
pay policy in the educational sector, recognizing
that such a solution w i l l require sector governance
reforms. The Bank will continue to support these
goals by improving pedagogical methods, sector
personnel management and promoting parental
involvement in school management, building on the
PROHECO model. Maintenance o f a sustainable
fiscal policy and control o f the public sector pay
remain prerequisites o f Bank-financed development
policy lending.
~~

(2) The most urgent task in public
infrastructure i s to transform the power

company into a reliable l o w cost provider,
given that this i s a leading obstacle to
private sector investment. In view o f the
frequency o f natural disasters, IDA should
continue to ensure that all infrastructure
projects are built to “disaster” standards

(3) In an effort to generate agricultural
growth, emphasis must be placed on
(a) improving access to credit and support
services for low-income farmers and
(b) rural roads.

Measures aimed at initiating a restructuring process
in the public electricity utility are triggers for PRSC
11. The Government has requested a Utility
Restructuring Project for the forthcoming CAS to
support this process. Country and Regional Energy
Studies have also been scheduled to assist the
Government develop a comprehensive energy
strategy. All o f these activities will be implemented
in close collaboration with IDB. Bank-financed
infrastructure projects will continue to ensure that
“disaster” standards are applied. Under the Disaster
Mitigation Project, the Bank has assisted
Government in developing and applying risk
mitigation and “disaster” standards in the sixty
highest risk municipalities. These activities will be
extended with GEF financing under the forthcoming
CAS.
Management agrees with the CAE’s priorities for
agricultural growth and has focused lending in this
area under the FY2007-10 CAS, including: a rural
competitiveness project will support agri-business
development through commercial credit and support
services, building on the experience o f the access to
land pilot project; a follow-up land administration
project; and a new rural access project,
complementing the Bank’s on-going support under
the Rural Infrastructure Project.

92

IEG Recommendations Requiring a

Management Response(June 2006)

Response

(4) In the area o f governance, the highest
priorities are strengthening internal
expenditure and revenue control systems,
professionalization o f the c i v i l service,
establishment o f fiscally sustainable
compensation policies, and procurement
reform. With regard to control systems,
institutionalization o f financial
management, procurement, personnel
management, and planning i s critical. For
procurement, urgent action i s needed to
introduce harmonized donor rules for
transparent hiring and procurement in the
PIUs. Given capacity and ownership
constraints within the GOH, procedural
procurement reforms might preferably be
piloted in one or two o f the most important
agencies, notably SOPTRAVI and FHIS,
which jointly account for the bulk o f
procurement spending.

Management concurs that the strengthening and
institutionalization o f internal control systems are
priorities for Bank support, but believes that these
should be complemented by strengtheningthe
demand side for good governance and social
monitoring o f public services and projects at the
field level. A social accountability specialist has
been hired in the field office to support this agenda.
The Bank will continue to support the
implementation and roll-out o f SIAFI and
procurement information systems, including eprocurement, in collaboration with IDB, under the
forthcoming CAS through technical assistance
credits and core fiduciary analysis. The
professionalization o f the c i v i l service i s also seen
as a priority, improving institutional effectiveness
and accountability. This will be a gradual process,
starting with pilot institutions and financial
management functions across the administration,
supported by the PRSC and technical assistance.
Paralleling the development o f government-wide
systems, the Bank will focus o n systems
development in those institutions where there are
on-going projects, including FHIS and SOPTRAVI.
A PHRD grant for Aid Coordination has recently
been awarded to harmonize donor assistance around
national procedures for planning, procurement,
financial management and project management in
four key sectors.

(5) The effectiveness o f the Honduran
Social Fund (FHIS), the largest recipient o f
social sector assistance, needs to be
examined. Long-term sustainable growth
requires efficient line ministries, not
special purpose organizations such as
FHIS.

Whilst concurring with the CAE’s assessment on
the importance o f institutional development,
Management i s encouraged by recent efforts supported by the Bank-financed FHIS V - to
transform FHIS into an institution supporting
municipal planning and projects. The
Government’s decision to channel part o f i t s debt
relief funding through municipalities i s expected to
strengthen the municipalities’ future role in PRS
implementation. This process will be supported by
the recently approved Rural Infrastructure and
Barrio Ciudad projects implemented through FHIS municipal partnerships. At the same time, the Bank
portfolio will continue to promote the development
o f core management systems and strengthen line
ministries’ policy, planning and implementation
capacity.

93

IEG Recommendations Requiring a

Management Response (June 2006)

Response

(6) Future ESW should intensify research
o n new economic opportunities for the
poor, particularly in agriculture and exportoriented maquilas.

Recent Bank ESW (notably the Drivers o f Rural
Growth Study, the Development Policy Review and
Poverty Assessment) provide the analytical
foundations for the forthcoming CAS. Building on
recent work, and taking into account the Bank’s
comparative advantage in relation to other partners,
Bank analytical work will focus on poverty
monitoring and improving the poverty impact o f
public expenditure, energy sector policy, and
studies on investment and economic opportunities
for the poor through a CEM. U S A I D has provided
substantial funding to FIDE for research on exportoriented growth.

(7) In line with the growing focus on
“results,” IDA, as the agency with the

Management agrees that Honduras’ statistics
systems w i l l need to be strengthened if there i s to be
a meaningful “results” orientation in the
Government program and the Bank’s CAS. A
Bank-financed regional project has assisted the
Statistics Institute develop a strategic plan for the
statistics system. This w i l l guide future Bank
support for statistics, in collaboration with IDB and
bilateral partners. At the same time, the Bank will
work closely with the Statistics Institute, the
Presidency and Ministry o f Finance to ensure that
CAS and project level monitoring systems are
aligned with the needs o f national monitoring and
statistical systems.

greatest capacity among donors for
producing high-quality documentation,
should show leadership in helping to
improve the unacceptably l o w quality o f
statistical information on the reality o f
trends in the economic and social
conditions in Honduras.

94

ANNEX G: DEBTSUSTAINABILITY

ANALYSIS

1.
This Annex summarizes the preliminary findings of a debt sustainability analysis @SA)
that i s being carried out by a joint Bank-Fund team using the joint Low-Income Country Debt
Sustainability Framework (LIC-DSF). The full D S A analysis will be made publicly available at the
http:www.worldbank.org/debt. The results derived from this DSA analysis do not impact IDA’S
lending to Honduras. Although the risk o f debt distress i s primarily used to guide IDA’S grant
allocation, Honduras i s currently classified as an IDA country subject to IDA lending on hardened
terms and, thus, not eligible to receive IDA grants. As such, the annual IDA allocation to Honduras i s
unaffected b y the risk o f debt distress classification resulting from this exercise.
2.
Honduras’ debt burden declined significantly since the HIPC Decision point in 2000 as a
result of HIPC and MDRI debt relief. The total external debt in nominal terms (public and publicly
guaranteed) represented 80.8 percent o f GDP at end-1999 and was brought down to 50.1 percent at
end-2005, following the HIPC Completion Point. This ratio has been further reduced on account o f
the MDRI to a projected 27.9 percent at the end o f 2006, or 21.3 percent o f GDP in NPV terms. (The
N P V o f the total public debt, which also includes domestic debt, i s projected to be 29.4 percent o f
GDP at end-2006.) The NPV o f Honduras’ external public debt at end-2006 i s projected to be 125
percent o f public revenues and 52 percent o f exports. These external debt ratios are significantly
below the indicative thresholds signaling potential debt distress for countries that, like Honduras, rank
as strong CPIA performers.’
3.
Honduras’ external public sector debt follows a sustainable path under the baseline
scenarioa2The l o w level o f outstanding debt at 2006, coupled with declining recourse to external
financing - although at less concessional terms - allows the N P V o f debt-to-GDP ratio to decrease
slightly over the medium term. Beyond the medium term, as the terms o f new borrowings become
progressively less concessional, the NPV o f debt-to-GDP starts rising again, but remains comfortably
under the 50 percent policy-dependent indicative threshold. Robust growth in exports o f goods and
services compensates for the increase in the cost o f financing, allowing for a stable reduction in the
NPV o f debt-to-export ratio, from 52 percent in 2006 to 49 percent by 2016. At the same time, as
fiscal revenues pick up in 2007 the NPV o f debt-to-revenue ratio falls from 125 percent in 2006 to 108
percent in 2013, while the subsequent stabilization o f revenues as a percentage o f GDP results in a
slight increase in the NPV o f debt-to-revenue ratio to around 110 in the long run.
4.
Honduras’ external public debt outlook remains fairly robust under various
standardized bound tests, Most of the external debt burden indicators remain well below the policydependent indicative thresholds under the various bound tests applied to the baseline scenario: the
NPV o f external debt-to exports i s projected to be comfortably below i t s respective threshold
throughout the entire period o f analysis, as are all the external debt service indicators, suggesting that
debt service payments remain at manageable levels. The same i s true for the N P V o f debt-to-GDP

’

These indicative thresholds, beyond which countries in the strong CPIA performing category generally begin to
experience debt-related distress, refer to an N P V o f external debt equivalent to 50 percent o f GDP, 300 percent
o f revenues or 200 percent o f exports. Honduras had qualified for H I P C assistance o n account o f a high debt to
revenue ratio.
2
K e y assumptions underlying the baseline scenario are an annual real GDP growth rate averaging 4 percent in
the medium term and 3.8 percent in the long term, the successhl implementation o f CAFTA, eventually leading
to greater trade openness and export diversification, a gradual deceleration o f growth in the inflow o f remittances
and a gradual reduction in the concessionality o f new borrowings. I t also assumes the maintenance o f prudent
policies that keep the budget deficits under control, resulting in modest domestic financing needs and yielding an
improved investment climate.

95

ratio and the NPV o f debt-to-revenues ratio, except under the most extreme stress tests3 These
extreme tests yield a temporary violation o f the indicative thresholds for these variables (see Figure 1).
This finding suggests that Honduras i s subject to moderate risk o f debt distress in the presence o f
certain external shocks, provided that i t maintains prudent fiscal policies.

5.
Honduras’s debt outlook worsens significantly under less disciplined fiscal policies.
While the debt outlook remains robust under several standard alternative policy scenarios involving a
permanently lower GDP growth and less favorable terms on new public loans, the risk o f debt distress
increases significantly in response to a deterioration o f fiscal policies. Compared to the baseline
scenario, such a deterioration o f fiscal policies i s simulated b y assuming either that the overall fiscal
deficit remains permanently at the 2005 value (denoted ‘No Reform’ scenario in Figure 2), or that the
authorities temporarily allow the fiscal deficit to widen in response to current political pressures to
raise public wages and energy subsidies (denoted ‘High fiscal deficit’ scenario in Figure 2).
Summary. The preliminary results o f this DSA suggest that all debt ratios remain below the
indicative thresholds associated with potential debt distress, provided that sound fiscal policies are
maintained, as assumed in the baseline scenario. This debt outlook remains fairly robust under various
bound tests, although i t i s subject to moderate risk o f debt distress in the presence o f certain extreme
external shocks. The risk o f debt distress increases significantly, however, in scenarios where fiscal
management i s allowed to deteriorate. Therefore, reducing the risk o f debt distress w i l l depend
critically on maintaining sound policies consistent with a prudent borrowing strategy for the medium
and long term.

6.

All bound tests in the LIC-DSF have been chosen to represent, on average a probability o f 25 percent o f
occurring over a 10-year period, and refer to shocks in terms of a temporary deterioration by one standard
deviation of real GDP growth, export growth, the US dollar GDP deflator, and net non-debt creating inflows, as
well as a combination o f all four shocks, where all variables temporarily deteriorate by one-half standard
deviation.

96

F i g u r e 1. H o n d u r a s : I n d i c a t o r s o f P u b l i c a n d P u b l i c l y G u a r a n t e e d E x t e r n a l D e b t
U n d e r A l t e r n a t i v e Scenarios, 2006-2026
(In oercent)
70

NPV o f debt-to-GDP ratio
60

-Baaelins

__ M o s t extreme stress test

_._._
.
"Threshold

50

___

40

30
20
10

t
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

180

6

NPV o f debt-to-exports ratio
I60
I40

-Baseline

I20

-Mort

extremestress test

IO0

80
60
40

-

50

20

,

18

'

Debt service-to-exports ratio
-Baseline

I6 ,

__ M o s t extreme stress test

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0 1

30

'

.

'

.

'

.

*
'
'
*
'
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

-

..... .Threshold

25
20
15
_-.Lc

10

5
O

~
"
"
'
"
'
~
"
'
*
I
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

Source: Staff projections and simulations.

97

Figure 2: Country: Indicators o f Public Debt Under Alternative Scenarios, 2006-2026 l/

-

50

NPV o f debt-to-GDP ratio

.
.

45
40
35

'

30
25

---

20

Baseline
No R e f o r m

15

M o s t extreme stress test

10

* *- Higher fiscal deficit

jl.

5
0

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
250

---

NPV of Dzbt,tQ;R,$vepe Ratio 2/
",
*.
r " *

200

*

150

- - e - -

e

*

---- ----

_------- _---

*

**

_I I

I

M

I

** 2 - a

--I+_ - A -

+-

---

100

Baseline
No Reform

__

50

M o s t extreme stress test
*

Higher fiscal deficit

0

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026
40

Debt Service-to-Revenue Ratio 2/

+.. f'a.

35

I )t-to-GDP ratio

30

*-$9

25

ib

*.w
ry*

~BBclm:c
No R e f o r m

20
15
10
5
0

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

Source: Staff projections and simulations.
1/ Most extreme stress test i s test that yields highest ratio in 2016.
2/ Revenue including grants.

98

ANNEXH: HONDURAS
COUNTRY FINANCING
PARAMETERS
T h e country financing parameters for Honduras set out below were approved in February 2005 by the Regional
Vice President, Latin America and Caribbean Region, and have been posted o n the Bank’s internal website.
Item

Cost sharing. Limit on the
proportion o f individualproject
costs that the Bank may finance
expenditures that the Bank may
finance

Parameter

100 percent
level limit

Remarks / ExDlanation

The Bank may selectively finance up to 100 percent o f
individual project costs. This would be determined
based on the IDA financing envelope, the project
context, and any co-financing by other partners.
Counterpart funding will be encouraged. Examples o f
the type o f projects where 100 percent financing i s likely
include: operations with strong local community
participation, environmental protection and biodiversity
conservation, regional programs (e.g.; HIV/AJDS).
Technical assistanceprojects and institutional
development grants may also be candidates for 100
percent financing. Cost-sharing i s likely to be the rule in
inftastructure projects. The Bank expects to move
increasingly towards SWAPS (especially in the social
sectors), where IDA financing i s expected to be a small
share o f total program cost.

P

P

Recurrent cost financing. Any
limits that would apply to the
overall amount o f recurrent
expenditures that the Bank may
finance

No
countrylevel l i m i t

The Bank will continue to monitor overall mediumt e r m fiscal and debt sustainability; and i t s
implications for recurrent cost financing. In
determining recurrent cost financing in individual
projects, the Bank w i l l take into account
sustainability issues at the sector and project levels
and implied future budgetary outlays. Recurrent cost
financing i s expected to stay within the modest levels
o f recent years.

Local costflnaming. Are the
requirements for Bank financing
o f local expenditures met, namely
that: (i)
financing requirements for
the country’s development
program would exceed the public
sector’s own resources (e.g., fiom
taxation and other revenues) and
expected domestic borrowing; and
(ii)
the financing o f foreign
expenditures alone would not
enable the Bank to assist in the
financing o f individual projects.

Yes

The two requirements are met. The Bank may therefore
finance local costs inthe proportions needed in individual
projects.

None

N o taxes or duties are currently identified as unreasonable
or discriminatory. At the project level, the Bank would
consider whether taxes and duties constitute an
excessively high share o f project expenditures.

Taus and dubs Are there any taxes
and duties that the Bank would not
finance?

99

Annex I:Summary o f Development Priorities
Coune
Network area

performance”

Poverty Reduction &
Economic Management
Poverty reduction

Poor

Economic policy

Fair

Public sector

Good

Gender

Fair

Human Development
Department
Education

Poor

Major issue

Implementing poverty reduction strategy;
improve effectiveness o f poverty reduction
spending
Ensuringmacroeconomic stability and
sustainable fiscal framework.
Improving transparency and
accountability, focusing on public
spending; strengtheningjudiciary;
professionalizationo f state; fostering
decentralization.
Mainstreaming across public sector
institutions and programs.

Improving quality o f basic education,
transition to secondary education and
accountability for performance
Improving quality and coverage o f basic
health services especially among the rural
poor.

Counhy

Bank

Reconciliation of country and

priority‘

p riority

Bank priorities

High

High

High

Moderate

High

High

Moderate

Moderate

High

High

Moderate

Moderate

Health, nutrition &
population

Fair

Social protection

Fair

Increasing the efficiency and targeting o f
safety nets, strengthening capacity of
indigenous and Afro-Honduran
communities

High

Moderate

Environmentally &
Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development

Fair

High

High

Environment

Fair

Improving security o f access to land and
promoting competitiveness of the rural
economy.
Improving environmental protection and
risk management.
Strenghtening social infrastructure,
improving quality and coverage o f
programs.

High

High

Moderate

Moderate

Low

Moderate

IMF takes lead on policy dialogue

IDB taking lead on social
protection, Bank supports
strengthening indigenous & AfroHonduran communities

Social development

Good

Finance, Private Sector &
Infrastructure
Financial sector

Good

Strengthening competitiveness and
resilience o f the financial sector.

Private sector

Good

Strengthening competitiveness through
improved regulatory framework and
support at firm level

Moderate

High

Energy & mining

Poor

Improving performance and cost o f
electricity utility services.

Moderate

High

On-going dialogue to address
structural constraints in electricity
and petroleum sectors

Infrastructure

Fair

Improving access to economic
infrastructure in rural areas.

Moderate

High

On-going dialogue to promote
sustainable development o f
transport and telecommunications

On-going dialogue to promote
regulatory reform, IDB will take
lead following termination o f ongoing Bank support
On-going dialogue, Bank
collaborates closely with IDB and
USAID in promoting agenda

(a) Use “excellent,” “good,” “fair,” or “poor.” (b) Indicate principal country-specific problems. (c) To indicate priority, use “low,” “moderate,” or
“high.” (d) Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

100

x x
i

< x
x x

IX

I

x

I
I

I

L
I
~

Annex K: Honduras Social Indicators
Same regionhcome group

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions
Growth rate (% annual average for period:
Urbanpopulation (% o f population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman:

1980-85

1990-95

1998-2004

4.2
3.2
37.7
5.6

5.6
2.9
42.3
4.5

7.0
2.4
46.0
3.6

545.9
1.5
77.1
2.5

2,441.6
1.o
48.7
2.1

3,576
125

1,686
122

4.0

3.3
4.3

2.5
3.5

89
89
90

91
90
92

96
95
93

83
89
78

90
99
82

89
96
69

81
93
70

53
58

89
94
18

92
89
17

92
91

86
88
11

63
61
65

67
64
69

68
66
70

72
69
75

70
68
73

62
83

37
49

31
41

27
31

32
40

306
237

202
141

259
214
1I O
56

219
124
194
87

182
114
153
86

POVERTY
(% ofpopulation)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)

48.0
37.0
58.0
640
48
52

790
12
12

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption:
Highest quintile (% o f income or consumption:

1,040
137
117
53.8
3.4
58.3

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (“ho f GDP)
Education (% o f GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate

3.8

(?Aof age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% ofpopulation)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunizationrate
(?Aofchildren ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years:
Life expectancy at birth
bears)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (1 5-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births:
Births attended by skilled health staff (“h:

Lowermiddleincome

Latin
America
& Carib.

45

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinationsbefore one
year o f age or at any time before the survey. World DevelopmentIndicators database, World Bank - 5 April 2006

102

-

Annex L: Honduras Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as YOof GDP)

2002

Actual
2003

2004

2005

Estimate
2006

2007

Projected
2008

2009

100
13
31
56

100
13
32
55

100
13
31
55

100
14
31
55

100
13
30
56

100
13
30
57

100
13
29
58

100
13
28
59

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

90
22
5
17

89
23
5
18

88
27
6
21

91
23
6
17

95
24
8
16

97
25
8
17

95
25
8
17

94
26
8
18

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

38
53

39
54

41
60

41
61

41
67

39
67

39
66

39
66

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings'

10
18

11
20

12
22

9
26

5
54

3
55

5
55

6
55

6510

6868

7459

8291

9179

10246

11218

12079

910

960

1040

1120

1160

1240

1330

1420

3.5
3.8

5.0
4.9

4.0
4.0

5.1
4.4

4.5
4.7

4.0
3.7

3.8
3.6

2.7
2.2
2.4

1.8
5.7
5.5

2.8
5.3
3.7

2.3
3.7
3.8

1.9
0.6
0.2

1.7
0.5
-0.1

Gross domestic product'
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$,Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 78 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
2.7
Gross Domestic Income
2.6

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 78 prices)
0.3
1.2
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption
2.3
1.1
3.0
1.5
Private consumption
Balance o f Payments (US%millions)
EXPOITS (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Imports ( G N F S ~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR78 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

2456
1364
3520
2806
-1063
969
-237

2635
1380
3796
3035
-1162
1106
-260

3058
1598
4546
3677
-1489
1389
-404

3372
1761
5165
4188
-1793
2002
-67

3791
1927
6168
5415
-2377
2800
-55

3976
2120
6834
5995
-2859
3309
-72

4386
2256
7382
6466
-2995
3481
-1 12

4727
2407
7924
6940
-3196
3 743
-145

176
-49
77
-125
324
-214

247
-39
96
-135
-36
88

325
425
22 1
205
158
-504

272
71
18
54
96
-372

299
98
262
-163
122
-464

307
364
448
-84
48
-647

3 14
507
448
60
-325
-384

326
480
402
78
-199
-462

-16.3

-16.9

-20.0

-21.6

-25.9

-27.9

-26.7

-26.5

4.3
4.3

-1.5

-5.2

7.3

6.0

6.0

6.0

6.0

3.4

-4.5

0.4

-8.3

17.0

6.7

7.4

6.6

103

-

Annex L: Honduras Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

Actual
2003

2004

2005

Estimate
2006

2007

Projected
2008

2009

27.4
25.7
1.7
6.8
1.8

28.8
24.3
4.5
7.5
3.5

28.2
21.4
6.8
8.4
5.3

26.5
21.6
5.0
8.2
2.8

28.3
21.7
6.6
8.4
4.3

28.5
21.6
6.9
8.4
4.9

28.7
21.8
6.9
8.4
4.2

53.6
13.7
115.7

55.7
15.8
58.6

59.0
20.7
145.8

61.9
20.4
99.4

65.4
17.1
-826.7

68.5
16.7
-14.0

71.4
13.9
-12.5

74.6
12.1
-13.0

90.0
137.2
65.6
103.0

92.5
155.9
59.3
99.9

112.9
188.3
60.0
98.5

116.0
235.0
49.4
99.4

119.8
242.5
49.4
97.4

124.3
251.8
49.4
94.6

124.8
252.8
49.4
90.3

125.6
254.4
49.4
87.6

7.7
6.3

7.7
7.7

8.2
8.5

8.8
10.3

5.2
5.5

6.1
6.6

4.3
5.0

3.0
3.4

2002

Public finance (as % o f GDP at market prices) e
Current revenues (including grants)
26.9
Current expenditures
23.7
Current account surplus (+) o r deficit (-)
3.2
Capital expenditure
6.9
Foreign financing
1.8
Monetary indicators
M2 / G D P
Growth o f M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR78 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)'

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a. G D P at factor cost

b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use o f IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/ LCU denotes appreciation.
C.

104

Annex M: Honduras - External Debt Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding (US$m)a

2001

Actual
2002
2003

2004

Estimate
2005

2006

Projected
2007
2008
2,919.7

2009

4,525.6

4,656.6

4,844.9

5,082.0

4,153.9

2,559.6

2,773.9

3,088.7

302.8

354.6

373.5

330.9

377.3

125.1

115.8

123.0

134.5

Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDOIXGS~
TDO/GDP
TDSIXGSb

148.2
71.5
9.9

142.2
71.5
10.8

134.1
70.5
10.3

117.4
68.1
7.6

79.7
50.1
7.2

41.7
27.9
2.0

41.5
27.1
1.7

40.0
26.0
1.7

39.6
25.6
1.7

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
IBRD DSKGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)
Share o f IBRD portfolio (%)
I D A TDO (US$rn)

13.3
0.6
127.5
0.1
901.0

9.9
0.6
105.3
0.1
1,014.0

12.4
0.8
84.7
0.1
1,142.9

9.0
0.5
69.7
0.1
1,310.5

28.5
1.4

1,426.5

1,517.3

1,620.6

1,733.8

(TDO)
Total debt service (US$m)"
(TDS)

1,400.0

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed external debt.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the BIS.

105

B

5

Y

I

z

5555888588855855555

Annex 0: Summary of Non-lending Services in Honduras
Product

Completion

Cost

FY

(US~OOO)

Audience (a)

Objective (b)

G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD

KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

Analvtical Wor k/ReDorts
Recent completions:
Dealingwith the coffee crisis in Central America
Investment Climate and International Integration
Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA)
Investment Climate Assessment (2 volumes)
Development Policy Review
PRSP 1st Progress Report & Joint Staff Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR)
PRSP 2nd Progress Report & Joint Staff Advisory Note
Poverty Assessment

FY03
FY04
FY03
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY05
FY06

Planned:
PRSP 3rd Progress Report & Joint Staff Advisory Note
Governance Strategy Note
Energy Study
Public Expenditure Review
ROSC Study
Institutionaland Governance Review
Environmental Assessment
Regional Energy
Investment Climate Assessment
Regional Land Management Study
Expenditure Tracking
Regional Disaster Mitigation Study
Country Economic Memorandum
Poverty Assessment
Regional Decentralization Study
Public Expenditure Review and Fiduciary Update
Regional Financial Sector Study
Regional Service Delivery Study

FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY07
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY08
FY09
FY09
FY09
FY09
FYlO
FYlO
FYlO

112
47
130

57
30
263

25
160
200
160
160
253
160
160
160
90
3 00
275
275
3 00
180
275
3 00

G, B
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD

G, D, B
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD

KG, PD, PS
PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

G, D, B
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, B, PS
G, D, B, PD

IDF & JSDF Ongoing Grants
Community Disaster Mgmt Tegucigalpa JSDF
FY03
FY03
Small Farmers Links to Specialty Coffee JSDF (regional)
Natural Disaster Mitigation - PHRD
FY05
FY04
Capacity Building Acces to Land Project - PHRD
FY05
Regional Development in Copan Valley PHRD
Pic0 Bonito Forrest Regeneration PHRD
FY05
Community Based Education - PHRD
FY05
Aid Coordination PHRD
FY07

1,984
900
508
43 1
400
612
715
450

G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

Other Ongoing
Indigenous Communities Ecosystem Mgmt GEF (regional)
FY06
Corazon Transboundary Biosphere Reserve GEF (regional)
FY06
Pic0 Bonito Sustainable Forests Project BiocarbonFund
FY07

4,000
12,000
2,800

G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

-

-

-

-

a. Government (G), donor (D), Bank (B), public dissemination (PD).
b. Knowledge generation (KG), public debate (PD), problem-solving(PS).

107

Annex P: Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment

2003

2004

2005

2006

13
2.7
15.4
5.9
15.4
5.9
18.9

18
2.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
23.2

18
2.9
0.0
0.0
5.6
6.1
31.4

18
3.1
11.1
9.6
11.1
9.6
36.8

Yes

Yes
2,529
141

Yes
2,550
142

Yes
2,226
124

Number o f Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent o f Problem Projects by Number
Percent o f Problem Projects by Amount
Percent o f Projects at Risk by Number
Percent o f Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
I
'

CPPR during the year (yesho)
Supervision Resources (total US$'OOO)
Average Supervision (US$'OOO/project)

Since FY

80

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% o f OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% o f OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

*

41
1,593.7
22.0'
15.7

Last Five
FYs

4
211.8
0.0
0.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent o f projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andor implementation progress (IP
A s defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio o f disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance o f the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning o f the year: Investment projects only.
All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception o f Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

108

Annex Q : I D A Program Summary
Proposed IDA Lending Program a

Fiscal
year

Proj ID

H
H
M

H
H
L

Subtotal for 2007

15.0
25.0
30.0
70.0

2008

HN PRSC
Utility Restructuring Project
Subtotal for 2008

30.0
30.0
60.0

H
H

H
H

2009

HN PRSC
Land Administration I1 APL
PRSC TAC I1

30.0
30.0
10.0

H
M
M

H
M
L

Subtotal for 2009

70.0

Rural Competitiveness I1 APL
Water & Sanitation Program
Subtotal for 2010

40.0
20.0
60.0

M
M

L
L

2007

2010

HN Education Program
HN PRSC
Rural Competitiveness IAPL

Total FY2007-10

260.0

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next four fiscal years, giving higher values in the range for each
operations.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L).

109

Annex R: IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2004-2007

2004

2005

2006

2007

0.0

0.0

9.0

0.0

Sector (YO)
Wholesale and Retail Trade
Total

0
0

0
0

100
100

0
0

Financing
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

100
0
0
0
100

0
0
0
0
0

5.98

0

0

0

Fiscal Year

IFC commitments (US$m)

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

110

Annex S: Statement o f IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As o f 06/30/2006
(In U S Dollars Millions)
FY
Approval Company

Loan

Held
Quasi

Partic

Disbursed
Equity
Quasi

Loan

Partic

2.45
9.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

2.45
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

11.45

0.00

0.00

0.00

2.45

0.00

0.00

0.00

1999 Granjas Marinas
2006 International
Total Portfolio:

Equity

Amrovals Pendine Commitment
Loan

Equity

Quasi

111

Partic

