Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 37932-KM

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERIM STRATEGY NOTE
FOR
THE UNION OF COMOROS
FOR THE PERIOD FYO7-OS
November 16,2006

Comoros Country Management Unit
Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and m a y be used by recipients only in the performance o f their
official duties. I t s contents m a y not otherwise be disclosed without W o r l d B a n k authorization.

UNION OF COMOROS
INTERIM STRATEGY NOTE
Date o f last Transitional Support Strategy Update
March 11, 2004

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Comorian Franc (KMF)
U S $ l = KMF 389 (as o f October 30,2006)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric system
FISCAL, YEAR
January 1 - December 3 1
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AFD
AfDB
AU
BADEA

CAS
CPIA
DIASCOM
DSA
DTIS
EIB
EU
ESW
EUR
FADC
GDP
GEF
GNI
GNP
HIPC
HIV/AIDS

Agence Francaise de Dkveloppernent
(The French Development Agency)
African DevelopmentBank
African Union
Banque Arabe pour le Dkveloppement
Economique en Afrique
(Arab Bank for Economic
Developmentin Africa)
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Performance Institutional
Assessment
la Coordination des Associations de la
Diaspora Comorienne
Debt Sustainability Analysis
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
European InvestmentBank
European Union
Economic and sector work
Euro
Fonds d ‘Appui awr Dkveloppernent
Communautaire
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Gross National Income
Gross National Product
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Human Immunodeficiency
VirudAcquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leader:
Task Team:

HDI
IDA
IDF
IF
IMF
JSAN
KMF
LICUS
MDG
MDRI
MDTF
NPV
ODA
OPEC
PCF
PER
PRGF
PRSP
SMF
s SP
STI
TA
TSSU
UN
UNDP
UNICEF
WBI
WHO

Human Development Index
InternationalDevelopment Association
Institutional Development Fund
IntegratedFramework
InternationalMonetary Fund
Joint Staff Advisory Note
Comorian Franc
Low Income Countries Under Stress
Millennium Development Goal
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Multi-Donor Trust Fund
Net Present Value
Official Development Assistance
Organization of PetroleumExporting
Countries
Post Conflict Fund
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Staff Monitored Program
Services Support Project
Sexually Transmitted Infection
Technical Assistance
Transitional Support Strategy Update
United Nations
United Nations DevelopmentProgram
United Nations Children’s Fund
World Bank Institute
World Health organization

Gobind Nankani
Colin Bruce
Anna van der Wouden
Harold Bedoya, Geoffrey Bergen, Eavan
O’Halloran, Maryanne Sharp, Javier Suarez

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .....................................................................
I INTRODUCTION............................................................................
I1 COUNTRY CONTEXT ....................................................................
A . Recent political developments ..................................................
B. Macroeconomic environment and outlook ........................................
C . Debt and HIPC ........................................................................
D. Social conditions .....................................................................
E. Governance ............................................................................

.

.

.

Page
1
2
2
3
4
5

6
7

........................................

I11 COMOROS’ DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
9
A . PRSP process .........................................................................
9
B. Donor alignment in supporting Comoros’ development strategy ............ 11

.

... 11

I V IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION OF PAST ENGAGEMENT
A . Implementation under the 2004 Transitional Support Strategy Update ....
B. Overall assessment and results., ..................................................
C . Lessons learned from past and current Bank engagement., ....................

.

V WORLD BANK INTERIM STRATEGY .............................................
A . Rationale for Bank engagement., .................................................
B. Principles for engagement in fragile states ......................................
C. K e y objectives, strategic and financial framework o f the Interim......
Strategy ................................................................................
D. Proposed program., .................................................................
E. Good governance and anti-corruption measures ...............................
F. Monitoring results., ..................................................................
G. Aid coordination and harmonization ..............................................

11
12
13

14
14
14
15
16
19
19
20

.

V I RISK MANAGEMENT. SCALING-UP and EXIT STRATEGY.............. 20
A . Risks.................................................................................. 20
B. Scaling up and exit strategy .......................................................
22
Annexes
Annex 1:
Annex 2:
Annex 3:
Annex 4:
Annex 5:
Annex 6 :

Results Indicators
Financial Execution o f Public Investment Plan per donor
Summary o f Paris Principles for International Engagement in Fragile States
2005 IDA Resource Allocation Index
Country Financing Parameters
Debt Sustainability Analysis

CAS Annex A l :
CAS Annex B2:

Comoros at a Glance
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

CAS Annex B3:
CAS Annex B4:
CAS Annex B8:

IDA Program Summary
Summary o f Non-lending Services
Operations Portfolio

Figures

Figure 1:
Figure2:

Comoros' governance indicators compared with SSA averages
Evolution o f Comoros' Governance indicators 1998-2005

Tables
Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:

Selected Economic and Financial Indicators 1990-2005
2004 TSSU Short-Term Results Matrix (March 2004-March 2006)
Planned Bank Group assistance during the I S N period

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

UNION OF COMOROS

INTERIM STRATEGY NOTE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Comoros i s a small, fragile state with a long history o f political and institutional instability.
Since 200 1 when the three Comorian islands adopted a new constitution following a secessionist crisis
during which one o f the islands attempted to break away, Comoros has been gradually stabilizing and
improving. This process, however, has not been without frequent setbacks resulting mainly from the
power struggle among the islands. Inter-island cooperation i s the fundamental condition without which
Comoros cannot move towards sustainable socio-economic development, and despite recent progress,
the situation remains highly vulnerable.
1.

ii.
Following presidential elections in M a y 2006, Comoros has a new President who has pledged
to rid the country o f corruption and economic and political mismanagement and to steer it into a path
o f sustainable economic development and poverty reduction. The new authorities face a daunting
challenge to consolidate stability and order after 30 years o f political turmoil brought by numerous
coups and counter-coups, and poor inter-island cooperation.

...

Years o f economic mismanagement and political crisis have resulted in a steady decline in real
GDP per capita at an average annual rate o f about one percent since mid-l990s, and the accumulation
o f external debt and arrears to most multilateral and bilateral donors. The economy o f Comoros has
limited resource endowments, a small domestic market (based o n a population o f only 575,000), weak
institutional capacity and a narrow export base, which make it particularly vulnerable to external
shocks. The country relies heavily o n remittances from the Comorian diaspora. At around 17 percent
o f the GDP in 2005, the share o f remittances in national income i s among the highest in the world.
111.

iv.
Social indicators are weak, although more favorable than in most o f sub-Saharan Africa, partly
because Comoros has one o f the lowest rates o f HIV/AIDS in the region. GNI per capita stood at $650
in 2005 and 37 percent o f households are living below the poverty line. The young and rapidly
increasing population constitutes a major challenge. -Chronic youth unemployment has already
become a major concern.
V.
Comoros faces major governance challenges. I t ranks well below the sub-Saharan Africa
average in four out o f six World Bank Institute (WBI) aggregate governance indicators, with
particularly poor performance on government effectiveness and corruption. In the past few years some
progress has been made with the support o f international partners regarding the transparency o f public
financial management. The new President has embarked on a good governance program but the
challenges are enormous and the population i s growing impatient for results.

vi.
The government has very limited resources to address the challenges and needs, and i s looking
to the international community to support the reform program. The Bank, recognizing the dire
situation o f the new government and the vulnerability o f the country, has prepared this Interim
Strategy for the next 18 months that builds o n the Bank’s previous Transitional Support Strategy
Update (TSSU). The Bank will focus on selected interventions in areas o f the Bank expertise and
comparative advantage. Given Comoros’ poor Country Program and Institutional Assessment (CPIA)
score, available IDA resources are limited and the Bank will supplement the program by trust funds to
the extent possible.

This Interim Strategy i s based o n the principles for engagement in fragile states and draws on
the Bank’s increasing experience in these countries. Bank assistance i s centered around two axes: (i)
providing basic services to the most disadvantaged communities with a focus on community and local
consolidating national reconciliation through building state capacity and
capacity building; and (ii)
increasing accountability.
vii.

viii.
The first axis proposes to continue the Bank’s work in basic service delivery through $5
million additional financing to the Services Support Project, a very successful community
development program and the Bank’s flagship operation in Comoros. A Poverty and Service Delivery
Study will complement the Bank’s work in this area by identifying bottlenecks to service delivery. The
strategy also proposes a Cooperation and Investment Forum with the Comorian Diaspora to tap on the
potential to establish a co-financing framework for community development.

The strategy proposes a variety o f instruments to achieve the objectives o f the second axis in
state capacity building and increased accountability. These include a $1.8 million Economic
Governance Technical Assistance project, leadership training, economic and sector work (ESW),
Fiduciary Risk Assessment and statistical capacity building work. A key activity will be to support the
completion o f a full Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) through a PRSP trust fund and policy
dialogue.
ix.

Given the magnitude o f governance issues, the Bank will pay special attention to fiduciary
aspects in project preparation and implementation, and will supervise the portfolio closely.

x.

xi.
This strategy carries significant risks that are largely internal. Rapid deterioration o f the
political landscape and the poor governance environment are the key risks for the strategy period.
Weak institutional capacity and government willingness to pursue necessary macroeconomic reforms
also pose significant risks. The Bank’s strategy could also suffer from the insufficiency o f government
resources that could lead to arrears to the Bank and close down project implementation. External risks
include vulnerability to shocks and lack o f external financial support should donor pledges not be
forthcoming. The Bank will mitigate these risks to the extent possible through i t s operations and close
coordination with the development partners.
xii.

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:
0

0

Does the proposed strategic focus offer an adequate response to the development needs o f
Comoros?
D o Executive Directors support the proposed approach to managing risks in the high-risk
country context?

I.
INTRODUCTION
1.
This Interim Strategy Note (ISN) presents the Bank's program of assistance to the Union
of Comoros for the next 18 months (FYO7-08). The I S N follows a Transitional Support Strategy
Update that was discussed by the Board o f Executive Directors o n M a r c h 11, 2004. The Transitional
Strategy covered a period o f 24 months until M a r c h 2006 but the preparation o f this strategy was
postponed until after the presidential elections in M a y 2006.
2.
Since the 2004 Transitional Strategy, Comoros has avoided the separatist crises that had
burdened it in the past. However, the new political framework has yet to stand the test o f time.
While recent developments have increased the potential for political stability, the situation i s s t i l l
fragile and the risk o f Comoros sliding back into political turmoil remains significant. In these
circumstances the Bank proposes to continue with an Interim Strategy. Depending o n the progress
made during this strategy period, either an updated Interim Strategy or a full Country Assistance
Strategy (CAS) will be prepared at the end o f FY08. Benchmark indicators for scaling up under a full
C A S are presented in Section V I o f this document.
3.
The I S N was prepared in consultation with a variety of Comorian stakeholders. The
strategy was discussed with the former government in early 2006 and with the new authorities in June
2006. In October 2006 the final draft o f the I S N was distributed in advance and comprehensive
discussions about the program were held with authorities representing both island-level and Union
governments, and with civil society.
11. COUNTRY CONTEXT
4.
Comoros i s a small island economy with 575,000 inhabitants spread unevenly among the
three islands that make up the Union of Comoros. A fourth island o f the Comorian archipelago,
Mayotte, chose to remain under French sovereignty when a referendum o n independence was held in
1975. Comoros i s one o f the world's poorest countries with poor transportation links, few natural
resources and a young and rapidly increasing population. It ranked 132ndout o f 177 countries on the
UN Human Development Index (HDI) in 2004. GDP for 2005 stood at $387 million, and G M per
capita at $650. Thirty-seven percent o f households live below the poverty line (2004). Social
indicators are relatively weak and Comoros i s unlikely to achieve most o f the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs).

5.
The economy of Comoros i s characterized by limited resource endowments, a small
domestic market, weak institutional capacity and a narrow export base, which make it
particularly vulnerable to external shocks. The economy i s centered on the primary sector and
retail services which account respectively for about 5 1 and 18 percent o f GDP. The third largest sector
i s government services (about 10 percent o f GDP), followed by transport and communication (9
percent), and financial services and construction and public works (about 5 percent each). The
primary sector i s geared towards the production o f three high-value export crops - vanilla, cloves and
ylang-ylang - which provide the bulk o f export earnings. Production o f food crops - mostly bananas,
cocoa, and tubers - as well as fishing for local consumption remains underdeveloped.
6.
The history of Comoros has been plagued by political and institutional instability since
independence on July 6,1975. The country has experienced 20 coups or attempted coups in 30 years.
This continuous political turmoil has thwarted social and economic development and has severely

-2-

weakened government institutions. In 1997 the island o f Anjouan attempted to break away from the
other two Comorian islands Grande Comore and Moheli. In February 200 1 a reconciliation agreement
was signed in Fomboni, and in December o f that year a new constitution was adopted creating a Union
o f Comoros with considerable autonomy accorded to each o f the three islands. The new constitution
provided for each o f the three islands to have i t s own President and Parliament, and the U n i o n
presidency was to be rotated among the three islands. This formula o f four presidents, four
governments and four parliaments proved to be a cumbersome and costly structure particularly for a
country this small. Moreover, the constitution did not address the core issue o f the division of powers
between the U n i o n and the islands. What followed was a struggle for power and influence between the
U n i o n and the island authorities over revenue sharing and budget execution.
A.

Recent political developments

7.
After 18 months of stalemate during which the country was virtually paralyzed as the
dispute over the division of powers continued, the national reconciliation process gained new
momentum. Notwithstanding the disagreements between the U n i o n and the islands, a transitional
agreement, brokered by President M b e k i o f South Afkica, was signed in Beit Salem on December 20,
2003. The Beit Salem agreement set out transitional measures for customs administration and budget
execution, and stipulated parliamentary elections for the island and the Union parliaments. The island
and U n i o n legislative elections were held in March and April 2004, and international observers
considered them to have been broadly free and fair. The party o f the then U n i o n President, Colonel
Assoumane Azali, Convention pour la renaissance des Cornores (CRC), was the clear loser in all the
four elections. The elections were followed by the establishment o f the Constitutional Court. The
newly established U n i o n parliament voted on the organic laws on the sharing o f powers, and a new
institutional structure was created. The international community stepped up i t s support to Comoros to
maintain the reconciliation momentum through financing key aspects o f the process, and while the
clashes between the Union and the islands were not entirely behind, the country seemed to be on a
more stable footing with a renewed sense o f hope.

8.
An important milestone in the national reconciliation was reached in April 2006 when
Ahmed Abdallah Mohamed Sambi was elected the new Union President. H e w o n a landslide
victory in democratic and peaceful elections with his message o f political change, anti-corruption and
a promise o f higher living standards. The new President appointed a streamlined government with a
reduced number o f ministers and counselors that has professed a commitment to reform. President
Sambi has thus far focused on resolving teacher strikes and o n an anti-corruption program. These
actions were well-received. However, public expectations for reform are extremely high, and it i s
unclear how the government, which lacks both resources and capacity, will achieve i t s ambitious
agenda o f social and economic reforms.
9.
Although the situation remains extremely fragile, there i s for now a window of
opportunity for development efforts that could help underpin stability. The new authorities are
faced with overwhelming challenges to reverse the fortunes o f the Comorian people and will need
strong backing from the international community to consolidate the support for the reform agenda and
to implement it.

-3-

B.

Macroeconomic environment and outlook

10.
Economic development in the past t w o decades has been hindered by a combination of
recurrent political crises, macro-economic imbalances, and external shocks. This has resulted in a
progressive decline in real GDP per capita at an average annual rate o f about one percent since mid1990s. It has also undermined Comoros’ capacity to service i t s high external debt. Against this
background, remittances from the Comorian diaspora’ have sustained domestic consumption and
provided a buffer against adverse terms o f trade shocks. The share o f remittances from the Comorian
diaspora i s one o f the largest in the world at around 18 percent o f GDP in 2005, and hence remittances
have largely come to define the economy and society in Comoros. They are counter-cyclical negatively correlated with growth and export performance - and contribute to a large structural trade
deficit. They are mainly used for consumption and create disincentives to work or produce in Comoros
as families focus their wealth accumulation strategies o n facilitating migration o f family members
with the expectation o f transfers in return’. Participation in the franc zone - where the Comorian franc
(KMF) i s pegged to Euro - has also been critical in maintaining macro-economic stability.
11.
Economic performance in recent years has remained lackluster despite slight
improvements in performance in 2005. Real GDP grew by 4.2 percent in 2005, mostly driven by
domestic demand which continued to be fueled by large private transfers from abroad. Monetary
policy remained circumscribed by Comoros’ participation in the franc zone, with inflation estimated at
3.2 percent. Broad money continued to contract, mostly due to the shnking o f credit to the private
sector as a consequence o f the lower levels o f vanilla crop financing and lack o f lending opportunities.
The trade balance deteriorated further in 2005 as a result o f continued decline o f vanilla exports
earnings and fuel import price increases. Despite steady flows o f private transfers from abroad the
current account deficit widened sharply in 2005 to over 7 percent. The first semester o f 2006 was
marked by an economic slowdown and a sharp deterioration o f public finance management in the runup to the Presidential elections. The budgetary arrangements for revenue sharing - transfers o f
resources between competing authorities requiring a high level o f mutual trust - ceased to function as
political tensions and mistrust between the island and U n i o n governments grew. This situation was
compounded by inter-governmental accusations o f political interference and non-transparent
management o f customs operations and public companies. The result was lower than targeted revenues
- some 13 percent lower than for the same period in 2005 - and an accumulation o f wage, external debt
service, and other domestic arrears. Continuing difficulties in the vanilla sector as well as a decline in
tourism sector revenues are also likely to impact economic performance in 2006, with GDP growth
projected at around one percent.
12.
Political uncertainty and poor governance affect economic outcomes. The poor economic
growth record can be attributed in part to Comoros’ inherent disadvantages, such as the small scale o f
the local market, high transportation costs and few air links, as well as various environmental factors,
such as high population density and deforestation. However, the main immediate obstacle to growth i s
the political economy situation. A core issue in this regard has been the weak inter-island coordination
o f economic policy particularly in the context o f fiscal decentralization. The I-PRSP identifies
tourism, agriculture, fishing, financial services and communication as sources o f growth. However,
without progress in resolving long-intractable governance issues along with inter-island tensions that
have eroded institutional capacity, i t i s unlikely that these sources o f growth will materialize in a

-

1

The Comorian diaspora is estimated at some 150,000 t o 200,000 people equivalent t o about one quarter o f
ropulation - living mostly in the island o f Mayotte and France.
See Africa Region Working Paper Series No. 75: “Remittances to Comoros: Volume, trends, Impact and
Implication ”.

-4-

substantive way. In the medium term, further economic reforms and debt relief will be critical to
achieving higher economic growth. The debt and governance situation are discussed below.
Table 1. Selected Economic and FinancialIndicators, 1990-2005
(YOof GDP unless otherwise stated)

C.

Debt and HIPC

13.
Comoros has carried an unsustainable external debt burden for over two decades. At the
end o f 2005, Comoros’ public external debt was estimated to be $265 million (70 percent o f GDP).
Multilateral creditors accounted for 82 percent o f this, the two largest creditors being the W o r l d Bank
and the African Development Bank (AfDB). Arrears to official creditors amounted to $93 million at
the end o f 2005 (160 percent o f government revenues and 106 percent o f gross international reserves),
o f which two-thirds was owed to multilateral creditors, mainly the AfDB and the Arab Bank for the
Economic Development o f Africa (BADEA). In 2005, external debt service obligations amounted to
$7.5 million (13.5 percent o f revenues), o f which Comoros serviced about half, including full
payments to the W o r l d Bank and partial payments to the AfDB, the Islamic Development Bank, and
OPEC. N o debt service was paid to BADEA, the European Investment Bank (EIB) and bilateral
creditors. At the end o f 2005, the net present value (NFV) o f external debt was well above all policydependent thresholds, in particular in relation to exports o f goods and services, with debt more than
four times above the threshold. Debt service due slightly exceeds the Debt Sustainability Analysis
(DSA) threshold for exports but i s below the threshold for revenues.
14.
Comoros i s to be grandfathered under the Enhanced Highly Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) initiative. According to International Monetary Fund (IMF) and W o r l d Bank Board meetings
on September 6 and 7, 2006, Comoros i s one o f the countries to be grandfathered under the HIPC
initiative based o n meeting the income and indebtedness criteria at the end o f 2004. This will allow
Comoros more time than envisaged under the HIPC sunset clause to establish a satisfactory track
record under the IMF Staff Monitored Program (SMP) that would pave the way to a Poverty
Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement. However, before Comoros can enter into a
PRGF arrangement with the IMF, i t will need to reach an understanding with i t s creditors o n clearing
o f arrears. Significant progress has been achieved with most creditors except for the AfDB. Comoros
currently does not qualify for the AfDB post-conflict facility and n o financing mechanism has yet
been identified to clear the $30 million in arrears. Discussions between the Comorian authorities and
the AfDB to solve the arrears issue are underway.

-5-

15.
Comoros would remain in debt distress under unchanged policies, but could achieve
sustainable debt indicators in an adjustment scenario with higher growth and arrears clearance, and
debt relief from HIPC and Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRQ3The joint I M F - W o r l d Bank
Debt Sustainability Analysis indicates that, with HIPC and MDRI debt relief in 2009, external debt
indicators would improve substantially. Arrears clearance in 2007 would sharply reduce the NPV-toexports ratio, to 3 11 percent. At the completion point, the NPV o f external debt would fall further, to
74 percent o f exports, well below the H I P C threshold and also below the policy-dependent lowincome D S A threshold. Interim assistance would help decrease the debt service-to-exports ratio to 14
percent in 2008. In 2010, the debt service ratio would become 5 percent o f exports. The analysis also
indicates that after the completion point, debt would be sustainable even under a variety o f shocks.

D.

Social conditions

16.
Comoros i s among the poorest countries in the world. The proportion o f households living
below the poverty l i n e in 2004 was 37 percent4. The incidence o f poverty varies across islands and
appears to be higher in rural areas, where 65 percent o f the population lives. Population growth i s
estimated at around 2.1 percent, with the average number o f children per woman estimated at 5.1. L i f e
expectancy was 63 years in 2005. With an average o f 390 inhabitants per sq km in 2001, Comoros i s
more densely inhabited than most sub-Saharan countries. This problem particularly affects the island
o f Anjouan where high population density i s imposing strains on farmland, water and firewood.
17.
Although the percentage o f women with a delivery assisted by qualified medical personnel
increased from 52 percent in 1996 to 63 percent in 2000, maternal mortality continues to be high at an
estimated 381 per 100,000 live births in 2003. Infant mortality stood at 52 per 1,000 live births, and
under-five child mortality at 70 per 1,000 in 2004, with only 39 percent o f children under five
receiving post natal care. Vaccination rates were 53.2 percent in 2004. The primary causes o f death in
children under the age o f five are malaria, diarrhea, respiratory diseases and malnutrition.

Adult literacy rates are l o w at 56 percent, especially among women (49 percent). The average
18.
net primary school enrollment ratio in 2004 was 69 percent and the average net secondary school
enrollment ratio for the same year was 66 percent. In 2004, only 61 percent o f the population had
access to sources o f drinking water. The average percentage o f population with access to latrine was
37.5 percent (and 32.2 percent in rural areas) in 2004.
19.
H I V / A I D S prevalence in Comoros i s s t i l l low, estimated at around 0.12 percent in 2002. The
country has presumably been protected by i t s insular status, its Muslim culture and nearly universal
circumcision for males, weak communication links with sub-Saharan Africa and a relative paucity o f
genital ulcerative diseases. The majority o f the population has some general knowledge about
H I V / A I D S and 75 percent could cite methods o f protection against transmission in 2004. However,
between 1996 and 2003, the percentage o f the population between the ages o f 15 to 24 years using a
condom during their last r i s k y act o f sexual intercourse decreased from 35.7 percent to 19.5 percent.
Moreover, stigma and discrimination remains an important challenge.

A particularly important vulnerable group i s youth. Children and youth represent a major
20.
and growing share o f the population: in 1995, 57 percent o f the population was below 20 years old.
This constitutes a major challenge for the country in terms o f education, health care, nutrition, jobs
4

See Joint I M F - W o r l d Bank Low Income Countries Debt Sustainability Analysis in Annex 6.
Estimated at about KMF285,OOO or about US$700 per capita per year

-6-

and leisure provision. Dependency ratios remain high, as employment rates are low, especially among
the youth. In 2004, the unemployment rate among youth between the ages o f 15 and 24 years was 29.4
percent. Moreover, the percentage o f unemployed girls i s twice as high as that o f boys. Poorly
educated, or unable to find a job, many young people remain idle, end up immigrating or become
engaged in criminal activities as this was the case during the secessionist crisis o f 1997. Socioeconomic costs (direct and indirect) associated with delinquent and r i s k y behaviors (e.g., juvenile
violence, early pregnancies, early school drop-out, drug and alcohol addictions, STI/HIV/AIDS), and
social disintegration following immigration abroad, can be enormous and go beyond costs related to
prevention and mitigation measures.

Although the legal framework for protection of women’s rights exists, women continue
21.
to be in a more precarious position than men. In rural areas and following traditional divisions o f
labor women spend more time working than men do: they are in charge o f some food crops, fetching
water and wood, taking care o f children, house chores, etc. Women’s level o f education i s lower than
that o f men’s. As a result, women s t i l l tend to be under-represented in local decision-making bodies as
well as in elected positions. The lower level o f schooling and literacy o f women compared to men
have predictable consequences o n the employment o f women. Furthermore, women are insufficiently
involved in economic activities as evidenced by the l o w percentage o f women in non-agricultural paid
employment (13.7 percent in 2004).

E.

Governance

22.
Comoros continues to face major governance challenges as years of political instability
have significantly eroded the legitimacy and accountability of the state. Poor economic
governance and weak institutional capacity across the entire public administration have been a key
impediment to economic growth and poverty reduction. Non-transparent management o f public
finances and procurement, weak financial controls, and a dysfunctional justice system have lent
themselves to widespread corruption with impunity, contributing not only to poor quality o f services
but also a high level o f public distrust in government institutions. This situation has been compounded
by the conflict o f powers between the central government and the islands. A particular area o f concern
i s the state-owned companies, notably the rice and h e 1 importing companies, the electricity company
and the telecom company which are managed in total opacity. Some o f these companies do not
produce financial statements on a regular and timely basis, and none o f them has been subject to an
independent audit for years.

23.
Comoros’ public sector finds itself in disarray, characterized b y strikes, absenteeism,
repeated cycles of salary arrears, and low skills base. The state i s largely absent at the local level,
particularly with the conflict between the islands over civil service powers and resource bottlenecks
resulting in a virtual failure in social service delivery. A case in point i s the health sector that receives
a very l o w share o f government resources, and although i t s budget allocation has improved
considerably in the last years, 80 percent o f the budget goes to paying salaries o f health personnel.
Health services are largely supported by communities themselves with the patients paying out o f
pocket for basic services and medicines, which in turns finances the payment o f contracted health
workers and operational costs o f health posts and centers.
24.
According to the W o r l d Bank Institute’s governance indicators, Comoros ranks well
below sub-Saharan Africa averages in four out of six indicators, with particularly poor
performance in the areas o f government effectiveness and control o f corruption. Political stability and
voice and accountability indicators appear slightly above regional average (Figure 1). The evolution o f
these indicators between 1998 and 2005 has not been very encouraging; government effectiveness and

-7-

control o f corruption indicators appear to have further deteriorated, likely as a result o f the standstill
due to the conflict o f competences between the Union and islands (Figure 2). The CPIA for 2005
gives an equally negative picture o f governance and corruption in Comoros: Comoros scores in the
bottom quartile on the main corruption question as well as broader governance issues.
25.
Against this backdrop some progress has been achieved in the past couple o f years with
respect to the transparency o f public finance management. A key outcome was the agreement o n
revenue sharing and the adoption o f a budgetary mechanism which allowed the implementation o f a
consolidated budget. The mechanism relies on the principle that all shared revenues are remitted to a
special account at the Central Bank. After putting aside fixed shares for external debt and civil service
pension payments, receipts are redistributed between each entity according to preset ratios. While this
mechanism has been critical in improving inter-island cooperation and worked fairly smoothly in
2005, it remains rather fragile. I t s major shortcomings are that: (i)
a bulk o f the revenues i s designated
for distribution (i.e. only a marginal portion o f revenues i s designated for retention by the
islandsAJnion); and (ii)
in practice, only two islands collect revenues designated from distribution. The
result i s that not only the incentives for each party to maximize revenues for distribution are weak, but
there i s also a strong incentive to hide revenues and circumvent the mechanism. This weakness was
patent in the run-up to the presidential elections in M a y 2006, when mistrust and mutual allegations o f
undeclared revenues resulted in a collapse o f the mechanism. Strengthening the transparency o f this
mechanism and improving i t s resilience to political interference will be critical for the consolidation o f
the reconciliation process.
26.
Rebuilding institutions and improving economic governance will be central to any
sustainable growth and poverty reduction in Comoros. This, together with strengthening political
governance and promoting national dialogue and cooperation, are the key challenges ahead for the
Union and island governments. The new authorities have taken preliminary steps to restore inter-island
confidence and strengthen the transparency and accountability o f public finance management, notably
by eliminating multiple accounts at the Central Bank, giving access to Central Bank information to all
parties, and allowing mutual monitoring o f revenue reporting operations. Moreover, in line with their
commitment to fight corruption, the new authorities have established commissions to inquire into the
management o f customs and tax revenue administrations as well as state companies.

Figure 1: Comoros' governance indicators (top) compared with sub-Saharan Africa averages

tovernnent Effectiveness

Regulatory Q u a l i t y

Rule o f Lam

Control o f Corruption

I

0

25

!In

Countrv's P e r c e n t i l e Rank (8-100)

-8-

75

1""

Figure 2: Evolution of Comoros' Governance indicators between 1998 (bottom) and 2005 (top)

l o i c s and R c c o u n t s b i l i t y

' o l i t i c a l S t a b i l i t y / N o Violence

1

No d a t a

Governnent Effectivencao

Rsgulatory W a l i t y

R u l e o f LaY

C o n t r o l o f Corruption

Countrq's P e r c e n t i l e Rank (0-IBB)

A.

I

PRSP Process

27.
The Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) was completed in October 2005 and
presented to the Board o f Directors o f the W o r l d Bank on M a y 16, 20065, together with the Joint Staff
Advisory Note (JSAN6). The I-PRSP i s the first comprehensive economic and social strategy
document prepared through a wide participatory process. The PRSP consultation process was
able to remain on track despite political tensions and contributed to bringing the U n i o n and the three
island authorities and stakeholders together to discuss common issues. The new authorities have
endorsed the I-PRSP, recognizing that it provides a valid long-term vision o f sustainable economic
growth and poverty reduction, which combines private-sector driven economic growth, improved
governance and better provision o f public services. The I-PRSP i s also considered critical for the
consolidation o f the national reconciliation process.
28.
The I-PRSP centers o n three main objectives: (i)
sustained economic growth; (ii)
improved
human capital development; and (iii)improved governance and political stability. T o achieve these
objectives the I-PRSP sets seven core strategic axes, comprising 35 programs over the 2006-2009
period:

1. Establishing supportive conditions for sustainable economic development by
strengthening public finances and developing the country's infrastructure;
2. Promoting private sector growth, with a particular emphasis on tourism, agriculture
and fishing.
3. Strengthening the justice system and promoting good governance;
5

The lag between the time the I-PRSP was completed and the Board discussion was due to a decision by the Bank and the LMF to wait for
the outcomes of the end-Decemberperformance under the SMP.
Report No. 35491-KM

-9-

4. Improving health conditions, with a particular focus o n combating priority diseases,
improving maternal health, and improving health system management;
5 . Promoting education and vocational training;
6. Promoting a healthy and sustainable environment; and
7. Strengthening security and combating crime.

29.
The JSAN commended the I-PRSP in its ambition and commitment for development and
noted that the strategy and its related action plan contained most of the material required for a
full PRSP. The I-PRSP’s macroeconomic framework i s considered broadly in line with the
government’s objectives although the JSAN recommends that the full PRSP develop the medium-term
macroeconomic framework more fully, including developing alternative scenarios for GDP growth

and availability o f financing. The I-PRSP stressed the need to foster private sector development and
good governance through, inter alia, improving the business environment, developing infrastructure
and strengthening the role o f civil society and the private sector as development partners. W h i l e the
strategy identifies key growth sectors - agriculture, fisheries and tourism - the JSAN recognizes that
more work i s needed to formulate sectoral policies in these areas. In particular, the I-PRSP’s emphasis
on human development i s commendable with an appropriate and ambitious strategic direction set out.
Nevertheless, the J S A N highlighted certain concerns about the lack o f basic human development
indicators, poor data collection, weak capacity, and limited resources available for the health and
education sectors. As regards implementation o f the ambitious strategy for human development, more
comprehensive and detailed expenditure tracking procedures will be needed as part o f the overall
program for strengthening budgetary management.

30.
Moving forward, the JSAN encouraged the government to translate the I-PRSP into
specific and realistic near-term priority actions that are consistent with available financial
resources and implementation capacities. The average annual cost o f the strategy i s $100 million,
over 20 percent o f GDP, which the government hopes to finance mainly through international aid. In
December 2005, the international community, led by Mauritius and South Africa, held a Donors
conference for Comoros in Mauritius to mobilize resources for the I-PRSP related implementation
Action Plan for 2006-2009. Donors pledged to boost their assistance to about $200 million for 20062009, a threefold increase from 2004-2005, but only about h a l f o f what the authorities estimate i s
needed for the implementation o f the I-PRSP. T o date, most o f the donor pledges have not yet
materialized. It i s highly unlikely that in the ‘current circumstances o f n o new significant Official
Development Assistance (ODA) and absence o f debt relief, the government would have the necessary
resources to fully implement the PRS Action Plan.
31.
In line with the I-PRSP the new authorities have centered their reform policies on
strengthening public sector governance and transparency to help improve the investment climate and
enable the private sector to pick-up. The program envisages a significant increase in public investment
and social spending - by about 6 percent o f GDP between 2006 and 2009 - based o n a gradual rise in
domestic revenue, a modest reduction in the wage bill, and higher external assistance as per pledges
announced during the 2005 donor conference in Mauritius. The economic policy priority for the new
government will be to strengthen fiscal revenues by rebuilding confidence between the island and
Union authorities and tightening revenue administration. A first step was taken in late June 2006 when
the ministers o f finance o f the Union and the islands reached an agreement to improve the
transparency o f the revenue-sharing mechanism, ensuring all revenues would be channeled through a
single account. Another major priority for the new government, and the President in particular, i s a
social housing program that i s not included in the I-PRSP. In light o f scarce financial resources, i t i s
important, however, that the government prioritizes i t s spending, allocating adequate resources on
poverty reduction measures other than public works.

- 10-

32.
In summary, the strategic areas o f the I-PRSP in need o f greater elaboration or improvement
have been detailed in the JSAN. One o f the Bank’s key priorities will be to work with the government
to formulate a full PRSP, particularly as regards setting realistic goals and priority areas for
development, and supporting the creation o f a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation system to
monitor the impact o f the strategy. These issues will serve as the focus for the Bank’s overall policy
dialogue for the I S N period.
B.

Donor alignment in supporting Comoros’ development strategv

33.
The role o f development partners in supporting the PRSP process i s critical. Given the limited
number o f donors in Comoros, there i s a vital need for a harmonized and coordinated approach to
donor support to the government program. In particular, close collaboration o n project and program
activities i s critical to ensure maximum developmental impact and to leverage additional sources o f
financing.

34.
The Bank’s principal project to date, the Service Support Project (SSP) has worked closely
with partners in a variety o f ways and sectors. In an effort to move toward an integrated communal or
local development mechanism, the SSP i s coordinating closely with the European U n i o n (EU) o n i t s
Decentralized Cooperation Program, which will support the decentralization dialogue, strengthening
o f democracy and good governance, and support to local development initiatives. In addition, a key
component o f the EU program will support local authorities in solid waste management. With respect
to the EU’s program o n education, discussions are underway to coordinate the construction and/or
rehabilitation o f school-related infrastructure, including latrines. In addition, the project will provide
capacity building for those school management committees that the EU project i s supporting. The
Agence FranGaise de Dkveloppement (AFD) i s currently preparing a health sector support project
focused on, among others, institutional capacity building, support to the national hospital, and
strengthening o f access and quality o f services in Anjouan, Discussions have been held with the AFD
team o n the creation and support to equipment maintenance in the major hospitals o f the country,
which i s partially being financed under the SSP. Moreover, the AFD and the project have worked
hand in hand in providing capacity building to communities who are benefiting from small water
projects financed by the AFD.
35.
Although the development partners have coordinated closely o n program activities in recent
years, partners do not yet have a shared vision and strategy for supporting Comoros beyond the
national reconciliation process. With the election o f the new President and a new government in place,
a major priority i s donor alignment in supporting the I-PRSP and the development o f a common vision
and strategic approach to programmatic interventions. This will be a key objective and expected
outcome o f the support to the PRS process.
IV. IMPLEMENTATIONAND EVALUATION OF PAST ENGAGEMENT
A.

Implementation under the 2004 Transitional Support Stratew Update

36.
The Transitional Support Strategy Update, based on the fragile states principles, was
presented to the Board on March 11, 2004. The strategy had two main objectives: (i)
maintaining
basic social services; and (ii)
supporting the reconciliation process and facilitating transition t o a
viable institutional structure. T o reach these objectives the Bank was to (i)
re-orient the existing
portfolio towards projects that have used communities for service delivery; (ii)implement a new

- 11 -

Services Support Project that would help maintain the delivery o f basic services to the poorest
segments o f the society; and (iii)
if the reconciliation process proves sustainable, co-finance a MultiDonor Trust Fund (MDTF) in a joint effort by all relevant donors to ensure the basic functioning o f
key public institutions.

37.
The Services Support Project of $13.3 million was the Bank’s only lending operation
during the strategy period. The SSP built o n a successful Social Fund project with improved
targeting to reach the poorest communities and introduction o f a participatory community planning
and development process. The project also sought to address some urgent health and water sector
needs and co-financed the 2004 national household survey. Following the signing o f the Beit Salem
agreement on transitional measures in December 2003, the Bank collaborated with other development
partners to reinforce the sustainability o f the reconciliation process through co-financing a MDTF. T o
this end, the Bank mobilized L o w Income Countries Under Stress (LICUS) and Institutional
Development Fund (IDF) grants in the amount o f $1.1 million, focusing o n (i)
capacity building on
budgetary and fiscal policies formulation and implementation; and (ii)rehabilitation o f customs
administration. The MDTF was closed in September 2005 after 1.5 years o f implementation.
38.
The Transitional Strategy foresaw two pieces o f analytical work: (i)a Rural Sector Review;
and (ii)
a Poverty and Service Delivery Assessment. Given the importance o f the reconciliation agenda
and i t s slower than expected implementation, the Bank decided to forego the Rural Sector Review,
postpone the Poverty and Service Delivery Assessment and concentrate o n small diagnostics that
could immediately feed into the reconciliation process and be translated into concrete measures by the
authorities. These diagnostics included (i)
a study on customs administration with an action plan for
rehabilitation; (ii)
the preparation o f new budgetary and accounting nomenclatures, which have been
validated and implemented in the 2006 budget; (iii)an assessment o f the expenditure control
mechanism; (iv) an assessment o f public procurement regulations and practices; (v) a study on the
civil service administration and the wage bill; and (vi) an audit o f the transitional budgetary
mechanism.
B.

Overall assessment and results

39.
The Bank’s interventions during the strategy period have proven relevant and largely
successful. Given the mixed track record o f previous investment projects in health, education and rural
development, the Bank’s decision to concentrate i t s investments in supporting service delivery at the
community level was pertinent for the strategy period. The Services Support Project has been
successful in delivering results o n the ground, and implementation has been largely satisfactory
despite the unstable and fragile operating environment. Supervision has been intensive with emphasis
placed on fiduciary safeguards. The various trust funds that the Bank mobilized were instrumental in
helping the authorities find a workable budgetary arrangement, paving the way for the agreement on a
consolidated budget and the resumption o f a Staff Monitored Program with the IMF in February 2005.
The MDTF was critical for the transition process by providing financing and technical assistance in
key areas. However, although the MDTF was successful in terms o f outcomes, the Bank’s experience
under the MDTF was not optimal. This was due to procedural problems that emerged from the Bank
not being able to contribute directly to the MDTF as per Bank policy. This issue i s under discussion
with development partners to learn from the experience and to avoid similar potential problems in
future. Lastly, one o f the main achievements o f the current strategy period was the completion o f an IPRSP, the development o f which was supported by the Bank through a PRSP Trust Fund.

- 12-

s \fatris (3Iarch 200C3larcli 2000)

Pillar I: Maintair)

432 t s taryet or 2 I O "

C.
The Hank has

19 projects sirice Coax

oined the Brettun

n ~ I ~ ~ coups
e r ~and
~ schanges in the a ~ ~ ~ i i n i structure
~ ~ ~ ~ o~ f i the
a ~country.
e
The islands have been
rtlluctant to accept Union oxrsight tn thetr d e ~ ~ ~ efforts
~ p ~atid
~ ~e hn e~ ~ projects
~ ~ ~ that
r e have
~structure
~t i co n~a ~have struggled. Moreover, the
depended on ccntral, or even d e ~ ~ ~ i ~i ~~~ns ~t ~~ t u
~ u r n ~ ~~ r~ ~i s ~~ ~r ~~ s~~~~ et ~t ocnhas
~
a l taxed
~ ~ rthee prczjecls as they h a a ~
devutud a ~ o ~ s i ~ c r aamount
ble
of time and ef-fwt to engage uith ~ i n ~ s on
~ ~all~ three
e s islands that often have differing priorities.
Overall poor go\ emance ~ n c ~ L ~~d ri no~ c ~ r issues
~ m ~and
~ fieyue'nz
i ~
changes in project ~ a n a g e r n ~ ~ i t
has also had a ncga.txw impact on project ~ r n ~ ? ~ e ~ ~ ~Bank
~ n t aprojects
t ~ o n . haw bccn nearly c ~ ~ ~ s ~ ~ t e n t l } ~
rated ~ I n s ~ ~ t a i ndtie
a b tcz
l ~ lack of budget resource's to ~ a ithe. ~project
~ outcomes.
~ ~ ~ ~ i

31,
% M e the Bank has rated its own perforntance as ~ a t ~ s f a c on
t ~ ~most
~ y accounts, it i s
arguabIe that some o f the ~ I ~ ~ p l ~rob^^^^^
~ ~ ~ could
~ a thave
i ~been
n c i r c M ~ ~ e n if
t ~the
d project
design had considered the country context and ~ M ~ ~ a ~ n a issues.
b i l j t ~I t sccnis tIiaZ the Bank \vas
overly a i i ~ and
b 0%
~ c~ ~~ ~ ~~national
~s
~capacity.
~ In
~ recent
a years,
~
the
~ ~ ~i t ~ a ~has
i o n~ m p r o v c d8s

- 13-

the Bank program became firmly rooted in prevailing conditions with reasonable expectations on
outcomes, tightened fiduciary control and focus o n working with communities.

42.

The key lessons learned from the Bank’s recent engagement in Comoros are that (i)
projects
implemented through communities are more successful than those implemented through the
government; (ii)
expected outcomes o f Bank operations need to be set at a realistic level; (iii)
the Bank
must focus i t s assistance o n a few selected areas to avoid over-taxing weak government capacity; (iv)
donor coordination and joint efforts are essential; (v) the PRSP process has proved to be a good
mechanism to bring parties together to discuss common issues; and (vi) operating in a L I C U S
environment requires frequent and intensive supervision, which i s difficult to achieve without incountry or regional presence. -Currently the Bank has n o staff based in Comoros.

V. WORLD BANK INTERIM STRATEGY
A.

Rationale for Bank engagement

43.

The Bank i s one o f the main development partners in Comoros having an important role as a
provider o f financial support and a knowledge institution offering the authorities advice and technical
assistance (TA) on areas o f Bank’s expertise. In terms o f financial contribution, the Bank’s assistance
i s relatively small compared to some other major development partners such as France or the European
Union. Nevertheless, the development impact from the Bank’s recent assistance relative to the
resources spent has been significant. Through the Services Support Project the Bank has had a direct
impact o n improving the living conditions o f the population which motivates the Bank’s work in
Comoros. Moreover, given the Bank’s extensive country knowledge and a long history o f t r u s t and
partnership with Comoros, the Bank has been granted a leadership role in strategic thinking among the
development partners who look to the Bank for direction. Hence, if the Bank were to disengage from
Comoros, i t would undoubtedly leave a void and have an impact on the development community as a
whole. Finally, as the experience from fragile states has shown, engagement in the long-run, including
during difficult times, i s critical for development and the effectiveness o f Bank assistance.
B.

Principles for engagement in fragile states

44.
This strategy draws on the Bank’s increasing experience and knowledge o n fragile states as
well as the Paris Principles for international engagement in fragile states. Given the distinctive nature
o f the Comorian conflict, the Bank’s program will be firmly rooted in country-specific circumstances
and analysis. In the Bank’s Fragile State typology Comoros falls closest, although not entirely, to the
classification o f a “gradual improver”, characterized by the presence o f some government reform
leadership but facing entrenched systems where change i s often difficult, slow and liable to periodic
setbacks. The Bank’s program i s centered around a set o f guiding principles for engagement in fragile
countries and gradual reformers in particular, including:
Balance of visible and invisible results. The I S N will balance governance and institutional
strengthening, which at times can be invisible to the population, with visible outputs which will
strengthen support for the reform process. This i s particularly important for Comoros where the new
government has an ambitious r e f o m program but limited resources to implement it while the
population i s anticipating quick results.

- 14-

State capacity building needs to move in tandem with efforts to build accountability. If Comoros i s
t o move towards a path o f durable stability, i t must establish strong and accountable state institutions
that are resilient to political and economic shocks. This will require a long-term focus o n capacity
building supported by the development partners. T o increase accountability, the new government has
pledged to increase transparency and to establish external oversight for major revenue and expenditure
actions.
Bank responsiveness needs to go beyond “mission model”. The traditional Bank mission model i s
not optimal in a fragile state environment where close supervision and hands-on assistance i s needed.
The Bank’s program in Comoros would greatly benefit from strengthened regional presence which i s
hoped to be established during this strategy period.
C.

Key obiectives, strategic and financial framework of the Interim Strategy

45.
The ISN i s based on the government’s I-PRSP and strategy consultations with the
Comorian stakeholders, including the Union and island governments and c i v i l society. I t does not
suggest a change in the course from the 2004 Transitional Strategy and proposes to continue with
roughly the same objectives for the next 18 months (FY07-08):

(i)providing basic services to the most disadvantaged communities with a focus on
community and local capacity building; and

(ii)consolidating the national reconciliation through building state capacity and increasing
accountability.
46.
While the I S N builds on the successes o f the 2004 strategy period, it will need to reflect
the evolving country context. Comoros has made significant progress towards a more stable political
and institutional environment. The Bank will focus on consolidating the national reconciliation
through selected interventions in areas where the Bank has a comparative advantage. At the same time,
the Bank will try to be flexible to take into account changing circumstances. In the immediate future,
the Bank’s interventions will be designed to contribute to the country’s efforts to become eligible for
HIPC debt relief and to formulate a full PRSP, both key priorities for Comoros. Considering the
continuing fragility o f the country context, the strategy will continue to include activities that have
been successful even in a confrontational political environment.
47.
The I S N has to make the most o f limited resources. Comoros’ IDA allocation has declined
due to poor CPIA ratings (2.4 in 2005). The total IDA14 envelope i s around $6.8 million. Since this
strategy covers the period until the end o f FY08 (ie. until the end o f IDA14 period), the available IDA
resources are known. T o ensure sufficient financing for the two new lending operations encompassed
by this strategy, the I D A 1 4 allocation will be 100 percent front-loaded to FY07. Against the
background o f limited IDA financing, the strategy will need to (i)
supplement IDA resources by
mobilizing trust funds e.g. f r o m the L I C U S facility; and (ii)
collaborate closely with development
partners to leverage resources. Considering the limited absorptive capacity o f the government, any
additional financing will primarily be used to either supplement existing Bank operations or to cofinance activities with development partners.

-15-

D.

ProDosed Drom-am

Objective I:Providing basic services to the most disadvantaged communities with a focus on
community and local capacity building
48.
Given the virtual lack o f social service provision, the Bank will continue to support the
government in this key area. The participatory community development approach introduced under the
previous strategy period i s quickly taking root and a recent (September 2006) Mid-Term Review o f
the Services Support Project made a series o f recommendations for expanding the scope o f the
community development activities, which are being integrated into the implementation o f the SSP.
The strategy proposes a $5 million additional financing to the Services Support Project (FY07) to
allow for a scaling up o f the project’s activities, including (i)extending the community development
process to a greater number o f communities and integrating the communal levels into the process,
resulting in an increase in the number o f community and local development plans; (ii)
improving the
quality o f the community development process and related activities; and (iii)
placing more emphasis
o n environmental protection and conservation activities. Communal authorities’ participation in the
local development process i s expected to contribute to strengthening transparency, accountability and
pro-poor development in the country.
49.
As stated in the I-PRSP, the Comorian environment i s considered a crucial and highly
sensitive domain in which priority attention needs to be paid to actions designed to protect, conserve,
and manage the natural heritage. The combined impact o f natural erosion and man-made behavior i s
deteriorating habitats and species. The government and i t s partners in the sector are currently
preparing a proposal for financing o f community-based management of environmental assets that
will be submitted t o the Global Environmental Facility (GEF). Day-to-day management o f these
activities will be undertaken by the SSP implementing agency, under the auspices o f the Ministry o f
Environment. Finally, trust funds are expected to be mobilized to support joint social sector activities
with other development partners: for example, Bank-United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
activities o n early childhood development (nutritional security, mother and child health, child
survival and development) and youth empowerment.

50.
T o inform the authorities about the causes o f poor education and health outcomes in Comoros
and bottlenecks to the provision o f basic services, the Bank will prepare a Poverty and Service
Delivery Study (FYOS). The study will examine the institutional structure for service delivery,
including roles and responsibilities at the national and island levels, and the budgeting and planning
processes for the two sectors. An analysis o f access and utilization o f education and health services
will also be undertaken. On the basis o f the results, the study will outline a series o f policy
recommendations to improve service delivery in these two areas in the short-and medium-term. The
study will use data from the 2004 national Household Survey, which will be complemented by the
2003 Census, the 2001 Multiple Indicator Survey, and public expenditure data.

51.
Given the virtual non existence o f the public sector, the role o f service delivery i s often
undertaken by the communities themselves, sponsored by the diaspora, although diaspora-financed
projects suffer frequently from inadequate planning, poor targeting and lack o f implementation
expertise. The new generation o f the Comorian diaspora i s eager to improve the targeting and impact
o f the diaspora financed activities. The authorities have also expressed their interest in establishing a
co-financing framework for community development projects throughout the country that would lay
the foundation for the development o f a sector-wide approach to community development. The Bank,
in collaboration with development partners, will support this initiative through a targeted Cooperation
and Investment Forum with the Comorian Diaspora (FYOS) which in addition to creating a

- 16-

permanent financing mechanism, will seek to ensure the financing o f a set number o f small
community and local projects in the three islands, identified in SSP-financed community development
plans. The Forum would be partially financed under the additional financing to the SSP.

Objective 11: Consolidating the national reconciliation through building state capacity and
increasing accountability
52.
Increased state capacity and accountability are essential for Comoros particularly with regards
to budget and public expenditure management which has for long been the stumbling stone o f the
U n i o n and island authorities. The new government relies heavily on the international community to
provide advice and support in this area. The Bank has been actively involved in economic governance
and institutional development during the 2004 Transitional Strategy and will continue to engage in the
area through an Economic Governance Technical Assistance Project (FY07) in the amount o f $1.8
million. In line with recent experience in fragile states, the project will focus on the most basic
administrative systems and priority actions needed to continue improvement in state performance and
prevent failure o f key functions. I t s overarching objective will be to support the strengthening o f
government core personnel and financial management systems and improving the transparency and
accountability o f government operations. The critical areas o f intervention will be: (i)
budget and
public expenditure management; (ii)
government procurement; and (iii)
civil service management. The
preparation o f the project will be done in close collaboration with other donors and partners active in
the area o f economic governance in Comoros, including the European Union, France, the IMF and the
UNDP. It will build on recent and ongoing interventions as well as o n the set o f diagnostics conducted
in the recent months. T h i s operation i s intended as an additional step to support government’s efforts to
improve economic governance.
53.
As the experience with the I-PRSP demonstrated, the PRSP process i s valuable in providing a
consensual platform for communication and national cooperation. Completing a full PRSP i s a core
priority for the government and Comorians at large, and the Bank will continue to support the process
through a PRSP Trust Fund that will include activities on: (i)
strengthening poverty analysis and
monitoring capabilities through the development o f the knowledge base on poverty and demography
in Comoros and the establishment and implementation o f monitoring and evaluation systems for the
PRSP; (ii)
supporting the move towards a full PRSP by contributing to sharpening the analysis in
selected areas to allow better prioritization o f policy actions and finalizing and disseminating the full
PRSP; and (iii)
strengthening the participatory process through training and capacity building
activities for the c i v i l society.
54.
The JSAN o f the I-PRSP highlighted the need to strengthen statistical capacity which i s seen
as critical for effective implementation o f the PRS. The I S N proposes a Statistical Capacity Building
Grant (FY07) to address this issue. The grant will finance a diagnostic o f the statistical system and
the finalization and validation o f the National Strategy for Development o f Statistics which the
government i s currently preparing.
55.
The new government has requested the Bank’s assistance in leadership training to enhance
communication in the complex institutional setting and to benefit from international leadership
expertise. The W o r l d Bank Institute will be organizing a Leadership Seminar as part o f an ongoing
L I C U S grant in early CY07. If the event proves successful, the Bank will continue, through WBI, t o
engage in a leadership program for the authorities which will be critical for building government’s
capacity and enhancing the inter-island cooperation.

- 17-

56.

T o support the Bank's work in the area o f public expenditure and financial accountability, the
strategy proposes a Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Review
(PEMFAR) (FYOS) that will assess accountability procedures in Comoros and identify areas for
improvement, with particular focus on the budget cycle (preparation, execution, control, accounting,
and auditing), parliamentary oversight o f budget and public accounts, and financial management,
accountability and reporting o f state-owned enterprises.

57.
At the government's request, Comoros will benefit from the Integrated Framework (IF) for
trade related technical assistance t o least developed countries. As provided for under the IF, the Bank
will take the lead in conducting a Diagnostic Trade Integration Study @TIS) (FYOS). The D T I S
will assess the overall competitiveness o f the economy, identify sectors for greatest export potential
and outline constraints to trade development. The DTIS will propose policy recommendations and
assess trade related technical assistance and capacity building needs t o advance the integration o f
Comoros into the global trading system.
58.
The I-PRSP stresses the importance o f private sector development to achieve equitable
economic growth and employment creation. A key priority will be reforming public enterprises,
notably the telecommunications and o i l importing companies. The authorities have started discussions
with the W o r l d BanWIFC t o launch preparation o f reform strategy in these two sectors that are deemed
critical to strengthening public finances and fostering economic growth. This strategy period aims at
pursuing the dialogue and strengthening political ownership and momentum for these
challenging reforms. IFC Advisory Services will support the government's reform agenda, subject to
the government's firm commitment and readiness to engage in these reforms.

This I S N will focus on preparing the activity while the actual implementation may begin under the next
strategy in FY09.

- 18-

E.

Good governance and anti-corruption measures

59.
Governance and anti-corruption issues are a primary concern for the strategy. T o
improve the government’s institutional safeguards against corruption, the Bank’s program for
Comoros will include a number o f capacity-enhancing activities as presented above. Moreover, a
Fiduciary Risk Assessment will be carried out in FY07. Simultaneously, the Bank will continue to
work through communities with an independent project implementation unit to ensure that the Bank’s
main operation i s implemented according to Bank regulations. The underlying goal o f the Bank’s
approach i s to build the government’s capacity to prepare the authorities to eventually take o n the full
responsibility for project implementation. Moreover, following the 2004 W o r l d Development Report
(WDR) and the fragile states principles o f engagement, capacity-building approaches in community
development projects can provide opportunities to foster better governance environments through
increasing “client voice”; emphasizing building bottom-up demand for end-user accountability and
service provision which i s inclusive, participatory, and effective; and fostering conditions for deeper
and more favorable long-term change in the governance environment.
60.
Building anti-corruption safeguards into the ongoing portfolio. N e w lending in the
Bank’s portfolio will continue to apply and expand institutional safeguards against corruption,
including:
At time o f project design
Governance review o f project anti-corruption environment, involving financial management
and procurement staff.
0

Fiduciary risk analysis as a standard part o f project design management procedures.

During supervision
0

Increased disclosure o f project information.

0

Introduction o f risk-based auditing.
Regular (annual) project performance review.

0

Increased transparency in monitoring project outcomes and audit results, including training
for civil society actors in monitoring techniques.

Full transparency o f procurement via publication o f all procurement plans and transactions.
Enforcement o f fiduciary standards, by following up systematically o n cases o f noncompliance, integrity issues and audit findings.
Independently monitored complaints mechanism.

F.

Monitoring results

61.
The I S N proposes a set o f indicators to measure the outcome o f Bank support. The indicators,
presented in Annex 1, aim at not being overly ambitious but grounded in the realities o f the current
country situation and fitted for the relatively short implementation period. The main outcomes focus
o n expanding the coverage o f the Bank’s community development activities and the number o f
participants involved in the process. In addition, completing a full PRSP and preventing the failure o f
key state functions while achieving very concrete steps toward improved performance are key areas

- 19-

against which the outcome o f Bank’s support will be measured. The Bank will assess progress against
these indicators on an ongoing basis.

G.

Aid coordination and harmonization

62.
Comoros needs strong, long-term support from i t s development partners to consolidate the
reconciliation and to finance key reforms. The number o f active donors in Comoros has been limited
making close donor coordination and leveraging additional resources a priority. The main
development partners in Comoros include France, UNDP, European Union, African U n i o n (AU), IMF
and the W o r l d Bank. Since the new government came to power, it has been looking to solicit support
from other international partners, particularly those in the Middle East and other Islamic countries, e.g.
i t has recently signed a series o f cooperation pacts with Iran and held discussions with Libya.

O f the main donors, France i s the most significant with a program o f around $62 million in
63.
grants for the next five years. The main focus o f France’s assistance has been in the health sector but
has also included capacity building activities for the assemblies, rural development and public finance
management assistance. Going forward, the scope o f activities France i s supporting will be expanded
to include justice reform. The European Union i s preparing i t s program for 2008-2013 that will
propose E m 3 6 million primarily for the transport and education sectors. The UNDP has been taking
the lead in donor coordination, particularly in the case o f the MDTF that it managed. I t also played a
key role in the electoral process and establishment o f the constitutional institutions. The African Union
made a significant contribution to the political process during the electoral period in 2006 and AU
troops were instrumental in ensuring the peaceful running o f the presidential elections in M a y 2006.
64.

In addition to close collaboration under the MDTF, the Bank has worked with the main donors

in several areas o f Bank engagement. In public finance management, the Bank and the IMF coordinate
closely with France. The AFD and the Services Support Project have created synergies in community

development. In communities where AFD financed small water projects, the SSP undertook the
community development process to ensure the sustainability and maintenance o f investments.
Moreover, U N I C E F and W o r l d Health Organization (WHO) are collaborating with the SSP on water,
hygiene and sanitation issues based o n their extensive field and technical expertise. The Bank, through
the SSP, and the EU have also started a dialogue on harmonizing the community and local
development process in Comoros and ensuring complementarity o f activities focused on capacity
building o f local authorities and c i v i l society. While donor coordination in Comoros has been
functioning relatively well, the respective programs o f all actors could benefit from a more aligned and
harmonized approach. A major bottleneck to increased donor coordination i s the weak institutional
capacity o f Government to assume i t s leadership role in this area. The Bank will continue to encourage
and support Government in this role.

VI. RISK MANAGEMENT, SCALINGUP AND EXIT STRATEGY
A.

Risks

65.
The I S N proposes a proactive approach to risk management whereby key risks are identified
upfront and dealt with pre-emptively to the extent possible. This strategy carries substantial risks, the
most prominent o f which include:

- 20 -

0

0

0

0

Return to instability. While the national reconciliation process to date has been
successful, the political environment i s s t i l l uncertain. Given the history o f Comoros, the
risk o f a rapid deterioration o f the political landscape cannot be excluded. If the islands do
not cooperate or the new government fails to consolidate i t s power, Comoros could
quickly slide into yet another period o f turmoil and instability. This could also be
triggered by the islands’ presidential elections that are scheduled for the f i r s t half o f 2007.
If a candidate close to the secessionist movement that i s s t i l l brewing underneath the
perceived stability wins the elections, the country could experience yet another
secessionist crisis. A major back-tracking in the reconciliation process would seriously
harm Comoros’ chances for reaching debt relief, jeopardize project implementation and
could alienate the international community that has made a major effort to support
Comoros in the past years. T o mitigate this risk, the Bank and other key donors must stay
firmly engaged, monitor the situation closely, and maintain a constructive dialogue with
the Union and island governments. The international community recognizes that there i s
currently an important window o f opportunity in which to act in order to help consolidate
the peacehl transition to the new government and to off-set the risk o f a relapse into
instability.
Poor governance. The governance environment clearly poses a risk for the
implementation o f the Bank’s program. As outlined in detail before, the Bank will
maintain tight fiduciary control o f i t s operations and will address the governance issues
through i t s operations and dialogue with the authorities.

Weak institutional capacity. Past experience in Comoros has shown that there i s limited
government capacity in terms o f human resources, institutions and physical capital for the
implementation o f reforms and projects. Even when government commitment i s present,
weak capacity poses a significant risk to the successful implementation o f the strategy.
Caution against unrealistic assumptions, especially regarding the implementation of
reforms, i s therefore warranted. C i v i l society and community organizations have potential
but lack skills and supporting infrastructure for coordinating activities, executing projects
and monitoring results o n the ground. The Bank’s Economic Governance Technical
Assistance Project focuses o n a limited set o f key reforms and measures that can influence
the performance o f the public sector and that can strengthen the implementation o f the
country’s Poverty Reduction Strategy. In the same way, the SSP project i s focusing on
strengthening the capacity o f communities, beneficiaries and other actors who are playing
a role in service delivery.
Insufficiency of resources and default. In the short-run, growth prospects for Comoros
are limited and i t i s expected that the economy will continue to depend on very few
productive activities. The indigenous private sector in Comoros i s also extremely weak as,
to date, the economy has been driven by the public sector through the civil service and
public enterprises. The Bank will continue to pursue a frank and open dialogue with the
Government about the importance o f diversifying i t s agricultural base away from the
reliance o n one or two crops, as well as focusing o n select sectors which have a real
potential for growth - such as tourism. This economic diversification should also be a
core element o f the future full-PRSP. Moreover, the overall reform dialogue will focus o n
the need for reforms in order to increase investment and foreign aid. The weak growth
prospects combined with the risks posed as regards the government’s willingness to
pursue necessary reforms in a consistent manner and i t s ability to maintain a stable
macroeconomic environment may lead to a sheer lack o f public resources that could result

-21 -

in non-servicing o f debt to the Bank which would bring to a halt the Bank’s project
disbursements, T h e government has so far been able to honor the Bank’s preferred
creditor status and has continued to meet i t s debt service requirements to IDA but has not
been able to meet these requirements to the AfDB and to other creditors. There i s also a
risk that the donor resources pledged during the December 2005 Mauritius conference will
not be forthcoming which would leave the I-PRSP seriously under-funded and which
could also lead to the government seeking alternative sources o f financing on a nonconcessional basis. The Bank will help to off-set the financing risk by continuing to work
with the IMF and other development partners to ensure Comoros will benefit from
comprehensive HIPC debt relief. The Bank and the IMF are also placing particular
emphasis o n budget management which, among other outcomes, should allow for greater
donor confidence in the new government’s management and encourage the donors to
fulfill their financing pledges. Moreover, the Bank, through the proposed Economic
Governance Technical Assistance Project, and advisory support to the authorities along
with development partners, will assist the government to follow- through o n the reform
program. The HIPC framework also facilitates dialogue o n overall macroeconomic and
public sector management and adherence to the reforms laid out therein.
0

Vulnerability to outside shocks. Comoros remains extremely vulnerable to exogenous
shocks, especially to fluctuations in the terms o f trade and dependence on the availability
o f foreign aid. In particular, the impact o f the current high o i l prices presents a particular
risk. As with any economy that i s highly concentrated in the production and export o f a
few goods, there will always be an element o f vulnerability to negative world commodity
price changes. T o mitigate this risk i t i s vital to continue the course o f prudent public
sector management, strengthening capacity and investing in human and institutional
capital. Good governance and an attractive investment climate can help in diversifying
the economy over the short run. Other exogenous shocks include the risk posed by natural
hazards such as vulnerability to volcanic eruptions and environmental impacts (cyclones,
tsunami etc). The Bank, through i t s dialogue with the authorities and collaboration with
development partners, will try to ensure that the government has a strategy o n emergencypreparedness that addresses the relevant natural hazards.
Political interference in implementation of SSPproject. Although to a lesser extent than
before, there i s s t i l l a risk that the U n i o n and island authorities could interfere with the
implementation o f the SSP project, and undermine the poverty targeting strategy used in
the selection o f beneficiary communities as well as the overall community-based approach
o f the project. With this in mind, the project has been designed to have a strong,
independent and autonomous project management and transparent and clear procedures
for community targeting are detailed in the project’s operational manual. Moreover, the
project continues to be closely supervised by the Bank on a regular basis.

B.

Scaliw UR and exit strategv

66.
Given the fragility o f the political and economic situation in Comoros, the weakness o f
government capacity, as well as limitations on the amount o f assistance the Bank will be able to
provide, the benchmarks for scaled-up assistance must remain somewhat general. K e y benchmarks,
which will be closely monitored by the Bank, are:

- 22 -

0

0

Political and Institutional Stability. Continued consolidation o f political and
institutional stability, including inter-island cooperation, as appraised by international
community.
Macroeconomic Management and Stability. Successful implementation o f a StaffMonitored Program, as appraised by the IMF staff, and establishment o f a PRGF
arrangement.
National Development Strategy. Delivery o f a full PRSP, which concludes with
prioritized and reasonably-costed objectives for national development, as jointly appraised
by Fund and Bank staffs
Governance. The adoption o f an action plan to reform public finances in congruence with
donor recommendations.

0

Portfolio implementation. Continued satisfactory implementation o f projects financed by
the World Bank, as determined by Bank staff.

67.
In principle, improvement in country policy and institutional performance, including progress
on governance reforms, should permit the Bank to increase IDA allocations for Comoros; however,
the exact amount o f allocations would also depend o n the performance o f all other IDA borrowers and
on the total size o f the IDA resource envelope at the time. Satisfactory performance along these
benchmark indicators would help Comoros improve CPIA outcomes in several categories, including
budget, effectiveness o f public administration, property rights, and governance/anti-corruption. It
would also permit the Bank to elaborate a full Country Assistance Strategy by the end o f the I S N
period. In the event o f unsatisfactory progress, the Bank will adjust i t s operations as needed. In
practice this would mean revising implementation schedules and planned activities, or in the case o f
severe obstacles, a partial suspension o f activities. The Bank remains committed to staying engaged in
Comoros in the long-term even in the event that activities would need to be scaled down.

- 23 -

Results Indicators

Strategic element

Provide basic services to the most
disadvantaged communities with a
focus on community and local
capacity building

Annex 1
Page 1 o f 1

Main results after 18 months o f imdementation

- Diaspora co-financing framework for community development
available for discussion
- Production o f 30 community and local development plans
- At least 35 communities have benefited from a subproject grant
- 60 percent o f the population o f the community have participated
in developing a community or local development plan

- Completion o f a full PRSP
- C i v i l servants wages are paid o n a timely manner and no further
salary arrears are accumulated

- The unit responsible for the accounting o f the consolidated
budget i s operational and government financial operations data i s
compiled and consolidated monthly within 30 days o f the end o f
the month
Consolidate the national
reconciliation through building
state capacity and increasing
accountability

- High authority for c i v i l service i s filly operational and 100
percent o f civil servants for the U n i o n and the Islands are
accounted for in the computerized management system
- C i v i l service functional review i s conducted and adjustment
plan validated through a participatory process
- Inter-island Budgetary Committee meets o n a monthly basis

Annex 2
Page 1 o f 1
Financial Execution of Public Investment Plan as of April 30,2006, per donor (in KMF m i l l i o n )

Name

Donors
European Development Fund (multisector)
CAON
Agriculture
Infrastructure rehabilitation (roads)
Transitory arrangements
Education sector program
Decentalization program
Emergency response (Karthala)
Multiprogram on MicroRealis
French Development Agency (multisector)
National Union of SANDUK
Agricultural diversification program
Project preparation funds
MECK
Water economic management project
AIMPS norms
China (airport)
Global Fund
W a l i d B e n Tala1 Fund (power)
UNICEF
FAC (social fund)
W o r l d Health Organization
UN Population Fund
UNDP
Damien Fund
IDA (Services Support)
Islamic Development B a n k (power)

Grants

Loans

8,288.0
4,029.2
226.2
642.9
639.6
856.2
621.0
442.8
291.1
309.4
1,295.3
119.5

3,106.9
0.0

46.8
61.5
23 1.2
836.3
900.0
447.0
400.0
389.4
375.0
244.9
125.9
61.6
19.7

467.4
467.4

2,539.5
100.0

Own Resources
Comoros Telecoms (telecom)
State
Road maintenance
Education (University)
Administration
Rahabilitation o f national heritage

Total Financial Execution of Public Investment
Plan
Source: Commissariat General au Plan

8,288.0

3,106.9

2006
Program

Execution
April
30", 2006

Execution
rate

11,394.9
4,029.2
226.2
642.9
639.6
856.2
621.0
442.8
291.1
309.4
1,762.7
119.5
467.4
46.8
61.5
23 1.2
836.3
900.0
447.0
400.0
389.4
375.0
244.9
125.9
61.6
19.7
2,539.5
100.0

4,121.6
1,677.8
65.2
71.0
0.0
684.9
256.2
0.0
291.1
309.4
163.7
8.1
0.0
7.6
14.7
16.8
116.5
350.0
206.3
0.0
352.6
40.0
213.4
62.2
45.3
11.6
998.7
0.0

36.2%
41.6%
28.8%
11.0%
0.0%
80.0%
41.3%
0.0%
100.0%
100.0%
9.3%
6.8%
0.0%
16.2%
23.9%
7.3%
13.9%
38.9%
46.2%
0.0%
90.5%
10.7%
87.1%
49.4%
73.5%
58.9%
39.3%
0.0%

7,612.0
5,918.0
1,694.0
564.0
630.0
350.0
150.0

2,258.7
2,005.0
253.7
0.0
239.0
6.2
8.5

29.1%
33.9%
15.0%
0.0%
37.9%
1.8%
5.7%

19,006.9

6,380.3

33.6%

Annex 3
Page 1 o f 1

Summary o f Paris Principles for InternationalEngagement in Fragile States
Take context as the starting point: sound political analysis i s needed, above and beyond
quantitative indicators o f governance, institutional strength or conflict.
M o v e from reaction to prevention, sharing and responding to risk analysis, addressing the
root causes o f state fragility and strengthening capacity o f regional organizations.
Focus on state-building as the long-term vision, strengthening the capacity o f state structures
to perform core functions; their legitimacy and accountability; and ability to provide an
enabling environment for strong economic performance.

Align with local priorities where governments demonstrate political will to foster their
countries’ development; where donor/govemment consensus i s lacking, seek wider
consultations and partial or shadow alignment.
Recognize the political-security-development nexus, moving to support national reformers in
developing unified planning frameworks for political, security, humanitarian, economic and
development activities at the country level.
Promote coherence between donor agencies, involving those responsible for security,
political and economic affairs as well as those responsible for development aid and
humanitarian as s istance .
Agree o n practical coordination mechanisms between international actor, including upstream
analysis; joint assessments; shared strategies; coordination o f political engagement; joint
offices, multi-donor trust h d s and common reporting frameworks.

Do n o harm, avoiding activities which undermine national institution-building, such as bypassing budget processes or setting high salaries for local staff.

Mix and sequence instruments, including use o f both state recurrent financing and nongovernment delivery to fit different contexts.
A c t fast and with flexibility at short notice when opportunities occur.

... but stay engaged long enough to give success a chance: capacity development in core
institutions will take at least 10 years.
Avoid pockets o f exclusion, addressing “aid orphans” and coordinating to prevent excessive
donor-driven aid volatility.

Annex 4
Page 1 of 1

2005 IDA Resource Allocation kdex (IRAI)
COMOROS

ss Rylulatoty Enwon

bsn in the Public Sector

Whin a cluster.
a/ for calwlalmn af the &aster averam. all cntenu are ectuallywigh
bE #vera11 r m ts calculated as Ae mean ofthe scare dfwrclust&i.
d For more mfcfmrtlon. see knnex 1 n MsWm to >IDA R
7
=
{kwrage Six G a v r m a w LndicabrsTJ.5)"
{WX IRA1 + 20% P w t b l ~ 1R a w ] x G w e m n c e FacBor.
* Ratings on each a m on a 1 0 to 6.0 5mle ( e w IDA Gounlty P e r b m n c e Rating5which m zOD5 range from 0 5 I o 5 6).

Annex 5
Page 1 of 4

Comoros: Country Financing Parameters
Item
Cost sharing. Limit o n the
proportion o f individual
project costs that the Bank
may finance

Parameter
up to 100%

Recurrent cost financing.
Any limits that would apply
t o the overall amount o f
recurrent expenditures that
the Bank may finance
Local cost financing. Are
the requirements for Bank
financing o f local
expenditures met, namely
that: (i)
financing
requirements for the
country's development
program would exceed the
public sector's o w n
resources (e.g., from
taxation and other revenues)
and expected domestic
borrowing; and (ii)
the
financing o f foreign
expenditures alone would
not enable the Bank to
assist in the financing o f
individual projects
Taxes and duties. Are
there any taxes and duties
that the Bank would not
finance?

N o countrylevel limit

Yes

None

RemarkdExplanation
During the 18-month duration o f the ISN, all projects are
expected to be financed at loo%, given government's
limited budget and inability to provide counterpart
funding. Ownership o f Bank-financed projects i s being
ensured through a close relationship between the Bank and
the Government's top leadership. At the project level,
ownership i s being ensured through means such as placing
project management responsibilities directly in the
communities together with concerned ministries, and close
supervision and capacity-building o f government
institutions.
The Bank, working closely with the IMF, will monitor the
fiscal and debt situation. In determining Bank financing
o f recurrent costs in individual projects, the Bank will
continue to take into account arrangements being
established to ensure sustainability.
The requirements for local cost financing are met.
The Bank may finance local costs in the appropriate
proportion needed in individual projects.

Taxes and duties are considered reasonable. At the project
level, the Bank will examine whether taxes and duties
constitute an unreasonable share o f project costs when
determining whether to finance.

Annex 5
Page 2 of 4
COMOROS: COUNTRY FINANCING PARAMETERS

1.
This Annex provides additional information o n the country financing parameters for
Comoros established pursuant to OP/BP 6.00, Bank Financing. The Government has been
consulted o n the country financing parameters.
A. Cost Sharing

2.
Development spending amounted to about 3.6% o f GDP in 2005. Foreign financing
accounted for approximately 80% o f capital expenditures for the same year. The state budget
(portion financed by o w n resources) covers the bulk o f recurrent costs. Bank financing i s
integrated into Comoros’ budget. Bank disbursements have averaged US$2-3 million per year.
As noted in the main text, the I S N i s based o n the government’s I-PRSP with two main objectives
for the next 18 months (FY07-08): (i)continue to provide basic services to the most
disadvantaged communities with a focus o n community and local capacity building; and (ii)
consolidate the national reconciliation through building state capacity and increasing
accountability. The Bank would continue to ensure that individual Bank-supported operations
are well embedded in the country’s PRSP, and integrated into the budget.
3.
Ownership o f Bank-financed programs i s being ensured through a close relationship
between the Bank and the Government’s top leadership. At the project level, ownership i s being
ensured through means such as close supervision and capacity-building o f government
institutions, and placing project management responsibilities directly in the communities together
with concerned ministries. As noted in the ISN, continued satisfactory performance o f projects
financed by the Bank will be a key benchmark for scaled-up assistance.

4.
Given Comoros current fragile situation and resulting needs, the Bank cannot expect
significant financial contribution from government. The I S N notes that new operations are
expected to be designed in a manner that responds to the specific circumstances o f a L I C U S
country; and that in view o f both the extent o f the ongoing fiscal mobilization effort and the need
to ensure rapid implementation, the Government will not be required t o provide counterpart funds
for any o f the operations included in the I S N (as with projects under the 2004 Transitional
Support Strategy). Therefore, and based on the needs o f the transition, the Bank will provide
100% financing for projects financed during the 18-month duration o f the ISN.
B. Recurrent Costs
5.
In Comoros, the Bank (and other donors) have been financing recurrent costs, mainly in
the context o f capacity building programs, and operating costs o f implementing agencies (salaries
and materials), which are for the most part outside the civil service. For instance, the Fonds
d ’Appui au Diveloppement Communautaire (Fund to Support Community Development (FADC)
was established as a n o n p r o f i t association for public service and i s financially and
administratively autonomous. In the only project approved since FY04, approximately 11 percent
o f Bank commitments were for recurrent costs, all o f which were for project operating costs.
Such recurrent cost financing i s considered necessary, and the Bank i s expected to continue to
finance such costs during the I S N period. Maintenance in large infrastructure programs i s not
financed by the Bank at this stage, but by the national budget. The state budget (portion financed
by own resources) finances the bulk o f recurrent costs.
As discussed in the ISN, fiscal and debt sustainability i s a concern. The Bank, working
6.
closely with the IMF, will monitor the fiscal and debt situation. As noted in the ISN, successful
implementation of a Staff-Monitored Program, as appraised by IMF staff, and establishment o f a

Annex 5
Page 3 o f 4

PRGF arrangement i s a key benchmark for scaled-up assistance. Sustainability has been a
concern in past- Bank financed operations. Lessons learnt have been incorporated into the design
o f recent operations to overcome such concerns (see I S N paragraphs 40-42).

7.
Given the transitional needs for recurrent cost financing and the measures outlined in the
paragraph above, n o country-level limit p e r se i s being set o n recurrent cost financing. In
determining Bank financing o f recurrent costs in individual projects, the Bank will continue to
take into account arrangements being established to ensure sustainability.
C. Local Cost Financing.

8.

Financing requirements for the country's development program exceed the public sector's

own resources (e.g., from taxation and other revenues) and expected domestic borrowing. The
average annual cost o f the I-PRSP strategy i s about US$lOO million, over 20 percent o f GDP,

which the government hopes to finance mainly through international aid. Donors have pledged to
boost their assistance t o about US$200 million for 2006-2009 which i s a threefold increase from
2004-2005. Nevertheless, this i s only about h a l f o f what the authorities estimate i s needed for the
implementation o f the I-PRSP.
9.
The financing o f foreign expenditures alone would not enable the Bank to assist in the
financing o f individual projects. The Bank's current portfolio focuses primarily on projects in
community development and financial management and governance related technical assistance,
both o f which have a high element o f local expenditure. For example, the local expenditure o f
the proposed additional financing operation (Services Support Project) will be around 70 percent.
The future Bank portfolio i s bound to remain around this range, as community driven
development will continue to be an important part o f the Bank's work in Comoros.
10.
The two criteria for Bank financing o f local costs are met. Thus the Bank may finance
local costs in any proportion required by individual projects.

D. Taxes and Duties Financing
11.
Major taxes and duties are summarized below. Bank projects have been either taxed at
the same rates or exempted, depending on the conditions negotiated at the outset.
Comoros: Major taxes and duties (as o f August 31,2006)

I Tax rates (range)

Item
Profit tax

Taxes

I income

on

I 35%

I

I

I

for individuals and companies with turnover less than C F 500
million, 50% otherwise
capital 15%

Payroll taxes
Consumption tax
Import tax

5%-30% depending on income
Base rate o f 10%; 0% - 5% for selected items.
Rates o f 0%, 15%, 21%, and 30% o f import value, c i f plus
administrative levy o f 1% o f customs receipts o n taxable imports; 3% o f
c i f value o f exemDt imDorts

Source: IMF. U n i o n o f Comoros: Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix (SM/06/328), September 28,
2006.

I

Annex 5
Page 4 o f 4

12.
Taxes and duties have been assessed as reasonable and the Bank may therefore finance
taxes and duties associated with project expenditures. The application o f this general approach
will be subject to an ongoing monitoring o f tax policy and h o w taxes are applied to Bankfinanced projects. At the project level, the Bank will consider whether taxes and duties constitute
an excessive share o f project costs.

Annex 6
Page 1 of 8
Union of Comoros: Debt Sustainabilitv Analysis

1.
This assessment o f Comoros’s external public debt dynamics was prepared jointly
with Bank staff based o n the I M F - W o r l d Bank debt sustainability analysis (DSA) for lowincome countries. It makes clear that in a baseline scenario o f unchanged policies, Comoros
would remain in debt distress even in the absence o f shocks. In an adjustment scenario, which
assumes improved economic performance and HIPC/MDIXI debt relief at end-2009, debt
would become sustainable even under a variety o f stress tests. Comoros’s external arrears are
a major near-term hurdle for achieving debt sustainability, and the specifics o f arrears
clearance mechanisms will have important implications for near-term debt service.
Background

2.
External debt has been unsustainable for over two decades. Large-scale
borrowing from official creditors after independence l e d to rapid accumulation o f external
debt, which had reached 100percent o f GDP by the mid-1980s. The debt burden became
quickly unsustainable and arrears as a proportion o f total debt increased from 9 percent in
1984 to 35 percent in 2005. At yearend 2005, the net present value (NPV) o f total debt
amounted to 419 percent o f exports o f goods and services. Though debt service to the World
Bank has been paid in full, arrears to most other official creditors have accumulated.
3.
At end-2005, Comoros’s public external debt was estimated to be $266 million
(72 percent of GDP). Multilateral creditors accounted for 82 percent o f this and the two
largest creditors were the World Bank and the AfDB Group. Comoros has n o loans from the
IMF. With 69 percent o f i t s total debt stock in SDRs, 14 percent in US. dollars, and
14 percent in currencies that are linked to the U.S. dollar, Comoros’s, external position i s
highly exposed to fluctuations o f the euro (to which the Comorian franc i s pegged) against
the US. dollar. Since 2001, Comoros has benefited from the depreciation o f the U.S. dollar
against the euro, which has contributed to a gradual reduction in i t s debt-to-GDP ratio,

Saudi
Other
Fund bilaterals
Fund 5%
3%
9%

Kuw

AfDB

group
24%

USD
14%

Other

BA
10%

Tultilaterals
8%

Bank
41%

-

M3st of the debt stock is affected by
the Euro/U.S. dollar rate.

M r e than 80 percent of Comoros’s debt
is owed to multilateral creditors.

II

SAR
5%

Others
2%

1%

SDF?
69%

Annex 6
Page 2 of 8

amounted to $7% million in 2005 (13% percent o f
revenues), o f which Comoros serviced about half,
including full payments to the W o r l d Bank and partial
payments to the AfDB Group, the Islamic Development
Bank, and OPEC in 2005. N o debt service was paid to
BADEA, the European Investment Bank (EIB), and
bilateral creditors.

5.
Debt indicators for Comoros are well above
HIPC and Low-Income D S A thresholds. The BankFund low-income D S A fkamework classifies Comoros as

Two-thirds of Comoros’s arrears are
owed to multilateral creditors.
Other
bilaterals

Saudi
Fund

Af DB
group

3%

14%

Kuwait
Fund
16%

Cthe
nuttilaterals World
8%
Bank
0%

28%

threshold for revenues.
Policy-Dependent External Debt Burden Indicators and Thresholds
Thresholds
Comoros Low income DSA
HIPC
end-2005
(poor performers)
NPV of debt in percent of:
Exports
419.4
100.0
150.0
GDP
52.3
30.0
...
Revenues
334.2
200.0
250.0
Debt service in percent of
Exports
Revenues

16.8
13.3

15.0
25.0

...
...

6.
Comoros’s external debt i s well above regional averages. In relation to GDP, debt
was o n a par with African HIPC countries but i t s debt-to-exports ratio was far higher than
most. Debt service due i s somewhat below regional averages, but i t s near-term liquidity
problems are more severe than in most other countries, given the amount o f i t s arrears.

9

See Interim Guidance on the Preparation o f Joint Fund-World Bank Debt Sustainability Assessments for
Low-Income Countries (2005).

Annex 6
Page 3 of 8

Comoros's external debt in 2005 was above
regional and HIPC comparators
(in percent of GDP).

H~K k.
R. Sub-Sahara Con-oros

500
400

60

300
40

H K Dec. R.

Sub-Sahara

200

20

1
Con-oros

600

100
80

Comoros' external debt in 2005 was far above
regional and HIPC comparators
(in percent of eqorts).

100

0

0

Diagnosis, Arrears Clearance, and HIPC and MDRI Assistance
Comoros i s to be grandfatheredunder the Enhanced HIPC initiative. According
7.
to IMF and W o r l d Bank Board meetings on September 6 and 7, 2006, Comoros i s one o f the
countries to be grandfathered under the HIPC initiative based on meeting the income and
indebtedness criteria at end-2004. Comoros has therefore more time to start an IMFsupported program than envisaged under the previous HIPC sunset clause.
Comoros needs to clear a large stock o f arrears before it can benefit from future
8.
debt relief. Before a PRGF arrangement with the IMF, Comoros would need to reach
understandings with its creditors o n clearing arrears. Clearance might take four forms: (i)
a
payment by Comoros, using i t s international reserves, (ii)
an arrears rescheduling agreement
with the creditor, (iii)
debt relief from the creditor, or (iv) third-party donor assistance to help
with arrears clearance. While Comoros has a relatively comfortable level o f international
reserves o f about 8 months o f imports o f goods and services, it can use only a minimal
amount o f them given the franc zone ceiling o n government borrowing from the central bank.
An informal meeting between the authorities and key creditors and donors was
9.
held at the IMF during the Spring Meetings in 2006. Most creditors have since proposed a

multiyear rescheduling o f arrears, which would keep open the possibility o f including part o f
the arrears in future debt relief. A special case i s the AfDB Group, where assistance with
arrears clearance i s constrained given that the AfDB does not currently classify Comoros as
eligible for i t s post-conflict country facility."

~

~~

lo
In the AfDB's arrears clearance mechanism, for countries classified as postconflict, one-third o f the debt
is paid by the country, one-third i s paid by a donor, and one-third i s cancelled by the AfDB.

Annex 6
Page 4 of 8

10.
The staff performed a debt sustainability analysis for both the baseline and the
adjustment scenarios. The baseline scenario (Tables l a and 2 ) assumes that economic
growth stays in line with historical averages (2 percent), economic reform i s limited, and
inflows o f aid are minimal. Fiscal revenues and wages would remain broadly unchanged,
preventing a pick-up in public investment and social spending. Comoros would continue to
service IDA, while arrears with other creditors build and external debt would remain
unsustainably high (see Tables l a and 2).

11.
The adjustment scenario assumes accelerated economic reforms and debt relief
(Tables l a and 2). I t allows for higher growth (4 percent over the long term), supported by a
pick-up in public and private investment. As in the I-PRSP, growth sectors are assumed to
include tourism, agriculture, fishing, finance, infrastructure, and communication. A rebound
in exports would limit the increase in the trade deficit caused by higher aid-related imports. A
primary surplus o f about 1 percent o f GDP would be targeted each year to allow for a modest
amount o f debt service and a gradual reduction in domestic arrears. Public investment and
social spending would increase by about 6 percentage points o f GDP between 2006 and 2009,
based o n a gradual rise in domestic revenue, a modest reduction in the wage bill, and higher
external assistance in line with pledges announced during the 2005 donor conference. The
adjustment scenario also assumes (i)arrears clearance and rescheduling o n concessional
bilateral debt rescheduling for 2007-09, (iii)
interim debt relief in 2008-09,
terms in 2007, (ii)
and (iv) HIPC and MDRI debt relief in 2009. I t i s assumed that there will be n o new
nonconcessional debt, while concessional borrowing will be relatively low, with most
assistance coming in the form o f grants.
12.
The specifics of arrears rescheduling can have an important impact on liquidity.
A relatively short arrears rescheduling without a grace period would imply relatively high
near-term debt service. For the D S A in the adjustment scenario, it i s assumed that arrears are
rescheduled over fifteen years for all bilateral and multilateral creditors except the AfDB,
where arrears are assumed to be cleared through a combination o f own payments and external
assistance.'

External debt service due
Scenario I
In percent of exports
In percent of revenues

Debt Service Due Under Alternative Arrears Clearance
Average (2007-2009)
Average (2010-2016)
Baseline
Adjustment
Baseline Adjustment

18.1
13.8

13.3
9.8

5.8
4.6

3.8
3.1

38.5
29.5

34.0
24.9

3.9
3.1

2.6
2.1

Scenario II
In percent of exports
In percent of revenues

''

In line with standard practice, a l l arrears clearance agreements w o u l d be explicitly linked to the H I P C
initiative to ensure that Comoros's contribution to arrears clearance does n o t reduce fbture debt relief and
that creditors providing debt relief before the decision point are credited under the initiative.

Annex 6
Page 5 of 8

13.
Since two-thirds of Comoros’s external debt i s owed to the AfDB group and the
World Bank, the country could benefit substantially from the MDRI. Under the MDRI, it
i s assumed for 2009 that almost all debt to IDA i s cancelled, as i s debt to the African
Development Fund, which i s about 7 1 percent o f all debt to the AfDB group.
11

&ears rescheduling and HIPChQRI debt relief would
ha= a strong impacton Comoros NWofexbrnal debt
(in percent ofexports).
1600 r

300

HIPCAORI debt rdiefwouid h a w a sb-ong impact on
debt sedce (in percent of goemment rewnues).

julicg,

After rescheduling, before NK

Adjushmt. after

200

--..

100
0
2006

2010

2014

2018

2022

2026

2006

2310

2014

2018

MZ?

2026

15.
I n the adjustment scenario, with HIPC and MDRI debt relief in 2009, external
debt indicators would improve substantially (Table la). Arrears clearance in 2007 would
sharply reduce the NPV-to-exports ratio, to 3 11 percent. At the completion point, the NPV o f
external debt would fall further, to 74 percent o f exports, well below the H I P C threshold and
also below the policy-dependent low-income D S A threshold. Interim assistance would help
decrease the debt service-to-exports ratio to 14 percent in 2008. In 2010, the debt service ratio
would become 5 percent o f exports.
16.
The debt dynamics in the adjustment scenario would be sustainable in a variety
of stress tests (Table lb). T o see whether HIPC and MDRI debt relief can bring debt to
sustainable levels, shocks are applied to the post-debt relief period o f 2010 and 201 1. Given
Comoros’s l o w level o f exports, the NPV-to-export ratio i s the indicator that i s most
vulnerable to shocks. For instance, a cumulative decline in exports o f 40 percent over the two
years, would raise the NPV o f debt to 163 percent o f exports in 201 1 (from 57 percent in the
adjustment scenario), and it would take 8 years to reduce the NPV to the policy-dependent
threshold o f 100 percent o f exports

Annex 6
Page 6 o f 8

(Figure 2). By contrast, the NPV-to-GDP ratio and debt service-to-export ratio would
17.
remain well below policy-dependent thresholds.
Conclusion
18.
Comoros would remain in debt distress under unchanged policies, but could
achieve sustainable debt indicators in an adjustment scenario with higher growth and
arrears clearance and HIPC and MDRI debt relief. The analysis shows that after the
completion point debt would be sustainable even under a variety o f shocks. A near-term
challenge will be to agree o n arrears clearance schemes that do not jeopardize the country's
liquidity position yet open the way for a PRGF-supported arrangement and HIPC and MDRI
debt relief.

80

-Baseline

N P V of debt-to-GDP ratio

-

70

-

60

Historical scenario

-

50

baseline scenario)

-

40
30

- - - - _ _-_- - - _ _ _ _

-

20

t

lo

900
800
700
600

500

-

N P V of debt-to-exports ratio

-----____
--

-

400

-

-

300

-

100

__-

Historical scenario
baseline scenario)

-

-

-

X

I

_

_

_

.

200

-Baseline

----__
-----___-_

0

50

Debt service-to-exports ratio

40

-

30

-

2o
I O

0

-

-Baseline

- - - Historical scenario
-Most

d- - - - -

-

\

---\

.

extreme stress test (on
baseline scenario)

------___-__

99'4'499
- r m o p m w
m

.
r

.:

,

:

,

:

: -z : .: .:
,

,

Annex 6
Page 8 of 8
Table 1b. Comoros: Sensitivity Analyses for Key Indicators of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 2006-26
(Adjustment scenario)
Projections

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

2016

2026

NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio (in percent)
Adjustment

5 2 3 5 3 2

9

8

8

7

5

3

5 2 3 5 3 2
52
35
32

9
10

8
9

6
8

8
6

6
7

2
5

5 2 3 5 3 2
52
35
32
52
35
32
52
35
32
52
35
32
52
35
32

9
9
9
9
9
9

9
10
9
10
12
12

8
12
10
12
17
11

8
11
9
11
16
10

6
9
7
9
14
8

3
5
4
5
7
4

A. Alternative Scenarios
A l . Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26 11
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26 21

B. Bound Tests
81. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one st. deviation in 2010-11
82. Export value growth at historical average minus one st. deviation in 2010-1 1 31
83. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one st. deviation in 2010-11
84. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one st. deviation in 2010-11 41
65. Combination of 81-84 using one-haif st. deviation shocks
86. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2010 51

NPV of debt-to-exports ratio (in percent)
Adjustment

493

311

272

74

64

57

51

37

19

493
493

311
313

272
275

74
78

64
69

58
62

53
56

44

42

12
28

493
493
493
493
493
493

311
311
311
31 1
311
311

272
272
272
272
272
272

74
74
74
74
74
74

64
104
64
81
107
64

57
163
57
85
160
57

51
149
51
78
147
51

37
115
37
60
115
37

19
56
19
29
56
19

19

21

14

13

5

5

4

3

1

19
19

21
21

15
15

13
13

5
5

5
5

4
4

3
3

1
2

81. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one st. deviation in 2010-11
82. Export value growth at historical average minus one st. deviation in 2010-11 31
83. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one st. deviation in 2010-1 1
84. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one st. deviation in 2010-11 41
85. Combination of 81-84 using one-half st. deviation shocks
86. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2010 51

19
19
19
19
19
19

21
21
21
21
21
21

15
15
15
15
15
15

13
13
13
13
13
13

5
7
5
5
6
5

5
9
5
5
7
5

4
9
4
5
7
4

3
6
3
3
5
3

1
4
1
2
4
1

Memorandum item:
Grant element assumed on residual financing (Le., financing required above baseline) 61

56

56

56

56

56

56

56

56

56

A. Alternative Scenarios
A l . Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26 11
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26 21

B. Bound Tests
81. Real GDP growth at historical average minus one st. deviation in 2010-1 1
82. Export value growth at historical average minus one st. deviation in 2010-11 31
83. US dollar GDP deflator at historical average minus one st. deviation in 2010-11
84. Net non-debt creating flows at historical average minus one st. deviation in 2010-11 41
85. Combination of 81-84 using one-half st. deviation shocks
86. One-time 30 percent nominal depreciation relative to the baseline in 2010 51

Debt service ratlo (In percent)
Adjustment
A. Alternative Scenarios
A i . Key variables at their historical averages in 2007-26 l /
A2. New public sector loans on less favorable terms in 2007-26 21
8. Bound Tests

Source: Staff projections and simulations
11Variables include real GDP growth, growth of GDP deflator (in US$ terms), non-interest current account in percent of GDP, and non-debt creating flows.
21 Assumes that the interest rate on new borrowing is by 2 percentage points higher than in the adjustment., while grace and maturity periods are the same
as in the baseline.
31 Exports values are assumed to remain permanently at the lower level, but the current account as a share of GDP is assumed to return to its baseline
level after the shock (implicitly assuming an offsetting adjustment in import levels).
41 Includes official and private transfers and FDI.
51 Depreciation is defined as percentage decline in doiiarliocal currency rate, such that it never exceeds 100 percent.
61 Applies to all stress scenarios except for A2 (less favorable financing) in which the terms on all new financing are as specified in footnote 2.

CAS Annex A2
Page 1 of 3

Key Development Indicators
(ZOOS)
Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (YOof total population)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP. international $)
GDP growth (Oh)
GDP per capita growth (Oh)

Comoros

SubSaharan
Africa

Low
income

0.60
2.2
2.1
37

741
24,265
2.1
35

2,353
29,265
1.8
' 30

0.4
650
2,000

552
745
1.981

1,364
580
2,486

4.2
2.1

5.3
3.1

7.5
5.6

63
52
25

44
75
46
100
29

59
80
39

I

Age distribution, 2005
Female

Male

io

io

0

20

Dercent

(most recent estlmate, ZOOtrZOOS)
Poverty headwunt ratio at $1 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2 a day (PPP. Oh)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (Oh of children under 5)

Jnder.5 mortallty rate (per 1,000)

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (Oh of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (Oh of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (Oh of age group)

91
80

99
87

73
50
110
99

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (Oh of population)

86
33

56
37

75
38

200

i50
io0
50
0

ism

Net Aid Flows

moo

3895

0 Comoms

1980

1990

2000

2005

43

45

19

25

12
0
1

24
0
0

11
0
0

13
0
0

34.9
129

18.2
104

9.3
35

6.8
42

14.6

-7.4
2.2

5.9

3.8

3.6
2.3

21 1.3
0

272.3
117

534.0
100

395.6
80

0.3
124

0.4
250

0.5
202

0.6
387

2.6
2.8

2.2
1.2

2.1
2.6

51 .O
11.0
4.4
38.0

4.0
-2.9
4.9
3.1

2.6
3.9
1.7
-0.6

3.5
2.5
1.7
1.4

(US$ mi//ions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2004):
France
Canada
Belgium
Aid (%of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

Srowth of GDP and GDP per capita (Oh)

Long-Term Economic Trends
Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual O
h change)
Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

mo1

0 SubSaharanAfnca

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

w

95

8a

--O-GDP

-GDP

05

percapita

1980-90
1990-2000
2000-05
(average annual growfh 56)

Agriculture
Industry
Manufactunng
Services

34.0
13.2
3.9
52.8

(% of GDP)
41.4
48.6
8.3
11.5
4.2
4.5
50.3
39.9

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't Rnal consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

79.2
30.9
33.2

78.7
24.5
19.7

92.3
13.4
10.1

100.7
12.2
9.3

3.0
1.8
-4.2

3.8
-4.1
-4.9

4.8
-0.9
0.6

Exports of goods and services
imports of goods and services
Gross sawngs

8.7
51.9

14.3
37.1
-1.3

16.7
32.5
11.2

12.5
34.7
5.1

9.3
-0.2

-1.8
-1.1

-3.3
4.2

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2005 data are preliminary estimates.
a. Aid data are for 2004.
Development Economics. Development Data Group (DECDG)

.. indicates data are not available.

CAS Annex A2
Page 2 of 3
Comoros
Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2005

14
56
-32

14
118
-82

Voice and accountability

Regulatory quality

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cia
Net trade in goods and services
Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

25.6

65.0

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

-4
-2.0

-12
-3.2

Reserves, including gold

42.5

87.1

Politicalstability

Rule of law
Contml of corruption
0

82005
02000

Central Government Finance
(% of GDP)
Revenue
Tax revenue
Expense

10.2

15.7

16.3

19.9

Cash surplus/deficit
Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

External Debt and Resource Flows

...
...

...
...

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

...

...

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

...

266.0
7.5

-

I

iource: Kaufmann.Kraav-Mastruzzi, World Bank

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 1,000 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

76.5

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area, 2000 and 2005)
Nationally protected areas (% of land area)

-0.5
0

C02 emissions per capita (mt)

13

2004

26

0.5

65

3.6

66
2.2

2,041
0.8
0.16

0.15

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

IDA
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

71
2
2

111
3
3

-

-

GDP per unit of energy use
(2000 PPP 5 per kg of oil equivalent)
Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

IDA 111

e,iaterai 52

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)

75

higher YBIYBS imply bensr reling~

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)

IBRO, 0

Private Sector Development

50

71.5
16.8

Comporltlon of total external debt, 2005

PI,".!.

25

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

Environment

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
HlPC and MDRl debt relief (expected; flow)

Short-brm, 30,

;overnance Indlcators, 2000 and 2005

(US$ miliions)

2000

2006

-

23
192.3
24

-

Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers Surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.
Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank branches (per 100,000 people)

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account
MiGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2005 data are preliminary estimates.
.. indicates data are not available. -indicates Observation is not applicable.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

10/31/06

CAS Annex A2
Page 3 of 3

Millennium Development Goals

Comoros

With selected targets to achieve between 7990 and 2075

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Goal 1: halve the rates for E l a day poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990

1995

2000

19

26

25

34

39
24

50
35

84

84

2004

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schoollng
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

57
32
I8
57

Goal 3: eliminate gender dlsparlty In educatlon and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagriculturalemployment)
Proportion of saats held by women in national parliament(%)

71
17
0

0

0

3

120
88
87

100
74
69

82
61
70

70
52
73

52

480
62

21

28

54

50

46
39

Goal 4: reduce under4 mortality by two-thlrds
Under4 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)
Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HiVlAlDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 1549)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis cases detected under DOTS (%)

88

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to bask needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improvedsanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2000 PPP S per kg of oil equivalent)

93
32
5.4

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Fixed line and mobile phone subscribers (per 1,000 people)
Internet users (per 1,000 people)
Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
Youth unemployment (% of total labor force ages 15-24)

111, -

IEducation lndlcators (%)

I

1888

-0-Primry

2000

Measles lmmunizatlon (X of 1-year olds)

2002

net enrollment ratio

2m4

I

1880

DConuros

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

2wo

2w

OSubSaharan Africa

.. indicates data are not available.

0.1

3.6

86
33
2.2

0.2

0.1

0.2

0.1

8
0
0

9
0

13
3
6

26
14
9

0

CT lndlcators (per 1,000 people)
30

1885

55

1

20.32

2002

2w4

0 Fixed + nubile subscribers
0 internet users

1Ol31106

CAS Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
as of 1013012006

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a * c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number as
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2004

2005

2006

2007

1

1

1

1

0.3

1.3

2.3

2.6

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
34.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
19.8

0.0
0.0
0.0
21.9

0.0
0.0
0.0
12.2

No
185,000
37,000

No
173,000
173,000

No
150,000
150,000

No
130,000
65,000

Since FY
80
18
109.2
47.1
48.2

Last Five
FYs
6
34.1
40.0
39.3

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andlor implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3
Page 1 o f 1

IDA Program Summary
as of 10/30/2006
Proposed IBRDllDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal
year

proi ID

2007
2007
Total

Additional financing to Services Support Project
Economic Governance TA Project

H = High
M = Medium
L = Low

US$(M)
5.0
1.8
6.8

Strategic Rewards
b (H/M/L)

Implementationb
Risks (H/M/L)

H

M
M

H

CAS Annex B4
Page 1 o f 1

Summary of Non-lending Services
as of 10/30/2006

Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$OOO)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

Knowledge/Problem
solving

Recent completions

FY03

32

Government

Environment Dialogue

FY07

15

BanWGovernment

PRSP

FY08

40

Government

Poverty & Service Delivery
Planned

FY08

63

BanWGovernment

Statistical Capacity Building

FY07

48

Government

PEMFAR

FY08

110

Government

Trade Integration Study

FY08

75

Country Strategy

FYO9

100

Government
BanWGovernmenff
Public disseminat.

Energy Note
Underway

a. Government, donor, Bank,
public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problemsolving.

KnowledgelProblem
solving
KnowledgelProblem
solving
Knowledge/Problem
solving
Knowledge/Problem
solving
Knowledge/Problem
solving
Knowledge/Problem
solving
Knowledge/Problem
solving

W

9

