d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 23329-CH

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ONA

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

FOR THE

REPUBLIC OF CHILE

January 23, 2002

Country Management Unit Argentina, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay
Poverty Reduction and Economic Management
Latin America and Caribbean Regional Office

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Us$1= 671 Chilean Pesos (as of December 5, 2001)

FISCAL YEAR
January 1-December 31

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

Adaptable Program Loan
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Special Commission on Indigenous Peoples
Copper Development Corporation
National Corporation of Indigenous Development
National Commission for the Environment
Deferred Draw-Down Option
Environmental Assessment
Economic and Sector Work
Gross Domestic Product
Global Distance Learning Network
Global Environmental Facility
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Implementation Completion Report
Information and Communication Technologies
Inter-American Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
Information for Development Program
International Financial Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Leaming and Innovation Loan
Southern Cone Common Market
Multilateral Investmnent Guarantee Agency
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Operations Evaluation Department
Policy and Human Resource Development Fund
Research and Development
National Women's Service
Small and Medium-size Enterprise
Standard and Poor's
United Nations Development Program
World Bank Institute

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Lead Economist: 
Task Manager: 

David de Ferranti
Myrna Alexander
Paul Levy
Veronica Salatino

APL 
CAE 
CAS 
CEPI 
CODELCO 
CONADI 
CONAMA 
DDO 
EA 
ESW 
GDP 
GDLN 
GEF 
IBRD 
ICR 
ICT 
IDB 
IDF 
InfoDdev 
IFC 
IMF 
LIL 
MERCOSUR 
MIGA 
OECD 
OED 
PHRD 
R&D 
SERNAM 
SME 
S&P 
UTNDP 
WBI 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THE REPUBLIC OF CHILE

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Summary 

A. 

B. 

INTRODUCTION 

MACRO-ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE 

Economic Performance 
Key Factors 
Rapid Recovery 
Vulnerability to Shocks 

C. 

SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT 

Poverty and Social Indicators 
Rejuvenation of Social Programs 
Impact on Poverty and Income-Distribution 
Vulnerable Groups 
Governance and Civil Society 

D. 

CHILE'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES 

Poverty Reduction in the 21s' Century 
Growth Prospects 
The Challenges 

E. 

THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM 

Expansion of Civil Liberties and National Unity 
Equal Opportunities and Inclusion 
Promotion of Growth in a Globalized and Competitive World 

F. 

THE WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

An Evolving Relationship 
Lessons and Progress in Realizing Past CAS Objectives 
The FY02-06 Program 
Vehicles for Bank Group Assistance 
Country Program Monitoring 

(i)

I

1

I
2
4
5

5

5
6
8
9
II

12

12
12
13

19

19
20
21

22

22
23
28
29
35

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

ANNEXES

Annex A2 
Annex B2 

Country at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
Annex B3 
Bank Group Program Summary
Annex B3 
Bank Group Fact Sheet - IFC and MIGA Program
Annex B4 
Summary of Nonlending Services
Annex B5 
Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Annex B6 
Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7 
Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8 
Operations Portfolio
Annex B8 
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex B9 
CAS Program Matrix (FY2002-FY2005)
Annex B1O Development Priorities

MAP 

IBRD 25555

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Introduction

i. 
This CAS provides an update on the country's performance and its development
strategy since the last CAS was prepared in 1995 and repositions the Bank Group for the
future. Over time, the relationship between the Bank Group and the Republic of Chile
has evolved. At the beginning of the 1990s, the agenda shifted from economic reforms to
the social sectors, environment, rural poverty alleviation and institutional development.
The focus changed again in the mid-1 990s when the Government decided to reduce its
external borrowing from the international financial institutions. At the end of the 1 990s,
lending was renewed, adding technology and reinforcing support for education and local
capacity building.

ii. 
IFC's experience mirrored that of IBRD: as the Chilean private sector gained
access to longer-term credit and sophisticated financial products, IFC became
increasingly selective during the 1 990s. This meant targeting activities where IFC would
have a strong role and significant development impact, including greenfield projects,
non-traditional industries, regional operations, second-tier companies and specialized
financial transactions. IFC's involvement further narrowed so that there was no
investment approval in FY98. In FY99, IFC resumed selective financing in response to
the decline in growth and the Government's request for support in priority areas.

iii. 
Today, faced with new challenges, Chile and the Bank Group are, once again,
reevaluating needs and laying the basis for a changed relationship in the coming years.
The relationship remains selective focusing on areas in which the Bank has a comparative
advantage in drawing upon global knowledge, sustaining a policy dialogue, and
exploiting synergies with other operations and past experiences. As outlined in the CAS,
the program aims to support programs and activities which deepen and sustain Chile's
efforts at poverty reduction with a mix of technical and financial support. Notably, in
this time of heightened global and regional risks, slower growth, low commodity prices
and reduced capital flows, the program includes the possibility to use the Bank's new
DDO instrument for risk management. IFC will continue its selective engagement in
high impact, government priority areas to help the private sector weather this period and
play a role in higher, sustained growth.

Recent Economic and Social Performance

iv. 
Chile has had, by far, the most robust economic performance in Latin America
and has social and economic indicators that are the envy of its neighbors. Its progress in
reducing poverty, especially in the 1990s, has been notable. Chile averaged over 6.6
percent economic growth per year during the 1 990s despite an economic downturn in
1999. Growth reached 5.4 percent in 2000 and 3.1 percent in 2001. Extreme poverty is
now at about 4 percent of the population and overall poverty levels have been halved,
dropping to between 17 and 21 percent of the population, depending on the poverty line

i

used. Even during 1999, preliminary data indicate that poverty reduction was
maintained. This reflects past economic reforms, combined with strong public
institutions and the maintenance of a solid macro-economic policy framework. There are
many ingredients to Chile's economic success, notably, high investment and savings
rates, an open economy, a strong financial sector with an autonomous central bank, stable
fiscal management, and prudent monetary policy. Growth has been a powerful factor in
explaining Chile's success in reducing poverty but another important factor has been the
concerted effort by the past three democratic governments to put in place social programs
and policies which address both opportunity and equity.

Development Challenges

v. 
Sustained and rapid growth has been at the heart of Chile's past success in
reducing poverty, accounting for much of the decline in the proportion of poor and to the
improvement in overall welfare. Thus, continuing to grow at a fast pace is of critical
importance for the future, along with policies and programs aimed at making growth
more inclusive. However, maintaining such rapid growth will likely be a more difficult
challenge in the next 2-3 years, given that Chile, as a small open economy, is necessarily
vulnerable to adverse global and regional developments. Thus, while long-term
prospects for Chile's continued economic and social progress remain very positive, the
risks that, in the short-run, Chile may not be able to sustain the growth and poverty
reduction achieved in the 1990s are higher today than they might have been prior to
September I1%h .

vi 
Currently, Chile faces several points of vulnerability. The external environment
today is much less hospitable for Chilean exports which are sensitive to developed
country demand and continue to be dominated by primary products. Despite very
substantial diversification since the 1970s, copper still accounts for about 40 percent of
total exports and, with copper prices depressed, an important source of revenue and
foreign exchange earnings is vulnerable. In addition, foreign direct investment and
external financing, which have been important all through the 1 990s, may not be as
forthcoming because of heightened regional uncertainties, especially in neighboring
Argentina, and risk aversion on the part of investors. This could lower overall investment
rates. It could also increase the refinancing risks faced by the private sector whose
indebtedness accounts for about 40 percent of GDP. Compounding these factors are
changing trends in global markets, in turn leading to shifts in demand for Chile's
products and introducing new requirements in terms of technology, skills, and
knowledge.

vii. 
Faced with these increased uncertainties, one of the challenges facing Chile is to
expand and diversify its risk management mechanisms. Moreover, the combination of
high unemployment (currently about 9%), relatively low levels of skills among the
present adult labor force, and the difficulties associated with matching educational
content to changing demands, make productivity and human capital development
continued high priorities. At the same time, sustainable use of natural resources, on
which Chile's success depends, is now even more important.

ii

viii. 
In addition, while there have been enormous advances across many social
indicators, there are still many poor people facing increasing hurdles in achieving a
satisfactory standard of living. Income inequality stands out as being relatively high in
Chile and is reflected in continuing severe disparities among different demographic
groups and between rural and urban populations. Especially vulnerable groups include
Chile's indigenous populations, youths, female-headed households and those living in
rural areas. Social policies and programs need to be refined and adapted to respond better
to the needs of these groups. At the same time, local institutions, which carry the major
responsibility for delivering social programs, can be strengthened. Underpinning these
efforts, a key requirement is a modem, efficient state that is responsive to its citizenry,
accountable and transparent.

The Government's Program

ix. 
Over the medium-term, Chile is aiming to take its substantial past
accomplishments further, inter alia by addressing social equity, inclusion and
opportunity, while keeping pace with rapid global changes. The development agenda set
by the present Chilean Government fully hones in on these concerns. Since taking over
in early 2000, the Government has been pursuing a comprehensive program, involving a
series of new initiatives within an overall policy framework and set of core goals which
provide full continuity with the priorities established by predecessor governments. The
overall framework emphasizes maintenance of a conducive, stable macro-economic
framework, strong public institutions, high investment in human capital and social
protection for the most vulnerable groups. The Government continues to see the private
sector as the primary driver of employment creation and production, with the public
sector facilitating and creating opportunities for private participation.

x. 
In terms of new initiatives/areas of special focus, the global trend towards
increased demand for knowledge- and skills-intensive products has led Chile to deepen
its focus on education, which had already been a major part of the program of
predecessor governments since 1990. The Government is also attaching high priority to
addressing the increasingly important issues of global competitiveness linked to
information technology, communications, research and innovation. It is expected that
progress in these areas will help to diversify the economy and create new opportunities in
the fast-growing knowledge economy. In parallel, Chile will continue to focus on sound
management of its natural resource base through ensuring that appropriate and
sustainable development takes place and, in keeping with its continued commitment to
efficient poverty reduction, move forward with initiatives to refine social protection and
services for the poor, the isolated and the vulnerable. Moreover, in part to help ensure
the success of the preceding efforts, the country will press forward in its effort to put in
place an accountable, responsive, "modern" state.

xi. 
In addition to the above, and taking into account the uncertain external
environment, Chile is seeking ways to manage risks pro-actively, especially in the event
of unprecedented volatility in international financial and commodity markets beyond

iii

what could be cushioned by the country's present risk management tools. Chile has put
in place a system of fiscal management that builds in automatic stabilizers and has for
many years been able to rely on its Copper Stabilization Fund to smooth the impact of
changes in copper prices on public revenues. Yet, prudent risk management under
conditions of higher risk point to the need for additional measures to ensure funding
sources in the event of simultaneous external shocks.

The Bank Group Program

xii. 
The Government priorities highlighted above constitute the core of the program of
partnership between Chile and the World Bank Group over the next five years. The CAS
sets three broad goals: (i) sustaining economic growth and social progress; (ii)
heightening inclusion, especially of rural populations and vulnerable groups; and (iii)
modernizing the state as the underpinning for the two previous objectives. The content of
the program is selective, focusing on actions aimed at deepening and sustaining poverty
reduction across the range of vulnerable groups. In addition, given the risks associated
with the current global economic slowdown and heightened regional uncertainties, the
Bank's assistance strategy includes the option of additional financing in support of
structural reforms.

xiii. 
It is anticipated that the FY 02-06 program could include up to six investment
operations for total lending of $250-300 million. At the current time, these are expected
to be as follows:

* Public Expenditure Management: Modernizing Chile's public expenditure
management, including integration of systems (accounting, treasury, human
resources, etc) and real time availability of data from decentralized agencies.

* Life Long Learning: Upgrading skills of adults, including giving a second chance
to those who have dropped out, by facilitating access to technical and other
education and labor mobility.

* Watershed Management: Supporting the development of a framework,
institutions, and capacity to manage Chile's environmentally sensitive watersheds
with the goal of finding sustainable development paths.

* Rural Infrastructure: Instituting programs of public-private, mixed service
delivery to provide rural, typically poor populations with economically,
environmetitally and socially sustainable services. The services could include
electricity, renewable energy, communications, water, sanitation and others.

* Technology and Innovation: Scaling up the ongoing LIL for the Millennium
Institutes as the corner stone for promoting increased R&D, business-academic
linkages, research networking and effective management of research programs.

iv

* Strengthening Local Service Delivery: Implementing service delivery
improvements across an array of programs while designing new programs to fill
gaps and improving the instruments for eligibility, monitoring and evaluation.

xiv. As a risk management measure, mitigating against possible adverse external
events (e.g., prolonged global recession, lower commodity prices and reduced capital
inflows), this program of investment and technical assistance loans would be
complemented by support for structural reforms in the arnount of $250-350 million.
Although Chile is among the few emerging market economies that are relatively well-
equipped to cope with such potential shocks, the Government is of the view that a
persistent and prolonged, unsettled global environment could sap Chile's considerable
risk management capacity. From available Bank instruments, the Government has
selected the Deferred Draw-down Option (DDO) in order to provide maximum flexibility
in managing risks in an uncertain global and regional environment. Chile fully meets the
criteria set out for the use of this instrument: notably, (i) Chile has not used Bank
resources to the fullest extent; (ii) exposure is low; (iii) Chile is in good standing with
the international capital market; and (iv) it has a strong track record in pursuing
consistent macro-economic policies and reforms.

xv. 
Several areas of possible reform, consistent with the proposed CAS objectives and
the Government's development agenda, have been identified and could form the basis of
a structural adjustment program suitable for Bank support. One potential area of
structural improvement is the health sector, based on the on-going deliberations of the
Presidential Commission on Health and reflecting past Bank analytical work. Other
possibilities include the regulatory framework for public services, the efficiency of public
expenditures, particularly in infrastructure, and the social protection and delivery system.
These are areas in which the Bank has accumulated both country and global knowledge
and where this knowledge could strengthen the likelihood of successful and sustainable
reforms being implemented. As always, an actual move to a Bank-supported adjustment
program would be contingent on a satisfactory macro-framework and agreement on the
specific content of the reforms.

Non-lending Services

xvi. A selective but active program of non-lending is planned. Activities range from
new GEF operations to the Development Gateway, Infodev, Global Distance Learning,
capacity building for indigenous municipal leaders, plus analytical work. On the latter,
several topics have been identified including: (i) examining how to expand the capacity
of SMEs to contribute to economic growth and employment generation; (ii) assessing
Chile's capacity to face the challenge of a knowledge based economy; (iii) taking a
systems approach to social risk management and social protection with an emphasis on
coverage for vulnerable groups; and (iv) building up knowledge on the specific needs of
the rural populations in terms of basic services. Another assessment of poverty would be
undertaken, as would a review of Chile's fiduciary framework for public procurement
and financial accountability. The Government has also indicated several areas in which it
would continue to request technical advice from the Bank on a reimbursable basis.

v

Portfolio Management

xvii. With only five operations under implementation, representing total loans of $280
million and $117 million undisbursed, Chile's portfolio is small and generally problem
and risk free. There is no major fiduciary concern with several actions agreed and/or
underway to address the few areas where improvement is needed.

IFC and MIGA

xviii. As of December 31, 2001, IFC's portfolio in Chile stood at $131 million.
Similarly, MIGA has been moderately active in Chile, supporting projects worth just over
$30 million in each of FY98 and FY99. MIGA's current exposure is $22.2 million and
there is one application received for a potential project in infrastructure. Looking ahead,
IFC expects to help the private sector respond to the global economic uncertainties and
the unsettled regional context. IFC remains focused on projects in high impact areas,
including SMEs (through financial intermediaries), specialized financial market activity,
infrastructure, and the social sector, guided by the Government's priorities and the private
sector's demand for improving competitiveness.

Risks and Creditworthiness

xix. 
For the Bank Group, Chile represents low risks: exposure is low, development
management capacities are strong, and the track record of achieving development impact
is high. The country possesses strong institutions and has followed consistent and
prudent policies. There is little doubt that, all other things being equal, Chile would be
able to implement successfully its development agenda with minimal assistance from the
international community. But Chile is not immune to the present global and regional
uncertainties. It has a number of strengths on which it can draw, notably, its strong
external position and solid fiscal position. It has undertaken preemptive financing and
can draw upon its Copper Stabilization Fund. Nevertheless, prudence warrants that
precautions be taken.

Board Discussion

xx. 
Chile is one of the best performers among the Bank's diverse middle-income
borrowers. It has not yet reached the threshold for graduation but has performed
exceedingly well over the past 15 years. Commensurately, the support from the Bank
Group has declined sharply over time and has shifted focus in response to changing
country needs. At the present time, the country faces new risks and challenges that the
Bank Group is being asked to help address and mitigate. A continued engagement is
being sought. The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:

* 

Is the diagnosis underpinning the CAS sufficiently comprehensive
and integrative?

vi

* Does the CAS strike the right balance between support for individual
projects and support for broader policy and institutional changes?

* 

Is the program of lending and non-lending instruments adequate and in
line with the Bank's comparative advantage?

* Among the various risk management instruments available from the
Bank, is the DDO the best option?

vii

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF CHILE

A. INTRODUCTION

1. 
The purpose of this Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) is to renew the
collaboration between the Republic of Chile and the World Bank Group for FY02-06.
The last CAS was presented in May 1995. Since then, the collaboration between the
Bank and Chile has evolved. This CAS outlines that relationship and the main features of
the program. A selective relationship remains the basis for the Bank Group's planned
collaboration with Chile.

2. 
As described subsequently, the program builds on Chile's success in reducing
poverty. It aims to support activities that deepen and sustain that process, bringing
together the Bank's global knowledge and financial support. The IBRD program
provides a mix of technical support and advice with sustained financing to act as a
catalyst and to provide a margin for additional financial support should circumstances
warrant. As slower growth and external shocks affect Chile, IFC will continue selective
engagement in high impact, government priority areas, to help the Chilean private sector
weather this period and play a role in higher, sustained growth.

B. MACRO-ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE

Economic Performance

3. 
Over the past two decades, Chile's growth rates have been among the highest in
the world. This performance can be attributed to sustained implementation of economic
reforms, including deregulation of factor markets, trade liberalization, control over fiscal
balances, and steady macro-economic management. But this was not a smooth path, with
significant economic and social hardship, particularly after the collapse of the exchange
rate regime and the eruption of the debt crisis in 1982 which led to a decline in GDP of
14 percent. At that point, unemployment peaked at some 20 percent of the labor force
and remained in double digits for several years. Chile emerged from the debt crisis in
1984 and since then has experienced sustained growth, averaging an unprecedented 6.8
percent per year through to 1999 when the country was affected by the aftermath of the
1997 East Asia crisis.

Table 1: Macroeconomic Indicators - Chile

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

Growth (%)

7.4 
3.9 
-1.1 
Shares to GDP (%l)
27.2 
27.4 
22.1 
22.3 
21.8 
21.8 
-5.0 
-5.7 
-0.3 

Estimate
2000 
2001

5.4 

3.2

23.4 
21.9 
-1.6 

23.7
21.6
-2.1

0.4 

-1.5 

0.1

-1.2 

-2.5 

-1.7 

-1.2

GDP at market prices 

10.6 

7.4 

25.8 
23.7 
-2.1 

2.6 

2.6 

-0.6 
2.0 

33.3 
7.2 

26.9 
21.8 
-5.1 

2.3 

2.1 

-0.7 
1.4 

33.5 
9.8 

8.2 

6.6 

Investment 
National Savings 
Current Account 

Central Govermment Balance (-deficit) (cid:1) 

Non-financial public sector balance (- = deficit)(cid:2) 

Central Bank Balance (- = deficit) 
Total Public Sector Balance (-=deficit)(cid:3) 

External DebtVGDP 
External Debt Service/GDP 

Consumer Price Index 

(cid:1) Ministry of Finance, Chile.
(cid:2) 
IMF definition. Includes Central Government and Public
Enterprises.
(cid:3) 
IMF definition. Includes Central Bank balance

Key Factors

1.9 

1.0 

-1.1 
-0.1 

-1.1 
-2.3 

35.3 
43.4 
7.4 
5.5 
Percentage
6.0 
4.7 

-1.1 
-3.6 

50.5 
8.2 

-0.9 
-2.6 

52.2 
8.6 

-0.9
-2.1

58.6
10.0

2.3 

4.5 

2.6

4. 
Investment and savings have been at the heart of Chile's growth: investment as a
share of GDP averaged 23 percent from 1984 to 1999, while national saving rates
averaged 20 percent. Investment was particularly strong in the latter part of the 1990s,
reaching 27 percent of GDP. This compares to an average rate of investment of less than
20 percent of GDP in the 1980s and a national savings rate of about 15 percent in the late
1980s. More than one-third of Chile's growth since 1985 has been due to physical capital
accumulation, followed by labor force expansion and human capital improvements, and
increases in total factor productivity.'

Table 2: Factors Accounting for Growth (1986-2000)

Average Growth 

Rate 

Physical Capital 

Accumulation 

6.6 percent 

2.5 percent 

Source: Gallego and Loayza

Labor and Human 

Capital 

2.3 ercent 

Total Factor

Productivity

1.9 percent

'See Gallego and Loayza, "The Golden Period of Growth for Chile", November 2001.

2

5. 
A strong financial sector, with an autonomous central bank, has contributed to
this. The size of the financial system is approximately four times as large as in the early
1 980s, reflecting the concerted effort after the banking crisis of 1982 to improve banking
regulation and supervision. As a share of the economy, banking deposits represent close
to 50 percent, one of the highest levels in Latin America. A strong financial sector
conveys confidence to both investors and savers. The reform of the pay-as-you-go
pension system in the mid-eighties was also important, contributing to the pool of savings
to be accessed by domestic investors.

6. 
There have been other ingredients to Chile's success. Chile is a small, open
economy. Trade liberalization helped efficient resource allocation, ensuring a rapid and
sustained growth in mining and natural resources. This growth has been export led:
exports have averaged 9.6 percent growth per year since 1984 and trade now accounts for
about 75 percent of GDP. Exports alone have climbed from 29 percent of GDP in the
late 1980s to around 40 percent at the end of the 1990s. While copper remains a key part
of Chile's exports (accounting for 37 percent of the total),2 there has been significant
diversification into forestry, fishing, wines, fruits and other agro-based products. In the
1970s, these products were negligible, accounting for only 3.7 percent of Chile's total
exports. By 1998, they represented 33.9 percent of total exports.

7. 
As noted above, total factor productivity has been important in explaining growth.
Chile, along with Argentina, had the highest rate of productivity growth in Latin
America, about 2 percent per year throughout the 1 990s.3 This can be attributed to
substantial investment in equipment and machinery, the increase in years of schooling,
high levels of in-house training for workers, low levels of regulatory burden and taxes,
access to financing, availability of basic infrastructure, and macro-economic stability,
among others. International comparisons of competitiveness put Chile at the same level
as many countries in South-East Asia, rating 27th among all countries included in the
2001 review by the World Economic Forum.

8. 
Solid fiscal management has been a mainstay of Chile's economic policies,
coupled with a strong predilection for refraining from tax increases as the remedy for any
fiscal problems. Prudence in handling copper revenues via the Copper Stabilization Fund
has contributed to this fiscal restraint.' Current public revenue accounts for 22-24
percent of GDP, a stable share since the early 1 990s, even though net transfers from
copper sales have fallen substantially as a share of total revenues. There have been
consistent fiscal surpluses by the central government, averaging 1.4 percent of GDP up to
1999. This fiscal performance has proven to be a key element to bring about
predictability and contributes to the lengthening of the planning horizon for investment
and economic development. At the same time, the financial performance of Chile's

2 This is down from 46 percent of total exports in 1990 and 76 percent of exports in 1970.
3 See Competitidad: El Motor del Crecimiento, BID, 2001.
4 The Copper Stabilization Fund accumulates revenue when international prices are above a reference price
(the average long-term price estimated by experts) for use when prices fall below that price. At present, the
reference price is 90 cents per pound. Under current circumstances, the Fund would be expected to transfer
about $290 million to the national treasury in 2002. It presently has a balance of about $500 million.

3

public enterprises5 -dominated by CODELCO (the publicly owned copper mine)-has
generally been positive, with net contributions to the central treasury in all years except
1993. Transport, ports and water supply companies have tended to be the worst
performers while copper mining and petroleum have been the best.

9. 
Monetary management was another key ingredient. With the primary objective of
reducing inflation, the Central Bank has conducted monetary policy with prudence,
gradually reducing the rate of inflation from more than 20 percent at the end of the 1 980s
to around 3 percent by the late 1990s. The exchange rate regime has changed over time:
a fixed exchange rate from 1985 to 1994 was replaced by a sliding band up until 1999.
Since then, the Central Bank has a managed floating exchange rate with inflation
targeting as the main policy objective.

10. 
These factors have all played a role in attracting foreign direct investment (FDI)
over the years. FDI has averaged 3.2 percent of GDP per year and accumulated to about
$36 billion during the 1990s. Notably, this level of investment matched Chile's current
account deficit, indicating that Chile was able to finance its external needs with a stable
source of foreign savings. Chile also avoided some of the negative effects of the large
capital flows to emerging markets in the 1 990s by limiting transitory inflows.

Rapid Recovery

11. 
In 1999, the economy faltered and experienced a drop in GDP of 1 percent as a
result of the world slow-down triggered by the crisis in East Asia in 1997. This was
aggravated by low commodity prices, particularly copper. Gross investment fell by 25
percent, associated with a rise in unemployment, from 6.1 percent in 1997 to 9.7 percent
in 1999. The central government's fiscal stance shifted to counter-cyclical spending,
including temporary municipal employment programs, showing a deficit of 1.5 percent of
GDP. This deficit was financed by using the Copper Stabilization Fund. Also, low levels
of public debt gave the Government ready access to financial markets.

12. 
The economic decline was short lived and appropriate macro-economic responses
quickly reversed the situation. Growth was restored in 2000, reaching 5.4 percent, the
highest in all of Latin America. In 2001, growth continued, albeit at a slower pace
because of an increasingly difficult external environment. Growth is estimated at about
3.2 percent for the year, with a trade surplus of about $1.5 billion, and a current account
deficit of about 2.1 percent of GDP. Growth has been aided by counter-cyclical public
spending, based on a structural surplus of 1 percent. This concept consists of managing
expenditures to keep public sector finances in equilibrium relative to the estimated
permanent (or long-term) component of public revenues: in other words, the structural
balance measures the fiscal surplus after removing transitory components of both
revenues and expenditures. 6

5 See Aspectos Macro-econ6micos del Proyecto de Ley de Presupuestos del Sector Publico del Ano 2002,

October 200 1.

6 The methodology is based on the IMF's recommendations and is similar to systems used in the United
Kingdom, Switzerland and New Zealand.

4

Vulnerability to Shocks

13. 
Other factors have been important in Chile's recovery from the 1999 slowdown
and its relatively low level of vulnerability. These include its high level of international
reserves in relation to short-term debt, the strength of the banking system, and the low
level of public debt, only 15 percent of GDP in 2000. These factors are consistent with
Chile's external position. The Government continues to access international financial
markets with a strong showing in terms of country risk (S&P rating A-). It rates
favorably on market based assessments of external vulnerability (such as credit ratings,
bond spreads, and indicators of fiscal solvency and liquidity) and has recently engaged in
precautionary international financing: with the highest investment grade rating in Latin
America, the Government secured $650 million in October 2001, with a 10-year bond at
7.2 percent interest.

14. 
Yet, there are points of vulnerability. The major vulnerability is the country's
continued dependence on copper which still constitutes close to 40 percent of exports,
and 10 percent of GDP. Copper prices have been highly volatile: prices reached a forty-
year low in early 1999 and continued to fall in the early part of 2001, albeit recovering
slightly at the end of 2001. Other natural resources based exports-wine, fruits, fishing,
timber-also tend to be sensitive to developed country demand now affected by the post
September 11 th decline in economic activity. As an energy importer, Chile can also be
vulnerable to higher oil prices: energy imports constitute about 2 percent of GDP. In
addition, the private sector-in contrast to the public sector-has been relatively
dependent on both foreign direct investment and debt financing. The private sector's
external indebtedness, about 40 percent of GDP, could expose it to refinancing risks in
the event of a reduced access to the international capital market. Thus, a prolonged
global recession, depressed commodity prices and reduced capital flows-all occurring
simultaneously-could constitute a significant shock for the Chilean economy.

C. SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

Poverty and Social Indicators

15. 
Chile's sustained economic growth during the 1990s has been accompanied by a
dramatic reduction in poverty: income poverty dropped from about 40 percent of the
population in 1987 to 17 percent in 1998, using the lower poverty line, or from 47 percent
in 1987 to 21 percent in 1998 using the upper line.7 Preliminary data for 1999 and 2000
show that the economic slowdown in 1999 did not deter poverty reduction and a
continuing decline was observed in the last two years. Remarkably, only about 4 percent
of the total population was below the indigence line in 1998, down from 13 percent in
1987. This reduction was more accelerated in the early 1990s but has been consistent

7 See the two Poverty Assessments prepared for Chile: Poverty and Income Distribution in a High Growth
Economy, 1987-1995, report number 16377-CH, dated November 25, 1997, and its update, covering 1987-
1998, report number 22037-CH, dated August 30, 2001.

5

throughout the period. Importantly, the reduction in poverty has been a function of the
rapid growth in per capita income: between 1987 and 1998, real per capita income
increased at an annual rate of 5.7 percent. The Bank's 1997 Poverty Assessment
estimated that growth contributed to 73 percent of the observed reduction in poverty in
the period.

Table 3: Key Social Indicators

Population (millions) 

Poverty 

IndiPence (headcount, %) 
Lower bound (headcount, %) 
Upper bound (headcount, %) 

Education 

Primary education coverage (%) 
Secondary education coverage (%) 
Illiteracy (%, older than 15 years) 

1990 

13.1 

9.0 
33.1 
38.9 

94.0 
77.0 
6.2 

1998 

14.8 

16. 
Not only has income
poverty been reduced but a wide

39 

variety of social indicators
continue to improve as shown in
17 0 Table 3. Chile is ranked 38 out
21.2 of 174 countries included in the
UNDP's Human Development
Index; the country stand outs in
terms of life expectancy and

infant mortality rates which are

similar to those of OECD

97.0 
83.0 
4.6 

Housing 

Dwellings meeting local standards (%) 

79.0 

87.7 

Health 

Life Expectancy (years) 
Life Expectancy-female (years) 

Infant mortality (per '000) 

Mortality under 5 years (per '000) 
Physicians (per '000) 
Hospital beds (per '000) 
Health expenditures per capita (1998 $) 

countries, and is advancing well
in indicators of education
coverage. As shown in Annex
B5, Chile is well ahead of
comparators in the Latin

74.4 

77.4 

16.0 

75.4 
78.2

10.3 merca Region with regard to
12.5 many social indicators.

20.0 
1.1 
3.3 
182.0 289.0 Programs

1.2

2.8 Rejuvenation of Social

Labor Market 

Unemployment rate %)7.8 

Participation in labor force-men (% 

Participation in labor force-women (%) 

Average years of schooling for workers (years) 

75.5 
30.9 

9.8 

6.2 
74.6 
35.0 

10.5 

Increase in Employment (base year 1990) 
Increase in Mean labor income (base year 1990) 

100.0 

115.5 

100.0 155.0 

Source: World 
Bank and Govemment of Chile 

17. 

Improvements in social

iniaoshvcmeadin

indicators have come hand-in-

hand with rejuvenation of public
programs. During the 1 980s,
reforms were undertaken to
education, health, and social

security services, with the goal

of creating an incentive
framework for their efficient delivery. This entailed the transformation of the pay-as-
you-go pension system to a private system based on individual contributions now being
replicated in other countries. In the case of education, the public education system was
decentralized in the early 1980s and converted into a quasi-voucher system, based on
school attendance, in which students could attend private or municipal schools free of
tuition. In 1981, higher education was opened to private sector institutions and fees were
introduced at public universities. In health, starting in 1979, the Government reorganized
the health service into 26 autonomous units, decentralized public health services to
municipalities and promoted private sector participation in the delivery and financing of

6

health services. This latter move was accomplished by allowing pre-paid private health
insurers and by establishing a public health financing agency, while targeting public
spending to low income groups. Both public and private financing agencies depend on
deductions from wages, supplemented by premiums and co-payments for private insurers.

18. 
The renewed attention to social services in the 1 990s did not entail reversal of the
reforms enacted earlier, nor alter the mix of public-private provision of services. What
has changed is the diversity and funding of public social programs while the privately run
programs continue to flourish. Public expenditures in education, health, housing, social
security and other social services have all increased. These areas accounted for 67
percent of total government spending (less interest on public debt) in 1991. By 1999,
they reached 71 percent of total government spending. This increase in public
expenditures was not accompanied by increases in taxes, since the tax reform introduced
in 1990, and the share of public revenue in the economy has stayed relatively constant.
Nor was the expansion of social programs financed by an increase in fiscal deficits, as
Chile continued to maintain a fiscal surplus, with the exception of 1999. Thus, the shift
in expenditures was accomplished through reallocations. 8

19. 
The largest share of funding goes to support the public pension system: this
represents 44 percent of total social spending or about 6.2 percent of GDP. But the
increase in public spending has been most evident in education. By 1990, public
spending on education had dropped to about 2.5 percent of GDP, from a high of 5.1
percent in 1982, and enrollment in primary education was declining, as was coverage of
the relevant age group. This trend has been reversed (see Box 1) and public spending on
education is currently the equivalent of 4.3 percent of GDP. Meanwhile private spending
on education has also increased, now accounting for 3.3 percent of GDP, bringing the
country's total educational spending to 7.6 percent. This increase in spending was part of
a broad-based program of educational reform supported by Bank loans. Not only has
spending increased, new targeted social prograns have been added. 
In total, the central
government spends about 1.5 percent of GDP on diverse social subsidies and programs,
50 percent more than the level as in 1991. One such program is a subsidy for water and
sewerage services introduced in 1990, aimed at ensuring that no family pays more than
five percent of income for water and sewerage services. Another example is Chile Joven,
begun in 1994, to provide job training for youths, using an innovative mix of public-
private delivery.

20. 
There is still a long way to go to satisfy fully the welfare needs of the population.
The Bank's Poverty Assessment included an analysis of the existing deficits in social
welfare -as measured by attainment of education, access to health services, and quality
of housing-using appropriate standards of service. This analysis shows that few
Chileans have deficits along all dimensions but about half of the population is lacking
along at least one dimension. The most critical deficiency exists in education, followed
by housing. Among the poor these deficits are more pronounced, with twice as many
poor persons having a deficit in educational attainment, as compared to the non-poor.

s The main areas in which expenditures declined proportionately include defense and interest on public
debt. The savings on interest alone amounted to 1.3 percent of GDP between 1991 and 2000.

7

Box 1: Improving Education

There has been considerable progress in improving Chile's education system as a result of a concerted
effort during the 1990s. A number of quantitative indicators support this conclusion. In the case of
primary schooling, these are as follows: (i) enrollment of 5 year olds has increased from 28 percent (1991)
to 82 percent (1996); (ii) repetition rate for 6-13 year olds has fallen from 12 percent (average for entire
primary cycle in 1991) to 6 percent (1996); (iii) average years to graduate from primary school has fallen
from 12.4 years (1991) to 9.7 years (1996); (iv) cognitive achievements in municipal schools in Spanish
and mathematics have increased at a faster rate than those in private paid schools and private subsidized
schools; and (v) rural schools participating in improvement programs have significantly improved their
scores outpacing the average. The gap in scores among municipal schools has been reduced, as has the
standard deviation of their scores. In the case of secondary education, accomplishments during the 1990s
are the following: (i) secondary coverage has increased from 78 percent (1995) to 84 percent (2000); (ii)
the average number of years to completion has dropped from 5.4 years (1993) to 5.0 (2000); (iii) the drop-
out rate has decreased by about 10 percent meaning that there were about one-third fewer drop-outs by the
end of the 1990s; and (iv) the completion rate has increased from 68 percent (1985-90 cohort) to 73 percent
(1995-2000 cohort). One of the particular accomplishments during the 1990s has been the expanded
coverage of rural populations from only 50 percent (1990) to 77 percent (2000). Similarly, coverage for the
poorest students has increased from 73 percent (1990) to 82 percent (2000). In the case of eighth grade test
scores, performance in municipal schools has increased significantly in natural sciences and history, with
negligible differences in mathematics and Spanish, in the period 1997 to 2000. Nevertheless, it remains the
case that education scores for private-paid schools-unadjusted for socio-economic factors-remain higher
than scores for municipality-run schools, indicating that there is still room for improvement.

Impact on Poverty and Income Distribution

21. Much of the renewed attention to social programs has served to reduce poverty:
the Bank's 1997 Poverty Assessment estimated that the increase in social spending was
responsible for 27 percent of the reduction in poverty seen in the early 1990s. The most
recent Poverty Assessment demonstrates the important impact of social spending on
income dispersion. Income inequality in Chile is a long-standing concern and is an area
in which Chile is most similar to its Latin American neighbors. As of 1998, Chile's Gini
coefficient stood at 0.547 showing no significant change since 1988. This distribution of
income is more equal than that in Brazil, comparable to that in Mexico, less equal than in
Argentina, and considerably worse than that in Uruguay and Costa Rica. But, while
many countries have seen a deterioration in income distribution during the 1990s, Chile's
Gini coefficient has remained stable. The rural areas tend to show more inequality than
the urban areas because of the faster rate of income increase among the urban population
than the rural population. The latest preliminary data for 1999 and 2000 show that this
situation continues to prevail.

22. 
The Bank's analysis of social programs in Chile demonstrates that social
programs can go a long way to transfer income to those less well off. 9 Income data in
Chile include incomes plus cash transfers but do not explicitly include the equivalent
monetary value of in-kind public services which are delivered free to beneficiaries.
Many of these programs are intended for the poor and reduce constraints within
household budgets. Thus, the more programs benefit the less well off, the more they

9 For more details, see Chile: Poverty and Income Distribution in a High-Growth Country, 1987-1998,
report number 22037-CH, dated August 30, 2001.

8

contribute to income equality. Chile's Gini coefficient falls from 0.56 to 0.50 when
social programs are included.' 0 This impact was most notable in the latter years of the
1 990s. Subsidies for education were the main contributor to improved equality, followed
by health, monetary transfers, and housing. For the poor, social programs make a
material difference in their welfare, almost as much as earned income. Importantly, the
analysis shows that these benefits accrue most in the urban centers, dominated by the
Santiago metropolitan area because of its size, and less to the rural populations which are
more prevalent in the poorest regions of the country, indicating that a better distribution
of benefits between rural and urban populations would be desirable.

Vulnerable Groups

23. 
Despite the improvements seen throughout the 1990s, poverty remains a problem.
Some of the key factors to explain the occurrence of poverty are laid out below:

* Education has been the single largest factor in explaining the differences between
the poor and the non-poor. Those who have had the least success in leaving
poverty tended to be young workers with low education, female heads of
households with low education, workers in the agriculture sector, those outside of
the labor force or unemployed persons with low education, and the elderly with
low levels of education. As of 1994, the most extreme cases are voung
agricultural workers in the south (Regions VI to X) (58 percent poor) aiid
unemployed heads of households with low education in the rural areas (80 percent
poor). Nevertheless, the highest concentration was among young workers, even
those with post-primary education, especially in the non-tradable sectors.

* Geography also makes a difference, second in importance to education. The

Bank's analysis showed that location (the district or comuna level) was important

in explaining poverty, even after controlling for other factors. Thus, there is a
physical dimension to the problem, with pockets of hard core poverty that are
more pronounced in rural areas than in urban ones. There has also been less
progress in reducing poverty in Regions other than Metropolitan Santiago, which
halved its poverty rate from 1987 to 1994. Those Regions less successful in
reducing poverty-and which continue to have high poverty rates and
concentrations of rural populations-are in the south (Regions VI through X).

* Another way to examine poverty and vulnerability is by ethnicity. Estimates of
the size of the indigenous population in Chile vary but range from 5 to 10 percent
of the total population. Regardless, these peoples remain among the poorest and
most vulnerable groups. The incidence of poverty is 36 percent for the
indigenous as compared to 23 percent for the non-indigenous (1996 data) and 65
percent of indigenous families are in the lowest two quintiles of income
distribution. They encounter difficulties in securing employment because of
discrimination and low levels of technical skills (Box 2).

10 The Gini coefficient used in this analysis has not been adjusted for adult equivalency while the figure
cited in paragraph 21 was adjusted for adult equivalency.

9

Box 2: Indigenous Peoples

Indigenous issues in Chile have become increasingly relevant to policy makers. While there is no current
nation-wide estimate of the size of the indigenous population, according to the 1992 population census, this
segment of the population represented about 7 percent of the total. Other estimates range up to 10 percent.
Alnost 80 percent live in urban areas belying the traditional image of indigenous peoples. By ethnic
group, the Mapuche are the largest-just over 80 percent--followed by the Aymara. Geographically,
Region IX (south) has the largest share, followed by Region I (far north) and Region X (far south). There
are differing estimates on the concentration in Metropolitan Santiago.

Indigenous people have poverty rates about 60 percent higher than the rest of the population, have about
one-half the incomes of the non-indigenous, and are more likely to be in unskilled jobs or agriculture.
Schooling is about 2.2 years below the average years for the non-indigenous. The indigenous are twice as
likely to rely on the public health system and are more likely to suffer from diseases such as diarrhea,
tuberculosis, and parasitosis. Only 65 percent of indigenous households have electricity, 58 percent
running water, and 41 percent sanitation connections, while the level of service for non-indigenous
households would typically be 50 percent higher. For the rural indigenous people, mainly Mapuche, the
issues of access to land, conflicts with the forestry industry, disputes over damn construction, and water
rights have created social tensions. For many indigenous people, discrimination based on their physical
appearance, behaviors and beliefs, and the lack of social and economic mobility are constants in their lives.

At the beginning of the 1990s, the situation faced by Chile's indigenous peoples was critical. An accord
was signed with the new government, establishing CEPI, the special commission for indigenous peoples, a
new law was passed in October 1993, changing the legal framework, and a new institution, CONADI, was
set up to implement the law through special programs. As a result there have been some significant
improvements. Nevertheless, there are many remaining challenges concerning the status and recognition of
Chile's indigenous peoples and increasing their welfare and inclusion. A task force established in May
1999 led to a new development plan -Pacto de Respeto Ciudadano-in August 1999. But differences
remain, particularly over access to land and water. A new IDB-financed project is to provide direct
assistance to indigenous organizations to develop their self-management and institutional capacities.

* Age and gender can be factors explaining poverty but are not significant ones.
These two factors only explain a small share of the differences in poverty and
income levels with the gender dimension losing relevance in the l990s while age
has become slightly more important. The program of guaranteeing basic pensions
for the elderly has helped in reducing poverty among that group. For specific,
small sub-groups, however, these dimensions can be critical: this is the case of
non-working female heads of households who had a poverty rate of 35 percent
(1994). Younger women (less than 35 years of age) were considerably worse off
(45 percent poverty rate) even if they were working. At the same time, family
size for such households has been decreasing over time, accompanying a general
decline in fertility in the country, with the exception of adolescents (Box 3).

10

Box 3: Gender Dimensions

Many indicators suggest that women's status has increased and that women have reached parity with men.
School enrollment is almost equal; fertility rates are the lowest of the Region; and maternal mortality rates
are comparable to those in high-income countries. But a closer look at social indicators reveal important
gender differences. This is most noticeable in the area of labor force participation where labor force
participation by women, at 35 percent, is the lowest among Latin American countries. In particular, poor
women are less likely to be employed in Chile than in other countries: lacking child care, some 65 percent
of poor women are not economically active, as compared to only about 45 percent among the non-poor.
At the other extreme, women with university degrees only earn 47 percent of comparable men's earnings.
Gender differences have emerged in education with boys having higher drop-out and repetition rates than
girls. Also, it is notable that contraceptive coverage in public hospitals only reaches 20 percent of women
in childbearing years and this service is only available after the first pregnancy. Teenage pregnancy is a
growing concern, especially in the rural areas where 64 percent of such pregnancies occur.

This situation points to the need for tailored interventions aimed especially at gender-related problems. To
this end, the Government, working with the National Women's Service (SERNAM), plans to institute a
new system of gender analysis and assessment, called Gender Equity, to ensure that all public programs
promote and incorporate gender equality in the delivery of their programs. SERNAM, the agency
responsible for promoting gender equality, benefited from an earlier IDF grant to strengthen its capacity: it
has been quite effective in putting gender on the public agenda and specific activities have been
incorporated in the Municipal Development II project with support of a Japanese PHRD grant.

Governance and Civil Society

24. 
Chile's progress during the 1990s has been accompanied by changes in societal
relations and relations with the state. No doubt the most significant change has been the
return to democracy following a long transition from military rule. This was successfully
accomplished and the country has progressed in deepening democratic institutions.
Members of Congress are freely elected, following active public debate by the candidates
and with a low level of absenteeism by the voting population. Since the return to
democracy, Chile has been led by three successive governments of a coalition, called the
Concertaci6n por la Democracia, of left-of-center parties. The process of
democratization is continuing at the local level, first, with municipalities (direct popular
elections were held in 1991) and then with regional governments (elections in 1996).

25. 
There are residual social and political issues that take time to be resolved (see
paragraph 49). UJNDP's 2000 Report, entitled Human Development in Chile: More
Society For Governing in the Future, examines this phenomenon: 50 percent of the
interview sample thought that talking about the past would negatively affect the ability of
Chileans to maintain positive relations between them. This report shows that Chile is a
country in which differences of interests and opinions are seen more as obstacles to
national unity, rather than a positive expression of social diversity. Compared to other
countries in which similar surveys have been conducted, social capital within Chilean
society is weak and mutual trust is lacking: only 32 percent of respondents had
confidence in others. This is also reflected in the rather low level of participation in civil
society organizations as compared to other countries. According to UNDP study, only 34
percent of the adult population participate in any form of organization, religious or
otherwise. Despite the fact that there are numerous civil society organizations in Chile,

they suffer from a shortage of experience, technical know-how and financial
vulnerability.

26. 
The slow development of civil society in Chile contrasts with the strengths of its
central public sector. According to assessments by the Bank and other international
groups, Chile is rated high on law and order and the quality of its bureaucracy, and low
on levels of corruption. Central public sector institutions score high in economic
management, structural policies, and overall public sector management, out-ranking
regional counterparts and income-group comparators. Probity and ethical standards are
expected among public officials and politicians. According to the results of the UNDP
study, more than fifty percent of the population had trust in their government, police
force, and universities. An exception was the legal system: a large majority did not
consider the legal system and the way in which the "rules of the game' are played as fair.
In addition, a majority felt that they are discriminated against in access to public services
because of their economic standing. Political parties and unions rank much further down
than the public sector in terms of trust while religious institutions rank the highest of all.

D. CHILE'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

Poverty Reduction in the 21't Century

27. 
As the preceding analysis indicates, Chile is well positioned as it enters the 215'
century. Its per capita income, currently estimated at $4,630 I, is comparable to that in
Mexico and Brazil. Importantly, levels of income inequality remain high, despite public
policies and programs to offset the effects, and there continue to be significant
differences among demographic groups, notably urban- versus rural-dwellers. The share
of the population that has not attained all of the basic social goals in terms of education
attainment, access to health services, and adequate housing stands at close to half. Thus,
there is the continuing challenge to increase welfare for a large share of the population.
In addition, concerted efforts are needed to reach the poor who are less able to benefit
from growth.

Growth Prospects

28. 
Chile is not imnmune to global events. It is a small, open economy, integrated into
the world market with exports sensitive to the perforrnance of industrialized economies.
The immediate impact of the events of September 11, 2001, is that short term growth
prospects for Chile will remain below their historical levels. For 2002, growth is
expected to be about 3.3 percent in real terms, reflecting the Government's present
counter-cyclical fiscal stance and a moderate expansion of exports as growth among the
industrialized countries recovers. The main factors affecting Chile's short-term growth
rate include: (i) global demand for exports, most notably copper; (ii) potential risk
aversion among investors; and (iii) prevailing regional uncertainties, particularly in
neighboring Argentina. Although Argentina only accounts for 3.2 percent of Chile's total

"GNI per capita, World Bank Atlas, 2001

12

exports, developments in Argentina could affect particular Chilean industries, such as
tourism, and the posture of Chilean companies that have invested in Argentina. Slower
growth could have consequences for employment.

29. 
Beyond 2003, there is reason to be optimistic. The country should continue to
reap the benefits of the persistency and consistency of its macro-economic policies and
investments in human capital. The Government expects that Chile could grow in the
range of 4.5 to 5.9 percent annually, with average growth about 5 percent or greater over
the decade. These rates are well within Chile's historical levels and its potential. 12
Realistically, they also reflect: (i) the likelihood that traditional sources of growth in the
natural resource sector may not grow as fast as they have in the past; (ii) the aftermath of
global events that may take some time to be overcome; and (iii) the lag in the impact of
human capital improvements on new potential sources of growth. These projections,
moreover, are subject to global and regional risks beyond Chile's control. On the down
side, if the global economy is very slow to recover, Chile's medium term growth rates
might be several percentage points lower. The consequences of this would be: (i)
increased need to be selective in any new public spending initiative; (ii) activation of
public resources to support temporary public employment programs to compensate for
persisting high unemployment rates; and (iii) continuing prudence in fiscal management
to stay within the one percent structural surplus policy. On the upside, higher growth
could create more fiscal space. Thus, precautionary measures, continuing close attention
and flexibility are needed as long as present global uncertainties prevail.

The Challenges

30. 
Chileans policy-makers are aware of, and ready to face, the short-term challenges
created by the more uncertain global environment and they are prepared to continue the
path of sustainable growth and social equity. In looking to the future, there are three
broad challenges-sustaining growth and social progress, making that process more
inclusive, and modernizing the state. These are summarized below.

1. 

Economic Growth and Social Progress

31. 
The main challenge for Chile will be to sustain rapid growth. There may, indeed,
be a downward shift in foreign direct investment and it may be necessary to move from
growth primarily based on factor accumulation to growth increasingly based on increases
in productivity. This shift will require greater focus on the quality of human resources
and knowledge.

32. 
In the past, Chile has benefited from high rates of investment which have had the
dual impact of generating output and labor intensive employment, largely in construction.
The 1999 recession put a sharp brake on investment, and commensurately employment:
sectors leading Chile's economic performance in the recent past were mining,
telecommunications, water, electricity and gas, while construction, commerce,
manufacturing, and agro-based activities declined. Even though the long-term prospects

12 Past studies by Chilean academics estimate Chile's growth potential to be about 6.5 percent per year.

13

for Chile's growth sectors-- mining, forestry and fishing--continue to be encouraging,
they are not likely to grow as fast as in the past. On the other hand, Chile's industrial
sector is small, heterogeneous, and dominated by small and medium scale enterprises
which could be a much more dynamic part of the economy.

33. 
Part of the challenge will be to enhance further the country's investment climate.
This is aided by the Government's on-going efforts at improving the regulatory
framework and corporate governance, and deepening financial and capital market
reforms. The Government is advancing rapidly in these areas, with the recent approval of
the new law of Public Offerings that provides protection for minority shareholders and
other reforms in the area of capital markets. Pending issues in judicial administration are
being addressed; these changes should positively affect investors and citizens. The
Government's emphasis on infrastructure in support of growth, largely through the on-
going concession program, has been validated in several recent regional studies. One of
these predicts that a reduction in logistics costs would result in the highest welfare gain
for Chile due to the importance of trade in the economy.'3 Other studies highlight the
importance of infrastructure, showing that each dollar spent on infrastructure can return
$1.18 in benefits. Thus, for the economy to restore a fast pace of growth, infrastructure
will have to grow commensurately. There is also room for efficiency gains: for example,
port efficiency could be improved, as reforms enacted in 1997 are slowly coming into
effect; there are ways in which competition in the electricity sector could be strengthened
as industrial electricity prices are considerably higher in Chile than in neighboring
Argentina;14 and in the case of telecommunications, privatization has not yet led to
significant tariff reductions especially for local service while the introduction of
competition for long distance calls in 1995 has led to lower rates for consumers (see
Table 4). From the point of view of enterprise development, there seems to be
considerable opportunity for local linkages and formation of competitive clusters,
especially for smaller firms.

34. 
The agenda should also further address issues of productivity and human
capital. The present focus on education - including adult education - is essential, as is
support for innovation and technology. On information and communications technology,
Chile displays some encouraging features (see Table 4). The number of computers per
person is quite high but behind Costa Rica and Uruguay. Chile stands out in terms of use
of e-mail, relative to other Latin American countries. On the side of R&D, Chile has
demonstrated a consistent increase throughout the 1 990s, bringing such investment to
about 0.65 percent of GDP. While far less than what is spent in OECD countries, this
level is among the highest in Latin America. Similarly, the number of researchers
relative to the size of the population is high in Chile as compared to its neighbors but low
in comparison to OECD countries. (However, the export of goods with a high
technology content is nascent and is substantially overshadowed by the export of basic
raw materials.) Finally, the arrival of the Internet during the last five years has

13 See Eric Bond, "Trade Structure and Development: The Role of Logistic Costs in Latin American
Countries", Background Paper for the Regional Flagship Report, 2001.
14 See "Productivity, Competitiveness and Economic Reform in Argentina: Was It Enough?", FIEL,
August 1999.

14

introduced a new dimension to the problem of universal access and goes beyond the
proximity to a public telephone. In Chile, availability of Internet infrastructure is
confined and the take-up of Internet sites is less than that in Uruguay, Mexico, and
Argentina. 
Internet use tends to be concentrated among a narrow social base, consisting
primarily of university students and self-employed professionals. Hence, the expansion
of access to the Internet will require programs to make service financially and culturally
accessible to SMEs and other segments of the population.

Table 4: Selected Information and Communications Technology Indicators

Country 

Telephone 
Mainlines 
(% population) 

LAC 
Chile 
Argentina 
Uruguay 
Mexico 
Brazil 
USA 
Australia 
UK 

13 
21 
20 
27 
11 
15 
66 
52 
57 

Cost of Local 
Call 
(US$ per 3 
minutes)
.09 
.12 
.09 
.18 
.14 
.03 
.09 
.16 
.19 

Mobile 
Telephones 
(% population) 

Personal 
Computers 
(% population) 

Internet
Users
(per 10,000)

8 
15 
12 
10 
8 
9 
31 
34 
46 

4 
7 
5 
10 
4 
4 
51 
47 
30 

191
467
243
1,000
188
208
2,665
3,158
2,083

35. 
Education has been a top priority all through the 1 990s. Evidence shows that the
increase in public spending and accompanying reforms to the basic and secondary
education systems are paying off (Box 1). Nevertheless, privately paid schooling
continues to show gains in student attainment so that the gap between public and private
schooling is closing only slowly. As a result, institutionalization and deepening of the
current education agenda remain a high priority. Moreover, improvements to quality and
equity are only beginning in post-secondary streams where it is expected that most of the
new entrants to the labor force will be trained. Thus, it is very important that the
Government continue the process of reform begun in the 1 990s with the support of two
now completed Bank-financed projects for primary and secondary education and the on-
going Higher Education project.

36. 
Added to this is a growing concern about the "stock" of Chile's labor force.
International studies show that the average level of functional education of the labor force
is relatively low: only 39 percent of the adult population in Chile has completed eight
years of schooling and almost 50 percent of the literate labor force does not meet the
minimum standards of reading and writing necessary for a modem employment sector.
Thus, the agenda on human capital development has been expanded to include adult
education, training and skill development, and mobility in the labor force.

37. 
Such initiatives will have bearing on Chile's ability to generate jobs. The 1999
economic downturn evoked a sharp rise in unemployment which was not reversed during
the 2000 recovery. Meanwhile, among Chile's poor, the chances of having one
household member unemployed rose to 1 -in- I0, 60 percent greater than for the average.

15

Unemployment data show that this rise has been generalized, by age, education, and
region, indicating an upward shift across the board. Statistics for 1998-2000 indicate the
employment creation was more likely for those with superior levels of education than for
those with only basic education. Those with the most difficulties were youth, and those
in agriculture, mining and industry and in the center and south (Regions IV, V, vm and
IX). The lack ofjob creation was notable by smaller firms (with less than 50

employees).'5

38. 
Performance in 1998-2000 has raised some concerns about Chile's long-term
capacity to create jobs and generated an on-going debate in the country on the causes of
the relatively slow recovery of employment since the 1999 downturn. Some of the
factors being discussed include slack domestic demand and spare capacity, the lasting
impacts of the recent adjustments made by firms, and relatively rigid labor market
regulations. Chile is among Latin Arnerican countries with relatively high and binding
minimum wages16 and, while the costs of terminating employment are close to the
average for the region, these costs are higher than that in Brazil, Argentina and
Uruguay. 1 7 Also, Chile's present unemployment insurance program reaches a fraction of
the unemployed-only 8 percent of all unemployed workers in 1998 received benefits--
highlighting the need for more attention to employment fluctuations in the design of
social protection programs especially for those in the informal sector. Recently adopted
reforms to the system of unemployment insurance, based on individual accounts, have yet
to make a significant difference in coverage or benefits.

2. 

Making Growth More Inclusive

39. 
The benefits of growth can be better shared among Chileans. All Regions but one
experience poverty rates at least 50 percent higher than that of Metropolitan Santiago,
reflecting the differences in the composition of their respective populations, with the
Regions outside of Santiago possessing a larger share of rural populations. Even though
only 14 percent of the total population is rural, this is swayed by the dominance of
Metropolitan Santiago accounting for half of the total population. Thus, excluding
Santiago, the share of rural populations is likely to be some 30-40 percent.

40. 
As highlighted below, rural populations are more likely to be poor and
indigenous, lack basic services and show significant differences in social indicators. In
the case of education, for example, Region VII in the south, one of the poorest, had a net
secondary enrollment rate of 70 percent as compared to 84 percent nationally. Overall,
net enrollment in the rural areas for secondary education is only 77 percent as compared
to 92 percent in the urban areas (even though the gap has been closing since 1990).
Another example is that only 75 percent of rural households have electricity, and 65
percent access to safe water. In the case of electricity, there has been considerable
improvement in the last five years, as a result of the Government's efforts to expand
service, up from 50 percent in 1994. The new goal is to have 90 percent of the rural

'S See Panorama Laboral 2000, ILO, dated February 2001.
16 Ibid. However, this conclusion contrasts with that of the recent IDB study on competitiveness.
17 See Competitvidad: El Motor del Crecimiento, BID, 2001, citing data from Heckman and Pages, 2000.

16

population served by 2005 with an increased role for isolated, renewable energy systems
to reach remote areas.

41. 
There may be environmental benefits from decongestion of the major center,
Santiago, which suffers from pollution and urban congestion problems. On the other
hand, many of the Regions - particularly those where mining, forestry, and fishing
dominate-encounter their own environmental problems due to the fragility of these eco-
systems. Given Chile's geography-a narrow country, divided by mountain ranges-and
its wide variations in rainfall, combined with its dependence on hydro-electricity and
irrigation for more than 35 percent of agricultural production, appropriate watershed
management is critical. Sustainable, equitable development at the regional level is a
complex agenda that combines infrastructure, services, capacity building, and sustainable
management of natural resources. It also entails the equitable allocation of public
resources taking into account both need and implementation capacity. Given the nature
of Chile's remaining poverty, local actions will play an increasingly important role to
stimulate income-earning activities and to target and improve social services.

42. While growth has gone a long way in reducing poverty during the 1990s, growth
can be more inclusive, not only across Regions but across groups. Importantly, inequity
in the access of the poor to higher education-the bottom 20 percent of the income
distribution received only 6 percent of the resources in the late 1 980s-are now being
reversed, with support of the on-going Higher Education Quality Project. Many of the
poor-who either drop out of secondary school or not do progress to a quality post-
secondary education-do not fare well in the labor market. 18 Moreover, a large number
of youths - about 24 percent-continue not to graduate from the secondary system,
resulting in youth unemployment problems.'9 Particular groups which tend to have high
poverty and unemployment rates, and low levels of education warrant attention: drop-
outs of secondary school, youths at risk, young women, female heads of households,
indigenous peoples and rural workers.

43. 
Thus, vulnerability remains a concern even though extreme deprivation has by
and large been eliminated and Chile has relatively developed, universal systems of
education, health insurance and social security, plus a wide variety of targeted social
programs. Two programs deserve mention: Chile Joven and Capacitaci6n para Mujeres
Jefes de Hogar (Training for Female Heads-of-Households). Both of these programs
provide training and support in securing employment for the groups with the lowest
chances of finding jobs.

44. 
The 2001 Poverty Assessment shows that coverage of some targeted programs
could be expanded, especially those with a high distributive impact: notable ones are
subsidies for child care which should be important for poor women to be able to work
outside the home and family allowances which can offset the low wages that most poor
women earn in the domestic service industry. These transfers are highly positive in terms
of income distribution and their expansion need not be at the expense of increased overall

18 For both boys and girls, the drop-out rate is highest in the first year of secondary education,

19 The main reason for dropping out is reported to be the need for extra family income.

17

spending as some targeted programs show considerable leakage, so that some tightening
of criteria could generate savings. This is most pronounced in the case of housing
programs and water subsidies. Finally, changes in Chile's successful scoring system of
beneficiary eligibility could make social programs more responsive. Combined with the
results of the regular household living standard surveys, 2 0 the two-page form (called the
ficha CAS or social stratification form) constitutes a cost-effective way for determining
eligibility for many social programs at once and is used by local governments to
administer programs. But the form itself and the scoring mechanism may be rigid and
not take into sufficient account variations in income.2 1 linprovements to this system and
how it is used are important at the local level because of the decentralized administration
of many social programs.

45. 
The present framnework of social protection can be further refined. One area of
concern is participation in the pension system: a substantial share of workers are in the
informal sector - 38 percent as of 1998-and 33 percent of all workers do not contribute
to social security, up from 20 percent in 1990.22 This could create an additional financial
burden on the pension system as these workers reach retirement age. Already the public
pension for non-contributors, benefiting 350,000 persons, has increased four-fold in the
past twenty years, now accounting for 1.2 percent of GDP. Another concern is how to
provide Chile's aging population with health care coverage and to insure the rest-
especially families with young children-against catastrophic health care costs. The
changing health profile-away from infectious diseases and toward chronic and life-style
diseases-needs to be taken into account. Equity considerations in the health system
deserve attention. At present, there is no consensus on how health care reform in Chile
should take place but the dual insurance system leads many to consider the system as
inequitable. This is aggravated by slow progress in changing management and incentives
within the public health system (see paragraph 52).

3. 

Modernization of the State

46. 
Underpinning Chile's ability to meet the above challenges is the capacity of the
state. As discussed earlier, the central public service stands out when compared to other
developing countries. One indicator of improving budget processes is the halving of
"reserved" funds, that is, funds whose spending purpose is not disclosed, to no more than
0.1 percent of the total. There have also been a series of innovations in public budgeting,
including a Competitive Fund which provides flexibility and can fumd programs, mainly
in the social sectors, which might not otherwise have been adequately fimded or at all,
and incentive bonuses of up to 3 percent of their wages to public employees working in
agencies which have accomplished their institutional goals. At present, 109 public
services are subject to performance monitoring and 120 programs have been evaluated.

20 As explained in the Poverty Assessments, Chile has a two-year cycle of household surveys that provide a
rich data set on living standards.

21 For a fuller discussion of thefiche CAS and the issues of targeting and coverage, see Chile: Poverty and
Income Distribution in a High Growth Economy, 1987-98, report number 22037-CH, dated August 31,
2001.
22 See Panorama Laboral 2000, ILO, dated February, 2001.

18

Decentralization is also part of the program as local institutions take on more
responsibility for managing investments.

47. 
This performance can be strengthened even further by: (i) implementing a system
of integrated public expenditure management to provide real time information to
decision-makers and provide more standardization in reporting across agencies, thus
facilitating monitoring and evaluation; and (ii) addressing some of the rigidities which
exist in the resource management system, notably over human resources. At the same
time, relaxing such controls especially over hiring and staffing transfers- without the
attendant systems to instill accountability and measure performance-runs the risk of
undermining fiscal stability. As the country moves to even more decentralization of
services, changes should be done cautiously, adding flexibility with performance and
accountability, including to society at large as being proposed under Government's State
Reform and Modernization Program (see paragraph 56). There is opportunity for more
partnerships with the private sector to accelerate investment in non-traditional areas, such
as hospitals.

E. THE GOVERNMENT'S PROGRAM

48. 
The above challenges have shaped the Government's program. During President
Lagos'six-year mandate, which began in March 2000, new initiatives are planned while
continuing the main thrust of the on-going economic and social program. The agenda set
out by the Lagos Administration is comprehensive and follows closely on those of its
predecessor administrations of the Concertaci6n coalition, providing continuity in the
overall policy framework. The essential priorities remain sustainable and equitable
growth and poverty reduction, via a conducive macro-economic policy framework, strong
public institutions, investment in human capital and social protection. The Government
continues to see the private sector as the driver of employment creation and production,
with the public sector facilitating that process and creating opportunities for private
participation. New initiatives under the Lagos Administration lie in three primary areas.

Expansion of Civil Liberties and National Unity

49. 
These initiatives acknowledge that the transformation to democracy has been
incomplete. Plans include eliminating outdated laws, carried over from the military
regime, on matters such as censorship, and deepening democratic processes. The
Government has proposed to Congress a number of Constitutional reforms that, among
other things, relate to the Armed Forces, the National Security Council, the Constitutional
Tribunal, the electoral system and non-elected senators. The Government has already
begun the process of modernizing family law, providing more rights to children and
wives and introducing family courts, and dealing with the emerging societal concerns
about security, personal liberties and crime, including the implementation of a new
criminal justice system. Finally, it plans to build on Chile's strong sense of national
identity and promote the expression of Chilean culture, sports and social organizations.

19

Equal Opportunities and Inclusion

50. 
The second set of initiatives focuses on employment and assurance that all
Chileans have equal access. To aid in the transition to full employment, the Government
will continue to provide temporary municipal-run employment relief, in programs such as
reforestation and housing. The present plan is to generate a total of about 150,000 such
temporary jobs in 2002, the same level as in 2001, triggered into action if the
unemployment rate surpasses 9 percent. The Government also plans to end
discrimination against indigenous and women, much of which is felt in the labor force. 2 3

51. 
The Government will continue to deepen efforts to improve the quality and
relevance of education (Box 1). Part of this will reduce inequality in education, by
expanding full day schooling, adding information technology to schools, and providing
more student loans and scholarships. To this will be added a new emphasis on adult
education and life long leaming, addressing the needs of adults, especially poor youths
who need a second chance at attaining secondary education. Access to information
technology will be expanded through info-centers, providing a solid legal basis for e-
commerce and use of ICT and facilitating interaction with the state by Internet.

52. 
A major effort will be directed to improve health services, building on the
recommendations of the on-going Presidential Commission on Health. Some of the
features of the reforms which are presently being debated include options for a solidarity
fund, risk-adjusted universal insurance, and the definition of a mandatory universal
benefit package with individuals in the publicly run system gradually being able to have
the choice to move to private insurers and providers. New impetus would be given to
health care management, budgeting, and incentives for performance. Such reforms at the
hospital level could be accompanied by private concessions and/or management
contracts. Attendant elements of this initiative include greater attention to primary health
care and prevention. Pensions would be increased and the problems of non-contribution
to the social security system addressed.

53. 
Reducing tax evasion is a key part of the Government's program to increase
equity. A new law on tax evasion has been passed and its implementation is expected to
add about 0.8 percent of GDP to tax collections even though Chile already has a
relatively low level of tax evasion. Other dimensions of the program include:
(i) addressing the deficiencies in housing, targeting the lowest 20 percent of the income
distribution, with accompanying urban renewal; and (ii) upgrading public mass transport
services in the Santiago area, thus addressing many environmental concerns in the urban
areas. Similarly, the Government intends to continue its focus on sound natural resource
management in the rural areas, watershed management, protected areas management, the
use of mercury bromide in the agricultural sector, and adoption of environmentally sound
practices in the forestry sector.

23 Women and youths have the highest unemployment rates in the country. Data are not available on
unemploymnent rates among indigenous peoples. Anecdotal evidence suggests that under-and un-
employment among indigenous is also very high.

20

Box 4: Integrating Environmental Concerns

Chile's success is founded on a market-based growth policy based on its comparative advantage in natural
resources. At the start of the 1990s, mining, fishing, forestry and industrial pollution were largely
unregulated. Visibly poor air quality in Santiago and the mounting destruction of forests highlighted the
need for action. Thus, the Government made protection of the environment and sensible management of
Chile's rich natural resources an important part of its progran. The strategy took into account that part of
the cost of past growth was being borne by the population and the country's resource base while, at the
same time, recognizing that over-regulation and too much control could be counter-productive. Thus, the
search was for an approach that combined use of economic incentives and regulations explicitly taking
envirornmental factors into account.

This led to the creation of the national environmental comrnission, CONAMA, in 1992. Chile's cautious
and practical approach resulted in a small, decentralized agency, beginning with the basic steps, addressing
priority areas in a gradual manner. The goal was to create a capacity for information management, analysis,
and debate. Part of CONAMA's work, with the support of the Bank-financed Environmental Institutions
Development Project, was to update legal regulations, develop procedures and guidelines for environmental
assessments, sponsor educational campaigns, and develop information systems. CONAMA has made
remarkable advances. The number of staff working on environmental concerns in the government grew
from six to 350. There are environmental units in ten ministries and there is a solid track record in impact
assessment, policy analysis and information systems. By 1999, norms were approved for 14 different
sectors of activity. Sector by sector, advances have been opportunistic; that is, authorities have seized
opportunities as they arose so that progress has been faster in some areas than others. This is particularly
the case of mining and fisheries (including the aquaculture industry) that lag, as compared to forestry where
progress is taking place. Perhaps the best accomplishment has been the creation of a space for informned
debate.

Promotion of Growth in a Globalized and Competitive World

54. 
The third set of initiatives covers enhancing Chile's ability to compete. While
many of the actions to be pursued in the other two areas-most notably in the area of
education and information technology-will contribute to this endeavor, actions are
envisaged to address some of the recognized bottlenecks. This entails capital market
reforms: improving self-regulation of banks, incentives for risk capital formation,
creating new stock markets, expanding the range of mutual funds which can be managed
by financial institutions, improving regulation of investment funds and financial
intermediation, and modifying credit rating mechanisms especially for SMEs. 
In a
competitive environment, it is important for Chile to improve efficiency in the provision
of electricity, telecommunications, water, and transport. As these markets evolve, Chile
intends to reassess its regulatory environment and ways to stimulate both new
investments and competition to ensure efficient resource allocation and pricing. Private
sector investment, especially in infrastructure, subways, and housing, will be promoted,
along with partnerships in other public services such as hospitals. This program will
include a multi-actor dialogue on improving competitiveness. Finally, the Government's
program entails measures to stimulate innovation via adoption of "clean" technologies,
quality control, information and communications technology, and bio-technology.

55. 
On international trade, Chile is collaborating with its MERCOSUR neighbors and
is currently advancing in trade discussions with the USA for a possible bi-lateral trade

21

agreement. It expects the on-going trade talks with the European Union to be completed
as early as mid-2002. These efforts continue the path that Chile has followed for the past
two decades, in liberalizing its trade relations on a bilateral basis, making Chile the most
open economy in Latin America. In all of these discussions, a positive investment
climate enhanced by Chile's track record, respect for the law, and environmental and
other regulations will be beneficial.

56. Modernization of the state remains a continuing feature of the Government's
program. This process is being deepened as part of the State Reform and Modernization
Program, instituted by the Lagos Administration. State-of-the-art information systems
are an important feature, notably in public procurement-via chilecompra. cl-and in
electronic transaction processing including tax payments-via tramitefacil.gob. cl. In this
context, an integrated financial management system for public expenditure management
is pivotal, along with efforts to improve the overall control environment. Issues of
transparency also include improved management of Chile's contingent liabilities,
especially those that arise because of concession contracts, guarantees of public debts,
minimum pensions, insurance schemes, etc. Concern about transparency and
accountability is further reflected in the Government's plans to strengthen the Auditor
General's Office, with IDB assistance, and to put in place an Office of the Public
Defender. There are plans to embark on an ambitious program of institutional reform
that proposes merging several ministries along functional lines. Decentralization and
deconcentration are key features, with the goal of increasing the share of public
investments at the regional level.

F. 

THE WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

An Evolving Relationship

57. 
The World Bank Group has been a major partner in Chile's development effort.
Chile was, in fact, the first developing country to borrow from the World Bank in 1948.
This long relationship has, by and large, been a successful one: the recently completed
Country Assistance Evaluation carried out by OED of the IBRD program from FY81 to
FY00 considers the results of this joint effort to have been highly satisfactory (see Box
5), highlighting progress in institutional development as particularly encouraging. The
new strategy laid out in the following section builds on this successful past, helping to
address the challenges of the future. A more detailed review of the accomplishments
under the previous CAS follows.

22

Box 5: OED's Country Assistance Evaluation

OED's Country Assistance Evaluation rated the outcome of the Bank's program in Chile for 1981-2000 as
highly satisfactory. Bank assistance supported substantial institutional development and time has shown
that achievements have a high likelihood of being sustained. One of the highlights has been institutional
development: OED's CAE states that: " [the Bank's] assistance helped to shape new institutions and
organizations to make public expenditures more efficient and to produce better social development". On
efficacy, OED rated the program as achieving substantial effectiveness. Overall, outcomes were rated as
being more successful in the early period, before 1991, as compared to more recent experience, reflecting
the changing and complex nature of these operations such as the Small Farmers Services, Housing Sector
II, and Valparaiso Water Supply Projects. Operations in Chile rank among the most cost effective per loan
approved.

Five lessons stand out: (1) programs can be effective if the countiy is committed to stable macro-economic
policies; (2) the Bank may be more effective in promoting reforms with a succession of structural
adjustment loans, an early feature of the Bank's program with Chile; (3) changes in incentives and
institutions in the way social services are delivered and natural resources managed can bring in the private
sector; (4) when there is insufficient information, the better route may be to pilot programs: test results can
be a powerful tool to convince stakeholders of the benefits of reforms; and (5) even in a country with as
sophisticated as Chile, the Bank should abstain from insisting on reforms if ownership is weak.

Source: Chile-Country Assistance Evaluation, OED, dated September 26, 2001

Lessons and Progress in Realizing Past CAS Objectives

1. 

IBRD Lending

58. 
The 1995 CAS, covering FY96-98, set out four areas for support: (i) upgrading
human capital necessary for international competitiveness; (ii) addressing pockets of rural
poverty through sustainable natural resource management; (iii) leveraging resources for
Chile's outdated and overloaded infrastructure; and (iv) mitigating damage caused by
urbanization and strengthening environmental management. 2 4 This program was
selective, with about one operation planned per year, including one guarantee, in the
areas of highways, water and sewerage, education, rural poverty and environmental
pollution. The planned level of lending, totaling $155 million, was significantly less than
that of the previous periods (see Table 5). In the end, the Bank approved five loans in
FY96-99 for $210 million. There was no new lending in FY00 and FY01 as the
transition to the Lagos Administration took place. IFC's experience during this period
mirrored that of IBRD and both institutions saw their level of support decline in the
1990s, to resume during the economic decline of 1999.

59. 
Implementation ofthel995 CAS reflected the Government's decision in 1996 to
curtail new borrowing and to reduce exposure under on-going operations that led to
cancellation of $160 million of the portfolio and prepayment of $515 million. This shift
was accompanied by a new program of reimbursable advisory services (Box 6). The
portfolio, which consisted of 14 projects under implementation in FY95, shrank to 5
projects by the end of FY01. Following approval of the Secano Agricultural

24 See Report No. 143 70-CH, dated Aprl 17, 1995.

23

Development Project in FY96, no new loan was approved until three loans--the Higher
Education Project, the Second Municipal Development Project, and the LIL for
Millennium Institutes--were approved in FY99, reflecting Chile's heightened emphasis
on the quality of human capital and institutional development as prerequisites for
benefiting from the emerging knowledge economy.

Table 5: IBRD Commitments by Sector: FY85-99 (US$ million)

1985-89 

750 

1990-94 

0 

Sector 
Adjustment 
Infrastructure 
Education and Health 
Industry and Finance 
Housing and Urban Development 

Agriculture 

332 

0 

215 
280 

56 

750 

1995-99 Total 
0 
120 
185 
0 
0 

15 

7T47 
472 
345 
280 
211 
116
65 
2,986 
199 

295 
287 
130 
0 
140 
50 
39 
941 
188 

60. 
As the portfolio
matured and a number of

rtoswr

operations were
completed during the
latter part of the 1990s, a
rich set of lessons

Water and Sanitation 
Public Sector Management 
Total 
Average per year 

emerged from the
respective
Implementation
Completion Reports (ICRs). The following summarizes the key results of the operations
completed during the latter part of the 1990s:

66 
1 
1,710 
342 

0 
15 
335 
67 

* Human Capital: The shift in lending towards the social sectors in the early 1990s
has born fruit. In primary education, under the Basic Education Loan (Ln. 3410-CH,
approved October 1992 and completed June 1998), results include: the introduction
of special education for disabled children, school-based health screening, and the
computer-internet based communications network called Enlaces; improved
pedagogy and learning materials, including libraries; upgrading of rural schools and
expansion of pre-school education including the training of mothers; and institutional
strengthening of the Ministry of Education including the introduction of standardized
testing. 
In the case of secondary education, under and the Secondary Education Loan
(Ln. 38836-CH, approved May 1995 and completed June 2001), the main
achievements were: upgrading learning materials and learning resource centers;
mobilizing teachers and students to be proactive in the change process including
cultural and voluntary activities; updating the curriculum; and improving teacher
methods. While still at a relatively early stage of implementation, the Higher
Education Project (Ln. 4404-CH, approved in FY99) is beginning the process of
improving quality, equity and efficiency at that level. Equally, in the case of health,
the two completed operations-Health Technical Assistance and Rehabilitation (Ln.
3427-CH, approved in December 1991 and completed in December 1997) and the
Health Sector Reform Loan (Ln. 3527-CH, approved in November 1992 and
completed in August 1999)-were successful in meeting their objectives. There were
a number of accomplishments, notably in the area of decentralization and laying the
basis for institutional and policy reforms.

* Rural Poverty: Success was mixed under the two Bank-financed projects. In the
case of the Small Farmer Services Project (Ln. 3473-CH), the ICR shows that the
initial hypothesis that small, poor farmers could graduate from state-subsidized
extension services and credit to privately run, non-subsidized services was not

24

feasible and the project failed to meet its objectives. As a result, how to assist best
this group of rural poor had to be rethought. A new approach was devised relying on
private-sector delivery of extension and financial services, with only partial cost
recovery. The Secano Agricultural Development project (Ln. 3974-CH), in its ICR,
shows that this new approach could work and some small, poor farmers can break out
of being marginal producers. However, the potential for replicability and
sustainability is not considered high because of the fiscal costs involved in providing
the subsidized services. One of the more general lessons derived from past work in
the rural sector is that poverty reduction also depends on non-farm income generating
activities, along with infrastructure and social services to integrate better these
populations. This lesson will be applied in the proposed Rural Infrastructure Services
and Watershed Management Projects. Continuing Bank technical advice is being
sought on how to evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of agricultural programs.

Infrastructure: Bank support for infrastructure dropped during the latter part of the
1990s, prompted by the private sector's successful access to financing combined with
the Government's progress in concessioning new investments. In part, this is a
consequence of the Bank's past support, including the completed First and Second
Transport Projects which were rated best practice by OED. These loans supported a
program of investment and institutional development with far-reaching results,
including: (i) the transformation of the highway agency into an efficient organization;
(ii) construction, upgrading, and rehabilitation of some 79,000 km. of roads; (iii)
ensuring that economic criteria were used for decisions on road investments; and (iv)
private participation which increased the efficiency of these expenditures and induced
the Government to spend more on maintenance. On-going support under the Third
Road Sector Loan (Ln 3833-CH) is accompanying the Government in furthering
institutional reforms.

Urban and Environmental Management: There have been clear advances on the
institutional side: the Bank's support for establishing a new environmental institution
under the CONAMA Loan (Ln. 3529-CH, approved November 1992 and completed
December 1999) was successful in establishing an environmental management
capacity, particularly on urban pollution issues. It contributed to generating
awareness of environmental issues and helped foster informed debate. Nevertheless,
CONAMA still faces major challenges in promoting enforcement and improving
natural resources management in key sectors closely linked to important extractive
industries (Box 4). As for global environmental issues, the experience shows useful
ways to mobilize grant resources for innovative programs (e.g., Montreal Protocol)
and their full potential is yet to be tapped. The earlier attempts at pursuing reforms
under the Second Housing Loan (Ln. 3331 -CH) were unsuccessful and the planned
financial support for urban development did not materialize because of changing
government priorities. Even though a potential project for addressing air quality in
the greater Santiago area also did not materialize, because of the decline in overall
borrowing, Santiago has been an active participant in the Regional Clean Air
Initiative and is now working on a climate change GEF operation integrating
transport and urban growth issues.

25

* Public Sector Management: Efforts under the Second Public Sector Management
Technical Assistance Project (Ln. 3411 -CH, approved October 1991 and completed
June 1997) have had lasting impacts. This project advanced institutional
improvements, focusing on the needs of the newly restored democracy. It aided
building in-house analytic, information processing, and administrative capacities in
core agencies. Support continues at the municipal level, under the First and Second
Municipal Development Projects, strengthening the core capacities of this level of
govermnent in a sample of municipalities as well as introducing innovations in the
areas of gender and indigenous peoples.

Box 6: Fee-based Advisory Services

In mid- 1996, the Bank and Chile signed an accord for providing, at short notice, technical advice on a
partially reimbursable basis. The rationale was to enable Chile to access global experience and advice that
would have been less readily available in view of the reduced level of Bank activity. It was also to serve as
a catalyst for bringing together government agencies to focus on specific issues. Among the features of the
Bank's involvement desired by the Government was objectivity that the authorities did not think was
always possible by engaging private sector consultants. The Bank saw the benefit of continuing to work
with a member that was tackling state-of-the-art or frontier development issues.

From July 1996 to May 1998, when the program was replaced by the Bank-wide fee-based advisory
services program, the Bank provided assistance in five areas: (i) airport concessions; (ii) toll roads;
(iii) higher education; (iv) regulatory institutions; and (v) hydrocarbons. In total, the Bank was reimbursed
about $220,000 for staff time, consultants and travel. Most of this advice was of short duration without
follow-up; an exception was the work on higher education which ultimately led to a new loan being
prepared and approved in FY99.

As a precursor to the Bank-wide program adopted in 1998, the program with Chile provides several
lessons. The first is that, being demand-driven, success depended on the local capacity to identify and
articulate needs. The second is that the advice being sought from Bank staff was usually cutting edge and a
challenge; thus, Bank staff welcomed the opportunity. Third, there were many demands and coordination
by the Ministry of Finance was critical. Recipient agencies were asked to cost-share. And finally, since the
program was designed to provide short-term advice, it was not always the best instrument to address areas
which demanded longer term support. On the side of the Bank, isolated provision of advice was not always
followed up or integrated into broader country strategy nor was this knowledge available to others.

Since the program of advisory services with Chile was subsumed under the Bank-wide program in 1998,
Chile has called upon the new program three times. The first case was support for the continuation of the
Bank's involvement in education. The second case was specific assistance in the area of health, building
on the conclusions of the ESW completed by the Bank. The third case involves the evaluation of the
contingent liabilities that the Government has under various concession agreements in infrastructure. Other
possible assigmnents are being discussed, including the identification of public-private partnerships in non-
traditional areas such as hospitals.

2. 

Portfolio Management

61. With five projects under implementation, representing total loans of $280 million,
with $117 million undisbursed, Chile's portfolio is small and problem and risk free at

26

present.25 The Third Road project is moving into its final stages, as is the Millennium
Institutes LIL, closing in FY03. All on-going projects remain relevant to Chile's
development agenda and are consistent with the Country Assistance Strategy.

62. 
There is no major concern on the fiduciary side reflecting that: (i) project audits
are up-to-date and do not reveal any systemic issues; (ii) Chile has been working with the
IMF on upgrading its public accounts and transparency; (iii) there has been no recent
mis-procurement under Bank-financed projects and complaints from bidders are rare; (iv)
Chile's public procurement system, considered relatively good, is being improved under
the 1999 Public Procurement Law; (v) IDB is providing assistance in strengthening the
Office of the Auditor General; and (vi) corruption is perceived to be low and the
standards of probity high. A combined Country Financial Accountability and
Procurement Assessment is planned to validate this assessment (see Table 7). In the
meantime, the proposed Public Expenditure Management Project, which accompanies
this CAS, will address areas identified for improvement.

3. 

Economic and Sector Work

63. 
In addition to fee-based advisory services (Box 6), a steady program of ESW was
carried out, consisting of one major piece per year on topics usually suggested by the
Government. Among the most recent ones was analysis of catastrophic health costs that
showed that these costs were not concentrated with the elderly, rather with young
families with children. The study further brought to light other problems in the
functioning of Chile's health insurance system. Two other studies were the Poverty
Assessments in FY98 and FYOO-O 1.26 These reports have advanced techniques in
measuring poverty and understanding the impact of social services on poverty and
income distribution. They have provided the underpinning for preparing this CAS. The
Policy Notes, a series of papers commissioned by the Bank from two local universities in
FY00, provided an overview of concerns within the Chilean academic community and
provided insights into ongoing debates in Chile, notably on public spending in education.

4. 

IFC and MIGA

64. 
During the 1980s, the private sector in Chile received broad IFC support. In the
1 990s, as the Chilean private sector improved its access to longer-term credit and
sophisticated financial products, IFC became increasingly selective. This meant in the
latter part of the 1 990s targeting activities in which IFC would have a strong role and
significant development impact, including greenfield projects, non-traditional industries,
regional operations, second-tiered companies that lack market access and specialized
transactions in the financial sector, such as fund management and venture capital. The
Corporation's involvement further narrowed in FY98 when there were no investment

25 The operations currently under implementation are: Road Sector III, Municipal Development II, Higher
Education, Millennium Institutes LIL, and the Montreal Protocol.
26 See Chile: Poverty and Income Distribution in a High Growth Economy, 1987-1995, Report Number
16377-CH, dated November 25, 1997, and its update, covering 1987-98, Report Number 22037-CH, dated
August 30, 2001.

27

approvals. In FY99, IFC resumed selective financing in response to the decline in
economic growth and the Government's requests for support in priority areas: a total of
$37 million was approved for a rail transportation project and a continuing investment in
a copper producer in FY99, followed by a $104 million investment (including
syndications) in a port project in FY00. As of December 31, 2001, IFC's portfolio for
Chile stood at $131 million (including syndications).

65. 
Since FY95, MIGA has been moderately active, supporting projects worth $31.3
million in FY98 and $31.4 million in FY99 in the mining and oil and gas sectors,
respectively. As a result of reductions of guarantee coverage, MIGA's current exposure
in Chile is only $22.2 million. While no new contracts were signed in FY00 and FY0 1,
MIGA has received an application for a potential project in the infrastructure sector.

The FY02-06 Program

66. 
This Country Assistance Strategy builds on Chile's success in reducing poverty
and aims to support activities to sustain and deepen that process. In light of Chile's
progress during the past decade, the proposed program for FY02-06 focuses selectively
on areas in which the comparative advantage of the World Bank Group can come into
play, bringing together global knowledge, past experience and the ability to sustain
dialogue and to exploit synergies with other activities.

Box 7: Consultation in Preparing the CAS

The consultations carried out for preparing this CAS focused on the linkage with the Bank's Poverty
Assessment. The Poverty Assessment laid out four main themes: (i) the importance of sustainable growth,
since growth has been the driver of poverty reduction since 1988. Productivity improvements,
enhancements of human capital and labor mobility, technology, and employment creation, especially by
SMEs, were considered key. Moreover, for growth to be sustained, natural resources, such as watersheds,
sensitive lands, and air quality, have to be managed; (ii) the need to target those less likely to benefit
readily from economic growth, such as youths, women heads of households, the elderly living in the rural
areas, and indigenous groups. Many of these have limited education and may benefit from a second
chance. Opportunities for them might arise in small firms and in small centers. Others may require more
responsive social programs; (iii) the disparities that exist among Regions and groups, especially between
those living in the rural areas versus urban centers. Thus, access to services and local capacities to provide
services and administer programs could be reinforced; and (iv) the continuing challenge of meeting the
basic needs of the population, notably in education, health and housing. While absolute deprivation is low,
the needs of the population with deficiencies remained high-almost 50 percent of the total.

This diagnosis and the accompanying proposals for the CAS were presented to two civil society groups in
November 2001. The first consisted of about 200 academics, students, and policy makers, sponsored by
the University of Chile. The second was a group of 20 leaders of non-governmental organizations. This
meeting was facilitated by the Secretariat-General of the Presidency. The NGO leaders are part of the
Commission on Participation formed by President Lagos to add new mechanisms for involving civil society
in public programs. Both audiences responded favorably to the poverty analysis and to the Bank's

proposals, endorsing the main thrusts of the proposed program. Feedback from the group of NGOs

highlighted the weakness of local administrations in implementing social programs and the need for

increasing public sector accountability. This group also noted potential areas to improve future

assessments of poverty. Equally, feedback from the academic group included comments on measuring

poverty in the future, and the need for more exhaustive and systematic evaluation of social programs.

28

67. 
There are three broad objectives for the program corresponding to the main
development challenges facing the country, namely: (i) sustaining overall economic
growth and social progress; (ii) heightening inclusion, especially of rural populations and
vulnerable groups, with an emphasis on opportunity and social services; and (iii)
modernizing the state as the underpinning for development. In each area, the proposed
program provides technical support and advice with sustained financing as a catalyst. It
also includes support for structural reforms with the option of deferring actual use of the
funds.

Vehicles for Bank Group Assistance

2. 

IBRD Lending Services

68. 
The proposed lending program for FY02 to 06 would be approximately $500 to
$650 million. The average amount of lending-about $100 million per year - is
comparable to past lending during the 1 990s and represents a significant decline from the
1980 and early 1 990s. 2 7 The first part would consist of up to six investment loans,
roughly one each year, for a total of about $250 to $300 million. This program would
consist of traditional investment and technical assistance loans, with perhaps one APL.
Table 6 lays out the expected operations, the links with CAS objectives and the rationale
for Bank involvement. There is no specific lending trigger with the understanding that
projects would only be prepared and presented for Board consideration if specific project
goals are agreed and the overall implementation of Chile's economic program remains
satisfactory.

69. 
The second part of the Bank's program would consist of one or two SALs,
depending on the scope and timing of the agreed program, with the Deferred Draw-Down
option (DDO), for a total of about $250 to $350 million. The choice of the DDO by the
Government reflects the heightened risks facing Chile in the current global and regional
economic environment, long with many other countries, and represents a precautionary
move by Chile to manage potential risks in the future. This approach is consistent with
the objectives of the proposed strategy and responds to the recommendations made by
OED in its Country Assistance Evaluation. It meets the criteria laid out for the possible
use of the DDO instrument (Box 8).

27 Because of the electoral cycle and the transition to the next administration in 2006, no lending is
anticipated in FY06 with the goal of consolidating activities in anticipation of the change and preparing the
basis for reviewing the Bank's collaboration at that time.

29

Box 8: Rationale for a DDO

The Board paper for the DDO, R2001-0174, dated September 26, 2001, provides the criteria for its
use. Applying those criteria to a possible DDO operation in Chile, it is apparent that:
.
Chile, an upper-middle income IBRD borrower, has made much less use of the Bank's
financial resources than it might have: in the 1990s, average lending fell to only about 20
percent of that in the 1980s.
* Chile is in good standing with the international fnancial markets, accessing those markets
with the lowest spread of all Latin American countries.
* Prudent risk management under conditions of higher risk both globally and regionally point to
the need for additional measures to ensure funding sources in the event of simultaneous
external shocks.
* Chile's external financing requirements-comparable to that in the economic downturn faced
in 1999-could be in the range of 1-1.5 percent of GDP, or US$700-1,000 million.
A strong reform package could be expected from Chile: it is a country with a solid track
record in designing and implementing reforms and maintaining sound macro-policies.
* The Bank's exposure in Chile is extremely low, reflecting both the level of past lending and
prepayments in the mid-1990s.

.

70. 
The goal would be to support a series of reforms, still at an early stage of
definition in terms of content, structure, and timing, to enhance Chile's long-term

structural performance. Several areas of reform have been identified, consistent with

CAS objectives. First, it is anticipated that the reform agenda could cover measures to
improve the health system, a priority for the Lagos Administration. Second, the reform
agenda could include other reforms emanating from the proposed ESW on social services
aiming to reinforce social service design and delivery. Other reforms could address the
present system of public works financing and the current regulatory framework and other
areas related to improving public expenditures. The Bank's ability to act as a catalyst for
change and to monitor performance would be important criteria in formulating the
content of the proposed operation or operations. In all of the possible areas identified
above, the Bank has already undertaken, or has planned, the required ESW and related
analytical work. Support through the DDO would only materialize if there is agreement
on a strong refonn package and a satisfactory macro-economic framework in place.

30

Table 6: Possible Investment Lending Services

Possible 
Proposed 
Projects 

Project Objectives 

_________________ 

Country
Assistance 
Strategy 

~~~~Obiective

Rationale for Bank 
Involvement 

Modernizing Chile's system Modernization 
of public expenditure 
of the State 
management to integrate core 
financial systems, install real 
time processing and 
standardize reporting and 
monitoring_

The Bank brings to the project 
global experience combined 
with its ability to work across 
agencies. 

Opportunity for
Partnership

IDB addresses public
auditing and
participation. The IMF
provides advice on
accounting structures and
transparency

Public 
Expenditure 
Management 

Life Long 
Learning 

Watershed 
Management 
(with GEF) 

Rural 
Electrification 
-Infrastructure 
(with GEF) 

Upgrading skills of adults, by 
facilitating access to 
technical and adult 
education, giving many a 
second chance, as well as 
new opportunities for skills, 
and increased labor mobility 

Demonstrating sustainable, 
multiple use of water 
resources in watersheds that 
involve environmental 
concerns, indigenous 
populations and competing 
interests plus multiple actors

Improving access to basic 
rural services, especially in 
isolated, poor areas, by 
exploiting altemative sources 
of energy, and alternative 
mixes of supply and delivery 
mechanisms. 

Sustainable 
Growth 

Inclusion 

Sustainable 
Growth 

Inclusion 

Sustainable 
Growth 

Inclusion 

Sustainable 
Growth 

The Bank has more than ten 
years experience in the sector, 
and can integrate adult 
education with parallel actions 
in higher education and 
secondary education. 

IDB would assist drop-
outs and youths at risk
and has assisted in
technical education. 
also aims to promote
female labor
participation.

It

The Bank can build on pilots
under GEF and on the
extensive global knowledge in
natural resources management.
The ability to work with
diverse groups is important.

The Bank has already piloted 
similar programs and can 
mobilize GEF resources for 
non-traditional energy sources. 
The Bank can also work with
private concessionaires 
to
mobilize their participation.

The Bank-financed 
Millennium Institutes LIL is 
being successfully 
implemented. The Bank's 
participation in scaling up 
would bring global knowledge
and intemational linkages.

IDB has worked in
expanding electricity
services as part of the
national grid.

IDB is providing support
for physical facilities, the
non-traditional sectors
and applied research by
firms.

Technology and Modeling best practices and 
Innovation 
building capacities and 
processes for effective 
research and innovation by 
networks of institutions with 
greater linkages to 
businesses. 

Social Service 
Delivery and 
Social 
Protection 

Strengthening capacity to 
identify beneficiaries and 
deliver social services to at 
risk and vulnerable groups, 
including rural populations, 
while improving targeting, 
monitoring and evaluation. 

Inclusion 

Modemization 
of the State 

Synergies with other Bank- 
financed operations aimed at 
municipalities combined with 
core knowledge of health and 
education as well as best 
practices in social risk 
management. 

IDB support is aimed at
social investment funds,
and various at risk groups
(disabled, indigenous,
youths, elderly) and
social problems such as
domestic violence.

31

3. 

IFC and MIGA

71. 
The role that IFC and MIGA can play in Chile complements that of the Bank.
Like the Bank, IFC would continue to be selective and respond to changing country
conditions. Currently, the private sector is coping with slower growth coupled by the
adverse effects of the global economic uncertainties and difficulties in Argentina. IFC
will help the private sector respond to these conditions in support of the Government's
priorities, particularly growth and competitiveness. Looking forward, IFC's strategy
remains focused on high impact areas, including wholesale support for SMEs, specialized
financial market activity including housing finance, infrastructure, and the social sectors.
IFC's focus will be guided by the Government's priorities and the private sector's
demand for improving its competitiveness. There are presently three projects in the
pipeline for power and infrastructure.

72. MIGA's strategy is to continue to facilitate foreign direct investment in Chile and
to counteract the adverse effects of the global and regional crises. The relative decline in
MIGA activities in Chile has been partially due to the improvement in Chile's investment
climate and the perception of decreased political risks in the country. MIGA's
involvement will focus on risks that are not adequately covered by the private insurance
market. In addition, MIGA is looking to support Chilean firms investing in other
countries by providing them with political risk coverage.

4. 

Non-Lending Services

73. 
GEF and other grants: Chile has been an innovative user of mid-size GEF
grants (Santiago Foothills and Valdivian Forestry Management) and the Montreal
Protocol. Two GEF grants integrated into investments are being developed: one
accompanying a Bank loan to support the proposed Watershed Management project and
another complementing government investments in Sustainable Transport and Air
Quality Management. Further opportunities will be explored including the proposed
Rural Electrification/Infrastructure project. Chile also will be one of the first participants
in the Carbon Prototype Fund with an investment in a flow-of-the-river hydroelectric
generating plant. Equally, there are opportunities to employ trust funds for small
innovative activities. An example is the Norwegian Trust Fund for a tri-country
program-Chile, Peru, and Bolivia-to support the south-south capacity building of
indigenous-led municipalities, linked to the Bank's ongoing Second Municipal
Development project.

74. 
Economic and Sector Work: The planned program of Bank-sponsored ESW
would be selective, consisting of one major analysis per year with cost sharing as
appropriate by assignment of officials to work with Bank teams. While it is not
anticipated that every analysis would be done this way, such joint products would lead to
more opportunities for internalization within the Government and greater efficiency and
impact of the studies. The topics which have been identified as of high interest to the
Government and the Bank and the rationale for Bank involvement are laid out in the
Table 7. In addition to formal ESW, the Bank and Chile will continue to pursue

32

opportunities for fee-based advice (Box 6) and to collaborate with staff exchanges as was
done in the case of education.

Table 7: Proposed Economic and Sector Work

Proposed 
Study 

The New 
Economy 

Social Risks 
and Social 
Protection 

Smnall and 
Medium Scale 
Enterprses 

Rural 
Infrastructure 

Fiduciary 
Assessment 

Poverty 
Assessment 
Update 

CAS 
Objective 

Sustainable 
Growth 

Modemization 
of the State 

Inclusion 

Modemization 
of the State 

Sustainable 
Growth 

Inclusion 

Modemization 
of the State 

Sustainable 
Growth 

Inclusion 

Modernization 
of the State 

Modernization 
of the State 

Study Objective 

Assessing Chile's capacity 
to face the challenges of a 
knowledge-based 
economy, examining the 
broad country position 
with more detailed look at 
e-government, e- 
commerce (especially for 
SMEs) and e-education 

Taking a systems 
approach to managing 
social risks and social 
protection of vulnerable 
groups, examining long- 
term needs and delivery, 
building on the initial 
diagnosis in the Poverty 
Assessment 

Assessing the capacity of 
SMEs to contribute to 
growth and employment, 
along with the 
concomitant role of the 
State. 

Determining the needs of 
rural populations for basic 
services in the areas of 
water. electiicity, 
communications. and 
access, along with 
institutional and policies 
to support greater access.

Validating the status of 
financial accountability 
and public procurement as 
well as measures currently 
planned or underway to 
address areas of 
improvement. 

Sustainable 
Growth 

Continuing to examine 
poverty in order to 
contribute to sustainability 
and enhance 
understanding of the ways 
in which poverty reduction Modemization 
can be effective 
of the State 

Inclusion 

Rational for Bank Involvement 

Partnerships
&Complementarities

This tri-country study (Chile, 
Argentina, and Uruguay) 
positions the Bank to understand 
policy and program implications 
of the knowledge economy. By 
using methodologies developed 
by WBI and already applied in 
Korea and Brazil, the Bank can
accumuiate global knowledge
and international benchmarking.

This study would provide a 
system wide view of social 
protection, as the basis for 
identifying gaps and designing 
new programs and policies. It 
would employ the conceptual
frameworks established by
recent regional studies and the
Social Protection Network.

An under-developed sector, 
SMEs are not well understood. 
A systematic assessment is 
needed to guide reforms and 
policies. There are synergies 
with other Bank-financed 
programs, notably Life-Long 
Leaming, Rural Infrastructure,
and Technology and Innovation,

1DB has investment programs
supporting research and is
facilitating access by firms to
technology. Participation of
local businesses, academic
institutions in the consultative
process.

IDB is active in delivery of
social programs and has
concentrated on specific
groups. Consultation with
NGOs and academic groups.

IDB has provided considerable
financial support for SMEs
and has an active interest in
the sector. Consultation with
diverse business organizations,
think-tanks and local
organizations.

This assessment would provide 
the baseline needed to determine 
the nature and scope of a 
potential operation, along with 
the complementarities with other 
actors, 

IDB has provided funding for
the Regional Development
Fund that may be a funding
source for future investments.
Also, many services are
presently provided by private
sector concessionaires.

Assurances that fiduciary 
Potential exists for IDB and
responsibilities are being 
the Bank to cooperate in a
addressed by the borrower is an 
joint undertaking as they are in
underlying feature of the Bank's Argentina and Paraguay.
work. In the case of Chile, the
aim is validating and monitoring
improvements.

Poverty reduction remains the 
reason for Bank involvement in 
the country. Continued poverty 
assessments are needed to
update and refine the ensuing
strategies.

I 

.

Continued collaboration with
academic groups, as well as
stakeholders.

33

5. 

Global Programs and Connectivity

75. 
Chile is an active partner in the Bank's global initiatives that were not featured in
the last CAS. An example is global distance learning: a GDLN center, connected to nine
other sites, was established with the University of Chile in April 2001. The Enlaces
program under World-links is another example: Enlaces initially began under the Bank-
financed Primary Education Project and is being expanded to cover almost the entire
public system, with 30 universities participating. The Bank is also continuing earlier
work in Chile, under the WBI's Alliances for Poverty Reduction, supporting the
identification of best practice cases of public-private-civil society partnerships to reduce
poverty. This program was extended in collaboration with the Ministry of Planning to
encourage participation. InfoDev has financed an innovative trial program to establish
telecommunication centers with Internet connections in poor neighborhoods, especially in
small towns and remote areas. And, finally, civil society organizations are actively
considering joining the Development Gateway.

6. 

Partnerships

76. 
Collaboration with the other IFIs remains important. The IMF's macro-economic
monitoring provides a valuable source of information for the Bank. Should the proposed
DDO operation materialize, it is expected that the Fund would provide active input into
assessing the macro-economic program. The IMF also periodically provides Chile with
technical advice: for example, the IMF's analysis of issues in public expenditure
management in July 1999 contributed to the formulation of a request for financial support
from the World Bank.

77. 
In the case of the IDB, there are complementarities between the two institutions
with the IDB having a more diverse program. The level of lending anticipated by the
IDB for CYOO to CY02 is about $600 million with the program to be reassessed at the
end of this calendar year. Examples of collaboration include:

* 

IDB is providing financial assistance to the Office of the Auditor General, which
is responsible for Chile's public auditing. This will constitute a key linkage with
the Bank's proposed support for Public Expenditure Management.
* Another critical area is the IDB's support for indigenous peoples. The agreed
division of labor is that the Bank would integrate ethnicity-as well as gender-
into programs rather than deal with them on a stand-alone basis and that the IDB
provides direct assistance under its Indigenous Communities Project.
* The third area of collaboration is technology where, by agreement, the Bank's
focus is on research and innovation processes with the IDB emphasizing support
for institutional and physical capacities, such as technology parks.

34

Country Program Monitoring

1. 

Performance Indicators

78. 
Chile sets a high standard for development performance. It aims to restore high
levels of growth, averaging at least 5 percent per year, and to maintain the downward
trend of poverty reduction, reducing the present rate of 17 percent (lower bound) or 21
percent (upper bound), while lowering unemployment below the 10 percent mark. While
continuing to reduce poverty overall, a goal would be to reduce differences across
Regions and groups. At present, the difference between the national average and the
rural and indigenous populations ranges from 50 to 60 percent depending on the location;
that gap would be reduced overall to less than 50 percent. At the same time, a goal would
be to show improvements in social services and coverage in programs, along with
implementation of the state modernization program. The following table summarizes
indicators of performance over the medium-term (see Annex B9 for more details).

Table 8: Performance Indicators

Program Development Goals 

Baseline 
Indicators 
(1998) 

Medium Term 
Targets 
(2005-07)

Corresponding Bank Performance
Indicator

Sustaining growth and social progress
(i) 
increasing R&D investment 

.65% GDP 

1% GDP 

LIL scaled up

(ii) 

(iii) 

increasing female labor market 
participation 
increasing grade 8 scores in municipal
schools 
(a) Spanish 

(b) Mathematics 

Modemizing the state
(i) 
integrated financial management 
system in place
increasing e-govemment and virtual 
information centers 
expanding non-traditional private 
provision of services 
increasing share of public investment 
resources managed at regional level 

(iii) 

(ii) 

(iv) 

Promoting Inclusion
(i) 
increasing rural coverage in
infrastructure services
(a) water 
(b) 
electricity 
reducing poverty gap between regions 
and groups 
increasing coverage by poor of social 
programs
(a) 
family allowances and subsidies 
(b) 
child-care 

(iii) 

(ii) 

Life Long Leaming Project's target
for female participation met

Local improvement programs in place
in target municipalities

Accomplished 

Processing time delays reduced

Public records/
tax

Pilots 

50% 

>75% 
>90% 
<50%

>50% 
>5% 

Pilot in hospitals functioning

Criteria adopted on the distribution of

public investment funds by Region

Targets met within project
population.

Poverty Analysis demonstrates targets
met.

Agreement reached on expanding
coverage and reducing leakage.
Improvements toficha CAS. Program

for target municipalities in place.

38% 

42% 

250 

250

238 
(1999)
238 
(1999)

N/A 

N/A 

N/A

46%
(2000) 

65% 
75% 
60-50% 

32% 
3% 

35

2. 

Risk Management and Creditworthiness

79. 
Chile has an excellent track record of servicing debt to the Bank Group and Bank
exposure in Chile is limited. As of December 31, 2001, Chile had IBRD debt outstanding
and disbursed of $734 million, amounting to 0.6 percent of the IBRD portfolio. Chile's
total public sector debt is very low at $10.1 billion, representing only about 15 percent of
GDP; of this, $3 billion is external.

80. 
Chile's strong creditworthiness reflects its excellent track record of development
management and macroeconomic performance over the past decade. However, the
country remains vulnerable to global and regional events that are largely beyond its
control or ability to influence. Particular risks are arising from the present pronounced
and widespread global economic downturn that will reduce demand for Chile's exports at
the same time as lower copper prices to which Chile remains sensitive due to the high
share of copper exports. In addition, the present international climate could adversely
affect investor confidence and could dampen interest in new investments by both
domestic and external investors. While contagion has so far been limited, the recent
events in Argentina creates additional uncertainties for the overall investment climate in
the region, and specifically for Chilean corporations operating in Argentina and those
vulnerable to exchange rate pressures following several years of growing private external
indebtedness.

81. 
These conditions present a challenge for Chile even though the country has a
good track record of dealing with shocks and it has a number of strengths to help
withstand those shocks. Chile is one of the few emerging market economies which can
afford to undertake counter-cyclical fiscal and monetary policies. On the monetary side,
a flexible exchange rate, healthy reserve levels and moderate inflation have been able to
counteract recent external shocks. On the fiscal side, its automatic stabilization
mechanisms including the Copper Stabilization Fund and a strong fiscal position have
placed Chile in a good position. It has already taken precautionary measures to access
the international capital markets. It also can rely on strong public institutions to carry
forward a solid policy regime. Nevertheless, the prolonged persistence of a negative
international and regional environment could ultimately sap Chile's capacity to withstand
such adverse conditions. Thus, prudence in the time of high uncertainty warrants that the
Country Assistance Strategy include instruments that provide optional access to external
financing in support of structural reforms.

3. 

Future Evolution

82. 
Even though Chile is one of the best performers among the Bank's diverse
middle-income borrowers, graduation is not foreseen as an immediate prospect: while
performance has been excellent over the past fifteen years, income levels are still below
the threshold for triggering a review of the country's situation. Present projections
indicate that reaching that level could take several more years reflecting the changing

36

economic conditions and prospects. In the meantime, the challenges to be faced have
been made more acute by recent global events.

83. 
One of the lessons from the past is that there should be flexibility in responding to
changing country needs. The Bank's partnership with Chile is an example of that
flexibility: over the past fifteen years the level and content of the financial and technical
support sought from the Bank has changed several times and Chile is now seeking a
sustained Bank involvement, at least for the foreseeable future, aiming to deploy the
support of the Bank Group selectively to high priority areas. Thus, the CAS reflects the
continuing engagement between the Bank and Chile for the period FY02 to 06.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By
Shengman Zhang

Washington, DC
January 23, 2002
Attachments

37

Chile at a glance 

1/24/02

LaUn 
Upper-
America middle-
Chile & Carib. 
Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Development dlamond'

2000
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

15.2 
4,610 
70.1 

516 
3,680 
1,895 

647 
4,620
2,986

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1994-0

Population (%) 
Labor force (%) 

1.4 
2.0 

1.6 
2.3 

1.3 
2.0 

G 
GNI 

G
pGross

per 

,pnimary

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 199440) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line) 
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (6 of population age 15+) 
Gross pnmary enrollment (% ofschool-age population) 
Male 
Female 

capita 

enrollment

21
86 
76 
10 
1 
94 
4 
101 
103 

75 
70 
30 
9 
85 
12 
113 

76
69
28
,, 
87
10
107 
106 

Access to improved water source

- Chil
Upper-middle-income group

.. 

-

100 

105

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000

Economic ratuoS

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross nabonal savings/GDP 

27.6 
21.0 
22.8 
16.9 
13.5 

30.3 
25.1 
34.6 
28.4 
23.2 

67.7 
22.1 
29.0 
23.9 
21.8 

70.5
23.4
31.8 
24.5
21.9

Trade

Current account balanceJGDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debtVGDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debtGDP 
Present value of debWexports 

.. 

-1.6 
4.5 
57.5 
27.1 

-0.3 
3.5 
50.5 
28.6 
53.1
179.1

-1.6 
4.1 
52.2
27.5

Domestic 
savings

Investment

3.3 
43.8 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

Indebtedness

1980-90 1990-00 

1999 

2000 

2000.04

(average annual growth)

GDP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

4.2 
2.5 
6.9 

6.8 
5.2 
9.4 

-1.1 
-2.4 
6.9 

5.4 
4.0 
7.5 

4.1 
2.9 
6.1

-

Chile
Upper-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Growth of investment and GOP (%)

(% of GDP)
Agnculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

7.3 
37.4 
21.5 
55.3 

8.7 
41.5 
19.6 
49.8 

10.3 
33.9 
16.1 
55.8 

10.5 
33.5 
15.9 
56.0 

4
20 
o'

95 

o 

97o

Privateconsumpton 
General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

70.7 
12.5 
27.0 

61.9 
9.8 
31.4 

64.1 
12.0 
27.2 

63.1
12.4 
30.8

-

GDI 

0 GDP

198090 199040 

1999 

2000 

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

(average annual grow th)

Agnculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

5.9 
3.5 
3.4 
2.9 

4.2 
6.0 
4.6 
5.2 

-0.7 
2.7 
-0.7 
-0.7 

7.6 
4.5 
4.3 
5.0 

30
20

10

oi

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

2.0 
0.4 
6.4 
1.8 

7.4 
3.9 
8.9 
11.0 

-3.1 
2.5 
-25.5 
-14.3 

4.1 
3.5 
13.7 
10.1

-IC 

as 

go 

97 

go N 

oo

-20

Exports 

Im,ports

Note: 2000 data are preliminary estimates.

The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

Chile

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

|Into b
Inflation I%)

Domestic prices 

(% change)

Consumer pnces 
Implicit GDP deflator 

35.1 
28.8 

26.0 
21.2 

2.3 
3.5 

4.5 
4.1

10 

Government finance

(% of GDP, includes current grants) 

o

Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

.. 
.. 
.. 

20.6 
2.5 
0.8 

22.5 
2.5 
-1.5 

23.7 
3.7 
0.1

95 

90 

97 

98 

99 

0

-

GDP deflator OCPI

TRADE

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Export and Import levels (USS mill.)

(US$ millions)

Total exports (fob) 
Copper 
Fruits 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 

4,706 
2,125 
340 
1,751 
.

8,373 
3,810 
757 
2,739 
7,742 

15,616 
5,889 
1,212 
7,152 
15,137 

18,158 
7,347 
1,122 
8,172 
18,089 

25,0N9

200

20009

1000

10o0.

Food 

~ 

i 

l

Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

1,208 
2,137 

1,799 
3,270 

2,890 
3,702

5.000 l

.. 

94 95 

96 

97 

98 

go 

00

Export price index (1995=100) 
Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995= 100) 

.. 

77 

67 

73

88 
88 

111 

122 
60

U Exports 

U Imports

.

60 

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

(US$ millions)

Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

.
.
.. 

10,222 
9,173 
1,049 

19,406 
18,056 
1,350 

22,087 
21,209 
878

0
1

Net income 
Net current transfers 

.. 

-1,731 
197 

-1,881 
453 

-2,404
538 

-3

Current account balance 

.

-485 

-78 

-989 

4-

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 

.- 
.. 

2,853 

-605 
683 

1,186 
-198 

s 

-2,368 

-3

Memo:
Reserves including gold (USS millions) 

.. 

5,358 
305.1 

15,013 
508.8 

15,211
535.5

Conversion rate (DEC, /ocal/US$) 

39.0 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 E

(US$ miltions) 

Compositlon of 2000 debt (USS mill.)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

12,081 
163 
21 

17,425 
1,860 
14 

34,167 
877 
8 

36,849
808 
7 

A ST

A 

|

Total debt service 
IBRD 
IDA 

2,706 
25 
0 

2,772 
249 
1 

5,548 
181 
1 

6,067 
187
0 

| 

:9,921 _ 

_ 

L 6 770

| 

E 494

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

9 
-145 
2,234 
213 
0 

73 
294 
1,187 
590 
320 

14 
-83 
-3,666 
4,366 
130 

0
-106
2,261
-1,103
-261 

|F: 

18549

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 

74 
14 
9 

130 
251 
120 

161 
43 
111 

0 
48 
116 

A -16RD 

E - Bilateral

B - IDA 
C-IMF 

D - Other multilateral 

F - Private
G-Short-term

Net flows 

5 

132 

-68 

-67

Interest payments 
Net transfers 

16 
-11 

130 
1 

71 
-139 

70
-138

Development Economics 

1/24/02

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

CAS Annex B2 -

As Of Date 12/11/2001

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

Indicator 
Porffolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a,d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ '000) 
Average Supervision (US$ '000/project) 

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

1999 

7 
2.9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
44.6 

2000 

2001 

2002

8 
3.8 
0 
0 
0 
0 
21.2 

5 
4.4 
20 
3.5 
20 
3.5 
22.2 

5
4.8
0
0
0
0
12.3

no 
647.62 
49.82 

yes 
643.75 
58.52 

yes 
302.06 
50.34 

yes
244.39
48.88

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs

36 
2776 
11.1 
11 

11
413.8
18.2
22.2

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3 - Bank Group Program Summary 

Chile 

As of Date 01124/02

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Annex B3
Page I of 2
[IBRD]

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

US$(M) 

Strategic Rewards b 
(HIMIL) 

Implementation b
Risks (HIMIL)

CL Pub Expenditure Management 
CL-Lifelong Learning and Training 
Result 

CL-Watershed Management APL/total 
CL - SAUDDO 
Result 

CL-Rural Electricification/Infrastructure 
CL-Technology-Innovation 
Result 

CL-Local Service Delivery 
Result 

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005 

2006 

Tot FY02-06 

Result 

H 
H 

H 
H 

H 
H 

M 

23.2 
75.7 
98.9

150.0 
300.0 
450.0

30.0 
20.0 
50.0

20.0 
20.0

0.0

618.0

H
M

H
M

M
M

M

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L).

Template created on 1/24/2002.

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Chile

Chile - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2001

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

[IFC/MIGAI

IFC approvals (US$m)* 

Sector (%)

OIL, GAS AND MINING 
TRANSPORTATION & WAREHOUSING 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)

Loans 
Equity 
Quasi-Equity** 

Total 

MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

* IFC's account only (not reflecting Participants').
** Includes both Loan-type and Equity-type.

1999 2000 2001

36.88 38.70 0.00

68 
32 

100 

0
100
100 (n/a)

0 
27 
73 

90
10

0

100 

100 (n/a)

62.67 62.67

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services -

As of January 23, 2002

Product 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) 

Audiencea 

Objective b

Annex B4

Recent completions/Underway

Health Insurance Issues - Old Age and 
Catastrophic Health Costs 

FY00 

147 

Policy Options, including Poverty 

FY01 

Social Risks and Protection 

FY02 

265 

147 

New Economy 
[joint task Argentina, Chile & Uruguay] 

FY03 

214 

Planned

SMEs 

Fiduciary Assessment 

Rural Services 

Poverty Assessment 

FY03 

FY03 

FY04 

FY05 

175 

100 

175 

175 

Government, 
Bank, Public 
dissemination 

Problem
solving,
Knowledge
Generation

Government, 
Bank 

Knowledge
Generation

Govemment, 
Bank 

Government, 
Bank, Public 
dissemination

Problem
solving,
Knowledge
Generation

Knowledge
Generation

Government, 
Bank 

Knowledge
Generation

Government, 
Bank 

Government, 
Bank 

Problem
solving,
Knowledge
Generation

Problem
solving,
Knowledge
Generation

Government, 
Problem
Bank, Public 
solving,
dissemination Knowledge
Generation

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Chile Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same region/income group

Annex B5
Page I of I

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOMEICONSUMPTION DISTRiBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GNI) 
Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to an Improved water source
(% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
ImmunizaUon rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) 
Adult (1I-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

1970-75 

1980456 

1993-99 

10.3 
1.7 
78.4 
3.2 

.. 
..
.. 

1,110 
1 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

4.1 
8.2 

94 
94 
95 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

66 
63 
69 

55 
96 

301 
177 

.. 
.. 

12.0 
1.6 
82.6 
2.7 

.. 

..

1,420 
21 
19 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 

4.4 
11.8 

89 
90 
90 

86 
97 
22 

92 
91 
2 

72 
69 
75 

20 
35 

218 
120 

.. 

95 

15.0 
1.4 
85.4 
2.2 

20.5

4,630 
124 
118

57.5
3.4
62.0

2.7 
3.6 
8.3 

89 
91
88

94 
99 
66 

95 
94 
1 

76 
73 
79 

10 
12 

140 
72 
20
100

Latin 
America 
& Carib. 

Upper-
middle-
Income

508.2 
1.6 
74.9 
2.6 

571.5
1.4
75.4
2.4

3,800 
140 

4,870
131

3.3 
3.6 
7.4 

91 

85 
93 
62 

90 
87 
9

70 
67 
73 

30 
38 

207 
122 

3.3
5.0
7.9

94

87
94
68

90
88

69
66
73

27
34

233
143

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to improved water
source data is 2000.

2001 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, Worid Bank

CAS Annex B6 - Key Economic Indicators - Chile 

Annex B6

Page I of 3

Acrual 
1997 

EFtiinate
2(101 

Indicator 

1995 

1996 

1998 

1999 

2o00 

2012 

20(163

National accounts
(as % GDP at current

market prices)

Gross domestic product 

100,0 

100.0 

100.0 

100.0 

100.0 

10O 

100.0 

1 

100.0

Agriculturea 
Industrya 
Servicesa 

9.2 
35.3 
55.5 

9.0 
35.2 
55.8 

8.4 
35.1 
56.5 

10.4 
33.1 
56.5 

10.3 
33.9 
55.8 

10.5 
33.5 
56.0 

10.5 
33.5 
56.0 

10.5 
33.5 
56.0 

10.5
33.5
56.0

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed 
investment
Government investment 
Private investment 
(includes increase in
stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

72.4 
23.9 

75.3 
24.9 

75.5 
25.5 

77.4 
26.0 

76.1 
21.9 

75.5 
22.3 

74.7 
22.6 

74.1 
23.4 

74.9
23.5

3.9 
19.9 

5.2 
19.7 

4.9 
20.6 

6.2 
19.8 

5.8 
16.0 

5.5 
16.8 

5.6 
17.0 

5.8 
17.6 

5.8
17.7

30.5 
28.7 

28.7 
30.9 

28.1 
30.9 

26.7 
30.9 

29.0 
27.2 

31.8 
30.8 

34.3 
32.7 

34.6 
33.2 

34.3
33.9

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

27.6 
23.7 

24.7 
21.8 

24.5 
22.3 

22.6 
21.8 

23.9 
21.8 

24.5 
21.9 

25.3 
21.6 

25.9 
22.4 

25.1
22.2

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current
prices)
Gross national product per 
capita (US$, Atlas method)

65215.9 

68567.6 

75285.7 

73063.4 

67657.5 

70545.0 

64041.5 

65272.8 

67231.0

3880.0 

4370.0 

4740.0 

4860.0 

4610.0 

4670.0 

4489.5 

4397.7 

4370.3

Real annual growth rates
(%, calculated from 1995
prices)
Gross domestic product at 
market prices
Gross Domestic Income 

10.6 

7.4 

7.4 

3.9 

-1.1 

:5.4 

3.2 

3.3 

5.0

16.7 

2.7 

9.3 

-6.2 

-3.0 

8.5 

3.2 

3.3 

5.0

Real annual per capita
growth rates (%, calculated
from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at 
market prices
Total consumption 
Private consumption 

9.1 

6.0 

6.0 

2.6 

-2.5 

4.1 

2.0 

22 

3.9

7.6 
8.3 

6.7 
7.3 

7.2 
7.5 

2.9 
3.0 

-3.9 
-4.4 

2.8 
2.9 

1.2 
1.1 

1.2 
1.] 
(Continued)

5.8
6.0

COUNTRY - Key Economic Indicators 

Annex BO
Page 2 of 3

(Continued) 

Actual 

Esiimate
200 

Indicator 

1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2Otn 

20J2 

2003

Balance of Payments
(US$n.)

Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Netcurrenttrrnsfers 
(including official current
transfers)
Current accormt balance 
(after official capital grants)

19359 
16024 
18299 
14643 
1060 
306 

19066 
15405 
20418 
16496 
-1352 
508 

20772 
16663 
22281 
18220 
-1509 
519 

18949 
14830 
21580 
17346 
-2631 
463 

19406 
15616 
18056 
13951 
1350 
453 

22087 
18158 
21209 
16722 
878 
538 

21939 
18050 
20957 
16790 
982 
165 

22584 
18772 
21687 
17468 
897 
165 

23047
19617
22779
1834'3
268
624

-1346 

-3511 

-3728 

-4143 

-78 

-989 

-1345 

-1436 

-1681

Net private foreign direct 
investinent
Long-term loans (net) 

2205 

3445 

3353 

1842 

4366 

-1103 

44 

1528 

158S

1596 

2037 

3561 

3402 

1430 

1482 

740 

790 

924

Official 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

Private 
Other capital inet, including 
errors and omissions)
Change in reserves (-=increase) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

-1394 

-790 

23 

-3167 

-6401 

808 

1682 

283 

379

-1061 

-1181 

-3209 

2066 

683 

-198 

-1120 

-It65 

-12t1

Memorandum i.'ems

Resourcebalance(%of 
GDP at current market
prices)

1.8 

-2.2 

-2.7 

-4.2 

1.8 

1.1 

1.5 

1.4 

0.4

Annual growth rates
Merchandise exports (FOB) 
Primary 
Manufactmres 
Merchandise imports 
(CIF)

38.1 
45.1 
29.2 
34.5 

-3.9 
-5.3 
-1.8 
12.1 

8.2 
9.4 
6.4 
10.3 

-11.0 
-17.2 
-2.2 
-4.5 

5.3 
4.7 
6.0 
-19.4 

16.3 
18.0 
14.3 
19.5 

-0.6 
-0.6 
-0.6 
0.5 

4.0 
4.0 
4.0 
4.0 

4.5
4.5
4.5
5.0

Public finance
(as % of GDP at current
market prices)e
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 

22.2 
16.7 

23.4 
17.6 

23.2 
17.7 

22.9 
18.8 

22.5 
20.0 

23.7 
20.0 

22.0 
19.6 

22.0 
19.2 
(Continued)

22.0
18.8

COUNTRY - Key Economic Indicators 

Annex B6
Page 3 of 3

(Continued) 

.ActuaJ 
1997 

F iimati,
201W' 

Intdicuior 

1995 

1996 

1998 

1999 

20)1) 

2'jti 

21i1'G

Current account surplus(+) 
or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

5.4 

5.8 

5.6 

4.1 

2.5 

3.7 

2.4 

2.8 

3.2

3.6 
-3.0 

4.1 
-2.9 

4.2 
-0.4 

4.3 
0.8 

4.4 
0.9 

4.0 
0.1 

3.9 
-1.1 

3.9 
-0.7 

3.9
-0.3

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP(atcurrentmarket 
prices)
Growth of M2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth 
total credit growth (%)

39.0 

42.7 

44.5 

45.8 

51.3 

49.6 

49.6 

50.1 

50.1

25.8 
124.2 

19.6 
119.0 

16.3 
122.8 

9.6 
76.3 

14.8 
103.7 

6.2 
113.0 

7.1 
100.0 

8.1 
100.0 

8.2
100.0

Price indices( 1987 =100)
Merchandise exportprice 
index
Merchandise import price 
index
Merchandise terms oftrade 
index
Realexchangerate 
(US$/LCU)f
Real interest rates
Consumer price index 
(% growth rate)
GDP deflator 
(% growth rate)

162.8 

136.3 

135.5 

110.6 

108.4 

118.7 

106.3 

105.9 

106.4

133.5 

149.0 

150.7 

149.0 

148.4 

162.8 

149.2 

147.9 

145.1

122.0 

91.5 

89.9 

74.3 

73.1 

72.9 

71,2 

71.6 

73.4

119.4 

123.8 

135.3 

132.8 

126.0 

126.7 

127.0 

127.5 

128.8

8.2 

6.6 

6.0 

4.7 

2.3 

4.5 

2.6 

3.6 

3.0

9.3 

1.7 

4.0 

2.5 

3.5 

4.1 

3.8 

3.6 

3.0

a. If GDP components are estimated at factor cost, a footnoote indicating this fact should be added.
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services "
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d Includes use of IMF resources
e. Should indicate the level of the government to which the data refer.
f "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

CAS Annex B7 - Key Exposure Indicators - Chile 

Annex B7
Page 1 of I

IridiLailcr 

j995 , ", 

-
; 

-l 

.

1.o~

Irkd,-5201 

.t; 19,9j-,,, 4 

2002 

'2003

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TOD)) (US$m)a

21736 

22979 

26701 

31691 

34167 

36849 

37499 

38410 

39527

Net disbarsements (US$m)a 

258 

1243 

3722 

4990 

2476 

2682 

650 

911 

1117

Total debt service (TDS) 
(USSm)a

4696 

6720 

5571 

4018 

5548 

6067 

6404 

5624 

5C17

Debt and debt service indicators

TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 

112 
33 
24 

121 
34 
35 

129 
35 
27 

167 
43 
21 

176 
50 
29 

167 
52 
27 

171 
59 
29 

170 
59 
25 

172
59
22

ConcessionaL/TDO 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

..

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XCS 
IBRD TDO (US$n)d 
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)

28.7 
81.6 

10.1 
30.7 

13.8 
54.5 

15.4 
33.4 

23.2 
48.6 

22.5 
55.7 

9.3 
21.8

19.3 

33.0

4.3 
1372 

1.8 
1047 

0.9 
980 

0.9 
945 

0.9 
877 

0.8 
808 

0.8 
730 

0.8 
953 

0.8
901

Of which DDO (US$m)f 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

300.0

Share of IBRI) portfolio (%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

1.3 
10.7 

1.0 
L0 

0.9 
9.3 

0.8 
8.6 

0.7 
7.9 

0.7 
7.2 

0.6 
6.5 

0.7 
5.8 

0.7
5.1

IFC IUS$;m) \c .g

Loans \h 
Equity and quasi-equity \i 

243.0 
51.0 

185.5 
61.9 

128.0 
59.9 

130.7 
50.4 

94.4 
58.7 

62.4 
58.7 

44.5
58.3

MIGA

MIGA guaranlees (US$m) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

62.7 

62.7 

0 

0 

0

a Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short.
term copital
b. 'XGS' denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, IFC, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equit) and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.
f. "DDO" denotes Deferned Drawdown Option. It is not expected to be disbursed.
g. Includes IFC's account only (not reflecting Participants'). Values do not reflect off-balance sheet items such
as guarantee and risk management products.
h. Includes (i) Loan and (ii) Quasi-Equity (Loan-type).
l Includes (i) Equity and (ii) Quasi-Equity (Equity-type).

Annex B8 [IBRD]
Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex BB - Chile

Operations Portfolio (IBRDIIDA and Grants)
As Of Date 1211112001

Closed Projects 

57

IBRDIIDA'

Total Disb,rsed (AcO-e) 

of whoch has been repaid 
To.al D,sbrr-sd (Closed) 
ofch,ch rhas beer repa,d 
Total Dlsbursed (Acve - Closed) 
ofch has been repaid 
Total Unrisborsed (At,ve) 
Tore UJdisb!rsed (Clos-d) 
Total Jvdisb-rsed (Active Closed) 

156.20
17 72
2,935.60
2.786.90
3.091.84
2.B04.83
117 27

c 20

117 27

Active Proiects 

Project ID 

P055480 
P055481 
P063386 
P006576 
P006661 
Overall result 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 

OrIional Amount In USS Millions 

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements "

Project Name 

CL MUNIC DEVT It 
CL-HIGHER EDUCATION 
CL-MILLENNIUM INSTITUT 
MONTREAL PROTOCOL 
THIRD RD SCTR 

Development 
Oblectives 
S 
HS 
HS 
S 
S 

ImMlementatlon 
Proaress
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 

Fiscal Year 

IBRD 

IDA GRANT 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. Frm Reved

1999 
1999 
1999 
1993 
1995 
Result 

10.1 
145.4 
5 

120 
280.6 

6.5 

6.5 

8.5 
101.1 
0.5 
2.6 
7.1 
119.8 

7.4
47 6
0.5
-2.7 
7.1 
60 

-2.7
7.1
4 5

a Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

Annex B8 [IFC]
Page 2 of 2

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Chile

Chile
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 12/31/2001
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

FY Approval Company 
1991/93 
Aconcagua 
1991/94/96 
BOMASA 
1999/02 
CBT 
1999 CBTI 
1989/91/99 
Escondida 
1996 FEPASA 
1990 ING-MLF-Nature F 
1994/96/97 Moneda Mgt 
1993/94 
Pangue 
1994 Pionero Fondo 
1996 Proa Fund 
2000 San Antonio 
2002 TFSA 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic 
0.00 
6.45 
0.00 0.00 
0.86 
4.80 
0.00 0.94 
0.00 
8.66 
0.00 0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.70 0.00 
0.00 
7.48 17.90 
0.00 
13.78 
0.00 
0.00 5.70 
1.20 
0.00 
0.00 
1.80 
0.00 
0.46 
0.00 0.00 
0.00 
2.82 
0.00 0.00 
0.00 
9.33 
0.00 0.00 
0.00 
7.34 
0.00 
0.00 
35.00 
3.70 
0.00 65.00 
0.00 
4.44 
0.00 
0.00 

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.00 
6.45 
0.00 0.00
0.86 
4.80 
0.00 0.94
0.00 
8.66 
0.00 0.00
0.00 
0.00 
1.70 0.00
0.00 
7.48 14.15 
0.00
13.78 
0.00 
0.00 
5.70
1.20 
0.00 
0.00 
1.80
0.00 
0.46 
0.00 0.00
0.00 
2.82 
0.00 0.00
0.00 
9.33 
0.00 0.00
0.00 
7.34 
0.00 0.00
12.25 
3.70 
0.00 22.75
0.00 
4.44 
0.00 0.00

Total Portfolio 

50.83 55.50 19.60 73.44 

28.08 55.50 15.85 31.19

Approvals Pending Commitment

Loan Eauitv Ouasi Partic

Total Pending: 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 0.00

The program supports three main objectives: (i) sustaining Chile's economic growth and social progress; (ii) inclusion, especially across groups and regions; and (iii) modemization of the state to underpin the
previous two objectives. Complementary actions in these three areas are expected to generate improvements to the well-being of the Chileans population as a whole, with increased equity in terms of access to
opportunity and public services for the poor and vulnerable.

Chile CAS Program Matrix (FY2002-FY2005)

Annex B9
Page I of 3

Country Goals: 

Growth rates > 5 % per year
Unemployment<10%
Poverty <17 %

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Specific 
Country Performance
Indicators 

Self-Evaluation Indicators 

Instruments

World Bank Group 

Major Related Activities of

1. 

Sustaining Economic Growth and Social Progress

Chile's track record of sustained 
economic growth has led to 
dramatic reductions in poverty 
levels. However, the first 
downturn in 11 years and a rise in 
unemployment in 1999 show that 
Chile cannot be complacent. 
Efforts are needed to continue to 
diversify the economy, adopt new 
technologies, and sustain 
productivity growth, 
competitiveness, human capacity 
and employment creation. 

This growth strategy should further 
take into consideration equity, 
environmental sustainability, and 
regional disparities, within a sound 
macro-framework. 

By and large the policy framework 
and institutional capacity exist for 
this. Bank Group assistance aims 
at helping Chile facc new 
challenges and frontiers, 

Growth 

Position Chile to take advantage of 
new opportunities for growth while 
preserving this capacity as conditions 
warrant. 

Leverage investments in infrastructure 
with private participation. 

Eouity 

Improve stock of human capital and 
support those with low levels of 
productivity. 

Sustainabilith 

Develop sustainable approaches for 
natural resources management, 
especially watershed and forestry, and 
for pollution reduction, 

Quality of labor 
force/international education 
scores 

Participation by women in 
the labor force increased 
from 38% to 43% 

Increased Private investment 
in "superior" infrastructure 
and non-traditional public 
services 

Sound management of 
liabilities to private sector 

Investment in R&D increased A coherent approach to the 
to 1% of GDP 
New Economy has been 
adopted. 

A new system for assessing 
skills of labor force in place. 

Resources for higher 
Education more equitably 
distributed, especially to 
private technical schools and 
to students from poor 
families. 

Innovations in R&D 
management acknowledged 
and generalized. 

Successful cases of multi- 
actor collaboration on 
sensitive environmental 
issues which can be 
replicated publicized. 

Donors

IDB is engaged in supporting
technology innovations, S&T,
and funding of regional
infrastructure. It is also
providing TA for the
preparation of new highway
concessions, SMEs, local
fishing plans and forestry
systems.

._____________________ 
ESWOther 

_ 

ESW
Policy Notes (01)
New Economy (03) 
SMEs (03) 
Other non-lending/TA 
Assessment of Contingent 
Liabilities 
Private Participation in Non- 
traditional public services 
Air Quality 
Regulatory Issues 
Agricultural Policies and
Programs
Lending
SAL/DDO (03)
Life Long Learning (02)
Watershed Management (03)
Technology -Innovation (04)
Supervision
Third Highway ((95)
Higher Education (99)
Millennium Institutes (99)
IFC
Possible investment in the
financial, SMEs, infrastructure
and social sectors.
Global Programs
GEF mid-size grant for
Valdiva Foresty Management,
Santiago Foothills. Air Quality.
Montreal Protocol

Note: Other nonlending services include fee-based advice, technical assistance, policy advice and trust funds.

Carbon Fund Prototype

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

2. 

Inclusion

Country Performance 
Indicators

Self-Evaluation Indicators 

Instruments

World Bank Group 

Major Related Activities of

Annex B9
Page 2 of 3

Other Donors

IDB is planning to provide
assistance for housing,
community development for
indigenous groups,

Ficha CAS system improved 
for targeting social 
programs. 

Systemic approach adopted 
for managing social risks. 

Advice reflected in the 
recommendations of the 
Health Reform Commission. 

Explicit programs for social 
programs included in 
municipal agenda with pilots 
in place in target 
municipalities 

Rural services - electricity, 
water and 
telecommunications- 
expanded according to plan 
in target areas 

ESW 
Catastrophic Health Care (00) 
Policy Notes/Poverty 
Assessment (01) 
Social Risks and Protection
(02)
Rural Infra. Services (04)
Poverty Update (05)
Other nonlending/TA
Health Reformn
Lending
SAUDDO (03)
Rural
Electrification/Infrastructure
(with GEF) (04)
Strengthening Local
Institutions (05)
Sunervision
Second Municipal
Development
Global Programs
Info-Dev (Tele-centers)
Distance Leaming
Carbon Fund Prototype

Service Delivery 

Chile has done a solid record in the 
1990s of expanding access to 
social services and to improve the 
Improvement to the responsiveness 
quality and relevance of education 
and capacity of local agents to provide 
in particular. These services go a 
targeted social programs and improve 
significant way in reducing income management of universal education 
inequalities. 
and basic health 

Yet, coverage of targeted programs 
is low and there is high leakage in 
some. Moreover, the health system 
has considerable inequities and 
inefficiencies. Non-contributors to 
the private pension system creates a 
future risk. 

Finally, there continue to be areas 
in which are isolated and lack basic 
services. The main deficiencies are 
in housing and education. Rural 
areas have special needs in 
infrastructure 

Oualitv 

Reform of the health care system 
providing protection against critical 
health crisis, within a financially 
sustainable framework 

Continued implementation and 
consolidation of improvements in 
education system 

Coveraee 

Rationale framework for social 
programs focusing on managing risks, 
especially for the aged and those
unemployed or with very low 
incomes, and youth at risk 

Increase participation in private 
pension funds 

Extend services in rural areas for 
electricity and telecommunications

Coverage of targeted program 
increases from 32 % to 50 % 
for family allowances and 
from 3 % to greater than 5 % 
for child-care. 

Participation in private 
pension plans increases from 
62% to 75% 

Health care reform which 
addressed quality, equity and 
solidarity adopted. 

Standard test score for 8h 
grade in mathematics and 
Spanish in municipal schools 
increased respectively by 5 
percent. 

Regional disparities reduce in 
terms of access to basic 
services for rural populations 

-

-

water from 65% to
75%

electricity from

75% to 90%
Reduce gap in poverty levels
between regions and groups
from >50% to <50%

Further empowerment of
schools and local
administration in education.

Expand access by poor
women to reproductive health
services

Diagnosis 

Strategy/Actions 

Country Performance 
Indicators

Self-Evaluation Indicators 

Instruments

World Bank Group 

Major Related Activities of
Other Donors

3. Modernization of the State

Annex B9
Page 3 of 3

Chile ranks very high in public 
sector institutional capacity and in 
other indicators of govemance, 
probity and judicial security. 
However, there are vestiges of the 
former military rule which still 
have not been overcome, many 
functions remain highly 
centralized, and the relative 
strengthens and roles of local and 
regional levels of govemment are 
evolving towards more 
decentralization. 

Like many countries, Chile too can 
take advantage of technology to 
make public services more
responsive, transparent and 
efficient. Finally, discrepancies in 
the quality and access to services 
can vary widely depending on 
location and population 
characteristics (especially for 
indigenous groups). 

Core Manaaement Functions 

Develop modem, integrated 
management system able to cope with 
decentralized agencies 

Public-Private Participation 

Expand the array of opportunities for 
private participation in non-traditional 
areas, such as hospitals and jails. 

Decentralization 

Redefine role for regional 
govemments 

Real time integrated financial 
information available 

Performance based 
management system in place 
with access by public. 

Real time information 
available and performance 
measures publicly available. 

Equity-need based criteria 
adopted for allocation of 
central funds to 
municipalities. 

More flexible, performance 
based regimes in place to 
manage HR function in public Gender and indigenous 
sector. 
concems introduced in 
municipal prograns. 

Increase in share of public 
funding managed by regions 
following explicit criteria. 

Municipalities connected to 
distance learning. 

Strengthen capacity of municipalities 
to carry out their functions, 
particularly social services 

Private participation in non- 
traditional services 
introduced. 

Pilot program of private 
hospital management in 
place. 

Transparency and Accountability 

Facilitate information access, across 
segments of society and civil society 
participation. 

E-govemment 
established/number of virtual 
information centers; core
public records available 
electronically 

IDB is providing support to
strengthen the Accounting
General's Office. It is also
providing assistance to
improve understanding by
public services of the needs of
indigenous groups and
partnerships between civil
society and the public service.
The IMF is advising on
transparency of public
accounts.

ESW 
Policy Options/Poverty 
Assessment (01) 
Social Risks and Protection 
(02) 
Fiduciary Assessment (03) 
Poverty Update (05) 

Other nonlendinglTA 
Support for association of 
municipalities in indigenous 
areas. 
Support to incorporate gender
in municipal programs.
Private participation in
Public services

Lending
Public Expenditure
Management (02)
SAL/DDO (03)
Strengthening l.ocal
Institutions (05)

Supervision
Second Municipal
Development (99)

Global Proerams
Distance Lann

CAS Annex B10 - Chile 
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

As of Date 12/12/01

Annex B10
Page I of I

Network area 

Country 
performance a 

Major issue b 

Country 
Prioirty 

Bank 
Reconciliation
priorityc of country and
Bank priorities d

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction 
Economic policy 
Public sector 
Gender 

Human Development Department
Education 
Health, nutrition & population 
Social protection 

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development 
Environment 
Social development 

excellent 
excellent 
good 
good 

sustaining rapid growth 
sustaining rapid growth 
HR mgt, local capacity 
participation 

excellent 
good 
good 

adult skills 
equity and efficiency 
coverage 

good 
good 
fair 

regional disparties 
natural resource mgt 
indigenous, participation 

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector 
Private sector 
Energy & mining 
Infrastructure 

excellent 
excellent 
good 
good 

SMEs 
sustainability 
private participation 

high 
high 
high 
high 

high 
high 
high 

high 
high 
high 

high 
high 
high 
high 

high
moderate ongoing dialog, advisory services
high
high

high
high
high

high
high
moderate 

IDB

low 
FSAP, ICF selective
moderate advisory services, IFC selective
moderate ongoing dialog, IFC selective
moderate advisory services, IFC selective, ongoing dialog

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary completion;" for environment, "urban air pollution").
c. To indicate priority, use "low," "moderate," or "high."
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

P E F tJ t; j 1 -. .4, ;11 1 1 Yr Wi kiF - 5 ( iprc. -~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i 
rC

^'J''' 
5t 

K 

1
\fi^SA WO 

{>: 

X 

^0L~~2>: 

' 

t 

lOIJldeJe 

v 

/ _ 

,.1,1 

0 .

J 

r- 

w 

| . or .41:f ~~~~~~ 
;_ 
>I 

j oNilrsC 
enXIaF: 
; (, 
nl sPr. 

I v 

1 

s 

, _

-fJjAjA,T, 

F __ > - --b .-;4

t ',I... - 1 -\ 

| 

i 

-
;@ -2 
1 

1' 

sI ., i - - -

J 

Z 

,,,, 

rLlh | _ 

l 

[X 1 ! 

/ br-,:l 

............... 

l E r.,>, t stS SS l, l~~~L

*>H.~h;R,__,rt 
l 

jlf 

l; 

i 

/ 

C H I L 

E;

