d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World l3ank

FO1R OIFIF'lCR[AL USE ONLY

Report No. 2ยง129=CO

MUEMOIRANDUM OF 1ITHIE PIRJESIDENT
OF T1H1E
IINTERNATlRIONAL 1BANK FOIR IRECONST]RUCT]ION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND TH11E lNT]ERINATRONAL FIENANCE C 
IRPRATIJON
TO THIE
EXECUTJVE DRRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOIR
THIE REPBLEC OF COLOM A

December 24, 2002

(Colombia-Mexico-Venezuela Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

Fi'his document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
Iofficial duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EOUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Colombian Peso (Col$)

US$ = 2,873.40

FISCAL YEAR
January 1 to December 31
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
Metric System
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AML 
AUC 
CAF 
CAS 
CFAA 
CFT 
CPAR 
CPPR 
ELN 
FARC 
FSAP 
GDP 
GEF 
IBRD 
IDB 
IFC 
IMF 
MDGs 
IDP 
MIGA 
PFMP 
ODS 
RAF 
SFAL 
SIIF 
SINERGIA 
VAT 
WBG 
WBI 

Anti-Money Laundering
United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia
The Andean Development Corporation
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Combating the Financing of Terrorism
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Portfolio Performance Review
National Liberation Army
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Gross domestic product
Global Environment Facility
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
The Inter-American Development Bank
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Millennium Development Goals
Internally Displaced Population
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Public Financial Management Project
Montreal Protocol on Ozone Depleting Substances
The Social Support Network
Structural Fiscal Adjustment Loan
Integrated Financial Management System
National System for Evaluation of Public Sector Performance
Value added tax
World Bankl Group
World Bank Institute

Vice President 
Chief Economist 
Country Director 
Sector Leader 
Task Manager 
Resident Representative 
Research Analyst 
Program Assistant 

Vice President 
Director, LAC 
Manager 
Task Manager 

ICBRD

David de Ferranti
Guillermo Perry
Isabel Guerrero
Marcelo Giugale
Connie Luff
Alberto Chueca-Mora
Mario Cuevas
Teresa Franco
IFC
Assaad Jabre
Bernard Pasquier
Toshiya Masuoka
Dileep Wagle

FOR OFICLAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. 
II. 

III. 

VI. 

1I

IV. 
V. 

Summary and Main Messages ........................................................
The Country Context .........................................................
2
Political Arena .........................................................
2
Recent Economuc Developments and the External Environment .........................................................
3
4
Colombia's Macroeconomic Prospects .........................................................
Evolution of Poverty and Inequality-Voices of the Poor and Development Goals ................................. 6
Colombia's Main Development Challenges .........................................................
9
Achieving Fast and Sustainable Growth ........................................................ 
10
Sharing Growth with all Colombians ........................................................ 
14
Building Efficient, Accountable and Transparent Governance ........................................................ 
16
17
Government's Agenda of Policies and Programs ......................................................... 
18
World Bank Group's Partnership with Colombia ......................................................... 
The Lessons of the Previous CAS ......................................................... 
18
Procurement and Financial Management in Colombia's Portfolio ......................................................... 21
World Bank Group Assistance Strategy ........................................................ 
22
CAS Objective: Achieving Fast and Sustainable Growth ..................................... 
................... 24
CAS Objective- Shanng the Fruits of Growth ........................................................ 29
CAS Objective: Building Efficient, Accountable and Transparent Governance ............................. 
..... 32
Monitoring CAS Implementation ........................................................ 
34
Exposure and Public Debt Sustainability Under the Proposed Strategy ........................... ...................... 34
Coordination with Partners and Civil Society Participation ............................................. 
36
Colombia CAS Consultation with Civil Society ........................................................ 
37
VIII. The Risks of the Proposed Strategy ........................................................ 
40
IX. 
Concluding Remarks ........................................................ 
40

VII. 

.6

.7

.7

Table 1. Key Macroeconomic Indicators 
Table 2. Poverty and Inequality Indicators 1978-2001 
Table 3. Vulnerability as Measured by Extreme Poverty and Poverty 
for Population Subgroups in Urban Colombia 2001
Table 4. Millennimum Development Goals 
Table 5. IFC Investments 1991-2002 ...........
Table 6. Tnggers to Remain in High-Case. 
Table 7 Colombia-IBRD Lending Program For FY03-06 .31
Table 8. Colombia-Bank Knowledge Based Program for FY03-06 .33
Table 9. Core MDG/CAS Monitonng Benchmarks .34
Table 10. Partnerships in Colombia's Development Framework 
Figure 1. IBRD Exposure to Colombia 
..
Figure 2. Colombia-Ratio of IBRD to Preferred Creditor Debt Service 
Box 1. Colombia Voices of the Poor 

.8
........................................... ......... 
.. 
........
20... 
2...........0........................ 
20
......... 
........ 
........................................... 23

..

.

.8

.35

39
35

ANNEXES
Al 
Colombia at a Glance
A2. 
Millennium Development Goals-Strategy and Indicators
B2 
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
B3 
IBRD Program Summary
B3. 
IFC & MIGA Program. FY 2000-2003
B4 
Summary of Nonlendmng Services
B5. 
Social Indicators
B6. 
Key Economic Indicators
B7. 
Key Exposure Indicators
B8 
Status of Bank Group Operations in Colombia Operations Portfolio
B8. 
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
B9. 
CAS Matrix FY03-05
Private Sector Strategy
Debt Management
Voices of the Poor

DI. 
El. 

Cl. 

This doicument has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance of their official duties. Its contents may not be otherwise disclosed
withouit World Bank authorization.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA

I. 

SUMMARY AND MAIN MESSAGES

1. 
There is no doubt that the long-standing armed conflict and violence driven by common
criminal activities, especially drug related, are the most important issues facing Colombia as a
nation, let alone as an economy. The cost of the violence is staggering. Since 1980, some
100,000 people have died directly as a result of the conflict, and two million displaced people
haive lost their jobs, homes, and hope. Another million have left the country and most will not
return. By some calculations, 
the conflict dampens GDP growth each year by two full
percentage points-this means that if peace had come 20 years ago, the income of the average
Colombian would now be 50 percent higher, and an estimated 2.5 million more children would
be above the poverty line. The conflict has caused distortions in resource allocation: frightened
by violence, private investment has, over the last 30 years, rarely surpassed one tenth of GDP,
and just the lost revenue due to sabotaged oil pipelines (some US$500 million per year) would be
enough to double the country's annual budget for social assistance. Behind these costs, lurks the
loss of Colombia's social capital, that is, its citizens' hope for a better future and trust in the
nalion's institutions.
2. 
In Colombia, stable economic growth rates have historically been instrumental to reduce
poverty and increase public resources for social spending. During the second half of the 1990s,
however, Colombia entered into a severe economic crisis, erasing over a decade of progress in
po verty reduction and undermining Colombia's ambitious social agenda. 
Indeed, poverty
increased 4 percentage points from 1995 to 1999, with the most recent data showing that poverty
ha' continued to rise, despite modest rates of economic growth. The economic recession and
pei,sistently high levels of violence have resulted in a marked deterioration in living conditions.
3. 
Economic prosperity alone will not be sufficient to stop the violence-but increased
poverty could well inflame the situation further. Therefore, the overarching development
objective of this strategy will be to support the government's efforts to achieve economic
de,velopment as a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for peace. Sustainable economic
development will underpin Colombia's efforts to build national reconciliation and lasting peace.
The WBG's strategy will seek to support Colombia's quest for peace in three essential areas: (a)
achieving fast and sustainable growth; (b) sharing the fruits of growth; and, (c) building efficient,
acc:ountable and transparent governance. WBG will prepare periodic progress reports on the
implementation of the planned strategy.
4. 
To support this strategy, the Bank lending program focuses on operations that would: (a)
have the most tangible impact on poverty alleviation and help Colombia meet the targets for the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs); (b) achieve fast and sustainable growth while
protecting the poor; (c) incorporate the lessons learned from Bank's operations, particularly from
on-going Learning and Innovative Loans, and (d) pilot innovative interventions with important
demonstration effects.
5.! 
The CAS envisages a maximum lending program for IBRD of about US$3.3 billion and a
base-case scenario of US$2 to US$2.9 billion for the for the remainder of FY03 to FY06. This

substantial increase in lending is justified by the ambitious program of the Uribe administration
to build the foundation for lasting peace and to achieve poverty reduction. Colombia, which has
traditionally had an excellent relationship with the World Bank Group, is now turning to it to
help the country through this period of: (a) fiscal difficulties resulting from low economic
growth, a drop in exports caused by the recession in countries that are Colombia's trading
partners, declining petroleum production, historically low international coffee prices, and low
private investment levels impacted by worsening intemal security conditions; and (b) restricted
access of Colombia to international capital marlcets due to the country's loss of its investment
grade credit rating and increased investor nisk aversion toward Latin America. 
IBRD would
review the lending program and move to a low-case scenario of about US$900 million (US$225
million per year) or lower, with a focus on operations targeted to alleviate poverty and build
social development, if the reform program were to completely stall or if the security situation
were to substantially deteriorate.
6. 
As reflected in the WBG's Private Sector Strategy (Annex C1), IFC's increased activity
will accompany IBRD's enhanced assistance, supporting private sector firms - large and small -
and catalyzing a private-sector supply response that Colombia needs for achieving higher,
sustained growth and the sharing of that growth. lFC's stepped-up activity, which has already
been taking place in response to the deteriorated market conditions and the administration's
request, is expected to continue during the CAS period. IFC's contributions will also support
the strategic areas of corporate governance, envircnmental and social sustainability, and low-
income and micro financing.
7. 
This CAS faces serious risks-of deepening conflict and violence with a resulting
escalated loss of local and foreign investor confidence. Nevertheless, these risks are worth
taking, given the rewards of helping to build a foundation for lasting peace and contributing to
poverty reduction, equality enhancement and the promotion of sustainable development. The
government's program is ambitious, but it has broad support-both within Colombia and
internationally. The risk to Colombia of not implementing this long overdue reform program is
great and the Bank's support may well mitigate it. 
In implementing its strategy, WBG will
continue its close collaboration with other partners, especially the IRF, 1DB and CAF, and will
maintain a strong program of consultation with civil society.

Hl 

THE COUNTRY CONTEXT

Political Arena

8. 
On May 26h, 2002, Colombians elected Alvaro Uribe to succeed President Andres
Pastrana, whose efforts to find a negotiated solution to the armed conflict proved unsuccessful.
After almost four years of govemment peace efforts, which included the granting of a large
demilitarized zone, little progress was made toward respect for international humanitarian law, a
lasting cease-fire or viable negotiation agendas. Instead, the internal conflict has intensified and
guerrilla warfare has increased: bombs have been set off in major urban areas, infrastructure has
been destroyed and politicians have been threatened (the country's 500 mayors have received
death threats, presidential candidate Ingrid Betancourt was kidnapped and President Uribe has
suffered several assassination attempts).
9. 
In response, Colombia's electorate embraced Mr. Uribe's message of restoring the
authority of government and enhancing law and order and he won the election with 53 percent of
the vote. The high approval rating he has commanded since his inauguration on August 7k" will
provide him the scope to implement his social, political and economic agenda. However, with

2

unemployment persistently high, poverty rising and the internal conflict expected to intensify,
President Uribe will need to act quickly while he commands broad civil and political support to
pass unpopular but essential reforms aimed at curbing violence, reducing common crime and
'improving socioeconomic conditions for the long term.
The violent situation that President Uribe is confronting is not new. 
Indeed, since
10. 
Ibecoming a republic in 1819, Colombia has suffered intermnittent periods of violence. Power
sharing agreements between the Liberal and Conservative Parties reduced the violence in the
t-arly 1960's, but excluded other political forces and led to the emergence of guerrilla groups.
Guerrilla movements and crime have been encouraged by an ineffective legal system, deep social
idisparities, and a weak state presence in rural areas. The current conflict has pitted the country
,against two well-armed guerrilla organizations, FARC and ELN, and fast growing paramilitary
Forces. The FARC and the paramilitary forces produce much of the world's cocaine and the
ELN is responsible for many of the roughly 4,000 kidnappings committed every year in

'Colombia.

11. 
Despite internal conflict and violence, Colombia has shown remarkable stability in its
democratic institutions, and since the mid-eighties major efforts have been made to increase the
iscope of these institutions. Key driving forces behind the changes in the political system have
'been the new Constitution of 1991 (expanding the scope of human rights, promoting civil society
participation 
in govemance, 
increasing 
the evaluation of public sector performance,
strengthening the independence of the judiciary, and enhancing government accountability), the
reform of the electoral system (making the process more transparent and fair), and the process of
territorial decentralization (including popular elections of mayors since 1988 and of governors
since 1991). Nevertheless, Colombia continues to face the problems of an inefficient judicial
system that provides services of poor quality and insufficient quantity, a high degree of
corruption and state capture, and local governments that do not offer quality public services and
or maintain fiscal discipline. The government is hence handicapped by the gradual loss of
credibility and weak presence in wide areas of the country. The success of Mr. Uribe's
government program will largely depend on the implementation of the proposed State reform
program.

Recent Economic Developments and the External Environment
12. 
Over the past half-decade, Colombia has run into fiscal problems, including significant
deficits and large future fiscal liabilities. The rapid expansion of the public sector over the
previous decade, from spending one fourth of GDP in 1990 to over one third of GDP today,
combined with growing liabilities, particularly with pensions, have led to large structural
deficits. 
Private GDP has grown little since the mid-1990s, and private investment has
deteriorated from its peak of near 12 percent of GDP in 1994 to under eight percent today. Total
investment is now about 15 percent of GDP. While government consumption grew by two thirds
between 1994 and 2001, that of households remained basically unchanged. As public spending
rapidly outstripped the sector's revenue generating capacity, much of the fiscal deficit was
financed with debt, both domestic and external. Today, net public sector debt in Colombia
stands at about 45 percent of GDP.
long 
tradition of prudent and successful macroeconomic
13. 
Despite Colombia's 
management, 
including good debt management, Colombia's economic performance has
continued to disappoint, with GDP growth reaching only 1.4 percent in 2001. Moreover, growth
forecasts for 2002 are also close to 1.5 percent. Major obstacles to a more robust recovery
include weak domestic demand associated with high unemployment, currently at almost 18
percent in urban areas, and historically low private investment levels. Moreover, exports, which

3

had led the recovery in 2000, languished over the past year due to a combination of domestic and
international factors. This has in turn affected the performance of manufacturing, much of
whose production is directed towards exports as a result of weak demand at home. Weak
domestic demand and worsening internal security conditions are reflected in continued weak
private investment. On the fiscal front, the projected deficit for 2002 is 4 percent of GDP,
largely due to election year spending, higher military outlays, and a weakening of social security
institutions. On security spending alone, the administration estimates that it willl need an
additional 1 percent of GDP per year. Nevertheless, the Uribe administration has stressed its
commitment to continue the fiscal adjustment efforts of the previous administration. Lwo key
structural reformns have already been presented to Congress: a strengthened pension reform to
address the looming deficits of the social security sector, Colombia's most pressing future fiscal
liability, and a labor reform proposal intended to increase flexibility in Colombia's rigid labor
market.
14. 
As a result of declining petroleum production and historically low international coffee
prices, Colombia's traditional exports are experiencing a decline, having fallen over 9 percent
during the first half of 2002 as compared to a year earlier, alleviated somewhat by the current
high world price for oil. Traditional exports had already declined by 22 percent in 2001. While
the country's non-traditional exports, mainly manufactured goods and cut flowers, had
performed well in 2001, the appreciated peso earlier in 2002 and the economic slowdown in the
United States, Venezuela and other Andean countries affected them negatively this year.
Declining imports have, however, helped maintain a surplus in the trade balance. The external
current account deficit is projected to be around 2 percent of GDP this year.
15. 
Inflation has continued its decline, assisted by sluggish demand, and today stands close to
6 percent-the target for the year. This has allowed the Central Bank to reduce interest rates,
which, along with enhanced prudential regulation, has helped the financial sector to rebound
from the significant crisis of 1999.
16. 
Colombia's vulnerability to external shocks has risen in recent months as a result of
several factors: increased violence domestically and uncertainty as regards the future path of the
internal conflict; the sharp deterioration in sovereign debt spreads; the recent worsening of
market sentiment towards Latin America; problems in Venezuela, 
the largest market for
Colombia's non-traditional exports; and an uncertain outlook for the US economy, Colombia's
main trading partner. That said, Colombia is relatively well-equipped to deal with moderate
external shocks, given its floating exchange rate, falling inflation, adequate international reserve
levels, as well as the potential for further fiscal adjustment and reforms.
17. 
Colombia's sovereign spreads and currency had, until recently, been relatively unaffected
by regional events, partly the result of the pre-financing by the government of more than three
quarters of its external market financing needs for 2002. Pre-financing was undertaken in 2C01
in order to avoid accessing the markets in the run-up to the presidential election. Colombian
bond spreads fell throughout 2001 and in early 2002, but increased somewhat in April after
Colombia's sovereign rating was downgraded by Fitch and its outlook changed to negative by
Moody's, both citing growing public debt and an uncertain outlook for reforms and fiscal results.
Despite this, in June 2002 the government obtained fresh funds in the international bond market
for US$195 million and an additional US$500 million in December 2002.
Colombia's Macroeconomic Prospects
18. 
Colombia's macroeconomic performance is expected to continue improving in the next
two to three years, but it will take longer before the country is able to achieve its full economic
potential. Following a mild recovery of economic activity in 2002, GDP growth is expected to

4

accelerate to about 2.5 percent in 2003 mainly due to a recovery of the export sector and slightly
better prospects for aggregate private investment. Growth will rise in 2004 to levels around 3
percent, reaching 3.5 percent by 2006.
19. 
Exports will be aided by a projected recovery of international trade growth and prices of
some of Colombia's key export products. A shift in trade patterns is also expected, as the share
of trade with neighboring countries will likely shrink due to the weak economic recovery of
some regional partners (especially Venezuela). The prospective economic recovery in the U.S.
and Europe suggests that Colombian exporters will shift their attention to these regions, with the
impact of economic recovery in those markets further amplified by a possible weakening of the
US$ relative to other major currencies. Colombia's exchange rate is projected to depreciate
mildly in real terms over the next three years, as continued low domestic inflation and a flexible
exchange rate policy facilitate a smooth adjustment of the tradable sector. 
In this connection,
inflation is expected to continue on a downward path and stabilize at levels close to 4 percent by
2005 (from 6 percent in 2002). Inflationary expectations will continue to be anchored through
credible management of monetary policy and Central Bank independence.
20. 
The projected GDP growth and exchange rate paths are consistent with a stable external
current account balance, which is projected to fluctuate at levels close to 3 percent of GDP.
Moreover, official foreign exchange reserves are expected to keep rising in line with the
expansion of the country's external obligations, including imports and debt service, thus ensuring
that future external liquidity ratios do not deteriorate. With improved macroeconomic prospects,
other sources of external financing, such as foreign direct investment, are expected to recover
close to their historical levels. In synthesis, the viability of Colombia's current account will in
part be achieved through the adoption of a flexible exchange rate policy, while the capital
account will be underpinned by increased reliance on official sources of funding.
21. 
Thus while the current policy framework is expected to provide for a solid adjustment of
the extemal sector, the key risk to the country's macroeconomic stability remains a large fiscal
deficit and the high burden of public debt. Assuming a full implementation of the proposed
reforms package, the overall public sector deficit is projected to fall from about 4 percent of
GDP in 2002, to about 3 percent in 2003, and about 2.5 percent in 2004 and 2005 (Table 1). The
projected overall fiscal balance is consistent with an improvement of the primary surplus from
about 1.5 percent of GDP in 2001 to 4 percent by 2005. A primary surplus of 4 percent of GDP,
if maintained on a permanent basis, would be consistent with stable public debt dynamics.
However, due to the lag in the fiscal adjustment process as well as the relatively conservative
economic growth prospects projected for the country, on a net basis total public debt is still
projected to continue rising (although at diminishing rates) before stabilizing at levels close to 50
percent of GDP. Achieving these goals for the overall public sector and thus macroeconomic
stability on a sustainable basis will require strong and deep adjustment at the level of the central
govemment, especially on the expenditure side, for which the authorities are still developing a
strategy.

5

Table 1. Key Macroeconomic Indicators

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002 

Projections
2003 

2004 

2005

0.6 
-3.8 
-5.3 
16.7 

-4.1 
-5.5 
0.4 
9.2 

2.6 
-3 4 
0.4 
8.7 

1.4 
-3.2 
-2.2 
7.6 

2.0 
-4.0 
-2.9 
6 2 

2.5 
-3.0 
-3.2 
6.0 

3.5 
-2.5 
-3.1 
5.0 

3.5
-2 5
-2 9
4.0

Real GDP Growth 
Fiscal BalancetGDP 
Curent Account/GDP 
Inflation 

Evolution of Poverty and Inequality-Voices of the Poor and Development Goals

22. 
Economic Recession and the Reversal of Two Decades of Poverty Reduction. From
1978 to 1995, stable economic growth rates averaging over 4 percent annually were instrumental
to substantial poverty reduction: the percentage of Colombians living below the poverty line fell
by almost a quarter (from 80 to 60 percent) and extreme poverty declined by more than half
(from 45 to 21 percent), as illustrated in Table 2. Growth also allowed for an increase of public
allocation of resources to social spending and for substantial social progress, particularly in
primary and secondary school completion, health 
insurance coverage, access 
to basic
infrastructure, child labor, infant mortality, and life expectancy. However, rising income
inequality during the 1990s limited the welfare gains made during Colombia's period of strong
economic growth up to 1995. During the second half of the 1990s, the most severe economic
crisis to hit Colombia since the 1930s erased over a decade of progress in poverty reduction, and
undermined Colombia's ambitious social agenda. Indeed, poverty increased 4 percentage points
from 1995 to 1999 and 3 more points up to 2001, exceeding by two points the poverty level of
1999. During that period, the poverty increase was more severe in urban than in rural areas.
Macroeconomic performance deteriorated significantly, growth rates plummeted, and the
unemployment rate doubled, reaching a historical high of over 20 percent. The most recent data
show 
that despite modest rates of economic growth, poverty has continued 
to rise.
Simultaneously, the continued increase in income inequality further aggravated already rising
poverty rates. To bring poverty down to the level of 1995, Colombia will need to sustain
economic growth rates of 4 percent over the next decade. The combined result of the economic
recession, increased macroeconomic instability, and persistently high levels of violence, is a
marked rise in the population's vulnerability to poverty. Most vulnerable are children, displaced
populations, indigenous peoples, Afro-Colombian populations, and non-homeowners households
with young, low-, mid-skilled, or unemployed heads. These groups are clearly worse off than
pensioners, the college educated, the elderly, and non-recent migrants, and should consequently
receive priority attention. (Table 3 and Box 1).

6

Table 2. Poverty and Inequality Indicators 1978-2001

Poverty indicators 

Poverty rate 
Poverty Gap' 
Exteme poverty rate 
Meanincomepercapia' 

Poverty rate 
Extreme poverty rate 

Poverty rate 
Extreme poverty rate 

Giru Coefficient 
Qwntiles(Top/Bottom) 

1978 

80% 
46% 
45% 
131 

70% 
27% 

94% 
68% 

0.53 
172 

1988 

65% 
32% 
29% 
213 

55% 
17% 

80% 
48% 

0.54 
17.6 

1995 
Natwinal

60% 
29% 
21% 
251 

Urban

48% 
10% 

Rural

79% 
37% 

National

0 56 
17.2 

1999 

2001

64% 
34% 
23% 
245 

55% 
14% 

79% 
37% 

0 57 
202 

67%
34%
26%
230

59%
17%

80%
42%

0.58
224

Inequaliy Urban-Rural Decomwosuion (7hedl)

Total 
0.54 
0 60 
0.70 
0 68 
0.70
Within 
0 42 
0 50 
0.59 
0 58 
0 61
Between 
0.12 
010 
011 
009 
0.09
I Poverty rater Percentage of population under poverty hlie 2 The povery gap desenbes the average distance to
the poverty line. 3 Tbousand 2001 pesos per moth.
Source DANE, Encuesta Nacioral de Hogares, and Colombia Poverty Report (2C02).

Table 3. Vulnerability as Measured by Extreme Poverty and Poverty for
Population Subgroups in Urban Colombia 2001

Urban Colombia (7 cities) 

Households with non-homeowning,
unemployed heads 
Households with unemployed heads 
Nor-homeowners 
Children under 2 yrs. 
From 2 to 6 yrs 
From 7 to 13 yrs 
From 14 to 17 yrs. 
Households with female heads 
Migranlts/just moved 
Women 
Disabled 
Homeowners 
Over 65 years old 
Pensioners 

Extreme 
Poverty 

17% 

Poverty 

59% 

Population
share

100%

50% 
39% 
25% 
28% 
27% 
24% 
21% 
20% 
19% 
17% 
10% 
10% 
8% 
2% 

90% 
83% 
70% 
72% 
72% 
72% 
69% 
63% 
64% 
59% 
56% 
49% 
41% 
25% 

4%
8%
49%
4%
11%
14%
7%
25%
1%
53%
1%
44%
5%
3%

* Refers to people who have lived less than 1% of their lives in the current city, 1999 data
Source. DANE, Encuesta Nacional de Hogares, authors' calculations.

Table 4. Millennium Development Goals

Targets 

1. Between 1990 and 2015, reduce by 
half the proportion of people living in 
extreme poverty and suffering from 
hunger. 

Position of the World 

20% of the world population live on less 
than US$1 a day (WBG estimate for 
2000). 

Current Position of Colombia

In 1998, 20% of Colombia's population
lived on less than US$1 a day The
prevalence of malnutntion among
chuldren under age 5 decreased from
10% in 1990 to 8% m 2000
Net overall primary enrollment ratio in
Colombia in 1998 was 87%.

The ratio of female to male enrollment in
primary and secondary schools is 101%.

The under-5 mortaity rate in Colombia
decreased from 40 per 1,000 in 1990, to
23 per 1,000 in 2000
In Colombia, matemal mortality rate was
67.7 (per 100,000 live births) in 1999.
In 2001, the prevalence rate of
HIV/AIDS among adult population was
0.35%.
In 2000, 91% of Colombia's population
had access to an improved water source
Likewise, in Colombia, land area in
protected areas totaled 9% in 1999.

2. Achieve universal completion of 
pnrmary education by 2015 for both boys 
and girls. 
3. Eliminate gender disparities in 
pnmary and secondary education by 
2005, and for all levels by 2015. 

90% of the world's elementary school- 
age children (6-14) are enrolled (WBG 
estimate for 1997).
Worldwide, there is a gender gap of 
7.6% in the primary education Gross 
Enrollment Ratio (WBG estimate for
1996).
4. Reduce infant mortality rates by two Worldwide, the under-5 mortality rate 
thirds between 1990 and 2015. 
was 78 per 1,000 (WBG estimate for 
2000). 
Worldwide, there are 400 matemal 
deaths per 100,000 live births. 
In 1999, the worldwide prevalence rate 
of HIV/AIDS among adults was 1.05%. 

5. Reduce matemal mortality rate by 
three quarters between 1990 and 2015. 
6. By 2015, halt and reverse the spread 
of HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other 
diseases. 
7. Ensure environmental sustainability. 
One indicator is access to an improved 
water source. A second indicator is ratio 
of land protected to maintain biological 
diversity to surface area. 

Worldwide, in 2000, approximately 80% 
of the population had access to water. 
Likewise, in South America, percent of 
land area in protected areas averaged 
7.4% in 1999

Box 1. Colombia Voices Of The Poor

* 
* 

The Colombia Voices of the Poor participatory poverty diagnoses focused on three themes: work and employment,
education and capacities, and security and violence The key messages of the poor are the following:
* 
Poverty has many dimensions 
in Colombia, including unemployment, 
lack of assets, inadequate social
opportunities, and powerlessness. Colombia is particularly characterized by stigmatization linked to political
and other forms of violence and the extreme vulnerability of youth and children,
* Work was valued as an attrbute to achueve well-being, in most cases above education and health,
* 
Poor people have an incredible versatility to find ways to make a living and adapt to adverse conditions, but this
versatility and wilhngness to work hard are not rewarded by the market or government programs,
Poverty is experienced and confronted differently in different regions of Colombia,
Political violence deteriorates economic conditions of the poor and leads to increased common crime, increased
violence in the home and violence at school. In addition, violence of all kinds is leading to more single mother
homes, which in turn increases the vulnerability of children to more violence;
* There is an increasing acceptance of illegal ways of making a living, such as through drugs, arned robbery, petty
crime, and prostitution;
* Police are absent from most of the 10 sites of the study and thus people find their own means to provide security
and apply justice. Thus lack of state security results in less investment, more stigmatization, more youths caught
up in gangs and irregular forces, and weakened communities that are victimized by armed groups;
* The economic crisis has shown the shortcomings of formal education as a means to get a job. Poor families
often send their children to school now for the food it provides rather than the learnng it may offer;
* The femnization of work as a consequence of the economic crisis of 1995 has led to tensions in the family by
the new demands on men to collaborate at home and has increased the vulnerability of children;
* The increased vulnerability of children leads to abuse, abandonment and the loss of human capital. Children
tend to reproduce the violence they have witnessed.

8

23. 
The govemment of Colombia is currently developing its strategy to attain the MDGs.
Table 4 shows Colombia's current position in meeting these targets and Annex A2 outlines
Colombia's strategy to improve its position. Studies conducted by the National Planning
Department, the UN Development Program and other institutions indicate a widespread pattem
of poverty, lower human development indices (especially in health and education), and a
significant deficit in access to basic infrastructure services such as water and sanitation among
both 
the indigenous and Afro-descendent populations. 
It is estimated that 10.5 million
Colombians are of Afro-descendant origin, 1.2 million of whom live in the Pacific Region and
southern Bolivar in the Caribbean coast. In addition, there are an estimated 800,000 indigenous
peoples distributed in 82 ethnic groups. There are also significant enclaves of Afro-descendant
persons living in urban slums, many of whom have been displaced by the armed conflict in rural
areas and are often excluded from access to public services.
24. 
Given this situation, the government and the WBG will conduct a special pilot exercise
which would disaggregate data from national household surveys and the national census, as well
as other reports, to assess the status of Afro-descendent and indigenous populations in terms of
the MDGs. Working in collaboration with the United Kingdom's Department for Intemational
Development (DFID), a cross-sectoral team of Bank specialists will assist the govemment to
develop a methodology for disaggregating poverty data regarding 
indigenous and Afro-
descendant populations; designing a system for monitoring the impact of current education,
health, social protection and rural/urban infrastructure programs on these traditionally excluded
populations; and, developing new modes of social targeting and project evaluation which would
more effectively include them in the country's poverty reduction programs.

III. COLOMBIA'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES-BUILDING THE
ECONOMIC FOUNDATION OF PEACE'
25. 
Growth has been Colombia's best and most effective social safety net; on average, each
percentage point increase in per capita GDP, reduces poverty by 0.6 percent (a quarter million
people). Given the historical, geographical, and military fragmentation of the country, and the
related weakness of the state, the possibility of eaming income within a growing economy has
held the nation together. That order came to an end in 1999, wiping out within a year the
previous decade of decline in poverty levels.

26. 

Furthermore the 27 million Colombians that live in poverty will need to be provided the

tools to share in that growth. For most of them, better human capital formation mechanisms, and
better markets in which to sell that capital, will be the answer. Both the public education and
health systems need to be freed of the vested interests that now resist reform and accountability.
In both systems, the govemment is paying too much, and getting poor and deteriorating quality.
At the same time, the legal and regulatory framework of the labor market, where the poor should
be able to exploit their human capital, is out of tune with a modem economy and effectively
shuts out one in three workers. A comprehensive labor reform is overdue. But flexible labor
markets and enhanced human capital will not be the answer for all Colombians-certainly not
for those that cannot cope with systemic shocks, have been displaced by the conflict, or still face
gender-based discrimination.
Finally, the govemment's capacity will be challenged by the breadth of the attendant
27. 
policy agenda and a reform of the state is thus critical. This implies improving the way the state

1. This section is based on Policy Notes discussed with the authorities in July 2002. Marcelo Giugale, Olivier

Lafourcade, and Connie Luff. Colombia-Policy Notes: The Economic Foundation of Peace. Washington,
D.C.: The World Bank.

9

discharges its main functions-how it budgets, procures, audits, evaluates, regulates, supervises,
and reports. Moreover, the context in which those functions are performed should be the subject
of reform, on three fronts. First, the decentralization of responsibilities is on an unsustainable
path, and a new incentive framework is necessary if departments and municipalities are to raise
the quality of their public services and maintain fiscal discipline. Second, the mechanisms to
fight corruption need strengthening. And, third, the judicial system delivers services of poor
quality and insufficient quantity which a few critical reforms could improve.
Achieving Fast and Sustainable Growth
28. 
Putting the economy back on a rapid, sustainable growth path requires action on six
fronts: (a) achieving a sustainable macroeconomic framework by spending less, reducing debt
accumulation, expanding the taxable base and improving tax collection; (b) completing the
reform of the financial sector-both the conclusion of the bank-restructuring program and the
fiscally all-important pension reform are pending; (c) improving the institutional, regulatory, and
cross-subsidization arrangements 
in 
infrastructure provision 
to encourage private sector
participation and extend service coverage to the poor; (d) achieving a strong supply response
from the private sector through reactivation of its dynamism and a strengthening of the
investment climate, (e) reorienting public policy to facilitate market signals to revive the rural
economy, despite the armed conflict, the illegal crops, and the coffee crisis; and (f) exploiting the
synergies between growth and environmental protection.
29. Maintaining Macro-Fiscal Adjustment. During the past four years, Colombia's
macroeconomic policy had to focus on redressing the imbalance in the public purse. 
In this
context, the growth of territorial transfers was delinked from the central government's revenues,
fiscal discipline among subnational governments was fostered, public investment was further
curtailed (to a mere 1 percent of GDP), civil servants' real wages were reduced (a measure later
reversed by the Constitutional Court), the base of the value-added tax (VAT) was widened, and
fuel taxes were increased. The Central Bank's independence was enhanced and its mandate to
fight inflation was strengthened. However, these measures fell short of correcting the financial
imbalance of the public sector-the deficit remains high and the country's sovereign debt
position has deteriorated and is still on a non-sustainable path.
30. 
Colombia has faced an 
increasingly difficult situation with 
increased security
requirements, lower-than-expected economic growth, and overspending by some public entities
have led to a larger fiscal deficit than foreseen under the government program supported by a
three-year IMF Extended Fund Facility and a Bank-SFAL. The fiscal slippage and the difficult
security situation exposed the country to increased contagion from other countries in the region,
and after mid-year the peso came under pressure. At the same time, the sovereign bond spread
widened sharply, effectively closing the financial markets to Colombia. Faced with these
challenges, the government took steps to rein in the fiscal imbalances, first by levying a one-off
tax on net wealth to finance increased security, and by presenting to Congress a fiscal package of
tax measures and key structural reforms. To further strengthen the public finances the authorities
have advanced on a plan to downsize public institutions, and early next year a proposal for a
two-year freeze on most current primary spending will be brought to a vote in a nationwide
referendum. The government has sought support from the IMF and a key component of the
program is to ensure that Colombia will gain firm control over its public debt dynamics, thus
reducing the exposure to external shocks.
31. 
The main macroeconomic task of the new administration will therefore be to carry out
fiscal adjustment and put the accumulation of public debt on a sustainable path. More
specifically, even under optimistic assumptions in terms of growth, the new authorities will have

10

to reach and maintain a primary surplus in the nonfinancial public sector of at least four percent
of GDP per year just to keep debt accumulation on a manageable trend and, at present, that
surplus stands at only one percent of GDP. This requires action on three fronts-a major
reduction in the size of the state, a growth-friendly tax reform, and better debt management.
This poses a formidable challenge, especially when there is a strong demand for more public
presence in the country.
Consolidating the Reform of the Financial Sector. Policy in the financial sector, the
32. 
second key element in achieving fast and sustainable growth, will also be about completing and
consolidating reforms. A systemic banking collapse was averted in 1999, through the
"officialization" of affected public banks and a consolidation process that drastically reduced the
number of players in the market; however, the fiscal liability arising from rescuing borrowers,
depositors, and bankers was large, and is so far estimated at about 7 to 8 percent of GDP,
depending on how much of the losses from non-performing loans of public sector banks are
recovered via the ongoing disposition of the foreclosed assets. Specifically, there are still
significant weaknesses in the housing finance sector where the nonperforming loan portfolios
continue to loom large (especially in the state controlled entities) and risks associated with asset-
liability mismatches have not yet been fully addressed. Reforms are also needed to improve the
operation of public debt management, address critical governance and regulatory issues related
to entities participating in the capital and debt markets, consolidation of state controlled second-
tier banking entities, and regulation for bank resolution, bad-asset disposition and the insurance
sector. Therefore, building on the financial sector reforms put in place during 1999-01, a second
round of financial sector reforms will need to be implemented, while minimizing any further
fiscal costs or interruptions in the flow of bank lending to the private sector.
33. 
Second, housing and rural finance merit a closer look. Restoring the housing finance
industry to soundness is vital, as Colombia is estimated to have a deficit of one million new
housing units, and two million in need of repair. The sector has experienced a sharply growing
non-performing loans portfolio as a result of the weak performance of the economy, uncertain
legal environment and deficient financial instruments related to indexation. Furthermore, it is
unlikely that private banks will be attracted back into rural finance, especially for small and
medium borrowers, as long as the armed conflict continues. Nevertheless, it is essential to
establish an institutional base for a sustainable expansion of access to financial services in rural
areas and other underserved segments, that does not rely upon continuous government subsidies.

34. 

Third, reform to the pension system also remains incomplete and poses a major

contingent liability to the fiscal accounts. The consolidated pension system for public sector
workers is technically insolvent, and the annual fiscal transfers required to cover its cash deficit
is equivalent to the total health budget. This is a worrisome position for a country that is still
demographically young and whose pension system only covers a third of the labor force.
Contribution rates are already too high and discourage participation in the formal labor market.
Until a transfer of all workers from the public pension system to the private sector can be
achieved, further reforms should focus on a reduction of the benefits package and reform of the
currently exempted regimes.
35. Moreover, banking and pension reforms go hand in hand with a strategy to create a
deeper, more liquid capital market. Much activity is underway: 
the three stock exchanges have
already been integrated and merged; a proposed draft capital market framework law that would
reduce obstacles for private securities issuance is currently in Congress; a new mortgage
securitization firm is now operating; market-making has been institutionalized for government
bonds; and, an almost complete range of Treasury bill maturities are now available. Recent
issues by multi-national entities have helped diversify somewhat the pool of fixed income

11

securities available in the market. However, access to the fixed-income market by non-sovereign
issuers needs to be improved to reduce the crowding out of private financing.
36. 
Finally, a healthy and stable development of the domestic financial sector would require
strengthening the legal and regulatory framework applicable to financial institutions, including
the Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AMLICFT) regime.
The Ministry of Finance and Banking Superintendency have strengthened its AML/CFT system
over the last two years, including the establishment of a monitoring unit to detect money
laundering and white collar crime. The Bank stands ready to provide technical assistance and
training in this area as needed, and/or to direct other TA providers to answer these requests. The
FSAP program, in which Colombia participated in 1999, could be an efficient tool to provide an
updated assessment of the country's financial sector vulnerabilities, including those in the
AML/CFT regime.
37. 
Infrastructure - Making Private Participation Work for All. Adequate provision of
physical infrastructure will be the third key element in retuming Colombia to a path of fast and
sustainable growth. 
This 
is particularly 
relevant for a country where armed groups
systematically target and destroy infrastructure and kidnap those that could help rebuild it. It is
therefore not surprising that private investmnent has been very low. A main challenge is the
existing major deficiencies in the access road network, water and sanitation facilities and basic
urban services. This especially affects basic services to the poorest segments of the population
such as those living in rural communities, urban squatter settlements and conflict areas.
Moreover, unsatisfactory sanitation 
facilities have been shown 
to have direct health
consequences which can be acute in the poorer neighborhoods-and absence of secondary roads
severely limits access to schools and health care facilities. Efficient policies and procedures also
need to be developed to anticipate, prevent and mitigate the effects of natural disasters which
strike Colombia with regularity and disrupt basic infrastructure services, making as much use as
possible of private initiative and insurance market instruments.
38. 
In the past, despite the difficult circumstances, Colombia has been fairly successful in
attracting private participation into the provision of infrastructure services. The policy challenge
is how to make private infrastructure investment more appealing in the context of the conflict,
increase the coverage for those that cannot pay for infrastructure services, and protect the fiscal
accounts. The remaining institutional and regulatory constraints that prevent further private
participation should be removed; and, the stratification system for subsidization should be
improved either by better means-detection and means-testing tools (not just housing quality); or
a government-funded minimum level of service should be provided to all consumers, above
which marginal tariffs grow steeply to recover the initial investment.
39. 
The problems with the various infrastructure sectors also have a common geographical
point of convergence-urban centers. Two thirds of Colombians live in urban areas, of which
more than half live in poverty and the armed conflict feeds the migration flow to cities. Those
cities now operate within more binding budget constraints that limits their capacity to support the
arriving poor. It is estimated that one fifth of all urban land developed each year is developed in
informal settlements, where the subsequent provision of basic services 
is not only more
expensive but also illegal. Local governments are compelled by law to produce nine-year land-
development plans that are supposed to direct the new settlements toward efficient locations, but
because of lack of resources, few municipalities do.
40. 
Facilitating a Private Sector Supply Response. 
If the private sector is to be able to
realize its full potential, it will be essential for the investment climate, in the form of the legal
and commercial framework for domestic and foreign enterprises, 
to be fully conducive.

12

Colombia has made a fair amount of progress towards establishing such a framework, both on
the domestic and FDI fronts, through the introduction of a number of legislative enactments over
the past decade. The challenge will now be. to consolidate all of these under a modem
bankruptcy and commercial framework, while strengthening institutional capacities (such as the
that of the Superintendency of Securities). Second, it will be essential for the major corporate
entities, which are the backbone of the private sector in Colombia, to be able to strengthen their
financial standing and competitiveness. To do this, they would need to improve access to
finance through a strengthening of corporate govemance practices and adoption of socially
sustainable business practices. Third, investment climate and access to financing for smaller
firms will need to improve in order to achieve a broad-based private sector response.
41. 
Facilitating the Rebirth of the Rural Economy. Starting in 1991, the govemment
embarked on a comprehensive reform program for the sector called la apertura. It essentially
aimed at (a) trade liberalization and lower tariff reforms, (b) the promotion of market-oriented
approaches, and (c) the reduction of state intervention in marketing and licensing activities.
These reforms were meant to reinvigorate the agricultural sector and promote private sector
involvement and access to the export markets that had remained underdeveloped as a result of
import-substituting policies. 
It aimed at building on Colombia's comparative advantages to
improve productivity and competitiveness. The apertura was immediately confronted with
major exogenous challenges that occurred at the same time: (a) a significant exchange rate
appreciation deriving from capital inflows associated to a favorable perception by foreign
investors of the new liberal policies; (b) the inflow of financial resources from drug trade; (c) a
drop of international prices for most agricultural commodities and consequent reduction of
producers' real prices; (d) an increase of inflation rates generated by lax monetary policies and
an expansion of government spending; and (e) one of the worst droughts in Colombian history in
1992. This led to a crisis in the agricultural sector which made further implementation of the
reform agenda in the sector very difficult and important reforms were only partially implemented
and for too short a period to have an impact. A decade later, the sector's productivity has not
increased, coffee production is on the brink of collapse, the crops that are profitable are illegal
and eighty percent of the rural population remains poor and subject to an armed conflict whose
epicenter is the control of land.
42. 
The necessary diversification, and through it, the revival of the rural economy, calls for
three main policy reforms. First, the sector needs to be put permanently on a path of open
markets and private-sector-led efficiency, including the development of competitive rural
financing systems and product diversification in line with the country's agro-ecological potential.
Second, distortions to the land market should be removed as Colombia has one of the most
concentrated land ownership structures in the world. Finally, the diversification of Colombia's
rural economy will be spearheaded by the structural transformation of the coffee industry, guided
by land redistribution and increased competitiveness. However, formidable external forces are
changing the business of coffee: international prices are very low and are likely to continue to
stay low; the concentration of international roasters, traders, and retailers has squeezed the share
of earnings going to producers; and consumer preferences have shifted toward specialty coffees.
43. Mainstreaming the Environment in Key Sectors. Colombia is one of the most
biodiversity-rich countries in the world, with unparalleled diversity at the genus, species, and
ecosystem levels. However, much of this natural wealth is being rapidly destroyed, by two main
factors. First, the arned conflict protects and fosters illicit crops that are grown in primary
forests, leading to soil contamination, discharge of chemical residues from coca laboratories into
important waterways, and forest clearing into virgin forest areas in response to fumigation
efforts. Second, much of Colombia's growth and fiscal resources are increasingly dependent on

13

oil, gas, and coal which can, without the introduction of best environmental management
practices and the transfer of international expertise, have a negative impact on the environment.
The government will need 
to balance socioeconomic development with environmental
protection. Policies which mainstream environmental considerations in key sectors can support
existing government programs, improve coordination and strengthen consensus among key
stakeholders, while supporting the development of appropriate fiscal instruments in support of
environmental goals.
Sharing Growth with all Colombians
44. 
Colombian society is highly unequal. While in the past three decades, sustained growth
brought about marked reductions in poverty, inequality continued to increase. This not only
affects the distribution of income but also of assets and of access to infrastructure-the two top
deciles control 60 percent of income, while the bottom two accrue less than five percent; the
measure of land concentration is one of the largest in the world (Gini 0.86); and the coverage of
electricity, water, sewerage, and other public services often do not reach the fast-growing
informal settlements where most of the urban poor live. Moreover, inequality seems resilient to
public policy-it has not been significantly dented by 40 years of land redistribution efforts, low-
income housing programs, and schemes for cross-subsidization among users of infrastructure. In
fact, many of those policy efforts were not only ineffective in reducing inequality but also hurtful
to growth (as the ensuing market distortions dampened investment). This is an inauspicious
position to be in because, in Colombia, inequality has been shown to be a determinant of
violence. There are two strategic lines of response for policy: break the lock that interest groups
have on the public systems of human capital formation (education, health, labor markets), and
attend directly to the needs of those for whom markets will not cater (social safety nets, the
displaced, gender discrimination).
45. 
Recovering the Mechanisms for Human Capital Formation. Some two million,
primarily poor, school-age children and youth are out of school, a worrisome fact since reaching
nine years of education in Colombia has been found to reduce the risk of poverty by one third.
Those inequities are exacerbated by problems with the quality of public education, in turn
brought about by outdated teacher training, weak teacher supervision, inflexible curriculums and,
most important, weak accountability mechanisms. The sharp inequity and the stagnant quality of
the public education system is not due to lack of resources-over the last three decades public
education expenditures quadrupled in real terms, while the school-age population grew by less
than one third. The policy priorities for education would be to better achieve the benefits of
decentralizing by supporting improved capacity at the local level and to link funding to the
number,of students rather than teachers, and to promote accountability for results.
46. 
A similar problem of capture by special interests affects the performance of health and is
bringing major parts of it to the brink of financial collapse. In 1993, Colombia implemented a
sweeping, pioneering reform of its health system. The new arrangement ensured efficient,
effective, and universal coverage by separating the funding of health services from the provision
of those services. People would pay for health insurance according to their means, with the poor
being subsidized by the government and by a portion of the premium for the nonpoor. The initial
results of the reform were impressive-total coverage more than doubled, rural coverage
increased sevenfold, and coverage among the poorest decile rose tenfold. The World Health
Organization now ranks the overall performance of Colombia's health system as the best in Latin
America, and 2 2nd in the world. These achievements, however, are jeopardized by the fact that
public hospitals have not adapted to the new market rules due to labor costs rigidities and, as a
result, although public resources for hospitals have more than doubled in real terms since the
reform began, two thirds of that increase went to pay for a larger wage bill.

14

47. 
Improving education and health will mean little in terms of inequality reduction if the
poor cannot count on functioning labor markets. However, Colombia's formal labor markets are
excessively rigid. High and binding minimum wages, hefty social security contributions, and
powerful unions that are primarily concerned with maintaining real wages result in high
unemployment (17 percent in mid-2002). The wedge between the cost of labor to the employer
and the compensation received by the employee is worth about 50 percent of the wage bill
(compared to 39, 31, 19 percent in France, Mexico, and the United States, respectively). Not
surprisingly, 60 percent of the workforce operate in the informal sector. This calls for a major
overhaul of the labor market legal and regulatory framework. Similarly, employment generation
will call for the expansion of low-income financing to entrepreneurs in the informal and micro-
enterprise sector, including programs to foster supplier linkages between larger firms and smaller
enterprises, and policies to facilitate the transition of non-profit micro-finance organizations into
regulated, financial entities.
48. 
Helping Those for Whom Markets Will Not Work. While strong human capital and
functioning labor markets will be an effective means for many Colombians to share in the fruits
of growth, there will be others for whom market-based solutions will simply not work and for
whom direct government support will be necessary-those that cannot cope with systemic crisis,
those that have been displaced, and those that are discriminated against on the basis of gender.
Colombia never really had a formal social safety net, something that became painfully
49. 
clear during the unprecedented macroeconomic crisis of 1999. 
In response to that crisis, a
temporary five-year Social Support Network was created to fund temporary employment
conditional cash transfers to poor families and firm-based apprenticeship grants for youth. The
network, which took two years to unfold fully, has several loopholes, but one is particularly
worrisome-it does not sufficiently protect children and adolescents at risk. All this is both a
challenge and an opportunity for the new administration. Based on the lessons that the
completion of the Social Support Network will bring in 2004, it should proceed to establish a
permanent and comprehensive Social Risk Management System. This need not mean new
budget appropriations; rather, it should absorb the funding currently going to the SENA, the Caja

de Compensaci6n and the ICBF.

50. 
Even a properly functioning social safety net would, however, need to be adapted to cater
to the urgent needs of Colombia's displaced population. Unofficial estimates put the number of
desplazados at some two million people (about five percent of the population). The majority are
women, about half are under 18 years old, and one fifth is either Afro-Colombian or Indigenous.
Virtually all are poor. To this end, there are five priorities. First is to give them means of
political 
representation, 
including mobile voter registration services-this would ensure
sustained policy attention. Second, support mechanisms should move from mere humanitarian
aid to schemes for return, relocation, or integration, and adequate budget resources should be
made available. Third, the operating rules of all existing social assistance programs, including
those that are based on means tests through the SISBEN, should be modified to allow for priority
consideration of displaced cases. Fourth, local governments should be encouraged to take the
lead in preventive action in high-risk regions, for which additional resource transfers from the
central government will be needed. Fifth, a good method to track and classify the displaced
populations should be developed.
Finally, ascription of gender-based roles distorts the way many Colombians can profit
51. 
from the growth process. But, contrary to common observations elsewhere, in Colombia those
roles are more harmful for men than women. Girls have higher school enrollment levels than
boys, women's fertility and maternal mortality have decreased, women's labor market
participation rates have increased, and gender gaps in wages have narrowed. Not only do boys

15

perform worse in education, but also males are more affected by HIVIAIDS-, alcohol-, and drug-
consumption-related diseases. More critically, males are the disproportional victims of violent
death because of both the armed conflict and crime. School curriculums and learning materials
that refrain from gender stereotypes and teach conflict resolution skills; media-based campaigns
that provide nonviolent role models; and community-based programs that seek to identify and
prevent local sources of violence (like the govemment's Convivencia y Seguridad Ciudadana)
are the best ways to address gender-driven social issues for males.
Building Efficient, Accountable and Transparent Governance
52. 
Reaching fast and sustainable growth and giving people the tools to share in the fruits of
that growth are difficult goals for any government. Colombia faces an especially formidable
challenge, for the armed conflict, the illegal drug industry, and the capture of policymaking by
interest groups have all but paralyzed the effective authority of the state. 
It will therefore be
imperative to focus on five areas where the marginal returns are highest-reform of the state's
functions, decentralization, budgetary institutions, corruption, and justice.
53. 
Reform of the State. Reform of the State should be about fixing critical functions within
the State, not about reordering reporting lines and shifting personnel among ministries and
institutions. Those functions include much-enhanced accountability in decentralization transfers;
an initial shift toward results-based investment budgeting in the central budget; a major overhaul
of procurement systems (with transparency as the guiding principle); much stronger intemal and
external auditing of the central government; currently-missing 
tools for evaluating public
expenditure in terms of their impact; more efficient and more independent regulation in
infrastructure (especially in roads, water, electricity, and gas); and better mechanisms to detect,
report, and punish abuse of power and rent-seeking.
54. 
Decentralization. Since the mid-1980s, Colombia led Latin America in embracing
decentralization to bring policymaking closer to its beneficiaries (partly as a tool to address the
causes of the armed conflict), enshrined it in the Constitution of 1991, and implemented it almost
at once. The results have fallen well short of expectations, and have threatened not only the
efficiency of sectoral expenditures but also the fiscal pillar of macroeconomic stability.
Decentralization remains the best option, but local govemments need support to improve their
capacity and to strengthen incentives to rely on local taxation, enhance efficiency in service
delivery, and maintain fiscal discipline. A mechanism is needed to evaluate, and hold local
govemments accountable for the results they achieve with transferred funds, especially in
education. Finally, central govemment resources should be invested in developing a common
budgeting, accounting, and reporting framework at all levels of the state, as well as common
procurement standards.
55. 
Budgetary Institutions. 
In recent years, Colombia has established a single treasury
account for its central govemment. This technical improvement has, however, not been matched
by better policies in designing and operating the budget itself. The National Development Plan
should become a strategic, indicative roadmap, rather than a bloated, legally binding list of
wished-for projects, the execution of which is then controlled discretionally through cash
management. 
International accounting standards (like the IME's Government Finance Statistics
Manual) should replace the rather loose definitions currently applied in Colombia's budget.
Congress and the public should be given access to the government's financial information
system and to the currently-under-construction results assessment system (S1NERGIA). The
split responsibility for the operational budget (current expenditure) under the ministry of finance,
and the investment budget under the ministry of planning should be unified, and only one of

16

those institutions made responsible for the whole budget, something that will avoid funding
investment projects without adequate operation and maintenance allocations in subsequent years.
56. 
Corruption. Corruption in Colombia is widely considered to be one of the most serious
development challenges. Surveys have indicated that although corrupt practices in transactions
such as tax payments or the processing of permits are relatively infrequent under regional
standards, a more systemic but less visible form of state capture permeates most areas of
government involvement. Powerful political, economic, and social interests exert influence on
policymaking bodies, regulatory entities, economic management and budget, and other key areas
of public policy. Although previous Colombian administrations have clearly identified
corruption as a main issue, state capture has not been faced in practice. During the Pastrana
administration, a Presidential anti-corruption program was set up under the direct leadership of
the Vice-President that had some interesting advances in citizen participation, processing cases
through the judicial system, and implementing risk-mapping techniques in some institutions.
However, the broader issues of the vulnerability of the state, from both policy and strategic
viewpoints, were not addressed.
57. 
Judicial System. This system was one of the main targets of the 1991 Constitution; the
overall objective was to raise the Judiciary's legitimacy and performance through a modern
institutional set up and increased resources. More that ten years later, in spite of some progress
in specific areas, the overall results are disappointing. What can now be done to fix it? First, a
new justice paradigm is required to respond to societal demands: providing adequate access to
the citizenry to prompt and effective justice services. Second, a critical challenge is related to
the Judiciary's governance structure that requires a single leadership, adequate mechanisms and
incentives for coordination, and a revised system of nomination of judges that ensures an
appropriate balance between independence and accountability. Third, although the resources
available to the Judiciary are relatively generous there is plenty of room for productivity
improvements; expenditure rigidities and investment preconceptions will need to be addressed as
demands for a new management model and style are growing, including more accountability to
the system's users through boards that include stakeholders outside the Judiciary itself. Fourth,
the Attorney General's Office should continue its restructuring process and become publicly
accountable for an agreed set of socially relevant performance indicators (like serious-crime
prosecution rates). Finally, a sizable investment in improving the physical infrastructure and
computer systems is long overdue.

IV. GOVERNMENT'S AGENDA OF POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
58. 
The government's strategy contains a broad social, political and economic agenda that
includes: 
(a) resuming peace negotiations (after 
the guerrillas cease all hostilities and
kidnappings); (b) restoring sustainable growth and generating employment by implementing
successful pension, labor and tax reforms, promoting exports, providing social protection, and
increasing coverage and enhancing quality in health and education; (c) supporting the rule of law
by ensuring that the government is itself bound by the law, that all Colombians are treated
equally under the law, that government authorities (including the judiciary) protect the human
dignity of its citizens, and that justice is accessible to all. The rule of law requires transparent
legislation, fair laws, predictable enforcement, and accountable governments to maintain order,
promote private sector growth, fight poverty, and protect human rights; and, (d) supporting the
international fight against terrorism.
59. 
At the core of this program is the administration's Development Plan for economic and
social reform, particularly in the areas of pensions, labor, tax and the modernization of the public

17

administration. The government is still working out the details of the plan, sometimes in
collaboration with the WBG. It has five pillars:
* Reduce the fiscal deficit by implementing a program that includes expenditure reductions
and a comprehensive overhaul of the public sector and of the taxation system. Although
the government has recognized the need to strengthen fiscal accounts and has begun to
set a solid foundation for further reforms, these will need to be expanded and accelerated
in the coming years. Continued fiscal adjustment is unavoidable if debt sustainability is
to be attained. Just as important, the quality of the adjustment is vital for a return to the
fast and sustainable growth that has historically been the key to poverty reduction in
Colombia. Reducing the fiscal gap, while strengthening conflict resolution and building
the peace effort, will represent a formidable challenge.
* Foster sustainable economic growth and employment generation by (a) implementing
labor and pension reform; (b) promoting competitiveness, innovation and technology; (c)
fostering trade integration; and (d) increasing private participation in the delivery of
public services and infrastructure.
* Bring about security by (a) seeking a negotiated solution to the conflict; (b) developing
conflict areas through assisting the displaced population, training the army and police
regarding human rights, providing basic infrastructure and food security; (c) fighting
narcotics 
through eradication, alternative development and prevention of drug
consumption; (d) controlling arms traffic and money laundering; (e) strengthening the
army; and (f) improving the judicial system.
* Building a more equitable society through (a) broadening the quality and coverage of
education; (b) widening and improving social protection; (c) strengthening SMEs and
cooperatives; and (e) improving the quality of life in urban areas.
Increasing the efficiency of the State through (a) implementing political and public
administration reform; (b) furthering decentralization and territorial development, and (c)
strengthening local democracies and civil society participation in public administration.

* 

V. WORLD BANK GROUP'S PARTNERSHIP WITH COLOMBIA

The Lessons of the Previous CAS

60. 
The previous CAS was discussed by the Board of Executive Directors in November
1997, and the CAS Progress Report was discussed in November 1999. Following participatory
consultations with government leaders and civil society the CAS identified, and the CAS
Progress Report reconfirmed, the main objectives of poverty reduction, social development and
sustainable growth. 
Anchored with a stable macroeconomic environment and fiscal
sustainability, these objectives were to be achieved by interventions in the following key areas:
(a) promoting peace and development; (b) supporting rural development; (c) developing human
capital; (d) attaining public sector responsiveness; (e) improving infrastructure services; and, (f)
ensuring sustainable development.
61. 
The Bank's primary support was through a base-case lending program of around US$300
million per year. This relatively low lending ceiling was determined by Colombia's preference
to limit its IBRD borrowings. The CAS Progress Report moved the assistance strategy to a high-
case lending program, with increased emphasis on adjustment lending, to around US$450 million
annually. This program was to be complemented by key non-lending services such as: (a) policy
notes to summarize the major challenges in Colombia's social-economic development and to

18

serve as a bridge to the new administration. These included thematic notes on peace, growth,
governance, natural resource management, poverty and inequality and notes on 33 essential
sector issues. There were discussed in July 2002, and at the request of the government, they will
be published as a book; (b) a poverty report to assess the evolution of poverty and inequality in
urban and rural areas, the incidence of crime and violence and related household responses, and
an overview of public social expenditures; and, (c) an assessment to evaluate the reforms to
Colombia's social safety net, both for addressing the needs of vulnerable groups during normal
times and for developing counter-cyclical strategies that could be implemented rapidly during
times of crisis.
There are several lessons of the previous CAS. First, the introduction of civil society in
62. 
the formulation and implementation of development initiatives will lead to a high level of
ownership and commitment to successful project implementation. Second, the transition from
reliance on implementation by centralized public entities, particularly in the social sectors, to
projects that are managed by decentralized, local levels of government also leads to increased
ownership and commitment. Third, in the infrastructure sector, project performance improved
due to the implementation of a strategy to shift from direct financing of ventures to activities that
aimed at strengthening 
the regulatory and institutional framework to enable private sector
participation. Finally, the Bank's investment in analytical work, especially collaborative ESW
products, provides decisive guidance in the design of our operations (Social Safety Net Study
and Poverty Assessment) and helps foster a process of debate on key development issues and
promotes serious discussion of alternatives facing the country (Policy Notes).
Colombia's portfolio performance has remained satisfactory
63. 
IBRD's Portfolio. 
throughout the CAS period, and currently only one project is rated unsatisfactory (5.3 percent of
commitments). The Bank's portfolio in Colombia contains 26 active projects, including 3
GEF/MP projects, with about US$1.3 billion in net commitments and an undisbursed balance of
US$ 569 million. The FY02 disbursement ratio for investment loans was 29.5 percent, versus 19
percent for the LAC Region, and the year-to-date disbursement ratio is about 5.1 percent.
64. 
OED plans to undertake a Country Assistance Review to assess the implementation
results of the 1997 CAS in the third quarter of FY03. Of the 15 projects that closed during the
implementation of the 1997 CAS, OED has rated 67 percent as achieving a satisfactory outcome,
sustainability was likely for 47 percent, and institutional development impact was substantial for
only 27 percent. While Colombia's performance was below average Bank performance for the
same period of implementation (for all Bank projects closing between FY97-02, 75 percent
achieved a satisfactory outcome, sustainability was likely for 62 percent 
and institutional
development impact was substantial for 43 percent), it is significantly above average Bank
performance for projects that have closed in the last two fiscal years. Furthermore, four
Colombia projects were assessed by QAG for quality at entry during the CAS period. The
overall assessments of these projects was 100 percent satisfactory, while the Bank average was
88 percent satisfactory. Similarly, four Colombia projects were assessed for their quality of
supervision and were rated satisfactory or better, while Bank-wide only 78 percent were rated
satisfactory. Finally, two Colombia AAA were assessed for quality and both were rated
satisfactory.
There are two main lessons that can be drawn from the implementation of the IBRD's
65. 
portfolio during the last CAS period. First during a change of administrations, it is essential that
the IBRD assist new counterparts to better understand the portfolio, and to ensure that the new
govemment has ownership of the projects under implementation. Second, the previous CAS
recognized 
that poor portfolio performance had impeded the Bank's ability to assist in
Colombia's development. An increased focus of the government and Bank's country team on

19

portfolio management helped improve project implementation. This focus included: (a) being
responsive to client priorities, including avoiding projects without strong government ownership;
(b) maintaining 
intensive supervision of projects; (c) strengthening the Colombia Country
Office; (d) making effective use of CPPRs; and, (e) increasing training aimed at improving
procurement, audit, and project management skills of staff in executing agencies.
66. 
A Country Performance Portfolio Review took place in September 2002. The objectives
of the review were: (a) learn from the implementation experience of on-going projects to
improve both the implementation of the existing portfolio and the quality of projects under
preparation; 
(b) ensure 
that the new government has ownership of the projects under
implementation; and, (c) discuss systemic problems and develop a time-bound action plan to
resolve them and address key project-specific issues. The findings of this review were discussed
in a day-long workshop with the government. Systemic problems were identified, particularly in
the flow of funds to projects, procurement, financial management and the sub-contracting of
project management to administrative agencies. It was agreed that a working group comprised
of the National Planning Department, Finance Ministry and the Bank would meet periodically to
review progress on the resolution of these issues.
67. 
IFC Experience. 
Since early 1990s, the level of lFC's activity in Colombia has
fluctuated over time with: (a) the level of private capital flows; (b) the level of private
investment; and (c) the pace of reform, particularly in infrastructure and the financial sector
(Table 5). In the first half of the l990s, Colombia was a regional leader in economic reform, and
by mid-1990s became a pioneer in the development of private infrastructure. Private investment,
relative to GDP, increased steadily towards a peak of 16.7 percent (in 1995); however, access to
private capital was modest around 2 percent of GDP during the period. This combination of
progress in reform, increasing private investment, and increasing yet still constrained access to
private capital presented EFC with an opportunity to play a catalytic role in Colombia. 
IFC
supported key sectors, such as the hydrocarbons and financial sectors and notably private
infrastructure, with investment totaling $379 million, including syndications, for the period
FY91-95. Beginning mid-1990s until the late 1990s, Colombia experienced further improved
access to external financing despite a slower progress in reform and declining private investment.
This lasted until the loss of investment grade credit ratings. During this period (from FY96 to
FY2000), IFC's investment volume decreased 
to $190 million, with its role with larger
companies that had good access to the market declining. 
IFC's opportunities to support
"frontier" sectors, such as the more difficult infrastructure projects and smaller companies also
declined, due to a stagnant private investment in these sectors.

Table 5. IFC Investments 1991-2002

IFC approvals ($m) 

IFC: sectors of major 
activity 

FY91 - FY95 
$379m 

Gas transportation 
Financial sector 
Ports 

FY96 - FY00 
$190m 

Financial sector 
Oil 
Tollroads 

FY01 - FY02
$642m

Support for corporate sector
(reorganization, corporate
govemance, sustainability)
Housing finance
Low income finance

68. With the loss of investment grade rating, the Government's strong commitment to
reform, and the recognition that broad-based, private sector-led growth plays a critical role in
Colombia's efforts to achieve a sustained growth path, demand for IFC to step up its activity in
Colombia increased substantially starting in FY2001. IFC's program has been stronger than in
any previous period (approval of $642 million for the past two fiscal years alone). At the same
time IFC's activity has been more focused in areas of systemic impact, which have been

20

highlighted through continuous dialogue with the Government. These areas included: (a)
supporting business groups and companies that form the backbone of the Colombian economy,
which were faced with constrained access to long-term financing and needed to improve their
organizational and financial structure; (b) expanding access to financing for a wider base of the
population 
(e.g. housing finance, 
low 
income 
financial services); and 
(c) promoting
environmental, social and corporate governance best practices. 
(See Annex Cl Private Sector
Strategy for a more detailed discussion of IFC's focus in Colombia going forward.)
Procurement and Financial Management in Colombia's Portfolio
Procurement. A Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR) was completed in
69. 
March 2001. The report found that, with a few exceptions, for Bank-assisted projects
procurement is carried out in accordance with Bank policies and procedures, and procurement
performance under these projects is generally satisfactory and free of major problems. Two
procurement audits and four agency procurement capacity assessments carried out in the last two
years have found no major problems and determined that the procurement risk in Bank projects
is lower than average. However, the CPAR found that public procurement and contract
management had deficiencies that had the potential to result in inefficient use of public funds and
could be a source of corruption. The main problems include: (a) a multiplicity of legal
instruments regulating different aspects of public procurement (namely Law 80 of 1993 plus
some 80 regulatory decrees); (b) poor planning due to a complicated budgetary and cash-release
management system; (c) 
the lack of a leading institution responsible for formulating policy,
developing regulations and standardizing procurement procedures and documentation; (d) the
absence of a procurement career stream; (e) 
lack of uniformity and cumbersome procedures,
including an ineffective registration and qualification system of contractors, consultants and
suppliers: (f) a costly and risky environment which discourages good consultants, contractors,
and suppliers from doing business with the public sector.
The findings and recommendations of the CPAR to strengthen public procurement were
70. 
discussed and agreed in principle, including: (a) carrying out an inventory and review of all
public procurement related regulations reviewing and consolidating it, and if needed amending
issuing an integrated regulatory decree; (b) establishing a
the procurement law (Law 80) and 
procurement policy body responsible 
for providing 
leadership and oversight 
to public
procurement; (c) adopting standard procurement documents; and (d) putting in place an internet-
based public procurement information system. Furthermore, building on the results of the
CPAR, the National Department of Planning (DNP) is implementing a Public Procurement
Project (Proyecto de Contrataci6n Estatal) with the objective of implementing the CPAR
recommendations, which is being supported by Public Financial Management Project (PFMP).
An initial output of the project was the development of a policy paper which was adopted by the
previous government.
The government has expressed its strong commitment to modernizing and introducing
71. 
transparency to public procurement, and has taken short term actions to increase public
participation on the oversight of procurement decisions. 
It has confirmed its intention to
continue with 
the 
implementation of the plan, but a specific medium- 
to long term-
implementation program has not yet been developed. The Bank will however assist on the broad
objectives of streamlining the legal framework, establishing institutional mechanisms that
provide leadership and administrative oversight, streamlining documentation and completing
implementation of a procurement information and e-procurement systems.
72. 
Financial Management. A Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) was
carried out in September 1998. As a result of the recommendations in the 1998 CFAA report,

21

the Office of the Accountant General and public accounting institutions have been strengthened.
These efforts have been supported by recently completed sector work on corruption and by the
Bank-financed PFMP I and II. These operations have supported the government's measures to
strengthen institutional capacity and analysis in a number of key areas of public expenditure;
macro-programming, formulation and monitoring of the budget, budget execution, including the
development and implementation of an Integrated Financial Management System (SIIF), and
evaluation of results of public expenditure, including the implementation of the National System
for Evaluation of Results of Public Sector Performance (SINERGIA).
73. 
Despite important progress in public expenditure management, further strengthening of
financial management processes is needed. The Bank would support the govemment to: (a)
develop a risk mitigation and capacity building strategy; (b) improve government effectiveness at
the national and sub national levels; (c) implement a new accounting model which would consist
of revised forms, principles and methods of accounting and financial reporting meeting the
requirements of an Integrated Financial Management System; and, (d) define a model of
financial agencies to support the financial management systems of projects. The next CFAA is
under preparation and will have a special focus on sub-national finances.

VI. WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

74. 
The long-standing armed conflict and violence are the most important issues facing
Colombia. Although economic prosperity alone will not be sufficient to stop the violence,
increased poverty could well further inflame 
the situation. 
Therefore, 
the overarching
development objective of this CAS will be to support the government's efforts to achieve
economic development as a necessary, albeit not a sufficient, condition for peace. Finding the
path to sustainable economic development will be an important foundation upon which
Colombia will build national reconciliation and lasting peace. The WBG's strategy, has been
fully discussed with the government. 
It will seek to support Colombia's quest for peace in three
essential areas: (a) achieving fast and sustainable growth; (b) sharing the fruits of growth; and,
(c) building efficient, accountable, and transparent governance. WBG will prepare periodic
progress reports on the implementation of the planned strategy.
75. 
The Bank's lending program would focus on operations that would: (a) have the most
tangible impact on poverty alleviation and help Colombia meet the MDG targets; (b) restore
macro-stability and sustainable growth while protecting the poor; (c) incorporate the lessons
learned from WBG's operations, particularly from on-going Learning and Innovative Loans, and
(d) pilot innovative interventions with important demonstration effects. The Bank would also
support Colombia with its analytical work. 
In order to ensure that these services are demand
driven, the Bank would continue to conduct most of its economic and sector work as joint
products with the government. The impact of this would be enhanced through close interaction
with policymakers and wide dissemination, including the use of seminars and workshops.
76. 
The CAS envisages a maximum lending program for IBRD of about US$3.3 billion for
the remainder of FY03 to FY06, in order to align the WBG's strategy and instruments with the
Uribe administration's term of office. About half of the lending program would consist of fast-
disbursing operations to support the government's comprehensive reform program. 
If the
government requires technical assistance, the Bank would add accompanying operations of less
than US$5 million to support these programs. This increase in lending is justified by the
ambitious and broadly supported program of the Uribe administration to build the foundation for
lasting peace and to achieve poverty reduction. Colombia, which has traditionally had an
excellent relationship with the Bank Group, is now turning to it to help the country through this

22

period when the country is faced with: (a) fiscal difficulties (resulting from fragile economic
growth, a drop in exports caused by the recession in countries that are Colombia's main trading
partners, declining petroleum production and historically low international coffee prices, and low
private investment levels impacted by worsening internal security conditions and delay in certain
policy reforms); and (b) restricted access to international capital markets (due to the country's
loss of its investment grade credit rating and the general economic turmoil in the Region). At the
end of FY02, JIBRD debt outstanding and disbursed was about US$2 billion and constituted less
than 2 percent of the total IBRD portfolio, less than 6 percent of the country's total foreign debt,
and less than 30 percent of total preferred-creditor debt. This is due, in part, to the country's
tradition of competent economic management and access to private creditors, which determined
its preference to limit DBRD borrowings and pre-pay IBRD debt when economic performance
was strong.
This is a performance based strategy, where weakened performance would reduce
77. 
lending from a high-case to base-case scenario, and, in the event of a stalling of reform, to a low-
case scenario. The envelope for the high-case is US$3.3 billion. If the triggers in Table 6 are not
met, IBRD would move to a base-case ranging between US$2 billion and US$2.9 billion and the
Bank would not proceed with investment lending support for Natural Disasters Prevention,
Water and Sanitation, Slum Upgrading, Decentralized Education 
in FY05 and FY06.
Furthermore, lack of progress in sectoral reforms supporting a proposed adjustment operations
also serve as a trigger for moving from the high to the base-case and would lead to an immediate
downward adjustment of the lending program by the relevant amount.
78. 
IBRD would review the lending program and move to a low-case scenario of about
US$900 million (US$225 million per year) or lower, with a focus on operations targeted to
alleviate poverty and build social development, if the reform program were to completely stall or
if the security situation were to substantially deteriorate.

Table 6. Triggers to Remnain in High-Case

Macroeconomic Sustainability 

Structural Reforms 

Social Sustainability 

Portfolio Performance 

Satisfactory macroecononmc performance, as demonstrated by continued
implementation of the govemment's program supported by the IMF Stand By
arrangement, together with the maintenance of a pnmary surplus sufficient to
ensure public debt sustainability.2
In the Public Sector, reforms will reduce ngidities of expenditure by
implementing intergovemmental fiscal transfers and other budget
entitlements, and reducing exemptions in the value-added and income taxes.
In the financial sector, approve and implement amendments to the Banking

* 

.

Law, including a more efficient bank resolution system

* 

* 

Satisfactory completion of the implementation of the Red de Apoyo Social
program.
Passage by Congress of the proposed social protection/labor reform
legislation and issuance of enabling regulations for its implementation.
* A disbursement ratio of not less than 15 percent;
* 
Satisfactory percentage ratings of not less than 80 percent of projects.

79. 
As reflected in the WBG's Private Sector Strategy (Annex C1), IFC's increased activity
will accompany IBRD's enhanced assistance, supporting private sector firms-large and small-
and catalyzing a private-sector supply response that Colombia needs for achieving higher,
sustained growth and the sharing of that growth. IFC is stepping up its activity in response to the
deteriorated market conditions, particularly the decline in private capital flows and low private
investment, and the administration's request to help revitalize the private sector. 
EFC's
contributions are expected to also support the areas of corporate governance, environmental and

2. Debt sustainability is defined here to mean the stabilization of the Debt/GDP ratio, not including contingent
liabilities.

23

social sustainability, and low-income and micro financing, with its international expertise being
transferred to the Colombian private sector.
80. 
IFC's primary choice of instruments will be structuring and investments (loans, equity
and credit enhancement) for individual transactions, supplemented by non-investment activities
in (a) private institution strengthening and (b) enabling regulatory environment and investment
climate (in collaboration with the Bank). 
It will place emphasis on reaching out to a broader
base of the Colombian private sector through: (a) supporting firms that are engines of growth,
and have linkages to wider economic and social activity; (b) reaching out to smaller firms
through financial and other intermediaries; and (c) selectively supporting small projects with
large potential impact, particularly on the poor.
81. 
The following 
is a summarized description of the main 
instruments for WBG
intervention, together with an indication of the strategic objectives they support (see Tables 7
and 8).
CAS Objective: Achieving Fast and Sustainable Growth
82. Macroeconomic Framework. To correct fiscal imbalances and face large future fiscal
liabilities, the government has recognized the need to strengthen fiscal accounts and has begun to
set a solid foundation for further reforms, which will be expanded and accelerated in the coming
years. The main objective of the IBRD's strategy in terms of the macroeconomic framework
would be to support Colombia's continued fiscal adjustment, including the quality of the
adjustment, as key for achieving faster and sustainable growth. To support this, the IBRD, in
close collaboration with the IMF and JDB, will prepare a Programmatic series of Fiscal and
Institutional Adjustment Loans (total of US$900 mnillion) to support fiscal adjustment, including
reforming 
the 
tax system, strengthening 
the tax administration, 
implementing a fiscal
responsibility law and reforming the public sector. These operations will support measures to
reduce tax exceptions and expenditure rigidities while ensuring better quality and coverage of
public services and investment. Tax reform measures will: a) simplify and expand the tax base
(focusing on reducing exemptions to the VAT and the individual and corporate income tax); and
b) reduce the disparity of tax rates for the VAT. The program would also include measures to
develop public sector capacity to make better use of state assets, including 
liquidation,
privatization and maintenance. Furthermore, these operations will support improvement of the
tax administration, with emphasis on reporting and intermediation by the financial system,
auditing and collection. A fiscal responsibility law would help reduce the fiscal gap by putting
targets and ceilings that serve as safeguards against excessive expenditure and add transparency
to budget and treasury operations.
83. 
As the current level and structure of Colombia's public sector debt pose a risk and
make the overall fiscal position vulnerable, an Assessment on Public Debt Management will be
carried out in FY03 to identify institutional needs, assist the government design a program to
strengthen those needs and develop a comprehensive debt strategy to better manage the risks of
the debt portfolio and reduce vulnerabilities. 
In addition, IBRD would help the government to
identify policies for enhanced growth and reduce poverty. This objective would be carried out
through a study on Growth for Tackling Inequalities for FY04 which would identify the major
constraints to growth and would provide policy recommendations for building an environment
conducive 
to sustained economic growth and greater competitiveness 
in order to reduce
inequalities. Finally, the Bank would also carry out a Public Expenditure Review and Country
Economic Memorandum in FY03 and FY05 respectively to enhance its knowledge on the main
issues in macroeconomic management, structural reforms, poverty and public service delivery

24

trends, public expenditures, public sector management, and financial sector issues. They will
provide diagnostic work and policy advice regarding main issues in these areas.
84. 
Financial Sector. In a continued effort to help promote the development of a well-
functioning financial system that can provide adequate services to all segments of the productive
sector and the population at large, and building on the achievements of the Financial Sector
Adjustment Loan (FY00), 
the Bank plans 
to process a Programmatic Financial Sector
Adjustment Loan (total of $300 million) to address the remaining agenda to ensure the health
and financial sustainability of the banking system and to foster capital markets development.
This will be complemented by: (a) EFC's interventions through individual transactions and
technical advice on an enabling regulatory environment (in collaboration with the Bank); and (b)
Bank analytical and advisory work to monitor developments in the sector and identify critical
areas that require action. Through these initiatives, the WBG expects to support:
* Winding up, restructuring, and/or privatizing (possibly with IFC support) the public
financial institutions (most important, Banco Cafetero and Granahorrar) as early as
possible to avoid further fiscal drain and erosion of the value of these entities.
* Review and overhaul policies, procedures, and action plans implemented by CISA, the
subsidiary of FOGAFIN responsible for the management and disposition of repossessed
assets.
* Review of the operations of the various second-tier development banks currently under
state control (Instituto de Fomento Industrial, State Industrial Development Bank, II;

Financiera de Desarrollo Territorial, FINDETER; Financiera Energetica Nacional,

FEN; FINAGRO, and BANCOLDEX) to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of
second-tier banking, eliminate the distortions these institutions introduce in the financial
system's incentive structure, and reduce their impact on fiscal expenditure and public
debt.
* A comprehensive agenda for capital market development, anchored in a new capital
markets law and appropriate regulations and complemented by transactional support via
1FC, to help improve the operation of markets for government securnties and public debt
management, strengthen market disclosure and transparency, put in place institutional
strengthening measures 
for capital markets 
entities, 
transform Corporaciones
Financieras into investment banks that operate in capital markets and corporate finance
under proper regulations and develop new market instruments, including securitization
instruments to help promote long term housing finance markets development.
* Strengthening/restructuring existing financial groups/institutions, supported by IFC.
* Reform of the pension and social security system.
* Modification and 
improvement of 
the problem bank resolution 
strengthening risk management in banks.
* Review and reform of judicial system procedures as they affect credit and financial
system operations, including especially more efficient foreclosure procedures.
* Review and reform of the solvency standards in the insurance sector, strengthening of the
supervision system and consolidation of the system based on upgraded capital
requirements.

framework and

25

* Development of sustainable financial services outreach to rural areas, especially to the
rural poor, using alternative institutional arrangements to the current scheme anchored in

Banco Agrario and FINAGRO.

* Assisting 
the Government of Colombia 
in assessing 
its AMLICFT regime and
strengthening the legal, regulatory and institutional framework for combating money
laundering and the financing of terrorism, and bringing Colombia in compliance with the
AMLJCFT international standard.
85. 
Infrastructure to Foster Competitiveness and Improve Services to the Poor. In
light of the high priority being attached by the government to promote competitiveness of the
Colombian productive sector and improving access to good quality basic public infrastructure
services to the least privileged population segments, the CAS will support Colombia's efforts to
establish efficient, effective, and well-managed infrastructure services. There is empirical
evidence of a strong causal link between the availability of adequate infrastructure services and
enabling economic growth and competitiveness. Moreover, the lack of basic water ad sanitation
services, shelter, secondary and community roads, telephone services and electricity has severe
adverse social effects on the poorest population in rural and urban areas.
86. 
In recognition of the urgent need to correct this situation, the Bank will support a
broad program of initiatives in the infrastructure areas to: (a) help turn around the significant
erosion of infrastructure in recent years which resulted from dwindling public investments for
maintenance of existing infrastructure and guerilla-inspired sabotage of critical highways,
bridges, and power stations as well as create mechanisms to maximize the possibilities for
enhanced private participation in the new infrastructure investments; (b) achieve a reduction in
logistics costs in the economy via efficiency increases in the transport and communications
systems; and (c) potable water supply, sewerage and wastewater treatment for the least well
served areas.
87. 
Specific Bank lending operations covenng water supply, wastewater and sanitation
management (to help Colombia meet its MDG target to increase access to safe water), national
urban transportation and urban upgrading strategy (with a focus on improving shelter and basic
services to the lowest income deciles) are envisaged for FY03-06. Complementing the Bank's
activity, IFC's focus will be on supporting new forms of public-private partnership-where
complementary public and private investment could improve access to services and fostering
local currency-denominated long-term financing through credit enhancement. Together, these
operations would help improve access of essential public services (e.g., water, sanitation and
community roads) to the poorest segments of the population, put in place cost recovery and tariff
structures that are socially and environmentally responsive, increase private participation and
bring in the critically needed investments in these sectors, and help enhance efficiency of
infrastructure provision and bring down logistics costs in the economy. The program also
envisages taking advantage of opportunities offered by the Kyoto Protocol through sources such
as the Prototype Carbon Fund (PCF) or the IFC-Netherlands Carbon Facility to finance off-grid
solutions making use of renewable energy sources (e.g., wind power or small, run-of-river hydro
power) and thereby contribute to pursuing a better energy-environment balance.
88. 
To support Colombia's efforts 
to promote productivity, competitiveness and
innovation, the Bank will undertake analytical work to examine the framework for knowledge
infrastructure-knowledge management, innovation, technology absorption and modernization
at the national and/or regional levels-and make recommendation for needed improvements
Specific options 
to enhance competitiveness and employment generation 
(e.g., 
through
reinforcement of production chains, integration of small producers into broader economic

26

reactivation programs of the regions and regional development programs that explicitly take
account of knowledge building initiatives) would be developed on the basis of this work.
The IBRD assistance program will also include non-lending and lending services
89. 
(including a proposed FY05 lending operation) to help improve Colombia's capacity to manage
natural disasters 
through appropriate preventive measures, appropriate codes design and
enforcement and specific initiatives to improve physical and financial contingency planning
including innovative use of insurance instruments (e.g., creation of pools and self insurance and
re-insurance mechanisms).
90. 
Private Sector Development and Strategy: Cutting across the WBG's proposed
activities, a Private Sector Strategy (PSS, see Annex Cl) forms an integral part of the WBG's
overall strategy for Colombia. 
IBRD, IFC, and MIGA will work closely together in the
implementation of the PSS, facilitating the private sector's contributions to the three thematic
pillars, especially in accelerating growth and broadly sharing the fruits of growth through private
sector initiatives. The Bank's overall strategy in private sector development would be to help
foster a business environment that would remove the impediments currently constraining the
achievement of the potential of the private sector, including adequate regulatory and competition
frameworks, and administrative procedures governing the establishment and operation of firms
that are not excessively cumbersome. To this end, and to foster a larger contribution of medium,
small and micro-enterprises in economic activity and the associated employment generation, the
Bank would undertake economic and sector work as well as a likely FY04 lending operation.
Key objectives of these programs would be to help to improve business environment and
promote productivity.
91. 
IFC's continued strong role in this area is envisaged, given the worsened access to
financing for the private sector and broad-based needs for reactivating private sector-led growth
in Colombia. IFC will thus focus on: helping improve access to financing, particularly through
the development of the domestic financial and capital markets; facilitating investor response
through support for companies which are an important engine of growth in the Colombian
economy; helping the private sector demonstrate tangible benefits of reform (e.g. infrastructure,
housing finance, low-income and SME/micro finance); and strengthening the natural resource
In pursuing these objectives, IFC will also focus on activities that help improve the
sectors. 
quality of growth-access to investment financing for underserved segments of the population,
environmentally and socially sustainable business practices, and corporate governance. 
IFC's
areas of focus responds to the Government's current priorities in facilitating private sector role in
the reactivation of the Colombian economy.
92. 
Linkages in IBRD-IFC Assistance Strategy in Colombia. The Colombia CAS has
been built around an integrated approach to Private Sector Development (PSD). Over the years,
the Bank Group institutions have had increasingly coordinated actions for the development and
strengthening of the private sector in Colombia. The private sector strategy formulated in this
CAS is a result of this coherent approach based on a balanced mix of activities ranging from
strengthened regulations, 
to institution building and to investment in private firms. The
continuous efforts 
to 
integrate 
IBRD and 
IFC activities have produced coordinated
implementation of the private sector strategy, as the following examples indicate:
* The Banking Sector. IBRD and the IFC have closely worked on the strengthening and
restructuring of the Colombian banking sector. While IBRD, through the FSAL, has
helped the Colombian authorities to properly address the key issues needed to avoid a
banking crises and defuse systemic risks in the mortgage sector, IFC has supported: (a)
the creation of the first secondary mortgage market company of the country; and (b) the

27

capitalization of the private sector banks. This work has also spanned into a joint work in
enhancing 
the regulatory and supervisory environment, and into EFC' s increased
involvement in direct and indirect assistance to the modernization and reorganization of
key Colombian financial groups.

* 

* Capital Market and Good Corporate Governance. The joint IBRD/IFC assistance on

capital market and corporate governance has already produced important changes in the
regulatory framework for domestic institutional investors and issuers. This has allowed
among other things the opening-up by IFC of the Eldorado bond market (first issue by a
supra-national in the domestic market of a local peso bond with the first long term swap
into US$) and Colombia becoming one of the pioneers in adopting good corporate
governance in Latin America. In this respect, an important pillar of IFC's strategy relates
to supporting the adoption by industrial groups of best corporate governance practices.
IBRD and EFC are also involved in providing technical assistance for the development of
a modern capital market framework law and a new bankruptcy code.
Infrastructure. In a number of sub-sectors where the IBRD's assistance helped improve
the regulatory framework, IFC's sequential involvement is focusing on pioneering private
infrastructure projects contemplating partial guarantees in local currency to avoid foreign
exchange exposure in sectors with local currency cash flows. This synergy is expected to
continue in infrastructure subsectors where the private sector is active.
* SMEs. IBRD's efforts in helping improve investment climate for smaller firms through
economic and sector work (and possible 
lending operations) on helping remove
regulatory and administrative constraints are complemented by lFC's activities in the
area of low-income segments/SME lending (through intermediaries), microfinace, and
increased involvement with the key Colombian private sector foundations.
93. 
Rural Development The Uribe administration's plan to address rural poverty, promote
social equity, and strengthen the rural sector includes promoting and financing initiatives that
boost the competitivity of Colombia's agricultural sector. The Government's strategy includes
supporting vertical integration in supply and marketing chains; strengthening the role of the
private sector in providing services to producers; promoting vertical integration; creating off-
farm opportunities in rural areas; supporting improved access to land for small farners; and
providing basic infrastructure and services in rural areas. World Bank's assistance to the
government in the area of rural development builds upon a rich history of projects (e.g.,
Magdalena Medio Regional Development, Rural Education, Earthquake Recovery, Peasant
Enterprise Zones projects) targeted towards strengthening local leadership and non-governmental
organizations in rural areas as well as generating increased confidence in the national institutions
in conflict-affected areas. Building on lessons learned in these operations, the Peace &
Development Project will strengthen on-going initiatives throughout Colombia by supporting
local, community-driven initiatives relating to increased productivity in rural areas, creation of
work opportunities, and the provision of social services to vulnerable groups. The Rural
Diversification Project will include (a) support for smallholders affected by the international
coffee crisis by improving competitiveness as well as and assisting in a transformation of the
rural economy in coffee-producing areas; (b) increase access to land and strengthening the
functioning of land markets, thereby increasing productivity in the rural sector; and (c) promote
reforestation, afforestation and improved land use management in priority areas. Likewise, the
Bank will assist the government in identifying financing sources to strengthen its agricultural
research system to improve rural productivity.

28

94. 
Environmental and Natural Resource Management. The Government has expressed
interest in the Bank's support to help promote mainstreaming of environment, and in this context
meet 
its MDG 
target 
to ensure environmental 
sustainability, 
through an Sustainable
Development Adjustment Loan, which will likewise support implementation of reforms to the
SINA. Input to this operation would include analytical work to review the licensing system and
provide recommendations for making this system more strategic and rapid; as well as analytical
work on the legal framework for environmental management, including financial sustainability
of environmental institutions. Second, emerging international carbon markets offer opportunities
to capture value-added from environmental assets, such as production of certified emission
reductions from new renewable energy investments as well as carbon sequestration and storage
via land use, land use change and forestry activities. 
In the case of Colombia, carbon trading
could constitute a valuable source of foreign 
trade and contribute 
to local sustainable
development. The Jepirachi Carbon Offset Project and the Rio Amoya Environmental Services
Project, financed by the Prototype Carbon Fund, and the Adaptation to Climate Change Project
financed by the Global Environment Facility, offer the possibilities of reducing carbon emissions
while fostering important technology transfers to the renewable energy (e.g., wind, small hydro)
sector. The National Parks Fund Project, financed by a grant from the Global Environment
Facility, will complement a creative portfolio of natural resources management projects,
strengthening protected areas and ensuring environmental services which provide water to 25
million Colombians and support the nation's hydropower generation. The Conservation &
Sustainable Use of the Colombian Amazon project, financed by a grant from the Global
Environment Facility, will support integrated natural resource management in indigenous
territories within 
the departments of Amazonas, Guainfa, Gueaviare 
and Vaup6s.
Complementing the Bank's strategy in this area, IFC will focus on environmentally sustainable
practices at the corporate level through individual transactions, which help demonstrate the
importance and the value of environmentally sound practices.
CAS Objective: Sharing the Fruits of Growth
95. 
Education and Health. Bank assistance in education for the FY03-06 would help
Colombia achieve 
its MDG target 
that all children will complete primary education.
Specifically, 
the Bank would provide support for the Government's strategy to face the
challenges of enhancing equity in coverage, quality and sector efficiency, within an environment
characterized by the need to reinforce the process of decentralization and efforts to reduce
intemal conflict and violence. The ongoing program of piloting support for decentralized basic
education and targeting selected areas with the poorest inhabitants, important indigenous and
African-Colombian populations, and displaced rural communities (Pasto Education, Antioquia
Education, Rural Education), would be expanded to include the Cundinamarca region, together
with a follow-up Rural Education Project and other regional operations. The policy and
institutional framework to enhance decentralization 
in education 
is being promoted as a
component of the Social Sector SECAL, with a programmatic approach to be pursued through a
proposed Programmatic Labor and Social Sector. On the demand side in education, support
would continue under the Human Capital Protection Project, with a possible follow up operation
(FY05). The same focuses on equity, quality and efficiency would form the bases for the Higher
Education Development Project, which would also support improvements on the demand side.
IFC will seek to supplement the Bank's assistance in education, as the role of the private sector
broadens in higher education, vocational and other training.
96. 
In health, the reform initiatives of the early 1990s had positive effects on coverage,
access, quality and equity, but further reforms are necessary to create a financially sustainable
system that provides incentives for greater efficiency. Bank support for the reform effort is

29

initially focusing on policy dialogue and actions being promoted under the ongoing SFAL and
Social SECAL, and health sector reform is expected to be an important component of the
proposed Programmatic Labor and Social Sector operations. Within this policy framework,
proposed studies in health care financing, hospital restructuring and social sector efficiency are
expected to lay the bases for a health investment operation to support hospital restructuring as a
critical part of the effort to transform transfer to health care facilities into demand side subsidies
(FY05).
97. 
Social Protection. Colombia has traditionally relied on economic growth to provide a
safety net, and has yet to implement a comprehensive safety net policy, and needs to provide
anti-cyclical financing, bring a strategic focus to a large and disperse set of institutions providing
service, and improve poverty targeting. To help Colombia protect its most vulnerable and meet
the MDG target of reducing the proportion of people living in extreme poverty, the Bank is
providing support to promote a major revamping of the system. Under the Social Sector
SECAL, the Govemment is developing a social risk management system, piloting decentralized
provision of service, promoting citizen oversight, and evaluating existing safety net activities.
Further, under the ongoing Bank operations new approaches are being pioneered using cash
transfers (Human Capital Development Project), workfare (Employment Generation Project) and
protection of children (Hogares Multiples). As in education and health, these reforms would be
deepened as part of the proposed Programmatic Labor and Social Sector operations.
98. 
Empowerment and Inclusion. A number of projects in recent years have contributed to
improved natural resource management in indigenous territories, almost all of them prepared and
indigenous organizations, governments and
implemented 
in close collaboration with 
comnmunities. The Bank's strategy in relation to the indigenous and Afro-Colombian populations
during the coming CAS period would include: (a) continuing the programs already begun which
include the participation of indigenous and rural Afro-Colombian communities in GEF and
Bank-funded projects; (b) opening up a dialogue with the government to provide funding and
identify investment opportunities for the implementation of the social, environmental and infra-
structural activities included in the Agenda XXI Pacifica and Amazonia reports; (c) ensuring that
all analytical work of the Bank, especially in the poverty and human development (e.g.,
education, health, youth, social protection) areas, includes the disaggregating of data by racial
(d) assisting the Colombian government, religious and civil society
and ethnic groups; 
organizations to deal more effectively with the internally displaced persons population (many of
whom as noted are indigenous and Afro-descendant persons) through the documentation and
scaling-up of pilot activities being funded under the current Japanese Social Development Fund
and Post-Conflict Fund grants for Internally Displaced Persons; and, (e) help the government
disaggregate data from national household surveys and the national census to assess the status of
Afro-descendent and indigenous populations in terms of the meeting the MDGs.

30

Table 7. Colombia-IBRD High-Case Lending Program For FY03-06

2003 

Programmatic Fiscal and Institutional Adjustment Loan I 

__ Programmatic Financial Sector Adjustment Loan I 

______ 

FA. 

HRaher Eduecation 
Bopota Urban Services 
Cundmamarca Educatilon 
Jepiroachi Carbon Offset (PCF) 
Subtotal 

ustme't 

t 

MS,(cid:7)' 

r 

f 

U5

2004 

Adjustmnent 
Investment 
Programmatic Fiscal and Institutional Adjustment Loan 11 

Programrnatic Financial Sector Adjustmnent Loan n1 

Programmatic Labor and Social Sector Reform I. 

PeSusnabe& Development 

Pricaeon 

Rural Divers 
Urban Transiort 
Protecton for the Displaced 
Ruo Amoya Environmental Services (PCF) 
Sierra Nevada (GEF) C

Anti-Corruption LIL 

ationalvity and S Gall & Miero Enterprises 
Subtotal 

Adjustment 

2005 

Programmatic Fiscal and Institutional Adjustment Loan IV 

Investment 
Progrmmmatic Labor and Social Sector Reforrn n 

Sustamable Development SAL 

Natura Disasters Prevention 

Water and Sanitation 

eRural Education APL 11 

AHealth mnvestment 

Human Capital Protection Project 
Judieial Devlopment 
Adaptateon to Climate Change (GEF) 
National Parks Fund (GEF) 
tI
ConservaFton & Ssisttnablhseoe of the Colombian Amazon (GEFa 

5ubtotu 

Adjustment 

Investment 

2006 

Programmatic Fiscal and Institutional Adjustment Loan IV 

Slum Upgrading 

Decentralizth g Education 
Social Safety Net "Hogares Multiples" 

lAnti-Corruption 

JSubtotal 

Totals 

A diustment 

Investment 

Adjustment 

Investment 

_190

450* 

300
150
200
100
15
3
768
450
315
150

I SO

150
70
200
120
51
40

105
1,024

450

572

150

150

610

151

125

50
IS
100
40

I

1,052

400

652

300

60

5a
51

30

490

300

3,334

1,600

1, 734

Forced Displacement. During the last decade, the escalation of the armed conflict has
99. 
caused increasing displacement of rural people. Given that forced displacement is both dynamic
and multifaceted, 
the policy for displaced populations should be flexible and multiple
In this context, Bank's strategy would include two lending
instruments should be used. 
operations in FY04 to assist the government of Colombia to reduce displacement by providing
municipalities with the incentives and resources to fulfill the preventive and coordination

31

responsibilities assigned by law, create appropriate incentives and opportunities for the internally
displaced to return to their homes or be relocated, and to support the design, implementation,
evaluation and dissemination of pilot operations to assist the internally displaced populations
(IDP). These operations would also include the support of monitoring activities in order to
establish the demographic dimensions of the problem. 
In addition, the Bank would prepare
analytical studies to better understand the key determinants of displacement and to help assess
the impact of policy instruments both in term of prevention, emergency assistance and
relocation. This would build on current work financed by the Bank, including a US$2 million
Japanese Grant and a Post-Conflict Grant of US$800,000.
CAS Objective: Building Efficient, Accountable and Transparent Governance
100. Anticorruption. Successive administrations have had presidential programs designed to
combat corruption and have had, in general, limited success. The previous administration's

Programa Presidencial de Lucha Contra la Corrupci6n, although ambitious in its objectives,

was in practice limited to channeling accusations of corruption through the judicial system on
behalf of citizens and implementing risk-mapping and analysis tools in certain public sector
entities. A comprehensive anticorruption policy, which would promote substantive reforms in
the public sector and address the issue of capture of the state by special interests, was sorely
absent. With recently available tools, such as a the results of a corruption survey carried out in
early 2002, the Bank would focus its support in this area to help the Uribe administration
broaden 
the scope of Colombia's anticorruption program 
to include 
the definition and
implementation of both policy and strategy, in order to tackle the broader issues of corruption in
the public sector. As reported by the survey, the issues are fundamentally the political and
economic clientelismo at all levels of government and the need for increased oversight by civil
society and regulatory agencies, among others. To support this initiative, the Bank is planning
an Anti-Corruption LIL (FY04) and a follow-up project based on lessons learned in the L1L
(FY06). Furthermore, the Bank will continue its support in areas that are critical for improving
transparency and accountability in the public sector, such as procurement, budgeting and
financial management, tax administration, and improved information systems.
101. 
Judicial Reform. The Bank will continue to support the Judicial authorities' efforts to
improve Court services delivery. This strategy involves significant organizational and logistical
reforns, and requires effective management and strong leadership. 
It is expected that during
their implementation a major competencies conversion exercise will be conducted within the
Judiciary, as well as the required improvement of the current information infrastructure base.
Some of the building blocks for this strategy are being developed under the Judicial Conflict
Resolution Improvement Project (LIL). The objective of the project is to improve the timeliness,
quality and productivity of the Judiciary's conflict resolution system. This would contribute to
the system's social legitimacy and ability to respond effectively to society's justice needs, create
increased incentives for the resolution of civil, family and labor conflicts through peaceful
means, and enable more effective and lower-cost enforcement of civil and commercial contracts.
The project will test specific proposals for proactivity, orality and principled reasoning to prevail
in judicial conflict resolution; it will go beyond the traditional judicial training paradigm into real
"cultural change" initiatives. The lessons learned of this operation may be used to design a
follow-up project (FY05) for the Attorney General's Office to adapt to criminal cases the
achievements of the civil, family and labor circuit courts.

32

Table 8. Ce!Gki-abia-Bank Knowledge Based Program for FY03-06

Fiscal Y 
2003 

_.

Tax Policy and Administration
Social Sector Efficiency
Labor Reform
Public Debt Management Assessment
Public Expenditures Review

2004 

2005 

Country Financial Accountability Assessment

Financial Sector Review
Growth for Tackling Inequalities Study
SMU & Micro-Enterpnse Development
Environmental Impact Assessment%icensing Framework
Financial Sustainability of Environment Management Institutions
Urban Strategy

Health Restructuring

Country Economic Memorandum
Disaster Management
Indigenous and Afro-Colombian Communities
Education Study

Country Procurement Assessment Report

2006 

Valuation of Natural Capital in the Amazon Basin
Knowledge Management to Enhance Productivity and Competitiveness

,Social Safety Net Study 11

102. World Bank Institute Support to Colombia. 
In the past couple of years, WBI has
provided support to Colombia in two specific areas of concern to the country and which were
part of the overall World Bank Group program under the last CAS. These were in the area of
Governance and in the area of Corporate Social Responsibility. 
In the first, WBI conducted a
series of surveys on "Governance and Anti-corruption" in which a large number of civil servants,
users of public services and entrepreneurs participated. The results of the surveys were issued
by the Vice Presidency of Colombia and the World Bank in the form of a book in March 2002
which served to outline an anti-corruption strategy for Colombia. In the context of the new CAS,
WBI will continue to provide support to the WBG efforts to achieve the objectives pursued by
the government in terms of growth, but particularly in terms of the more equitable distribution of
that growth among all Colombians and of improved quality of government. This will be done
through specific on-demand requests for continued support in the areas of governance and
corruption, as well as through the numerous offerings of learning/training regional activities in
areas of interest such as Social Safety Net, Labor Markets, rural development, health and
education, decentralization and fiscal responsibility and the judicial and legal system to which
Colombian participants will continue to be invited. The presence of a distance learning center in
Bogota as part of the GDLN network will facilitate and promote the expanded participation of
Colombians in these learning activities.
103. MIGA. MIGA will focus on its areas of comparative advantage: the provision of
political risk guarantees for private sector investments; hands-on technical assistance for
investment promotion intermediaries; and the dissemination of information on investment
opportunities in Colombia through its on-line services (IPANet, PrivatizationLink, and FDI
Xchange). In the area of political risk guarantees, MIGA's focus will not only be on supporting
inward investment into Colombia, but also to assist Colombian investors as they expand their
investment activities into other countries of the region, particularly in the Caribbean. Specific
demand from investors for MIGA's guarantees, however, will depend on a number of factors
related both to the domestic situation in Colombia and to broader regional and international
economnic issues.

33

Table 9. Core MDG/CAS Monitoring Benchmarks
MDG/CAS Goals 

MDG/CAS Progress Benchmarks

Share of population living on less than US$1 a day falls to
18% by 2006 (from 20% in 1998)

1. Between 1990 and 2015, reduce by half the proportion 
of people living in extreme poverty and suffering from 
hunger.
2. Achieve universal completion of primary education by Net pnmary enrollment ratio increases to 90% by 2006
2015 for both boys and girls. 
(from 87% in 1998). Primary completion rate increases to
90% by 2006 (from 85% in 2000).
3. Elihmnate gender dispanties in primary and secondary Maintain ratio of girls to boys in pnmary and secondary
education by 2005, and for all levels by 2015. 
education close to 100% through 2006 and beyond (It was
101% in 1998). Reduce gap between female and male
unemployment rates by half by 2006 (gap was around 6%
in 1998-2000 period).
Decrease of under-5 mortality rate to 18 percent by 2006
(rate was 23 per 1000 in 2000). Immunization rates for
polio, DPT+DT, BCG, measles, rubella and mump
reaches at least 90% by 2006 (immunization rates were

4. Reduce infant mortality rates by two thirds between 
1990 and 2015. 

5. Reduce maternal mortality rate by three quarters 
between 1990 and 2015. 

6. By 2015, halt and reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS, 
malaria, and other diseases. 

7. Ensure environmental sustainability. 

8. Build a global partnership for development. 

Monitoring CAS Implementation

between 80-86% in 2001).

Maternal mortaity rate falls to 50 for very 100,000 births
by 2006 (rate was 67.7 for every 100,000 births in 1999).
Access by pregnant women to prenatal assistance by
qualified medical staff rises to 95% by 2006 (rate was

91 % in 2000).

Incidence rate of HIV by 2006 does not nse beyond 42
per 10,000 inhabitants. Rate was 35 per 10,000
inhabitants in 2001. Incidence of dengue fever down to
120 per 100,000 inhabitants by 2006. Incidence was
180.1 per 100,000 inhabitants in 2001. Incidence of
malaria down to 500 per 100,000 inhabitants by 2006.
Incidence was 766.5 per 100,000 inhabitants in 2001.
Increased percentage of protected areas from 9% m 1999
to 10% by 2006 
Increase in the number of people with
access to safe water sources to 95% by 2006, from 91 in

2000.

Progress implementang Doha, increased number of free
trade agreements with developed and developing
countnes.

104. Overall success in CAS implementation would be assessed on the basis of Colombia's
progress in meeting the MDGs (see Table 9). WBG will work in partnership with the
government, other donors and NGOs to help Colombia attain these goals and targets. WBG has
worked with the government to develop the following key indicators to monitor and evaluate
progress in the implementation of the strategy.

Exposure and Public Debt Sustainability Under the Proposed Strategy

105. At the end of FY02, IBRD debt outstanding and disbursed was about US$2 billion and
constituted less than 2 percent of the total IBRD portfolio, less than 6 percent of the country's
total foreign debt, and less than 30 percent of total preferred-creditor debt. This is due, in part, to
the country's tradition of competent economic management and access to private creditors, which
determined its preference to limit IBRD borrowings and pre-pay LBRD debt when economic
performance was strong. Under the planned program, IBRD exposure in Colombia would rise to
a maximum between 3-3.5 percent of the total IBRD portfolio after five years (Figure 1). The
ratio of IBRD to preferred creditor debt service will remain below 30 percent of total preferred-
creditor debt (Figure 2).

34

Figure 1. IBRD Exposure to Colombia

Pro 

ject

4500

4000 
3500
3000
2500

2000

1500

1000N

ooo -

-

-lN 

, N N N N 

N N N N N

106. 
In contrast to the relatively small IBRD exposure, the public debt situation in Colombia
presents relatively high risks and vulnerabilities. Over the last seven years, the level of total
gross public debt and public debt service in Colombia have been rising steadily in absolute terms
and as a proportion of GDP. As of 2002 net public sector debt in Colombia stands at about 45
percent of GDP. In 1997, prior to the onset of the recession, public debt stood at 27 percent of
GDP. Spending on interest payments to service public debt now stands at near five percent of
GDP, constituting approximately a quarter of the central government's expenditures and more
than twice its investment budget. 
Furthermore, debt-to-GDP, debt-to-exports, and debt
service-to-exports ratios are relatively high, underscoring Colombia's external vulnerability. In
order to reduce risks and vulnerabilities the government will have to implement policies to
strengthen its primary fiscal balance from a primary surplus of about 1.4 percent of GDP in 2001
to a permanent primary surplus of at least 4 percent of GDP in the medium term. Moreover,
Colombia's debt portfolio is highly vulnerable to unexpected changes in both real interest and
exchange rates. 
In this context, Colombia is strengthening its debt management capacity to
increase its efficiency and effectiveness for managing a vulnerable and complex debt portfolio.
Figure 2. Colombia-Ratio of IBRD to Preferred Creditor Debt Service

45

35

107. ublicDebt ountr Assessme 

20
'5-
10
5
0

tead Ato 

ln 

h 

ooba 

uhrte 

r

107. 
Public Debt Country Assessment and Action Plan. The Colombian authorities are
engaged with Bank support in strengthening the government's securities market an debt
management. In response to the government's request for TA support from the Bank in the areas
of public debt management and government bond market development, a Country Assistance
and Action Plan in this area is being implemented in FY03. The objective is to provide support
to the Colombian authorities so that they develop an action plan, based on a detailed World Bank
assessment, 
to improve 
the government's capacity in central government debt and cash
management (including management of financial guarantees), and in the development of the
domestic debt market. This project will require the active participation of the Colombian

35

authorities to diagnose areas that need strengthening, propose strategies for their resolution and
design an action plan.
108. Possible Uses of the IBRD Financial Products. In the context of the new CAS, IBRD
could provide a variety of risk management tools to help Colombia manage its debt portfolio.
Commodity swaps linked to some of the operations in the new CAS could be particularly
relevant for the government given the impact of certain commodity prices on fiscal revenues. At
the same time, IBRD local currency financial products linked to the local currency expenditure
components of existing or new 1BRD loans could be a potentially helpful tool to reduce or
eliminate the foreign exchange risk associated with planned borrowings from the IBRD at the
subnational level.

VIL COORDINATION WITH PARTNERS AND CIVIL SOCIETY
PARTICIPATION

109. 
IMF Program. As mentioned above, in response to the severe recession of 1998-1999,
the government embarked on an ambitious program of stabilization and adjustment. 
In
December 1999, the EMF approved a three-year Extended Fund Facility (EFF) for SDR 1,957
billion in support of the government's program. Considerable macroeconomic stabilization has
been achieved through the program but the momentum of Colombia's economic recovery slowed
down in 2001 in the context of lower oil exports, weaker extemal demand, and a fall in coffee
prices. The situation worsened three months ago, as contagion from other countries in the region
intensified along with fiscal slippages. The EFF expires in December. The government is
currently negotiating with the IMF a multi-year Stand-By Arrangement and if necessary to build
up reserves they will draw from the Arrangement. The Bank-IMF collaboration has been active
in macroeconomic management, 
including 
exchanging 
information 
for monitoring
macroeconomic and structural reform.
110. 
IDB Program. The Inter-American Development Bank assistance program in Colombia,
as laid out in their August 1999 country strategy, focuses on five areas: (a) support to the peace-
process; (b) poverty and inequality reduction; (c) decentralization consolidation; 
(d) state
modernization; and (e) sustainable growth promotion. 1DB is currently preparing a new strategy
for the 2003-2006 period that is expected to be presented to their Board in April 2003. The
lending program consists of 28 operations representing about US$2.2 billion as of September 30,
2002, of which about 55 percent has been disbursed. During this calendar year, two loans have
been approved for a total of US$79 million to support the peace process in Colombia by
investing in social infrastructure and to strengthen the institutions of the capital district of
Bogota. New operations for the 2002-2003 period will be discussed during a programming
mission to be carried out on November this year. Preliminary discussions indicate that the 1DB
will focus on supporting structural economic reforms proposed in the government program, the
areas of social protection and steps to improve health services, water and sanitation and housing.
In addition, the 1DB will support programs in areas such as microenterprise, transportation,
irrigation districts and rural development. The Bank and the IDB are closely coordinating the
strategic areas of interventions through both lending and non-lending services.
111. CAF Program. The Andean Development Corporation's (CAF) efforts in Colombia are
aimed at creating appropriate conditions for the recovery of productive 
investment and
employment arnid low economic growth and an unfavorable international context. CAF'
completed a programming mission in Colombia on the second week of October in agreement
with the govemment for financing of US$3.5 billion for the 2003-2006 period. This financing
comprises programs and projects in the following areas: macroeconomic stability, structural

36

reforms and integration into intemational markets (US$900 million); infrastructure to support
integration, competitiveness and regional logistics (US$1.8 billion), and the modernization and
strengthening of the business and financial sectors (US$800 million). In the last four years, the
CAF has supported operations totaling US$3 billion, tripling its portfolio from US$600 to
US$2.23 billion. One third of CAF's portfolio in Colombia (US$717 million) relates to funds
from other financial sources which participated in operations such as syndicated loans and partial
credit guarantees, under CAF's umbrellas. 
In 2001, CAF operations in Colombia totaled
US$819 million and disbursements were US$379 million. Colombia is currently the largest
beneficiary of CAF loans. The Bank and the CAF are closely coordinating their lending and
non-lending services.
112. USAID Program. USAID has maintained a program in Colombia for almost forty years.
In FY00, USAID started assistance on specific objectives that complement Plan Colombia which
was presented by the Government of Colombia in 1999. Plan Colombia is an integrated proposal
to promote the objectives of peace, the rule of law, prosperity and respect for human rights.
USAID five-year strategy for Colombia (FY2000-2005) is of approximately US$557 million of
which US$224 million have been disbursed. The strategy addresses three areas: (a) reduction of
illicit crop production through alternative development and improved social infrastructure
(US$265 million); (b) assistance to internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups
through basic humanitarian services and transitional assistance (US$167 million); and (c)
strengthening of Colombian democracy through an effective justice system, observance of basic
human rights, increased democratic participation, stronger local govemments, and a decline in
government corruption (US$125 million). USAID is also involved in two other specific projects
in Colombia: the reconstruction of the coffee zone following the January 1999 earthquake in
Armenia and Pereira; and, in conjunction with the government of Colombia, the establishment of
a mechanism for awarding grants to Colombian NGOs for environmental and child protection
projects in the mountains, the Amazon plain, and the Pacific coast, funded by the Enterprise for
the Americas Initiative. The Bank and the USAID closely coordinate their activities.
113. United Nations Agencies Program. There are 16 agencies of the United Nations
System operating in Colombia supporting programs in multiple areas, among them: humanitarian
relief for the displaced population, human rights, alternative development, economic and social
development, health and nutrition, education, agricultural development and food security,
competitiveness, energy, environmental protection, labor, population policies, and national peace
efforts. UNDP has recently submitted their Second Framework of Cooperation with Colombia
(2002-06) centered on restoring peace through dialogue and reconciliation, with three specific
objectives: poverty reduction, promotion of democratic governability and rule of law, and
reduction of the violence and its impact on the Colombians. The Bank and the agencies of the
United Nations System closely coordinate their activities, including active participation by the
Bank in thematic groups that monitor the MDGs and in the formulation of the Common Country
Assessment (CCA) and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF).

Colombia CAS Consultation with Civil Society

114. To prepare this CAS, WBG staff organized two full-day seminars with broad and diverse
members of Colombian civil society, including members from religious groups, academic
institutions, business chambers, indigenous communities and non-governmental organizations.
The consultations took place in Cali and Barranquilla with over ninety representatives of civil
society. The dialogue helped the WBG to enhance its appreciation of the development
challenges facing Colombia, as well as to better define the role that the WBG may play to assist
Colombia society 
to address these challenges. Despite some divergent perspectives on

37

approaches to economic and social development, there was general agreement that the three
pillars of the WBG's strategy to support Colombia-(a) achieving fast and sustainable growth;
(b) sharng the fruits of growth; and, (c) building efficient, accountable and transparent
governance-are key to the development of the country and will help build the conditions for
lasting peace. The constructive atmosphere in which the consultations took place contributed to
an improved understanding of Colombia's key problems.
115. Many participants stressed that while economic growth is essential for poverty reduction,
it will not by itself be sufficient to build an equitable society. Development should be envisaged
as a broad and multifaceted process that should also aim to improve the overall well-being of
Colombians. Furthermore, it is vital to share the benefits of development with all Colombians-
the excluded, the displaced, the Afro-Caribbean, the indigenous, women, youth and children.
The well-being of all Colombians must be put at the center of the development process, and at
the center of any program of the World Bank in Colombia. This will require new and innovative
ways to measure development. The need to strengthen the presence of the State in rural areas,
promote tourism, enable the potential of the private sector, and reactivate the coffee sector were
amongst the issues mentioned to try to reach sustainable growth.
116. A second point centered on the long-standing conflict and violence which has plagued
Colombia for decades. Participants pointed out that violence in Colombia has had a terrible cost.
Beyond the destructive impact on the development of the country-up to 2 percent of the annual
GDP-violence has contributed to greater inequality in income distribution, land ownership, and
lack of access to services such as health, education, clean water, transport and credit.
117. 
Participants also stressed that to build good governance, it will be essential to strengthen
the fight against corruption, build more transparent mechanism and stable rules, increase the
capacities of the State and civil society to promote decentralization, as well as promote security
and justice. Colombians must recover their trust in the State and its institutions. Participation,
democracy, transparency, and the fight against corruption should be promoted by the State, by
the private sector, and by all Colombians. While the limits of the public sector, private sector,
and civil society must be better understood; they need to be empowered to play a better and more
efficient role. 
In particular, the important role civil society can play to promote peace,
sustainable development and the fight against poverty should be recognized.
118. 
Participants felt that it will also be vital to take into consideration existing regional
inequalities for policy formulation and program design. This may imply building the capacity of
local/regional govemments and civil society organizations in some regions of the country, as a
prerequisite, for successful decentralization or the allocation of resources based on performance
criteria. Regarding cultural and ethnic diversity, representatives from indigenous and Afro-
Colombian groups felt that their world view should be supported by the State, even if it is
different from that of the rest of the country, in their approach to education, health, environment
and govemance.
119. At the conclusion of both sessions, participants expressed their appreciation for the
opportunity to express their views on the development challenges facing the country. The
continuity of WBG projects involving civil society was strongly supported, as was public access
to Bank documents such as the Policy Notes and the CAS. A continuation of such dialogue
during the implementation period of the WBG's assistance strategy was highly encouraged.

38

Table 10. Partnerships in Colombia's Development Framework

Development 
Challenges 

Achieving Fast and 
Sustainable Growth 

Sharing Growth with 
All Colombians 

Building Efficient,
Accountable and
Transparent
Governance

Partner

Government

IBRD

IFC

IMB

CAF

USAID

United Nations

Agencies

Civil Society

Private Sector

High Focus 

Significant Focus 

Some Focus

120. Table 10 summarizes the focus of WBG interventions and of our partners in Colombia's
development program.

39

VIII. THE RISKS OF THE PROPOSED STRATEGY

121. The WBG strategy faces important risks. First, the conflict and violence associated with
illegal drug activity could escalate which would negatively impact the implementation of the
Bank's program. Although Colombia is deeply committed to ending the violence that has
plagued the country for decades, and has obtained the pledge of the intemational community to
support them in this endeavor, the conflict could significantly intensify during the next few
years.
122. 
Second, although President Uribe won the elections with a substantial majority, it is not
clear that he will be able to maintain the level of commitment needed to implement important
reforms. Congress could block or alter policy initiatives, or the Constitutional Court could
reverse key legal reforms. This risk is lessened as the reform program proposed by the Uribe
administration has the support of both major political parties. Furthermore, the composition of
the Constitutional Court has been changed and its recent rulings have been more pragmatic and
market-oriented.
123. Third, the fiscal situation may deteriorate which would jeopardize the macroeconomic
situation. It could also increase the risk to the WBG portfolio, as the government may not have
access to sufficient counterpart funds to support its investment program. The WBG program,
and that of the IMF and IDB, is intended to reduce this risk by supporting the government's
program of fiscal adjustment. 
If any of these three risks were to occur, and could not be
mitigated, the WBG would review the composition and processing of new lending.
124. There are also external risks which could be augmented if the adverse economic
conditions currently affecting Latin America prove to be deeper and longer than originally
anticipated. However, the government is committed to implement a sound program of reforms
that will lessen this risk by sending positive signals to the market that Colombia is determined to
maintain sound economic management.

IX. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS

125. The objective of this WBG assistance strategy is to support Colombia's efforts to achieve
sustainable economic development as a foundation to build national reconciliation and lasting
peace. The WBG will support the government's strategy to achieve fast and sustainable growth,
share the fruits of growth, and, build good governance. This strategy is the result of analytical
work, lessons of operational experience and country consultation.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:
Shengman Zhang 

Washington, D.C., December 24, 2002

Peter L. Woicke

40

CAS Annex Al- Colombia at a glance 

9/14/02

LaUn 
Ameica 
Colombia & Carib. 

Lower-
middle-
Income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Development dbamond*

2001
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, USS billions) 

43.0 
1,890 
81.5 

524 
3.560 
1,862 

2,164 
1,240
2,677

Ufe expectancy

Average annual growth, 199541

Population (%) 
Labor forae (%) 
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1995-01) 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban populaffon (% of total population) 
Ute expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 lIve births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to an Improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Grossprimaryenrollment (%of'school-agepopulation) 
Male 
Female 

1.8 
2.7 

1.5 
2 2 

1.0 
1.2 

G 
GNI 

G
Gross

> 

per 

primary

capita 

enrollment

75 
72 
20 
7 
91 
8 
112 
112 
112 

76 
70 
29 
9 
85 
11 
130 
131 
128 

46
69
33
11 
80
15
107 
107 
107

Access to Improved water source

Colombia
Lower-middle-Income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1981 

1991 

2000 

2001
82 4
14 9 
19.4
15.3
14.3

Economic ratios'

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic Investment/GDP 
Exports of goods and semrces/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross nafional savings/GDP 
Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt service/exports 
Present value of debVGDP 
Present value of debt/exports 

36 4 
20 6 
11.9 
17.0 
16 5 

41 5 
15 9 
21.3 
23.4 
23.1 

83.2 
13.4 
199 
13.7 
12 3 

Trade

-4.7 
1.3 
240 
20.7 

5.7 
3.4 
41.5 
36.3 

0.4 
2.5 
41.0 
29.9
40.2
193.7

-2.2 
2 5 
45.1

Domestc 
savIngs

Investment

.
.

.

Indebtedness

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

2001-05

(average annual growth)
GOP 
GDP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

3.8 
1.7 
9 4 

2.5 
0.6 
4 8 

2.6 
0.7 
3.3 

1.4 
-0.3 
4.1 

2.3 
0.6 
2.5

-

Colombla
- - Lower-middle-Income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1981 

1991 

2000 

2001 

Growth of investment and GOP (%)
20

(% of GDP) 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Servces 
Pnvate consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

198 
31.5 
21.9 
48.7 
72 5 
10.4 
15.4 

174 
371 
20.9 
45.4 
67.4 
9 2 
13.9 

134 
30.1 
15.9 
56.5 
64 6 
21 8 
19.6 

13.0
29.9 
16.3 
57.1 
63 6 
21.1 
19.0

0

-20 Do
q4

67

GDI 

-- e-GDP

1981-91 

1991-01 

2000 

2001 

Growth ot exports and Imports (%)

(average annual growth)

Agricuhure 
Industry 
Manufacturing 

3.3 
5.2 
3 9 

-1 8 
1 2 
-21 

4.7 
4.4 
10.5 

0.1 
-0.1
-0.8 

1'

99 

97

ServIes 

3.2 

38 

1.2 

2.1 

-15 

\ 

Pnvate consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

2 8 
4.4 
0 6 
0 8 

1.9 
9 6 
4.3 
6.3 

2 6 
-2.1 
12.3 
4.4 

1.9
0.3 
9.6 
11.2

30

Exports 

e mports

Note: 2001 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators In the country (In bold) compared with its Income-group average. It data are missing, the diamond vill
be incomplete

CAS Annex Al - Colombia

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domesic p 
(% d-iWan) 
Consumer prices 
Impfldt GDP deflator 

w 

e1981 1991 

2000 

2001 

InflatIon (%)

25
20

27.3 
22.8 

26.8 
26.0 

8 7 
13.6 

6.5 
7.6 

is.

Government finance 
(% of GDP, includes current grants) 

s -.

-,

-

Currentrevenue 

.
.. 
.. 

14.1 

11.8 

13.3 

es 

97 

g9 

99 

oo 
iCPI

01

Current budget balance 

4.8 
2.6 

-5.2 
-6 0 

-5.0 

GDP deflator 

Overall surptus/defldt 

-.1 

TRADE

(US$ mlblns) 
Total export (fob) 
Coffee 
Petroleum 
Manufactures 
Total Imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 
Export prica index (1995=130) 
ImportpriceIndex(1995=100) 
TerTnsoftrade(199S-1=00) 

1981 
3,195 
1,423 
36 
928 
5,199 
319 
726 
1,859 
8 
7 
118 

1991 
7.653 
1,336 
1,460 
2,400 
4,963 
280 
284 
1,565 
59 
63 
94 

2300 
13,115 
1,089 
4,569 
5,190 
11,538 
1,428 
234 
3,414 
247 
193 
128 

2001 
12,309 
764
3,083 
5,606
12,834 
1,578
189
4,468 8
243 
209 
116

Export and I'mport leveis (US$5 mlhL)

20,000

15.00-

10,o

GS go 
z 
1 
9 
I3 Exports 

97 

Gs 

899 

O 

01

9 

9 

o 0

UtnWorts

BALANCE ot PAYMENTS

(US$ millIons) 
Exportsofgoodsandservices 
Imports of goods and services 
Resoure balance 

1981 
4,678 
6,215 
-1,537 

1991 
9,115 
6,633 
2,482 

2000 
15,624 
14,400 
1,224 

2001 
14,932 
15,840
-908 

Currant account balance to GDP (94

2-.

o 

-o 

i

Net Income 
Net current transters 

-427 
243 

-1,832 
1,697 

-2,530 
1,662 

-2,975
2,094 

-2

Current account balance 

-1,721 

2,347 

356 

-1,789 

4 

1 

7 

.:..

Finandng items (net) 
Changes In net reserves 

1,284 
437 

-298 
-2,049 

513 
-869 

2,955
-1,166 

.Z

Memo:_

Reserves Including gold (US$ miions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, loca1oVS$) 

.. 

.. 

9,006 
2,087.6 

10,245
2,299.8

54.5 

629.3 

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

19i1 

1991 

2000 

2001

(US$ miliorns) 
Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

Composition of 2001 debt (US$ miiL)

8,716 
1,164 
21 

17,201 
3,728 
14 

33,930 
1,920 
7 

38,713
2,006 
7

3795 

7

Total debt servIce 
IBRD 
IDA 

1,120 
161 
1 

3,755 
798 
1 

5,i09 
368 
1 

7,924
365
1

Composition of net resource flows 
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct Investment 
Porifoto equity 

104 3

7 
277 
1,127 
265 
0 

68 
-150 
-270 
457 
0 

79
102 
728
2,376 
26

203

2,328 

' 

'

World Bank program
Commitments 
Dlsbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net fiows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

0 
251 
77 

60 
301 
492 

350 
266 
243 

635 
368 
233 

A - BORD 
B -IDA 
D - Other mutateral 
C -IMF 

E - Bilateral
F -Prtvate
G -Short-tam

174 

-191 

24 

135

85 
89 

307 
-498 

127 
-103 

133
3

Development Economics 

9/14/02

COLOMBIA: MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS

CAR AnnpY A2

POVERTY
To reduce the proportion of people living on less than $1 a day to half the 1990 level by 2015.
Target 1. Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than one dollar a day.
Target 2. Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger.
Country Context 
Bottlenecks 
Strategy 
Instruments 

Monitoring 

Share of population living on less 
than US$I a day flls to 18% by 
2006 (from 20% in 1998). 

Slow GDP growth; high 
unemployment, unequal 
income distribution; and 
inefficiency of the public 
sector. 

Achievement of the goals: 
likely, 

During the last several years 
Colombia has expenenced 
the worst economic cnsis in 
recent history. The situation 
has been compounded by 
natural disasters, armed 
conflict, and forced internal
In 1998, 20% 
displacement 
of Colombia's population 
lived on less than US$1 a
day. The prevalence of
malnutrition among children
under age 5 decreased from
10% in 1990 to 8% in 2000. 

Package of macro and 
microeconomic reforms aimed at 
promoting sustainable economic 
growth, supplemented by specific 
measures aimed at reducing 
poverty. 

Sound macroeconomic 
management, including strong 
fiscal adjustment. Labor market 
reform to facilitate employment 
creation. Targeted social 
expenditures. Implementation 
of public sector reform
program., including anti-
corruption measures.

WBG: adjustment lending and
AAA/ESW.

_ 

_

EDUCATION
Target 3: Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete primary schooling.
Instruments 
Monitoring 
Bottlenecks 
Strategy 

Country Context 

Achievement of the goal: 
likely. 

In 1998 the net primary 
enrollment ratio was 87% 

In 2000 the primary 
completion rate was 85%. 

Low administrative capacity at 
several levels; lack of 
information and evaluation 
tools to support administration 
of the sector. 

The armed conflict has 
generated a sharp increase in 
demand for education services 
in urban areas. 

The government's National 
Development Plan aims at creating 
I 5 million new places at all 
educational levels; increasing 
efficiency of expenditures; 
rationalizing the distribution of 
resources and responsibilities across 
different levels of government. 

Implementation of the 
Education Reorganization 
Plan aims at improving the 
distribution of physical, 
human and financial resources 
in an equitable. 

WBG: adjustmnent and
investment lendmg, as well as
AAA/ESW.

Net primary enrollment ratio 
increases to 90% by 2006 (from 
87% in 1998) 

Primary completion rate increases
to 90% by 2006 (from 85% in
2000).

Partners

Government,
IMF, IFC,
IADB, CAF,
civil society and
the private
sector.

Partners

Govemment,
LADB, civil
society and the
private sector.

GENDER EQUALITY
Target 4 Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education, preferably by 2005, and at all levels of education no later than 2015.

Country Context 

Bottlenecks 

There are no major gender 
disparities in education. 
However, gender biases 
against women still exist in 
the job market. Achievement Many cultural biases against
of the goal: likely. 
working women. 

Slow adaptation of legal 
framework to address gender 
issues 

Ratio of girls to boys in 
pnmary and secondary 
education 101% in 1998.

Relatively high female
unemployment (23% vs.
17% male unemployment in
1998-2000 period).

Strategy 

Instruments 

Monitoring 

Partners

Enforce laws against discrimination 
by gender 
Improve access to 
information and social services by 
disadvantaged women. 

Legal framework against 
discrimination by gender. 
Information dissemination and 
access to social services. 

Maintain ratio of girls to boys in Government,
primary and secondary education 
IADB, civil
close to 100% through 2006 and 
society and the
beyond (it was 101% in 1998). 
private sector

WBG: Include gender 
perspective in lending 
operations, AAA, and donor 
coordination activities. 

Reduce gap between female and
male unemployment rates by half
by 2006 (gap was around 6% in
1998-2000 period).

REDUCE CHILD MORTALITY
Target 5. By 2005, reduce by two-thirds the mortality rate of children under 5 years of age.

Country Context 

Achievement of the goal: 
likely. 

The under-5 mortality rate 
decreased from 40 per 1000 
in 1990, to 23 per 1000 in 
2000. 

Immunization coverage in 
2001: polio (80.5%), 
DPT+DT (77%), BCG 
(84 8%); measles, rubella 
and mumps (85.5%) 

Children under-5 years of
age without health or social
security. 49% in 2001

Bottlenecks 

Strategy 

Weakness of the decentralized Maintenance and expansion 
public admmistration, coupled 
of the nutrition program for 
with weak coordmation and 
children under 5 years of 
institutional capacity at the 
age. 
local level. 

Instruments 

Vaccination Law, Baby Friendly 
Hospital Initiative (UNICEF); 
fortification of foods for mass 
consumption; improvement of 
nutritional support mechanisms for 
children under 5 years of age 

Improve data collection 
about nutrition, vaccination, 
and access to health services WBG investment lending, AAA and 
by children. 
donor coordination activities 

Inadequate management of the 
targeting instruments meant to 
pnoritize access by children to 
health services

Socio-economic situation hurts 
household income, curtails 
food and health expenditures 

Improved targeting and
increased access to nutrition
programs, vaccines and other
health services

Monitoring 

Partners

Decrease of under-5 mortality rate Government,
to 18 percent by 2006 (rate was 
IADB, civil
23 per 1000 in 2000). 
society;
UNICEF, WHO,
PAHO; and the
private sector.

Immunization rates for polio, 
DPT+DT, BCG, measles, rubella 
and mump reaches at least 90%
by 2006 (immunization rates were
between 80-86% in 2001).

IMPROVE MATERNAL HtIAL 1 tl

Target 6. Reduce by three quarters, between i990 and 20i5, iie matemai nisria;iLy faiio.

Country Context 

Achievement of the goal 
likely. 

Bottlenecks 

Lack of qualified personnel in 
some regions 

Inadequate management of 
targeting instruments. 
Incidence of corruption, 
patronage or nepotism 

Weak checks and balance 
mechanisms in the health 
system 

Matemal mortality rate in 
1999 67 7 for every 100,000 
burths 

Access by pregnant women 
to prenatal assistance by 
qualified medical staff in 
2000: 91% 

Births in a health institution 
relative to total births in 
2000 87 5%. 

Access to medical assistance
by mothers with postnatal
problems in 2000: 53.9%.

Strategy 

Improved trainig of 
healthcare professionals, 
better allocation of skilled 
resources across regions; and 
greater attention to the 
quality of care. 

Enhanced patient education. 

Implementation of 
reproductive health policies.

Improved data collection
about access to health
services and assistance
conditions

Instruments 

Monitoring 

Partners

Improved use of targeting mechanisms Matemal mortality rate falls to 50 Government,
by social security managers; 
for very 100,000 births by 2006 
IADB, civil
application of strengthened checks and 
(rate was 67.7 for every 100,000 
society;
births in 1999). 
WHO, PAHO;
balances; implementation of 
pregnancy and risk pregnancy 
and the private
assistance, intensified monitoring and 
sector.
data collection on maternal deaths. 

WBG. investment lending, AAA and 
donor coordination activities.

Access by pregnant women to 
prenatal assistance by qualified
medical staff rises to 95% by
2006 (rate was 91% in 2000).

COMBAT HIV/AIDS, MALARIA AND OTHER DISEASES
Target 7. Halt by 2015 and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Target 8. Halt by 2015 and begin to reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases.
Country Context 
Bottlenecks 
Strategy 
Instruments 

Achievement of the goals: 
likely. 

Estimated incidence rate of 
HIV in 2001 was 35 per 
10,000 inhabitants. 

Incidence of dengue fever in 
2001: 180.1 per 100,000 
inhabitants. 

Social attitudes toward 
Development and 
HIV/AIDS Weak early 
strengthening of the 
diagnostic of population at risk. HIV/AIDS national program. 
High cost and lack of access to Coordination with 
medication and quality 
reproductive health policy 
treatment 
Insufficient 
information given to the 
community. 

Implementation of reproductive health 
policy; implementation of national 
program agamist IV/AIDS, 
implementation of nationwide program 
against vector transmitted diseases. 

WBG: investment lending, AAA and 
donor coordination activities 

Growing resistance to anti- 
malana drugs Weak epidemic 
Incidence of malaria in 2001 monitoring and control. 
766 5 per 100,000 
inhabitants 

Development of the 
territorial management and 
institutionalization of 
monitoring, prevention and
assistance mechanisms to 
address HIV/AIDS 
epidemic. 

Improved vector control and
immunization strategy
nationwide.

Partners

Government,
IADB, civil
society;
WHO, PAHO;
and the private
sector

Monitoring 

Incidence rate of HIV by 2006 
does not rise beyond 42 per 
10,000 inhabitants. Rate was 35 
per 10,000 inhabitants in 2001 

Incidence of dengue fever down 
to 120 per 100,000 uihabitants by
2006. Incidence was 180.1 per
100,000 inhabitants in 2001

Incidence of malaria down to 500
per 100,000 mhabitants by 2006.
Incidence was 766.5 per 100,000
mhabitants m 2001.

ENSURE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Target 9. Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of environmental
resources. Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water.
Country Context 
Bottlenecks 
Strategy 
Instruments 

Monitoring 

Partners

Scarce institutional capacity to 
manage the environmental 
sector reform. 

Natural resource depletion 
undermnes the country's 
socio-economic 
development. In addition, 
access to natural resources No valuation of the country's 
is unequal. Achievement 
national assets. Gaps in 
of the goal: possible 
strategy to ensure the financial 
stability of environmental 
management mechanisms

Resolve legal, fiscal, and 
institutional constraints to 
effective natural resource 
management 

Implementation of comprehensive 
legal, fiscal and institutional reforms 
aimed at improving management of 
natural resources. 

Increased percentage of protected 
areas from 9% in 1999 to 10%/o by 
2006 

Government,
IADB, civil
society; and the
private sector.

Increase in the number of people
WBG: investment lending, use of trust with access to safe water sources
funds, AAA, and donor coordination 
to 95% by 2006, from 91 in
activities 
2000..

Gaps tn understanding of the
potential for the Colombian
national forests to play a role in
carbon sequestration.

INationally protected 
areas (% of total land
areas): 9 in 1999. 

C02 emissions (metric 
tons per capita) 1 7 in 
1999

Access to an improved
water source (% of
population): 91 in 2000.

Access to improved
sanitation (% of
population): 97 (Urban),
51 (Rural) in 2000.

BU 
'I 5 D A CLOBAL PA FR T l.I 

) 
Country Context 

Bottlenecks 

1;i 

PS T LO D E EVW E EC J{T. 
Strategy 

,l l iFNT

Instruments 

Monitoring 

Partners

In the 1980s and early 
1990s, Colombia was 
among the best 
performers in the LAC 
region. The country's 
macroeconomic 
performance has 
deteriorated more 
recently 

Lack of coordination at the 
national level, and between 
national and extemal partners 

Shared vision often not 
complemented by concrete 
actions. 

Improved coordination of 
national strategy. 
Maintenance of strong 
relationship with 
international financial 
institutions Market-friendly 
framework policies 
Negotiation of free trade
agreements at regional and
I global levels.

Competitiveness plans, open trade 
policy, international trade negotiations. 

Progress implementing Doha, 
increased number of free trade 
agreements with developed and 
developing countries 

Multilateral and
bilateral aid
agencies, WTO,
global NGOs,
and
multinational
corporations.

CAS Annex B2 - Colombia
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of November 27, 2002

Indicator 

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number "' 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount ad 
Disbursement Ratio (%) ' 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$ 000's) 
Average Supervision (US$ 000's/project) 

C 

2000 

2001 

2002 

2003

26 
3.4 
7.7 
6.9 
7.7 
6.9 
36.6 

YES 
1,245 
47.88 

22 
3.2 
4.5 
5.5 
4.5 
5.5 
24.6 

NO 
1,240 
59.04 

24 
3.1 
4.2 
5.0 
12.5 
7.0 
29.5 

YES 
1,594 
83.89 

23
3.5
4.3
3.9
13.0
5.9
8.0

YES
1,799
78.20

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 

91 
6,374.6 
27.8 
27.3 

Last Five FYs
7
264.0
14.3
18.1

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

CAS Annex B3 - IlBRD Hligh Case Program Summary - Colombia

Proposed As of November 27,2002

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a

Fiscal 
year 

2003 

2004 

2005 

2006 

Proj ID 
Pro ID 

US$(M) 
Strategic Rewards 
US$(M)(H 
) 

b 

Implementation
Risks (H/M/L)

b

Programmatic Fiscal and Institutional Adjustment Loan I 
Programmatic Financial Sector Adjustment Loan I 
Higher Education 
Bogota Urban Services 
Cundinamarca Education 
Jepirachi Carbon Offset (PCF) 
Result 
Programmatic Fiscal and Institutional Adjustment Loan II 
Programmatic Financial Sector Adjustment Loan II 
Programmatic Labor and Social Sector Reform I 
Peace & Development 
Rural Diversification 
Urban Transport 
Protection for the Displaced 
Rfo Amoya Enviromnental Services (PCF) 
Sierra Nevada (GEF) 
Anti-Corruption L1L 
Productivity and Small & Micro Enterprises 
Result 
Programmatic Fiscal and Institutional Adjustment Loan m 
Programmatic Labor and Social Sector Reform 1I 
Sustainable Development SAL 
Natural Disasters Prevention 
Water and Sanitation 
Rural Education APL II 
Health Investment 
Human Capital Protection Project 
Judicial Development 
Adaptation to Climate Change (GEF) 
National Parks Fund (GEF) 
Conservation & Sustainable Use of the Amazon (GEF) 
Result 
Programmatic Fiscal and Institutional Adjustment Loan IV 
Slum Upgrading 
Decentralizing Education 
Social Safety Net "Hogares Multiples" 
Anti-Corruption 
Result 
Result 

300.0 
150.0 
200.0 
100.0 
15.0 
3.0 
768.0
150.0 
150.0 
150.0 
70.0 
200.0 
120.0 
55.0 
15.0 
9.0 
5.0 
100.0 
1,024.0
150.0 
150.0 
100.0 
150.0 
125.0 
50.0 
150.0 
100.0 
40.0 
8.0 
15.0 
14.0 
1,052.0
300.0 
60.0 
50.0 
50.0 
30.0 
490.0
3,334.0

H 
H 
H 
M 
M 
M 

H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
M 
M 
M 
H 
H 

H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
M 
H 
H 
M 
M 
M 
M 

M 
H 
H 
H 
H 

H
H
H
M
M
M

H
H
H
H
M
M
M
M
M
M
M

H
H
H
H
M
M
M
M
H
M
M
M

M
H
M
M
M

a. This table presents the Bank's lending program for the next three fiscal years.
b. H=High, M=Moderate, L=Low

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M), or
low (L).

Template created on 12/20/2002.

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) - Colombia

FY 2000-2003

IFC approvals (US$m)* 

Sector (%)*

OIL, GAS AND MINING 
TRANSPORTATION AND WAREHOUSING 
FOOD & BEVERAGES 
NONMETALLIC MINERAL 
PLASTICS AND RUBBER 
FINANCE AND INSURANCE 
COLLECTIVE INVESTMENT VEHICLES 

Total 

Investment instrument(%)*

Loans 
Equity 
Guarantee 
Quasi-Equity (Equity Type) 
Quasi-Equity (Loan Type) 

Total 

MIGA guarantees 

*IFC's account only.

2000 

2001 

2002

224 

176 

242

9 
42 
0 
0 
6 
43 
0 

0 
0 
0 
10 
0 
79 
11 

15
0
41
0
0
44
0

100 

100 

100

87 
2 
0 
11 
0 

100 

4 
33 
57 
0 
6 

100 

52
13
0
0
35

100

155 

0 

0

CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - Colombia

As of November 27,2002

FY 

Product 

Cost

(US$000) Audience a 

Objective b

Annex B4

Recent completions
Social Sector CEM 
Agro-Ecology 
Improve Public Expenditure EF 
Colombia Rural Finance 
Poverty Selected Topics 
Social Sector Review 
Environment, Land & Poverty 
Policy Notes 

Underway

Planned
FY04 

FY05 

FY06 

Tax Policy and Administration 
Social Sector Efficiency 
Labor Reform 
Public Debt Management Assessment 
Public Expenditures Review 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 

Financial Sector Review 
Growth for Tackling Inequalities Study 
SMU & Micro-Enterprise Development 
Environmental Impact Assessment/Licensing Framework 
Financial Sustainability of Environment Management Institutions 
Urban Strategy 
Health Restructuring 

Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) 
Disaster Management 
Indigenous and Afro-Colombian Communities 
Education Study 
Country Procurement Assessment Report 

Valuation of Natural Capital in the Amazon Basin 
Knowledge Manag. to Enhance Product, and Competitiveness 
Social Safety Net Study 11 

a. G=Government, D=donor, B=Bank, PD=public dissemination.
b. KG=Knowledge generation, PD=public debate, PS=problem-solving.

88 
60 
45 
100 
100 
150 
120 
100 

81 
88 
110 
81 
72 
130 

41 
83 
83 
79 
79 
81 
81 

158 
81 
81 
81 
90 

158 
81 
81 

G, B 
G, B 
G, B 
G, B 
G, B, PD 
G, B, PD 
G, B 
G, B 

G, B 
G, B 
G, B, PD 
G, B 
G, B, PD 
G, B 

G, B 
G, B, PD 
G, B, PD 
G, B, PD 
G, B, PD 
G, B, PD 
G, B, PD 

G, B 
G, B 
G, B, PD 
G, B, PD 
G, B 

G, B, PD 
G, B, PD 
G, B, PD 

KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
PD

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS

KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS

CAS Annex BS - Colombia Social Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionrincome group

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total ferbility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY
(% of population)
Poverty rate 
Urban poverty rate 
Rural poverty rate 

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
ConsumerpnceIndex(1995=100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) 
Highest quintile (% of Income or consumpbon) 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Heafth (% of GDP) 
Education (% of GDP) 
Social security end welfare (% of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to an Improved water source
(% of population)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
Child malnutriton (% under 5 years) 
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 rive births) 
Under5(per1.0001ivebirths) 
Adutt (1 5-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female(per1,000popuiabon) 
Matemal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled heaith staff (%) 

1970-75 

1980-85 

1994-01 

25 4 
2 4 
60.7 
4.6 

80 0 
70.0 
94 0 

560 
1 

.

53 0 

.. 

.

2.2 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.
.

.

.. 

63 
61 
65 

54 
113 

262 
209 

.. 
.. 

31.7 
2.1 
67.0 
3 4 

65.0 
55.0 
80.0 

1,150 
11 
11 

54.0 
,. 

.. 

.. 

28 
27 

65 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.

51 
61 
17 

67 
64 
71 

35 
58 

237 
162 

.. 

42 3 
1 9 
74.9 
2.6 

67 0
59 0
80 0

2,020 
209 
191

58.0
3 0
60.9

52 

3.5 
2.3 

87 

.. 
.

91 
98 
73 

75 
74 
8 

72 
68 
75 

20 
23 

203 
114 
120
85

Latin 
America 
& Carib. 

515 7 
1 6 
75.4 
2.6 

Lower-
middle-
Income

2,047.6
1.1
42 0
2.1

3,670 
144 

1,130
146

2.8 
3.3 
7.4

97 
99 
98 

85 
93 
62 

93 
87 
9 

70 
67 
74 

29 
37 

208 
121 

2.3
4.6

91
91
91

80

95
69

89
89
11

69
67
72

33
41

192
125

Noteo 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data.

Annex B6

Page 1 of 2

CAS Annex B6 - Colombia - Key Economic Indicators

Actual 
1999 

Estimate 
2002 

Projected
2004 

Indicator 
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 

1997 

1998 

2000 

2001 

2003 

2005

100 
14 
29 
57 

100 
14 
28 
58 

100 
14 
28 
58 

100 
13 
30 
56 

100 
13 
30 
57 

100 
13 
30 
57 

100 
13 
30 
56 

100 
13 
31 
56 

100
13
31
56

Total Consumption 
Gross domestic fixed investment 

85 
21 

86 
20 

88 
14 

86 
13 

85 
13 

87 
13 

87 
13 

86 
14 

86
14

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS) 

15 
21 

15 
21 

19 
19 

20 
20 

19 
19 

18 
21 

20 
22 

21 
23 

21
23

Grossdomestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

15 
13 

14 
12 

12 
10 

14 
12 

15 
14 

13 
13 

13 
13 

14 
13 

14
13

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNPpercapita(US$, Atlas method) 

106719 

98806 

84845 

83227 

82411 

77485 

75812 

75559 

75991

2570 

2450 

2150 

2150 

1980 

1860 

1780 

1720 

1720

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1994 pnces)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
3 4 
Gross Domestic Income 
3.6 

0 6 
-1.1 

-4.1 
-3.8 

2.6 
3.1 

1.4 
2.7 

2.0 
0.2 

2.5 
2.5 

3.5 
3.7 

3.5
3.7

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1994 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices 
1.5 
-1.3 
Total consumption 
3.3 
-1.7 
Private consumption 
0.5 
-2.7 

-5.7 
-4.2 
-6.2 

0.7 
-0.5 
0.7 

-0.3 
-0.3 
0.1 

0.4 
1.6 
2.0 

0.9 
0.5 
0.3 

2.0 
1.8 
2.5 

2.0
1.8
25

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b 
MerchandcseFOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
Current account balance 

14195 
11529 
18411 
14371 
-4216 
789 
-5953 

13432 
11480 
17344 
13930 
-3913 
446 
-5225 

13919 
12037 
13405 
10262 
515 
1435 
353 

15624 
13621 
14400 
11090 
1224 
1662 
356 

14932 
12775 
15840 
12267 
-908 
2094 
-1789 

13933 
11918 
16031 
13005 
-2099 
1973 
-2259 

14971 
12813 
16853 
13671 
-1882 
1810 
-2413 

16048 
13741 
17736 
14388 
-1688 
1873 
-2349 

17059
14612
18602
15090
-1543
1939
-2201

Net private foreign direct investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, mic:. erors & ommussions) 
Change m reservesd 

4830 
2200 
-452 
2652 
-1354 
277 

2032 
1039 
178 
862 
3541 
-1388 

1353 
357 
1013 
-656 
-1742 
-320 

2031 
-1282 
103 
-1386 
-1974 
869 

2287 
-670 
986 
-1656 
-994 
1166 

2333 
-6 
442 
-448 
-31 
-37 

2391 
565 
1655 
-1090 
-96 
-446 

2475 
580 
2309 
-1729 
-99 
-607 

2561
289
1396
-1107
-74
-576

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP) 
Real annual growth rates ( YR94 prices)
Merchandiseexports (FOB) 
Manufactures 
Merchandise imports (CIF) 

-4.0 

-4.0 

0.6 

1.5 

-1.1 

-2.7 

-2.5 

-2.2 

-2.0

5.7 
4.2 
-4.5 

9.1 
19.3 
0.3 

7.2 
1.1 
-25.4 

3.0 
5.4 
-25.6 

2.9 
5.2 
67.6 

-3.8 
-4.0 
2.1 

3.9 
4.3 
1.7 

3.8 
4.2 
2.9 

3.5
4.0
3.5

(Continued)

Colombia - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Indicator 

1997 

1998 

Actual 
1999 

2000 

2001 

Estimate 
2002 

Projected
2004 

2003 

2005

Public finance (as % of GDP at mnarket prices)'
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2(%) 
Privatesectorcreditgrowth/ 
total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR94 =100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandisetermsoftradeindex 
Real exchangerate (US$/LCU)f 

Consumer price index (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

27 4 
21.8 
5.6 
9.6 
0.6 

36.0 
25.8 
79.2 

26.9 
22.9 
4.0 
8.0 
2.6 

34.4 
10.9 
76.5 

108.4 
86.0 
126.1 
119 1 

17 7 
16.8 

93.5 
81.5 
114.7 
113.5 

16.7 
15.2 

27.4 
24.5 
2.9 
8.7 
1.3 

36.0 
10.5 
-49.2 

92.9 
79.6 
116.6 
102.7 

9.2 
10.2 

28.2 
23.7 
4.5 
8.0 
1.8 

32.3 
4.7 
20.1 

102.2 
115.9 
88.2 
95.6 

8.8 
13.6 

28.9 
24.4 
4.5 
8.1 
2.3 

33.2 
12.0 
66.2 

93.3 
76.9 
121.2 
98.0 

6.5 
7.6 

28.9 
24.3 
4.6 
7.9 
3.1 

33.2 
8.2 
85.0 

28 9 
24.0 
4.9 
7.8 
2.2 

33.2 
7.1 
66.0 

93.9 
76.4 
122.9 
91.0 

6.2 
6.0 

97.2 
79.0 
123.0 
84.0 

6.0 
6.0 

28 9 
23.8 
5.1 
7.8 
2.4 

33.2 
6.9 
66.0 

100.4 
80.8 
124.3 
79.1 

5.0 
5.0 

30.0
23.4
6 6
7.9
1.8

33.2
6.6
70.0

102.9
82.2
125.1
75.5

4.0
4.0

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. NFPS
f. An increase denotes appreciation.

CAS Annex B7 - Colombia - Key Exposure Indicators

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Indicator 

1996 

1997 

Actual 
1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

Estimate 
2002 

2003 

Projected
2004 

2005

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)8

28900 

31941 

33083 

34423 

33930 

38713 

38772 

39340 

39920 

40212

Net disbursements (US$m)a 

4397 

3618 

820 

1262 

-194 

2973 

59 

568 

583 

292

Total debt service (TDS) 
(US$m)R

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb 
TDO/GDP 
TDS/XGS 
Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRDDS/publicDS 
Preferred creditor DS/public 
DS (%)c
IBRD DS/XGS 
IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
Share of IBRD portfolio(%) 
IDA TDO (US$m)d 

IFC (US$m)CA
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity' 

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

5401 

4511 

4539 

6606 

5109 

7924 

5851 

7271 

6129 

6352

219.9 
29.7 
41.1 
3.3 

225.0 
29.9 
31.8 
2.8 

246.3 
33.5 
33.8 
2.7 

247.3 
40.6 
47.5 
2.8 

217.2 
40.8 
32.7 
2.8 

259.3 
47.0 
53.1 
2.3 

278.3 
50.0 
42.0 
2.3 

262.8 
51.9 
48.6 
2.3 

248.8 
52.8 
38.2 
2.2 

235.7
52.9
37.2
2.2

18.2 
34.2 

21.1 
42.2 

11.9 
24.8 

8.2 
21.1 

10.6 
26.2 

7.9 
19.4 

7.5 
32.5 

6.0 
30.8 

8.3 
35.3 

9.4
39.8

4.0 
2177 
2.0 
10 

4.0 
1723 
1.6 
10 

2.6 
1740 
1.5 
9 

2.8 
1960 
1.6 
8 

2.4 
1920 
1.6 
7 

2.4 
2006 
1.6 
7 

2.3 
2147 
1.8 
6 

2.2 
2521 
2.1 
5 

2.2 
3097 
2.7 
5 

2.5
3597
3.1
5

118 
18 

72 
21 

61 
17 

41 
43 

29 
43 

29
56

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, IFC, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Excludes participants' account. Excludes guarantees and risk management products. 2002 is actual.
f. Includes both loan and equity types of quasi-equity instruments.

CAS Annex BS - Colombia
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

As of November 27, 2002

Closed Projects 

145

Total Disbursed (Actve) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which hs been repaid 
Tota1 Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Acive) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

666 82
24.31
8,20735
7,90174
8187417
7,926 24
547 23
000
547 23

Actve Protec 

Project ID 

P057692 
P006880 
P044140 
P006891 
P057369 
P046112 
P041642 
P040109 
P050578 
P073572 
P006861 
P065937 
P068762 
P069964 
P050576 
P006884 
P063317 
P054125 
P053243 
P040102 
P006894 
P057326 
P039291 
Overal result 

Project Name 

Jedooment 

bn.D=t0n 

FIscal Year 

IBRD 

IDA 

GRAN 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. 

Frm Rev'd

ilst PSR 

Supervision Ratng 

OzrnalB Anmou 
US$ Mitlons 

Differee Between
Expeted and Aclim
Disburrnesents

2nd Magdalena Media Project (LIL) 
AGRiCULTURETECHNOLO 
CARTAGENAWATERSUPPLY&SEWERAGEENVIRO 
COANTIOQUIAEDUCATION 
CO Judicud Resolution Inprovement Pt3
CO PASTO EDUCATION 
CO PRODUCrIVE PARTNERSHIPS 
CO PUBLIC FINANC MANAGEMENT PROJECr 11 
CO RURAL EDUCATION 
CO StDctural Fiscal Adjusmtent Lon 
CO URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE 
CO WATER SECTOR REF ASSISTANCE PROJECT 
CO- COMMUNITY WORKS (MANOS A LAOBRA) 
CO- Human Captal Prot- Cash Trnsfers 
CO- YOUTH DEVELOPMENT 
FINANCIALMARKETSDEVELOPMENT 
GEFCO-HIGHANDES 
MP/COODSPHASEOUTr 
PEASANT ENTERPRISE ZONES (LEL) 
REG REF.TA 
SANTAFE I (WaledSupply) 
SIERRANEVADASUSTAINABLEDEVELOPMENT 
URBANENvlRONMENTTA(TAL) 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HiS 
U 
S 
S 
5 
S 
5 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
s 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
U 
S 
S 
5 
5 
5 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
s 
S 

2002 
1995 
2000 
1998 
2002 
1998 
2002 
2001 
2000 
2002 
1998 
2002 
2000 
2001 
1999 
1997 
2001 
1999 
1998 
1997 
1996 
2000 
1996 

50 
510 
850 
400 
5 0 
7 2 
320 
355 
20.0 
400.0 
75.0 
400 
1000 
1500 
50 
150 
00 
00 
50 
125 
145 0 
50 
200 
1253 2 

28 
67 
629 
13 2 
4 7 
27 
297 
33 7 
17 4 
600
214 
390 
82.4 
1228 
1.4 
18 
143 
76 
21 
3.3 
35 0 
36 
13 
569 1 

0 0
67 
409
12 2 
11
27 
-2.3
-2.3
97

39.3
77
531
-27 2
14
73 
20
-07
21 
3.3
35 0
-14
1.3 
1918 

-82

3 1

11

18

01

1.3
-0 7

26 0 

55 

154 
87 

24 0 

55 

a. Intended disbursements to dale rilnus actual disbutmemnts to date as projected at appraLsal

a Intended disbursements to date minus actual dlsbursements to date as projected at apprarsa

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) - Colombia

Colombia
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of November 30,2002
(In US$ Millions)

Held 

Disbursed

Loan 
0.0 
70.0 
0.0 
0.0 
4.1 
6.0 
38.1 
0.0 
30.0 
0.0 
50 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
25.0 
0.0 
3.3 

Equity 
7.0 
0.0 
7.4 
10.6 
10.0 
0.0 
0.0 
15.0 
0.0 
0 6 
1.1 
0.2 
10.0 
5.0 
00 
5.1 
0.0 

Quasi 
00 
30.0 
00 
0.0 
0.0 
0 0 
25.0 
0.0 
5.0 
0 0 
00 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
50.0 
0.0 
0.0 

Partic 
0.0 
1450 
00 
0.0 
13.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
6.3 
0.0 
0.0 
0 0 
0.0 
0.0 
10.7 

Loan 
0.0 
70.0 
0.0 
0.0 
4.1 
6.0 
13.1 
0.0 
2.0 
0.0 
5.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
25.0 
0.0 
0.0 

Equity Quasi 
70 
0.0 
0.0 
30.0 
7.4 
0.0 
4.0 
0.0 
10.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
25.0 
15.0 
0.0 
0.0 
5.0 
0.6 
0.0 
1.1 
00 
0.2 
00 
7.1 
00 
5.0 
0.0 
0.0 
47.2 
2.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

Partic
0.0
145.0
0.0
0.0
13.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
00
6.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0 0
0.0
0.0

FY Approval 

Comnpany 
2002 BCSC 
2002 Bavana 
1969/1985/1988/1993/1995 CFdelValle 
2001 CHMC 
1974/2001 CementosCanbe 
1963/1968/1969/1990 Coltejer 
1995/1999 Corfinsura 
2002 Inversura 
2002 Omimex Oil 
1987 PRODESAL 
1977/1989/1992V1994/1996Promigas 
1994/1995 Prormsan 
2002 Proteccion 
1996 Proyectos 
2002 SIG 
1999 Surenting 
Tolcemento 

2001 

Total Portfolio: 

181.5 

72.1 

110.0 

174.9 

125.2 

60.0 

107.2 

164.2

Diagaessc| 

PoeBy noadt 

|ace 

World Bank Group's Support lstrunentts 

Progmres Belceimarks 

CAS Objective: Achieving Fast and Sustainable Growth

_______________________ 

_m 

|__________________ 

cial 

Non-Flin cial 

Co try 

| 

Colombia - CAS Matrix FY03-05 - High Case

Macro economics_______ 
Large trd prtsaces fiseal anbalances he ld to s Tie ern tbae dof tM WBGCs seat.egY 
is 
ornsatatsable Vbne debt hsa.s 3.e T ab.c 
pr 
is co 
f the arocxxs, boarnwac w.I be a pIa 
faes lsp buirune 
is 
Icbd sdat 
d 
'. 
ids 
iseal adinsla(sat, Ftciaini 
t qsalcy of rhe 4woansi 

fulcal I 

r 

ttclu 

Ps Flme SFit r SeJ Aduj 
I (FY03), Pig Fias Tx Flihcy and AditDsaxat Sudly (FY03), iNc seorid fiscal cin 
al anise pibc dlebi Ebha-2ed debate nd bmy to .arsDbil 
tad last tdo Lema I (FYOI). PFo Frs Setrl Adj Debt Maagesis Assesa (FY03). Fibi 
s 
bibclty Eisa grs 
ppoahrtes 
absdsg fiscal powty tel debt samaibihty
tuail f (FY04), Pes Fiscal alst Adj ta 0 Expendite Ree 
(FER) (FY03), Country 
pila 
lent
(FY04), Froa Fureal WA IL Adj Lnna I (FYOS). Edaxeac Mensracsdst 
(CEM) (FY05)
Piol Flatl ams has AdJ tea IV (FY06)

_______

Finasndal Sector

weak

Anrtuhas of Oiaisical Icasuia, itscbs Fs 
f Ui.be 'De WBG W pipsm govessca ascootisidsed Fl FUL Seats AdJ ious I (FY03), fiso 
FlF. itslecise 
S 
teea (FY04) Country Enarica SaDshered 
sanldspcscso 
iacageasest 
WWD rsnanrilly atn eas catlnyti reesan 
govniraateaneed 
tobe restructredxi2ndAm vn adcs)g resatag, ialrevarIuiS sevei Srn Adj [,an n (FY04), feibibe [FC apmin Mceatbs(CEkM) (FY05) 
asets ah lohansal of ite govertesent laproed 
pclrb,zed. Dspius ofassetsis Itet lsamdof ctne 
tbe ficra k rte 
ta sanieerect tl bssk
fialal snaaLns to at ansle ofr tl 
eenai 
zlaigb alvdndusal acsasla (FY03-05) 
sawnsork (fe ba tCi vsageracn sandresosaat. rexaasta t oCbonlnba
govasens needs msbe s rse iptd ass eftlceacL (eg., BANCAFE ad GCnalr) toaad afunher
Bancabc oeat oradriescaolsi 
firusork a 
fiatal desisL

Annex Bg

|A 

rtca eniS

AW

iMF, IDB

Jauttlh prcedures as enforce garnaes aal 
focile dofpo peiresa ausstolow Brabtcy 
Fncaedaes sed as be insirdiosed. 

The WBG -1i sen a reformofpabcal 
Fag* FD Soear Adj t 
I (FY03). Flog. F. 
Fiscud Sectew 
tc 
(iFY04). Countryy Eimoae Siergl-d 
eii-sceubfe 
tse obfteear s of WDG rafally ntys ascalysi frt roteltnof 
faeedues diai afflect ccl as)d ri 
i cyste Sensr Adj tfa 0i (FY04). Febisscumy 
tao Seed Mesnsa-dans(CCEb) 
(FY05), possble IFC TA (i gnstalue as) flenose of celieala ilb 
b-atsty frastewsrl,
pcrantas, as well a refonX thatsrengt 
& Miaso Easerises (FY04) 
colb-ell 
ho 
asih the Bak) (FY03-05) 
SnrestelrdbabeotIctcy ,anoidrs
saainsal 
tataldon sad other strenlesas tal
,ould help rsdlwe the econtwc bcidesof legrl assd
,dcu 
ssest

IMF, IDB

Caicta natin se call 
stLee.de,ldaopl 
Ietdesseirasa do. tf coqetcive galtaegy to 
Flo& FitL Seser Ad ) 
I (FY03), Fer. Fl. 
FIsli Senior ftce (FY04). Camly nixleacx lowd arvmsy sad Vgdtory fiarsewsik WBG stsecGanisnly 
ty iseoarnsorf stea o papi l rarkets ta Ute 
contri 
as to theqxui-ot IMP. 0DB.
Suap sory 
firate rhk 
f 
acte axsatry Is fotaerncaplal ecka etetancut. salag a sew Sactir Adj fea 
f (FY04), possible iFCic MeMaosianad(CEC ) (FY03) 
for(fsetosauce o 
iey- 
ay 
Ig 
tAIS
aiu relalrety weak 
capti 
rnkets lat, ou 
h cki thelasne ute 
dSacb bxiadoial trancacrcuse (FY03-05) 
cago) ana,1i lsae Deveoepsca o a ftresc, 
fiarnnaek(st 
for tie msurunce idbsay
LnnspreQy ades 
n 
SdeSgls the bega ((sotesoia 
bhonslc aist radk
cad ael-auory s&-

t 

libere re sll gaps ma te legalI,jeglstry sad 
The WBE -ll assi ft go 
seeasessng 
as Fla Ftl Secur Adj toea I (FY03), Flo. Flt 
Sctir, Adj Leas n (FY04) 
asupe y foirensiod as 
toombtc aey 
i eie AWFAF1gpme andsuleegt 
g toE egal. 
asd Lesmri Osateig (AMdCT firenworks) 
reesay asd mmna 
i fxeat fr,r 
coaidIDg antoey loasbsg sad toe afcaanes of
satscom

Fli Seios Rft (FY04). Country EcBnsasat linadctonlf ao egstessr ed fmeswaka 
WtDofaG 
tsbast to asudafnua oofa 
Mberaaten (CEM) (FY05) 
e 
saicajsey lain a ndise 
taro 
fibasceg. r 
sve fensnewoco 
bat 
rmn ey 
laoaeana and terrorist finlscia 

IMF, iDB.
USAID,
IOSCO

Infrastricture to Foster Competaiveness nd Improve Services to the Poor
Lack of bast tcr ad sarcasas,serines, sbelr. SIe WBG i smapsp saon aves ar W (a)s ansaads Bg Urban Serntes Leaa (FY03), Jpesrci 
UJbt Sna, Scaly (FY04), Dalsaer Masagei 
stecnyary 
nasammurity 
reads, telone srcties ft crucnn of mftlgnxti_e wincn testlds fromi Cal Offse (PCF) (FY03). aRs Dieersfian Stoly (FY05). COay Ecnscan Meanxdum a 
sad dlerciniy has a 
da,..Mgia budga acesas fse srafteaance asnd Le (FY04). Urbam Tri Leas (FY04). Bio 
(CEM) (FY05) 
i-spsrnesabctnge. (a) expandltoesa ma on Anays Ehahrnasl Seav ces ftCF) (FY04). 
asd)omormoumns syitsac. sad (a) Dase 
War, ansd 
s) staltana easn (FY05). shotaUpsnadasg 
tr foiscrufore by itpoor 
(FY06). pssable ECZ toupler through bvcdual

gpenia 

trunacl"'

frte 
nsard acs to baste aulces by tie poor WBG coenbtriues to m 
lsehoesec malt of ieY 
loressed ecortpetiteess of key ecsas 
laipjas Cem Vogrses that ucresse, aocess 
to havec
re5t 
sercea by to pose WBG aIla s a
nd )marnss ((ai5 mcsse
e 
aoarpeutvvencs 
enestmr

couantsoin m. Molesn 
to 

of Cortatna's 

IDB. CAF

Colombia - CAS Matrix FY03-05 - High Case (Continued)

Dln 

c 

Policy and Strateyy 

World B Group's Support lIenS 

Progress Benchtmrks 

CAS Objective: Achieving Fast and Sustainable Growth (Continued)

______________________ 
______________________ 

~~ ~~~~~Floosidol 

Non-Pinoodol l 

Countr 

W B G

Increase Productivity Through Privas Sector Development

ped-,s cn-nly coosaunag the adseo 
of the poLetl of the pote sereme mdude 
m deqooeaeeogtotery msd ornpeooc fsrr 
ord cwtderooe rs 
ave pocte 
go,vestoo tte astailhllntot sstoperstiuondfaresm 

Wbe WBG net wecsk mWeds tte woeestattn of PfrdOnl ty too Soull d Mtctarwtses (FY04) SMU & MrEeosqsnes Dovetepsent Stxly 
toiat detameheftouoatm 
t SMEs nod WBG cun 
to the ntepumntOsha of key 
e us 
tne PSD stegy tn pou1a,. IFC 
t1knewtost. 
dred uam 
ts.nepuoxte, (FY04). Cty Eouemitcc Meouoeon (CEM) maostpo 
skes a dyn sc conubnomo to prcousat p 
s shot 
th 
ave the Lfeottset
stok si 1constre tolbtoew wogoe o tha ssra 
(FY05). Kstoewp Maoo-ttO Entatce 
totc stawts) 
job cretion.tto cto ntty 
climate. WBG aslo nmes *coOttbwLoto
fteoty snd Cautpfitlonso (FY06) 
tojectu sod ponos hom 
t 
nssoea the cLtnct of
SkMEs sod oicveotposes to cocte jabs

Annex 89

Parltnest

Active In toh

IDB. CAF

Rural Development

iLoo of =te5graout m astyxd am kettm ctint WBG osstonee wtt he 
tedtoneah 
to sod L nrun)slt Gops fipnot. octr 
stteoheoa 
toco daed 
andtor=a) oos 
i 
poowsot of ns,co moden r 
L 
f 
ta-fafto nstn sear toom 
and gpoootsoc msed caonfdence m 
oppatuatois Is ns areats od tutnted acIon to 
ยขte -s,-atsiuttos mr non ires 
r 
Te WHO
lttd f(to stut foarnees Gdeenlly weak 
t alsoosuppout caouretnty-drnveadevelopmem

ta & Deetjoero (Fy04). Rus Dlhnfoc= 
(FY04B cnYf), 
Pronoetun 
fet Dploced (FY04), Itrttl 
Eoo,n APLH (FY05) 

Casty E-os Metmoretot(CEM) (FY05) 

Itod 
ftUnttsne of ioest nes usiso tod Frt urenrtun df the WHO =Otte 
telrmreasedinteggmnmn to sotutllotid 
segy totds tomivedecomtrtoc ettcoes t
otrwoly 
oxtt 0nea5 
t 
md trheng Iral iasotstuns

IDB. CAF

Environmental and Natural Resource Management_

Legal foonk Ir niraturet nonagenat 
WIe G w 
i 
new the exii ESIA and 
I 
qmacid Ctrn Offoset 
(FPCF) (FY03). Ru Ampoy Erswontstat Ictmi 
)O Asse smas.0V5o1 
snd liUcsotag oechost seeds tobe more stseg Itoetig qsl.m the sew Utoesmg Lato. mod 
E ..s ott Sante 
(PCF) (FY04). Stern 
Iotwok Sady (FY04), Ftsnciast soubtsty 
sod eso. t 
mtos( 
tkto n 
tooas 
fst fIb 
hmL- 
s 
l 
ovoI ene-tesn fhe s 
eg Syt 
Nesadt (0EF) (FY04). EsetinlesordAl SAL (FY05). Ertosso MWnO tnttntti- (FY04). 
euooubttilotey0f saeoett lsusttuts Nfttd sob srtes, sesd mopid. 'le WBG tott ceatto 
Nsoost Disu , Preuton (FY05), Adaptton to Vatesbsofatnase Cstttat m ยขt Anon Beso
capml) tot ne yet bee ppely 2lue& 
MM= pfUM ยขit offer the pusnbityof redhxins C1Ct 
Chn 
nge 
(GEF) (FY05). N uke F 
Po (FFY06)
(GEF) (FY05), Smasots todigas People Ito
carbonemtooou 
Sast. (oe of te Anmoao (FY05)

t 

Re&tod tcaeran eawOonoso 
togetea wl deusitEtC wt 
0 
ct 
toto 
nf onto tdsalodtes tothe eesecear 
acasgtattn ftons, inlts 
Suuicofot 
ft 
t 
red

w 
FWY woDB, NGOS
copcty 

tnstto

W 

HW

llS 

~ 

~ 

ยงW

alitj 

Dlongoswc 1 PoUcy and Strategay 
CAS Objective: Sharing the Fruits of Growth (Continued)

________________________ 
_________________________ 

Colombia - CAS Matrix FY03-05 - High Case (Continued)

Annex 89

Wold Bak Groups Support lstnaneots 

j 

Progress Benchmarks 

Acde In this

SFla ncial 

Non,Bi - cdal 

Co 

W BG 

_ _y_W

Labor aarkets

abdr nldtet to Colta, ob aus oody st.ct 1me -
Jecbve dofc WBG sltegy t ba a 
PM LabMd Sonl Sector RetRf I (FY04), Labor Refoen, Swdy (FY03). SOan Safety Nol Tlooed ftctor of lcbor 
la. 
tetso 
SaoSfactaaycepiuso of admnuatoopetrttst 
ge restca sod httion son fn wdl be tobedp to tke Ib 
labor n 
f ebe. to Pm8 Laad SOat Secutr ofoal (FY05) Strly n (FY06) 
Coloa 
loeha to tsedy,sotoc jb ereasod ua a 
Sd mW 
raurg s to IbC bctia 
of lbo
nto 
workeS. affect fte kvd of eoplymal sod ureraamftrae sbaos fttbs of efcotao gW-fft asd 
a reaosu of utforaldy 
ottets t Colootbt
oaa of elts forol strI

Ihe daade betwe foal and mtfomrl labor 

edace u 
s 

n 

DB

CAS Objective: Bufilding Efficient, Accountable and Transparent Governance

Anticorruption
UL(FY04), AratiCoreoupas Conay Fsot Actoatblhty Aosnat ra 
B oadrnedsrapo of be ortate's anticmruo Sastaty c 
Stccsslc e adtsodsoao lase ntleornated 
Bsta0 so I 
resol- of. 
nana wys mdeAey nArb-ComPrtaon 
peesidoual prgoans dsigoor to coaotcotrrupotot ano r eatly 2002. 0t WBG Wai hiep be 
(FY06) 
(FY03), Cotury PCrcoreemt Assotrrnt Repon pepogd ordCdOr ta tbe trt.ofpra 
at boon bad, at beoedr bord srrcces 
adatraao brtoadn 
t lscope of Colorrta's 
(FY05) 
iad stcresse Ossptrtwy smd accotabilbty of
Ihe rbbc seun|

.orbled ESW 

ototortlait P(ro 

teutotof 

oto 

LILast IDB. UNDP.
OAS

Judiild Refo nrm_ 
Jde calthour boon aleady sadrwed orl 
ptrdert 
to ,hce cs4gado Ioddelays to. da 
Dobcial tyao Hoaewor. lu rategy itrnlsr 
g.ftlcan organneurvul and toloisucal rfortt. 
reqans tfecon tnsogesasa ad grong 

_ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ 

Seas of the buddorgt bik fer Ie WBG saue5gy Judacal 
uDeweps 
inbrale uatoet of fIt tor- qsuoly and 
podacbyuy of eUcjtiabry's cerdbclrertttsoo
ad systeorn nttayb peris toarsos, ot 
ble mre
effecute sod lawer coso of etfoeretreet

(FY05) 

__ 

_ _ _ _ _ _ __ 

_ _ 

RSdctroofccgsurao dso delayst l afttaibal Saccesb corrpi eaerfloeedaoperraroer atd 
-yatm 
adtt5tay staree 

_ _ _ __ 

_ _ _ _ _ _

iDB, UNDP.
OAS

Results-Oriented Public Sector Rcrm and Budget Management

Pestdoat Dtrecve NM10 of Augot 10. 2002 
WBG td) soplr 
taln toiry t 
setso o shona 5d rned-atenrtobjecOs,s 
ao 
fuscalal orfort at Iat way et 
c err 
srb s tsossa rateorre nosgeoe aaomsett allocated snd results mtcrrd. 
pcatetteb od mprfore bodhellg. atn5i 
oth 

P Fiscal oat 
transl AdJ ions I (FY03), Pabhc Espeats ft 
(FY03). Cranny 
P0g 
ro Focal sod bafltostr Adj Loss 11 (FY04). Fr 
l Aocnratublitty Assesstuer 
(FY03). 
PFn Focad sad ltstallonal Adj Ino HI (FY05). CCy Peneonfi A 
rssoor Repan (FY05).
Pn. Fca1 ard Easdnalnal Adj Lo IV (FY06) Country Ecolsc MOensagadun(CEM) 
(FY05).
Scidal Safety Neo Stady n (FY06)

A nmme 
result-onrced pbtc sector. b 
trreased acceuabtlty at mpanecy 

aiBcote 
ESW

f leo 

a 

td 

iDB

CAS Annex Cl
Colombia: Private Sector Strategy

I. 

Introduction:

After the recent severe economic recession and fiscal instability, which have resulted in a
sharp increase in unemployment and a widening of economic inequality, recovery of the
Colombian economy to a sustained growth path is essential to the goal of poverty reduction, and
is hence an important priority of the World Bank's Country Assistance Strategy (CAS). A return
to sustained economic growth will not be achieved without a significant contribution from the
private sector, whose own growth has languished in recent years. The performance on all fronts
of the private sector -
large, medium, small and micro-enterprises - a segment critical to
employment generation in the economy, has fallen behind during the past few years. The first
priority for Colombia is the return to macro-economic stability, which is essential for the of
investor confidence and for the private sector to be able to contribute effectively to the growth
process. From a longer-run perspective, structural weaknesses in the economy will need to be
addressed, to be able to improve competitiveness and unleash the full potential of the private
sector. The agenda that lies ahead is a challenging one, encompassing multiple sectors of the
economy and broad segments of the private sector, to which the World Bank Group has the
opportunity to be a major contributor and catalyst. It includes the following key priorities:

* 

* bringing about a strengthening of the business environment, through improvements in the
regulatory framework, and reductions in the administrative burden on enterprises
imposed by a myriad of administrative fees and license requirements;
improving the efficiency of the infrastructure and natural resources sectors, through
reform of the tariff and tax structure, and focusing on the realities of the security
situation;
restoring to health the financial sector, by completing the restructuring of the banking
sector, reforming the pensions system and improving asset quality in the housing finance
industry, and broadening the base of financial intermediation through development of the
capital market;
* assisting the restructuring and recovery of otherwise dynamic private firms, that have had
the fundamentals right but which suffered from the downturn in the economy and erosion
in access to finance.

* 

This Private Sector Strategy (PSS) is organized as follows. Section II provides an overview of
the development and role of the private sector in the economy, and a diagnosis of the key
developmental issues arising. Section m outlines the private sector's agenda and in light of this,
the World Bank Group's strategy for promoting the private sector (Section IV).

II. 

Background:

The private sector has played a varying role in Colombia's economy since the early
1900s, beginning with coffee and a few other export crops, and continuing with the growth of the

textile industry. During the 1970s, it grew fairly rapidly, though mostly behind high tariff and
regulatory barriers - which encouraged a concentration of production in import-substituting
sectors, especially in capital and intermediate goods. Protection also had the consequence of
generating a bias against exports, so that during this period, the private sector had a relatively
low share in the country's exports. During the 1980s, Colombian industry was characterized by
relatively high concentration of production, the predominance of a small number of
a 
conglomerates spanning a number of sectors, and a declining level of investment and
productivity. Through much of this period, private investment as a percentage of total
investment in the economy declined, in some years (1983 and 1984) falling below the level of
public investment, and the manufacturing sector's share in the economy stagnated at a relatively
low level.

This situation changed only by the end of the 1980s, when trade policy reforms were
introduced, followed by more wide-ranging structural reforms initiated in 1990, under the
Apertura, with the aim of improving economic efficiency and productivity. There was a
significant opening up of the economy, which had an impact on the structure of industry and its
Import licensing requirements, which had covered 99% of goods imported in
competitiveness. 
1984, and 61% in 1989, virtually disappeared by 1991. Average tariffs declined from 27%
across the major sectors in 1990 to 12% in 1992, with effective rates of protection declining from
around 90% to less than 30%. A free trade and customs union agreement was signed with
Venezuela in 1992. The exchange rate regime was considerably liberalized, with control of the
peso rate shifted between 1991-94 from the central bank to the market. Supported by these
reforms, private investment grew to a peak of 18% of GDP by 1994, and output by 5% a year
during 1992-95.

An important focus of the structural transformation process initiated by the Apertura
reforms was a strengthening of the overall business environment, together with deregulation of
the infrastructure sector. From 1989 onwards, public/quasi-public sector monopolies in the
transport, utilities and telecommunications sectors were dismantled in stages, and regulatory
frameworks introduced in natural gas and power, to allow for more competition and private
sector participation. At the same time, a number of measures were introduced to strengthen the
business operating environment, focusing on competition policy, insolvency procedures and
In this way, between 1989 and 1993, legislation was
legislation, and institutional capacity. 
introduced to provide legal recourse for contract enforcement and conflict resolution, and to
consolidate all bankruptcy, 
liquidation and reorganization 
laws and regulations under a
consistent commercial code. A new banking law, passed in 1990, similarly sought to introduce
greater competition in the financial sector. In its transition from owner to regulator of financial
institutions, the Government, through FOGAFIN, took steps to close, restructure and/or privatize
several state-owned financial institutions and opened up the banking sector to foreign
participation.

Through much of the 1980s, until the middle of the 1990s, Colombia's economy was a
sustained success. Steady growth of GDP (an annual average rate of 4.6% during 1986-90, one
of the best performances in Latin America) was accompanied by diversification away from an
reliance on coffee exports, and 
the development of significant centers of
excessive 
manufacturing activity in Medellin, Bogota, Cali and Barranquilla. The private sector played an

2

increasingly important role in this performance, especially after the reforms, when buoyant
demand, led principally by private investment, contributed to growth rates of 5.4% and 5.6% in
1993 and 1994.

Unfortunately, this pace of growth proved difficult to sustain. From 1996 onwards,
economic performance deteriorated significantly as interest rates rose, as a result of political
investment and
uncertainties and persistent 
fiscal deficit, adversely affecting private 
consumption, and in turn, manufacturing output. This was followed in 1998-99 by a major
recession, accompanied by a soaring fiscal deficit, increase in unemployment and a subsequent
reduction in access to commercial finance, as a consequence of a downgrading of the country's
investment-grade status by the credit rating agencies during 1999. With GDP growth rates
tailing off to 0.6% in 1998, -4.3% in 1999, and 2.8% in 2000, Colombia entered an economic
downturn from which it has yet to emerge.

Overview of the Private Sector:

Fluctuating role of the private sector in Colombia's economy: Though Colombia has
been a predominantly private economy, private consumption rather than investment has been the
principal driver. As seen from Table 1, the share of private consumption to GDP rose to over
69% in the first half of the 1990s, though it declined somewhat after the onset of the recession, to
64.4% in 2000. Private investment as a percentage of GDP was lower than the ratio for almost
all comparable countries in the region (Table 2) through most of the 1980s and 90s. Colombia's
private investment ratio was 9.9% on average for the decade of the 1980s, which compared
poorly with an average of 16% for Brazil, 15.4% for Argentina and 12.9% for Mexico for the
same period. It did however pick up during the first half of the 1990s, when it rose to a peak of
16.7% of GDP in 1994 (even so lower than Argentina's 1990's peak of 19.9%, Brazil's of 17.6%
and Mexico's of 18.9%), before declining to 5.5% in 1999 - its lowest level in three decades. By
way of comparison, levels for Sub-Saharan Africa as a region, fluctuated between 12.2% of GDP
and 9.6% during the decade of the 1990s, and for East Asia, between 22.9% and 13.8%.

The role of the state on the other hand increased significantly in Colombia during the
latter half of the 1990s. Public (government) consumption, which had remained fairly steady in
the range of 9 to 12% of GDP during the first half of the decade; rose sharply from 1996 to 1999,
from 18% to 24%. At the same time, public investment rose (amidst fluctuations) from a low of
6.4% of GDP in 1990 to a peak of 9.2% in 1997. Several factors were responsible for this,
including the developmental agenda of the new constitution, which resulted in new spending
commitments for social services, the expansion of the judicial sector and increased defense
spending on account of the growing violence and guerrilla conflict.

3

Table 1 

Colombia - Private & Public Consumption and Investment

1990 
66.4 

1991 
67.7 

1992 
67.0 

1993 
67.5 

1994 
68.1 

1995 
69.4 

1996 
65.5 

1997 
65.1 

1998 
65.7 

1999 
64.7 

2000
64.4

(% of GDP)

9.4 

11.3 

12.0 

11.7 

13.1 

13.1 

18.0 

19.9 

20.6 

24.0 

22.8

10.2 

6.4 

8.4 

6.5 

8.3 

6.7 

10.8 

16.7 

14.5 

13.0 

11.0 

8.1 

6.6 

7.9 

8.5 

9.2 

9.9 

7.7 

5.5 

8.6 

6.9

7.4

Private 
Consumption
Government 
Consumption
Private 
Investment
Public 
Investment

Sources:
(Consumption data): EIU Country Profiles;
(Investment data): 
Trends in Private Investment in Developing Countries: Statistics for 1970-2000 (IFC
Discussion Paper No.44), Table C I

Table 2 

Private Investment in the Region

Argentina 
Brazil 
Chile 
Mdxico 
Peru 

Colombia 

1980 
19.2 
17.0 
11.2 
13.9 

9.8 

1985 
12.5 
12.9 
14.1 
12.5 
12.0 

8.4 

(% of GDP)

1990 
9.4 
17.6 
18.4 
13.6 
12.9 

10.2 

1995 
15.8 
16.8 
19.9 
12.4 
19.5 

14.5 

2000
15.4

-

16.4
18.6 
17.0

6.9

1

Among sectors of activity, agriculture, industry and services accounted in 2000 for

13.8%, 30.5% and 55.7% of GDP, respectively. Since 1990, the services sector has been the
fastest growing sector (average annual growth rate of 4.3%), having increased its share ten
percentage points from 45.4%. Though the share of industry remained relatively stable over the
period, that of the manufacturing sector, which in 1990 had accounted for just over 20% of GDP,
declined with the recession to under 14% by 1999. For the decade of the 1990s as a whole, the
manufacturing sector recorded a negative average rate of growth (-2.3% per annum). The
agricultural sector underwent a contraction over the decade, having been affected by a number of
factors, including low commodity prices, exchange rate alignments, the economic liberalization
and subsequent uneven policy changes, manifested in a shrinkage in the area under cultivation
and a negative (-2.2%) rate of growth for the sector over the period as a whole.

Exports and export markets have been relatively concentrated. Exports have steadily
increased in value over the past decade, from $7.2 billion in 1991 to $13.1 billion by 2000.
However their base has been relatively narrow, with a high dependence on traditional exports, in
particular oil and coffee which accounted for more than 50% of the total in recent years (in
contrast, exports of industrial products have in recent years accounted for under 40% of total
value). The US has consistently been the principal destination for Colombia's exports,
especially oil, accounting for between 38 and 50% of total trade during 1996 to 1999. The EU

4

was the second largest market up to 1995, but declined in importance as coffee prices fell in
subsequent years. Exports have however been on the increase with other Andean Pact countries,
especially Venezuela, Peru and Ecuador, though this has been constrained by the recent
deterioration in economic conditions of some of these countries.

Private sector involvement 
is strong in the energy and infrastructure sectors.
Colombia's approach to private participation in infrastructure differed significantly from that of
other countries in the region, especially from the "big bang" approach of outright privatization
followed by Argentina and Chile. In response to stem resistance from the unions, and in part to
the fact that much of the country's infrastructure was owned by municipal governments over
which the central government had no legal authority, the Colombian approach to ownership has
been eclectic, ranging from joint ventures and leases to outright privatization (including the
creation of "mixed companies" jointly owned by public and private sectors, providing services
under lease contract). Despite a seemingly "gradualist" approach, however, Colombia was
successful in introducing a fair degree of private participation and competition in the sector, as
well as being able to attract substantial private investment, through project finance, into the
sector, until the recent economic downturn .

In oil, where Colombia has been a net exporter since the 1980s, private oil companies
have been engaged for many years in exploration and production, and in the operation of the
major gas and oil fields. As a result of a successful privatization effort, the coal sector is now
almost entirely in private hands, and private companies operate the main gas pipelines under
Build-Own-Manage-Transfer (BOMT) contracts. The power sector has undergone a major
from almost 100% public ownership in 1990 to around 60% private
transformation 
-
participation in electricity generation (measured in MW installed) and over 43% participation in
supply to final consumers. Colombia was a pioneer in introducing structural and regulatory
reforms in the sector, with the result that the supply of power now takes place through a well-
functioning wholesale electricity market, based on the British model, which has been successful
in bringing about improvements in efficiency, costs and quality of service.

Colombia was also a pioneer in promoting the participation of the private sector in
development of ports, which handled the bulk of the country's exports, and airports. The
country's general cargo port terminals were privatized over a three year period, 1991-93, during
which time legal reforms were put into place, due diligence conducted and separate concessions
offered for each port. The government kept a 30% share of the ownership structure of the
concessions, retaining ownership of the port infrastructure. The concessions, which turned out to
be fairly successful, business-wise, resulted in dramatic improvements in port productivity2 . As
its Civil Aviation Authority, and
regards airports, 
in 1993, the government corporatized 
undertook development of a second runway at El Dorado international airport in Bogota, under a
20-year BOT concession. Three hub airports and the second Bogota airport terminal were
similarly given out under concession contracts. Private participation was also sought to be
introduced in the roads and highways sector, through use of toll road concessions. However,
highways have been fairly vulnerable to sabotage and road hijackings by guerillas, and this has

1 In 1995, Colombia led Latin America in project finance and ranked fifth in the world, attracting US$1.56 billion

of loan finance for infrastructure projects.

In 1993 alone, the public ports registered a 45% increase in general cargo throughput.

2 

5

been a constraint on the willingness of private investors and sponsors to enter into new
concession agreements .

The telecommunications sector lagged behind this progress, having seen relatively
limited progress in terms of private sector participation. Currently, only 3.4% of telephone lines
in Colombia are in the hands of private companies, compared to an average of 85% for Latin
America as a whole. Part of the constraint has been the fragmentation of regulatory institutions
in the sub-sector and the relatively low telephone tariffs set (in some cases well below the cost of
providing service), which has acted as a major disincentive to private companies considering
entry. Colombia also has a very low level of internet penetration - only 0.54 internet hosts per
1,000 inhabitants, well below other countries of comparable GDP per capita, such as Brazil and
Mexico. This is something Colombia needs to address in improving its competitiveness in the
Information Age.

Private firms had relatively good access to commercial rmance until the recession,
and relatively poor access thereafter. In the wake of the apertura reforms, improvements in
performance of the economy and growth of private GDP during the early 1990s were reflected in
an improvement in Colombia's access to foreign capital. Between 1989 and 1992, inflows of
foreign direct investment rose sharply from $113 million to $679 million, accompanied by a
sizeable increase in new loans from abroad to the private sector. Capital inflows continued to
rise in subsequent years, with FDI increasing from $1,298 million (or 1.92% of GDP) in 1994 to
a peak of $4,753 million (3.91% of GDP) in 1997. Debt flows to Colombia also increased
during the period. As seen from Table 3, net private debt flows rose from $696 million in 1992
to $3,660 million in 1996. Coinciding with these trends, Colombia's credit rating attained
investment grade, when S&P provided a (BBB-) investment grade rating for Colombia's foreign
currency debt in June 1993 and Moody's followed in September 1995 with its own (Baa3) rating.

From 1998, Colombia begun to see a decline in capital flows from external sources. FDI
inflows declined sharply from their peak to a low of $1,352 million (0.89% of GDP) in 1999, and
private debt flows turned into negative. This 
overall decline was accompanied by a
corresponding decline in the country's credit rating, both S&P's and Moody's downgrading
Colombia to below-investment grade in 1999.

Apart from FDI and external debt, credit to the private sector from the domestic financial
sector also significantly increased between 1992 and 1997, at the rate of 39% per annum, from
5,779 billion pesos to 29,962 billion pesos. This changed from 1997 onwards, in the wake of the
banking crisis, when credit to the public sector - which had amounted to a negligible 49 billion
pesos in 1992 - expanded much more rapidly, at an annual rate of 45%, from 2,684 billion pesos
in 1997 to 11,863 billion pesos by 2001. While credit to the private sector did not completely
dry up, its increase was limited to a relatively modest 6% per annum, to 44,702 billion pesos by
2001.

3 Though some of these concessions (including those in which IFC participated) had been quite successful in

attracting foreign capital.

6

Table 3 Colombia: Private Capital Flows & Domestic Credit

619926 1,73 

154 

1 

1995 

1996 1 

2, 

1 

1998 1 

1999 1 

20 

85710 
1.39 

.203 

1,298 
1.92 

902 

71172 2,783 
0.84 
2.76 

-560 

294 

24,753 
3.91 

-169 

2,032 
1 45 

346 

1,352 
0.89 

-1413 

12,124 
4 
1.22 

-997 

2001

42,075
.11

-243

679 
1.74 

65 

696 

Debt toPrivat 

-Foreign

FDIC(S$ mn) 
% of GDP 

Equity 
Portfolio
Investment
(US$mn)

Debt to Private 
c,773 
Sector

(UJS$rnn)*
_Domestic
Credit to 
Private Sector

(Pesos bn)

_ % of GDP 
Credit to Public 
Sector
(Pesos bn)

% of GDP 

2,561 

2,325 

3,660 

2,444 

-4,93 

-1,561 

-460 

682

5,779 

8,591 

12,740 

17,262 

21,765 

29,962 

37,684 

39,627 

41,751 

44,702

14.80 
49 

16.80 
151 

18.86 
730 

20.44 
1,088 

21.61 
1,233 

24.62 
2,684 

26.82 
4,497 

26.15 
5,959 

24.03 
9,161 

23.88
11,863

0.13 

0.30 

1.08 

1.29 

1.22 

2.21 

3.20 

3.93 

5.27 

6.34

Source: Institute of International Finance, Central Bank
*Foreign flows are net flows.

A better picture is obtained by looking at credit to private and public sectors in relation to
GDP. As a percentage of GDP, domestic credit to the private sector in Colombia rose from
14.8%4 in 1992 to a peak of 26.8% in 1998, but declined thereafter to 23.9% in 2000. Within the
region, by 2000, this level compared poorly with Chile, where domestic credit to the private
sector was 68% of GDP, Bolivia (59.5%), Brazil (37.6%) and Ecuador (33.4%); but relatively
favorably with Argentina, where it was only 23.8% of GDP, Venezuela (12.1%), Mexico
(13.2%) and Peru (25.9%)5. Credit to the public sector in contrast rose sharply after 1996, from
only 1.22% of GDP to 6.34% by 2000. The reduction in access to commercial finance currently
faced by private firms, including some of the larger firms looking to make new investments, is
reflected in the decline in share of credit to the private sector.

The Financial Sector:

The private sector and the State have historically shared the task of providing financial
intermediation in Colombia. Dating back to the 1930s, the government had introduced a range
of specialized state institutions to provide credit for its industrial and agricultural production, and
trade finance for exports. The government was also the traditional owner of a range of other
financial institutions, including development finance corporations and insurance companies.
Public sector ownership of financial institutions expanded significantly during the financial
sector crisis of 1982, as the State took over a large number of insolvent private financial
institutions. The Fondo de Garantias de Instituciones Financerias (FOGAFIN) was created to

4 Source: HF Database

5 Source : All data from World Development Indicators

7

oversee the reorganization of these institutions, and a range of reforms introduced to increase the
authority of the Central bank and strengthen supervision.

This trend reversed itself with the launching of the Apertura reforms in 1991, which
brought about heightened competition and fundamental changes in the structure of the financial
sector. Most of the nationalized banks were privatized, foreign investment was liberalized, the
central bank was granted independence and the new Banking Law provided the basis for a
considerable strengthening of supervision of the banking industry. At the same time, the creation
of financial groups was permitted, which -
together with the introduction of a new regulatory
framework - paved the way towards universal banking. Benefiting from these reforms, as well
as from the resultant rise in foreign investment in banking institutions, the sector grew rapidly
during the 1990s, until the beginning of the banking crisis in 1998-99.

The rapid expansion of the banking sector in many ways contributed to the onset of the
crisis. By late-1996, the sector was already coming under considerable pressure on account of a
significant increase in bad loans at state-owned banks, financial cooperatives, and savings and
loans institutions. A lack of liquidity, high inflation (20% in 1998) and unemployment (18% in
1998), compounded these problems, contributing to a further weakening of the loan portfolio,
especially in the mortgage sector, where real estate prices had begun to decline. By mid-1998, as
the Central Bank sharply increased domestic interest rates, economic growth slowed and the
private sector tried to reduce its debt burden, credit demand fell along with a rapid deterioration
in the financial institutions' asset quality. 
In 1998, declaring an economic emergency, the
government introduced a number of measures to cope with the situation, including a tax on
financial transactions (to fund FOGAFIN), a debt relief program for mortgage debtors, capital
injections to institutions taken over by the state and higher loan loss provision requirements.
Notwithstanding this, bank earnings remained negative during 1998-2000, with the level of non-
performing loans in the system rising from around 7% in early 1998 to a peak of 20% by end-
1999.

As of end-December, 2001, Colombia's financial sector (in terms of credit providers)
consisted of 28 commercial banks 
(including 10 
foreign), 8 
financial corporations
(Corporaciones Financieras), 28 commercial finance companies (11 of which were specialized
leasing institutions) and 13 cooperatives (Table 4). A result of the regulatory changes that made
it possible for banks to diversify into new markets, and of the heightened competition in the
marketplace, was that the financial system went through a deep consolidation process that
drastically reduced the number of players in the market. Included among these were the savings
and loans institutions, which had originally specialized in mortgage finance: as a result of laws
passed in 1999; these have now been converted into banks.

8

Table 4 Colombia's Financial Sector (as of end-December, 2001)

Commercial Banks 
Domestic 
Foreign 

Financial Corporations 

Commnercial Finance 
Companies_
cooperatives 

Special Official Institutions 

(IOEs)*-

Number of 
Entities 
28 
18 
10 

Assets 
(US$ million) 
31,600 
21,286 
10,314 

8 

28 

13 

9 

3,909 
1,457 

159 
8,107 

Net Income
(US$ million)
160.57
40.97
201.54

(185.88)
29.47

3.99
265.54

Total 

_ 

* Government entities which act as the second tier financial institutions channeling resources from multilateral banks
and other sources to specific sectors, such as energy, agriculture, urban development, and import and export promotion.

86 

45,231 

314.67

Source: SuperBancaria

The banking industry has dominated the financial sector, domestic and foreign
commercial banks accounting for 69.9% of total assets and 64% of total earnings. As a result of
the consolidation process, the industry has become highly concentrated, with eight financial
groups currently dominating the market, offering a range of services, from commercial and
mortgage banking, leasing, pension fund management, and insurance services. Bancolombia,
formed as the result of a merger between Banco de Colombia and Banco Industrial Colombiano
in February, 1998, is the country's largest bank, with assets of over $3.5 billion. Other large
banks include Banco de Bogota, owned by a local financial sector group, Grupo Aval, with
assets of $2.8 billion, Banco Ganadero, owned by Banco Bilbao Viacaya (BBV) of Spain, with
assets of $2.5 billion and Bancafe, with assets of $2.3 billion.

Colombia's capital markets are relatively underdeveloped, despite the fact that there are
no major policy distortions impeding capital market development. Stock exchanges -
recently
merged - have operated in the three major urban centers, Bogota, Cali and Medellin, but as seen
from Table 5, despite a substantial increase over the decade of the 1990s, market capitalization
remains small even by regional standards.

9

Table 5 

Stock Market Statistics: Colombia and Selected Countries in the Region

Countries 

Colombia 
Argentina 
Brazil 
Mdxico 
Chile 
Venezuela 
Peru 

1990 

2000-2001

Market 
Value 
Capitalization 
Traded 
$m. 
% GDP % GDP 

1,416 
3,268 
16,354 
32,725 
13,645 
8,361 
812 

3.5 
2.3 
3.5 
12.5 
45.0 
17.2 
3.1 

0.2 
0.6 
1.2 
4.6 
2.6 
4.6 
0.4 

Listed 
domestic 
companies 

80 
179 
581 
199 
215 
76 
294 

Market 
Value 
Capitalization 
Traded 
$m 
% GDP % GDP 

13,217 
192,499 
186,238 
121,403 
56,310 
6,216 
11,134 

11.8 
58.3 
38.0 
21.8 
85.6 
6.7 
19.8 

0.5 
2.1 
17.0 
7.9 
8.6 
0.6 
2.8 

Listed
domestic
companies

123
111
428
168
249
63
207

Source: World Development Indicators (World Bank)

As seen from Table 6, the increase in market capitalization in Colombia was not without
some fluctuation during the period. From a 1990 base of US$1.4 billion, it rose to a peak of
$19.5 billion in 1997, before declining -
in the wake of the crisis -
to $9.6 billion in 2000
(reviving in 2001 to $13.2 billion). The relatively low level of market capitalization, for what is
one of the more developed countries in the region, reflects the fact that relatively few companies
in Colombia are publicly owned, and those that are listed on the stock exchanges have, for the
most part, a narrow ownership base.

Table 6 

Colombia - Trends in Market Capitalization (1990-2001)

1990 

1,416 

1991 1992 

4,036 

5,681 

1993 

9,237 

1994 

14,028 

(US$ million)

1995 

17893 

1996 

17,137 

1997 

19,530 

1998 

13,357 

1999 

11,590 

2000 

9,560 

2001

13,217

Capital markets in Colombia are heavily skewed in favor of fixed income securities.
Measured at end-2000, equity transactions represented less than 1% of the value of Colombia's
capital markets transactions, while fixed income debt securities accounted for the rest. A large
part of both primary and secondary capital markets activity in the fixed income sector has been
generated by the government debt market, with treasury instruments now catering to maturities
of up to 12 years. 
Institutional investors now invest heavily in government securities. The
success and liquidity of this market has - by absorbing most of the available demand in the
domestic capital market - in fact begun to crowd out private financing; which is a matter of some
concern. Recent issues by supra-nationals have helped diversify somewhat the pool of fixed
income securities in the market. However, access to the fixed-income market by non-sovereign
issuers needs to be significantly improved.

10

III. 

Private Sector Development Agenda:

The agenda for recovery and growth of Colombia's private sector flows from the
structural constraints outlined above, as well as from the macro-economic instability that is
currently faced by the country. At the macro level, the enormous increase in public debt,
domestic and external, incurred since the beginning of the banking crisis, has resulted in a public
sector debt of some 46% of GDP and interest payments of nearly 5% of GDP to service it; and
on the external front, for a debt-to-exports ratio of 220% for 2001, accounting for 45% of current
account receipts by way of debt service. This situation has been exacerbated by a deterioration
in the country's export performance, especially on account of weakness in earnings of traditional
exports. The magnitude of the debt, together with an assessment of the difficulties that lie ahead,
has been principally responsible for the country's ratings downgrade by the major credit rating
agencies, and for the consequential reduction in access to commercial finance by the private
sector.

If there is to be any real improvement in the private sector's access to finance, restoration
of economic stability is an essential prerequisite - calling for prudent economic management, and
the introduction of sustainable fiscal policies. Equally important, however, is the existence of a
well-functioning domestic financial system, able to provide adequate services to all segments of
the productive sector, through healthy banking, housing finance, capital markets, pensions and
insurance systems. A key element of the agenda for development of the private sector would be
the completion of the reform process for the financial sector, so as to facilitate a deepening of
domestic markets, strengthening of the banking sector and development of the capital markets
framework.

Two other elements of the PSD agenda can be considered a priority. The first, to ensure
that the overall business environment is conducive to realizing the full potential of the private
sector - calls for a strengthening of regulatory and competition frameworks for commercial
enterprises, as well as for the financial sector, a strengthening of the FDI framework and
demonstration of a commitment to increased private participation in the economy. The second,
to facilitate the international competitiveness of the productive sectors, calls for improving the
competitiveness of infrastructure and natural resources sectors (e.g. through reductions in costs
of transport and communications). An important part of this agenda would be to further the
participation of the private sector in these sectors, both through a reduction in administrative
barriers and an acceleration of the privatization process.

A key element of this agenda is attaining a strong supply response from the private
sector, so as to help fuel growth and facilitate a better distribution of its benefits across various
segments of the population - something that was perceived as missing in the reform era of the
1990s, not only in Colombia but in Latin America as a whole.

Improving the Investment Climate

Strengthening the Framework of Commercial Laws and Regulations: Colombia has
already made considerable progress towards establishing a framework of commercial legislation
conducive to the development of markets and the needs of a modem private sector. Under the
reform process initiated at the beginning of the 1990s, a number of steps were taken to promote
deregulation, particularly 
in the infrastructure sector, and to strengthen the competition
framework. This was followed by a new Arbitration and Mediation legislation (Law 23 of
1991), introduced in 1991 to provide mechanisms for contract enforcement and conflict
resolution, and legislation in 1994 to consolidate all bankruptcy, liquidation and reorganization
laws and regulations under one consistent legal framework. Revisions concerning concordato
and bankruptcy procedures included the establishment of the Superintendency as the sole
authority over these procedures, and a number of changes to the Commercial Code to strengthen
transparency and corporate governance, 
including 
the appointment of statutory auditors,
reporting on management's compliance with the company's bylaws and shareholder decisions
and supervising the operation of internal controls and measures to safeguard assets.

Improving the institutional and regulatory framework of the financial sector: Steps
already taken to strengthen the framework of laws and regulations for the financial sector, as
well as the unfinished agenda awaiting implementation, are included in the discussion on the
financial sector, below.

Strengthening the EDI framework:
As a result of the "opening" of the economy in earlier years, which removed most of the
principal barriers to foreign direct investment, the legal and regulatory frameworks for FDI in
Colombia have generally been considered to be on par with the most liberal countries in the
region. The current FDI regulations 6 provide national treatment for foreign investors and permit
100% foreign ownership in almost all sectors of its economy, with the exception of hazardous
waste and national security, and the natural resources sector, where foreign exploration and
development of petroleum resources must take place as a joint venture with Ecopetrol, the state
oil company. Most bureaucratic and screening procedures were replaced by a single, simple
registration at the Central bank and most foreign exchange controls were lifted. For 2002, the
Heritage Index of Economic Freedom rated Colombia's capital flows and foreign investment
regime on par with the United States7 .

Despite the liberal nature of the regulatory framework, FDI flows to Colombia have to a
large extent been influenced by other factors. Until 1997, FDI flows to Colombia increased
rapidly, reaching nearly 4% of GDP, well in excess of the regional average. A large share of this
increase however was only weakly related to the international competitiveness of the country as
a host to foreign investment. According to Central Bank estimates, privatization receipts
accounted for 60% of FDI flows in 1997. Similarly, one-third of inflows over the period 1991-
97 took place in the mining and oil sectors, that were also largely independent of the investment
climate. Non-regulatory factors have also played a role in the decline in foreign investment

6 Law 9, Resolutions 51, 52 and 53 of the Council on Economic Social Policy and Resolution 21 of the Board of
Directors of the Central Bank
7 Rating both countries a score of 2 ("low barriers").

12

taking place after 1997. In recent years, partly as a result of rising guerilla attacks on pipelines
and infrastructure facilities, foreign investors have become more concerned about the security
problems arising from the growing violence of the civil conflict, and their associated costs, direct
and incidental. Secondly, investors have been increasingly concerned about the macro-economic
instability that the economy has been undergoing, and the uncertainties generated as regards the
exchange rate.

What remains to be done? The dual problems of security and macro-economic stability
are in any case high on the government's list of priorities. Though major improvements in the
framework are not called for, a number of minor barriers to foreign investment remain which
may usefully be addressed. These include: (a) the lack of any treaties for the avoidance of
double taxation, which -
though not a serious impediment - can sometimes makes investors
question the seriousness of a country in seeking foreign investment; (b) the remnants of some
forms of exchange controls (e.g. some foreign exchange surrender requirements for exporters)
that appear to have survived for largely bureaucratic reasons, imposing an avoidable economic
cost; (c) substantial delays in obtaining visas and work permits for expatriates; and (d) frequent
changes in the tax system, introducing uncertainty about the rules of the game.

Increasing Private Participation:
An increase in the size and role of the private sector in the economy, relative to that of the state
(which had gone through an unprecedented expansion in recent years), with the state playing the
role of regulator rather than operator, will be critical to the country's economic recovery. Initial
steps that have been taken in this direction include measures to consolidate the financial sector,
including the liquidation of Banco Central Hipothecaria (BCH) in 2001, and the on-going
liquidation of Banestado. Of the four remaining public banks, only one (Banco Agrario) is
planned to be retained in government hands. Bancafe is being offered for sale, and the Instituto
de Fomento Industrial (IF) and GranAhorrar are being assessed for subsequent closure or sale.

Turning to infrastructure, in the power sector, the reform process, which had included
establishment of the wholesale market for electricity, led to the divestiture of a number of state-
owned power plants, leaving ISAGEN, with an installed capacity of 1,460 MW, as the only
major power company still in state hands (the privatization of ISAGEN itself was held up on
account of a dispute with another utility). Privatization of distribution was initiated through the
successful unbundling and recapitalization of EEB in Bogota, and the outright divestiture of
several distribution companies on the Atlantic coast that were grouped under two companies,
Electrocosta and Electricaribe.

What remains to be done? About 20 electrificadoras, smaller distribution companies
owned by the central government in conjunction with local governments, have for various
reasons been awaiting privatization since 1999. Given the imminence of their privatization,
investment in these companies was reduced; however, the delay has meant that their situation has
been deteriorating steadily, rendering prospects for a successful divestiture increasingly more
difficult. Given that these companies serve over 45% of total users of power, it is imperative that
privatization be implemented without further delay, otherwise the increasing debt of these
companies with the wholesale market could lead to an eventual cutting off of supplies.

13

Promoting Competitiveness

Improving the efficiency of infrastructure services:
The quality of infrastructure - power, water, transport and telecommunications - is an important
determinant of the competitiveness of modem economies. For Colombia it is even more
important, in light of the erosion of facilities that has occurred in recent years, through the
periodic acts of sabotage stemming from the insurgency. The substantial inflow of foreign
investment that Colombia was able to attract through project finance into the infrastructure sector
in earlier years had helped to bring about improvements in the quality of service. However, the
contraction of foreign flows during the past three years has meant a drying up of resources to the
sector, raising the question of how to ensure the generation of investments necessary for the
maintenance of existing assets in the sector.

Steps taken by the government over the years to broaden private participation in the
sector and introduce regulatory and other reforms proved in many cases to be successful in
improving productivity and efficiency of services. 
In the ports sub-sector for instance, the
productivity of cargo port terminals rose significantly after their privatization in 1991-93. Apart
from a significant increase in general cargo throughput, rates fell by more than 50% in real terms
in the subsequent three years (and by 75% per container), as a result of the increase in
competition among ports (and among stevedores at each port), as well as from increased
investment in container handling equipment. Similarly, the establishment of the wholesale
electricity market brought about significant efficiency gains through reductions in cost and
service interruptions. Outcomes were less satisfactory in the telecommunications sub-sector,
where opposition from labor unions and local groups during 
the 1990s prevented 
the
privatization of national and municipal-owned telephone companies, where very low , regulated
tariffs were giving rise to financial problems for companies, and where the fixed-wire services
remained dominated by government-owned local and long-distance telephone capacity. 
In
comparison, cellular companies were much more private-oriented, though cellular penetration
itself in Colombia, at 7 lines per 100 inhabitants, was lower than most other countries in the
region, except for Peru.

What remains to be done? 
In telecommunications, reform of local telephone tariffs
seems to be an essential pre-requisite to stimulating private investment. Other reforms include
the consolidation of the existing regulatory institutions into a single entity, transparent and
accountable, as well as permitting greater freedom to local companies into the provision of
mobile service, so as to provide incentive for greater domestic competition. In other sub-sectors
there is a need to redesign the key elements to take account of evolving circumstances -
in
particular the realities of the security situation.

Reviving investment in the energy sector:
The oil industry in Colombia has been in a state of decline for the past several years - manifested
in a decrease in export volumes (from 810,000 bbd in 1999 to 630,000 bbd in 2001) and a steady
decline in exploration, and hence in proven reserves (from 3,000 Mbbl in 1995 to under 2,000
Mbbl in 2000). Oil investors consider Colombia a high-risk country, as a result of frequent
changes in policies and contractual terms, and with high exploration and production costs,

8 In some cases below the cost of providing the service

14

compounded by major security problems (there were more than 180 bombings of the pipelines in
2000 and 2001). At the same time, relatively high taxes and royalties have reduced the
competitiveness of the industry in the global context. This has led to a sharp decline in
investments in the sector. Total investments of $140 million in 2000 and $282 million in 2001
fell well below the levels of 1997-98, and the number of wells drilled dropped from 292 in 1985
to only 92 in 2000. At current production levels, it is estimated that existing reserves would be
sufficient for only eight years.

In an effort to promote competitiveness and attract foreign investments, the government
has introduced several legislative reforms, but has faced a number of obstacles. A new
association agreement distributing production on a 30:70 basis between Ecopetrol and the
associated company was introduced in 1999 as part of a National Development Plan, which was
however declared unconstitutional by court. Law 619 was introduced in 2000, introducing a
sliding scale for royalties in proportion to the size of the fields, and substantially reducing the
government's stake, but this too was declared unconstitutional. A new law was approved in June
2002, establishing royalties in relation to size of field and production, and it is hoped that this
will stimulate investments in the 18 blocs Ecopetrol opened to international bidding during
Round 2000 (estimated by the government at a potential 47 billion barrels of recoverable
reserves).

Putting the financial sector on a sound footing:
Strengthening the legal framework: The legal framework governing banks and financial
institutions had originally been introduced in 1923, remaining virtually unchanged until the
reforms in 1990. There was a complete overhaul of legislation in 1990, under the financial
reform program. Two key pieces of legislation implemented at the time were Law 45/1990,
allowing foreign investment in financial institutions, and broadening the scope of activities in
which banks could engage in, and Law 35/1993, which outlined the conditions under which the
government could intervene in the financial sector. 
In an attempt to strengthen the banking
system, in the wake of the crisis, the Banking Superintendency implemented several new
regulations in 1999, including a re-definition of requirements for entering the financial system,
capital investments and a new structure for the financial system which is used today. After the
banking crisis, several new pieces of legislation were introduced through a new financial sector
law, passed in 1999, which redefined the requirements for entering the financial system, its
structure and the minimum capital requirements for entry. Also introduced was Decreto 1154 of
1999, which modified the structure of the Superintendency of Banks, by redefining the scope of
its supervision and functions, and Law 546 of 1999, which established norms and regulations for
mortgage lending. New powers were given to FOGAFIN to expedite mergers and acquisitions,
using other banks as trustees to manage credit portfolios.

Further progress was made in 2001-02 in modifying the prudential regulations governing
the banking system, a principal objective of which was to give banks a more proactive role in
risk management. Three important regulatory changes were recently implemented: the first9 of
which introduced improvements in the valuation and classification of shares; the second of
which incorporated market risk in the calculation of risk-adjusted capital ratioslยฐ; and the third of

9 Under Circular Externa 033 of August 2002
'0 As prescribed in Circular 048

15

which introduced an additional category for the disclosure of loans under the heading of
"Microcredits" 
, to complement the existing three loan categories (commercial, consumer and
mortgage). In addition, banks were also required by the Superintendency to develop their own
credit risk administration systems, incorporating policies for evaluating, classifying and
controlling risks within prescribed guidelines. Banks were also required to create a general loan
loss reserve of 1% by end-June 2002, and guidelines were prescribed to ensure that loan loss
reserves did not fall, even under extreme circumstances, below specific levels, according to loan
classification. Other measures taken to strengthen the system included the implementation of
restructuring programs carried out by FOGAFIN, which during 2001 issued convertible bonds as
part of a capitalization program and directly injected funds into two public banks.

What remains to be done? The main policy and institutional reforms that are still
pending for the sector center around the development of a comprehensive strategy for capital
markets and financial intermediaries, aimed at deepening the capital markets, increasing liquidity
and helping reduce the excessive fragmentation of the financial market. Towards this end, the
new capital markets framework law, which is under discussion, should help reduce obstacles to
the issuance of securities by companies and provide the legal basis for developing securitized
transactions. Secondly, the government will need to reassess its domestic debt financing strategy
so as to encourage access to the fixed-income market by non-sovereign issuers, thereby reducing
the crowding out of private financing that is currently occurring. Other steps that should be
considered include: (i) strengthening the capacity of the Superintendency of Securities to provide
it with the skills to detect and investigate market fraud or insider trading, and (ii) implementing
internationally-required accounting and financial reporting norms for the issuance of securities to
provide reliable investor information; both of which would be critical to instilling market
confidence.

Reforning the pensions system (which is also part of the conditions of the current lending
agreement with the 1MF): As it stands, the public pensions system is technically insolvent, and
with the annual transfer to cover its cash deficit equaling the size of the total health budget,
constitutes a major risk to fiscal stability over the medium term. A key reform objective is the
transfer of all workers from the public pensions system to the private sector. Until this is done,
measures to reduce the future cost of fiscal outlays to fund the public (including municipal)
pensions schemes include changes in the contribution rate, some reduction in benefits and more
stringent conditions for benefit accrual. Additional reforms would include the consolidation of
the various public pension regimes, including the national and territorial cajas and ensuring
greater coordination between social security and central budget units in the government to assure
accountability from departmental and municipal governments.

Completing the restructuring of the banking sector: Though the profitability of the
banking system improved in 2001, with banks reporting an average ROA of 0.8% after three
consecutive years of losses, the operating environment continues to be weak, with consumer
demand weighed down by unemployment rates of over 16%, and continuing concerns about
security, low rates of savings and investment (gross domestic savings, which declined for
Colombia from over 24% in 1990 to 10.3% of GDP in 2001, being currently among the lowest in

1 Described in Circular Externa 011. As of end-June 2002, niicrocredit loans so described accounted however for
only 0.3% of the system's loans

16

the region). Equally importantly, asset quality remains weak (the ratio of non-performing loans
to total loans standing at 10.2% as of end-2001), so that completing the restructuring of the
banking sector becomes a matter of priority.

As part of the government's response to the banking crisis, public banks had earlier been
"officialized", with FOGAFIN taking over direct management oversight and ownership stake,
with a view to cleaning up their balance sheets, recapitalizing them, and selling or liquidating
them. However, after more than three years, the resolution of this process is still not clear. A
continuation of the process will include action by the Superintendency of Banks to enforce
proper loan classification and provisioning requirements, including reducing the over reliance of
banks on collateral property as a substitute for cash provisions. Other factors that have had a
destabilizing impact on the system, and which will need to be addressed, include the impact of
the drug trade and insurgency via the money laundering of illicit funds. Some major steps have
already been taken by the government to begin tracking such monetary assets and to develop an
anti-money-laundering legal framework, and more intensive steps will need to be taken in the
foreseeable future.

Restoring the housing finance industry to soundness: 
The mortgage banks (CAVs)
were particularly badly affected by the crisis, reporting NPLs as high as 23% (at end-May 1999)
in contrast to average levels in the 12-15% range for the overall banking system. By end-1999,
residential mortgage debt represented a high (31%) proportion of the total debt of the banking
system, most of it concentrated on the CAVs. Between 1998 and 1999 various debt relief efforts
were provided in the form of debt write-downs or refinanced mortgage loans at lower interest
rates, which provided some relief to the mortgage banks in 2000 (though NPLs rose again to the
same levels in 2001). Housing Law 546 of December 1999, which permitted commercial banks
to provide mortgage loans, also provided for the conversion of the CAVs into banks - regulated
and supervised as such -- the standardization of mortgage loans into a few eligible inflation-
indexed (UVR) schemes, and new secondary mortgage instruments and institutions, such as
mortgage bonds, MBS and securitization agencies. Notwithstanding this, the mortgage portfolio
has not significantly improved and represents an area of major potential instability for the
financial system. Of the seven banks in which the portfolio is concentrated, only Davivienda
consistently earned a profit throughout the financial crisis, and was the only former CAV not to
require recapitalization support from FOGAFIN. The situation has been exacerbated by the
continuing economic recession and the fact that the State bailouts have to some extent been self-
defeating, as they have tended to generate a culture of non-payment among households - which
has even begun to contaminate the private banks. 
In addition, some recent rulings of the
Constitutional Court in the wake of the Housing Law - capping interest rates and forbidding out-
of-court foreclosure proceedings - have further weakened housing as collateral for the lending
institutions, thereby inhibiting interest banks might have in resuming lending in this sector.
Immediate priorities for the sector 
include restoring mortgage collateral strength, while
introducing consumer protection regulations, abandoning the interest rate cap and facilitating the
issuance of mortgage securities.

Strengthening Micro-Finance: Access to credit to the low-income segment of the market
is currently provided by two types of micro finance institutions: 
the first composed of the non-
profit organizations (NPOs) that account for 40% of the market, the second by the regulated

17

banking system, which account for the balance 60%. The largest players in the regulated
segment include Banco Caja Social (an IFC client), Banco de Colombia and some specialized
financial institutions such as Finamerica and Compartir. Micro finance 
is one of the
government's leading programs: through the MiPymes Law, the government has tried to create
the conditions that would allow the banking system and the NPOs to continue supporting the
sector. Under the slogan "Colombia Pais de Propietarios", the object is to mobilize $120 million
per year through the banking system in order to finance micro-enterprises. Banco Caja Social is
the leader of the program, with 50% of that amount. The most representative NPO in Colombia
is Banco de la Mujer, with more than 127,000 outstanding micro-credits. Other non-profit
organizations sponsored by the main economic groups in the country have also played an
important role in the micro finance sector, as in the case of Fundacion Mario Santodomingo
(Bavaria Group) and Fundacion Carvajal.

Strengthening Education:
Though Colombia has made considerable progress in improving basic literacy, reducing its adult
illiteracy rate from 15.9% in 1980 to 8.6% in 1999 (significantly lower than the Latin America's
regional average of 12%12 in that year), its performance has lagged behind the regional average
in terms of enrollment at primary and secondary levels'3 . There have also been deficiencies in
the quality of education, with weaknesses observed at all grade levels, especially in international
comparison with countries of similar income levels'4 . Together, these have contributed to an
overall skills deficiency, which was reflected in the negative growth of total factor productivity
in Colombia during much of the 1980s and 1990s'5. As such, Colombia's agenda for the
education sector is as much to promote improvements in student achievement and quality of
education as a widening of its coverage. Given that Colombia's expenditure on education, public
and private, has been higher than in most other Latin American countries, what this translates
into is a need for greater focus on efficiency gains, as through programs to develop school
infrastructure, and provide teaching materials, and for a better targeting of educational assistance
to the poor. The private sector has scope to play a greater role, particularly in higher education,
and vocational and other training.

IV. 

The World Bank Group's Private Sector Strategy:

The World Bank Group's Private Sector Strategy (PSS) for Columbia is based on the
diagnosis of the opportunities and constraints faced by the private sector, outlined above. A key
objective of the WBG for Colombia is to promote a revival of private sector investment and
growth, to enable it to play an effective role in the country's economic recovery. Over the years,
the WBG institutions have had an increasingly coordinated approach to the development and
strengthening of the country's private sector, based on a balanced mix of activities ranging from
strengthening of the regulatory framework, institution-building and direct investment in private

13 

12 World Bank educational statistics
In 1999, Colombia's gross enrollment ratio at the primary level was 112.5% and at the secondary level, 70.9%,
well short of the regional averages for Latin America of 131.5 % and 83.9% respectively.
14 Test scores from International Math and Science Study tests, in which 8h grade students from Colombia and

Chile participated showed both countries to be among the worst performers. See "Closing the Gap in Education and
Technology"; David de Ferranti, Guillermo Perry, et al, (World Bank), 2002.
15 "Closing the Gap....., op.cit., The authors estimated TFP rates for Colombia at -0. 17% per annum for the 1980s
and -0.27% for the 1990s (Table 3.2).

18

firms. This coordination has taken place across the full range of sectors and activities. Within
the context of this coordinated approach, the specific activities of each institution are defined by
their respective comparative advantages in the marketplace.

Comparative advantages of IBRD and IFC/MIGA: In pursuing the WBG strategy for
the private sector, IFC/MIGA and IBRD will follow a division of labor based on the respective
comparative advantages of both institutions. In general, IBRD's comparative advantage lies in
its ability to assist governments in macro-economic policy, knowledge building and transfer,
sector policy advice and capacity building. The Bank has also been effective in advancing policy
dialogue with the Colombian authorities through open and constructive discussion. IFC's (and
MIGA's) comparative advantage lies in its ability to help mitigate investor perceptions of
country risk, through the financing of successful investments, and through its role in mobilizing
commercial finance/insurance. EFC's strength is derived from its practical knowledge of the
financial and corporate sectors, dialogue with international and local investors, and 
its
accumulated knowledge and expertise of emerging markets, of corporate governance, and of
environmental and social business practices.

In Colombia, as in most middle-income countries, demand for IFC's services has
primarily been a function of the country's access to other sources of commercial finance and
know-how available to the private sector. During much of the 1990s (particularly mid-1990s),
on account of the country's investment grade credit rating, and the access to international
financing that its top-tier firms and banks were able to have, IFC was able to play only a
relatively limited role in financing investments. Between FY95-98, IFC approved only 5
projects for a total IFC net of $60.6 million (with another $25.0 million from syndications),
which could be considered a relatively low volume of investment activity for a client country of
Colombia's population and economic size. However, the position changed dramatically with the
onset of the crisis, and the reduced access to commercial finance. During the three years FY99-
02, project approvals increased significantly in number and value -
IFC approving 12 projects
for a total IFC net of $493.4 million (plus $248.6 million in syndications). These projects were
focused on (i) financial markets, including micro/SME financing, (ii) natural resources sector,
and (iii) corporate modernization and restructuring. Along with the loss of alternative financing
sources, this period also saw the development within IFC of new expertise - especially in the
financial sector - which has been applied in Colombia. During the period to date, IFC has
undertaken increasingly complex tasks in financial strategy and corporate restructuring, 
in
introducing new instruments and, together with the World Bank, in advising the government on
regulatory improvements. An example of innovation in this area is the first local currency bond
in Latin America issued by an international institution.

IFC's growing focus and expertise on various aspects of corporate social responsibility
are also part of the Corporation's comparative advantage. 
IFC's ability to help firms better
incorporate environmental, social and corporate governance considerations in their operations
can significantly improve the competitiveness and sustainability of private economic activity. In
infrastructure and financial markets, the Corporation's extensive experience contributes to
"getting private activity right", and avoiding the ill-structured transactions that have been visible
in many countries and have had political reverberations. 
In the current climate of popular
uncertainty about the benefits and risks of private investment, this "higher quality" investment

19

can play an important role, reducing risks to firms and enhancing developmental gains for the
country. Several of IFC's recent investments in Colombia (e.g. SIG, Banco Caja Social and
Bavaria - see Boxes 2 & 3 below) illustrate the value-added that the Corporation can bring on
this account.

IFC's held portfolio for Colombia stood at $541 million, including syndications, for a
total of 17 companies, as of October 31, 2002. Specific loss reserve and loan arrears ratios stood
at 4. 1% and 1.9% of the portfolio, respectively, mostly on account of two projects. This reflects
better than the average ratios across the portfolio in IFC, and contrasts with the high level of
arrears in the domestic banking system.

As of Sept. 30, 2002, MIGA has one active guarantee in Colombia, with a gross exposure
of $62.4 million, and a net exposure of $31.2 million, for a project in the power sector. MIGA
has also provided assistance to several other projects in Colombia's infrastructure and banking
sectors. The total estimated amount of FDI into Colombia facilitated by MIGA to date is $514
million.

IBRD:

In a continued effort to help promote the development of a well-functioning financial
system that can promote adequate services to all segments of the productive sector and the
population at large, and building on the achievements of the Financial Sector Adjustment Loan
(FYOO), the Bank plans to process a second Financial Sector Adjustment Loan to address the
remaining agenda to ensure the health and financial sustainability of the banking system and to
foster capital markets development. This, together with associated analytical work, will support
(a) completing the restructuring and privatization of state-owned banks, (b) strengthening
problem bank resolution systems as well as the supervisory framework for banking and
insurance, (c) consolidating and rationalizing the multiple second-tier banks that are currently
operating, and (d) 
improving judicial system procedures 
that currently hinder efficient
foreclosure. The IBRD will also help foster, via a proposed lending operation and analytical
work, simplification of administrative procedures governing the establishment and operation of
firms, that are currently excessively cumbersome, and creation of an environment more
conducive to increasing economic contributions by medium, small and micro enterprises
(including employment generation).

The EBRD's assistance strategy in the coming three years will place considerable
emphasis on supporting Colombia's efforts to establish efficient, effective and well-managed
infrastructure services. 
In recognition of the urgent need to correct existing gaps the IBRD will
support a broad program of initiatives in the infrastructure area to: (i) help turn around the
significant erosion of infrastructure in recent years; (ii) create mechanisms to maximize the
possibilities for enhanced private sector participation in the new infrastructure investments -
most importantly through the strengthening of the regulatory and competition frameworks,
establishment of clear rules of the game for concessions, and effective public-private
partnerships to enable the efficient provision of infrastructure services, achieving a reduction in
logistics costs 
in the economy via efficiency 
improvements 
(e.g. 
in the transport and
telecommunications systems); (iii) urban upgrading and improvement of shelter supply, water,

20

roads, power and telephone services for slum area communities; and (iv) potable water supply,
sewerage and wastewater treatment for the least served areas. Specific lending operations
covering wastewater and sanitation management, water supply, low-income regional roads,
national urban transportation, and an urban upgrading project - and associated analytical work -
are envisaged for FY03-06, to provide support along the above lines and make up for the
depleted infrastructure. Together, these operations would help improve access of essential public
services (e.g. water, sanitation, community roads and telephones) to the poorest segments of the
population, put in place cost recovery and tariff structures that are socially and environmentally
responsive, increase private participation and bring in the critically-needed investments in these
sectors, and help enhance efficiency of infrastructure provision and bring down logistics costs in
the economy. The program also envisages taking advantage of opportunities offered by the
Kyoto Protocol through the Prototype Carbon Fund (PCF) or the EFC-Netherlands Carbon
Facility to finance off-grid solutions making use of renewable energy sources.

IFC:

Looking forward, IFC's strategy for Colombia aims 
to help 
in a broad-based
"reactivation" of the country's economic growth by promoting a stepping up of private sector
investment and activity, and more broadly-based growth. This approach places emphasis on
reaching out to a broader base of the Colombian private sector in facilitating growth and a
sharing of its benefits. LFC's interventions will in this way focus on supporting firms that are
engines of growth, and have linkages to wider economic and social activity; on reaching out to
smaller firms through financial and other intermediaries; and on selectively supporting small
projects with large potential impact, particularly on the poor. LFC's strategy is closely aligned to
that of the World Bank and is centered around the following four objectives:

(a) Improving access to finance through development of domestic financial markets (including a
broadening of access to the low-income segment of the market)
(b) Facilitating the investment supply response of the private sector
(c) Strengthening the Natural Resources sector
(d) Help further private participation in the Infrastructure sector

Development of domestic financial markets: 

IFC's approach to strengthening and

broadening access to finance has several pillars, including helping to deepen capital markets,
promoting the strengthening of the banking sector, helping develop the capital markets
the transition of the financial corporations (Corporaciones
framework so as to promote 
Financieras) into investment banks, helping to improve micro and SME financing for the low-
income market, and supporting the government's efforts to reform the pension sector.

To help deepen capital markets and improve the private sector's access to finance IFC
has undertaken a number of transactions in different sub-sectors in recent years. These included
a $50 million investment, approved in FY99, in the development finance corporation Corfinsura,
including a $25 million revolving credit facility, to strengthen the corporation's capital and
liquidity position, allowing it to offer US dollar loans of longer maturities to medium and large-
sized companies, at a time of severe credit shortage. In the same year, IEFC invested in Surenting,
the first Colombian company dedicated to operating leasing (e.g leasing of truck fleets). 
In

21

FY01, lFC approved a $140 million investment to help create Colombia's first secondary
mortgage market company (Box 1), which issued a first successful MBS, and plans to make a
subsequent larger issue. The securitizations have been successful in diversifying the risks of the
mortgage originators by converting illiquid mortgage assets into liquid MBS assets and to
provide funding sources to these banks. Also in FY01, IFC approved a $19 million investment
in the first private equity fund (CCGF) aimed at supporting Colombian middle market
companies.

BOX 1 

Colombia Home Mortgage Corgoration (CHMC)

Between 1993 and 1998, IFC had advised the Colombian government regarding the introduction of
appropriate regulations for the establishment of a mortgage securitization company. The regulations were passed
in 1998, just prior to the recession, and were followed by the new law reforming the mortgage sector and
supporting its financing through MBS and other such instruments, in 1999. Titularizadora Colombiana CHMC,
Colombia's first secondary mortgage company, was established in 2001 as an independent, multi-function
company, with the business objective of acquiring and securitizing high quality residential mortgage loans.

The core sponsors of the project were Grupo Bolivar, Grupo Suramericana and Grupo Social, three of
the largest private groups in Colombia, and in turn majority shareholders of Davivienda, Conavi and Colmena,
respectively, the three largest mortgage originators in the market. Grupo Aval and Grupo Colpatria were also
involved in the project from its inception, as junior sponsors. IFC approved an investment of upto $40 million,
to take a 25% equity stake in the company, in addition to extending a $100 million local currency guaranty
facility, to support the company's funding and securitization programs.

CHMC was designed to have a market-wide impact on the country's capital markets and on the
mortgage finance sector, by making MBS and the Company's own (highly rated) general corporate debt
available for domestic pension funds and life insurance companies. It would help develop the primary mortgage
market via improvements in loan quality and products, and improve the affordability of housing finance by
making longer term financing available, and by enhancing the liquidity of mortgage assets.

Since its establishment, CHMC has already issued a first very successful MBS and has plans for a
subsequent issue of up to $400 million (for which IFC will provide enhancement).

More recently, IFC launched in FY02, a $100 million domestic Colombian peso "El
Dorado" 5-year bond issue - the first AAA-rated local currency bond in Latin America and the
first Colombian peso issue by an international institution. The issue, which was more than twice
oversubscribed and achieved broad distribution with over 40 domestic investors, including all the
large pension funds, will provide a benchmark for future high-grade issuers, increasing investor
confidence in the sector and helping develop the local capital markets. Looking forward, IFC
intends to provide more local currency instruments in the foreseeable future, through partial
credit guarantees and risk hedging intermediation.

22

To promote strengthening of the banking sector, IFC has been in discussion with
FOGAFIN about the possibility of investments, in support of privatization, in one of the
"intervened" banking institutions. To help develop the capital markets framework IFC has -
in
conjunction with the World Bank and CAF -
initiated discussions with the Supersociedades to
provide technical assistance to develop a new bankruptcy framework law to replace the current
law (Law 550 of 1999, which is set to expire in 2004). IFC and World Bank are also working
with the Superintendencia Bancaria and Superintendencia de Valores to help define a modem
regulatory framework for the transformation of the DFCs into investment banks. 
IFC is also
looking at the possibility at helping structure the merger of some of the DFCs, so as to create a
strong investment bank that would be able to focus on corporate restructurings, M&A, securities
trading and structured term financing for corporates. 
IFC has also recently approved a $15-25
million partial credit guarantee to facilitate the first ever subordinated bond issue in the local
capital market, for Davivienda, Colombia's leading mortgage originator.

In supporting the small and micro-enterprise sector, IFC's strategy is to help broaden
access to credit to the low-income segment of the market. Towards this end, IFC has recently
supported Banco Caja Social with a $7 million investment in FY02, aimed at assisting the
expansion of its low-income financing into new geographic areas in the country (see Box 2).
LFC is also supporting programs to foster linkages with SMEs, and to foster development of their
commercial and technical capacities, as illustrated in the Bavaria project (see Box 3). A third
pillar of IFC's strategy in this area is to assist the transition of sustainable NGO micro-finance
institutions into for-profit, regulated entities that would in turn be able to provide an enhanced
degree of support 
to productive micro businesses, contributing 
thereby 
to growth and
employment generation.

BOX 2 

Banco Caja Social (BCS)

Banco Caja Social, owned by Fundacion Social, a non-profit entity in Colombia,
has a ninety-year history of working successfully in the low-income finance sector. Over
three quarters of its portfolio has been in low-income consumer loans and some 20% in
small business loans to entrepreneurs with whom the bank has had a long term savings
and personal credit history. In terms of total assets it is the 10'h largest bank in the
Colombian system. BCS has historically been one of the most profitable banks in the
Colombian system, having developed a hybrid business model of good consumer banking
practices and innovative microfinance underwriting. From 1996, BCS earned ROAs and
ROEs significantly in excess of the system average. However, its ability to expand and
meet the growing demand for financing in the low-income sector was constrained by the
rate of growth of its retained earnings. BCS estimated that it could increase its low
income portfolio by 60-70% if it had additional capital.

To help the institution expand its financing operations and ensure its proper
capitalization, IFC approved a $7 million equity investment in May, 2002. The project
would enable the bank to expand into urban and rural markets that presently have little or
no banking access. In addition, it would allow BCS to develop new electronic banking,
ATM and call center services for its low income clients, thereby lowering the cost of
providing services. The project is expected to have a strong development impact
stemming from an increase in availability of formal credit, and a lowering of the cost of
this credit, to low income borrowers; a widening of BSC's geographic reach; and BCS's
ability to move into markets that have been underserved, following the collapse of many
of Colombia's cooperatives.

23

Investment Supply Response of Private Sector: 
IFC's approach 
to facilitating the
investment supply response of the private sector focuses on helping build up confidence in the
private sector by providing support to companies in manufacturing and other key sectors that
would like to undertake investment programs that would in turn promote employment and
economic growth, but which are constrained by lack of availability of finance. The focus is on
good sponsors, with strong managerial capabilities, whose projects will - by their success -
provide a strong demonstration effect for potential investors. One pillar of this approach is the
financial restructuring and modernization of corporate group structures; another the financing of
their rationalization and expansion plans - both through direct financing by IFC and through its
mobilization of commercial finance. Yet another is the strengthening of their corporate
governance practices.

This support to major companies and business groups is based on the recognition that
sustained recovery and employment generation is unlikely to come about in Colombia unless the
major corporate entities, which are the backbone of the country's private sector, are able to
strengthen their financial standing and improve competitiveness. The need to improve corporate
governance and introduce socially sustainable business practices goes hand in hand with this
objective, partly as a means of improving access to capital 
through a strengthening of
shareholder trust, partly of improving competitive efficiency through better development of
human capital and increased productivity. Economic and social impact on a wider base would
result from the demonstration effect of the adoption of socially responsible business practices by
these firms, and through their business linkages to smaller economic activities.

As part of this approach, in FY00, IFC provided a $10 million loan (in addition to
mobilizing another $60 million) to Cementos Caribe, to assist in the modernization and capacity
upgrading in Tolcemento in Colombia and Andino in Venezuela. This was followed in FY02,
by a $100 million corporate investment package designed by IFC to support various
organizational and financial measures being undertaken by Grupo Suramericana (SIG), as part of
a program to restructure and reduce its debt, improve its corporate governance practices and
rationalize its corporate structure and investment holdings. Most recently, IFC has arranged a
$318 million financing package -
involving the mobilization of $200 million of finance from
participant institutions - for Bavaria S.A., the premier Colombian beverage manufacturer, to
finance part of a major ($700 million) modernization and expansion program that it is
undertaking. The project also involved recommendations for significant improvement in the
company's corporate governance code, 
including 
in Board composition and practices,
transparency and disclosure, shareholder rights and shareholder relations (see Box 3), as well as
improvements to bring the company not only in compliance with World Bank environmental and
social guidelines, but to set even higher standards in many areas. 
In addition, IFC sought
commitment from the company that it would expand its social activities in line with the growth
of its income and operations.

24

BOX 3 

IFC Investment in Bavaria

IFC's investment in Bavaria S.A., for which it arranged a financing package of US$318 million in
FY02, is an example of its efforts to promote an improvement in a wide range of sustainable business
practices that would benefit both the company and the community in which it operates. Improvements were
recommended in the following areas:

Corporate Governance: 
IFC recommended that the Company make important changes in respect of (a) the
composition and practices of its board of directors, and (b) accounting, audit and disclosure practices. These
would result, among other things, in (i) the creation of standing committees of the board, of independent
directors, for oversight in areas of potential conflicts of interest and in accounts and audit; (ii) the adoption in
the Company's Code of Good Practice provisions for the protection of minority shareholders; and (iii)
ensuring that subsidiaries that are not wholly-owned by the Company will incorporate into their own Codes of
Good Practice all the dispositions necessary in order to fulfill the same obligations.

Oreanizational Structure: Based on a review of the Company's new organization structure, IFC made various
recommendations to provide greater transparency and provide an added measure of confidence to external
investors.

Environmental: 
IFC made a number of recommendations to not only bring the Company into compliance
with World Bank environmental guidelines but to adopt higher standards in many areas. The Company is in
any case highly environmentally conscious: for example, it already recovers the carbon dioxide generated in
the brewing process, utilizing it in bottling and bright beer storage, and for sale to local carbonated soft-drinks
producers. It recovers heat from the wort coolers, which it re-uses for brewing and other purposes. It utilizes
waste-water treatment programs, and implements solid waste recycling management (e.g. solid malt residues,
which are dried, packaged and sold as animal feed) in many of its installations. Under the project, it will now
extend these practices more widely, and to all of its installations.

Support to Suppliers: 
(a) Since 1991, the Company has provided support for programs to modernize
barley cultivation and diversify production in traditional barley-growing areas in Colombia. Various programs
have been introduced to help barley growers improve yields, adopt sustainable agricultural practices, diversify
production and improve marketing strategies. (b) The Company is also starting a program with fruit farmers
to increase production yields, improve programming of plantation cycles and achieve the consistencies
necessary to develop export markets. (c) As part of its efforts to promote sustainable business practices, the
Company provided financial support and training, and outsourced logistics, distribution, sales and marketing

functions to retrenched workers in order to dampen the effect of job losses on the affected communities. This

program has so far created direct employment for over 100 persons and indirect employment for nearly 8

times that number.

25

Private participation in Infrastructure: 
In infrastructure, EFC had earlier (FY96)
invested $9.5 million to finance the rehabilitation and expansion of the road from Tulua to La
Paila as a modem 4-lane highway with emergency assistance and security patrols. This was the
first private toll road under the government's highway privatization program. Private investment
in infrastructure has been constrained since mid-1990s, reflecting in part a slowing down in
progress of reforms in this sector, and in part the general withdrawal of strategic investors from
infrastructure in developing countries in recent years.

IFC is now focusing its attention on the privatization/deregulation of the telecom sector,
where 
it has been following up closely the PCS process during the last year. 
IFC's
understanding of structures that work, and of those which are less sustainable, can help achieve
privatization objectives. The WBG is looking forward to supporting the liberalization process of
Colombia's 
telecom sector by providing a comprehensive service, 
ranging from 
the
policy/regulatory advice provided by the World Bank to financing the winners of PCS licenses
by IFC. The Corporation is also looking at the possibility of making an investment to finance the
network expansion and restructuring of liabilities of one of a specific telecom group. IFC is also
looking for opportunities to support private participation in other sub-sectors, for instance water,
where it is exploring the use of suitable financing instruments, such as local currency/partial risk
guarantees. A project to enhance a bond issue through a $20 million partial credit guarantee, for
financing the capital expenditures and restructuring of a company in this sector is currently at an
advanced stage. Similarly, in the power sub-sector, a project to finance the capital expenditure
and restructuring plan for two Colombian distribution companies, that will help bring about a
reduction in technical and non-technical losses (which had been as high as 36% in 2000), is
currently under consideration. However, opportunities may be limited by the uneven pace of
sectoral reform, and the absence of interest in emerging markets on the part of strategic foreign
investors in these sectors.

Strengthening the Natural Resources Sector: 
The natural 
resources 
sector 
in
Colombia has considerable untapped potential. While it has previously enjoyed access to
external financing, current market conditions have increased the need for official support. In the
oil and gas sector, IFC has recently approved a $30 million loan to fund the development of three
Colombian heavy oil fields (Jazmin, Moriche and Under River) located in the Middle Magdalena
Valley, as well as the expansion of Ominex's 190 km Colombian pipeline. IFC is also looking to
support improvements in efficiency in mining, through one or two possible operations involving
the enhancement of transportation facilities (port and rail) of one of the companies. 
In these
sectors in particular, IFC's expertise in environmental and social issues will be a key ingredient
in ensuring sustainable development of resources (witness the widely-publicized exit of a large
investor on these grounds).

Supporting Education: 
Poor economic conditions have 
led 
to a decline 
in
enrolment rates in private institutions in both secondary and tertiary sectors, revealing an acute
need for student financing. In the tertiary sector, attempts to find more creative ways to provide
private student financing have emerged, although 
these schemes, 
financed directly by
universities, are limited in scale and offer primarily short-term payment plans. IFC is examining

26

ways to expand student loan programs, working in conjunction with local banks. Looking ahead,
as economic conditions improve, IFC will also consider providing financing to private
universities, many of whose plans for expansion are currently on hold.

MIGA

MIGA continues to see considerable interest for its guarantee instrument - both for
investments into Colombia, and from Colombian investors seeking to expand their operations in
neighboring countries, especially in the Caribbean region. For example, MIGA signed a
memorandum of understanding with Pro-Barranquilla, an investment promotion agency funded
by the local corporate sector, which has been able to leverage MIGA' s guarantees as a risk
mitigation tool for investments coming into Colombia. MIGA is also working to improve
Colombia's ability to attract FDI by assisting the national investment promotion agency,
Coinvertir, and training officials from the Free Zones association and chamber of commerce.
Nonetheless, demand for MIGA's political risk guarantees will depend heavily on investor
reactions both to the on-going civil strife in the country and to broader questions surrounding
investments into emerging markets, particularly in Latin America.

27

CAS Annex DI
Synthesis of Public Debt Policy Note

Summary

Over the last seven years the level of total gross public debt in Colombia has been rising steadily in
absolute terms and as a proportion of GDP. In addition, public debt service has risen significantly.
Both the level of the debt and the debt service are worrisome, and to avoid a debt crisis the
government must further strengthen its primary fiscal balance-from a primary surplus of about 1.4
percent of GDP in 2001 to a permanent primary surplus of at least 4 percent of GDP in the medium
term. To achieve this, the governnment will have to implement policies to strengthen the fiscal
"fundamentals," by cutting public sector expenditures and increasing public sector revenues.
Moreover, the government must complement the fiscal adjustment with improvements in public
sector debt management, by strengthening debt management capacity and debt portfolio
management.

I. Background

The total gross stock of Colombia's public debt,' both internal and external, increased from about 27
percent of GDP in 1994 to about 58 percent of GDP in 2001.2 This resulted primarily from rising
fiscal imbalances at different levels of government throughout the decade (see Figure 1). The steady
growth in fiscal imbalances first became visible in the central govemnment accounts, but this was
initially masked by surpluses in other parts of the public sector.

The central government accounts started the decade of the 1990s with a small surplus. However,
since 1992 the central government has posted a series of increasing deficits, which peaked in 1999
with a deficit of 7.4 percent of GDP. Total expenditures increased from about 15 percent of GDP
in 1992 to nearly 20 percent of GDP in 1999. By contrast, total revenues fell from about 15 percent
of GDP in 1992 to 12 percent in 1999. Behind the deterioration in the central government accounts
are some of the institutional changes brought about by the 1991 Constitutional reform, and the
resulting impacts of the economic policies implemented throughout the decade.

1. There are several types of public sector habilities other than "debt." The following terminology is adopted
throughout this paper (a) direct-explict liabilities are liabllities established by law or contract and include "full faith
and credit" debt, expenditures prescnbed by budget law, and claims for services rendered (the timing and amount of
these liablitles may nevertheless be affected by contingencies); (b) direct-implhcit liabilities are liabilities on which it
is presumed, with good probability, that the government will make good, but without a legal obligation to do so; (c)
contingent-explcit liabilities are recognized in legally binding documents, but the extent and timing of payment
hinges on uncertain future occurrences; and, (d) contingent-implicit liabilities refer to an expectation that
government will accept a liability without having a legal obligation to do so. For more details on the classification of
public sector liabilities, see Budgetin,gfor Fiscal Risks, by Allen Schick, World Bank, September 1999.
In net terms, the total stock of public debt represented about 46 percent of GDP in 2001. Net debt is total gross
debt minus the stock of Treasury bonds (MES) held by all public sector entities. The evolution of debt aggregates in
the last decade is discussed with reference to gross aggregates because estimates of net debt in Colombia are
available only from 1999 onward.

2. 

4.0-

A. 2-0 

to -2.0

-4.0-

-6.0-

-8.0

Figure 1. Public Sector Balances

1

_. 

xs 

mI 

Wt 

-

0 

f 

o 

_

_ 

a, 

(,~ 

a, 0 

~ 

0% 

ON 

'0 

o, 

t- 

00 

0% %0 

O_N CD

M NFPS * Central Govemrnnt
Source: IMF and WB Staff estunates

The 1991 reforms transfetred to subnational levels of government considerable discretionary
spending powers, but not the responsibility to fund this spending. As a result, the central
government financed through fiscal transfers subnational expenditures over which it had littde
control. In addition, the central government had often negotiated large increases in the salaries and
benefits of employees of subnational governments (for example, 
teachers and health sector
personnel) which subsequently had to be funded through additional fiscal transfers. Moreover,
recognition of central government implicit and contingent liabilities arising, for example, from the
public pension funds (the Cajas PNbIicas) and the financial sector (as evidenced in the 1999
restructuring of the financial sector) put upward pressure on expenditures.

Other reforms (although correct for increasing efficiency in resource allocation) negatively affected
fiscal revenues (for example, trade liberalization led to a fall in tatiff revenues). More important,
several reform packages aimed at strengthening tax revenues were only partially successful. The
economic slowdown compounded fiscal weaknesses because tax revenues fell in tandem with
sluggish economic activity. This led to increased reliance on nonrecurrent revenue-generating
measures, such as privatization, and more significantly on increased public sector debt to finance the
central government deficit.

By the mid-1990s it became evident that the public sector accounts were rapidly deteriorating. The
public sector deficit rose steadily-basically tripling from just over 2 percent of GDP in 1995 to 6.4
percent in 1999. Large central government deficits, growing deficits at the subnational level,
dwindling social security surpluses, and volatile oil revenues all contributed to the deterioration in the
public sector balance. This is evidenced by the continued erosion of primary balances in the second
part of the decade, when the public sector primary balance went from a very small deficit in 1996 to
a deficit of 2.7 percent of GDP in 1 999.3

The increased debt service augmented the vulnerability of public sector finances. 4 Total public debt
interest service increased from about 2.2 percent of GDP in 1994 to about 4.5 percent of GDP in

3. Total public sector revenues have remained at around 27 percent of GDP since the mid-1990s, while total
expenditures increased from just under 30 percent of GDP in the mid-1990s to about 33 percent of GDP by 1999.
Throughout this period, the Central Bank posted a smaU average surplus equivalent to 0.28 percent of GDP.
4. The real average rate of interest paid on domestic government debt has been high and volatile. It has averaged 7.3
percent since 1997 (for one-year TES securities), peaking at around 20 percent m 1998 and falling as low as 2.2
percent more recendy. It folows that the steady increase in the government's interest burden cannot be explained
by high real interest rates alone, although this factor cannot be neglected as an important cost source.

2

2000. 
Total 
interest service on 
internal debt 
increased more 
than 
proportionately-almost 
threefold-from 1 percent of GDP in 1994 to about 
2.9 percent of GDP in 2000 (see Figure 2). In 2001, 
total interest service remained roughly stable at 4.5 
percent of GDP, with a fall in domestic interest 
paymnents to an estimated 2.3 percent of GDP being 
offset by an increase in external interest payments. 

5.0

40-

| 

t 301
&

2.0

&.

Figure 2. Interest Payments
of the Public Sector

.

a, 

,, 

CD

.

o 

1fi 

: 

l ยฐ
0 

E Internal

* External 

Source:IMFandWBStaffestmutes.

In this context, both the level and structure of public 
sector debt changed. 
In the early 1990s, 
the 
government reduced its total debt from about 40 
percent of GDP in 1991 to about 30 percent of
GDP in 1994-mostly through debt retirement and 
buy-back operations, financed in part by high oil 
revenues. External debt fell sharply from about 32
percent of GDP in 1991 to about 14 percent of GDP in 1996. However, as the public sector
accounts began to deteriorate in the mid-1990s (particularly central government accounts), debt
levels 
increased. 
Throughout 
this period, central government debt 
increased more than
proportionately, thus taking an increasing share of public debt of the total gross public debt
outstanding in 2001, about 40 percent of GDP was central government debt (up from about 16
percent of GDP in 1991). A sizeable portion of the change in the level of total debt occurred
through an increase in external debt, which reached about 26 percent of GDP in 2000, bringing the
share of external debt in total debt dose to the levels of the early 1990s. Most of the increase in the
external debt after 1996 has been driven by central government borrowing-other levels of
government have faced statutory and procedural restrictions on external borrowing. 5 However, both
the central government and subnational entities have continued to issue domestic debt to finance
their increasing expenditure program throughout this period. As a result, domestic gross public
sector debt rose steadily, from about 14 percent of GDP in 1994 to about 27 percent of GDP by

Figure 3. Gross External ad 

Domestic Debt of the Public Sector 

Figure 4. Gross Public Debt by Debtor
70

70 

60 
C 50 

0 

0- 

X 60

0 /- D L- 
50
40

-< 

4 0 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~2

Q

030

V 

*7temal 
D3 Intemal 
Sources: IMF, MoF, Contraloria and WB Staff estinates 

ECentral Gvemnent 
OOther Public Sector
Sources: IMF, MoF, Contralona and WB Staff estirates

U Sub-National Govemrnmnt

5. These restrctions are discussed in The Legal Framework and Govemance subsection of this Policy Note.

3

2000 (see Figures 3 and 4).

This period is also characterized by a drastic change in the sources of finance (see Figures 5 and 6).
At the beginning of the 1990s most new financing was coming from nonmarket sources (for
example, bilateral and multilateral agencies, and the Central Bank). However, during the 1990s, as a
result of a transformation of the overall public sector institutional framework the government relied
more on the financial market (both internally and
externally) as the main source of funding-half of
domestic debt and two thirds of external debt are 
now market based. 

Figure 5ovestiebt 
of the
~~~~~~Central Government by Creditor

now market based.

More 
specifically, 
the 
implementation of 
theth6
Constitutional reforms of the early 1990s led to 
elimination of Central Bank financing of the fiscal 
deficit. As a result, the central government had to 
tap the domestic market on a more competitive 
basis to finance its expenditure program. 6
The 
domestic debt of the central government continued 

to rise through a large expansion in issuance of 

Treasury bonds 

(TES). 

This increase resulted

mainly from (a) the need to finance growing defcits, 

and (b) an attempt to limit the exposure to currency
risk and to make only limited use of additional
external financing.' Tapping the domestic market 
was also expected to foster development of the 
domestic capital market through lengthening of the 
yield curve and deepening the market.8

The sources of external financing also changed 
considerably throughout the decade (see Figure 6). 
Whereas in 1990 official debt amounted to 66
percent of the total stock of public external debt, 
this had fallen to only 39 percent by 1999. The

share of commercial bank debt fell relative to the 

total stock of public external debt, from 32 percent 

in 1990 to 23 percent in 1999. 

In contrast, 

sovereign bonds gained considerable ground over 
this period, increasing from about 2 percent in 1990

-

12 -

1_

6

4

I 

* 

* 

2

* 

* 

* 

*

a CentrnBnnk * Bonds* Other

Figure 6. External Debt of the Cental

Goverment by Type of Creditor

25

20

115

l0

5

m 

! 

a, 

a, > 

O 

a, 

CD

* Mukilateral 

* Other Official

M Conmercial Bank 

* Bonds

6. 

In 1990, debt to the Central Bank amounted to 50 percent of the total internal debt of the public sector-falling to
less than 1 percent by the end of the decade. The Central Bank has nevertheless continued to contribute to
financing the government through transfers of its balance sheet surpluses (for example, in 2001, these transfers
represented about 0.7 percent of GDP).
In the mid-1990s, the authorities expected large foreign currency inflows resulting from exploitatLon of the recently
discovered oil fields (Cusiana). This expectation also created incentives for increasing reliance on the local capital
markets.
8. The share of TES bonds of longer maturity-five years or longer-increased from 12 percent in 1995 to 37 percent
of the outstanding stock of TES bonds in 2000.

7. 

4

to over 50 percent of the total external debt of the public sector by 2001. This resulted mainly from
Colombia's good access to international financial markets and its borrowing strategy.

In contrast to the case of central government debt, the stock of subnational government debt has
remained relatively stable since 1991-fluctuating between 7.4 and 9.2 percent of GDP. The
borrowing requirement of subnational public entities has been somewhat limited, in part because
financing gaps have often been met through direct fiscal transfers from the central government (as
has already been mentioned). In fact, the external debt of subnational entities has been continuously
falling, mainly as a result of the restrictions on external borrowing by subnational entities; that is,
they require Congressional approval to issue external
debt. However, this has been fully compensated by 
an increase in domestic debt. In 1991, the domestic 
debt of subnational levels of governmnent amounted 
to about 3 percent of GDP, rising to about 5
percent of GDP by 1995, and to about 6 percent by 
1999 (see Figure 7). Domestic commercial bank 
lending to subnational governments has been the 
main source of the 
increase, either directly or 
through rediscounting of Financiera de Entidades 
Territoriales (FINDETER) loans. This has partly
resulted from 
(a) the explicit or implicit credit 
guarantees from the central government, and (b)
in the implementation of the LIy de
loopholes 

Figure 7. Debt Structure of

Sub-National Entities

e 4
v 2

10

& 8

6

,l

0

Semadforos, 

government 

aimed 

at 

borrowing, 

regulating 

creating 

subnational 

"perverse"

Source. Contralona and WB Staff

incentives for both subnational governments and banks to expand credit rapidly.

Recent fiscal adjustment efforts have made good progress in restoring a fiscally sustainable path. In
2000, the public sector deficit was almost halved, to -3.5 percent of GDP; moreover, the primary
fiscal balance showed a surplus (although small) of around 0.9 percent of GDP-for the first time in
several years. However, there are still large and growing implicit and contingent public sector
liabilities (arising mainly from the pension system in the Social Security system, the financial sector,
and subnational levels of government), which are not yet fully reflected in the fiscal accounts,
threatening Colombia's fiscal stability in the future.9

II. Issues and Diagnosis

A) The Primagy Balance and Debt Sustainabili'y

The current level and structure of Colombia's public sector liabilities are risky and vulnerable.
Should current trends continue in the absence of comprehensive policy reforms, particularly in Social
Security, public sector debt is likely to become unsustainable. To analyze the sustainability of public
sector debt, we calculate the primary fiscal balance necessary to keep public sector debt on a

9. The nature and size of this type of liability is discussed at greater length in other Policy Notes.

5

sustainable path'0 using a model that includes (a) the present value of all net public sector liabilities
(including implicit and contingent liabilities from Social Security); and (b) key economic parameters
and projections in a base case scenario."

According to the analysis, to avert an explosion of the debt-to-GDP ratio, the public sector has to
generate a permanent primary surplus of about 4 percent of GDP.12 This adjustment can only be
done through a combination of measures to simultaneously (a) cut public sector expenditures, and
(b) increase public sector revenues. 
(For details on the specific policy actions and measures to
achieve both (a) and (b), see Policy Notes on the Macroeconomic Framework and the Tax System)
Such level of fiscal adjustment is a necessary condition for ensuring fiscal sustainability and avoiding
the outcome of other countries (for example, Argentina) 
that have delayed strengthening the
"fundamentals," particularly the fiscal accounts, through financial engineering.

Table 1. Key Assumptions and Projections*

Real GDP Growth (p.a.) 
Inflation (p.a.) 
Nominal Exchange Rate Depreciation 
Real Interest Rate 

Total Public Sector Debt (% of GDP) 
Domestic 
External 

Base case scenario.

2002 
2.0% 

6.0% 

8.0% 
4.6% 

48.2% 
20.8% 
27.4% 

2003 
2.5% 

5.0% 

7.0% 
5.5% 

51.2% 
22.3% 
28.9% 

2004 
3.0% 

4.0% 

6.0% 
6.2% 

2005 
3.5% 

4.0% 

4.0% 
5.8% 

2006 
3.5% 

4.0% 

3.0% 
5.7% 

53.9% 
23.7% 
30.3% 

56.6% 
25.0% 
31.6% 

57.6% 
25.5% 
32.1% 

2010
3.5%

4.0%

2.0%
5.2%

56.7%
25.1%
31.7%

Moreover, by comparison, for the last six years the average primary balance-to-GDP ratio
was -0.37 percent (that is, a deficit). During this period, the debt-to-GDP ratio grew very rapidly
(the average expansion rate of the debt-to-GDP ratio was about 6 percent per year), thus suggesting
that the current path of the debt-to-GDP ratio in the absence of adjustment is not sustainable. 
It
follows that in the absence of comprehensive reforms, keeping debt on a stable path requires a
sustained fiscal adjustment in the primary balance of at least 2.6 percent of GDP (to bring the
primary surplus to 4 percent of GDP, from about 1.4 percent in 2001). 
If the primary surplus were
kept permanently at 4 percent of GDP, it is estimated that total net debt of the public sector would
nevertheless continue increasing, reaching about 57 percent of GDP by 2010 (see Table 1).

10. This is the level of the primary balance expressed as a ratio to GDP that if generated "permanently" by the
government, would keep the debt-to-GDP ratio sustainable. However, the debt-to-GDP ratio does not necessarily
"stabilize" or reach a "constant" value during the projection penod, because the steady state debt-to-GDP ratio is
achieved only in the long term.
11. In the base case scenario, it is assumed that some fiscal policy reformns are implemented, but more comprehensive
reforns (for example, reforms to the pension system in the Social Security System) are only partly umplemented.
12. Primary balances are defined here with respect to the consolidated public sector, including Social Security and
subnational govemment entities. For consistency with other chapters, we consider that seignorage revenues accrue
to the government "above the line" (through the reported Central Bank balance).

6

2.00 

1 75 

} i12/ i 

30 -

1250 

60

30

Figuze 8. Debt-GDP Ratio 
Primary Balance Constant at 2001 Level 

Figure 9. Debt-GDP Ratio

Primy Balance Set to Keep Debt-GDP Riato Constant

Ck. 

- 90 
8~~ ~~ 
0.60-

| & X75 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~70 

70 -

~~~~~0 

0 5.0 --5 

_ _ _ _ __6_ 

_ _

_ 

_ 

_ 
_ 

_ 
_ 

_ 
_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

_ 

6 

_~~~~~~~4 

30 

40 #

204
130 

10 

II 

R30Sยข 

fi 

fi 

ff 

I oD i 

I00I 

X i 

AIAI 

i 

ยฐ 

i 

i 

i 

I A 

!_ A 

R 

3 

-Primary Balance 
-Debt/GDP 
Ratio 
Source: World Bank estanates GDP growth at 3.5 percct p.a. 

-Primary Balance 
-
Debt/GDP Ratio (2001)
Source. World Bank estimates. GDP growth at 3 5 percent p a.

The vulnerability embedded in public finances in the absence of comprehensive reforms can also be
shown by projecting the path of the total net debt of the public sector under the assumption that the
primary balance-to-GDP ratio is kept constant at the 2001 surplus level (just over 1.4 percent of
GDP).1 3 As can be seen in Figure 8, total net debt would rise from about 46 percent of GDP in
2001, to about 80 percent of GDP in 2010 (assuming real GDP growth of 3.5 percent per year). In
this scenario, the debt-to-GDP ratio would be rising at an average annual rate of about 8 percent per
year, implying an acceleration in the rate of increase of the debt-to-GDP ratio from the 1994-2000
level (when the debt-to-GDP ratio increased at an average annual rate of about 6 percent).

Figure 9 shows the path of the primary balance required to stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio at the
2001 level (about 46 percent of GDP). As can be seen, the primary surplus would have to be
maintained in the range of 4 to 6 percent of GDP in the next decade to keep the debt-to-GDP ratio
constant (higher than the 4 percent of GDP required to keep debt on a moderately rising but still
sustainable path).

Table 2 shows the sensitivity of these calculations to changes in the rate of GDP growth; for
example, if GDP growth is 2.5 percent per year in the long term (instead of 3.5 percent), the
permanent primary surplus that keeps the debt-to-GDP ratio along a sustainable path is 6.2 percent
of GDP (instead of 4 percent, as before). The sensitivity of these calculations to the recognition
(explicitly) of liability payments arising from Social Security (mainly pensions) in a scenario of limited
structural reforms is also shown in Table 2. For example, if GDP is assumed to grow at a rate of 3.5
percent per year and Social Security "payments" (of the implicit liabilities) are excduded from our
calculations, a permanent primary surplus of 0.8 percent of GDP would be sufficient to keep the
debt-to-GDP ratio on a sustainable path. This should be contrasted with the 4 percent primary
balance-to-GDP ratio required once Social Security (implicit liabilities) are included explicitly as flow-
payments in these calculations.1 4

13. If the 2001 primary balance was adjusted to filter out cyclical or noise components, the resulting "structural" primary
balance would in fact be lower, since unusually high oil revenues improved the fiscal accounts that year. With the
primary sutplus kept constant at the lower, adjusted level, the debt-to-GDP ratio would increase even faster.
Similarly, the size of the fiscal adjustment required for debt sustainability would be greater than 2.6 percent of GDP.
14. Should comprehensive Social Security and other reforms take place, the present value of contingent and implicit
government liabilities could fall sharply, implying that the permanent primary surplus required to keep the debt-to-
GDP ratio on a sustainable path would be smaller than 4 percent of GDP.

7

The impact on debt ratios of slower long-term 
GDP growth can also be 
illustrated with 
reference to a slow-growth scenario (see Figure 
10). 
If it is assumed that the primary balance
quickly converges to 4 percent of GDP during 

the projection period, but that GDP growth is 
slower than in the base case (1.5 percent annually, 

instead of 3.5 percent), ceteris paribus projected 

total debt would rise to almost 70 percent of 

GDP in 2010 and keep rising thereafter-instead
of stabilizing at about 57 percent as in the base 

case. Furthermore, since the permanent primat 

surplus that generates a nonexplosive debt path 

g 

10. DebtGDP Ratio

Prtnu BaConstant at 4% ofGDP

70 

Slow Crowth Scenaro 

S 

60 

.O 50 

r. , 

e 

. @ 40-
t 

30 

_ 

__ 

_ 

___

PnmyasyBalance 
Source World Bank estimates GDP growth at 15 percent p a.

-DeGDPRatio

70

60

-

50__ 

40 

a.0

with long-term growth of 1.5 percent annually is
8 percent of GDP (when pension liabilities are included in the calculations) it is clear that in the
slow-growth scenario, a primary surplus of 4 percent of GDP, is not consistent with a stable debt
path.

Table 2. Permanent Primary Surplus: Sensitivity Analysis*

GDP Growth Rate 
Including Social Security 
Excluding Social Security** 

1.5% 
8.0% 
1.7% 

2.5% 
6.2% 
1.2% 

3.5% 
4.0% 
0.8% 

4.5%
1.3%
02%

'Permanent primary surplus as a percentage of GDP required to ensure a non-explosvie debt path
**Hypothetical scenario that excludes the future fiscal impact of inphcit pension liablities

Table 3. Permanent Primary Surplus: Sensitivity Analysis*

Real Interest Rate 
Including Social Security 
Excluding Social Security** 

4.5% 
17% 
0 3% 

5.0% 
3.4% 
0.6% 

5.2% 
40% 
0 8% 

5.5%
5 1%
1.0%

*Permanent primary surplus as a percentage of GDP required to ensure a non-explosvse debt path

-Hypothetical scenario that exctudes the future fiscal impact of implicit pension habitites

The average real interest rate has also impacted the fiscal accounts in the past, contributing to the
Dverall fiscal deficit. For example, during 1995-96 and 1998-99, from the strictly financing needs of
the public accounts, about half of the increase in the overall financing needs of the public sector was
due to increased domestic interest payments. Put differently, about half of the increase in total debt
in those years could be attributed to financing current interest payments on domestic debt. During
1995-2001 (a period of rapid expansion of public debt stocks) the real interest rate on domestic
public debt averaged about 8.5 percent. By contrast, with fiscal adjustments, the average real interest
tate on domestic debt could fall to a range of 5 to 6 percent.

We also estimated the sensitivity of permanent primary surplus to changes in average real interest
t,ates, ceteris paribus (Table 3). For example, if Social Security payments (of implicit liabilities) were
included in the analysis and real interest rates amounted to about 5.5 percent over the long term

8

(instead of 5.2 percent as in the base case), the permanent primary surplus required to restore fiscal
sustainability would be 5.1 percent of GDP (instead of 4 percent of GDP as in the base case)."5

In sum, the analysis shows that Colombia needs to further strengthen its fiscal accounts in order to
increase the primary fiscal balance and ensure fiscal sustainability in the medium and long term. This
can only be achieved through policy actions that will cut public expenditures and increase public
revenues. This is necessary because, even under a relatively benign macroeconomic scenario but in
the absence of comprehensive reforms, an adjustment of at least 2.6 percent of GDP in the primary
surplus from the 2001 level is required to restore fiscal sustainability. 
If this adjustment in the
primary balance were carried out, the debt-to-GDP ratio would nevertheless continue rising,
reaching about 57 percent of GDP by 2010, but this ratio would likely be in a nonexplosive path.

B) Vulnerabili (cid:143)y and Management Risks in the Debt Structure

To complement the fiscal adjustment, Colombia needs to strengthen its debt management capacity
to increase its efficiency and effectiveness for managing a vulnerable and complex debt portfolio.
Indeed, Colombia's debt portfolio is highly vulnerable to unexpected changes in both real interest
and exchange rates.1 6 The high vulnerability to real interest rates is caused by the relatively large
share of debt with short maturities and high refinancing risks. 
In addition, growth in foreign-
currency- and exchange rate-linked debt, has led to an increase in vulnerability to exchange rates.
Such exposures could create short-term liquidity problems for the government at times of strong
unanticipated adverse movements in real interest or exchange rates.

The rapid growth of debt stocks to finance growing expenditures in the past led also to a
deterioration in the structure of the portfolio. Management of the debt portfolio has been
constrained because (a) domestic markets are shallow and incomplete; (b) access to international
markets has been limited, particularly in the last few years"7 ; and (c) weak debt management capacity.
Underdeveloped and incomplete domestic markets led to a reliance on relatively expensive financing
sources and shorter maturity instruments.'8 Moreover, the maturity of new external government
bonds has been shortened to between three and five years.'9

Given the limited development of domestic markets and the absence of hedging instruments, the
government is exposed to liquidity and refinancing risks. Although the value of domestic bonds
redeemed every year has not increased significantly relative to the size of the portfolio, the shares of
floating and indexed domestic debt instruments grew from 13 percent by the end of 1996 to 48
percent by the end of 2001, thus significantly increasing the interest and exchange rate exposures.
Given the high volatility of domestic real interest rates, managing this exposure is a key challenge to

15. It is worth noting that the analysis is "partial equilibrium" in essence, and explores the impact on the permanent
primary surplus required to keep debt on a sustainable path, of changes in individual economic variables-that is, all
else remaaming the same.
16. Due to lack of comprehensive information on public debt other than central govemment debt, this discussion is
centered on the latter. Unless otherwise stated, all references in this subsection are to gross central govemment
debt, and the discussion excludes other government liabilities.
17. Colombia lost investment grade rating in 1999.
18. Real interest rates on domestic debt have averaged about 8.5 percent since 1995, compared with about 5 percent Cin
real terms) on extemal debt.
19. Constramts on access to intemational markets were eased in 2001 owing to a structured operation that used a World
Bank guarantee and that allowed the government to again tap the 10-year segment of the market.

9

be addressed. High domestic real interest rate volatility has translated into highly variable real
coupon payments on public domestic debt-the average coupon (expressed in real terms) increased
from close to 5 percent in 1998 to nearly 12 percent in 1999, falling steadily to levels dose to 8
percent by 2001. The increase in real interest rates on domestic debt experienced during 1998-99
played an important role in the growth of public debt stocks in those years, as new debt was
contracted partly to finance the rise in the cost of servicing public debt.
In the mid-1990s, when the government started issuing bonds in domestic markets, the strategy for
mitigating the refinancing risk built up in the domestic portfolio was to issue longer-term external
debt (10 years or more), increasing therefore, the average maturity and smoothing the external debt
profile. However, this strategy could not be sustained for long in the context of large and growing
fiscal imbalances, and the deterioration in access to international capital markets. As a result, the
external portfolio also has a concentration of refinancing risk (although relatively less than in the case
of the domestic portfolio). More specifically, in the external market, debt redemptions are dustering
between 2003 and 2005, whereas in the domestic market, debt redemptions are clustered in 2002 and
2003. In 2001, for the first time the government carried out a debt exchange operation in domestic
markets, aimed at smoothing out the near-term redemptions schedule. Additional operations of this
nature have been implemented in recent months with relative success, however close to 47 percent
of domestic debt still matures in the next four years, thus suggesting that important refinancing risks
still remain in the portfolio.

Exposure of the portfolio to foreign exchange volatility could, in the future, become a serious
problem. First, with the abandonment of formal exchange rate targets and recent adoption of an
inflation target by the Central Bank, the volatility of the exchange rate could be increased. Second,
given the structure of the debt portfolio, the overall impact of the exchange rate on debt service
could have a greater impact than interest rate effects because the former affects about half of the
"principal" of the portfolio in addition to the interest rate component. Third, the management of
foreign currency risk is more difficult because there are no derivatives markets for the government to
hedge its currency exposure.in The government has partially managed this risk through matching, to
the extent possible, assets and liabilities in terms of currency structure. Nevertheless, the accelerated
increase in the foreign stock of debt has outpaced growth in international reserves and exports,
increasing foreign exchange exposure. 
In addition, there is an increasing proportion of domestic
debt indexed to the exchange rate. Thus, the government's debt management strategy in the future
will have to focus on managing the exposure of the total debt portfolio denominated in foreign
currency or linked to the exchange rate.

Effective debt management has also been limited by weak institutional capacity and lack of an
appropriate governance framework.2 ' Moreover, the lack of well-defined formal benchmarks used in
day-to-day operations for the overall debt portfoliora has also constrained efficiency in debt portfolio
management.

20. This is to be expected. Smce the government can choose to set or influence the value of domestic currency through
various policy instruments, issues of moral hazard immediately arise. In the absence of comprehensive monitoring

and supervision mechanisms available to potential counterparts, the availability of hedging instruments is generally
very limited.
21. Issues relating to the institutional framework and the need for thorough nsk management analysis will be discussed
in subsequent sections.
22. No formal domestic benchmark has been produced. A benchmark for the external portfolio has been produced but
it has never been implemented.

10

i. Colombian Internal Debt

The largest share of internal central government debt consists of Treasury bonds (ThS).' At the
end of 2000, TES issuance accounted for 86 percent of total internal debt. There are four types of
TES issuance: fixed-rate bonds, CPI- and UVR-indexed bonds, and USD-indexed bonds. CPI- and
UVR-indexed bonds also differ in that the latter type capitalizes the interest payments while the
former type does not. The various types of bonds are also available in different combinations of
maturities (see Table 4).

Table 4. Types of Domestic Treasury

Type of Rate 
Fixed rate 
CPI-floating rate 
(no capitalization of interest)
Fixed rate 
(capitalization of interest)
Fixed rate 

*Real Value Units

**US dollar

Denomination 
COP 
COP 

UVR*-indexed 

USD**-indexed 

Maturity (years)
1, 2,3 and 5
5, 7 and 10

5 and 7

2 and 3

Figure 11 shows the outstanding value of these four types of instruments since 1996. The shares of
floating and indexed debt instruments grew from 11 percent at the end of 1996 to 42 percent of the
outstanding stock of TES by the end of 2001. UVR-indexed bonds remain a very small part of the
domestic debt portfolio, since most of the increase in the stock of bonds since 1996 took place in
CPI-indexed and USD-indexed bonds. Together with this change in structure of the domestic debt
portfolio, exposures to the exchange rate and inflation have increased considerably.

Figure 11. Domestic Central 
Government Debt by Type of Coupon 

TES Bonds

14-8 ,4.0 

1 2 -

3 

| 

| 

E 

Figure 12. Half Life and Duration of
Domestic Central Government Debt

_. 

_ 

'3.5

5.o
4 

lo 

-

-

10.~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~.

6 

*FaxedRnatCOP IDCPIPloatmgRale DUSDFzxedRate DuvrRFxdte 

Source MoF, DGCP 

2.0~~~~~~~~~~. 
-0 

0.5

0.0 

1.0 

_ 

.

-

'0 

'0 

_ 

.

.

-

' 

v 
o 
l
-Half 
Life--- Duration - - - Modified Duration
Source: MoF, DGCP

-

_- 
% 

23. Due to lack of consistent information on public debt other than central government debt, this discussion is centered
on the latter. Unless otherwise stated, all references are to gross central government debt. This discussion excludes

government liabilitLes other than debt (for example, contingent or implicit liablities arising from Social Security or
subnational levels of government), since no comprehensive inventory of all government liabilities exists.

11

The duration and modified duration of the domestic portfolio have been rising steadily since 1998,
but are still low (remaining at around 2). This is the result of high interest rates, which quickly return
to investors (in the form of coupon payments) substantial amounts of their investment. 2 4 The half-
life of the portfolio increased sharply in 1998 to about 4.5, then fell in 1999 and 2000 to 3.5, and
again recovered to 4.5 by late 2001 (see Figure 12).

Figure 13 shows the evolution of the domestic debt maturity structure since 1997. At the end of
1997, almost 90 percent of domestic debt would mature within four years. By contrast, at the end of
2001, about 47 percent of total domestic debt is expected to mature over the next four years. This
suggests that with a "flattening" of the maturity structure, refinancing risks have improved since
1997. However, there is still an imnmediate and significant refinancing risk, because 30 percent of the
domestic debt portfolio will mature within a year.'

Figure 13. Maturity of Domestic Central Government Debt

50

~45

40

35

130

~25

2 

3 

l 

11 

31

Maturity (Years)

01997 

1999 

200

Source: MoF, DGCP

i. Colombian External Debt

The evolution of the currency composition of external debt is shown in Figures 14 and 15. At the
end of 2001, USD, EUR, and JPY debt account for 77 percent, 17 percent, and 5 percent of total
external debt, respectively. The current benchmark portfolio is USD (83 percent), EUR (13 percent),

24. Duration can also be thought of as a measure of the time that an investor keeps his money invested. For zero
coupon bonds, maturity is a straightforward measure, since investor's money is tied to maturity. By contrast, with
coupon bonds, maturity is an imperfect measure of investment time since part of the value of the investment is
returned in the form of coupon payments before the bond matures.
25. Formally, to conduct a more comprehensive assessment of refinancing risk we would need to identify the main
holders of maturing domestic government debt and estimate their propensity to agree to offer refinancing.
However, it remains true that refinancing risk is higher than it would be (keeping the identity of bondholders
constant) if the debt profile were "flatter."

12

and JPY (4 percent). The increase in the share of EUR-denominated debt and decline of USD debt
during 2001 has meant a further departure from the existing benchmark currency composition.

Figure 14. Currency Structure of 
External Public Debt 

Figure 15. Currency Structure of
External Public Debt

90 -
80 -7
70- 
60 -

n50

30

10

25,000

20,000

.12 15,000

U~10,000

JPY 

01999 

12000 

EUR 
032001 

USD 
Cnernchmnark 

โฆ 

-

m e 

m 

O 

0o o 

โฆ 

DMUSD 

El EUR 

ElJPY 

aOter

Source MoF, DGCP 

Source: MoF, DGCP

External debt has a larger share of fixed-rate debt than in the case of domestic debt (compare
Figures 11 and 16). Fixed-rate debt accounted for about 65 percent of external debt at the end of
2001, with variable and semivariable rates accounting for the rest of the portfolio. The coupon
structure of the external debt portfolio has remained relatively stable over time, with perhaps a mild
trend against semivariable rates and in favor of variable rates.

In addition, the external portfolio traditionally has had longer duration (around 3.5 years) than the
internal portfolio (compare Figures 12 and 17).
In addition, the half-life of the external portfolio
is also higher and more stable than the half-life of

FigurlCentral 
Figure 16. External Coupo 

Government 

n 

20 

p 

b 

t54 

10 

I:::::" 

.. 

. .

.

. .

. .

. .

.

the domestic portfolio.

Together, these characteristics 
imply a smaller
interest rate risk than in the case of domestic

o 

EFixed 

0Variable 

ElSemi-Vanable 

Source MoF, DGCP 

debt. Figure 18 shows the evolution of the
external debt maturity structure during 1998-
! eX 2001. 
Compared with domestic debt, 
the
external debt has a relatively smooth maturity
structure. As a result, only 11 percent of external
debt matures within a year (compared with 30
percent for internal debt). However, relatively more significant external refinancing needs will arise
in 2003, when 16 percent of the current external debt will mature. As can be seen in Figure 18, the
proportion of the external portfolio maturing in the one-to-three-year range increased considerably
in 2001, relative to the levels of 1997 (36 percent versus 27 percent, respectively). Correspondingly,
the share in the portfolio of longer maturities has fallen markedly from the levels of earlier years.
External refinancing risk has thus been rising steadily in the last five years.

13

โฆ
Figure 17. Half Life and Duration of

External Central Government Debt

-

_ -

_-

-

00 

00 

CN) 

C

0 

7.0
6.0- 

5.0 
4.0 -
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0

Half 

-- Duratio--' Modified

Source: MoF, DGCP

Figure 18. Maturity Structure of
External Central Government Debt

.5

1 

2 

3 

4 

____1997 
Source MoP, DGCP

.. -- 

5 

6 

7 

Maturity (Years)
1999 
2001 

-

8 

9 

10

-Benchmark

C) Key Government Liabilities and PotentialImpact on DebtManagement

Explicit, implicit, and contingent liabilities arising from subnational government entities, the Social
Security and pension systems, and the financial system, among other factors, have increased the
vulnerability of fiscal accounts and are likely to worsen debt exposures. The existing framework for
debt management faces severe limitations on handling these types of liabilities because no entity has
the mandate nor the capacity to register and quantify them.

Subnational government entities are currently exposed to refinancing risks, because most of their
debt has maturities of between three and five years. In addition, debt servicing is mostly linked to
the 60-day deposit rate, creating substantial exposure to interest rate risk." To complicate matters
further, a new law requires the government to provide a formal guarantee that could cover up to 40
percent of the outstanding debt and 100 percent of the new debt of departments and municipalities

26. Interest rate exposure already induced a major debt-servicing problem for subnational entities in 1998 and 1999,
after real mnterest rates on domestic debt increased substantially (the applicable nominal interest rate reached almost

37 percent per year in mid-1998, when inflation averaged just under 19 percent).

14

that negotiate a debt restructuring and fiscal adjustment program. This would shift the problem of
debt servicing and financing from the subnational level to the central government.2 7

In addition, the recent crisis of the financal system, and in particular of the Housing Savings and
Loan Associations (CAVs), has also led to an increase in government liabilities (funded through the
issuance of government debt as per Law 546, and Fondo de Garantia de las Instituciones Financieras
[Financial Institutions Guarantee Fund, FOGAFIN] debt instruments with the guarantee of the
central government). The combination of these liabilities (both direct and contingent) represents an
increase of nearly 7 percent of GDP in total government liabilities in 2001 alone."' Furthermore, the
public sector has also accumulated 
large pension liabilities (for example, in Social Security).
Calculations of pension system liabilities vary, but there is agreement that at the end of 2001 the
order of magnitude of the net present value of these types of liabilities amounted to about 200
percent of GDP.

The government also faces other contingent liabilities arising from the efforts during the last decade
to involve private sector participation in infrastructure, which included power purchase agreements
and "minimum traffic" toll road guarantees. In 2000, a law was passed by the Congress requiring the
central government and other public sector entities to quantify all implicit and explicit risks
associated with guarantees, and to appropriately budget for them. More recently, the public
telecommunications company provided guarantees to the private sector to foster an expansion of
telecommunications infrastructure; limited monitoring capacity meant that no provisions were made
by the government for these liabilities at the time of budget preparation.

Information on these liabilities remains sparse because no entity currently has the mandate nor the
capacity to register and quantify the magnitude of all implicit and contingent liabilities of the public
sector in Colombia. The government has recently started adopting a more systematic approach to
the management of these types of liabilities. In 1997 the Department of National Planning (DNP)
conducted, for the first time, a study to quantify the value of contingent and implicit liabilities.2 9 Law
448 of 1998 provided a legal framework that introduced the obligation to quantify and budget for the
risks associated with the public sector's contingent liabilities. This law also authorized the creation of
a Guarantee Fund that would facilitate the financial management of resources budgeted by different
public sector entities to deal with contingent liabilities, mandating the Ministry of Finance to oversee
the operations of the overall scheme. A small unit within the General Directorate for Public Credit
at the Ministry of Finance was created in 2001 to fu lfill the Ministry's responsibilities in this area?.
Although the scope of operations of the new unit is still limited and its authority insufficient to fully
address all issues pertaining to management of the public sector's contingent liabilities, its creation is
nonetheless an important step in the right direction.

27. Most large and medium-sized municipalities (excluding Bogota) had already renegotiated their debt by end 2001.
However, these restructunngs mostly addressed refinancing risks by smoothing the debt profile, but did not deal
with interest rate exposures (most municipal debt carries floating interest rates). At the same time, the central
government has now provided a more formal guarantee on municipal debts.
28. Recent reforms of the supervisory and regulatory framework for the financial sector may have lowered the relative
magnitude of contingent liabilities.
29. The 1997 DNP Report estimated that total public sector contingent liabilities amounted to 154 percent of GDP,
with pension and infrastructure-related liabilities accounting for 140 percent and 8 percent of GDP, respectively.
30. See "Manejo de Pasivos Contingentes en el Marro de la Dixapkna Fiscal en Colombia, " 2002, by Jorge Enrique Cardona, xrv
Regional Seminar on Fiscal Policy; 28-30 January-, Santiago, Chile.

15

Box 1. Legul Framework
for Debt Management in Colombia

The legal framework for pubhc debt management in Colombia is complex:

* 

.

* 

.

* 

.

* 

Issuance of Treasury bonds is regulated by a law that sets a ceiling consistent with the budget approved
every year.
The Treasury (not DGCP) is authorized to issue short-term paper for cash management purposes, but not
for budgetary financing purposes.
A 1992 Central Bank resolution gives the Central Bank authority over the issuance of short-term domestic
public debt The resolution also estabhshes that the Central Bank must approve the financial terms of all
mternational public debt operations.
In 1995 Congress gave the Finance Ministry increased flexibility with mternational bond operations.
Congress would approve a multiyear quota for the gross value of operations that can be executed without requirng
case-by-case authorization by Congress. The annual authorization to issue external debt was subsequently changed
from a gross to a net basis.
The Finance Ministry has authornty over debt issuance by pubhc entities. Subnational governments need
additional approval by Congress to issue foreign debt.
The Ley de Semajoro of 1997 lnks the total indebtedness of a public entity to its debt servicing capacity.
A 1998 law establishes that any publhc entity issumg any type of contingent-explicit liability should estLmate
the magnitude of the liability incurred and its capacity to service the liability.

D) Legal and Institutional Framework for Central Government Debt Management

The lack of a comprehensive and coherent conceptual and legal framework for debt management,
combined with overlapping responsibilities among various institutions of the government and the
Central Bank, substantially reduce the effectiveness and efficiency of the country's debt-management
system. Weaknesses and gaps in the legal and regulatory framework reduce transparency and
accountability. The scope of debt management is unnecessarily restricted-no entity currently has
the legal mandate or capacity to comprehensively manage all types of explicit, implicit, and
contingent liabilities of the public sector, as part of a unified strategy. In fact, Colombia's debt policy
has been driven mainly by the need to finance the fiscal deficit, and consequently, debt decisions
have been taken with limited systematic analysis of risks, and without a strategic framework for debt
management.

While there is no single framework law for public debt management (see Box 1), the governance
structure for debt management is also deficient. There is no clear separation of accountabilities and
responsibilities between the higher-level bodies responsible for policy design and approval (the
Minister of Finance and the Debt Committee), and the levels in the Ministry responsible for policy
execution (the DGCP and Treasury). As a result, the Minister needs to formally approve (by means
of a resolution) 
the execution of many individual operations carried out by the DGCP and
Treasury.3" Given the dynamics of capital market operations and the limited time a Minister can
allocate to this process, in fact, the decisions are taken by the DGCP and Treasury but the formal
accountabilities are not properly established.

31. In the case of domestic Treasury debt auctions, the Minister is consulted about at what rates to declare an auction
vacant. The Minister is also regularly consulted on the terrns of the international bond operations.

16

E) Domestic Debt Markets

In the 1 990s, Colombia underwent a series of important institutional changes in the domestic capital
markets, including the privatization 3 2 and internationalization of banking services, the creation of a
public debt market, and the reform of Social Security that led to the creation of private pension
funds. Despite some progress, domestic debt markets remain shallow and underdeveloped. Key
obstacles to their development indude (a) the use of a complex, nontransparent benchmark for the
minimum rate of return of pension funds (established by law); (b) the presence of conflicting
incentives that do not stimulate efficiency gains in the mutual fund industry; (c) limited know-how of
mutual fund management techniques; (d) deficiencies in the current market makers system: liquidity
is concentrated in very few points of the curve, the current ranking is too biased to the longer term
instruments and some of the market makers(particularly the security houses) may be exposed to
serious duration risk that could affect the capacity of the system to support the market in the difficult
times (e.g increases of the interest rate) (e) money mtrkets are very inactive affecting the secondary
market activity of the government bond market (f)cumbersome procedures for the authorization of
securities-lending transactions that increase transaction costs; and (e) the use of an old and possibly
biased methodology for calculating the Interest Rate Index (DTF) rate, which might limit its value as
a benchmark for the wholesale market for bank asset operations (loans) and contributes to the
segmentation of the markets.

III. Policy Recommendations on Debt Management

Colombia's fiscal imbalances require strong fiscal adjustments. In addition, in light of the large risk
exposures and vulnerabilities of its debt portfolio, it requires a transparent policy for debt
management. An improved fiscal discipline, together with strong debt portfolio management,
including the control of the growth of debt stocks, will help restore fiscal and debt sustainability.
The initial success of the fiscal stabilization program provides the government with the necessary
credibility to implement an active debt management strategy. Actions in this regard will also provide
additional comfort to investors and thus help reduce the costs of borrowing and keep liquidity and
refinancing risks to a minimum. Failure to address the issues raised by the portfolio structure, and
shortcomings of the institutional framework and the portfolio strategy for debt mnanagement, could
significantly delay the full impact of the fiscal stabilization efforts. 33

A) Debt Management Strategy and Ponforko Restructuring

To improve debt management and debt portfolio structure, the following specific steps could be
considered (a) the Debt Office (or the DGCP) should develop new portfolio benchmarks for the
short, medium, and long term3; (b) the new benchmark strategies should be presented to the Debt
Committee, and submitted for subsequent approval by the Minister of Finance with the Committee's

32. Most of the privatized banks had been nationalized in the 1980s during the financial crisis.
33. For example, in the late 1990s, the full impact of the fiscal adjustment in Brazil was delayed because, at that time,
Brazil lacked an adequate debt management strategy to deal with a vulnerable debt structure.
34. The strategy should distinguish between portfolio and issuing (funding) benchmarking, and should include a formal
risk management framework as a guiding principle (for example, use the concept of maximum tolerable budget-at-
risk-that is, maximum BaR-as a selection criterion).

17

advice 3 5 ; (c) the strategy should include the systematic use of active debt management operations
(exchanges, swaps, buybacks, and so forth) to modify the existing stocks and the funding strategy for
the new operations; and (d) the Minister of Finance, with the advice of the Debt Committee, should
provide clear guidelines to the Debt Office (or the DGCP) for implementation of the strategy. In
addition, to facilitate management of the explicit contingent liabilities of the government, the Debt
Office (or the DGCP) should develop and implement a plan to improve monitoring (registration and
quantification) of these types of liabilities.

The portfolio and issuing (funding) strategies should integrate the long-term fiscal and debt
sustainability analysis of the government, with a thorough analysis of portfolio risk exposures. These
benchmarks should reflect the government's assessment of an "acceptable" level of fiscal risk
(budget-at-risk and or cash-flow-at-risk) relative to the expected reduction in cost of funding. To
reduce central government debt exposure, a comprehensive restructuring of the debt portfolio is
warranted. More specifically, debt portfolio restructuring should address the "bunching" of
domestic debt and external debt amortization. The strategy could include the maximum level of
amortizations 
that the government could "tolerate" under different scenarios of interest and
exchange rates, and seek a set of financial instruments and terms that could achieve that benchmark.
Given that there are no hedging instruments available that could be used to manage foreign exchange
risks of the size associated with the government's portfolio, and that international reserves provide
only a limited natural hedge, this type of risk should be managed through the control of the primary
issuance of instruments and making strong efforts to deepen the domestic debt markets.

It is recommended that a unified view on debt risks be developed by the DGCP and the
macroeconomic programming unit. Ultimately both units should be concerned with budget risk,
that is, the magnitude of the risk that debt service can bring to the budget. The macroeconomic
programming unit can conduct an analysis of the government's balance sheet, in particular, of
revenue and expenditure patterns. Based on such analysis, a maximum "budget-at-risk" (max-BaR)
can be derived, which can be defined as the maximum tolerable risk (the amount of debt service) that
the budget can sustain. The DGCP can then use this max-BaR as a risk benchmark-the DGCP
should choose only funding strategies and portfolios that imply smaller BaRs than the max-BaR.

B) Strengthening the Capaty of the Debt Office

To strengthen the capacity of the Debt Office, the Ministry of Finance should centralize operations
in a single Debt Office, with expertise in both cash and debt management (merging the DGCP and
Treasury), alternatively, within or outside the Ministry (as a special administrative unit or an institute),
in accordance with the new framework law. In the short term, the government should prepare an
action plan that indudes at least the following key elements: (a) an organizational chart, including a
front office, a middle office responsible for strategic debt analysis and risk management, and a back
office; 36 (b) a human resources plan, including staffing and training; (c) a comprehensive diagnosis of
information systems and plans for improvement; and (d) proposals for the elimination or transfer to
other entities of all non-core functions.

The proposed functional structure consists of a unit responsible for leading transactions (the front
office), one responsible for analyzing portfolio risks and aligning the actual portfolio with the

35. 

In some countres (for example, Poland, Sweden, and the United Kingdom) the Committee is actually a board
chaired by the Minister of Finance and empowered to take key decisions.
36. The front and back offices should ideally be the same ones for cash and debt management operations.

18

benchmarks (the middle office) and, finally, a unit in charge of settlements (the back office). The
DGCP and Treasury should be merged into a debt management unit to ensure consistency along all
the term-structure of government debt, and to eliminate overlaps (especially in the back office and
domestic front offices). Two possible alternatives for institutional design have been identified: (a)
transforming the Debt Office into a special administrative unit under the Ministry's structure
(following the example of the tax and customs units), or (b) creating a separate institute under the
Ministry of Finance following the structure of institutions like FOGAFIN. There are advantages and
disadvantages to both options. Under the first option, constraints on salaries and adlministratve
procedures are likely to remain, but the smooth flow of information within the Ministry will be
preserved. Under the second option, there will likely be more salary and structure flexibility that will
help increase the capacity of the Debt Office, but relationships with Ministry departments-units will
likely be negatively affected. With a clearer governance framework provided by a new law, the latter
may nevertheless become the preferred option. Non-core business activities currently under the
DGCP and Treasury should be phased out or transferred to other units within the Ministry or other
institutions like the National Planning Department.3 7 However, the current arrangements whereby a
specific group within the Debt Office is responsible for monitoring contingent liabilities should be
strengthened and given increased authority to request timely information from other government
entities responsible for the management of those liabilities.

The new unit should have access to necessary human resources and skills to carry out its functions,
and should have the admmistrative flexibility to act and respond to fast changes and opportunities in
the financial market. This requires adjusting the salary level and structure to make it more
competitive vis-a-vis the private sector. 
It is also important to establish and institutionalize a
comprehensive training program, including specialized courses, scholarships, and internships in
public and private sector institutions in Colombia and abroad. The proposed reforms of the
organizational structure will require a new, fully reengineered information and technology system.3 8

The Ministry of Finance should also issue comprehensive regulations and guidelines for debt
management and for Debt Office operational procedures. These regulations and guidelines should
clearly define responsibilities and internal accountabilities; ensure that adequate checks and balances
are maintained; address issues of actual or potential conflicts of interest encountered by Debt Office
staff; define mechanisms and procedures for preserving the confidentiality of information and
operations of the Debt Office; and establish a code of conduct to guide the behavior of Debt Office
staff, consultants, and all other entities or persons rendering services to the Debt Office.

C) Legal and Institutional Reforms

To create a proper legal and governance framework for debt management operations, the
government should prepare and submit for Congressional approval a framework law consolidating
all legal and regulatory instruments on debt management. Key principles of the proposed framework
law3 9 should include provisions for (a) separation of policy formulation, implementation, and

37. Noncore business activities include participation in negotiations of multilateral and bilateral loans, supervision of the
issuance of domestic bonds by subnational government entities, and involvement in the financal design of
infrastructure projects and in the process of privatizing public companies.
38. The decision to introduce the UNDP database (CIGADE) that centralizes all debt operations is an important step in
the right direction.
39. For further discussion of the key principles that could underpin a new framework law, see "Guidelines for Public
Debt Management," World Bank and IMF, March 2001.

19

evaluation functions; (b) creation of a new Debt Office (by merging the DGCP and Treasury) and
redefinition of the role and structure of the Debt Committee in light of the proposed new
framework; (c) creation of an independent entity reporting directly to the Minister of Finance for the
evaluation of debt policy implementation, including the definition of provisions for ensuring
adequate checks and balances'; (d) very clear objectives that include risk-cost tradeoff issues as a
central dimension of debt management; (e) use of modern financial instruments and tools for active
debt management; (f) definition of responsibilities and accountabilities at different levels of the
government; and (g) separation of debt management from the Central Bank's mandate, particularly
with regard to the issuance of short-term Treasury bills to improve 
the government's cash
management flexibility.

Within this new framework, the Minister of Finance, with the advice of the Debt Committee, should
define a set of portfolio benchmarks and the overall strategy to achieve it. A clear and transparent
mandate for the execution of this policy decision should then be given to the Debt Office (or the
DGCP). Moreover, the assessment and evaluation of the quality of the execution of debt policy
should be conducted by an entity or auditing unit (or external audits) independent of the Debt
Committee and the Debt Office.

D) Deepening the Domestic Debt Markets

To enhance and deepen the functioning of domestic markets, thus facilitating the management of
public debt, the Ministry of Finance should draft and submit for Congressional approval a legal
amendment to simplify the benchmark for the minimum rate of return of pension funds.4" The
benchmark for the minimum rate of return of pension funds should be changed to the lowest
nonbinding benchmark of either (a) a real rate of return calculated so as to achieve a specific pension
replacement rate, or (b) an average of the current rate of return on the government's medium-term
bonds. In addition, the Ministry of Finance should undertake a study to identify the major regulatory
and incentive constraints for increasing the efficiency of collective investment vehicles and mutual
funds, and to develop an action plan to remove such constraints. The government could also
explore and analyze the conditions for establishing a securities-lending backstop facility that, in
exchange for cash or securities, lends different securities to an intermediary to support repo and
short-selling activities. Finally, the government and the Central Bank should assess the suitability of
the current DTF rate calculation methodology and evaluate with the industry 
introduction of an alternative market reference rate (for example, the London Inter-Bank Operations
Rate [LIBOR] type) for secondary market activities.

the possible

ro successfully develop domestic debt (and capital) markets, the investor base must be expanded.
'The market needs a strong and diversified group of institutional investors (including pension funds,
nsurance, mutual funds, and foreign investors) that can generate demand for different segments of
the yield curve (short, medium, and long term), and generate a liquid secondary market. Reducing
transaction and information costs could facilitate this process. One important step toward domestic
,:apital market development is the phasing out of government reliance on captive investors.
Currently, nearly 50 percent of new issuing is allocated to a group of captive investors-the so-called
nversionesforZosasy convenidas for a breakdown of domestic public debt by type of holder). These are
basically the public pension fund (at the Social Security Institute) and government entities running

10. Extemal auditing could be used as an altemative to the creation of a new auditing unit.
-1. See "Developing Governrnent Bond Markets: A Handbook," 2001, Washington, D.C.: World Bank and IMF.

20

cash surpluses that, by regulation, have to be invested in a portfolio of government bonds through
direct negotiations with the Treasury. The size and importance of captive sources in government
financing have introduced market distortions (segmentation) and have negatively affected the
development of the investment and mutual fund industry.

In the case of the pension funds, simplifying complex regulations behind the calculation of the
minimum yield on pension fund investments could reduce unnecessary "noise" and reduce
information costs. For mutual funds, further market opening for foreign financial companies
managing mutual pension, and investment funds could create competition in the mutual fund
industry to diversify and extend portfolio duration. These changes will likely induce consolidation in
the industry, which will also reinforce the process of modernizing financial management companies.

The government could also promote the rating of asset management companies (and of the funds
they administer) by local or international rating agencies, reducing information costs for investors
and increasing competition and transparency. While most of the above principles also apply to the
insurance funds industry, promoting the development of annuity products (rentas vitalicias) through
new regulation (now under preparation) would further promote the development of domestic capital
markets.

One important area for improvement relates to the existing relationship of the Debt Office with
primary dealers. The system needs to be reformed to introduce liquidity along the entire yield curve
and not just at a few points in the longer-term segment, as it currently operates. This would require
that the valuation procedure put equal emphasis on key points along the curve. The government
should also consider a rotating system by which each dealer is given a combination of off-the-run
and on-the-run points, so that pressure is put along the entire curve. This will allow the government
to move effectively along the curve depending on expectations and market conditions.

An important issue that needs proper government supervision is the level of risk exposure that key
market makers acquire when acting as Primary Dealers (PDs) of the government. 
In particular,
security houses seem to be taking large risks, given the relatively lenient capital adequacy standards
and limited enforcement that they currently face. This situation presents a sharp contrast with that
of another important group of intermediaries-the banks-which are subject to more demanding
capital adequacy and supervision standards. This is important for the financial system as a whole and
for the sound operation of the PD system, because a sudden increase in interest rates could
conceivably force an important group of PDs to move out of the market-making business, or even
to go out of business altogether. Market liquidity and the risk exposure of government would likely
deteriorate in such a situation, highlighting the need for joint action by the Debt Office and the
securities market regulator.

To support a more active secondary market and facilitate the holding of longer-term instruments,
matket agents need to be able to access instruments that will promote liquidity and hedge
unnecessary risks (such as repos or simultdneas). However, there are constraints on the development of
secondary markets, including the lack of standardized and fungible issues. A possible solution to be
explored is the introduction of a securities-lending backstop facility that, in exchange for cash or
securities, lends different securities to an intermediary. These and similar arrangements have been
adopted in several countries. The Colombian government could explore this or other types of
solutions to facilitate the development of secondary markets.

21

The introduction of altemative reference 
rates to the current DTF may contribute 
to an
improvement of financial market integration and price signaling within financial mnarket segments
(for example, bank deposits and lending, money markets, and government bond markets). The
alternative reference rate should be transparent and consistent with the activity of the secondary
markets to effectively facilitate the pricing of financial assets and liabilities. For example, a group of
financial institutions (market makers) has already been working on a proposal to create a Bogoti
Inter-Bank Operations Rate [BIBOR], a concept similar to LIBOR). The government jointly with
the Central Bank should evaluate and explore alternative solutions. 
Finally, promoting the
development of retail investors could also strengthen capital markets. In general, there are two main
avenues to tap this market: (a) the creation of specialized Treasury bond funds (for example, Spain
was very successful in promoting specialized government bond funds as close substitutes for bank
deposits); and (b) the direct distribution of securities (through, for example, the Internet).

22

CAS Annex El
Executive Summary of Voices of the Poor Colombia

Introduction
To inform the formulation of the Colombia Country Assistance Strategy
(CAS) 2002-2006, 
the Voices of the Poor study explores poverty from the
perspectives of poor women and poor men from different regions of Colombia. The
study was designed to enable a wide range of poor people in diverse contexts in the
country to express, analyse and share their realities, priorities and perceptions, and to
organize and present these reflections in such a way that they can inform policies and
programs to reduce poverty in Colombia.

The Colombian study has two features that makes it different from the global
Voices of the Poor study: its study agenda is more focused on areas of particular
relevance to poverty and development in Colombia and the study design is oriented to
developing action proposals. The three major themes explored in the new study are
work and employment, education and capacities, and violence and security, and they
were framed by the findings from recent quantitative and qualitative World Bank
studies of Colombia, in particular, the new Poverty and Social Safety Net reports.'
The effort to generate poor people's own policy proposals for improving their lives
seeks to support the design of more appropriate and effective policies and programs
to reduce poverty.

Building on the World Development Report: Attacking Poverty, 2000/1, the
World Bank's Strategic Framework Paper identifies "empowering poor people and
investing in their assets" as well as "building the climate for investment, jobs and
growth" as the two priority areas for Bank support to client governments. The study
methods were adapted from the participatory and qualitative tools used in the global
Voices of the Poor study and from a growing body of participatory work worldwide.
The research approach, which engages poor people directly in data gathering and
analysis, provides a strong foundation for bringing greater poverty focus and
supporting empowerment strategies in World Bank's activities in Colombia. Given
the country's worsening poverty trends, continuing civil conflicts, and new
government, the study was well timed to strengthen awareness of poverty issues,
support peace-building efforts, and contribute to activities to reduce poverty.

2

l World Bank, Colombia,Poverty Report, March 2002, Green Cover, Washington, D.C.
World Bank, Colombia Social Safety Net Assessment, April 2002, Report N 22255-CO, Washington,
D.C.
2World Bank, "Empowerment and Poverty Reduction: The World Bank's Agenda," November 30,
2001 draft.

The election of a new government made the study particularly relevant as it provides
an opportunity for the findings of the study to influence the preparation of the
National Development Plan for the period 2002-2006.

Study Design

The study was conducted in 10 sites selected to ensure regional diversity,
rural and urban contexts, ethnic diversity, special vulnerabilities, high and low
in
intensity of and armed conflict. 
The sites included urban neighborhoods 
Cartagena, Medellin, Pasto, Cali and Barrancabermeja, 
an Afro-Colombian
fisherman community in the Pacific Coast of Narifno, a periurban neighborhood of an
internally displaced population on the outskirts of Bogota, rural sites in Gir6n
(Santander), Usme (Bogota), and an Indian community in Northern Cauca.

Five research teams were trained by the World Bank to conduct the fieldwork.
The researchers were affiliated with two universities, Javeriana in Bogota and Valle
in Cali, NGO's specialized on violence, youth and communications for development,
and grass-roots movements. Some of the teams had contacts with the communities
where they conducted the study, thus facilitating their entry to begin the fieldwork
and providing some security in areas of conflict. Fort other sites entry and security
were ensured through national NGO's with a presence in that locality.

Within communities, researchers met with poor men and poor women, youth
and children. The study topics were explored in small and large discussion group
settings with women, with men, and with both genders. Open-ended individual
interviews with poor people and key informants such as local leaders and
schoolteachers were also conducted. A variety of qualitative and participatory visual
techniques were used, such as institutional mapping, Venn diagrams, time lines, and
calendar of events. The development of visuals gives poor people a more systematic
means to identify and assess options and alternatives useful for social policy and
institutional changes that could bring meaningful improvements to their lives. In this
way, the study in Colombia gives greater emphasis to proposal for action than to the
diagnostic of poverty.,

Key study findings

Poverty in Colombia, is perceived by poor people in the different sites as
having multiple dimensions, including unemployment, lack of assets, inadequate
social opportunities and powerlessness. What makes the over experience of poverty
in Colombia different from that of other countries is the overwhelming consensus
about work as the number one condition for wellbeing, the shortcomings of education
as a means to get a job, the extreme disempowerment and stigmatization of poor
people due to violence, 
the extreme vulnerability of children and youth, the

2

perception of a state that is largely absent, and a widespread desire by poor people
for stronger community groups and local institutions.

1. The overwhelming consensus around work as the number one condition for
welbeing.

'Estar bien es tener trabajo... El trabajo es la base de la sustentaci6n de la
familia...' - a woman from Barrancabermeja

'Con empleo uno vivefeliz' - a young man from a barrio of Medellin

Having a job that offers a decent and stable income, not just any job, was
ranked by both male and female study participants as the number one condition for
well-being - above health and education in all but three sites. Conversely, the
absence of work is seen as the chief source of fear and despair in the home. Across
the 6 urban sites of the study, people report that their work prospects have worsened
since the start of the economic crisis in the mid 1990s. People repeatedly commented
that they now work more than before but earn less. This finding is consistent with the
conclusions of the recent Poverty Report which show that increased labour by the
household is not matched by an equivalent increase in 
income. Furthermore, poor
people display incredible versatility in finding ways to make a living and adapt to
adverse conditions, but this versatility and willingness to work hard are not rewarded
by the market or by government programs.

On the other hand, the feminization of work as a consequence of the economic
crisis of 1995 has led to tensions in the family by the new demands on men to
collaborate at home and has increased the vulnerability of children. Finally, there is
an increasing acceptance of illegal ways of making a living such as through drugs,
armed robbery, petty crime, and prostitution.

2. The shortcomings of education as a means to get a job.

'4 muchachos terminaron bachillerato y no han conseguido trabajo... Hay

muchos ejemplos ast, entonces epara que?' (discussion group on education

with Cali youths).

'El estudio que recibi de bachillerato no me sirve para trabajar, porque en lo
que me sale trabajo no necesito ser bachiller sino celador, mensajero'
(Cazuca youth).

The poor want education to improve their work opportunities, but what they
find, overwhelmingly, is that public education is failing to equip them with the skills
the labour market requires. The economic crisis has shown the shortcomings of
formal education as a means to get a job. Dropping out at an early age is on the
increase. In every study site without exception, researchers discovered that the

3

majority of children do not complete secondary school. The material collected in the
study puts the average age of those who drop out of school definitively at 13, with
considerable evidence of children leaving school much earlier, as early as age 8 or 9.
One of the more disturbing reasons given to justify the high drop out rate in schools is
children's and parents' widespread disaffection with the public education system. The
poor consistently report that teachers are often bad or absent, the costs of education
(in relation to its meagre benefits) considerable, and, most serious of all, there is little
evidence that it improves children's future work prospects. The need to make some
extra cash was also cited across the sites as the most common reason for dropping out
of school.

Education is also idealized as a vehicle for values, personal development, and
better social relations, but reality paints another story. The school is no refuge for
children suffering abuse in the family. Discrimnination of children from the poorest
families, sometimes expressed through teacher abuse, 
is alarmingly common. The
trend is justified by parents and children on the grounds that the school system is
failing to prepare students adequately for work.

What is so striking is that despite their biting criticisms of the education
system, the poor continue to believe in education as an ideal. Education is frequently
present in their proposals to overcome their problems. The proposals formulated by
study participants across the sites to improve education focus on options to make it
more vocational, more accessible, and better suited to local culture and conditions.

3. The extreme disempowerment and discrimination of poor people due to violence.

"La gente esta enferma por la impotencia, por el miedo..." -- An Afro-
Colombian in poor rural community on the Pacific Coast

"La presencia de grupos arnados ha limitado las posibilidades de

organizaci6n. " "Ser lider lo Ilevo en la sangre..." "-- Study participant in a

poor neighborhood of Medellin

Poor people in Colombia view the political violence and drug trade as fueling
ever more juvenile delinquency and neighborhood crime and violence -- as well as a
cascade of other harmful political, social and economic impacts. They also describe
widespread violence in the home against women and children. All of these types of
violence feed on each other to create vicious cycles of violence that begin at very
young ages, and leave poor people increasingly fearful and isolated in their homes
and communities. Against this backdrop, poor people express profound sense of
disempowerment that takes many forms -- inability to make ends meet, 
to protect
their own children or to keep conflict out of the home, to move about freely on their
own streets, or even for neighbors and leaders to come together. In addition, violence
of all kinds is leading to more and more single mother homes, which in turn increases

4

the vulnerability of children to greater poverty, higher rates of school dropouts, and
more violence in the community, and the cycle goes on.

Pupils from Barrancabermeja, Cali, Sanquianga, the outskirts of Bogota, and
Cazuca, told researchers repeatedly that other children, and sometimes teachers, treat
them badly. Poor clothing (beneath the uniform) and shoes, a different accent, rural
origin, darker skin, and at times a slower learning rate, are frequently the object of
ridicule and reprimand. For black children from the poorest families, getting admitted
to a school is a problem. In an AfroColombian barrio of Cali, teenagers say they are
forced to lie about where they are from. Most alarming is the situation of displaced
children in Cazuca. Children feel acutely that their rural origin 
is the object of
ridicule by other children. These children long to return to the schools they attended
before being displaced.

4. The Extreme Vulnerability of Children and Youth

"Los muchachos se crian en un ambiente de violencia y en la escuela lo
repiten agrediendo a sus companieros y a los maestros" - a teacher from
Sanquianga"

" Cuando llega el hambre, la moral se va, 
neighorhood in Medellin.

-a young womanfirom a

In all sites, parents and local leaders expressed a deep concern for the
increasing vulnerability of children. They are exposed to abuse inside and outside
home, increased abandonment as a result of all adults at work, and the loss of human
capital by malnutrition, lack of access to health services, and their absence or drop-
out from school. 
In at least 5 of the 10 sites, malnourishment was identified as a
problem seriously affecting child development. 
In Cartagena, 
the Cauca, Cali,
Medellin, and Sanquianga on the Pacific Coast, teachers report that a significant
number of children find it difficult to concentrate and follow classes. So perhaps it
should come to little surprise that a major reason cited by parents for sending their
children to- school is for the free lunch. School may do little to prepare children for a
working future, but at least it is a place, say parents, where they get a free balanced
meal.

Teachers, social workers and poor people suggest that children who have
experienced or witnessed violence at home frequently reproduce the violence with
family members, in their schools and on the streets.

Youth are widely seen as the population group most vulnerable to and
engaged in crime, violence and immoral activities in their communities, and this is
frequently linked to their frustration over the lack of work opportunities. Parents
express deep concerns that their children's only options is to be recruited by guerrilla,

5

paramilitary or drug related groups. The attractions of drugs, alcohol, 'easy money',
and consumerism, were also cited as reasons for leaving school, particularly in the
urban sites. In Barrancabermeja, a discussion group of teenagers admitted that
'algunos somos viciosos y borrachines. Nos empieza a gustar tener plata, entonces no
estudiamos mas'. In Cali and Medellin, youths spoke of the easy money that comes
from selling drugs and stealing. The money is spent on flashy consumer goods to
the latest sneakers, an expensive watch, a CD player. Easy money
impress friends -
and the consumerism it breeds then becomes a drug in itself.

5. A state that is both present and absent.

"...para jo'venes en Acci6n solo recibieron catorce y aqui hay mas o menos
trescientos o cuatrocientos j6venes. " -- A poor person in Cartagena

Unlike very many other poor communities around the world, the ten
Colombian sites visited do not seem to contend with basic infrastructure and human
development gaps like unreliable and polluted water, lack of electricity, distant
primary schools and health clinics, or isolation due to lack of roads and transport,
except on the Atlantic Coast. This suggests a more decentralized state presence and
capacity than one might have assumed given problems of violence. Nonetheless,
people in the study express a deep sense of abandonment by the state on other key
threats to their wellbeing --- namely the total lack of public safety and justice, but
also increasing hunger, very poor work opportunities and the deep vulnerability of
children and youth to experiencing diverse forms of violence, to leaving school, and
to being drawn into illegal work activities once on the streets. 
. Police are absent
from most of the 10 sites of the study and thus people find their own means to
provide security and apply justice. This lack of state security results in more intrusion
by irregular forces, less investment, more stigmatization, more youths caught up in
gangs and irregular forces, and weakened community organizations pray to armed
gangs. These disturbing trends have worsened since 1995, as the economy has
struggled with crisis and slow recovery and conflict has intensified.

6. A widespread desire among poor people for stronger community groups.

"El problema mas grave es la desunion de la gente. Si estamos asociados
podemos hacer reclamaciones juntos y asi nos escuchen mas. " -- Hombre de 43
anos. from an isolated rural community forty minutes away from Bucaramanga

What is especially striking about Colombia is that poor people across all ten
communities emphasized solutions that would strengthen their local groups and that
In particular, poor people
would especially provide resources directly to them. 
sought help with overcoming obstacles such as weak or corrupt local leaders, lack of
trust among people, and politicians who divide their communities or make empty
promises. One community, an indigenous village in the Department of Cauca, had a
very strong community organization and tradition of collective action, and this was

6

clearly seen to have brought greater physical safety and economic security as well as
a sense of social belonging to all of the people who lived there.

The proposals for poverty reduction coming from the voices of the poor

Three major policy implications underlie the findings of the study. First is the
fact that poor people clearly see rising insecurity, poor work opportunities, and
problems with the relevance of education as tightly linked and propose integrated
solutions. In contrast with the sectoral approach of the poverty experts, poor people in
Colombia see their needs as multidimensional and thus consider that the ways to
address them must be integrated. This has implications for both the government and
the Bank on the design and implementation of more integrated approaches that
simultaneously address the linkages across problems of lack of work, violence and
poor educational opportunities. There were frequent proposals for services that
targeted poor households as a unit, and that would reduce conflict and support greater
cohesion at this level.

Second, each community presented different priorities, obstacles and
opportunities for addressing these problems, and thus the government needed greater
capacity to deliver flexible yet tailored services. Poverty is contextual: it varies from
place to place. For example, communities expressed different preferences 
regarding
the content and form of education and training programs that would best enhance local
work opportunities; and communities had different views about the need to integrate
values, better family and community relations, recreation, cultural concerns and so
forth into education efforts.

Third, poor people's proposals across the study communities called for
stronger community organizations, greater local presence of the State, and the
opportunity to relate directly to government institutions. In all sites, poor people
perceive their local organizations as a necessary instrument to enhance their welbeing.
However, they want support to strengthen the capacity of these organizations to
become more representative, better able to manage collective activities, and to interact
more effectively with local government institutions. At the same time, poor people
call for more state presence, particularly to improve public safety and access to justice.
They also seek more responsive public institutions and better access to information
about how the government works and the various social programs and services
available. And they want to relate directly to these institutions without intermediaries.
With enhanced local organizational capacities and closer relations between poor
citizens and the State, poor people express confidence that public institutions will be
more responsive to their needs and the effectiveness of policies and programs to
reduce poverty will improve.

7

More specific proposals discussed by groups from the 10 sites to address the
different dimensions of poverty are listed below:

* Access 
to a microfinance program 
to support self- employment and
cooperative enterprises that guarantees access to poor families in urban and
rural areas. This will create work opportunities, 
the single most cited
mechanism by poor people against poverty, violence and armed conflict;
* Vocational and technical training opportunities responsive to needs and
conditions of local people and real demands of the market. This implies the
expansion and improvement of the services of SENA in partnership with
experienced and specialized NGO's;
* Access to formal education that is relevant to the conditions of the locality,
specific in terms of information, knowledge and skills that are demanded by
the market, and integral, that is for family and community life, work and self-
employment;
Increasing the protection of children through integrated family programs of
family care and thus expand the services of ICBF. In the long term, the best
option is to increase family income;
* Provide psychological counseling to families to help deal with increased
internal and external tensions and violence generated by the economic crisis.

* 

Concluding Comment

Many proposals by poor people call for simultaneous initiatives to improve
local livelihoods, public safety and educational opportunities. Not only must
strategies to reduce poverty be more holistic and integrated, but poor people also
seek interventions that are more flexible and able to adapt to and support the needs
of Colombia's diverse communities and cultures. Underlying these proposals is a
widely seen view that the causes of poverty and insecurity where they live are
numerous and tightly interlocking, and that previous governmental efforts to change
this have largely passed them by.

8

780 

-

C~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~IR 

a3r1251e 

r

-12' 

Caribbean 

VNZUL

|< 

PaNAX 

i~~~O 

4s'MA 

v 

A 

_

I 

Ba R 
Zf,5 
L 

C A U C AG h HUMAJW 
IARE 

W DVC R

t 

COLOMBIA~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~OLMI

C A SA NA RE/

Ten1n 

A 

D 

C 
CCUNDINAMA 

, 

PA3M 

O CEA N 

COLOMB~NT 

Q IA 

DE 

0 100 200 KILOMEtERS~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I

ARAUC

s ~ ~ ~ ~ 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~f 

Casool nplre 

il0A 
Iq FSO CIE 

50 

Car4 

g Nationa Capital< 
78 ยฐ~~~~ 

780 

414 > 

CUDIAM 

74 

X 

~ 

a 

C0

I~~~ 

*Tu 

~ 
B.o DECUADOR to5Y_W7tx ~ DEEMBE 200
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

V A U P E S 

C HI 

I 

.

/ 

CDX70'

D~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~EEBR20

*nlrLD- 

N. 

.

Type: 

CAS

25129 

CO

