d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 23849-ME

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR
THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES

April 23, 2002

Colombia-Mexico-Venezuela Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEXICO-FISCAL YEAR

January 1-December31

CURRENCY EOUIVALENTS

(as of 18 April 2002)
Currency Unit 
= 
Peso
= 
US$I
9.16 Pesos 
WEIGHTS MND MEASURES
Metric System

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AIDS 
APL 
ASERCA 

BANCOMEXT 
BANOBRAS 

BANRUJRAL 
BANSEFI 

CONAFOR 
CONAPO 
CONASUPO 
CPAR 
CSO 
DAL 
DIF 

CAS 
CCL 
CAM 
CNA 
CEM 
CFAA 
COMPRANET 

Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
Adaptable Program Loan 
Apoyos y Servicios a la Comercializaci6n 
Agropecuaria 
Banco Nacional de Comercio Exterior, S.N.C. 
Banco Nacional de Obras y Servicios POblicos, 
S.N.C. 
Banco Nacional de Credito Rural, S.N.C. 
Banco del Ahono Nacional y Servicios 
Financieros 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Contingent Credit Line 
Comisi6n Ambiental Metropolitana 
Comisi6n Nacional de Agua 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Country Financial and Accountability Assessment 
Sistema Electr6nico de Contrataiones 
Gubemrnamentales 
Comis%in Nacional Forestal 
Consejo Nacional de Poblaci6n 
Compadia Nacional de Subsistencias Populares 
Country Procurement Assessment Report 
Civil Society Organization 
Decentralization Adjustment Loan 
Sistema Nactional para el Desarrollo Integral de la 
Familia 
Decentralization and Regional Development 
Early Childhood Development 
Encuesta Nacional de Ingreso y Gasto de los 
Hajores 
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program 
Economic and Sector Work 
Fideicomiso de Apoyo al Rescate de Autopistas 
Fondo de Operaci6n y Financiamiento Bancario a 
la Vivienda 
Fondo de la Vivienda del lnstituto de Seguridad y 
Servicios Sociales de los Trabajadores del Estado 
Financial Sector Assessment Paper 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
Gross Domesfic Product 
Global Environment Facility 
Global Fnvironment Facility/Montreal Protocol 
Gross National Product 
Intemational Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development 
Inter-American Development Bank 
IDB 
IFC 
International Finance Corporation 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IMSS 
Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social 
IMSS-Solidaridad Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social-Solidaridad 
Instituto del Fondo Nacional de la Vivienda para 
INFONAVIT 
los Trabajadores 
Instituto Nacinala Indigenista 

DRD 
ECD 
ENIGH 

ESMAP 
ESW 
FARAC 
FOVI 

FSAP 
GAIT 
GDP 
GEF 
GEF/MP 
GNP 
IBRD 

FOVISSSTE 

INI 

IPAB 
ISSSTE 

LIL 
NAFIN 
NAFTA 
NGO 
OAS 
OECD 

OED 
OD 
OP 
PARE 
PAREIB 

PCF 
PEMEX 
PET 
POP 
PIDIREGAS 

PROBECAT 

PROCAMPO 
PROCEDE 

PRODEI 
PROGRESA 
PRONAFIDE 
PSBR 
PSD 
SAGAR 

SAGARPA 

SAL 
SAT 
SECODAM 
SEDESOL 
SEMARNAP 

SEMARNAT 
SIAFF 
SixnSIP 
SME 
SSA 
TAL 
UNDP 
UJNEP 
WBG 
WHO 
WTO 

Instituto de Protecci6n al Ahorro Bancario
Instituto de Segurdad y Servicios Sociales de los
Trabajadores del Estado
Learning and Innovationi Loan
Nacional Financiera, S.N.C.
North Anierican Free Trade Agreement
Nongovemmental organization
Organization of American States
Organizafion for Economic Cooperation and
Development
Operations Evaluation Department
Operational Directive
Operational Policy
Programa para Abatir el Rezago Educativo
Programa parm Abatir el Rezago en Educaci6n IniciaJ
y Bisica
Prototype Carbon Fund
Petr6leos Mexicanos
Programa de Empleo Tenporal
Persistent Organic Pollutant
Proyectos de knpacto Diferido en el Registro del
Gasto
Programa de Becas de Capacitaci6n para
Desempleados
Programa de Apoyos Directos al Camrpo
Programa de Certificaci6n de Derechos Ejidales y
Titulaci6n de Solares Urbanos
Programa para el Desarrollo de la Educaci6n inicial
Programa de Educaci6n, Salud y Alimentaci6n
Programs Nacional de Financiamiento del Desarrollo
Public Sector Borrowing Requirements
Private Sector Development
Secretarla de Agricultura, Ganaderia y Desarrollo
Rural
Secretar de Agricultura, Ganaderia, Desarrollo
Rural, Pesca y Alimentaci6n
Structural Adjustmnent Loan
Sistema de Administraci6n Tributaria
Secretarfa de Contraloria y Desarrollo Admrinistrativo
Secretaria de Desarrollo Social
Secretarla de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales y
Pesca
Secretarfa de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales
Sistema Integral de Administraci6n Financiera Federal
Simulations for Social Indicators and Poverty
Small- and medium-size enterprise
Secretarla de Salud
Technical Assistance Loan
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Environment Programme
World Bank Group
World Health Organization
World Trade Organization

IBRD 
Vice President 
David de Ferranti 
Vice President, Investment Operations: 
Director, LAC: 
Chief Economist: 
Guillermo Perry 
Olivier Lafourcade Manager: 
Country Director. 
Lead Economist/Manager: Marcelo Giugale 
Task Manager: 
Task Manager 
Marcelo Giugale
Team Production Support: Michael Geller

IFC
Assaad Jabre
Bernard Pasquier
Toshiya Masuoka
Toshiya Masuoka

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MEXICO

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. 

SUMMARY AND MAIN MESSAGES ........................................................... 1

11. 

THE COUNTRY CONTEXT ........................................................... 
(a) The Political Arena ........................................................... 
(b) Recent Economic Developments ........................................................... 
III. MEXICO'lS DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGE: PovERTY REDUCTION IN THE NEW ERA .......... 
(a) Consolidating Macroeconomic Gains ...........................................................
8 
(b) Accelerating Growth Through Enhanced Competitiveness ................................................. 9
(c) Human Capital Development ............................................................
11
(d) Balancing Growth and Poverty Reduction with Protecting the Environment .......... 
......... 14
(e) Building an Efficient, Accountable, and Transparent Government ................................... 15

........ 5

3

3
4

IV. 

THE WORLD BANK GRouP's ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ........................................................... 17

(a) The Lessons from the Previous CAS ........................................................... 
17
(b) The Lessons of IBRD's Portfolio ................ 
........................................... 19
(c) The Lessons of IFC's Portfolio ........................................................... 
21
(d) The Role of the WBG in Mexico's New Era ........................................................... 
22
(e) The WBG Strategy, Program Selectivity, and Partnership
Over the Next Three Years ........................................................... 24
(f) Sectoral Support Strategies and Tools to Deliver them ...................................................... 26
(g) Exposure Evolution Under the Proposed Strategy ........................................................... 35
V. 
THE RISKS IN THE PROPOSED CAS ........................................................... 
37
VI. COORDINATION WITH OTHER PARTNERS AND PARTICIPATION N TmIs CAS ............. 
............. 3 8

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS .. 

41

TEXT TABLES
Table 1. Main Macroeconomic Indicators .. 
Table 2. Share of the Population in Extreme Poverty and Poverty in Mexico .. 
Table 3. Mexico and the Millennium Development Goals .. 
Table 4. 
Inequality in Total Current Income (Gini Coefficient) .. 
Table 5. Partnerships in Mexico's Development Framework .. 
Table 6. Mexico-CAS Matrix FY03-05 .. 
Table 7. Mexico-World Bank Group Financial Instruments-FY2003-2005 .. 
TExT BOXES
Box 1. Country Assistance Evaluation ..................... 
18
Box 2. 
Procurement and Financial Management in Mexico's Portfolio ...................................... 19
Box 3. What Went Well and No So Well in This CAS Cycle ................................................... 
20
Box 4. 
Private Sector Strategy: Linkages in IBRD-IFC Assistance to Mexico ........................... 22
Box 5. 
Capacity and Learning Activities of the World Bank Institute (WBI)
in Support of the CAS Objectives ................................................... 
Box 6. 
IDB's Program ................................................. 
Box 7. Mexico CAS Consultation with Civil Society ...................... 

33
39
........................... 40

5
6
7
8
25
43-47
49, 50

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

FIGURES

Figure la. Mexico IBRD Exposure Scenarios, 1996-2015: Debt Outstanding .............................. 36
Figure lb Mexico IBRD Exposure Scenarios, 1996-2015: Disbursements,
Repayments, and Undisbursed Balance ..... 

37

ANNEXES
BL. Mexico at a Glance ..... 
B2. Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ..... 
B3. Bank Group Program Summary, FY2002-05 ..... 
B3. 
IFC and MIGA Summary, FYl999-2001 ..... 
B4. Summary of Nonlending Services ..... 
B5. Poverty and Social Development Indicators ..... 
B6. Key Economic Indicators ..... 
B7. Mexico-Key Exposure Indicators ..... 
B8. Status of Bank Group Operations in Mexico Operations Portfolio ..... 
B9. Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio ..... 
B1O. Mexico: Private Sector Strategy ..... 

51, 52
53
55
56
57
59
61, 62, 63
65
67
69
71-98

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF TLE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF TIHE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES

I. SUMMARY AND MAIN MESSAGES

1. 
The World Bank Group's (WBG) previous Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for
Mexico was discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on May 13, 1999 (Report No. 19289-
MX), and its Progress Report was considered on May 21, 2001 (Report No. 22147-ME). The
central theme of that CAS was sustainability-economic and social-in the face of heightened
uncertainty for the country and, consequently, for the WBG assistance program (notably, the end
of the presidential sexenio, international financial volatility, the speed of the decentralization
process, instability in the financial sector, and the nonadditionality of IBRD funding to the
budgets of line agencies). Thus, the 1999 CAS called for flexibility in delivering assistance
within a prudent overall financing envelope.
2. 
Over the CAS period, Mexico made remarkable progress along its development path, and
is now entering a new era of opportunity for growth and poverty reduction. 
In the process
surrounding the presidential election of July 2000, its political system showed a high degree of
maturity and achieved a new level of openness, participation, and accountability. Its economic
performance has also been strong. Seven years after a major macroeconomic crisis affected its
banking system and sent millions of Mexicans into poverty, the country became one of the
fastest-growing economies in Latin America, an investment-grade borrower, and has achieved
considerable financial and commercial integration. While a succession of emerging economies
stumbled (East Asia, Russia, Brazil, Argentina), Mexico continued growing. Even the 2001
recession in the United States was overcome-with a slowdown, but without crisis. As a result,
Mexico's poverty headcount has sharply decreased, and is at present much lower than before the
crisis.
3. 
The WBG has been a close partner of Mexico in its development progress. Using the
program flexibility built into the last CAS, the WBG was able to deliver over the last three years
assistance aimed at furthering the country's reform agenda at both the macro level (for example,
fiscal, finance, decentralization) and at the sectoral level (for example, rural development, health,
gender). Throughout, the primary focus has been poverty reduction, and the impact has been
significant, especially in terms of intellectual contribution to policy design. The WBG's role in
providing knowledge and advisory services is perhaps best shown by the role it played during the
presidential transition-its collection of Policy Notes became an analytical bridge across
administrations and, at the request of the incoming authorities, was published as a book.' 
In

1. Giugale, M., 0. Lafourcade, and V. Nguyen, eds., 2001, Mexico-A Comprehensive Development Agenda for the
New Era, World Bank Publications, Washington, D.C.

parallel, the WBG's financing flows toward Mexico remained strong and within the CAS
envelope, the quality of its portfolio improved to highly satisfactory standards, and country
exposure fell. None of the potential risks envisioned in the CAS materialized (the end-of-
sexenio did not lead to a crisis; no externally or domestically generated macroeconomic shock
took place; the financial sector stabilized and strengthened; and there was no reduction in
projected counterpart funding). And new frontiers were reached in the relationship with the
country-for the first time, the CAS Progress Report was made public, systematic CAS
consultations with civil society were held, transition Policy Notes were published, an adjustment
operation was implemented at the state level, a daylong summit between a Mexican President
and the President of the WBG took place, and previously closed sectors/areas were open to
analytical work (corruption, judicial, gender).
4. 
The combination of country development and success in delivering assistance has placed
the relationship between Mexico and the WBG at an encouraging high point. Yet, for all the
progress achieved, 45 million Mexicans are still poor, inequality remains massive (as do
disparities across ethnic groups, genders, and business sizes), and the already vast development
gap between north and south continues to widen. The WBG will therefore maintain its support
over the next three years, and help the govermment seize the unique opportunity for poverty
reduction that the new political era has brought about-an opportunity that may not last long or
repeat itself. This call for continuing support has been voiced not only by the government, but
also by civil society and private business sector representatives consulted during the preparation
of this CAS.
5. 
Addressing the development challenges pending in Mexico will take formidable efforts
on several policy fronts. Those efforts can, however, be organized around five strategic
objectives: (a) consolidating the macroeconomic framework; (b) accelerating growth through
competitiveness; (c) human capital development; (d) balancing growth and poverty reduction
with environmental protection; and (e) building an efficient, transparent, and accountable
government. These objectives, which underlie the federal authorities' National Development
Plan, will also be the motivating pillars of this CAS. To deliver the WBG's assistance, IBRD
will retain a rich program of analytical work and offer a three-year, US$5 billion lending
envelope (half of which will be fast-disbursing) that preserves a US$1.5 billion "cushion,"
balances macro- and micro-oriented activities, and caters to the three levels of government
(federal, state, and municipal). That five-pillar IBRD strategy will be integrative and mutually
reinforcing of IFC's program of interventions-in turn, geared to provide a wider spectrum of
private entreprises with a better and broader business environment in which to operate, including
a more developed financial market, better means to compete internationally and, critically,
support in accessing industries that may become open to private participation. (The WBG's
Private Sector Strategy is presented in Annex B 10).
6. 
The 
strategy described above 
(five poverty-reducing pillars guiding 
IBRD's
interventions, and IFC's support for broad-based private sector development) heeds the lessons
learned during previous CAS cycles-the value of program flexibility, attention to portfolio
quality, timely analytical work, interaction with subnational governments, balance between
macro- and microeconomic interventions, and country ownership. These lessons give comfort
that the risks embedded in this CAS are manageable-risks of large, negative macroeconomic
shocks; Congressional paralysis; reform complacency; weak intra- and intergovernmental
coordination; unsuccessful federalismo; or infrastructure crises. Finally, the strategy presented

2

here fits into, and exploits the synergies of, the array of comparative advantages across partner
institutions operating in Mexico, especially the IDB and the IMF.

II. THE COUNTRY CONTEXT

(a) The Political Arena
7. 
The transformation of the Mexican political system toward a multiparty democracy
acquired a new dimension with the election of President Vicente Fox in July 2000, thereby
ending a period of one-party domination that had lasted for seven decades and, more profoundly,
redefining the roles of the legislative, executive, and judicial branches and those of political
parties and local governments. Breaking with a history of recurrent end-of-sexenio crises, the
transition of power was remarkably smooth-due in good part to solid macroeconomic
management. Greater political plurality has been a welcome factor both within Mexico and
abroad, for it entails a search for consensus around pending reforms (and, indeed, around the
kind of society Mexicans want), a tool for conflict resolution, and a mechanism to enhance
transparency and accountability in the exercise of the government function.
8. 
Predictably, the election results raised unrealistic expectations for immediate change.
And, predictably, after only a year and a half in office, the administration has made slower than
hoped for progress in enacting its ambitious legislative and policy agenda. With none of the
political parties having an absolute majority in Congress and with limited country experience in
legislative pluralism, negotiations over the two major reforms so far proposed by the Executive
(indigenous law and tax reform) were protracted and, eventually, passed with substantial
modifications. Furthermore, the administration's legislative agenda over the next year will be
conditioned by the mid-term Congressional elections of July 2003. Yet, the chances for reform
are not negligible, because neither the administration nor the various political parties stand to
benefit from legislative gridlock. To be sure, the agenda of pending reforms is a challenging
one-it includes opening the power sector to private sector initiatives, a new labor code that can
keep Mexican workers competitive as the country further integrates into the world economy, a
new social security scheme for public sector employees 
that does not threaten fiscal
sustainability or stiffen the labor market, the rationalization of water use, and an adjustment in
the mandate of public development banks.
9. 
Those reforms, and the ensuing consensus-building efforts, will have to take into account
another dimension of governing today's Mexico-the speed and depth of the decentralization
process, or federalismo. Since the early 1990s, decisionmaking power has been gradually
devolved to state and municipal governments. This process gathered momentum in 1997 when,
after legislative elections, Congress was no longer dominated by a single party and political
negotiations led to the transfer of responsibility for major budget lines (in the so-called Ramo 33)
to subnational authorities. The results of the presidential elections of 2000 gave additional force
to decentralization-federalismo being a priority for President Fox, himself a former state
governor. As a result, policy decisions in key development areas (such as education, health, and
the enviromnent) are quickly becoming the prerogative of states and municipalities. While local
responsibility is in general welfare-enhancing (because it brings decisionmakers and decision-
beneficiaries closer together), it requires a clear framework of "rules of the game" if it is not to
become a destabilizing element countrywide. Those rules are much more than technical
parameters, because they will determine whether the quality of government services Mexicans

3

receive and, ultimately, the standard of living they enjoy, differ substantially across regions. In
other words, the party controlling the federal government will have to establish working
partnerships with 31 states (and one large federal district) and some 2,400 municipalities of
which it controls only one third and one tenth, respectively.

(b) Recent Economic Developments
10. 
After an extended period of strong expansion, economic activity in Mexico experienced a
sharp slowdown during 2001 as the downturn in the global economy, and in particular in the
U.S. economy, spread across emerging markets. Growth of Mexican manufactured exports, nine
tenths of which go to the United States, plummeted from an average annual growth rate of 20
percent to minus 3 percent last year. Such a pronounced drop in external demand and the related
slump in manufacturing investment led to a contraction of real GDP growth during 2001, down
to -0.3 percent, in contrast to the 5.6 percent average annual growth rate observed over the
preceding five-year period.
11. 
Even during the contraction, the economy proved resilient in many ways-thanks in large
part to sound macroeconomic management. Whereas during the rapid economic expansion of
2000 there was a relatively expansionary fiscal stance and a tight monetary policy, the new
authorities during 2001 targeted a lower budget deficit (0.7 percent of GDP), and implemented
budget rules automatically cutting expenditures when revenues turn out lower than budgeted.
Monetary policy was eased, although cautiously, in the face of strong capital inflows, weakening
of domestic demand, and lower inflation expectations. Cautious monetary management, the
appreciation of the currency (due to the strength of capital inflows), and the slowdown in growth,
all combined to keep inflation in check-the 2001 year-end inflation rate fell to 4.4 percent, well
below the initial target of 6.5 percent.
12. 
The external accounts remained manageable. The balance of payments' current account
deficit stayed practically unchanged from the previous year (at 2.8 percent of GDP), as lower
manufacturing export revenues and lower oil prices were largely offset by a similar reduction in
imported intermediate inputs and capital goods. Mexico has continued to enjoy favorable access
to external financing and steady investment flows. This simultaneously allowed for the bulk of
the current account's deficit to be financed through foreign direct investment, an accumulation of
international reserves, a strengthening of the peso, a reduction in private investors' perception of
country risk as measured by sovereign bond spreads, and a significant reduction of domestic
interest rates. As of March 2002, Mexico's sovereign bonds have investnent-grade rating by all
three major international rating agencies, making it possible for a broad range of foreign
institutional investors to buy Mexican bonds. The economy thus seems well positioned for a
strong recovery upon the rebound of economic activity in the United States, expected in the
second half of 2002.
13. 
Fiscal discipline is a key priority for the administration. As part of that discipline, the
government proceeded with the publication of a broadened fiscal deficit measure, known as the
Public Sector Borrowing Requirements (PSBR),2 which is projected at 4 percent of GDP for

2. The PSBR includes some quasi-fiscal operations that are not or are only partially included under the traditional
fiscal deficit measure, such as the total interest cost of liabilities related to bank and debtor support programs, the
deferred cost of investment projects (PIDIREGAS) in the energy sector, the net financial intermediation by
development banks, and the inflation component of indexed bonds. The PSBR excludes nonrecurrent revenues
from privatization and unrealized capital gains.

4

2002 (in contrast to the budget deficit target in its traditional definition at 0.7 percent of GDP).
The shift of the attention to the PBSR was part of the motivation behind new tax legislation
enacted in December 2001 that is expected to increase tax revenue by 1.2 percent of GDP in
2002. This additional income has been allocated to offset low oil prices, and to finance priority
social expenditures. 
In 
its 
recently published medium-term 
financing 
framework
(PRONAFIDE), the government stated its intention to move gradually to fiscal balance (on a
PSBR basis) by 2006, something that will require further fiscal consolidation in the near future.
Mexico has no active IMF program and no outstanding obligations to the IMF (see Section VI).
14. 
Over the CAS implementation period, the Mexican economy is expected to recover from
its current, shallow recession toward the economy's medium term potential annual rate of growth
of about 4-5 percent. Even though the recovery of demand for Mexican manufactured exports
will initially be the driver of the economic expansion, the strong rebound expected as of the
second half of 2002 is projected to be broad-based, i.e., a simultaneous and balanced growth of
consumption, investment and export demand. This growth pattern is expected to lead to an
increase in the country's balance of payments' current account deficit from the current 2.8
percent of GDP to about 4 percent of GDP by 2004 and stabilizing at that level thereafter.
Foreign direct investment flows will continue to finance the bulk of the country's external
deficit. Further fiscal consolidation is projected to take place not only to make progress in
attaining fiscal sustainability but also as a key instrument in aggregate demand management and
price stability (Table 1); Section IIIa describes the instruments of fiscal consolidation in more
detail.
Table 1. Mexico-Main Macroeconomic Indicators

Indicator 

Actual 

1999 

2000 

Estimated 

2001 

Projected

2002 

2003 

2004 

2005

Gross Domestic Product(% growth) 
Consumption 
Investment 
Exports 
Imports 
Balance of Payments
Current Account (US$ billion) 
Current Account (as % ofGDP) 
Foreign Direct Investment (US$ billion) 
Fiscal Balance (as % of GDP)
Traditional definition 
Broadened PSBR 
Inflation (% year-end) 

3.8 
4.2 
4.1 
12.4 
13.8 

-14.4 
-3.0 
11.9 

-1.2 
-6.3 
12.3 

6.9 
8.7 
8.8 
16.0 
21.4 

-17.7 
-3.1 
14.2 

-1.2 
-3.7 
9.0 

-0.3 
1.7 
-9.2 
-5.0 
-6.0 

-17.5 
-2.8 
21.0 

-0.7 
-3.8 
4.4 

1.5 
1.4 
4.0 
2.7 
4.0 

-22.7 
-3.5 
13.6 

-0.6 
-4.0 
4.5 

4.1 
3.7 
6.6 
6.0 
6.5 

-26.5 
-3.9 
14.4 

-0.3 
-3.1 
3.5 

4.5 
3.9 
6.6 
6.1 
5.9 

-29.0 
-4.0 
15.8 

-0.3 
-2.6 
3.0 

5.0
4.9
5.0
6.2
5.9

-31.1
-4.0
16.6

0.0
-2.1
3.0

III. MEXICO'S DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGE: POVERTY REDUCTION IN THE
NEW ERA

15. 
Through fast and sustained growth, Mexico has over the last six years made solid
progress in combating poverty, and has left behind the devastating social effect of the 1994-95
crisis-which in a few months, fully undid the 10-percentage-point reduction in poverty levels
painstakingly achieved over the preceding decade. From 1994 to 1996, the share of the

5

population in poverty (defined as having a level of per capita consumption below what is
necessary to meet basic food and nonfood needs) 3 drastically increased, from 51 to 62 percent at
the national level. Since 1996, however, there has been an impressive turnaround, with the share
of the population in poverty in 2000 having declined to 46 percent nationally. The share of the
population in extreme poverty (defined as not being able to meet basic food needs) 4 has also
fallen dramatically. Poverty, and especially extreme poverty, remains much higher in rural than
in urban areas, but in both urban and rural areas, poverty is now below the 1994 precrisis level
(Table 2).

Table 2. Share of the Population in Extreme Poverty and Poverty in Mexico

Urban 

Rural 

National 

Urban 
Rural 
National 

1989 

18.13 
41.38 
27.04 

1989 
50.70 
69.32 
57.84 

Extreme Poverty

1994 

1996 

10.95 
18.16 
49.78 
60.47 
21.46 
29.72 
Extreme and Moderate Poverty
1994 
1996 
40.64 
53.25 
78.82 
84.84 
50.97 
61.88 

1992 

16.79 
44.66 
24.42 

1992 
49.14 
73.26 
55.74 

1998 

16.25 
57.06 
27.31 

1998 
49.97 
82.06 
58.66 

2000

8.45
46.08
18.02

2000
36.33
73.29
45.73

Source: World Bank staff estimates based on the ENIGH surveys. The poverty measures are based on a
comparison of total per capita current consumption (not adjusted to the national accounts) with poverty lines
representing the cost of basic needs and computed following the INEGI/CEPAL method.

16. 
The lesson from the 1990s is clear-while many factors certainly play a role (notably,
efficient social expenditures), growth is the most important determinant of poverty in Mexico.
This close link between growth and poverty was a central theme of the previous CAS and
remains so in this document, not only because of the obvious improvement that growth brings to
the income of the poor, but also because of the positive synergies that it brings to their
nonmonetary welfare (such as infant mortality, life expectancy, school enrollment, and access to
safe water). Growth in Mexico is "propoor," because the distribution of gains in nonmonetary
indicators favors the poor (for example, when enrollment rates increase, the poor are more likely
to benefit from the increase than the nonpoor because the nonpoor already send their children to
school). This should help Mexico meet, in some cases ahead of the 2015 deadline, the
Millennium Development Goals (especially the extreme poverty target) (see Table 3).5 WBG
estimates suggest that, in Mexico, an annual average GDP growth rate of 5 percent would reduce
infant and under-five mortality by almost half by 2015, life expectancy would increase by more
than five years, and net primary enrollment would come close to 97 percent. More generally,
such an overall rate of growth would bring the level of extreme poverty (defined on a US$1/day
basis which differs from the poverty lines in Table 2) down to 5 percent of the population by
2015 (that is, less than a third of the level in 1989).

3. That level of consumption translates into a Mexican peso value of 970 and 776 per month per person in urban
and rural areas, respectively, in 2000 prices.
4. A Mexican peso value of 485 and 443 in urban and rural areas, respectively, per month per person in 2000 prices.
5. Table 3 accounts for seven of the eight Millennium Development Goals; at present, there is no sufficient data to
assess fulfillment of the eighth such goal-Global Partnership for Development.

6

Table 3. Mexico and the Millennium Development Goals
Targets 
Position of the World 
Current Position of Mexico
1. Reduce the proportion of people 
20 percent of the world population Using the US$1/day poverty line (which differs
living in extreme poverty and 
live on less than US$1 a day 
from the poverty lines used in Table 1), an
suffering from hunger by half 
(WBG estimate for 2000). 
estimated 13.2 percent of Mexico's population was
between 1990 and 2015. 
living in extreme poverty in 2000, versus 16.2
percent in 1989. The prevalence of malnutrition
among children under age five decreased from
14.4 percent in 1988 to 7.5 percent in 1999.
According to the 2000 population census, 91.3
percent of Mexico's elementary-school-age
children (6-14) are enrolled.

2. Achieve universal completion of 90 percent of the world's 
primary education by 2015 for both 
elementary-school-age children 
boys and girls. 
(6-14) are enrolled (WBG 
estimate for 1997).
3. Eliminate gender disparities in Worldwide, there is a gender gap There is only a 0.6 percentage point gender gap in
primary and secondary education by of 7.6 percent in the primary 
elementary education enrollment (ages 6-14) in
2005, and for all levels by 2015. 
education Gross Enrollment Ratio Mexico (Population Census 2000). However, the
(WBG estimate for 1996). 
gender gap increases at higher levels of schooling.
4. Reduce infant and child mortality Worldwide, the infant mortality According to WBG data, the under-five mortality
rates by two thirds between 1990 and rate per 1,000 live births was 54.2 rate in Mexico was 35.8 per 1,000 in 2000,
2015. 
(WBG estimate for 1999). 
compared to 46.0 per 1,000 in 1990.
5. Reduce matemal mortality rate by Worldwide, there are 400 
According to Mexico's Ministry of Health, the
three quarters between 1990 and 
maternal deaths per 100,000 live matemal mortality rate has been reduced from 54
2015. 
births (estimates depend on 
per 100,000 in 1990 to 51 per 100,000 in 1999.
method used; UNFPA 1995).
In 1999, the worldwide 
prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS 
among adults aged 15-49 was 
1.07 percent (WHO data). 

In 1999, the prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS among
adults aged 15-49 in Mexico was 0.3 percent.
Among women aged 15-24, it was in the range of
0.05-0.08 percent. Among men aged 15-24, it was
in the range of 0.33-0.48 percent (WHO data).
In Mexico, access to an improved water source
increased from 83 percent of the population in
1990 to 86 percent in 2000 (WBG data).

6. Halt and reverse by 2015 the 
spread of HIV/AIDS, malaria, and 
other diseases. 

7. Ensure environmental 
Worldwide, in 2000, 
sustainability. One indicator is 
approximately 80 percent of the 
access to an improved water source. population had access to water. 

17. Mexico's achievements 
in poverty 
reduction and development 
are, however,
overshadowed by four persistent characteristics of the country's social map: (a) although
reduced, absolute poverty numbers remain unacceptably high (some 45 million Mexicans are
still poor); (b) there is sharp inequality in the distribution of income, which seems immune to the
growth process and so far resilient to policy interventions (by current Gini measurements,
Mexico's is the one of the most unequal economies in Latin America; see Table 4); (c) the
incidence of extreme poverty in rural areas is abnormally acute (in 2000, almost one in every two
Mexicans living in rural areas was extremely poor); and (d) there is a widening development gap
between the southern region and the rest of Mexico (southerners are far poorer, less educated,
less likely to have running water, and more likely to die younger). These characteristics gather
additional urgency when seen in the light of the available employment opportunities for the
poor-while formal unemployment has remained low, some 1 million new jobs are needed each
year just to accommodate new entrants into the labor force (at the peak of its recent growth
performance, the Mexican economy managed to create only about 600,000 such jobs).

7

Table 4. Inequality in Total Current Income (Gini Coefficient)

Year 
1984 
1989 
1992 
1994 
1996 
1998 
2000 

National 
0.473 
0.519 
0.529 
0.534 
0.519 
0.543 
0.539 

Urban 
0.442 
0.498 
0.498 
0.508 
0.493 
0.511 
0.505 

Rural
0.448
0.444
0.434
0.419
0.452
0.480
0.470

18. 
Both the achievements and the remaining challenges in reducing poverty and inequality
(and creating jobs), point to a new agenda for Mexico's development-one that combines the
effect of a solid macroeconomic framework and sustained growth with micro interventions by
sector and region in order to bring the benefits of growth to all Mexicans. This comprehensive
agenda, and the macro-micro links that it implies, can be organized around five challenges that
are embedded in the country's 2001-06 National Development Plan-{a) consolidating the
macroeconomic gains of recent years; (b) accelerating growth through competitiveness; (c)
developing the stock of human capital; (d) balancing growth and poverty reduction with
environmental protection; and 
(e) building an efficient, accountable, and 
transparent

government. 6

(a) Consolidating Macroeconomic Gains

19. 
Since the financial crisis of 1994, Mexico's macro framework has had three pillars: (a) a
tight and fairly independent monetary policy, (b) a flexible foreign exchange regime, and (c) a
conservative fiscal stance. This arrangement not only took the economy out of its crisis, but
delivered a respectable rate of growth, single-digit inflation, a viable external balance, a
comfortable debt position, and three investment-grade sovereign credit ratings, all despite four
major international crises that dampened economic prospects worldwide (East Asia in 1997,
Russia in 1998, Brazil in 1999, and Argentina in 2001). It thus seems sensible, over the coming
years, to stay the course in macroeconomic policy, with one exception: fiscal management needs
further strengthening.
20. 
The challenge of strengthening Mexico's fiscal and, thus, macroeconomic framework,
involves policy efforts in several areas: (a) completing the tax reform initiated in December 2001
(whereby some major loopholes in the tax code were closed) and, equally important, improving
the quality of tax administration; (b) establishing budget rules to stabilize revenues, reduce oil
dependency, and avoid pro-cyclical fiscal policies (the country's oil revenue stabilization fund
provides a good platform from which to design those rules); (c) addressing the public sector's
implicit and contingent liabilities accumulated during past banking and transport sector rescues
(by IPAB and FARAC), and currently building up through the deficits of various public housing

6. Mexico's National Development Plan 2001-06 is a broad government agenda that covers areas that go beyond
(although are not unrelated to) economic development. It presents three main objectives: (a) Social and Human
Development (education, equity, collective initiative, harmony with the environment, confidence in public
institutions); (b) Growth with Quality (macroeconomic management, competitiveness, inclusive development,
regional development, sustainable development); and (c) Order and Respect (sovereignty, national security,
democracy, 
federalism, 
population 
dynamics, 
corruption, 
public 
security, 
justice). 
See
www.presidencia.pob.mx.

8

institutions 
and guarantees 
in 
infrastructure 
contracts 
(INFONAVIT, FOVISSSTE,
PIDIREGAS), or latent in the actuarial imbalances of the federal and state public-employee
pension systems (ISSSTE); and (d) ensuring, through hard-budget constraints, that Mexico's
rapidly unfolding decentralization process remains fiscally sustainable, both for the federation
and for the states (see below).

(b) Accelerating Growth Through Enhanced Competitiveness

21. 
In the past, Mexican governments sought to foster growth by bolstering aggregate
domestic demand, the result of which were short-lived growth spurts brought to a halt by
balance-of-payment crises. Today, with the country already integrated in and enjoying the
benefits of the global economy, particularly in NAFTA, long-term growth acceleration will be
sustainable only if achieved through an economywide enhancement in competitiveness. This
needs to encompass both export-oriented firms (which in Mexico tend to be large formal
corporations) and those catering for the domestic markets (which are usually smaller or
informal). A large array of factors contribute to a country's competitiveness. This section
focuses on the four challenges which, at present, could most add to Mexico's competitiveness:
(a) enhancing the quality of its physical infrastructure, (b) broadening the reform of its financial
sector, (c) raising the productivity of its agriculture, and (d) integrating middle-market and
micro- and small enterprises into the "new" Mexican economy.
22. 
Despite major advances in creating an open and supportive environment for private
businesses to operate in Mexico, the infrastructure sector has not fully benefited from the
efficiency enhancing effect of private participation-an uncomfortable position for a country that
is estimated to need additional infrastructure investments worth 2 percent of GDP per year over
the next 10 years, and has limited public sector resources to pay for it. For example, the energy
subsector (petroleum, natural gas, and electricity) still faces the challenges of structural reform,
to unbundle activities, create strong and independent regulatory bodies, and establish a robust
competition framework. The transport system is in a similar position. Although Mexico has
enhanced the quality and efficiency of its airports and ports (mainly through private-sector-led
competition), the quality of its road network is declining, reflecting years of inadequate
maintenance and poorly designed private concessions. 7 From highways to secondary and rural
roads, the upcoming challenge is to find contractual arrangements with private partners for
federal and local governments that ensure both financial and physical sustainability. To improve
export competitiveness, more attention is needed to facilitating multimodal transport and
associated logistical improvements.
23. 
Sustainability is an even more immediate issue for the water and sanitation subsector,
which faces a crisis in the near term. Weak pricing policies, payment enforcement and property
rights, and unclear definition of responsibilities and varying institutional capacities across levels
of government contribute to the problem. While aggregate figures of service coverage compare
favorably to most other Latin American countries, one out of eight Mexicans (mostly poor) lack
access to clean water, and one out of five lack sanitation service. The government is aware of
the health risks associated with these deficiencies and has declared them a matter of national

7. An attempt in the last decade to expand the highway network via an aggressive toll road concessions program
ended up in a highway sector crisis as a result of unrealistic demand assessments and faulty financial design,
with many private concessionaires eventually having to be bailed out by the federal government under a special

FARAC program.

9

security. As with other parts of the country's infrastructure, a sustainable solution to the water
problems will call for private-public partnerships.
24. 
Private participation has also been limited in another critical component of Mexico's
infrastructure-housing. The country has an estimated housing deficit of about 4.6 million
housing units, a gap that is rapidly expanding as some 700,000 new families are formed each
year. Meeting that pent-up demand will involve bringing private financiers to a market that has
always been dominated by public financial institutions dispensing subsidies which, in turn, have
been financed through social security contributions and payroll taxes. The government
recognized the magnitude of the necessary reform, especially in transforming dispersed subsidies
into means-tested, up-front, demand-side contributions, restructuring major public institutions
(notably INFONAVIT, FOVI, and FOVISSTE), facilitating the development of primary and
secondary housing finance markets, opening a new role for microfinance institutions for housing
and home improvements, and coordinating the related federal level agencies (SEDESOL,
Housing Commission, etc.) with each other and with state and municipal authorities. 
In the
urban context, that coordination will also be critical to provide the housing market with a viable
physical context-that is, with an integrated, metropolitan-area-based approach that combines
basic urban infrastructure and services with effective land planning and titling, affordable urban
transportation, and environmental preservation.
25. 
The second task implicit in the challenge of enhancing Mexico's competitiveness is to
build a broad-based and efficient financial sector. The country has overcome the traumatic
banking crisis of 1995; it has succeeded in establishing an adequately capitalized, competitive
banking industry that operates within solid supervisory and regulatory parameters, that has
received abundant foreign direct investment, and that enjoys a more conducive legal framework
for loan recovery. While the crisis-driven assumption of bad loans and resolution of unviable
banks has created a large, long-term debt for the govermment, asset recovery and debt
management is being handled effectively (through the so-called IPAB). These are hoped to set
the stage for a long-awaited recovery of domestic credit that contracted during the past six years.
However, several areas of the financial sector beyond banks remain in need of reform. First, the
mandates (and, thus, practices) of the public development banks will have to be adjusted to the
new realities of the markets in which they have been operating (for example, BANOBRAS in the
current, more fiscally decentralized and more market-driven 
framework for subnational
borrowing) and to ensure that they complement, rather than compete with, private initiative (for
example, BANRURAL's role in giving access to credit to the rural, unbanked poor).
26. 
Nonbank credit institutions, especially those serving the poor and populations in the rural
areas, will likely play a more prominent role, calling for matching supervisory arrangements (for
example, implementing recently passed legislation governing microcredit, saving and loans, and
financial cooperative institutions). Third, while major progress has been achieved in giving
private-sector workers adequate mechanisms for long-term saving, the reform of the public-
employee pension systems (both federal and state) has not begun and, in some cases, will require
a revision of the cross-funding arrangement that those systems operate (for example, financing
health insurance or mortgages). Finally, Mexican capital markets remain largely untapped as a
source of finance, notably long-term finance. 
Improvements 
in information disclosure,
protection of minority shareholder rights, corporate governance, and the like are still under
implementation. Further private sector participation is needed to broaden the institutional
investor base and strengthen still nascent capital market infrastructure.

10

27. With adequate physical infrastructure and a more effective financial sector, Mexico will
be well placed to tackle the third constraint to its competitiveness-the low productivity of its
agriculture and the integration of its rural sector into the rest of the economy. This sector has,
arguably, had the most drastic structural reforms over the last decade (GATT- and NAFTA-
driven trade liberalization, elimination of price interventions, constitutional reform of land
tenure), but the results have been disappointing 
(stagnating growth, 
lack of external
competitiveness, 
increased rural poverty) in spite of much public support (PROCAMPO,
PROCEDE, Alianzapara el Campo, CONASUPO, ASERCA, among others). Past reforms have
not resolved decades of structural limitations in the capacity of smallholders to access assets, to
participate in better-functioning factor and goods markets (land, financial services, labor,
warehousing, technology), and to add value in the marketing chain, all of which have severely
constrained the contribution of the rural sector to the growth process. This presents a major
policy challenge because the NAFTA agreement will put the sector in open competition with
Canada and the United States as of 2008. The key will be to redesign and coordinate official
support programs so that they promote diversification into higher-value crops or shifts into more
productive on-farm and off-farm activities. The government is aware of these challenges and has
already put in motion a number of initiatives: (a) it enacted a new Rural Development Law that
provides the framework for future policy and institutional intervention in the sector; (b) it
approved a Sector Development Plan that emphasizes competitiveness, on-farm and off-farm
employment generation, promotion of rural enterprises, rural finance, and regional development;
(c) it enacted the Capitalization Law that disconnects the PROCAMPO payments from planting
and permits "cashing-out" the discounted value of the whole of those payments against viable
investment projects; and (d) it is restructuring and decentralizing its support programs for
enhanced integration and relevance.
28. 
Finally, the effort to enhance competitiveness will worsen income distribution if it leaves
behind the mass of middle-market and micro- and small (mostly informal) enterprises that make
up Mexico's "other economy" and that, by some estimates, may account for as much as three
quarters of total employment. These homegrown enterprises represent a core of the Mexican
private sector, and if left behind, could become an Achilles' heel for Mexico's long-term growth
and poverty reduction. Improving investment climate for these enterprises is therefore critical.
Indeed, proceeding with the comprehensive infrastructure and financial sector reforms described
earlier, eliminating labor-related rigidities (see below) and, importantly, rationalizing and
decentralizing the 200-odd federally funded, size-specific support programs are also essential to
mitigate the tradeoff faced by the typical informal entrepreneur-to avoid regulatory costs by
remaining small and informal ("under the regulator's radar") or to abide by the regulations in
order to expand and reap economies of scale. The government has made a good start on this by
launching an Enterprise Development and Competitiveness Plan for 2002-06-an overall
strategy to foster the provision of microfinance including private sector initiatives, technological
upgrading, and business development services.

(c) Human Capital Development

29. 
Over recent decades, Mexican governments have implemented several nationwide
programs to reduce poverty. The record of those programs, especially earlier ones, is mixed and
their sustainability is unproven. Yet, past efforts provide a solid platform from which to tackle
the poverty and the inequality problems on a more permanent basis, not through open-ended

11

transfers but, rather, through human capital development. This encompasses reform challenges
in education, health, social protection, labor markets, and in the group-specific needs of
indigenous peoples, women, and the rural poor.
30. Mexico's education system continues to be the focus of many quality-improvement and
outreach programs (Carrera Magisterial, PRODEI, PARE, Escuelas Comunitarias, PAREIB,
Telesecundaria, among others). Many of these programs are achieving their objectives. Access
to primary education is universal, secondary enrollment is high and continues to increase, and
per capita educational expenditure has been expanded. This provides a good stepping stone from
which to address a broader challenge in Mexico's public education-to bring the system to the
next level of quality, a level compatible with the demands of a modernizing economy. The
current teacher-centered teaching model, which effectively emphasizes memorization to the
detriment of comprehension and was designed for the average student, has to be abandoned in
favor of cooperative, student-driven learning by investigation, where the teacher is not just the
source of knowledge and the custodial controller of the students but, rather, the class facilitator.
31. 
That new teaching approach will require adjustment in the curriculum (which will have to
put more weight on critical thinking and communication); in time-on-task (more time devoted to
classroom teaching and less to classroom administration and mechanical repetitions-it is
estimated that a Mexican primary school teacher spends less than half of the prescribed 810
classroom hours per year actually teaching); in the school environment (teachers will need to
have more say about the type and amount of textbooks, material, and infrastructure that their
individual classes get, and the government's near monopoly in textbook production will need to
be eliminated to give room to creative competition); and, most critically, in the nature of the
mechanisms for teacher and school accountability (supervisor and parent participation will have
to focus less on process and more on actual results, as measured by published student scores in
standardized national tests). 
In all these reforms, the teachers themselves (individually and
collectively through their unions) and the states (which, as recipients of the education
decentralization process, will need to be in charge of human resource management in the sector)
will have to be included as partners. All this amounts to a change in the culture of Mexico's
education system, a change that will take time but that can start during the current sexenio.
32. 
A change in culture is also the key to improving quality in the health sector. In the past,
Mexico used centralized institutions and vertical programs to control infectious diseases and
increase prevention and education. This brought about major first-generation successes-lower
maternal and infant mortality, higher vaccination rates, and higher life expectancy. These and
other factors have changed the country's epidemiological profile, and now chronic diseases and
injuries are becoming the main causes of death and disability, new health threats are emerging
(such as AIDS and pollution), and increasingly sophisticated consumers demand advanced-
technology medicine. These second-generation issues call for a change in the government's role
away from command-and-control and toward facilitating private provision, while ensuring
universal access to an essential health package.
33. 
To fulfill its new role in the health sector, the government will need to put in place new
institutional and financing arrangements and a different market structure for health services. The
current public health institutions (SSA; IMSS; IMSS-Solidaridad; ISSSTE; the health services of
PEMEX, the states, the Federal District, the police, the armed forces, and other parastatals) each
finance and operate health systems with their own facilities and physicians. This raises costs and
fails to pool risk. The fragmentation among public health institutions shelters them from private

12

competition and hampers efforts to set an adequate legal and regulatory framework for regulation
of private health providers. 
It perpetuates the subsidization of supply rather than means-tested
demand, and precludes the objective of universal coverage. Furthermore, the current industry
structure makes it difficult to accommodate another institutional arrangement that is sweeping
the provision of public health service-decentralization to state and municipal responsibility.
34. While education and health undoubtedly top Mexico's list of social investment needs, it
remains a challenge to set up mechanisms able to protect that investment. The country's
progress in social assistance and social insurance has been significant. Some of its social
assistance programs are world models-notably OPORTUNIDADES (formerly known as
PROGRESA), a direct income transfer arrangement for poor, rural women conditional on the use
of selected education, health, and nutritional services by themselves and their children. The
general direction in food-related programs (like Liconsa, Tortibono, Diconsa, and DIF Breakfast)
has been the right one: means-testing has largely replaced universal subsidization, and program
decentralization to the state and municipal level is proceeding. The same appears to be the case
for income-generating interventions (PET, PROBECAT, Apoyos Productivos, among others).
Yet, important gaps in social risk coverage still exist. The social security system covers only one
in every five of the urban elderly population, and only 2 percent of the total poor. Critical social
assistance tools (like preschool and ECD programs) have at best limited reach in rural,
indigenous areas. And poor, urban, school-aged children too often drop out of both ends of the
school system. In social insurance, the pension system and negative income tax regime have, by
nature, benefited the formal, middle-class workers, and left out the informal, the poor, and the
unemployed.
35. 
Even though building and protecting human capital is the key to reducing poverty, human
capital does not by itself reduce poverty. The poor need to be able to earn income with that
capital. The link between human capital formation and actual poverty reduction is provided by
the labor market. 
It is therefore a serious concern that the legal and regulatory framework for
Mexico's labor market is outdated (part of it dates back to 1917) and constitutes an impediment
for workers, especially poor workers, in an increasingly globalized economy. The current
system of severance payments; collective bargaining and industry-binding contracts (contratos-
ley); obligatory union memberships (cldusula de exclusion); compulsory profit sharing;
restrictions to temporary, fixed-term and apprenticeship contracts; requirements for seniority-
based promotions; 
registration of firm-provided 
training programs; and 
liability 
for
subcontractors' employees (patr6n indirecto) do not benefit the employees. As a result, roughly
one in every two Mexican workers remains in the informal labor market, about half of them
against their will. 
It is also not surprising that NAFTA investors resent Mexican labor
regulations and pass the cost on to workers through lower wages-those regulations impose a
"tax wedge" worth 31 percent of payroll, compared with 12 and 19 percent in Canada and the
United States, respectively.
36. 
Finally, the challenge of human capital formation is particularly difficult for three,
overlapping social groups-women, indigenous populations, and the rural poor. 
Socially
ascribed gender roles have placed women at a clear disadvantage in terms of both health
(especially reproductive health), education, labor, and personal safety. Similarly, about I in 10
Mexicans defines himself or herself as indigenous and holds, and may respond to, a different set
of economic values, whereby assets (especially land) are nontradable sources of group identity,
community benefit is held in higher regard than individual profit maximization, traditional social

13

governance bodies are trusted over those dictated by the country's laws, social organization is
based on prestige and civic duty, and the language of preference (and frequently the only
language) is not Spanish. The recently passed Indigenous Rights Bill is an attempt, although a
contested one, to recognize those differences. Correlated with that ethnicity, the incidence of
extreme poverty in rural areas, especially in the ejidos, is disproportionately high-and
persistent. Past reforrns in the sector have not resolved decades of structural and cultural
limitations on the capacity of poor farmers to access input and output markets. Nor have they
addressed the heterogeneity of the rural sector and its regional variations. As a result the sector
remains uncompetitive, segmented between farm and off-farm employment, and unable to
capture the externalities of conglomeration between urban centers and rural areas.

(d) Balancing Growth and Poverty Reduction with Protecting the Environment

37. Mexico's economic growth has been predicated, in great part, on the mining of natural
resources and, in the absence of a coherent approach to environmental protection, has
contributed significantly to polluting the environment. Water, forests, biodiversity, and air
quality are being depleted in order to foster growth, which "green" national accounting shows
has cost the country some 10 percent of GDP per year. Such degradation has now become a
binding constraint to Mexico's external competitiveness, and to its ability to access new markets,
attract foreign investments, and further develop its tourism industry. As a member of NAFTA,
WTO, and the OECD, the country is compelled to enhance its environmental standards and
compliance mechanisms. There is growing international awareness that exports based on
polluting production carry negative global externalities and constitute an unfair competitive
advantage. Moreover, the deterioration of the environment is already becoming a physical
impediment to production. For example, the depletion of aquifers (100 of Mexico's 257 aquifers
are being overexploited) is a direct impediment to industrial activity in the northern states, where
most of Mexico's economic dynamism is located. 
In other words, at the current rate of
environmental degradation, growth and, hence, poverty reduction, are no longer sustainable.
38. 
Yet, 
the relationship among poverty and environmental degradation presents the
characteristic of a vicious circle-in many rural areas, depleting natural resources appears to be
the only way for the poor to survive because they lack access to markets, public services,
infrastructure, and, plainly, better alternatives. This calls for a revision of existing development
programs and incentive structures, whereby pricing policies and subsidies (in water, energy,
agriculture) that claim to assist the poor, actually convey perverse signals and induce overuse,
misallocation, and waste of environmental assets. Thus, unless the implicit short-term tradeoffs
between social protection and environmental protection are addressed, environmental programs
are likely to fail.
39. 
Environmental management in Mexico also entails difficult institutional challenges.
First, the definition of property rights over natural resources, both on individual and community
bases, remains incomplete, as does the enforcement of those rights and the ensuing protection
responsibilities (especially in a large country like Mexico, where enforcement must also rely on
market-driven instruments, social communal control, public disclosure programs, and voluntary
compliance). 
Second, decentralization of environmental management (a very desirable
arrangement for a function so dependent on local knowledge) is now under way but faces uneven
institutional capacities across states and municipalities and weak fiscal incentives for those
subnationals to tax polluters and recover the cost of environmental usage (one clear example is

14

water management where further decentralization at the watershed level would be warranted).
Finally, mainstreaming the environment through sector policies and programs has remained an
elusive objective of the federal government; the Environmental Ministry has suffered in the past
from its sectoral confinement but is now taking steps to obtain commitments from sectoral
ministries (Agriculture, Energy, Infrastructure) 
toward the achievement of environmental
objectives.

(e) Building an Efficient, Accountable, and Transparent Government

40. 
The challenge of putting the Mexican economy on a sustainable, rapid, poverty-reducing,
environmentally-balanced growth path will tax the government's capacities, and calls for their
enhancement. 
Improving the quality of government (understood to be a more effective, more
efficient, and more transparent body of providers of public goods) is, however, a multifaceted,
multiyear task the full completion of which will likely span into the long-term. It will therefore
be imperative to focus on four critical areas where the marginal returns in terms of quality
improvement are highest-decentralization, the judicial system, anticorruption, and civil society
organizations.
41. 
As mentioned, decentralization in Mexico is already under way and progressing rapidly.
It has tremendous potential for improving the quality of government services by bringing
policymakers and final beneficiaries closer together. It can rightly change the role of the federal
government away from pursuing those results that the subnational governments can achieve on
their own, and toward capturing nationwide externalities. 
But ill-conceived or poorly
implemented decentralization also has the potential to be a destabilizing factor for service
delivery and public finances at all levels and, ultimately, for the country's macroeconomic
performance. The Mexican government has thus sought to avoid these dangers by imposing hard
budget constraints on states and municipalities (through, among other things, renouncing its own
powers to hand out discretionary transfers, establishing a regulatory link between credit access
and credit ratings, and assisting those states that seek adjustment-for example, Estado de
Mexico). However, 
in the medium term, subnational fiscal discipline will have to be
supplemented with a framework more conducive to decentralization, something that entails
reform in the tax-sharing system (or "Fiscal Pact"), a clearer assignment of expenditure
responsibilities (and for policymaking around those expenditures), and better reporting and
coordination among levels of government. 8
42. 
The judicial system is the second governance front where the payoffs of reform will be
particularly high for improving 
the overall quality of the government function 
(and
simultaneously, of the business environment for private-sector-led growth). Although currently
void of comprehensive and systematic evaluations, this is an area where consensus seems to exist
on the broad diagnosis-the system provides services in insufficient quantity and of poor quality,
is not free of corruption, and is not equally accessible to the nonaffluent. The cause of such

8. It is important to note that the devolution of taxes and the assignment of expenditure responsibilities are much
more than technical matters, because they will defne the type of federal nation Mexico wants to be. For

example, the amendment of the Fiscal Pact to devolve taxes will call for a parallel amendment of the transfer

formulas which, in effect, currently carry resources from richer to poorer states and smooth development
disparities across regions. Similarly, full decentralization of expenditure responsibilities may or may not be
conditional on minimum standards of achievement (say, in education) meant to ensure a certain level of national
homogeneity.

15

weak performance, and the reform challenge, is a combination of outdated substantive and
procedural laws (including those that allow for recourse at higher levels of government or
amparos), overlapping federal-state jurisdictions, inadequate administrative structures and
processes, inadequate human resource management, and underfunding. Although Mexico is
quickly advancing toward judicial and electoral independence from political powers (at the
federal and state level), it will need further development of alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms for efficiency and participation purposes.
43. 
Third, improvement in the quality of Mexico's government function will undoubtedly
involve the strengthening of anticorruption mechanisms. While systematic diagnosis and
documentation of the problem is recent and incomplete, available indications and surveys
suggest that there is a pent-up demand for transparency. The federal government is responding
with agency-based anticorruption strategies that often involve private sector support and client
participation. Addressing the corruption problem will, however, be difficult and will take time.
It will thus be critical to focus first on key incentive-setting institutions: (a) SECODAM and the
Contaduria Mayor de Hacienda (the government's internal and external auditors, respectively),
and core federal agencies to reduce corruption opportunities; (b) a career civil service must be
established, where promotion and compensation are market competitive and performance based
and where official information (records, accounts, decisions) is kept confidential only by
specified exception; and (c) several societal institutions will require specific support, notably, the
judicial system (addressed above), the police (to break the link between crime and corruption),
and the media (the role of which in the new, more open Mexico is likely to expand, testing the
strength of the legal protection framework for its operation). 
In addition to setting up a
conducive framework, the implementation of the federal government's Integrated Financial
Management System 
(SIAFF) 
remains 
incomplete 
(instituting 
legislation, 
inter-agency
harmonization, and training are still required for the SIAFF to be fully operative).
44. 
Finally, civil society organizations (CSOs) will play a critical role in enhancing
government quality, as partners in the design of development policy and as a means for public
accountability during implementation. Mexico has a long and evolving tradition of social
organization-from small, voluntary, and philanthropic foundations dealing with localized issues
to professional, technically-competent entities influencing public policy in trade, democracy,
human rights, anticorruption, environment, and women's rights. The new administration has
taken positive steps to foster CSO participation. Alianza Ciudadana, a national office for public-
private partnerships and reporting directly to the President, was inaugurated. CSOs have been
regularly invited to debate specific issues of national relevance. Several line ministries have
engaged CSOs around sectoral strategies and programs (notably, SEDESOL's Consejos de
Consulta Ciudadana in social assistance, SAGARPA's Consejos Regionales de Desarrollo
Sustentable in regional development, and INI's Fondos Regionales for indigenous peoples). And
several respected civil-society leaders were appointed to new posts within the government. Yet,
despite that significant progress, the environment in which CSOs operate remains a constraining
one: the legal and fiscal framework does not facilitate their emergence; their institutional
capacity to engage in policy debate and seize new opportunities to participate (for example, in
public expenditure monitoring) is uneven; inter-CSO coordination is weak (especially, between
highly-representative but often 
isolated community-based organizations and 
technical
organizations with access to decisionmakers); and they face a persistent (although at present
declining) culture of exclusion in parts of the public sector.

16

IV. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

(a) The Lessons of the Previous CAS

45. 
The fiscal 1999-2002 CAS period was driven by the theme of "sustainability," both
economic and social. The uncertainties of the then-upcoming presidential elections, and the
preceding record of end-of-sexenio crises, called for flexibility in the design of the assistance
program. There lies the first lesson of the now-closing CAS: when properly used and with clear
selection criteria, flexibility works. The WBG was able to support macroeconomic and financial
sector sustainability through adjustment operations for which political consensus around the
necessary reforms existed (as in the decentralization and banking areas); to refrain from others
where such consensus was lacking (as in fiscal reform, for which the WBG focused on diagnosis
and analysis); and to seize opportunities for intervention in key development sectors as they
presented themselves (as with the Gender LIL). These and similar efforts were carried out
within a predefined financing envelope that respected cautious exposure limits.
46. 
The second lesson from the previous CAS is the high value of good analytical work,
independent of the likelihood of immediate actual reforms. 
In Mexico, investment in country
knowledge tends to have large returns but long "payback" periods. The "seed" value of ideas is
particularly high. Thus, when the issue is important for development, the WBG must assist in
understanding 
it, preparing suitable policy options, and help to foster consensus among
stakeholders. This conceptual readiness positions the institution well to respond at short
notice-for example, the WBG's support to the recently approved reforms in the fiscal code
started a year earlier with the Fiscal Reform CEM. Similar advanced investments in knowledge
will be made in the coming years-in areas like judicial systems, anticorruption mechanisms,
labor legislation, and public development banks.
47. 
Third, tailoring assistance to the level of government effectively responsible for policies
and programs pays off. Following the deepening of the political decentralization process in
Mexico during this CAS period, the WBG put heavier strategic emphasis on working with
municipal and state governments, both in investment (for example, DRD III) and adjustment (for
example, Estado de Mexico SAL) operations, and in analytical work (for example, Public
Expenditure Reviews in Guanajuato and Veracruz). This will help the WBG adapt its future
assistance to the deepening federal nature of its Mexican client.
48. 
Fourth, for most Mexican counterparts, 
technical quality is what makes IBRD's
assistance attractive, not its advantageous financial terms (although these terms remain attractive
for the financial authorities). 
In Mexico, IBRD loans are not additional to the budgets of the
implementing sectoral ministries (their individual allocations are determined in the federation's
budget independently of how they are funded). In spite of this nonadditionality, which is very
likely to remain in future operations with the federal government, the authorities still see IBRD
participation as a catalyst for best practices in design, support in implementation and, critically,
market credibility through the commitment of resources by an independent party.
49. 
Fifth, IBRD, through policy dialogue, knowledge management, and advisory services,
has been acknowledged to have contributed to a smooth process of transition between
presidential administrations. The production, discussion, and publication of the comprehensive
collection of policy notes (some 30 sectoral notes, five thematic notes, and an overall strategy-
setting synthesis) proved to be an instrumental input for the incoming government, because they
distilled the sector-by-sector observations that the Bank accumulated during more than five

17

decades of relationship with the country, provided diagnostic analyses of the main issues, and put
forward policy options to resolve them.
50. 
Sixth, effective assistance strategy requires a balance between interventions that foster
growth within a sound macroeconomic framework and those that pursue microeconomic
objectives necessary for sectoral efficiency. Over the CAS period that now closes, the IBRD
support carried that balance, delivering both broad, rules-establishing operations (for example,
the Decentralization Adjustment Loan) and investment projects that enhanced the quality of
specific sectoral expenditures (for example, Education APL). This combination of mutually
reinforcing, macro and micro priorities will remain in the upcoming CAS cycle.
51. 
Seventh, as with the previous CAS, recurrent evidence cautions against overreliance on
quantitative, time-bound benchmarks when designing strategy. The large array of factors outside
the WBG's (and, sometimes, the government's) control lessen the value of those benchmarks-
some outcomes were obtained even without the predicted policy action taking place (for
example, large foreign investment in the banking industry without reform of the judicial system),
while others were missed even though that action took place (for example, slow growth in 2001
despite a sound macroeconomic policy mix).
52. 
Eighth, as for IFC, a major lesson of the past years in Mexico and other countries is that
the Corporation is coming under increased pressure to balance its multiple objectives of
profitability, efficiency, and outreach, as it seeks to serve smaller (and often riskier) companies
and pioneer (often more complex) projects. In Mexico, IFC has so far been able to maintain a
good balance with the combination of large, medium, and small clients, intervention through
financial intermediaries, and targeted small projects with high probability of success.
53. 
Finally, a 10-year retrospective Country Assistance Evaluation was completed in 2000,
covering only partially 
the now-closing CAS period. 
It points to a varying degree of
effectiveness and relevance over the different CAS cycles, and emphasizes the role of
government ownership in guiding the WBG's assistance (see Box 1).

Box 1. Country Assistance Evaluation
The WBG assistance program to Mexico during fiscal 1989-2000 was reviewed by OED, and the report, Mexico-
Country Assistance Evaluation, has been discussed at the CODE. The report found that the WBG's assistance
program was adequately adapted to the country's rapidly changing developmental challenges and noted that the
Mexico operations of the period received more favorable OED ex post evaluations for outcome, likely sustainability,
and institutional development impact than other operations in the region and Bankwide. Still, the report concluded
that the effectiveness of the program varied over time and should be, overall, considered as partially satisfactory.
ESW was considered marginally effective, partly because Mexican officials under the previous governments did not
want to accept outside intellectual influence, or at least did not acknowledge it.
The CAE found that the Bank had positive impact in primary education and health services, the transport
sector, and in reforms in contractual savings. It also found that there were significant lapses in the Bank's effective
engagement in the financial sector during FY92-94 and on environmental issues in FY96-99. Also, the CAE stated
that Bank lending had the most impact at times of crisis, when Mexico's access to capital markets was curtailed.
The CAE stressed that the Bank's experience since FY89 showed that, due primarily to the quality of human capital
available to the Government and changing nature of the country's development tasks, it was increasingly
challenging for the Bank to have non-financial value added in Mexico.
During the most recent period of evaluation, fiscal years 1997-2000, the report concluded that the WBG's
assistance program was relevant but too ambitious, relative to which the results were partially satisfactory. The
ambitiousness of the 1996 CAS program led the government to expect high levels of new commitments and
disbursements that were not fully met due to lack of policy progress and a tighter-than-expected fiscal stance,
creating a shortage of counterpart funding.
For the most part, the program in the 1999 CAS was not yet at a stage to be considered in the report.

18

(b) The Lessons of IBRD's Portfolio
54. Mexico's portfolio performance remains satisfactory with only two projects rated
unsatisfactory (3.7 percent of commitments), as of March 14, 2002. The Bank's portfolio in
Mexico includes 28 active projects, including six GEF/MP projects, with about US$5.2 billion in
net commitments and an undisbursed balance of around US$2.8 billion. The year-to-date
disbursement ratio for investment loans was 10 percent. Proactivity and realism indexes for the
portfolio are both at 100 percent. Financial management and procurement performance has been
impeccable (see Box 2).

Box 2. Procurement and Financial Management in Mexico's Portfolio

The Country Procurement Assessment Review (April 2002) concluded that procurement in IBRD projects was
satisfactory and free of major problems, because the agencies responsible for project implementation carry out
procurement in accordance with WBG policies and procedures, using its standard bidding documents. Two
procurement audits and 10 agency procurement capacity assessments carried out in the past two years found no
major issues. In April 2002, the government, together with IBRD, OAS, and NGOs, sponsored an International
Conference, Mexico Unido Frente a la Corrupci6n, at which the Plan of Actions put forward in the CPAR was
discussed.

The CPAR states that Mexico needs to: revise the current public Procurement Laws to differentiate
procurement of goods and services from selection of consultants in order to obtain better designs and advice;
standardize bidding documents among its 3,000 agencies to avoid arbitrary specifications or conditions; create a
procurement career track to ensure availability of qualified staff; and fully implement the rule of calling for bids
only when final designs are completed.

The first Country Financial and Accountability Assessment (CFAA) will be completed within fiscal 2002,
and on-demand subnational level assessments are scheduled as of fiscal 2003. For all IBRD projects, annual audit
reports have been reviewed and considered acceptable. Most of them have been received on a timely basis.
Misuse of funds has not occurred in any IBRD project in Mexico. The use of COMPRANET, the federal
government's innovative system for electronic bidding, was successfully piloted in an IBRD project and will be
expanded. The presence of a senior financial management and procurement team in IBRD's Mexico Office has
proven instrumental in these achievements.

Despite these satisfactory developments, 
the government's information systems do not yet have
classifications that are sufficiently detailed and harmonized. 
IBRD continues to work on procurement and
financial management with Mexico as part of the government's anticorruption strategy and promotion of access to
information. All new investment projects are required to have a Financial Management Specialist as a member of
the task team throughout the project cycle, to carry out a financial management assessment at entry, and to
establish adequate mechanisms for constant monitoring.

55. 
Over the last CAS period that now concludes, a number of general observations can be
made about those projects that performed less well than others (see Box 3). First, some
operations have been affected by broad changes in the political and legislative environments.
Implementation was slowed down by the transition of administrations both before and after the
July 2000 presidential election, especially in terms of delayed project signing and effectiveness.
Similarly, an accelerated devolution of budget and execution authority from the federal to state
governments has necessitated a time-consuming reorientation of several operations that were
originally designed for the federal level.
56. 
Second, the previously mentioned nonadditionality of IBRD funding has made sectoral
ministries 
increasingly reluctant to give budget priority to implementing Bank-financed
programs, which must compete with others while being characterized by stricter fiduciary and

safeguard requirements (this is especially true of the infrastructure sectors). This underscores the

19

continuous need for superior quality in IBRD's technical inputs, both at the stage of project
design and during implementation.

57. 
Third, in a handful of high-risk-high-reward cases, IBRD-financed operations have been
buffeted by volatile policy debates (for example, housing finance). This riskiness, which
sometimes was a delaying factor, is also a healthy feature of IBRD's portfolio, as the institution
seeks to explore new avenues for civil participation that can give sustainability to the
government's reform efforts.

58. 
Finally, as already noted in the May 1999 CAS, decentralization of IBRD's Country
Department to the field, particularly in the fiduciary area, has resulted in faster response times
and better results on the ground. Mexico-based staff are now taking on an expanding share of
task management, enabling the Bank to respond to the client in a more timely manner and, in
some sectors, to open up new lines of cooperation-for example, anticorruption programs with
SECODAM and rapprochement with subnational governments. While there is no hard evidence
of cost savings out of the Department's decentralization process, those costs have not increased
either-while client service has improved.

Box 3. What Went Well and Not So Well in This CAS Cycle
IBRD-supported programs have had both successes and failures over the last four years. Here are some examples
of both.

The lack of progress in the transport sector, evidenced by a long delay in the signing and effectiveness of
the Federal Highway Maintenance loan and the long gestation of the Highway Finance SECAL, is especially
emblematic of the nonadditionality conundrum in Mexico. 
In those sectors where the Bank's technical
contribution does not substantially outweigh the cost of its procedural, fiduciary, and safeguard requirements,
assistance opportunities will remain limited.
The decentralization agenda (that is, working with subnational governments) has generally had positive
results, although advances have been uneven. A major achievement is the work done under the Estado de Mexico
SAL in fiscal 2000, the first-ever adjustment operation with a Mexican state. The loan, and the multisectoral
policy package it supported, helped the state redress its fiscal imbalances in the context of a comprehensive, cross-
sectoral adjustment program-something that both became a model for other states and, critically, protected the
national macroeconomic 
framework over the presidential 
transition. 
This followed 
the Decentralization
Adjustment Loan (fiscal 1999) which had helped consolidate the federal framework for subnational fiscal
autonomy and creditworthiness. 
The necessary complement of state-level or city-based poverty-focused
investment programs, especially in infrastructure, is still in process for a number of reasons: (a) lingering political
transition uncertainties at several levels of government, (b) lack of a solid financial intermediation channel
(BANOBRAS has been undergoing internal structural changes over the last few years and is still redefining its
mandate); (c) IBRD is only starting to develop knowledge about the institutional capacity of this new set of clients
(PERs were completed recently for Guanajuato and Veracruz, and assessments of the fiduciary and safeguard
systems in a few selected states are in their early stages); and (d) the modality of the Bank's financial relationship
with the states had to undergo (and successfully underwent) a thorough legal review to give confidence that it
meets Constitutional provisions. Those delaying factors were, in effect, startup investments, as they have now
solidly set the stage for an expansion of IBRD support to subnational entities.
Finally, the IBRD's engagement in the human development sectors continues to be successful. At the
request of the government, the Bank's technical involvement and financing role in health and education were
stepped up significantly during the CAS cycle that now concludes. More generally, IBRD's program has had great
success in the unprecedented level of dialogue and cooperation surrounding its analytical work, where the Bank
has come to be perceived as a trusted advisor. 
(A notable example has been the publication of Mexico-A
Comprehensive Development Agenda for the New Era, the collection of transition notes whose dissemination
included a large number of Mexican states, plus the United States and Europe.)

20

(c) The Lessons of IFC's Portfolio

59. 
As per the CAS Private Sector Strategy cycle that now closes, IFC's activity in Mexico
has followed three priorities: (a) assisting the Mexican private sector in gaining greater and more
evenly distributed access to external private financing; (b) improving the efficiency of domestic
financial intermediation and mobilizing domestic resources; and (c) helping private firms grow
and enhance their international competitiveness. These have translated into IFC's sectoral focus
on financial sector development, support for middle-market firms, private infrastructure, and the
social sectors. 
In addition, sustainable development, an area that had not been explicitly
identified for IFC in the previous CAS, has received increased emphasis. More specifically,
from fiscal 1999 to date, IFC approved operations 
totaling US$907 million, 
including
syndications of US$301 million, for 27 projects, of which 10 were in general manufacturing and
services (middle-market firms), 8 were in the financial sector, 5 in infrastructure, 2 in health and
education, and 2 in environmental sustainability. 
IFC has also continued to expand into new,
high-impact areas. This is reflected in project approvals in such areas as hospitals and primary
schools (fiscal 2000), a private railway project in Chiapas (fiscal 2000), housing finance (fiscal
2001), microfinance (fiscal 2001), cleaner fuel (compressed natural gas) for automotives (fiscal
2001), and sustainable forestry products (fiscal 2002).
60. Mexico has IFC's third-largest exposure, representing 7.4 percent of IFC's total
disbursed portfolio (net of specific reserves). As of February 28, 2002, IFC's disbursed and
outstanding portfolio in Mexico consisted of investments in 47 companies, with total exposure of
US$708 million for IFC's own account and US$422 million for participants. IFC's investments
in Mexico cover a broad range of sectors. On a volume basis, the financial sector, infrastructure
(utilities and transportation), chemicals, food and agribusiness, and general manufacturing and
services are the sectors with the highest level of IFC investment. The financial sector (30
percent) and infrastructure 
(21 percent) have received 
the largest shares of investments,
reflecting IFC's strategic priorities in these sectors.
61. 
Overall, IFC's portfolio in Mexico is of high quality and has managed to withstand
economic cycles. As of February 28, 2002, only 0.6 percent of IFC's loan portfolio was in
nonaccrual status, ranking among the best in the Corporation. This stellar perfornance was
attributable to Mexico's flexible macroeconomic management and increased private sector
resilience (honed through the liberalization process since the early 1990s), and to IFC's project
selection, emphasis on due diligence, and early involvement in project structuring. 
IFC's
strategic emphasis during the previous CAS period on frontier (or riskier) types of projects and
sectors, such as 
the social sector, middle-market 
firms, subnational 
infrastructure, and
microfinance, has not to date affected the aggregate quality of the Mexico portfolio. With the
economic slowdown in 2001, declining capital flows to developing countries, and stress on IFC's
global portfolio, maintaining the quality of new projects at entry, and of portfolios of Mexico's
size, is expected to become increasingly important for IFC's strategy implementation and overall
performance. (See Box 4 for a discussion of the linkages between the private sector strategy and
IBRD-IFC assistance to Mexico.)

21

Box 4. Private Sector Strategy: Linkages in IBRD-IFC Assistance to Mexico
Mexico, with three consecutive CASs with a private sector strategy, represents a primary example of an
integrated WBG approach to PSD. Over the three CAS periods, the WBG's PSD strategy has become more
coherent, with its activity progressively integrated between the IBRD and the IFC, as the following examples
indicate (more details of the WBG's approach to PSD in Mexico are provided in the Private Sector Strategy
presented in Annex B 10):
* 
The financial sector. The IBRD's assistance in enhancing the regulatory and supervisory environment
and the strengthening of the banking sector and the financial sector infrastructure would help set the
stage for the IFC's increased involvement in direct and indirect assistance to viable Mexican financial
intermediaries, including capital market institutions. The IBRD's assistance in urban development and
housing would also be complemented with the IFC's assistance in developing housing finance
institutions and mortgage markets.
Infrastructure. A number of subsectors where the IBRD's assistance helped improve the regulatory
framework have provided increasing opportunities for the IFC's sequential involvement in helping
structure and mobilize a financial package for pioneering private infrastructure projects. This synergy is
expected to continue in the areas that could be further liberalized, such as water and energy.
SMEs. IBRD's nonlending services in SME development would benefit from the IFC's complementary
experiences with impediments to private sector development generally, and with SMEs in particular.
This IBRD activity would in turn support the IFC's increasing focus on assisting SMEs and middle-
market companies through financial intermediaries.
* Health and education. IBRD's assistance in reforming and improving the public services in this area
would continue to be supplemented by the IFC's support for private service providers, helping enhance
public-private complementarities.

* 

* 

(d) The Role of the WBG in Mexico's New Era

62. 
As described earlier, Mexico faces formidable development challenges-consolidating its
macroeconomic 
framework, enhancing its competitiveness, developing its human capital,
protecting its environment, improving the quality of its government. The country is, however, in
an enviable position from which to meet those challenges given that it is a middle-income nation
with a relatively sophisticated institutional capacity, membership in the OECD and WTO, access
to international financial markets, and a free-trade agreement with the largest economy in the
world (NAFTA). Mexico is an investment-grade sovereign borrower, has an annual GNP per
capita of US$5,080, 9 already meets several of the Millennium development goals, and boasts
several private conglomerates that are global leaders in their field. Its political system is stable
and representative, and its most recent presidential election was an example of participatory
democracy and smooth transition.
63. 
Against this background, it is natural to ask: What is the value added of the WBG for
Mexico in the new era? Or, in other words, should the country "graduate"? Mexico should
indeed seek graduation, but along a gradual path and as a long-term objective. Within the three
years covered in this CAS, the WBG should maintain, and where necessary enhance, its
engagement in Mexico, in both an intellectual and financial capacity. There are several reasons
behind this view, which represents the expressed desire of the Mexican government and the
broad message of the civil-society consultation process underpinning this CAS.

9. World Bank Atlas methodology. Datum is for the year 2000.

22

64. 
First, as mentioned, there are still some 45 million Mexicans living in poverty. And the
country's average income indicators disguise deep disparities-between the 10 percent of the
population that accrues more than 40 percent of the income and the rest of the Mexicans that do
not, between urban and rural areas, north and south, large outward-looking corporations and
small domestically-oriented entrepreneurs, 
indigenous and nonindigenous people, men and
women. The WBG will respond to the authorities' request and employ its analytical and
financial resources as a contribution to closing those development gaps.
65. 
Second, growth will be a necessary (although not sufficient) condition for poverty and
inequality reduction. 
In turn, achieving higher, long-term growth in Mexico calls for the
implementation of a large, pending reform agenda by the federal government in areas such as
labor, energy, the financial sector, fiscal federalism, and water. It has been the lesson from past
CASs in Mexico, and the recommendation of the recent Bankwide Task Force on Middle-
Income Countries,'0 that the WBG's analytical and financial support, together, can prove
instrumental for governments that are committed to such reforms and have the political will to
see them through. On the one hand, the WBG technical assistance effectively transfers
international best practices that enhance the quality of the reforms. On the other hand, by
committing its own resources through investment or policy-based operations, the WBG lends
critical market credibility to the reforms in question and facilitates further private sector
financing. This is the essence of the "growth rationale" for WBG intervention: WBG funding is
not necessarily linked to balance-of-payments or fiscal gaps; rather, it is a catalyst because it
seeks to ensure that the growth process is credibly sustainable and, thus, the country 
is
creditworthy, so private sources can fill those gaps. Recent examples of this in Mexico are the
Banking Restructuring Facility Loans I and II, the Decentralization Adjustment Loan, the
forthcoming Tax Rationalization and Environmental SALs, and IFC's intervention in private
sector projects.
66. 
Third, the rapidly unfolding process of decentralization has changed the nature of the
policymaker in Mexico. 
In most of the key development areas (education, health, business
environment, natural resource management, just to namne a few), the federal government no
longer decides policy unilaterally. State governments now have primary or shared responsibility
for legal, regulatory, and institutional frameworks (and, certainly, for the implementation of
programs). 
Increasingly, the federation has a subsidiary role-focusing on interventions with
externalities at the national level. For those states taking on new tasks, the continuing presence
of the WBG is particularly critical. Not only do they face a large agenda of first-generation
reforms (like setting up effective payment enforcement mechanisms for public services), but they
also generally have limied technical expertise and have access only to domestic financial
markets. 1 " Moreover, the WBG often helps catalyze federal-state coordination. While the WBG
has worked with Mexican states and municipalities for decades, it has since 1999 supported the

10. World Bank. 2001. Report of the Task Force on the World Bank Group and the Middle-Income Countries.
Washington, D.C.
11. Mexican states are constitutionally forbidden from entering into debt contracts with foreign lenders or in
foreign currency. To facilitate subnational financing, in 1939 the federation created a development bank
(BANOBRAS) primarily to channel funding from the official multilateral and bilateral donors to states and
municipalities. The WBG, and other donor agencies like IDB, have over the years funded subnationals through
BANOBRAS with sector-specific investment operations and, more recently, with policy-based adjustment
lending.

23

country's decentralization process with enhanced strategic emphasis on state-level analytical and
financial interventions, with encouraging results (for example, the Estado de Mexico SAL).'2
67. 
Fourth, the presidential election of 2000 and the additional impetus it gave to the process
of federalism has opened a unique window of opportunity to address long-awaited and much-
needed reforms at the federal and state levels. The next three years will be crucial in seizing that
opportunity. This makes it desirable to use the full capacity of the WBG's instruments. In terms
of IBRD lending, this will mean respecting a prudent exposure "cushion" while deploying the
feasible financing envelope as the implementation of the pending reform agenda allows.'
68. 
Finally, because of the size of its economy and its prominence among emerging-market
borrowers, Mexico's development process carries regional and global externalities. These
externalities can directly affect poverty counts elsewhere as the effect of the 1995 "Tequila
Crisis" demonstrated-particularly in this era of heightened risk perception over, and reduced
capital flows to, emerging markets in general.

(e) The WBG Strategy, Program Selectivity, and Partnership Over the Next Three Years

69. 
Poverty reduction will remain the overarching and ultimate objective of the CAS . The
lessons of the previous CASs and the critical role that the WBG can play in seizing the poverty-
reduction opportunities available in today's Mexico suggest that the optimal strategic path over
the next three years is one of continuing, close involvement, and where gross financial flows are
used to support reforms that address the main development challenges the country faces. Those
flows will fit within an overall IBRD lending envelope of US$5 billion over fiscal 2003-05 (half
of which in fast-disbursing operations), evenly distributed across years. This strategy will place
the country and the WBG in a flexible position from which to define a new assistance plan three
years from now.
70. More specifically, the WBG's strategy will be based on five pillars: (a) macroeconomic
stability; (b) competitiveness; (c) human capital development; (d) environmental sustainability;
and (e) good governance. For each pillar, a program of sectoral interventions-analytical and
financial-is proposed. In all cases, IBRD will heed the experiences of the previous CAS and,
thus, will invest heavily in early analytical contributions, work with all levels of government

12. Given the relevance of the Estado de Mexico SAL as a source of not only demonstration effect for other
Mexican states but also of lessons in subnational adjustment operations valid for other countries, the WBG will

respond to a request by Estado de Mexico authorities and publish a book distilling that experience.

13. An argument can be made in favor of holding back new IBRD lending commitments in order to create even
more "room to maneuver' in case Mexico runs into an external financing crisis. That argument should,
however, be weighed against several factors. First, IBRD's yearly gross commitments amount to some US$1.7
billion, while Mexico's average gross annual financing needs exceed US$60 billion; in other words, even if
IBRD refrained completely from lending to Mexico over the next five years, it would still not have enough

lending room to effectively fund the country through a close-down of access to international financial markets.
Second, with Mexico among emerging market borrowers with ample access to external financing (and one of
the very few with sovereign investment grades), only an international financial crisis of massive proportions
and long duration could close down that access; such a situation would likely call for a complete
reconsideration of the country assistance strategy, rather than a relative small increase in lending. Finally, and
more fundamentally, Mexico today faces a historic opportunity of reform, one that has not presented itself in
the last 70 years. Letting that opportunity slip away could be the cost of holding back IBRD assistance and
overcushioning IBRD exposure.

24

(federal, state and municipal), and preserve a balance between macro- and micro-oriented
activities in its work program.
71. 
As explained in Section III, the five pillars which conceptually underpin Mexico's
National Development Plan 2001-2006 are mutually reinforcing, and hence, equally essential for
sustainable poverty reduction. The WBG fully supports the Government's comprehensive
approach to development and stands ready to work in each of the priority areas defined by
Government. However, within the Government's priorities, specific areas for WBG involvement
have been selected in accordance with a number of strict criteria as follows. The overarching
criterion is the likely poverty-reduction impact of a given WBG intervention, albeit recognizing
that such impact is not always direct, quantifiable, or immediate. Nor are the impacts exogenous
to each other-the poverty-reducing effect of, say, rural finance reform is much enhanced by the
existence of an efficient judicial system. 
In this context and based on the country's
circumstances, 
the CAS program contains 
interventions within each sector that will: (a)
contribute most to the poverty reducing objectives of sectoral strategies; (b) have the most "spill-
over" effects to other sectors of WBG involvement; (c) enjoy a high degree of "ownership"
among relevant stakeholders; and (d) best exploit the WBG's comparative advantages, taking
into account the planned activities of the full range of other domestic and international
development partners (see Table 5).
Table 5. Partnerships in Mexico's Development Framework

Developmer 
acr 
Challenges ecDnornic 
Stability 

Pa8 , : l E 8/i = CC 

mman 
L 

co~ 

Acoelerating growh through enhanoed 
Competitiveness 

Human Capital 
Development

Emnronment 

Good govemanc

l_

E ~~ 0) 

LD 

(D 

l 

CG 

i 

E111111li 

' p

0 

w= 

0L 4 

' 

~, 

VO

8 Y 

U~~~w 

X 8 

E

-

Co D

Wol ank/ 1lllllllllliiiiiiiii 

IMF ~ ~ ~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

~ 

I

'Ellllliiil-

AFcb 

8 

E 

iiiiillll 

>iiiiiii 

E Elo 

l 

| 

~~~~~~LiSJ 

Focu 

(DilSm ou giiatFcsHg 
ou

72. 
As the preceding suggests, the WB3G's assistance will be closely coordinated with that of
other key external agencies supporting Mexico. For example, while the WBG will play an
important 
role 
in supporting 
some aspects of macroeconomic management 
(like 
tax
administration), it will only play an observer role in others (like monetary policy, to be primarily
supported by the IMF). Similarly, the WBG will provide selected analytical support in the area

25

of social protection, while IDB will finance the authorities' flagship OPORTUNIDADES
(PROGRESA) program. Finally, IBRD will follow IDB's lead in the financing of infrastructure
investment under the Puebla-Panama Plan. 
[For more details on coordination with other
partners, see Section VI].
73. WBG support presumes that several conditions are in place, as follows: (i) that sound
macroeconomic management, including a continuing, satisfactory dialogue with the IMF; (ii)
that all targeted interventions are "owned" by the respective counterparts, defined to include
stakeholders whose political support is instrumental in implementation; (iii) that intragovemment
coordination remains conducive to reform dialogue and project implementation; and (iv) that the
solid record of procurement and financial management of IBRD projects is maintained. Slippage
in these areas will trigger a shift in the WBG program toward a "downside" scenario of reduced
exposure.
74. 
As with all WBG operations, it should be noted that its support will depend on the
conduciveness of legal and regulatory environments and, when necessary, on the political
consensus for the required reforms (for example, in taxation, banking, labor, public pensions);
lacking that consensus, lending will be correspondingly lower. Naturally, the speed at which
reforms will be implemented cannot be predicted with precision and, therefore, the WBG
assistance will be adjusted accordingly. However, an indicative program of financial and non-
financial interventions is presented in Tables 6 and 7 (and Annexes B3 and B4) for each
development pillar.
75. 
As an integral part of the overall WBG strategy described above, the IBRD and IFC will
work closely together in the implementation of a Private Sector Strategy (see Annex B10)
aligned along the five pillars, especially competitiveness and human capital development through
private sector initiative. IFC's interventions will thus focus on giving private entrepreneurs a
more developed financial sector (and more evenly distributed access to financing); better means
to compete internationally; support to invest in areas newly opened to private participants (for
example, the social sectors and infrastructure); and assistance in internalizing sustainable
development and corporate governance practices. The volume and composition of IFC's
activities will depend on market conditions, private sector's access to international financial
markets, and reform progress-in general, IFC's role is stronger when and where access to
international financial markets is limited, which has not been the case for top-class Mexican
firms in recent years. IFC has thus remained relatively more active in other parts of the private
sector, and in industries that have become open to private sector participation.

(f) Sectoral Support Strategies and Tools To Deliver Them

76. 
The general strategy described above will be delivered through a set of sectoral strategies
and corresponding analytical and financial products. These are listed in Table 6, alongside the
primary development objectives they will serve, and the benchmarks for monitoring their
progress.14 Their conceptual thrust is explained below for each sector. 15

14. Further details are provided in Table 7 and Annex B3-Financial-and Annex B4-Nonfmancial.
15. 
In the previously mentioned day-long summit between President Fox (and his economic cabinet) and President
Wolfensohn (and WBG senior management) on December 8, 2001, five areas of the proposed WBG strategy
were identified as subjects for special emphasis: the "poorest among the poor" (especially those living in
Mexico's southern region), education, health, judicial reform, and anticorruption mechanisms.

26

77. 
Poverty and Inequality Monitoring and Analysis. As mentioned, poverty reduction is the
ultimate, overarching objective of this CAS, and the common theme of all its sectoral strategies.
It is therefore crucial that the WBG maintains a thorough understanding of the determinants and
trends in poverty and inequality. 
IBRD has completed two Poverty Assessments for Mexico,
based on the 1996 and 2000 household surveys; it will complete a third assessment on the results
of the 2002 survey. 
It will also analyze how business cycles affect the poor, what poverty
programs can do to smooth negative impacts, and how OPORTUNIDADES (PROGRESA) has
influenced the welfare of its beneficiaries. IBRD has also, in recent years, studied the causes of
Mexico's deep disparities (for example, earning differentials; the way technology diffusion
affects returns to education), and will now devote further efforts to assist the Government in the
design of growth-friendly policy options to reduce inequality (Growth and Inequality, FY04).

(i) Consolidating Macroeconomic Gains

78. Macroeconomic Framework. The analysis of poverty dynamics in Mexico shows that
macroeconomic sustainability is a necessary, although by no means sufficient, condition for
poverty reduction. This CAS will contribute to that sustainability through two main channels.
Firstly, IBRD will support, with fast-disbursing lending, the design and implementation of
critical macroeconomic reforms as they are put forward by the authorities. An example is the
Tax Rationalization SAL and accompanying Technical Assistance Loan expected to be presented
to the Board in fiscal 2002. In the event that the labor market reform is implemented, IBRD will
support it through a Labor Reform SAL. Secondly, IBRD will devote ample analytical efforts to
key macro issues like public expenditure management, fiscal responses to economic shocks,
public debt management, international factor mobility, and labor markets convergence. A
technical dialogue will be initiated on shifting public expenditure management (in particular,
investment expenditures) toward a result-based approach, to lay the foundations for result-based
management of the country's development process in the future. Finally, IBRD will continue its
close monitoring of macroeconomic developments in the country, as a means to inform its policy
dialogue with the authorities and adapt the implementation of its assistance strategy. This
monitoring will cover short-term developments (for example, through short-term risk notes) and
more fundamental, 
long-term structural trends (for example, 
through Country Economic
Memorandums).

(ii) Accelerating Growth Through Enhanced Competitiveness

79. 
Infrastructure. The change in administration has opened a new opportunity to bring
reform, especially private participation, to core infrastructure facilities. Because of the analytical
basis that the WBG has built over the years in this area, its strategy is now to support the
implementation of that reform. 
For example, recently completed sector work on urban
development and low-income housing will provide the conceptual basis for financial support to a
nationwide urban upgrading initiative (National Urban Upgrading Loan FY03). The program
will emphasize management of major metropolitan areas (logistically, financially, fiscally) in a
way that carefully balances urban development with environmental sustainability, urban land
management, 
institutional reforns, and rationalization of low-income housing subsidies.
Similarly, the ongoing IBRD support to the design of a national program for the modernization
of the water and sanitation systems throughout Mexico (with legal, regulatory, and institutional
reform at the federal, state, and municipal levels, as a means to induce water conservation and

27

enhance private sector participation) will be expanded through a Water & Sanitation Investment
Loan in fiscal 2003. Also building on recent sector work, a Highway Finance loan in fiscal 2004
will support the government in improving the design and financial engineering of private
highway concessions, as required to ensure fiscal and physical sustainability, and synergy
between the old and new parts of the national, state, and local road networks.
80. 
A Power Sector Reform operation (fiscal 2005) is envisioned to support the reform, if
approved by Congress, in the petroleum, natural gas, and electricity sectors which is being
contemplated by the government and will give larger participation to private agents. A GEF
project and a parallel IBRD Technical Assistance operation (fiscal 2003) are being developed to
complement and facilitate 
the mainstream power sector reforms with an off-grid rural
electrification program. If successful, this could be extended to a full-fledged national effort.
IBRD funding and advisory services will be offered to help the authorities design a strategy to
increase the share of renewable energy sources (including sugar-cane based resources) as part of
the ongoing ESMAP program, and to develop carbon trading under the Prototype Carbon Fund
(PCF). To make sure that the various infrastructure reforms permeate to the subnational levels of
government, 
IBRD will prepare 
two State Level 
Infrastructure Decentralization APL
operations-a "wholesaling," financial-intermediary operation which would make funding
available for fiscally sound states and municipalities that seek to consolidate that fiscal
soundness, develop their institutions, and complete sector reforms and invest in water and
sanitation, electricity, transport, and telecommunications.
81. 
The overall program of IBRD support to the infrastructure sectors will be underpinned by
related analytical products, notably an Energy Sector review (fiscal 2004), a report on Low-
Income Housing (fiscal 2004), and a policy note on Urban Land Management issues and options
(fiscal 2005). IBRD will also develop for federal and subnational authorities an urban poverty
"tool kit" (fiscal 2003) that pulls together knowledge developed by various sector groups on
urban poverty issues.
82. 
IBRD's efforts in infrastructure will be synergetic with an expanding IFC participation.
The Corporation will seize the opportunity to facilitate private investments in power, water,
sanitation, and hydrocarbons, as these sectors become open to private agents-a path-breaking
event that, as mentioned, will greatly contribute to unleashing Mexico's growth potential. At the
same time, IFC will continue to provide support for private sector projects in transport and
logistics.
83. 
Financial Sector. In addition to continuing close monitoring, IBRD will seek to support
the broadening of financial sector reforms beyond the commercial banking industry, in a three-
pronged strategy. First, it will support policy and institutional reforms in rural finance (including
the restructuring of BANRURAL) through a Rural Finance SECAL (fiscal 2003). Second, it will
assist in the reorientation and restructuring of the other main public development banks (NAFIN,
BANOBRAS, and BANCOMEXT) toward complementing, rather than competing with, private
providers of financial services (Financial Sector SECAL I, fiscal 2004). Third, further
strengthening of the legal and institutional infrastructure for capital markets transactions (like
information disclosure practices, and collateral and credit registries) will be sought through a
Financial Sector SECAL II (fiscal 2005), and through a comprehensive review of impediments to
the development of the insurance sector (fiscal 2004). Finally, an operation to support reforms in
state-level public-employee pension systems may also be considered in the outer year if the

28

states in question show their readiness to embark on such programs following the reforms
implemented for the federal employees' pension regimes (see below IMSS and ISSTE).
84. 
Those IBRD activities will be mutually reinforcing with the IFC's activities which, in the
financial sector, will focus on (a) reaching out to Mexican firms (including SMEs and
microenterprises) that lack access to term-financing through local financial intermediaries, and
(b) supporting transactions that help develop the domestic financial sector. The latter will
include nonbank intermediaries, housing finance institutions, credit enhancement, and local
currency facilities, and better corporate governance practices (for example, through private
corporate and financial restructurings).
85. 
In spite of many reforms, Mexico's agricultural
Agriculture and Rural Development. 
sector has not yet adjusted and prepared for the forthcoming competition under NAFTA. The
WBG aims to help make that adjustment both efficient and, more important, socially sustainable.
Thus, it will base its sectoral strategy on a more integrated rural development strategy that builds
on on-farm and off-farm opportunities at the regional level while promoting agricultural
productivity. First, it will support efforts to improve the living standards of the rural poor-
especially the indigenous populations-through the expansion of the Rural Development in
Marginal Areas APL project (fiscal 2004) and the related Carbon Sequestration in Coffee Areas
project (fiscal 2003) with financing from the Prototype Carbon Fund, and a new phase of the
Community Forestry project (fiscal 2004). Second, enhanced agricultural competitiveness will
be sought through the consolidation of the transfer of the irrigation districts and their
modernization (Irrigation and Drainage Modernization, fiscal 2003), and continued support to
the restructured Alianza program (Agricultural Productivity II, fiscal 2004) with an emphasis on
diversification and microenterprise development. Third, the improvement of key factor markets
will be (re-) emphasized, notably; (i) rural financial markets (a Savings and Credit TA loan in
fiscal 2002 and a Rural Finance SECAL in fiscal 2003 will support, respectively, 
the
strengthening of savings and loan institutions through BANSEFI and SAGARPA, and the
restructuring of public development banks like BANRURAL and FIRA); (ii) land markets (a
Land Titling LIL for fiscal 2003 will be the vehicle for enhanced access and security, completion
of the PROCEDE program, and the sharing of international experience); and (iii) warehousing
and inventory financing through sector work (fiscal 2003). Finally, as in other sectors, the policy
dialogue with state governments will be deepened, in this case as a means to foster municipal
capacity and the provision of basic infrastructure services in rural areas (Municipal Development
in Rural Areas fiscal 2003). This four-part strategy described above will be based on the
continuing accumulation of analytical knowledge on the sector which, in the coming three years,
will explore policy options for the repositioning of the coffee and sugar sectors (fiscal 2002),
agricultural competitiveness under NAFTA (fiscal 2003), rural public pension schemes (fiscal
2003), indigenous peoples' access to assets and factor markets (fiscal 2004), warehousing
schemes (fiscal 2003), and rural enterprise development (fiscal 2004). 
Improvements in the
sector's policy framework will present opportunities for firms with enhanced competitiveness in
agribusiness, an area in which IFC will continue to focus as a means to reach out to smaller
farmers through larger actors.
86. Middle-Market, Micro-, and Small Enterprises. IFC will take the lead in direct financial
assistance to the Mexican corporate sector, catalyzing access to investment financing for the
broad spectrum of Mexican firms. IBRD will focus its support to microbusinesses and small
and medium enterprises (MSMEs) on creating a market-friendly environment for their operation

29

(cost of doing business, technology-based development services, access to finance, and the like).
The strategy, and its interventions will, however, be demand driven and decentralized-that is, it
will allow private agents (firms, financial intermediaries, and other service providers) and
subnational governments to decide what kind of assistance they need, with the federal
government (and the WBG) assuring appropriate monitoring and evaluation. When required,
this will translate into remittance investment schemes, whereby the savings of migrants residing
abroad are channeled into (micro)business in their community of origin. The ongoing South-
East Regional Development LIL, National Micro- and Small Business Development Project soon
to be brought for Board consideration, and a forthcoming report (SME Development, fiscal
2003) will provide the operational framework for IBRD's assistance, and will be well
complemented by IFC's funding for financial intermediaries catering for MSME (including
microfmancing schemes in poor areas).

(iii) Human Capital Development

87. 
Education. Mexico's education system needs better quality, more uniform access, market
sensitivity, and local accountability. The WBG's education sector strategy, and a major part of
its overall CAS, will be aligned to serve those needs-the richness of the existing sectoral
dialogue and project pipeline provides an excellent platform from which to proceed. The
ongoing IBRD efforts in basic education (the sustainability of which will be ensured by the Basic
Education APL III in fiscal 2005) will be complemented by new interventions in Technological
Training and Certification in fiscal 2003 (to put the opportunities of the new knowledge
economy within the reach of Mexican workers competing in global markets), Science Education
in fiscal 2004 (to foster critical thinking and group learning in the early stages of education), and
Science and Technology II in fiscal 2005 (to continue bringing financing to those that merit
higher education but cannot afford it). In parallel, two formal reports will study mechanisms to
improve quality and access in secondary (fiscal 2004) and adult education (fiscal 2003)
(especially for the poor and the indigenous), and an assessment of constraints to the expansion of
the Knowledge Economy will be carried out in fiscal 2003. IBRD efforts will be complemented,
on the supply side, by IFC's support for private providers of education, a growing area of activity
for the Corporation in Mexico.
88. 
Health. The WBG will align its strategy in the health sector to the three objectives of the
government's National Health Program 2001-06-equity, quality, and financial viability. This
entails IBRD's support of interventions to deliver health services to people living in underserved
rural and urban areas (and specifically the indigenous populations through the Indigenous Health
project in fiscal 2005), and to continue developing sustainable institutional capacity at the central
and local level (ongoing support for SSA; ISSSTE SECAL and TAL in fiscal 2003; and Health
Systems Reform IMSS in fiscal 2004). The reform of these institutions will not be rapid or
simple-the issues include separation of financing and delivery, agglomeration of all public
financing under a single fund, definition of basic health packages, competition in delivery,
accountability, and regulation and accreditation of providers. IBRD will continue to contribute
to the design of those reforms through the above-mentioned projects but, equally important,
through formal and informal analytical work. At the same time, technical assistance will be
provided for the implementation of insurance mechanisms that could alleviate the formidable
financial burden that catastrophic illnesses have on the poor (for example, the Indigenous Health
report in fiscal 2004). Fundamentally, as IBRD-supported reforms take root, the health sector

30

will open to private investors, whose entry IFC will seek to facilitate through partnerships that
build on the Corporation's experience with health provision in Mexico.
89. 
Social Protection. Mexico can show major recent achievements in its social protection
network (for example, its OPORTUNIDADES program), and has allocated the necessary
resources to build on them. The WBG will thus focus on contributing ideas to preserve and,
where possible augment, the efficiency of that network as the process of enlarging coverage
unfolds, especially onto urban areas. There, it will be difficult but important to minimize
regressive targeting structures, avoid leakage to the nonpoor, evaluate impact, and coordinate the
actions of the three levels of government. The WBG's analytical contribution to efficiency
enhancement will also include the design of more adequate mechanisms for "graduation" from
program eligibility, countercyclical triggers for social expenditure, closer links between planning
and demographic dynamics, and early identification of new groups at risk. Two pieces of
analytical work will channel that support (Urban Poverty report, fiscal 2003, and Safety Net
Programs, fiscal 2004).
90. 
Indigenous Peoples. The WBG's strategy toward indigenous peoples in Mexico will
continue to fulfill its responsibilities under OD 4.20 (currently under revision as OP 4.10); that
is, to ensure that Bank-financed operations in Mexico do not cause adverse impacts upon
indigenous peoples and that they provide such peoples with culturally appropriate benefits. But
the strategy will go beyond safeguards-it will emphasize 
indigenous people's direct
participation in WBG-financed operations, especially those meant to improve their access to
basic health, education, and rural development services (for example, Indigenous Health, fiscal
2005). The WBG has supported, in collaboration with a number of Mexican governmental and
academic institutions, the preparation of a series of state-level profiles of indigenous peoples,
and a major investigation of the situation of indigenous peoples living in urban areas. This
analytical work provides a framework for "development with identity," especially in projects
located in indigenous regions that mean to protect the local environment (the ongoing Indigenous
Community Biodiversity Conservation and Mesoamerican Biological Corridor GEF projects, the
Regional Southeast Development LIL, and the forthcoming Community Forestry II in fiscal
2004). A new sector work on indigenous people access to assets and markets will be prepared in
fiscal 2004.
91. 
Gender. Over the next three years, the WBG gender strategy for Mexico will continue to
focus on bringing gender considerations across the whole of the development spectrum-that is,
on "mainstreaming" gender. Priority areas of entry for this mainstreaming will be gender
constraints in the labor, family, and domestic violence laws; gender differences in responses to
workforce participation and self employment; and male gender issues such as violence (including
domestic violence), risky behavior, and substance abuse. Three types of vehicles will deliver
that strategy. First, the recently approved Gender Equity LIL will, among other things, support
gender-specific financial services for female-headed microbusinesses, access to child care, and
the resolution of gender stereotypes in childrearing (especially by fathers), pedagogical methods,
and youth development. Second, analytical work will identify policy options for gender issues,
notably through the dissemination of the book, Gender and the Mexican Economy, published in
2001, and the soon-to-be-completed "Gender Assessment of Mexico's Legal Framework."
Third, a Portfolio Gender Assessment (fiscal 2004) will identify mechanisms to mainstream
gender in the WBG's own operations.

31

(iv) Balancing Growth and Poverty Reduction with Protecting the Environment

92. 
Environmental Management. The government's five-year environmental action plan,
with which the WBG will continue to align its strategy for the environment, involves two types
of cross-cutting reforms-institutional (especially decentralization of responsibilities to the state
and municipal levels and better enforcement), and policy (user charges, fees, taxes, and pricing
in different sectors, notably water and energy). The WBG will support both types as it will
prepare a programmatic, environmental adjustment operation to address regulatory and policy
reforms in sectors like water, forestry, waste, energy, and tourism, that are critical for the
protection of natural resources (Environmental Support SAL under discussion for fiscal 2002,
and its programmed successor in fiscal 2005). The above financial interventions will be
conceptually supported by a growing body of analytical work-Degradation and Poverty (fiscal
2003) and Environment and Growth (fiscal 2004).
93. Mainstreaming. In the context of a better policy and institutional framework, the WBG
will continue to work with the line agencies leading environmental protection programs in each
sector: (i) in water, with CNA, a modernization program will be supported for the consolidation
of the irrigation sector (fiscal 2003), and for the strengthening of the water and sanitation sectors
(fiscal 2003); (ii) in forestry, with CONAFOR, support will be continued for the expansion of the
community-based approach developed under the on-going project for indigenous forest-based
ejidos (fiscal 2004); and (iii) in air quality, with CAM, through the Mexico City's Transport and
Air Quality II (fiscal 2004) in support of the Government's recent Air Quality Plan that sets the
stage for a revision of the effectiveness of the transport system, the efficiency of vehicle
technology, and the policy and regulatory framework for, air quality management.
94. 
Global Issues. The WBG will assist the government in taking advantage of the potential
synergies among global, national, and local resource management through the GEF. The
National Protected Areas system will be consolidated and expanded (fiscal 2003-04); and a new
operation for the conservation of the Gulf of Cortez will be promoted (fiscal 2004). Moreover,
support will be sought for testing Climate Friendly Air Quality measures (hybrid technology) in
Mexico City (fiscal 2003), and efforts to control the use and environmental impact of Persistent
Organic Pollutants (POPs) will be pursued. Through the Prototype Carbon Fund, a follow-up
operation to the existing GEF carbon sequestration project in Oaxaca would be put in place.
95. While IBRD interventions focus on strengthening institutions and setting policies for
environmental protection, IFC's support for business in sustainable development will help foster
environmentally and socially sound practices among private participants-an increasingly
important area for maintaining international competitiveness and growth, as mentioned earlier.

(v) Building an Efficient, Accountable, and Transparent Government

96. 
Decentralization. As noted throughout the sectoral strategies,federalismo, understood as
the devolution of decisionmaking power to states (and their municipalities), is changing the way
policy is made in Mexico across all sectors-and the nature of IBRD's country client. The WBG
has therefore accompanied, and will continue to accompany, this decentralization process closely
with a four-pronged strategy. First, it will assist on insuring that the process is sustainable, both
fiscally and programmatically. The first step in this direction was the FY99 Decentralization
Adjustment Loan (DAL), of which the underlying package of federal "rules-of-the-game" has

32

become a model for other countries. Subsequent operations will help fine-tune those rules (for
example, through analysis of options for the Reform of the Fiscal Pact in fiscal 2003).
97. 
Second, the WBG has begun to support individual states that request help in adjusting to
the new responsibilities and to 
the structural reforms and fiscal discipline 
that those
responsibilities imply-as it did with the Estado de Mexico SAL in fiscal 2000, and will do with
a program of State-Level Adjustment loans and technical assistance that will place special
emphasis on poorer states, a parallel implementation-focused Technical Assistance Window for
subnationals in fiscal 2004, and a succession of state-level Public Expenditure Reviews and State
Economic Memorandums as of fiscal 2003.116 Third, IBRD will also help states and large
municipalities that have reached a sustainable fiscal and financial path, access infrastructure
financing in sectors (like water, sanitation, and transport) where they still need know-how to
complete legal and regulatory frameworks that are conducive to private participation (the
channel for this assistance will be the State Infrastructure Decentralization APL I and II projects,
in fiscal 2003 and fiscal 2005, respectively). Fourth, IBRD will continue its institutional
development work with poor municipalities in rural areas through the Municipal Development in
Rural Areas projects (fiscal 2002 and 2005). Finally, the World Bank Institute will maintain, and
where possible expand, its successful, long-distance learning programs for subnational officials,
with special emphasis on public sector management techniques (Box 5).

Box 5. Capacity and Learning Activities of the World Bank Institute (WBI) in Support of the CAS
Objectives.
As the learning and capacity-building arm of the World Bank Group, WBI designs and delivers courses and
seminars aimed at building the institutional and human capacity of its client governments to fight poverty. 
It
facilitates networks and communities of development practitioners among its clients so they can access, share, and
promote innovation and knowledge.

In Mexico, WBI supports the CAS objectives by focussing on capacity building, with special-emphasis
areas such as decentralization, 
finance, governance, 
sustainable development/environmental management,
population and health, and social protection. In support of this strategy:

* During 1999-2001, over 5,000 participants from Mexico took part in WBI activities, at both the national
and regional levels and in worldwide events.

* WBI has established a training partnership with the Instituto Tecnologico y de Estudios Superiors de
Monterrey. This partnership, through which public sector management education was delivered to
thousands of national and local government officials in Mexico and Latin America, pioneered the use of
distance-learning technology in this field.

* The federal government's internal auditing institution, SECODAM, participated in a WBI worldwide
forum on anticorruption strategies, and in ensuing training on participatory government.
In the coming three years, WBI will continue to align its knowledge and capacity-building program with
the development priorities identified in this CAS-in particular, decentralization and public finance, governance,
education, community empowerment and social protection, sustainable development and environmental
management, rural poverty and development, and health and population. In all cases, WBI will continue to work
closely with the Mexico Country Department and other relevant operational units to ensure that its interventions are
client responsive, demand driven, and integrated in current and future projects. WBI will also seek to establish

16. The criteria to choose states for IBRD adjustment support will follow the government's own priorities as
expressed in the letter of development for the Estado de Mexico SAL (Report No. P7400ME). These include:
i) the state's poverty levels and incidence; ii) impact of the state's finance on the national macroeconomic
framework; iii) degree of the state's commitment to a comprehensive reform program; and iv) potential
demonstration effect on other states.

33

additional partnerships within the country to ensure long-tern sustainability and national-level "ownership" of the
various training programs. Distance learning will remain the main communication tool, because it ensures access
to wider audiences at all levels of governuent and throughout the Mexican territory.

98. 
Judicial System. In fiscal 2000, a diagnostic study of Juicios Ejecutivos Mercantiles was
completed at the request of the Supreme Court of the Federal District. Since the presidential
transition of 2000, the government has made judicial reform a priority, and has requested IBRD
support. The key for the success of that support will be ownership by the judicial branch itself.
Assuming such ownership materializes, the first step in that support, and the initial objective of
the sector strategy, will be to design, in partnership with the judiciary, a comprehensive Judicial
Reform Agenda in fiscal 2003. "Early wins" and lessons in implementing that agenda will be
sought through an Access to Justice LIL, also in fiscal 2003. This will set a solid basis for a
second phase of support, and for the deepening of related reforms, through a Judicial Reform
Investment loan in fiscal 2005. Mexico is also participating in the WI31-sponsored training
program on judicial reform in Latin America.
99. 
Anticorruption. As with judicial reform, the WBG had until the current presidential
administration only a limited presence in the anticorruption area- although a successful one, for
its support led to the establishment at SECODAM (the federal government's internal auditor) of
a path-setting electronic system for public procurement (COMPRANET). Since the publication
of the government's Anti-Corruption Program 2001-06 and the ensuing interministerial
agreements, the WBG faces a heightened demand for support in the fight against corruption at
the various levels and institutions of government. WBG will respond to that demand. First, it
will provide on-demand technical assistance for the design of anticorruption strategies to
individual federal ministries and their dependent agencies, starting with those the operations of
which are most exposed to rent-seeking practices (the first will be Secretaria de Hacienda y
Credito Pu2blico, and the Tax Administration Office [SAT] it oversees). Second, it will, also on
demand, carry out State Financial and Accountability Assessments and State Procurement
Assessment Reports each year through fiscal 2005. Third, an Anti-Corruption Investment Loan
(fiscal 2004) will support the implementation of necessary institutional reforms, at both the
federal and state levels. Fourth, IBRD will continue assisting SECODAM in making the federal
government more transparent in areas like standardization of bidding documents, arbitration of
procurement disputes, contracting of consulting services, and e-government. Finally, WBI will
expand its training programs for federal and subnational employees, whose emphasis on
corruption has recently proven instrumental for SECODAM's strategy-setting efforts; Mexico
was also chosen as the site for a region-wide course on National Governance and Anti-
Corruption (in which more than 2000 public officials have participated).
100. Civil Society. The WBG will continue to assist the opening of Mexico's development
process to civil society participation. This CAS has been prepared in a consultative manner, with
three regional events to gain feedback from a broad range of local actors (see below).
Consultations with key civil society actors were held in 2001 to discuss the WBG's own policies
for information disclosure and indigenous peoples. And IBRD continues to explore ways to
involve local CSOs in its lending products. In a remarkable example, the Marginal Areas project
has transferred decisionmaking on community development priorities, approval of subprojects,
contracting of technical assistance, and project supervision to Regional Councils, with civil
society and community involvement-mostly through indigenous organizations. Over the next
three years, the WBG will expand its support for dialogue between government and civil society

34

on participatory approaches to the design, execution, and evaluation of WBG-financed projects
and, more generally, to public policy formulation and accountability. 
It will also seek suitable
mechanisms to help civil society engage in budget planning, execution, and evaluation, and will
pilot an information disclosure 
initiative to bring better access to information for poor
communities and their organizations. If requested, the WBG would provide technical assistance
on enabling legal frameworks for CSOs.

(g) Exposure Evolution Under the Proposed Strategy

101. As of February 28, 2002, IBRD exposure to Mexico was US$10.9 billion, its third-largest
country portfolio, and 9.5 percent of the total IBRD portfolio. Under the scenario outlined in this
CAS, with a lending envelope of US$5 billion during fiscal 2003-O5 (half of which through
faster disbursing adjustment loans), Mexico's IBRD exposure is projected to increase to US$12.1
billion by end-fiscal 2005 and stabilize at that level thereafter. IBRD exposure to Mexico would
thus remain well within the IBRD's single borrower exposure guideline of US$13.5 billion
throughout the CAS period, leaving a US$1.5 billion "cushion" should additional lending be
needed.
102. Exposure projections are sensitive to, among others things, the level of new lending, its
rate of disbursement, disbursements from the existing pipeline of US$3 billion in loans already
approved, possible cancellations of approved lending and, for longer-term projections, the
repayment schedule selected. To ensure that the IBRD's single borrower exposure guideline is
not breached in the outer years because of the level of lending committed during this CAS cycle,
and that IBRD's assistance program is therefore not impaired in the future, exposure projections
have been carried out for a 10-year period (see Figures la and lb). These projections show that
keeping the IBRD annual commitments at US$1.6 billion in fiscal 2006 and thereafter-that is, a
program similar in size to the one proposed in this CAS for fiscal 2003-05-would lead to a
relative peak exposure of only US$12.3 billion in fiscal 2009, well below the guideline and
leaving some headroom to assist in case of a crisis.
103. Alternative disbursement assumptions were also employed to test the sensitivity of the
exposure projection to a faster disbursement profile of both adjustment and investment lending
(see, again, Figures la and lb).'7 Whereas the normal disbursement scenario assumes a three-
year disbursement profile for adjustment lending (with 65 percent of the loan disbursed within
the first year) and an eight-year disbursement profile for investment loans (both based on the
actual disbursement profile of IBRD lending to Mexico over the past decade), the fast
disbursement scenario assumes an immediate, upon-approval, one-tranche disbursement of all
future adjustment operations and a shortened, five-year disbursement profile for investment

17. 

In addition to the level of new lending and the disbursement profile (the latter inclusive of the split between
faster disbursing adjustment and investment lending), exposure projection scenarios may include variations in
future loan cancellations, repayment schedules, and the currency composition of IBRD debt. To err on the
cautious side, the projections presented here do not include any future cancellations and take a standard
repayment schedule for future lending applicable to Mexico with a five-year grace period and 15-year maturity.
In the past CAS, both disbursement ratios and new commitments proved lower than orginally anticipated, which
resulted in an exposure lower than expected (for example, the 1999 CAS projected a total IBRD TDO of
US$13.3 billion for the year 2001, compared with an actual for that year of US$10.8 billion). The projections
do not consider the exchange rate risk stemming from the currency composition as practically all of Mexico's
IBRD debt outstanding is denominated in U.S. dollars, and all contracting of IBRD debt has taken place in this
currency ever since the single currency loan was initiated in fiscal 1998.

35

lending. Such an accelerated disbursement would bring exposure to US$12.8 billion by end-
fiscal 2005 and US$13.4 billion by end-fiscal 2009, still within-though exceptionally close to-
the exposure limit. Although such a disbursement profile would constitute a major change from
past performance (evident in the rapid drop of the undisbursed balance of approved loans), such
a fast buildup of exposure could require a cutback in lending past fiscal 2006. Management will
continuously monitor the implementation of the lending program, including the disbursements of
approved lending and the implications thereof for country exposure.
104. Both the proposed IBRD lending program and its sensitivity analysis, assume that policy-
based, adjustment lending will be disbursed as per regular practice. The Mexican authorities are
aware of IBRD's new and forthcoming product lines (especially, Deferred Draw-Down Options
and Guarantees) and may consider requesting them in the future if they suit the evolving
economic and development conditions of the country. From the point of view of IBRD's Mexico
exposure (as opposed to Mexico's debt outstanding and disbursed with IBRD), the choice of
delivery tool does not change the time-series or conclusions from Figure la and lb-that is, the
proposed program preserves a US$1.5 billion "cushion" vis-a-vis the absolute concentration
limit.
Figures la and lb. Mexico IBRD Exposure Scenarios, 1996-2015
(a) Debt Outstanding

145- 
,

4.,,,,,,,_ 

Actal 

I P iecte

E osZ linit 

-

140

13500 

1150 

IIOOOD

1050D

-

# 

.

w 

t 

FastDisb.

Disb.

36

(b) Disbursements, Repayments, and Undisbursed Balance

. .

. ......

:S 

* ~~~~~~~~~~Fast 

Uni\u=e_
Disb. 

Normal Di

_ae

f_ 

Nor 

Diab. 

Fast Disb'

so,. 

00O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

' 

-,oO 

Os 

o 

e

4400

4000 

3600

3200

O2800 

2400 

1600 

12000,

800

V. THE RISKS IN THE PROPOSED CAS
105. The assistance strategy put forward in this document faces a series of real but manageable
risks. First, in the more integrated Mexico of today, the possibility of negative external
developments unsettling the country's macroeconomic framework is not negligible-the rebound
of the U.S. economy is by no means guaranteed, and contagion from another emerging market
crisis cannot be assumed away. Also, the recent appreciation of the Mexican peso deserves close
monitoring, even though much of the currency's strength reflects a significant improvement in
market "fundamentals" 
(higher productivity, a floating exchange rate regime, enhanced
independence of the monetary authority, fiscal credibility, a more comfortable public foreign
debt position, three investment grades, falling inflation rates, a flight-to-quality by international
investors seeking emerging market exposure in their portfolios, and so on). As mentioned
earlier, fiscal consolidation remains a challenge. Oil price volatility presents an additional
challenge. Mexico's recent macroeconomic record and policy mix (especially its fiscal
discipline and flexible exchange rate regime) are solid, have proven resilient during the U.S.
recession, and have "market differentiated" Mexico through successive international financial
crises (East Asia in 1997, Russia in 1998, Brazil in 1999, and Argentina in 2001).
106. 
Second, with no single party holding a majority in Congress, and mid-term elections
scheduled for 2003, the Mexican government may find it all but impossible to see through
pending reforms (energy, labor, judicial, water, and so forth). While this type of political risk is
difficult to mitigate, the government has learned the lessons from the recent attempt at fiscal
reform (eventually passed but in a partial manner)-future legislative initiatives are likely to be
accompanied by more up-front debate, systematic consensus building, and negotiation.
107. Third, as the U.S. economy rebounds, growth in Mexico will likely recover in full force
and quickly reach the high rates of the late 1990s. This may put Mexican policymakers in a
"comfort zone," that is, under the perception that further structural reforms are either not
necessary or not worth the political cost. Growth sustainability could then be compromised. The

37

likelihood of this complacency is, however, not large, because the current administration
continues to show a strong commitment to reform that is compatible with the mandate for change
it received in the 2000 elections.
108. 
Fourth, many of the necessary reforms are cross-ministerial undertakings, fall under the
purview of both federal and subnational governments, and are championed by presidential
commissioners. Coordination among that many actors will be difficult, even before stakeholders
outside the Executive (like Congress) enter the debate. Such coordination problems did occur in
the early part of the administration, but a gradual and reassuring improvement is visibly
underway (for example, in the design of water sector reform).
109. 
Fifth, as federalismo unfolds and long-entrenched structural problems in the states
become immediately binding, the likelihood of a crisis, be it financial or social, at the
subnational level will expand. For example, this could take the form of a state or large
municipality being fiscally unable to deliver the basic social services for which they are
increasingly 
responsible, or previously marginalized groups bringing 
their accumulated
grievances and pent-up demands to bear all at once, overwhelming the capacity of local
governments to respond. This risk is present countrywide, but especially in poorer southern
states. 
It is in part mitigated by the federal government's recent efforts to establish market-
driven rules for decentralization, by its ongoing support to states that proactively seek to reform
themselves, and by the newly available mechanisms for subnational accountability.
110. 
Sixth, in the absence of sectoral reforms, Mexico may run into an "infrastructure crisis"
during this sexenio-power generation might prove unable to keep up with faster growth,
northern industrial states might run out of water, or transport-driven air pollution might bring
large cities to a halt. This type of crisis, and the resultant political pressures for quick-fix
solutions, could permanently damage the country's prospects for long-term growth. The federal
government is aware of these dangers and is placing better infrastructure provision (notably,
through increased private sector participation) at the forefront of its reform agenda.
1. 
Finally, as with the previous CAS cycle, IBRD's assistance program to federal entities
remains at budgetary risk-the nonadditionality of IBRD funds with respect to sector-ministry
budgets will continue to dampen the demand for its participation. As in the past, the decisive
factor will be the technical quality of IBRD's contribution. The presence of a particularly strong
program of analytical work in the proposed CAS seeks to mitigate that risk.

VI. COORDINATION WITH OTHER PARTNERS AND PARTICIPATION IN THIS
CAS

112. The WBG continues to maintain a fluid and productive relationship with the community
of Mexico's development partners. That relationship takes many forms, in accordance with the
country's needs. In some areas, the WBG is the leading agency and acts as a catalyst for the
intervention of others (for example, in GEF operations where UJNEP and UNDP take part). In
other cases, the WBG has developed complementary partnerships (for example, with the IMF to
help strengthen the macroeconomic framework) or joint products (for example, IDB's parallel
financing of the Decentralization and Rural Development project series). Sometimes the
government led institutional specialization. For example, in decentralization, the WBG has
focused on setting conducive legal and regulatory frameworks and helping states adjust to them,

38

while IDB emphasized institutional capacity at the subnational level. And sometimes donor
coordination has taken the form of knowledge sharing, like with the OECD. A comprehensive
overview of how various stakeholders integrate into a comprehensive framework is shown in
Table 5. Among partner activities, two of particular importance for this CAS are further
described below-IMF and IDB.
113. Mexico maintains an excellent relationship with the IMF. Following the successful
completion in 2000 of a 17-month SDR US$3.103 million Stand-by Arrangement, which the
country eventually treated as precautionary and from which it did not withdraw the last
installment, the Fund continues providing regular surveillance (Article 4 consultations) and
technical assistance (for example, in monetary policy up to the year 2000, and tax administration
matters). It also produced, together with IBRD, a Financial Sector Assessment Paper (FSAP) in
2001. In addition, the authorities may explore the possibility of an IMF Contingent Credit Line
(CCL), which would be the first of its kind since the facility became available for countries
which pursue strong macroeconomic and structural policies and show progress toward adherence
to internationally accepted standards in the financial, fiscal, and statistical areas. Apart from the
continued pursuance of sound economic policies, the CCL would be based on further progress
toward compliance with international standards, including following up on the recommendations
made in the FSAP. These IMF efforts are, of course, directly complementary to the first
conceptual pillar of the proposed CAS-consolidating the macroeconomic gains of recent years.
114. 
IDB also has a sizable assistance program in Mexico (with new commitments worth
some US$1.2 billion per year, and an accumulated debt of about US$6 billion). 
Its strategic
focus is on social sector modernization and poverty reduction, fiscal decentralization, private
sector competitiveness, and international economic integration. The ensuing interventions have
reinforced, rather than substituted for, the WBG's assistance-IDB has put emphasis on
institutional development (for example, in decentralization) and on supporting ongoing programs
(for example, PROGRESA), while the WBG's analytical and financial assistance has favored the
design and implementation of new reforms (for example, in state-level adjustment programs).
The synergies have sometimes lead to joint or parallel-financing operations (for example, in rural
municipality development, and in the proposed ISSSTE project). 
(For more details on IDB's
program in Mexico see Box 6).

Box 6. IDB's Program
During 1999-2000 the IDB had 11 projects in Mexico-one general multisector loan, five in the power sector, and
one each for bank restructuring, housing, labor market reform, strengthening subnational finances, and rural water
and sanitation. Mexico's outstanding debt with the IDB was US$5.8 billion at the end of 2000, with net
disbursements of approximately US$250 million in recent years, usually lower than the interest payments.
IDB's program for the next five years has four main components: (a) social sector modernization and
poverty reduction, (b) modernization and decentralization of the state, (c) improvement of private sector
competitiveness, and (d) international economic integration. The base-case scenario includes operations in the
amount of approximately US$1.2 billion per year on average during 2002-06. Approximately 40 percent of the
value of the planned operations corresponds to support for poverty reduction; 35 percent is for improvements in
private sector productivity, 20 percent is for modernization of the state, and 5 percent is for international
integration. The high-case scenario includes lending of approximately US$1.5 billion per year, with the main
difference being greater emphasis on fast-disbursing operations.
To support modernization of the social sector and reduction of extreme poverty, the IDB will put forward
operations in several areas: primary education, the labor market, and targeted support to poor groups, particularly

39

women, indigenous peoples, and probably also health. The biggest projects in this area would be for PROGRESA,
primary education, labor market reform, restructuring social security for public sector workers (ISSSTE), and
sustainable restructuring of small-scale rural producers.

Improving competitiveness of the private sector by lowering barriers to enhanced productivity is the
second major area of lending foreseen by the IDB. This includes support for modernization of the financial
system; public and private investment in various sectors; improvement of regulatory schemes and incentive
systems; and enhancing economic efficiency by helping the private sector play an active role in financing and
implementing investments in electricity, water and sanitation, transportation, telecommunications, and education
and health infrastructure construction projects.

Modernization of the state, and subnational decentralization and development, while having a smaller
volume of lending than the first two areas, is equally important for improving the social and economic climate in
Mexico. The IDB would support improvements in government practices and in the regulatory framework,
strengthening the civil service and public institutions in states and municipalities, and improving the justice and
property rights systems.

Since the integration of Mexico with the rest of North America through NAFTA is proceeding
satisfactorily, IDB support in this area would be for the Puebla-Panama Plan, which seeks to expand integration to
the south as a way to fight poverty in both Mexico and Central America.

115. 
The preparation of CASs in Mexico has followed an increasingly participatory approach.
Until 1999, CAS documents were confidential and of limited distribution even within the
government. 
In 1999, a consultation process was undertaken with a range of stakeholders
(including NGOs, academics, think tanks, unions, businessmen, and politicians) and the final
product was made widely available within the administration. The 2001 Progress Report (on the
1999 CAS) was published by the authorities-a first-ever event for Mexico. This gradual
opening to civil society in the articulation of the WBG assistance took another step forward in
this CAS-a countrywide process of consultation with the full array of stakeholders was put in
motion through a series of public events organized in Mexico City, Monterrey, and Oaxaca
during March 2002. (For a description of those consultations, see Box 7). Those events were
complemented by a large number of individual meetings with leaders of civil organizations,
whose feedback will also be sought on a continuing basis during CAS implementation, a practice
that proved instrumental in the previous strategy cycle.

Box 7. Mexico CAS Consultation with Civil Society

In the process of preparing this CAS, WBG staff organized three full-day seminars with a broad and
diverse selection of members of Mexican civil society, including representatives from trade unions, religious groups,
academic institutions, charitable foundations, producer and community-based organizations, business chambers and
other non-governmental organizations. The discussions that took place in March 2002 with more than 120
representatives of civil society organizations at three different 
locations throughout Mexico-Mexico City,
Monterrey and Oaxaca-allowed for a better definition of the role that the WBG may have in assisting Mexican
society to address the country's main development challenges, as well as an increasing stakeholders' awareness of
the WBG's activities and assistance strategy. Despite, at times, different and divergent perspectives on development
issues, the general constructive atmosphere in which the consultations took place contributed to an improved
understanding of the key problems that Mexico faces and the identification of new issues for future support, such as:

* The importance of evaluation and impact analysis of public policies and programs in order to improve the
efficiency of public spending and the design of effective government interventions. Such evaluations
should be made public and should be widely discussed, something that would not only improve the quality
of future service provision but also give legitimacy to the taxation required to fund those services.

* The need to conceive development as a broader and multifaceted process that, beyond economic growth

40

and poverty reduction, should aim at the improvement of overall human well-being.

.

.

The role that strengthening domestic-market-oriented suppliers (including through linkages with NAFTA-
driven ones) and the enhancement of their competitiveness can play in economic growth, job creation and
poverty reduction.

Developing closer relationships between civil society and government will enhance stakeholder
participation and ownership of public policies and programs. In view of the political transition that Mexico
is going through, the WBG can play a critical role as an independent analyst and catalyst for dialogue
within society and between government and civil organizations.

* The relevance of taking into account regional dimensions in the design and implementation of development
policies and public investment programs, especially in a country of the size and with the sharp regional
contrasts of Mexico.
The continued, strong engagement of the WBG in Mexico received broad endorsement by Mexican civil
society in view of the major development challenges the country faces and, in particular, the contribution the WBG
can make in tackling the still-prevailing high levels of poverty and inequality in the country. Many participants
expressed their appreciation for the WBG's initiative to reach out to civil society for views on its assistance
strategies and strongly encouraged a continuation of such activities with the possibility to include the Mexican
government in such discussions. A summary report and detailed minutes of the consultations have been distributed
to participants and are available upon request.

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

116. The objective of this WBG assistance strategy is to support the government's efforts to
consolidate 
the macroeconomic 
framework, 
accelerate 
growth 
through 
enhanced
competitiveness, develop the country's human capital, protect the enviromnent, and build an
efficient, accountable and transparent government. That strategy is the result of extensive
analytical work, lessons of operational experience, and country consultation.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:

Shengman Zhang 

Peter L. Woicke

Washington, D.C., April 23, 2002

41

42

Table 6. Mexico-CAS Matrix FY03-05

COUNTRY 
DEVELOPMENT 
OBJECTIVES 

Consolidating 
macroeconomic 
stability 

GOVERNMENT 
INSTRUMENTS 

Strengthening federal fiscal anchor 
by (a) continuing the tax reform, (b) 
addressing implicit and contingent 
liabilities, (c) maintaining 
subnational fiscal discipline; and (d) 
sub.ational fiscal discipline; and (d) 
stabilizing oil revenues 

Accelerating growti 
through enhanced 

competitiveness 

Ensuring the adequate provision of 
physical infrastructure 

WORLD BANK GRouP's SUPPORT INSTRUMENTS
FINANCIAL 
NON-FINANCIAL 

Macro-monitoring (ongoing) 
Public Expenditure Management 
FY04 
Promoting Trade FY04 
Intemational Factor Mobility FY04 
Country Economic Memorandum 
FY05 
Economic Shocks and Fiscal 
Responses FY05 
Labor Market Convergence FY05 
Public Debt Management FY05 

Energy Sector Dialogue FY03 
Urban Poverty Toolkit FY03 
Energy Sector Review FY04 
Low Income Housing FY04 
Urban Land Management FY05 

Tax Reform SAL FY02 
Tax Reform TAL FY02 
Labor Reform SAL FY04 (tbc) 

National Urban Upgrading Loan 
FY03 
Off-grid Rural Electrification 
Loan FY03 
States Infrastructure 
Decentralization APL I FY03 
Water & Sanit. Modernization 
FY03 
Highway Finance Loan FY04 
Power Sector Reform Loan 
FY05 
States Infrastructure 
Decentralization APL 11 FY05 
IFC's Operations in Transport, 
Power, Water, Sanit. & 
Hydrocarbons 

ancrasin 
g efficiency in the financial Rural Finance SECAL FY03 
sector (broadly defined). 
Financial Sector SECAL I FY04 
Financial Sector SECAL n 
FY05 
IFC's Financial Sector 
Instruments FY03-05 

Fin. Sector Monitoring (ongoing) 
Insurance Sector Report FY04 

43

PROGRESS
BENCHMARKS

For country: Continued sound fiscal
and monetary policies including
reduced dependency on oil-related
revenues, coupled with continuation
of tax reform. Preserve satisfactory
standing with IMF. Maintain
sustainable balance-of-payments
current account deficits.
For WBG performance: Enhanced
country awareness and debate around
key macro vulnerabilities, notably the
need for completing tax reform as
evidenced by relevant reform
proposals by core interest groups
For country: Improved financial
performance and efficiency in
highways, power, and water utilities;
improved access for the poor to basic
infrastructure. Increased ownership
and involvement of subnational
governments in setting key
infrastructure development and
fmancing strategies
For WBG performance: Enhanced
catalyst role in progress toward
structural reform in key infrastructure
subsectors, notably electricity, as
evidenced by the quality of the sector
dialogue and operations. Expanded
support for state-level infrastructure
reformn.
For country: Strengthened financial
sector supervision, better performing
development banks, and improved
financial infrastructure.
For WBG performance: WBG
technical assistance as a catalyst for
reform in the overall incentive
structure for the operation of the
financial sector, especially in the area
of legal and regulatory infrastructure.

Table 6. Mexico-CAS Matrix FY03-05

COUNTRY 
DEVELOPMENT 
OBJECTIVES 

Accelerating growth 
through enhanced 
competitiveness 

(continued) 

GOVERNMENT 
INSTRUMENTS 

Raising productivity in the 
agricultural sector 

WORLD BANK GROUP'S SUPPORT INSTRUMENTS
FINANCIAL 
NON-FINANCIAL 

Savings & Loan Sector 
Coffee Sector Study FY02 
Development FY02 
Sugar Sector Restructuring FY02 
Irrigation Sector FY03 
Ag. Competitiveness FY03 
Land Titling LIL FY03 
Muicipal Development in Rural Areas 
Rural Finance SECAL FY03 
FY03 
Ag. Productivity II FY04 
Rural Pension Schemes FY03 
Rural Develop. Marginal Areas Warehousing Schemes FY03 
APL III FY04 
Rural Enterprise Development FY04 
IFC Operations in Agribusiness 
FY03-05 

Integrating Middle-Market and 
Micro- and Small Enterprises in the 
"new" Mexican economy. 

SME development FY03 

National MS Business 
Development Project FY02 
IFC Financial Intermediary 
Operations for MSME FY03-05 
IFC Direct Support for Middle- 
Market Companies; Corporate 
Governance Support FY03-05 

44

PROGRESS
BENCHMARKS

For country: A consolidated non-
bank savings and loan sector, being
strengthened through capacity
building and enhanced supervision.
An improved framework for
agricultural productivity and
competitiveness and better access to
diversification opportunities and TA.
A restructured sugar sector in the
process of privatizing the government
expropriated mills. A revised
incentive framework for the
rehabilitation and repositioning of the
coffee sectors. The operation of more
effective warehousing schemes.
For WBG performance: Contri-
bution to the implementation of key
programs as determinants to
agricultural competitiveness and
productivity, and enhanced
understanding of the functioning of
factor and goods markets in rural
areas through the delivery of key
sector work.
For country: Improved business
environment for MSMEs, including a
reduction in the "cost of doing
business," and better access to
- development services and finances.
For WBG performance:
Satisfactory implementation and
completion of the ongoing Southeast
Regional Development LIL and
Urban Micro-Business Loan.

Table 6. Mexico-CAS Matrix FY03405

COUNTRY 
DEVELOPMENT 

OBJECTIVES 
Human Capital 
Development 

GOVERNMENT 

INSTRUMENTS 
Enhancing the quality of public 
education 

Increasing the quality of public 
health services 

Closing gaps in social protection 

WORLD BANK GROUP'S SUPPORT INSTRUMENTS
FINANCIAL 
NON-FINANCIAL 

PROGRESS

Knowledge-Economy Assessment 
FY03 
Adult Education Study FY03 
Secondary Ed. Study FY04 

Tech. Training & Certification 
FY03 
Science Education FY04 
Basic Ed. APL III FY05 
Science and Techn. 11 FY05 
IFC's Operations with Private 
Education Providers FYO3-05 

BENCHMARKS
For country: Improved quality of
education inputs (i.e., increased
number of primary education teachers
retained in remote rural areas,
increased number of primary
education students with educational
material in rural areas), and enhanced
efficiency (i.e., intemal efficiency in
primary education)
For WBG performance: Delivery of
technical assistance for effective
education programs at all levels
(basic, secondary, technical, and
-------------- 
------------------------------------- !~ighereducation).
ISSSTE SECAL FY03 
Evaluation Basic Healthcare FY03 
For country: Increased access to
ISSSTE TAL FY03 
Indigenous Health FY 04 
basic healthcare for rural (particularly
Health System Reform IMSS 
indigenous) and urban underserved
FY04 
populations, and strengthened
Indigenous Health FY05 
coordination among public health
IFC's Operations with Private 
care institutions at the three levels of
Health Providers FYO3-05 
government. Arresting the growth of
the implicit debt in the public-
_Femployee pension system
For WBG performance: Cons-
olidating the delivery of a basic
health care package for uncovered
and underserved rural and peri-urban
poor. Successfully assisting in the
implementation of the public-
employee pension reform.
For country: Improve coverage and
minimize regressive targeting
structures and leakages.
For WBG performance: Deliver TA
to help GOM design better SP
programs.

Urban Poverty FY03 
Social Safety Net Evaluation FY04 

45

Table 6. Mexico-CAS Matrix FY03-05

COUNTRY 
DEVELOPMENT 
OBJECTIVES 
Human Capital 

Development (continued) 

GOVERNMENT 
INSTRUMENTS 
Understanding and attending to the 
specific needs of the poor and the 

disadvantaged. 

Balance growth and 
poverty reduction with 
protecting the environment, 

Establishing an adequate incentive 
framework for environmental 
protection and for the 

decentralization of environmental 
management. Breaking the vicious 
maa gement Break 
the vco 
circle between degradation and 
survival. 

Pursuing opportunities for 
harnessing global benefits to the 
advantage of local development. 

Building an efficient, 

accountable and transparent 
government. 

___________________________ 

Pursuing Decentralization 
(Federalismo) Along a Sustainable 

Path 

WORLD BANK GROUP'S SUPPORT INSTRUMENTS
FINANCIAL 
NON-FINANCIAL 

Indigenous Health FY05 
Gender LIL (recent approval) 

Gender Assessment of Legal 
Framework FY02 

PROGRESS
BENCHMARKS
For country: Improved access to
health services for the indigenous.

Dissemination of Gender and the 
Mexican Economy FY03 
Poverty Assessment FY03 

Impact of PROGRESA FY03 
Portfolio Gender Assessment FY04 
Business Cycle and the Poor FY04 
Growth Poverty and Inequality FY04 

Indigenous Peoples Access to Assets 

and Markets FY04 

_____ _____ 
____ _____ _____ ____ 

Degradation and Poverty FY03 
Environment and Growth FY04 

.-- 

State-level CFAA FY03 

State-level CPAR FY03 
Reform of the Fiscal Pact FY03 

State-level PER FY03 
State-level CEM FY03 
State-level CFAA 11 FY04 

State-level CPAR 1I FY04

Envirornental SAL FY02 
Air Quality 11 FY04 
Community Forestry FY04 

Environmental SAL H FY05 
IFC's Operations in 
Environmentally-sound 
Infrastructure FY03-05 
IFC's Operations in Sustainable 
Development Business Practices 
FY03-05 
-. 
-inka-es 
GEF Protected Areas 11 and III 
FY03/ FY04 
GEF Climate Change-Hybrid 
Technology FY03 
PCF - Carbon Sequestration in 
Coffee Areas FY03 
GEF - Persistent Organic 
Pollutants FY03 
GEF - Gulf of Cortez FY04 

Municipal Development in 

Rural Areas FY02 
EdoMex TAL FY02 

State Infrastructure 
Decentralization APL FY03 
State-level Adjustment FY03 

46

Identify and begin to correct gender
biases in the country's legal
framework, as well as in the WBG's

own portfolio.
For WBG performance: Improved
understanding of indigenous and
gender issues, and related projects

being satisfactorily implemented.

Expanded analytical work on poverty

and inequality leads to better targeted

operations.

For country: Better and more
decentralized management of water
and forestry resources. Improvement

of air guality in Mexico City.
For WBG performance: Effective
contribution to environmental policy
reforms and to capacity building at
the state level. Better understanding
of the incentive structure driving
environmental degradation and its
with poverty and growth
For country: Expanded protected
areas system to new reserves.
Contribution to climate change
initiatives through better transport
technology and carbon sequestration.
For WBG performance: Catalyst
role in Mexico's seizing opportunities
to contribute to global-level
biodiversity conservation and climate

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~change 

mitigation.

For country: Decentralization is

proceeding apace, while fiscal
discipline at subnational levels is

maintained. Improved institutional
capacity among states and
municipalities.

Table 6. Mexico-CAS Matrix FY03-05

COUNTRY 
DEVELOPMENT 
OBJECTIVES 
Building an efficient, 
accountable and transparent 

governrnent (continued) i 

GOVERNMENT 
INSTRUMENTS 
Pursuing Decentralization 
(Federalismo) Along a Sustainable 

Path (continued) 
government (continued) 

WORLD BANK GROUP'S SUPPORT INSTRUMENTS
FINANCIAL 
NON-FINANCIAL 

State-level TAL Window FY04 
State-level Adjustment II FY04 
Municipal Development in 
Rural Areas II FY05 
State Infrastructure 
Decentralization APL II FY05 
State-level Adjustment III FY05 

State-level PER 11 FY04 
State-level CFAA III FY05 
State-level CPAR III FY05 
State-level CEM II FY05 
WBI Sub-national Training Programs 
FY03-05 

PROGRESS
BENCHMARKS
For WBG performance: Catalyst
role in improving coordination across
levels of government, strengthening
the sustainability of decentralization,
and facilitating state adjustment.
Effective contribution to institutional
capacity at the subnational level.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~levels 

Judicial Reform Agenda FY03 

For country: Dispute resolution
mechanisms are faster, more
efficient, and more accessible, at both
national and subnational level.
For WBG performance: Instru-
mental contribution to putting in
motion judicial reforn across all
of government.
Anticorruption TA Window FY03-05 For country: Mexico's international
State-level CFAA FY03-05 
ranking of transparency is
State-level CPAR FY03-05 
significantly improved.
WBI Transparency Training 
For WBG performance: Lending
Programs FY03-05 
and nonlending support to
transparency enhancements prove
effective and sustainable.
For country: CSOs participation in
public policy formulation and
accountability. Enhanced
institutional capacity of CSOs.
For WBG performance: Local
CSOs participation in IBRD
operations is deepened at all stages of
the project cycle. Network of CSO
dialogue is expanded.

Civil Society Organization Dialogue 
and TA FY03-05 

Fostering a more efficient and more 
accessible judicial system 

Access to Justice LIL FY03 
Judicial Reform Loan FY05 

Strengthening anticorruption 
Mechanisms 

Anticorruption 
Mechanisms Loan FY04 

---

Expanding the role of civil society 
in government accountability 

47

48

Table 7. Mexico-World Bank Group Financial Instruments-FY2003-2005

FY03 

Rural Finance SECAL ($200 million) 
ISSSTE SECAL ($500 million) 
State-level Adjustment ($200 million) 

FY04 

Policy-based.
Highway Finance Loan ($200 million) 
Financial Sector SECAL I ($200 million) 
Health System Reform IMSS ($200 million) 
State-level Adjustment II ($200 million) 

FY05

Power Sector Reform Hybrid Loan ($200 million)
Financial Sector SECAL II ($200 million)
Environmental SAL II ($200 million)
State-level Adjustment III ($200 million)

.______________________________________ 
: 
.Standard 
National Urban Upgrading Loan ($50 million) 
Off-grid Rural Electrification Loan ($5 million) 
Water & Sanit. Modernization ($200 million) 
Irrigation Sector ($220 million) 
Tech. Training & Certification ($150 million) 
ISSSTE TAL ($15 million) 

_ 

Investm ent Projects
Ag. Productivity II ($300 million) 
Science Education ($100 million) 
Air Quality II ($100 million) 
Community Forestry ($100 million) 
State-level TAL Window ($50 million)
Anti-corruption Mechanisms Loan ($50 million)

Science and Techn. II ($150 million)
Indigenous Health ($50 million)
Municipal Development in Rural Areas II ($200 million)
Judicial Reform Loan ($30 million)

States Infrastructure Decentralization APL I ($250 million) 

APLs (new and follow-ups)
Rural Develop. Marginal Areas APL III ($100 million) 

l____________________________________j Basic Ed. APL III ($170 million)

States Infrastructure Decentralization APL II ($200 million)

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
_ _ _ _ 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _L 

IL

Access to Justice LIL ($5 million)
Land Titling LIL ($5 million)

continued

49

Table 7. Mexico-World Bank Group Financial Instruments-FY2003-2005 (continued)
FY03 
FY04 

GEF Protected Areas 11 
GEF Climate Change-Hybrid Technology 
GEF Persistent Organic Pollutants
PCF - Carbon Sequestration in Coffee Areas

CEF/M*tP
GEF Protected Areas IIl
GEF Gulf of Cortez

FY05

Municipal Development-Capacity Building

IDF/Grants

IFCW s Operations in Transport Power. Waier. Sanil. & 

Hydrocarbons 
IFC's Financial Sector Projects 
IFC Financial Intermediary Operations for MSME 
IFC's Operations with Private Education Providers 
IFC's Operations with Private Health Providers 
IFC's Operations in Sustainable Development Business 
Practices FY03-05 
IFC Operations in Agribusiness 
IFC Direct Support for Middle-Market Companies; Corporate 
Governance Support 

[FC'

IFC's Operations in Transport. Power, Water. Sanit 

& Hydrocarbons 
IFC's Financial Sector Projects 
IFC Financial Intermediary Operations for MSME 
IFC's Operations with Private Education Providers 
IFC's Operations with Private Health Providers 
IFC's Operations in Sustainable Development 
Business Practices FY03-05 
IFC Operations in Agribusiness 
IFC Direct Support for Middle-Market Companies; 
Corporate Governance Support 

Note:
3IBRD overall projected lending commitment in FY03 
is $1,800 million, of which $900 million in adjustment 
lending 

IBRD overall projected lending commitment in 
FY04 is $1,600 million, of which $800 million 
in adjustment lending 
a. All IEFC instruments are indicative, and subject to the Mexican private sector's demand for EFC assistance.

50

IFC's Operations in Transport, Po%%er, Water, Sanil. &

Hydrocarbons
IFC's Financial Sector Projects
IFC Financial Intermediary Operations for MSME
IFC's Operations with Private Education Providers
IFC's Operations with Private Health Providers
IFC's Operations in Sustainable Development Business
Practices FY03-05
IFC Operations in Agribusiness
IFC Direct Support for Middle-Market Companies; Corporate
Governance Support

IBRD overall projected lending commitment in FY05
$1,600 million, of which $800 million in adjustment
lending

Annex B 1

Mexico at a glance

Latin 
Upper-
America middle-
Mexico & Carib. 
income 

POVERTY and SOCIAL 

Development diamond'

2000
Population, mid-year (millions) 
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$) 
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions) 

98.0 
5,080 
497.0 

516 
3,680 
1,895 

647 
4,620
2,986

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1994-00

Population (I%) 
Labor force (I%) 

1.5 
2.5 

1.6 
2.3 

1.3 
2.0 

'N
GNI 
Per 
capita 

Gross
pnmary
enroliment

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1994-001 
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population) 
Life expectancy at birth (years) 
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5) 
Access to an improved water source (% of population) 
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+) 
Gross primary enrollment (% ofschool-age population) 
Male 
Female 

74 
72 
29 
8 
86 
9 
114 
116 
113 

75 
70 
30 
9 
85 
12 
113 

76
69
28

.. 

Access to improved water source

87
10 
107 
108 
105

_ 

Mexk
Mexico
Upper-middle-income group

.. 

---

.. 

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1980 

1990 

1999 

2000

Economic mtloe

GDP (US$ billions) 
Gross domestic investmenVGDP 
Exports of goods and services/GDP 
Gross domestic savings/GDP 
Gross national savings/GDP 

223.5 
27.2 
10.7 
24.9 
22.4 

262.7 
23.1 
18.6 
22.0 
20.3 

479.4 
23.5 
30.9 
21.9 
20.5 

579.9
23.1 
31.1
21.3
20.1

Trade

Current account balance/GDP 
Interest payments/GDP 
Total debt/GDP 
Total debt serviceJexports 
Present value of debt/GDP 
Present value of debt/exports 

4.7 
2.0 
25.7 
45.4 

-2.8 
2.2 
39.8 
20.9 

-3.0 
2.1 
35.0 
25.8 
33.9 
102.6 

-3.1 
2 0 
2814 
34.0
26.1
77.8

Dometc 
savIngst 
savigs

1 

Investment

m ent

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 

Indebtedness

1980-90 199040 

1999 

2000 

2002-04

(average annual growth)
GDP 
GOP per capita 
Exports of goods and services 

1.1 
-1.0 
7.0 

3.1 
1.4 
14.6 

3.8 
2.3 
12.4 

6.9 
5.4 
16,0 

3.3 
1.9 
4.9

Mexico
Upper-middleincome goup

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Growth of Investment and GDP (%)

(% of GDP)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

9.0 
33.6 
22.3 
57.4 

7.8 
28.4 
20.8 
63.7 

4.7 
28.8 
21.1 
66.5 

4.2
27.9 
20.4 
67.8 

20 -

-20 + 

9D 7 

Oa 

DD 

00

Private consumption 
General government consumption 
Imports of goods and services 

65.1 
10.0 
13.0 

69.6 
8.4 
19.7 

67.1 
10.9 
32.4 

67.5 
11.0 
32.8

.40

Got 

-- "-GDP

1980-90 

199040 

1999 

2000 

Growth of exports and Imports (

(average annual growth)
Agriculture 
Industry 
Manufacturing 
Services 

0.8 
1.1 
1.5 
1.4 

1.8 
3.8 
4.4 
2.9 

2.0 
4.2 
4.2 
3. 

2.1 
6.6 
7.1 
4 

40

30
20
10

7 

Private consumption 
General govemment consumption 
Gross domestic investment 
Imports of goods and services 

1.4 
2.4 
-3.3 
1.0 

2.4 
1.8 
4.6 
12.3 

4.3 
3.9 
4.1 
13.8 

9.5 
3.5 
8.8 
21.4

-10
-20

Exports 

-* 

Imports

Note: 2000 data are preliminary estimates.
The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

51

Annex B2

Mexico

PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Inflation 

(%)

Domesti'c prices
(% change) 

40

Consumer prices 
ImplicitGDPdeflator 

.. 

26.7 
28.1 

16.6 
14.9 

9.5 
12.1 

30
20

33.4 

Govemment flnance 
(% of GDP, incudes current grants) 

It

o 

I 

, 

I

Current revenue 
Current budget balance 
Overall surplus/deficit 

27.4 
4.1 
-3.6 

25.3 
0.9 
-2.6 

20.9 
1.5 
-1.2 

21.8 
2.0 
-1.2

95 
96 
-GDP 

97 
deflator 

g9 
99 
-- OCPI

00

TRADE

(US$ millions) 

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000 

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

Total exports (fob) 
Oil 
Agriculture 
Manufactures 
Total imports (cif) 
Food 
Fuel and energy 
Capital goods 

16,284 
10,441 
1,528 
3,802 
19.342 
2,448 
11,720 
5,174 

40,711 
10,104 
2,162 
27,828 
41,593 
5,099 
29,705 
6,790 

136,391 
9,928 
3,926 
122,085 
141,975 
12,175 
109,270 
20,530 

166,455 
16,383
4,217 
145,334
174,458 
16,691 
133,637
24,130 

200,000

150.000

100,0h*
50000 

16*

o

94 

9s 

99, 

97 

99 

00 o

Export price index (1995=100) 

134 

99 

98 

106 

9 

5 

9 

7 

9 

9 c

Import price index (1995=100) 
Terms of trade (1995=100) 

67 
201 

90 
110 

99 
99 

102 
103

EExpoorts 

UInWorts

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions) 
Exports of goods and services 
Imports of goods and services 
Resource balance 

1980 
22,600 
27,430 
-4,830 

1990 
48,732 
51,535 
-2,803 

1999 
148,083 
155.465 
-7,382 

2000 
180,167 
190,494 
-10,326 

Current account balance to GDP (%)

-1
.2

Net income 
Netcurrenttransfers 

-6,438 
833 

-8,626 
3,978 

-13,306 
6,313 

-14,747 
6,994 

3

4

Current account balance 

-10,434 

-7,451 

-14,375 

-18,079 

5

Financing items (net) 
Changes in net reserves 
Memo:
Reserves induding gold (USS millions) 
Conversion rate (DEC, localWUS$) 

11,453 
-1,019 

10,999 
-3,548 

14,969 
-594 

20,901
-2,822 

.

3,052 
2.00E-2 

9,909 
2.8 

31,829 
9.6 

33,595
9.5

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

1980 

1990 

1999 

2000

(US$ millions) 

Composition of 2000 debt (USS mill.)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed 
IBRD 
IDA 

57,378 104.442 
2,063 
11.030 
0 
0 

167.626 
11,353 
0 

164,686
11,444
0 

24382 

11444

| 

-

> 

~~~~~~~-13674 

Total debtservice 
IBRD 
IDA 

10,958 
255 
0 

11,311 
1,552 
0 

39,760 
2,155 
0 

63,497 
2,220
0

4494

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants 
Official creditors 
Private creditors 
Foreign direct investment 
Portfolio equity 

14 
795 
-524 
2,156 
0 

54 
4,168 
-582 
2,549 
563 

..

-1,708 
13,181 
11,915 
3,901 

-525
-5,059
14,190
478 

128061

World Bank program
Commitments 
Disbursements 
Principal repayments 
Net flows 
Interest payments 
Net transfers 

625 
422 
89 
333 
166 
167 

2,562 
3,326 
801 
2,525 
751 
1,774 

1,671 
844 
1,323 
-479 
832 
-1,311 

1,130 
1,647 
1,330 
318 
890
-573

A-IsRD 
B-IDA 
C- IMF 

E-Bilateral
F -Private
G -Short4eerm

D - Other multilateral 

1 

9

Development Economics

52


Annex B2

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

CAS Annex B2 - Mexico

As of March 14,2002

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a. c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number at d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) ' 
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$000) 
Average Supervision (US$000/project) 

1999 

2000 

2001 

2002a

24 
3.4 
12.5 

10.1 

12.5 
10.1 
20.2 

26 
3.3 
11.5 
13.3 
11.5 
13.3 
22.9 

28 
3.1 
10.7 
12.6 
10.7 
12.6 
25.7 

No 
1,866.6 
77.8 

No 
2,386.6 
91.8 

No 
2,144.5 
76.6 

28
3.4
7.1
3.7
7.1
3.7
9.6

--

--
--

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
of OED Proiects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 
118 
22,279.9 
28.4 
0 

Last Five FYs
22
4,113.1
10.0
0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance. For current FY data as of March 14, 2002.
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,

53

54

Mexico-Country Assistance Strategy
Annex B3. Bank Group Program Summary, FY2002-05
Proposed IBRD Lending Program, FY2002-05

Project 

Amount 

(US$ millions) 

Strategic 

Rewards 

Implementation

Risks

Annex B3

200 
30 
43 
200 
400 
27 
8 
5 
905

200 
500 
200 
50 
5 
200 
220 
150 
15 
250 
5 
5 

1,800

200 
200 
200 
200 
300 
100 
100 
100 
50 
50 
100 

1,600

200 
200 
200 
200 
150 
50 
200 
30 
200 
170 
1,600
5,905

H* 
H 
H 
M 
M 
H 
M 
M 

M 
H 
H 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 
H 
H 
H 
M 
M 
M 
M 
M 

H 
H 
H 
H 
M 
M 
M 
M 
H 
H 
M 
M 
M 

M 
M 
M 
H 
M 
M 
M 
H 
H 
M 

L
M
M
M
M
M
M
M

M
H
M
M
L
M
L
L
M
H
H
M
M
M
M
M

M
L
M
M
L
L
L
L
M
H
M
M
M

M
L
L
M
L
L
L
M
M
L

FY 

2002

2003

2004

2005

Tax Reform SAL 
Tax Administration TAL 
Savings & Loan Sector Development 
Environmental SAL 
Municipal Development in Rural Areas 
EdoMex TAL 
Urban Microbusiness 
Landing Titling LIL 

Total FY02 

Rural Finance SECAL 
ISSSTE SECAL 
State-level Adjustment 
National Urban Upgrading Loan 
Off-grid Rural Electrification Loan 
Water & Sanitation Modemization 
Irrigation Sector 
Technical Training & Certification 
ISSSTE TAL 
State Infrastructure Decent. APL 1 
Access to Justice LIL 
Land Titling LIL 
GEF Protected Areas II 
GEF Climate Change-Hybrid Technology 
GEF Persistent Organic Pollutants 
PCF Carbon Sequestration in Coffee Areas 
Total FY03 

Highway Finance Loan 
Finance Sector SECAL 
Health System Reform IMSS 
State-level Adjustment II 
Agricultural Productivity II 
Science Education 
Air Quality 11 
Community Forestry 
State-level TAL Window 
Anti-corruption Mechanisms Loan 
Rural Develop. Marginal Areas APL III 
GEF Protected Areas 111 
GEF Gulf of Cortes 

Total FY04 

Power Sector Reform Hybrid Loan 
Financial Sector SECAL 11 
Environmental SAL II 
State-level Adjustment III 
Science and Technology II 
Indigenous Health 
Municipal Development in Rural Areas II 
Judicial Reform Loan 
States Infrastructure Decent. APL 11 
Basic Education APL III 

* H = High, M = Moderate, L = Low.

Total FY05 
TOTAL 

55

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) - Mexico
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1999-2001

Annex B3

IFC approvals (US$m)' 

Sector (%)1
Agribusiness 
Chemicals 
Financial Services 
Infrastructure 
Manufacturing & Services 
Social Services 

Total 

Investment instrument (%)'

Loans 
Equity 

Quasi-Equity 

Other 

Total 

N1GTA -uarancec- (USSin i 

1999 2000 2001

121 

210 

232

0 

0 
44 
1 

55 

0 

0 
21 

1 
46 
14 
17 

3
4
92
0
1

0

100 

100 

100

73 

18 

9 
0 

86 

9 

0 
5 

93
5

1
0

100 

100 

100

0 

0 

0

lApprovals for IFC's own account; approvals including syndications amounted to
US$13 Im (1999), US$401m (2000), and US$332m (2001).

56

Mexico-CAS FY03-05
Annex B4. Summary of Nonlending Services

Annex B4

Consolidating Macroeconomic Stability 
Macro-monitoring (ongoing) 
Reform of the Fiscal Pact FY03 
Public Expenditure Management FY04 
Promoting Trade FY04 
International Factor Mobility FY04 
Country Economic Memorandum FY05 
Economic Shocks and Fiscal Responses FY05 
Labor Market Convergence FY05 
Public Debt Management FY05 

Cost (US$000) 
158 
41 
81 
81 
158 
158 
81 
158 
41 

Accelerating Growth Through Enhanced Competitiveness
Financial Sector Monitoring (ongoing) 
81 
Coffee Sector Study FY02 
81 
Sugar Sector Restructuring FY02 
81 
Agricultural Competitiveness FY03 
158 
Municipal Development in Rural Areas FY03 
100
Rural Pension Schemes FY03 
41 
Warehousing Schemes FY03 
41 
Energy Sector Dialogue FY03 
41 
SME Development FY03 
81 
Energy Sector Review FY04 
41 
Insurance Sector Report FY04 
41 
Low-Income Housing FY04 
81 
Rural Enterprise Development FY04 
81 
Urban Land Management FY05 

Human Capital Development 
Gender Assessment of Legal Framework FY02 
Dissemination of Gender & the Mexicon Econ. FY03 
Poverty Assessment 03 
Impact of PROGRESA FY03 
Knowledge-Economy Assessment FY03 

41 
10 
158 
41 

Cost (US$000

Evaluation Basic Healthcare FY03
Adult Education Study FY03 
Secondary Education Study FY04 
Indigenous Health FY 04 
Urban Poverty FY03 
Social Safety Net Evaluation FY04 
Portfolio Gender Assessment FY04 
Business Cycle and the Poor FY04 
Growth Poverty and Inequality FY04 
Indigenous People Access to Assets and Markets FY04

81
41
81
81
81
41
81
81

Balance Growth and Poverty Reduction with Protecting the
Environment
Degradation and Poverty FY03 
Environment and Growth FY04 

81
81

Building an Efficient, Accountable, and Transparent
Government
State-level CFAA FY03 
State-level CPAR FY03 
State-level PER FY03 
State-level CEM FY03 
Judicial Reform Agenda FY03 
State-level CFAA FY04 
State-level CPAR FY04 
State-level PER FY04 
Anticorruption TA Window FY03-05 
State-level CEM FY05 
State-level CFAA FY005 
State-level CPAR FY05 
WBI Transparency Training Programs FY03-05
Civil Society Organization Dialogue and TA FY03-05 158

90
90
81
81
81
90
90
81
158
81
90
90

57

58

Annex B5

CAS Annex B5 - Mexico
Poverty and Social Development Indicators

Latest single year 

Same regionrincome group

1995-2000 

Latin America & Upper-middle
Caribbean 
Income

POPULATION

Total population, mid-year (millions) 
Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

POVERTY (unadjusted figure-all poor)

(%6 ofpopulation)

National headcount index 
Urban headcount index 
Rural headcount index 

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumerpriceindex(1995= 100) 
Food price index (1995=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Share of income or consumption
Gini index 
Lowest decile 
Highest decile 

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (percent of GDP) 
Education (percent ofGDP) 
Social Security (percent of GDP) 
Net primary school enrollment rate
(7l of age group)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Access to an improved water source
(%l ofpopulation)
Total 
Urban 
Rural 
Immunization rate
(%6 under 12 months)
Measles 
DPT 
BCG 
Child malnutrition (percent under 5years) 
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Total 
Male 
Female 
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births) 
Under 5 (per thousand live births) 
Adult (ages 15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population) 
Female (per 1,000 population) 
Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

Source: 2000 Census INEGI, and 2001 World Development Indicators.

59

97.4 
1.3 
74.7 
2.4 

45.73
36.33
73.29

5,080 
219 
227

51.9
4.0
56.7

2.3 
4.9 
2.9 

101 
101
102

86 
63 
94 

96 
96 
99
8 

75 
73 
78 

29 
36 

166 
104 
51
92

508.2 
1.6 
74.9 
2.6 

571.5
1.4
75.4
2.4

3,800 
140 

4,870
131

3.3 
3.6 
7.4 

91 

85 
93 
62 

90 
87 

9

70 
67 
73 

30 
38 

3.3
5.0
7.9

94

87
94
68

90
88

69
66
73

27
34

207 
122 

233
143

60

CAS Annex B6 - Mexico

Key Economic Indicators

Annex B6

lindiceawir 

1997 

Actual 
1998 
1999 

2000 

Esiima(ed 
2001 

Projected
2003 

2002 

2004

National accounts

(as % GDP at current market prices)

Gross Domestic Product 
Agriculturea 

IndustlYa 

Servicesa 

Total Consumption 
Gross Domestic Investment 
Government Investment 
Private Investment 
(includes increase in stocks)

Exports (GNFS)b 
Imports (GNFS)b 

Gross Domestic Savings 
Gross National Savingsc 

Memorandum items
Gross Domestic Product 
(US$ million at current prices)
Gross National Product per 
Capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real Annual Growth Rates
(%, calculated from 1993 prices)
GDP at market prices 
Gross Domestic Income 

6.8 
7.7 

Real Annual per Capita
Growth Rates (%, calculated from 1993 prices)
GDP at market prices 
5.2 
Total Consumption 
4.4 
Private Consumption 
4.9 

100.0 
5.5 

28.6 

65.9 

74.2 
25.9 
3.1 
22.8 

30.4 
30.4 

25.8 
23.9 

100.0 
5.2 

28.6 

66.2 

77.8 
24.3 
2.8 
21.5 

30.7 
32.8 

22.2 
20.5 

100.0 
4.7 

28.8 

66.5 

78.1 
23.5 
2.9 
20.6 

30.9 
32.4 

21.9 
20.5 

100.0 
4.2 

27.9 

67.8 

78.7 
23.1 
2.9 
20.2 

31.1 
32.8 

21.3 
20.0 

100.0 
4.4 

27.0 

68.6 

81.3 
20.9 
2.9 
18.0 

27.8 
30.0 

18.7 
18.0 

100.0 
4.5 

27.7 

67.8 

81.5 
21.4 
3.7 
17.7 

27.8 
30.7 

18.5 
17.9 

100.0 
4.5 

28.0 

67.5 

81.1 
21.9 
4.0 
18.0 

28.4 
31.4 

18.9 
18.0 

100.0
4.4

28.2

67.3

80.6
22.4
4.2
18.2

28.9
31.8

19.4
18.4

400,868 421,010 479,448 579,925 

615,855 

641,345 683,663 730,146

3,710 

4,000 

4,440 

5,080 

5,520 

5,940 

6,330 

6,660

5.0 
4.2 

3.6 
3.5 
4.0 

3.8 
4.6 

2.3 
2.8 
2.8 

6.9 
8.3 

5.4 
7.2 
7.9 

-0.3 
-1.3 

-2.4 
-0.4 
-0.6 

1.5 
1.1 

0.1 
0.0 
-0.7 

4.1 
4.2 

2.7 
2.3 
2.2 

4.5
4.6

3.1
2.4
2.3

61

CAS Annex B6 - Mexico
Key Economic Indicators (continued)

Indicator 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

Actual 

Estimated Projected

2002 

Annex B6

2003 

2111)4

Balance of Payments
(US$ m)

Exports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Imports (GNFS)b 
Merchandise FOB 
Resource balance 
Net current transfers 
(including official current transfers)
Current account balance 
(after official capital grants)

Net private foreign direct investment 
Portfolio investment 
Long-term loans (net) 
Official 
Private 
Other capital (net, including 
errors and omissions)
Net use of IMF resources 
Change in gross reserves 

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of 
GDP at current market prices)
Current account balance 
(% of GDP at current market prices)

Annual growth rates (%)
Merchandise exports 
Merchandise imports 

121,701 128,982 148,083 180,167 
110,431 117,460 136,391 166,455 
121,608 137,801 155,465 190,494 
109,808 125,373 141,975 174,458 
94 
-8,818 
-7,382 
-10,326 
5,247 
6,012 
6,313 
6,994 

171,207 
158,547 
184,494 
168,276 
-13,287 
9,338 

178,342 193,965 210,732
164,946 179,699 195,423
196,789 214,652 232,327
179,898 196,647 213,097
-18,447 
-20,688 
-21,595
10,009 
10,727 
11,499

-7,448 

-16,090 

-14,375 

-17,737 

-17,457 

-22,701 

-26,544 

-29,037

12,830 
3,800 
356 
-4,567 
4,922 
4,395 

11,602 
-451 
12,420 
-805 
13,225 
-4,281 

11,915 
3,901 
11,479 
-1,703 
13,182 
-8,643 

14,190 
401 
4,416 
-524 
4,940 
5,850 

-3,439 
-10,494 

-1,063 
-2,137 

-3,682 
-594 

-4,299 
-2,822 

0.0 

-1.9 

-2.1 

-3.8 

-1.5 

-3.0 

-1.8 

-3.1 

15.0 
22.7 

6.4 
14.2 

16.1 
13.2 

22.0 
22.9 

21,022 
1,092 
113 
2 
112 
2,645 

0 
-7,330 

-2.2 

-2.8 

-4.8 
-3.5 

13,600 
1,146 
9,353 
760 
8,592 
61 

14,400 
1,204 
11,889 
526 
11,363 
74 

15,800
1,264
11,301
262
11,039
87

0 
-1,459 

0 
-1,023 

-2.9 

-3.5 

-3.0 

-3.9 

0
585

-3.C

-4.0

4.0 
6.9 

8.9 
9.3 

8.8
8.4

(Continued)

62

CAS Annex B6 - Mexico
Key Economic Indicators (continued)

Annex B6

lndiicaor 

1997 

Actual 
1998 
1999 

2000 

Estimated 

2001 

Projecled
2003 

2004

2002 

Public finance
(as % of GDP at current market prices)d
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 
Current account surplus (+) 
or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure 
Overall Balance 

23.1 
19.9 
3.1 

3.7 
-0.6 

20.4 
18.3 
2.1 

3.3 
-1.2 

20.9 
19.3 
1.5 

2.7 
-1.2 

21.6 
21.1 
0.5 

1.7 
-1.2 

22.0 
21.0 
1.0 

1.7 
-0.7 

22.6 
21.1 
1.4 

2.1 
-0.6 

22.8 
21.0 
1.9 

2.2 
-0.3 

22.9
20.9
2.0

2.3
-0.3

Monetary Indicators

M2/GDP (at current market prices) 
Growth of M2 (%) 

28.3 
33.9 

27.9 
19.7 

26.2 
11.8 

20.9

-4.5

Private sector credit growth/
total credit growth (%)

Price indices (1993=100)
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 
Real exchange rate (LCU/US$) 0

Consumer price index 
(% growth rate, period average)
Consumer price index 
(% growth rate, end of period)
GDP deflator 
(% growth of rate)

114.8 
109.2 
105.1 
101.6 

20.6 

15.7 

17.7 

108.0 
108.4 
99.6 
97.9 

15.9 

18.6 

15.4 

112.1 
107.5 
104.2 
100.2 

16.6 

12.3 

14.9 

120.6 
110.6 
109.0 
88.3 

9.5 

9.0 

12.1 

120.7 
113.9 
105.9 
85.4 

5.5 

4.4 

5.4 

122.4 
116.9 
104.7 
85.4 

125.6 
119.7 
104.9 
85.4 

4.5 

4.5 

4.5 

4.0 

3.5 

4.0 

128.6
122.3
105.1
85.4

3.5

3.0

3.5

a. GDP components estimated at factor cost, as a % of GDP at factor cost.
b. 
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services".
c. 
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital.
d. Consolidated non-financial public sector
e. "LCU" denotes "local currency units". A decrease in LCU/US$ denotes appreciation.

63

64

Annex B7

CAS Ans1ex B7 - Mexico
EPey Exposure Indicators

Actual 
1998 
1999 

Estimated 
2001 

Projected
2003 

Indicator 

I"' 7 

2000 

2002 

2004

Total debt outstanding and 

148,697 

161,404 

167,626 

164,686 

165,099 

174,513 

186,476 

197,865

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

Net disbursements (US$m)r 

-3,083 

11,357 

7,797 

117 

413 

9,413 

11,961 

11,387

Total debt service (TDS) 

43,480 

27,990 

39,760 

63,497 

42,410 

42,062 

51,062 

61,214

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO/XGSb 

111.5 

119.9 

108.9 

88.2 

91.7 

92.9 

91.3 

89.2

TDO/GDP 

37.1 

38.3 

35.0 

28.4 

26.8 

27.2 

27.3 

27.1

TDS/XGSb 

34.4 

20.8 

25.8 

34.0 

23.5 

22.4 

25.0 

27.6

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRDDS/publicDS 
Preferred creditor/ 
public DS (%)C

6.5 
20.8 

iO.6 
22.2 

10.1 
38.6 

7.4 
29.3 

15.8 
21.2 

17.4 
24.1 

16.5 
23.8 

13.2
19.2

IBRD DS/XGSb 

1.7 

1.5 

1.4 

1.2 

1.3 

1.3 

1.1 

1.0

IBRDTDO(US$m)d 
Present value 
of guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 

11,906 
550 

12,108 
595 

11,353 
326 

11,444 
0 

10,883 
0 

11,709 
0 

11,723 
0 

11,973
0

11.0 

10.2 

9.3 

9.4 

9.0 

9.2 

9.3 

9.6

IFC (US$m)'
Loans 
Equity and quasi-equity, 

402 
165 

263 
154 

366 
170 

455 
209 

519 
214 

... 

... 
... 

...
...

a. 
Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-term capital.
b. 
"XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank of
International Settlements.
Includes present value of guarantees.
IFC's own account exposure (excluding guarantees and risk management products).
Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

d. 
e. 
f. 

65

66

CAS Annex B8 - Mexico
Status of Bank Group Operations in Mexico Operations Portfolio

As of March 14, 2002

Annex B8

Project ID 
Fiscal Year 
Number of Closed Projects: 157

Borrower 

Pwpose 

IBRD 

IDA 

Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig 

Fru Revd 

Dev Ob_ 

Imp Prog

OngiWal Amount in USS MillionS 

Diference between expected 
and actual disbursements a/ 

Last PSR
Supervision Rating hi

Active Proiects
MX-PE-7648 
MX-PE-7710 
MX-PE-7701 
MX-PE-34490 
MX-PE-7689 
MX-PE-7713 
MX-PE-7700 
MX-PE-44531 
MX-PE-7720 
MX-PE-55061 
MX-PE-49895 
MX-PE-7711 
MX-PE-48505 
MX-PE-7610 
MX-PE-66938 
MX-PE-57530 
MX-PE-64887 
MX-PE-65779 
MX-PE-70479 
MX-PE-71323 
MX-PE-66321 
MX-PE-60577 

Total 

1993 
1994 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1998 
1998 
1998 
1998 
1999 
1999 
2000 
2000 
2001 
2001 
2001 
2001 
2001 
2002 

BANOBRAS 
BANOBRAS 
NAFIN 
NAFIN 
NAFIN 
NAFIN 
NAFIN 
NAFIN 
BANOBRAS 
BANOBRAS 
BANOBRAS 
NAFIN 
NAFIN 
BANOBRAS 
NAFIN 
NAFIN 
BANOBRAS 
BANOBRAS 
BANOBRAS 
NAFIN 
NAFIN 
NAFIN 

MEDIUM CITIES TRANSP 
N. BORDER I ENVIRONM 
ON-FARM&MINORIRRI 
TECHNICAL EDUC1ntAINING 
BASIC HEALTH B 
WATERRESOURCESMANA 
COMMUNITY FORESTRY 
KNOWLEDGE & INNOV. 
HEALTH SYSTEM REFORM - SAL 
HEALTH SYSTEM REFORM TA 
HIGHER ED. FINANCING 
RURAL DEV. MARG.AREA 
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCT 
FOVI RESTRUCTURING 
GENDER (LIL) 
RURAL DEV.MARG.AR 11 
DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
FEDERALHIGHWAYMAINTENANCEPROJ 
EDO DE MEXICO SAL 
BANK RESTRUCTURING FACILITY II 
BASIC HEALTH CARE PROJ. Hi 
SOUTHEAST REGIONAL DEVELOPMENIT 

200.0 
368.0 
200.0 
265.0 
310.0 
186.5 
15.0 
300.0 
700.0 
25.0 
180.2 
47.0 
444.5 
505.1 
3.1 
55.0 
404.1 
218.0 
505.1 
505.1 
350.0 
5.0 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

63.0 
313.4 
30.0 
69.7 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

55.8 
23.6 
11.9 
51.3 
29.6 
120.4 
6.1 
195.4 
150.0 
1.3 
144.3 
30.2 
155.6 
312.0 
3.1 
42.7 
395.7 
206.9 
200.0 
350.0 
350.0 
5.0 

118.8 
337.0 
41.9 
120.9 
29.6 
101.2 
5.1 
67.0 
150.0 
1.3 
72.1 
22.5 
52.5 
308.7 
1.4 
5.4 
45.0 
-11.1 
.304.6 
-51.7 
0.0 
0.0 

95.8 
62.3 
11.9 
90.9 
29.6 
41.9 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
-28.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

S 
S 
S 
S 
HS 
S 
S 
S 
5 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
U 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 

5,791.4 

0.0 

476.1 

2,840.8 

1,113.0 

304.3

S
S
S
U
HS
S
S
S
S
HS
S
S
S
S
U
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

Total Disbursed (IBRD and IDA): 
of which has been repaid: 
TotalnowheldbylBRD andIDA: 
Amount sold 
of which has been repaid: 
Total Undisbursed 

: 

Activc Proiects 
2,474.6 
84.4 
5,230.9 
0.0 
0.0 
2,840.7 

osed Proiects 
24,541.7 
18,435.3 
6,121.9 
92.3 
92.3 
15.5 

Iotal

27,016.3
18,519.7
11,352.9
92.3
92.3
2,856.3

a. Intended disbursements to date mninus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.
b. Following the FY94 Annual Review of Portfolio performance (ARPP), a letter based system was introduced (HS = highly satisfactory, S = satisfactory, U = unsatisfactory, HU = highly unsatisfactory): s4
pToposed Improvements in Project and Portfolio Perfonnance Rating Methodology (SecM94-901), August 23,1994.

67

68

CAS Annex B9 (IFC) - Mexico 
Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of February 28, 2002
(In US Dollars Millions)

Annex B9

FY Approval 

Company 

Held 
Equity Quasi 

Loan 

Partic 

Loan 

Disbursed
Equity Quasi 

Partic

1998 
1998 
1994/01 
2000 
1997 
2001 
1999 
2001 
2000 
1997/01 
1998 
1991/96 
1993 
1994/96/00 
1993 
1997/98 
2001 
1998 
1989 
1997 
1992/93/95/96/99 
1998 
1994/96/98/00 
2000 
2000 
2000 
1994 
2000/01 
1998 
1995/96/99 
1996/99/00/01 
2000/01 
2002 
2000 
2000 
2000 
2001 
1999 
1997 
1992 
1991/92 
1998 
2002 
1988/91/92/93/95 
1998 
1990/92/96/99 
2001 
1995/99 

Total Portfolio: 

CIMA Mexico 
C]MA Puebla 
CTAPV 
Cbiapas-Propalma 
Comercializadora 
Compartamos 
Corsa 
Ecomex 
Educacion 
Fondo Chiapas 
Foja Monterrey 
GIBSA 
GIDESA 
GIRSA 
GOTM 
Gen. Hipotecaria 
Grupo BBVA 
Grnpo Calidra 
Gnupo FEMSA 
GrupoMinsa 
Grupo Posadas 
Grupo Sanfandila 
HellerFinancial 
Hospital ABC 
ITR 
Innopack 
Interceramic 
InverCap 
Merida IH 
Mexplus Puertos 
NEMAK 
Pan American 
Puertas Finas 
Rio Bravo 
Saltillo S.A. 
Servicios 
Su Casita 
Sudainerica 
TMA 
Toluca Toll Road 
Vitro 
ZN Mxc Eqty Fund 
ZN Mexico H 
Apasco 
Ayvi 
BANAMEX 
BBVA-Bancomer 
Baring MexFnd 

0.00 
6.75 
2.88 
0.00 
2.41 
1.00 
11.14 
5.00 
6.50 
0.00 
12.07 
16.23 
2.50 
57.00 
0.33 
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
0.00 
12.00 
34.65 
8.09 
0.00 
30.00 
14.00 
0.00 
5.00 
0.00 
29.59 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
13.00 
50.00 
35.00 
10.50 
0.00 
0.00 
2.58 
4.83 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.80 
8.57 
75.71 
86.47 
0.00 

4.80 
0.00 
0.00 
0.82 
0.00 
0.66 
3.00 
0.00 
0.00 
4.18 
3.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
3.29 
2.67 
6.00 
5.26 
10.00 
5.00 
0.00 
3.12 
0.00 
0.00 
15.00 
0.00 
1.07 
0.00 
4.46 
0.00 
9.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.90 
10.62 
15.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.17 
15.30 
10.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
11.82 

0.00 
0.00 
1.69 
0.00 
1.72 
0.00 
0.00 
1.50 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
0.00 
5.71 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
15.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
4.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
9.04 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.60 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
4.38 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
12.07 
54.57 
0.00 
70.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
7.50 
0.00 
18.00 
5.00 
3.61 
0.00 
14.00 
4.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
72.15 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
59.50 
43.00 
10.00 
0.00 
0.00 
8.95 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
43.20 
0.00 
5.49 
0.00 
0.00 

0.00 
3.25 
2.88 
0.00 
2.41 
1.00 
11.14 
3.00 
4.90 
0.00 
12.07 
16.23 
2.50 
57.00 
0.33 
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
0.00 
12.00 
34.65 
6.76 
0.00 
1.76 
14.00 
0.00 
5.00 
0.00 
29.59 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
50.00 
35.00 
10.50 
0.00 
0.00 
2.58 
4.83 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.80 
8.57 
75.71 
86.47 
0.00 

4.80 
0.00 
0.00 
0.82 
0.00 
0.66 
3.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.54 
3.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
3.29 
2.67 
6.00 
5.26 
10.00 
5.00 
0.00 
3.12 
0.00 
0.00 
15.00 
0.00 
1.06 
0.00 
4.46 
0.00 
9.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.90 
10.62 
15.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.17 
14.77 
0.90 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
11.24 

0.00 
0.00 
1.69 
0.00 
1.72 
0.00 
0.00 
1.50 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10.00 
0.00 
5.71 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
15.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
4.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
9.03 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.60 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
4.38
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
12.07
54.57
0.00
70.00
000
0.00
0.00
7.50
0.00
18.00
5.00
2.95
0.00
1.24
4.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
72.15
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
59.50
43.00
10.00
0.00
0.00
8.95
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
43.20
0.00
5.49
0.00
0.00

564.60 

156.14 

51.26 

435.42 

514.93 

142.28 

51.25 

422.00

Approvals Pending Commitment

1998 Cima Hermosillc 
1999 BANAMEX LRF nI 
2002 Coppel 
2000 Educacion 
2001 BBVA-Bancomer CL 
2001 SuCasita 
2001 GFNorte-CL 
2001 La Colorada 
2001 Greenmanor 
2001 PanAme-La Colora 

Total Pending Commitmnent: 

Loan 

Equity Quasi 

Partic

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1.20 

1.20 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
2.40 
0.00 
6.00 
0.00 
0.00 

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
100.00
18.30
0.00
0.00

8.40 

118.30

7.00 
50.00 
30.00 
3.20 
100.00 
0.00 
100.00 
4.30 
7.00 
0.00 

301.50 

69

70

Annex BIO

Mexico: Private Sector Strategy

I. Context for Private Sector Strategy

1. 
Private sector development-a key cross-cutting theme for the Mexico CAS. This
Private Sector Strategy (PSS) forms an integral part of the World Bank Group's (WBG's)
approach to Mexico's development and poverty reduction. As noted in the CAS, growth is an
essential (but not sufficient) condition for poverty reduction in Mexico. The costs of lagged or
negative growth could be substantial to the poor, as we have learned through the crises in
Mexico, Asia, and more recently, Argentina. The private sector is clearly the engine of growth
in Mexico, and has also played a growing role in public service delivery. The first priority for
Mexico, therefore, is the continuation of macroeconomic stability, which is essential for the
private sector to continue its contributions to growth. However, there is also a large array of
issues to be addressed, to enhance Mexico's competitiveness necessary for long-term growth,
and to distribute more evenly the benefits of growth. These issues encompass a number of
critical areas and require a coherent approach by the WBG. This PSS expands on the summary
discussion presented in the main text of the CAS, and presents an overview of the WBG's
multisectoral approach to private sector development (PSD) in Mexico.
2. 
Mexico PSS in the context of the WBG's corporate PSD strategy. This Mexico PSS
draws substantially on the framework of the recently discussed corporate strategy for PSD.
Mexico is one of the first countries where the WBG has sought to integrate a private sector
strategy in the CAS, and is the first to have a third-generation private sector strategy. Drawing
on the corporate strategic framnework now in place and on rich past experiences, this PSS
solidifies the WBG's approach to private sedtor development in Mexico. The key threads of the
WBG's private sector strategy in Mexico follow the overall corporate strategic thrust, which is
summarized in the following:

Private sector development is critical for poverty reduction in two major ways.
First, private markets are the engine ofproductivity growth and thus create more
productive jobs and higher incomes. Second, complementary to government roles
in regulation, funding and provision, private initiatives can help provide basic
services that empower the poor by improving infrastructure, health and
education-the conditions for sustainable improvements of livelihoods.

In Mexico these broad PSD themes have bearing on a set of CAS core threads: (a) consolidating
macroeconomic gains, (b) accelerating growth through enhanced competitiveness, and (c)
reducing poverty through human capital development. This PSS particularly addresses the
second and the third threads, with the identification of more detailed development issues in
Mexico, as follows:

1. Access to financing-more evenly distributed access to investment financing
2. The financial sector-broader, more efficient financial intermediation for growth

1. Private Sector Development Strategy: Directions for the World Bank Group, January 25, 2002 (SecM2002-
0047).

71

Annex B IO

3. Infrastructure for enhancing competitiveness and tapping private initiatives for public
service delivery

4. The corporate sector-enabling an environment for enhanced competitiveness and

broad-based development
5. Facilitating human capital development-private participation in the social sector.
3. 
This PSS is organized as follows. Section II provides a general overview of the Mexican
private sector and a diagnosis of the principal private sector development issues. Section III

details the WBG's strategy in responding to these issues, and a proposed division of labor
between IBRD and IFC.2

II. Private Sector Development Priorities

The Mexican Economy-the Past Six Years

4. 
Increased private sector role. The Mexican economy has gone through a dynamic
transformation since the Tequila Crisis (1995), with the private sector playing an increasing role.
Growth continued apace since then until the last year. This growth was accompanied by
significant increases in the share of private investment in GDP, while public investment
remained at a low and declining level. As shown in Table 1, the increases in industrial
production played a major role in this growth, reflecting the private sector's role as the engine of
growth. Unemployment rates in the meantime declined from a high of 6.3 percent in 1995 to 2.2
percent in 2000.

Table 1. Mexico: Growth (per year) and Investments as a Share of GDP

Real GDP Growth % (1993 prices in pesos) 
Industrial Production % Change 
Public Investment as a % of GDP 
Private Investment as a % of GDP 

1995 
-6.2 
-7.5 
3.7 
16.1 

1996 
5.2 
10.7 
3.0 
20.1 

1997 
6.8 
8.4 
3.1 
22.8 

1998 
4.9 
6.2 
2.8 
21.5 

1999 
3.8 
3.7 
2.9 
20.6 

2000
6.9
6.6
2.9
20.2

5. 
Exports and maquiladora sector expanded. A steady expansion of exports, and a
strong performance of the maquiladora sector, 3 characterized Mexico's growth during this
period under the NAFTA (Table 2). The value of exports grew at an average nominal rate of
15.9 percent per year, with its shares in GDP growing from 14 percent of GDP in 1994 to 29
percent in 2000. The export expansion was helped by the strong performance of the U.S.
economy, and the progressive economic integration under the NAFTA. The share of exports to
the U.S. in the total exports increased in tandem, indicating an increased reliance on the U.S.
economy.

2. Mexico is not a member of the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA).
3. Maquiladora refers to Mexico's in-bond industry under the Maquiladora Program. A Maquiladora Program is
granted to a legal entity that is formed in Mexico with the purpose of manufacturing, assembling, repairing, or
other processing of goods that are destined mainly for the export market.

72

Annex B 10

Table 2. Mexico: Growth in Exports

Merchandise Exports ($ bn) 
Exports % Change 
Merchandise Exports % GDP 
Merchandise Export: U.S. % Total 

1995 
79.5 
30.6 
27.7 
83.3 

1996 
96.0 
20.7 
28.8 
83.9 

1997 
110.4 
15.0 
27.5 
85.4 

1998 
117.5 
6.4 
27.9 
87.8 

1999 
136.4 
16.1 
28.4 
88.3 

2000
166.4
22.0
29.0
88.7

6. 
The role that the maquiladora sector played in this process was significant. First, exports
by the sector maintained a significant and growing weight in the total exports (Table 3). Second,
the maquiladora sector's net contributions to the overall trade balance were substantial. Third,
the number of workers employed by the sector grew apace during the period. Fourth, many
observe a growing role of the sector in technology transfer and human capital improvements,
with corporate strategies in maquiladora shifting toward increasing the scope and technological
complexity of the production process and the linkages with local producers and educational
institutions. 4

Table 3. Mexico: Maguiladora Sector

Maquila Exports ($ bn) 
Total Merchandise Exports ($ bn) 
Exports: Maquila / Total (%/6) 
Employment by Maquiladoras (thousand) 
Maquila Trade Balance (S bn) 
Total Merchandise Trade Balance ($ bn) 
Source: INEGI.

1995 
31.1 
79.5 
39.1 
681.3 
4.9 
7.1 

1996 
36.9 
96.0 
38.5 
799.3 
6.4 
6.5 

1997 
45.2 
110.4 
40.9 
936.8 
8.8 
0.6 

1998 
53.1 
117.5 
45.2 
1,043.5 
10.5 
-7.9 

1999 
63.9 
136.4 
46.8 
1,195.4 
13.4 
-5.6 

2000
79.5
166.5
47.7
1,308.0
17.8
-8.0

7. 
Domestic finance played a minimal role in growth. The domestic financial sector did
not play a major role in financing this growth and export expansion during the period. Credit to
the private sector actually contracted from 34 percent of GDP in 1995 to around 10 percent in
2000. Steady flows of foreign direct investment (FDI) in effect represented the major source of
financing for growth during the period.S External private debt flows were volatile, providing a
major share of financing in 1998 (3.1 percent of GDP) and turned into a net outflow in 2000 (-
0.1 percent) (Table 4). With the increased risk aversion away from the emerging markets,
private debt flows are expected to remain at a low level. With the weakened U.S. economy, FDI
flows also face the risk of slowdown. This pattern of financing chiefly supported the expansion
of the firms that had access to external fmancing-top-tier companies. The rest of the corporate
sector benefited little from the external financing, and was at a disadvantage due to the domestic
credit contraction.

4. 

See, for example, "Maquila, Economic Reform and Corporate Strategies," Buitelaar and Perez (World
Development Vol. 28, No. 9, 2000).
5. The reliance on FDI flows from the United States also increased. The share of FDI originated from the United
States in the total FDI to Mexico increased from 46 percent in 1994 to 71 percent in 1998.

73

Table 4. Mexico: Domestic Credit to the Private Sector and Private Capital Flows (% GDP)
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000

Annex B 10

10.0
2.4
0.1
-0.1

Credit to Private Sector 
34.0 
20.7 
16.1 
FDI 
3.3 
2.8 
3.2 
Equity Portfolio Investment 
0.2 
0.8 
0.8 
Debt 
-5.2 
0.5 
0.7 
Sources: Institute of International Finance and Bank of Mexico.

14.4 
2.8 
-0.2 
3.1 

11.7 
2.5 
0.8 
1.7 

8. 

Slowdown in 2001 points to future PSD agenda. The slowdown in the U.S. economy,

particularly since September 11, 2001, has hit Mexico. The economic slowdown has been
amplified in Mexico, with GDP contracting by 0.3 percent in 2001. Merchandise exports
declined by 4.8 percent. Unemployment has edged up to 2.5 percent. 6 Unlike the contraction
after the Tequila Crisis, the current economic contraction was not caused by macroeconomic
imbalances, and has highlighted the importance for Mexico to address the long-standing private
sector development agenda to foster home-grown, broad-based growth.

Private sector develoDment agenda

(1) Limited and uneven access to financing

9. 
Top-tier firms maintained limited access. The current difficult international market
conditions, coupled with the still low domestic financial intermediation, favor top-quality credits.
Although Mexico has become an investment-grade country, sovereign borrowers, along with the
largest and creditworthy firms, remain the primary beneficiaries of the limited access to external
private financing. During 2000-01, for example, there were 25 bond issues for a total of $17.9
billion in the external markets, of which 18 issues totaling $14.9 billion were by the United
Mexican States, PEMEX, and its affiliates. The rest (seven issues totaling $3.0 billion) were
limited for a handful of blue-chip firms, such as Telmex, Cemex, Grupo Elektra, and Grupo
Televisa. Top-tier firms have also maintained access to domestic credit. However, due to the
contracted and still nascent domestic intermediation, even for large firms the tenor of such
borrowing (except from foreign banks or with facilities backed by funding from multilateral
institution) has been typically limited to revolving credit for up to three years.
10. 
Less than top-tier firms and SMEs. The rest of the Mexican firms (99 percent in
numbers) have very limited access to investment financing, although the conditions are expected
to improve over time, particularly for large firms, with the country's investment grade. As Table
5 shows, access to domestic and foreign banks significantly declines as the size of firms becomes
smaller. The majority of bank credit is used for working capital needs, and loans for investment
purposes are limited. The lack of bank credit, particularly for SMEs, is substituted by supplier
and customer credit, and loans from other companies (40 to 65 percent of firms' outside
financing sources). Such "substitute" financing is generally of a short-term, working capital
nature (40 to 50 days)-an inadequate tenor for investment financing. The majority of those
firms reported that they did not use bank credit even for such short-term financing because of
high interest rates and the difficulties in accessing bank loans. Continued perceptions of
uncertainty and high costs over collateral enforcement and bankruptcy processes further add risk

6. Employment in the maquiladora sector declined by 13.7 percent.

74

Annex B 10

premium, and significantly 
raise potential financing costs especially for smaller-sized
companies. 7 Because of the lack of alternative financing, those firms often have to consider
prohibitively expensive nonbank financing as the only source for their investment fumding, with
an interest rate 6 to 7 percent higher for a limited tenor than their larger counterparts. This
differential access to, and cost of, financing makes broad-based development of the Mexican
private sector difficult, and hampers an equitable sharing of the benefits of growth. A critical
element in addressing this uneven access to financing is the development of the domestic
financial sector, as noted below.

Table 5 Mexico: Credit Market Survey* (3rd Quarter, 2001)

Firms that Used Bank Credit

Firms that Did Not Use Bank Credit

Firms that Grant Some Tvpe of Financing

Small 

62.3 

14.6 
2.4 

70.4 
14.8 

24.5 

42.9 

By Firm Size**

Medium 

Large 

52.9 
23.5 

3.7 

66.3 
11.2 

32.0 

37.0 

44.1 
21.7 

9.9 

53.8 
15.4 

23.1 

40.4 

AAA

32.5
30.0

15.0

63.6
9.1

14.3
35.7

84.3 

11.6 

76.9 

12.0 

77.1 

7.6 

50.0

13.6

(Percent of answers) 
Sources of Financing

Suppliers 
Commercial banks 

Foreign banks 

For:

Working capital 
Investment purposes 

Because of:

High interest rates 

Difficulty in access 

To:

Clients 

Suppliers 

Average maturity of the financing granted (days) 
41.1 
44.5 
81.4
* Nationwide sample with responses from at least 500 firms. The reply to this survey is voluntary and
confidential.
** Based on firms sales in 1997, Small = I to 100 million pesos, Medium = 101 to 500 million pesos, Large 
to 5,000 million pesos, and AAA = over 5,000 million pesos.
Source: Bank of Mexico.

50.6 

501

(2) The fnancial sector-broader, more efficient intermediation for growth

11. 
A well-functioning domestic financial sector is an essential element for broad-based and
sustained growth of the private sector.8 
In this regard there is much to be done in Mexico,
because domestic financial intermediation through both the banking sector and the capital
markets are still at a low level. The following presents a snapshot of the Mexican financial
sector, and the areas for improvements.
12. 
Banking sector. The most notable feature of the Mexican banking sector in the past
years is credit contraction. There are also three other notable features in this period: (a)
consolidation, (b) foreign participation, and (c) improvements in capital adequacy toward
international standards. The consolidation process started after the Tequila Crisis, and the

7. The recent legal reforms are in the early stages of implementation.
8. This section is a synthesis of the WBG's findings and analysis, drawing heavily on IBRD's financial sector work
and IFC's experiences.

75

Annex B 10

number of traditional Mexican banks has come down significantly. Of the present 35 banks,
only two have not gone through changes of control or been intervened. The Mexican banking
system has become among the most concentrated in the world, with 80 percent of the banking
assets held by the five largest groups. This consolidation has been accompanied by a remarkable
increase in foreign participation. Prior to 1998, foreigners controlled only 24 percent of bank
assets. In 2001, foreigners had effective control over three-quarters of the total banking assets.
While there has been an improvement in capital adequacy, studies by rating agencies and
investment banks suggest that capital adequacy still falls short of international standards in
certain areas of the system. The foreign capital infusions and improvements in profitability are
expected to further improve capital adequacy; however, the continued strengthening of the
regulatory and supervisory functions will be important for maintaining sound development of the
sector.
13. 
Potential impact of consolidation and foreign participation on local firms. The
consolidation and foreign participation may amplify the lack of access to credit for homegrown
middle-market firms and small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Some recent studies
show that these processes may lead to less access to bank credit for those firms, as bigger (and
foreign) banks tend to follow large (or foreign) clients. This is probably because large banks
perceive lending to smaller (or local) firms as riskier, in view of the quality of information,
collateral values, and lending experiences (or lack thereof). Three measures could be envisioned
to mitigate this potential problem:

* Legal and regulatory improvements in secured lending and corporate bankruptcy
procedures (under implementation by the government)
* Helping 
improve 
infornation 
transparency, 
accounting practices, 
corporate
governance, and management through regulatory measures and business development
and other services
* Transferring methodologies and credit culture that foster profitable SME lending,
through credit lines and risk sharing facility from international institutions.
14. 
Capital markets. Both equity and bond markets are still small in Mexico. The equity
market, with a capitalization of US$126 billion, is one of the larger among emerging markets.
However, relative to the size of the Mexican economy, it is small (see Figure 1), and is not
sufficiently developed to alleviate the scarcity of debt capital. There were only four equity issues
in 2000 totaling $1.3 billion, of which $1.2 billion was for Telmex.9 In 2001, there was only one
issue, which was related to Citibank's acquisition of BANAMEX. Again, top-tier firms
addressed this limitation through their access to external capital-raising capital primarily in
ADRs in the United States-and partially contributed to the stagnation of the domestic equity
market. The bond markets are also small at around 30 percent of GDP. Furthermore, the
government securities dominate new and outstanding issues, with a share of some 90 percent in
the total outstanding debt securities.

9. Telnex accounted for about one quarter of the total market capitalization.

76

Annex B 10

Figure 1. Equity Market Capitalization to GDP, 2000

200 
1 8 0 
1 6 0 
0 - 14 0 

189

- -

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

- -

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

- -

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

o 
c] 140 - -- 

~~~~116

- -- --- 

-- - 8--- -

-- 8Y6 -- 
-- i 
-88-- 
----

------------------

_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_

_ 120 

_ X 

-

Y8 0 _ 

- -

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -_ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ 

37.9

40 

-

-- 

-- 

-

-

-

22 --- 

- 19 -

-

-- 

-

0 

UK 
(London) 

US 
(NYSE)

Spain 

Chile 

Japan 

Brazil 

Mexico 

Peru 

Colombia

15. 
There are two major reasons for this low level of domestic capital market activity. First,
ownership is very concentrated and entangled in Mexico. In large companies, which dominate
the market,'0 the controlling group holds 40 percent of their shares. Smaller companies are often
closely held. Cross-lending and extensive cross-holdings by related parties reduce attractiveness
in investing in Mexican listed securities, and corporate governance in Mexico has also been
perceived as unattractive for outside investors (see paragraphs 34 and 35). Second, the investor
base is still nascent and small." Domestic institutional investors, such as pension funds, mutual
funds, and insurance companies, are still at an early stage of development, and hold a tiny
fraction of shares and securities issued by the local private sector. 2 The current regulatory
guidelines are very restrictive on investing in equities and securities issued by the private sector.
Further reform, in particular, prudent liberalization of the investment regime to increase
investment choices, is important for growth of this sector. Particularly important among these
institutions are the private pension funds-AFOREs'3 (pension fund managers) and SIEFOREs'4
(pension funds themselves)-that have recently grown rapidly, and are expected to reach over
$160 billion in 15 years.

10. Six companies account for over 60 percent of the Mexican stock market index.

11 This small investor base in turn tends to exacerbate the concentration of ownership in the market.

12. For example, only 7 percent of the total SIEFOREs' assets are in private sector securities. The rest are mostly
in government securities.
13. Administradoras de Fondos para el Retiro.
14. Sociedades de Jnversi6n Especializada de Fondos para el Retiro.

77

Figure 2. Mexico: Private Pension System-Assets Under Management of AFOREs (US$ billion)

Annex BIO

$30

$25 ------------------------ 

$20--. 

$15 ---------------------- 

$10 .

.. 

$5 .

$0

.

-

-

..-

-

....

.... 

....- 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001*

* As of November 2001.
Source: Asociaci6n Mexicana de Administradoras de Fondos para el Retiro, A.C.

16. 
SOFOLs. The expansion of the SOFOLs1 5 sector has partially filled the financing gap
created by the contraction of bank credit and the low intermediation through the capital markets.
Created in 1993, these non-deposit-taking, limited-scope lending institutions have substantially
increased their credit; together, they increased credit from $31 million in 1994 to over $8 billion
in 2001 (Figure 3). As of November 2001, there were 34 SOFOLs, of which 18 are specialized
in housing finance; the others are dedicated to consumer financing, microfinance, and so forth.
The housing finance SOFOLs play a major role in the sector, with $4.2 billion in outstanding
loans, and are responsible for the origination and administration of 98 percent of the mortgages
placed by FOVI, 6 a governmental institution acting as a second-tier bank for low-income
housing finance. There are two main issues currently facing the SOFOLs. First, SOFOLs are
highly dependent on funding from FOVI. 
In the medium to long term, SOFOLs need to find
additional funding sources to reduce this dependence. 
Second, as a non-deposit-taking
institution, SOFOLs have no formal regulatory body.'7 However, they are closely monitored by
FOVI, their main creditor, and by the Bank of Mexico and the National Banking Commission
(CNVB). There is a need to clarify and strengthen the regulatory and supervisory roles over
SOFOLs.

15. Sociedades Financieras de Objeto Limitado.
16. Fondo de Operacion y Financiamiento Bancario a la Vivienda.
17. Under Mexican law, credit granting alone is not considered an activity subject to regulation by the financial
authorities. 
If credit granting is done with resources funded by the public through deposit taking, then it is
considered financial intermediation subject to regulation. In contrast, credits granted by nondepository financial
institutions supported by funds raised other than from the securities markets are considered commercial
transactions regulated by the Commercial Code. Moreover, transactions related to real estate (including
mortgages) are regulated by the Civil Code of each state.

78

Figure 3. Mexico: SOFOLs-Total Loan Outstanding (US$ billion)

0 Other types * Housing Finance

9.

8----------------------------------

6------- 

5------- 
4- 
3- 
2-- 

--------------------- 
-------------------------- 

1- ------------------------------- 

------ 

----- 

o- 

1994 

1995 

... 
n 

1996 

I 

1997 

.

1998 

1 

1999 

* As of November 2001.
Source: La Asociaci6n Mexicana de Sociedades Financieras de Objeto Limitado A.C.

Annex B1O

---

----

-.

--

....---- 
-

I9 

2000 

2001*

17. 
Housing finance. Mexico's housing finance sector relies heavily on the public sector's
role, and has not been able to respond to growing housing shortages. Allowing a larger role of
the private sector is critical for the development of both primary and secondary markets.
Mexico's housing shortage is severe-estimated at 4.6 million units-due to the high rate of
population growth in the past 20 years and the decreased availability of housing finance since the
Tequila Crisis. The housing sector is primarily divided along the lines of annual income. 18

There are largely two groups: (a) the social interest sector in which families earn between 2.5

and 15 minimum wages, and (b) the open market sector with borrowers earning more than 15
minimum wages.19 The social interest sector is currently addressed by public sector institutions,
such as FOVI, INFONAVIT, and FOVISSSTE.21 The open market sector is currently served in
a minimal way by a small portion of SOFOL lending and through cautious reentry of commercial
banks to the market. Mortgage debt outstanding is only US$18 billion, or 3.1 percent of GDP.
There is a large potential for increased participation of the private sector. The potential of the
open market sector is estimated at about US$580 billion, and of the social interest sector at about
$280 billion.
18. 
Primary Mortgage Market. The Tequila Crisis caused banks to withdraw from the
mortgage market. As noted earlier, FOVI lends mortgage funds through the SOFOLs, while
government-controlled pension funds such as INFONAVIT and FOVISSSTE engage in direct
mortgage lending. Together, these three public sector institutions account for over 80 percent of
mortgage credit to the social interest sector, and are the major sources of funds available for
mortgage loans in Mexico. The private sector's role is limited primarily to SOFOLs. However,

18. Defined in terms of minimum wage; one minimum wage is about US$1,500 per year.
19. There also is a "minimum" sector for those with incomes below 2.5 minimum wages, and it comprises the
informal economy where borrowers have no banking relationships, and housing is self-built and financed by
discretionary cash or through microcredit facilities.
20. FOVI (Fondo de Operaci6n y Financiamiento Bancario a la Vivienda), INFONAVIT (Instituto del Fondo
Nacional para la Vivienda para los Trabajodores), and FOVISSSTE (a pension/housing fund similar to
Infonavit for government workers and teachers).

79

Annex B 10

SOFOLs are heavily dependent on FOVI for their funding. This funding limitation constrains
them from entering into the open market sector.
19. 
Secondary Mortgage Market. The development of a secondary mortgage market is an
important step for growth of the housing finance sector. There has not been a mortgage-backed
securitization (MBS) market in Mexico.21 So far, Su Casita (an IFC client) has been the only
institution to successfully place an MBS-type security with a reasonable size. The government
has begun setting the foundations for the creation of a secondary mortgage market to serve the
social interest sector. There is a large development potential in this area, with private sector
participation and support from institutions such as the WBG.
20. Microfinance. Most of the microenterprises in Mexico lack access to formal financial
services. This is critical, because many microenterprises reside in the poorer segments of urban
areas and in rural areas, and their development is important for equitable growth. There are
about 3.5 million microenterprises, which play a significant role in the Mexican economy: over
90 percent of Mexican enterprises are microenterprises, accounting for over 40 percent of the
workforce. Microfinance is not well developed in Mexico. Studies show that less than 1 percent
of the Mexican poor have access to some type of formal financial services. This creates a large
potential market for commercial microfinance 
institutions (MFIs). There are only a few
specialized, commercially oriented MFIs with a wide client base. With 82,000 clients,
Compartamos (an IFC client) leads Mexico's MFIs. It reaches remote rural communities, which
lack access to financial services. Serious limiting factors have inhibited the growth of Mexico's
microfinance sector in the past, namely inflation and the collapse of many financial institutions
(including numerous credit cooperatives) following the Tequila Crisis, and rigid and incomplete
regulations.
21. 
The regulatory environment for MFIs is made of three main overlapping institutions: the
Ministry of Finance, the Central Bank, and the CNVB. The Ministry of Finance, in cooperation
with the other agencies, is implementing the April 2001 law (La Ley de Ahorro y Credito
Popular) that would facilitate the provision of microfinance services by private financial
institutions. The law proposes to consolidate and create a supervision context for savings and
loan societies, credit unions, cooperatives, and private lending corporations.
22. Other financial intermediaries. There are also other important financial intermediaries
that could help support broad-based growth. Leasing and factoring typically play a particularly
important role in providing funds to smaller companies, which have not established a formal
banking relationship due to banks' perceptions of high risks and other factors. In Mexico these
industries are still underdeveloped. Leasing is a costly means of finance for firms in Mexico,
due in part to perceived high risks associated with the processes of bankruptcy and collateral
repossession. Factoring is also underdeveloped, due to costly regulatory filings and poor judicial
efficiency. 
Financial institutions specializing in distressed assets (Non-Performing Loans,
NPLs) have a particular relevance in Mexico, which still carries a large number of NPLs-the
legacy of the Tequila Crisis. These institutions purchase packages of NPLs at a discount through
auctions conducted by IPAB, 2 2 and either liquidate, resell, or restructure NPLs and repackage
them for issuing new securities backed by restructured cash flows. Liabilities held by IPAB are

21. An MBS issue was placed several years ago, but it was very small and illiquid.
22. Instituto de Protecci6n al Ahorro Bancario, the Mexican Deposit Protection Agency.

80

Annex B 10

estimated at US$75 billion, and IPAB plans to raise $2.2 billion annually for its own funding
through auctioning of loan portfolios.
23. 
Credit 
annnmnt. As discussed earlier, firms in emerging markets, except for the
largest known names, are faced with the difficulty in accessing the international market or even
domestic debt markets. On the other hand, there is a large universe of creditworthy companies in
Mexico, which are only moderately leveraged. These firms could be introduced to financial
markets if an adequate Level of credit enhancement 
is provided with their debt issues.
Multilateral institutions may have a potentially important role in this area as providers of such
credit enhancement. 
in the case of domestic debt issues, this would in turn help develop the
domestic markets by introducing additional securities and providing a potential benchmark for
corporate issues.

(3) 

L:, 

' 

Ij. l, 

.g' i, 

and tapping private initiatives

24. 

bug beneven pirogress. Mexico has made significant, although uneven,
progress in reforming the infrastructure sector. 2 3 The role of the private sector in infrastructure
has become increasingly important. Private investment in infrastructure during the last decade
increased from 18 percent of GDP to 23 percent, while public investment declined from 5
percent to less than 3 percent. Starting in the late 1980s, the government opened various
subsectors to private participation: first, telecommunications, and then toll roads and ports, and
more recently railroads and airports. The results vary across these subsectors. Energy, and water
and sarntation have largely remained in the public domain. Mexico's infrastructure agenda going
forward includes (a) fiirtler improving the quality and efficiency of infrastructure services,
thereby enhancing competitiveness of Mexican enterprises, and (b) promoting private
participation where possible, thereby reducing large fiscal burdens associated with public sector
management.
25. 
AK:. L-4Sv cmc 
e8veness. Mexico faces challenges in enhancing competitiveness
through better infrastruct ue services in the context of globalization on one hand and
decentralization on the o2ier. Mexican enterprises will require higher quality infrastructure
services in telecommunications, 
transport, and power, in order to compete in free trade,
especially within NAFTA. The need for infrastructure investment is very high. For example, in
highway transport alone, the government has identified over 2,300 kilometers of priority projects
and an additional 400 kilometers of bypasses for construction in the next 10 years.2 4 Analysts
estimate that the energy sector would require expenditures of over US$100 billion over the next
decade. Demand for higher quality and more efficiency point to the importance of promoting
private financing of infrastructure where possible, further fostering competition in the liberalized
subsectors, and capacity building among regulatory institutions at both the national and
subnational levels.

26. 

L.^-IIraI2I;' sttructure and processes. To attract private investment, investor perception

of risk needs to be lowered through the institutional and regulatory framework. Mexico's
experience to date with autonomous and credible regulation has been limited. In many sectors a

23. This section draws heavily on the IBRD-IFC private participation in infrastructure country framework study

(April 2001).
24. At the same time, the government is in the process of restructuring the debt that it took on of the federal
highway system.

81

Annex B IO

single agency has been responsible for policy formulation, actual operation and investment, and
monitoring and regulation. The resulting environment of complex roles and incentives has led to
the perception of high risk for private entrants, uneven regulation, and mixed sector performance.
Regulatory agencies need political and financial autonomy, accountability, and transparent and
open processes. Also, there is still a lack of capacity to plan, design, and execute complex
transactions like infrastructure concessions, particularly at the subnational level.
27. 
Telecommunications. Mexican telecommunications performance made good strides
during the 1990s, but it still lags that of other Latin American countries.. The state-owned
monopoly carrier, Telmex, was privatized as an integrated firm. Under private operation,
penetration and usage of phone service increased. However, performance indicators still lag
behind those of other countries in the region.2 5 Competitive entrants to the market still have had
limited success in Mexico, and regulatory limitations need to be addressed to promote
competition.
28. 
Transport. An important challenge for the transport sector in Mexico is the need for
more integrated transport systems that support efficient supply chains. Mexico has been very
successful in attracting private sector interest and investment in ports and railroads, and in roads,
though with mixed results. 
It has also made a good start in private participation through
concessioning and privatizing airports. Progress in the railways privatization program has
generated significant interest in multimodal logistics and improved intermodal coordination
(including linkages with the U.S. systems). However, rail and road access to port facilities and
distribution centers still needs improvement. The gains achieved through port reform are
significantly reduced by long waiting times for truckers and trains in cargo reception areas in the
interior. Also, the level of containerization of Mexican freight, a critical requirement for
integration of the transport network, is low, at 36 percent. Mexico's inventory levels of raw
materials and finished goods are higher on average by 58 percent and 46 percent, respectively,
than those in the United States, indicating the potential for more efficient supply chains. A major
obstacle is the lack of intermodal facilities, particularly with respect to international traffic. In
highways country risk is perceived to be high, primarily due to the government's constraints and
consequent inability to deliver on guarantees and contractually obligated adjustments. This
continues to casts a shadow over toll roads, and devising mechanisms to finance the operations
and maintenance expenditures remains a priority.
29. 
Broadening private participation-the energy sector. The energy sector continues to
be an important sector for Mexico's economic development, given the country's substantial
reserves of oil and gas, and the sector's potential to generate growth and employment. The
sector has been recognized as a strategic sector for Mexico, and has been mostly in the public
sector domain. 
Two state-owned companies-PEMEX (Petr6leos Mexicanos) and CFE
(Comisi6n Federal de Electricidad)-dominate 
the sector. Substantial investments will be
required for the sector to meet the demand for energy supplies. It is estimated that the sector will
require investments of $100 billion to $130 billion to keep up with economic growth over the
next decade. These investment requirements will represent 10 to 15 percent of annual federal

25. In 1998, Colombia, Costa Rica, and Uruguay had not yet privatized their wire-line telephone companies, yet all
had better performance indicators than Mexico. Of the large Latin American countries, only Peru has lower
telephone penetration, with GDP per capita some US$1,000 below Mexico's. International long-distance tariffs
in Mexico are estimated to be the highest among large Latin American countries, except for Uruguay and
Venezuela.

82

Annex B IO

expenditures, and 50 to 60 percent of the federal investment budget. Thus, reducing the need for
public sector funding, through promoting private sector participation, would be a critical element
for the sector policy. Mexico has large reserves of both oil and gas. Oil reserves account for 29
billion barrels (about the same as in the United States); gas reserves account for 30 trillion cubic
feet (slightly higher than United Kingdom's reserves). On the other hand, production rates per
given reserves lag behind those of countries such as Canada, Norway, the United Kingdom, and
the United States. Reform in the sector, along with that in petrochemicals, would attract much-
needed financing for growth and efficiency, and present significant opportunities for the private
sector.
30. 
Economic growth since the mid-1990s has highlighted the need for increased electricity
supply. Mexico has at present 35,000 megawatts of capacity. Future demand is forecast to grow
at 5.8 percent per year until 2010. This would require additional capacity of 27,000 megawatts.
The cost of meeting this demand, including additional transmission and distribution capacity,
would amount to $23 billion until 2010. Much of the expansion in generation capacity over the
past six years is attributable to private investment under the IPP (Independent Power Producers)
program, and is expected to follow this trend in the near future. There have been discussions on
gradually allowing further private sector participation in this sector. A regulatory structure that
provides sufficient incentives for investment is important, as the recent energy shortages in
California and Brazil suggested.
31. Water and sanitation. Since the early 1990s, federal sector policy has promoted private
participation as a tool for improving the efficiency and quality of urban water supply and
sanitation services. However, in practice very few municipalities have had success so far in
attracting long-term private funds. In spite of large investment needs (US$6 billion), the sector
as a whole faces parallel trends of declining investment, low revenue mobilization, and limited
cost recovery. The reasons for this relate to pricing, commercial and technical inefficiency, and
continuing dependence on federal transfers. Water and sanitation tariffs charged by the majority
of Mexico's urban water companies are quite low (US$0.3 per cubic meter) compared with
tariffs in other countries in Latin America and the OECD ($0.9 to $2.5 per cubic meter), and
barely cover operational costs. Subsidy policies and the tariff structure need to be reexamined in
order to increase the private sector's contributions to the sector. Also, a credible regulatory
environment is necessary for reducing investor uncertainty. Very few states have put in place
regulations governing private sector participation. In addition, multilateral financial institutions
could play a constructive role in supporting the new federal-subnational "master trust"
arrangement that enhances private participation in subnational infrastructure and public services.
(4) Corporate sector-enabling environment for enhanced competitiveness and broad-
based development
32. 
The corporate sector plays the key role in Mexico's private-sector-led growth and job
creation. 
In Mexico, large companies and maquiladoras have played a significant role in the
recent export-led economic expansion, with important, although limited, "trickle-down" effects.
However, micro, small, and medium firms continue to play a significant role in employment,
providing 72 percent of the total employment in Mexico (Table 6).

83

Annex B IO

Table 6. Mexico: Corporate Sector by Size (1999)

Number of Companies (thousand) 
Number of Employees (million) 

Micro* 
2,690 
5.9 

Small 
88 
1.8 

Medium 
26 
2.3 

Large** 
8 
3.9 

Total
2,811
13,9

* Possibly underestimates the number of informal micro firms; IFC's interviews with microfinance institutions
indicate that the number could be over 3.5 million firms.
** Under the INEGI classification by the number of employees, firms with more than 500 employees in
manufacturing and more than 100 employees in commerce and services are lumped as "large" firms.
Source: INEGI Economic Census 1999.

33. 
The Mexican corporate sector is faced with a number of constraints to achieving broad-
based private sector development. An underdeveloped financial sector and infrastructure
deficiencies put the sector at a disadvantage in competitiveness. There are also issues that pose
added challenges to the Mexican private sector-issues of laws and regulations that affect
Mexico's business environment, such as corporate governance, bankruptcy and secured
transactions laws, and the judiciary.

34. 
Corporate governance. 
Improving corporate governance practices 
is critical 
in
developing the domestic capital markets and the corporate sector. 
Investors have become
increasingly concerned with corporate governance issues in Latin America. McKinsey, in
cooperation with the World Bank, surveyed 90 institutional investors in mid-1999 on their view
on the issue of corporate governance and priorities for reform.2 6 Over 80 percent of respondents
stated that, relative to financial considerations, they viewed corporate governance issues as
important in their investment decisions. The most cited issues for Lain America, including
Mexico, were shareholder rights, disclosure, and the boards of directors. 2 7 The survey also asked
investors whether they would be willing to pay more for investing in companies with
international standards of corporate governance. For Mexico, 90 percent of respondents stated
that they would pay an average premium of 21.5 percent. This indicates that the gains from
improved corporate governance are considerable at the individual firm level in terms of cost of
capital.

35. 
The government is making efforts in this area, and enacted a new Capital Markets Law in
June 2001, which would allow Mexico to make a good stride in the right direction in corporate
governance standards. Under the new law, the protection of minority shareholder rights is
enhanced, and the CNBV is explicitly granted the power to regulate tender offers in order to
prevent the exclusion of minority shareholders from the benefits of these transactions. Table 7
shows Mexico's improved corporate governance standards (as of January 2002), compared to
other major countries in the region. The new law represents a marked improvement in Mexico's
corporate governance framework, although there remain certain areas for further improvements
(for example, oppressed minority remedy). Actual improvements in practice remain to be seen.
There is a role for multilateral institutions to help improve corporate governance practices in
Mexico.

26. Respondents represented 90 institutional investors with global asset holdings of US$1.65 trillion.
27. Observers note that Mexican corporate governance has been characterized by serious shortcomings in protection
of shareholder rights, control of conflicts of interest, and responsibility and professionalism of boards of

directors. Mexico historically scored poorly on corporate governance. Well-publicized cases, often involving
the use of the company's assets to support the interests of the controlling shareholder, have damaged investor
confidence and related securities markets development.

84

Annex B IO

Table 7. Shareholders' Rights and Corporate Governance Practices

Share Cumulative 
Not 
Voting 
Blocked 
Prop. 
Before 
Represen- 
Meeting 
tation 

Share 
To 
Call 
ESM 

One 
Share/One 
Vote 

Pre- 
emptive 
Rights 

Oppressed 
Minority 
Remedy 

Share- 
holders 
Rights 
Indec? 

Mandatory
Tender
Offer Bids 
in Change 
of Control

Independent 
Directors 

Committee
Practices

Chile 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

0.10 

Yes 

Yes 

Argent 
ana 

Brazil 

No 

No 

Yes 

0.05 

Yes 

Yes 

New 
legislation 
encourages 
reduction of 
nonvoting 
shares to 50% 

Yes 

No 

0.05 

No 

Yes 

5 

4 

3 

New 
Required under 
Legislation new legislation; 
requires bids 
shnsion 
beginning im fund have long 
2003 
directors 

Special committee
to review audits
and conflicts-
prone transactions
required under new legislation

Required under 
new legislation 

27% of boards
havestanding committees;
required under new legislation

No 

17.6% of boards
have standing committees

Required 
under new 
legislation 

Required
under new
legislation 
only for 
voting
shares

New
legislation 
Mexico m2o5e slitly 
on nonvoting 
shares

No 

No 

0.10 

Yes 

No 

I 

CNBV 

empowered to 
set rules 

25% required
by new 
legislation

Required under new legislation

a. La Porta and others 1997 index (0 low to 5 high). This index was calculated prior to recent reforms, but still
serves as an indicator of past practices and market perceptions.
Sources: La Porta and others, in "Beyond the Washington Consensus; Institutions Matter," World Bank 1998,
updated with World Bank/1IFC Corporate Governance Assessments for Chile, Brazil and Mexico; and
Spenser Stuart Business Indexes: Brazil, 1999 and Argentina, 1998. As of January 2001.
36. 
Laws and judicial system. Legal and regulatory improvements, and reform in the
judicial system, are seen as critical for a better business environment in Mexico. Improvements
in secured lending and corporate bankruptcy procedures improve access to credit particularly for
smaller firms, by reducing creditors' perceived risk. The government has made significant
In May 2000, amendments to the Credit and Banking Laws and the
progress in this area. 
Commercial Code became effective, and the new Commercial Insolvency Law was introduced.
These substantially changed the framework for secured lending2 8 and bankruptcy procedures.2 9
The success and effectiveness of the new laws need to be tested over time. Improvements in
laws will not be effective if they are not supported by an improved judicial system. It is well
known that in Mexico citizens distrust the judicial system. An inefficient and unreliable judicial
process presents a heavy cost to doing business. Judicial inefficiencies pose significant hidden
costs to business; for example, in intermediation costs (because banks need to cover risks of

28. The amendments introduced the pledge without transfer of possession, and included provisions for the
enforcement and foreclosure of security interests. This is expected to improve borrowers' access to credit with
a pledge of a portion of their current assets, such as inventories and accounts receivable. Prior to the
amendments, a pledge on movable assets could be perfected only under very limited circumstances. However,
the amended provisions still have room to be improved. The new provision requires, in every pledge without
transfer of possession, the introduction of a clause that provides that in the event the collateral is sold and the
proceeds are not sufficient to cover the secured obligation, the uncovered portion is deemed to be extinguished
and discharged. With this provision, banks may be reluctant to use the new pledge device, or ask for additional
overcollateralization.
29. The new law provides for a single insolvency process-a conciliatory phase of mediation and bankruptcy
filing-compared to the old system that had two processes-suspension of payments and bankruptcy, which
significantly compromised creditors' position.

85

Annex B 10

judicial uncertainty in enforcing contracts within loan spreads), and in contracted prices (because
business has to add a risk premium for the eventual unenforceability of commercial contracts). It
is important that the government continue its current efforts to improve the judicial system.
37. 
Sustainable development. Another area of importance which has been gaining
awareness in the Mexican corporate sector is sustainable development and good corporate
citizenship. The increased awareness arises not only from the recognition of corporate
responsibilities for preserving public goods, but also from its importance for maintaining
Mexico's competitiveness and growth. Environmental and social practices that do not meet
international standards, and actual depletion of environmental resources, are now becoming a
competitive disadvantage for Mexican firms, and a constraint to their ability to access new
markets and attract foreign investments (for example, in tourism). Substandard practices are
increasingly seen as constituting unfair competition in external markets at the expense of global
public goods, particularly with NAFTA, WTO, and the OECD, of which Mexico is a member.
Recognizing this, a growing number of Mexican firms are turning to the concept of sustainable
development, which enhances firms' competitiveness and thus the value of these firms. For
example, wood products that use raw materials produced by sustainable forestry management
may provide access to export markets in OECD countries. Sustainable environmental and social
business practices may also attract and retain a motivated, high-skilled, quality workforce-an
increasingly important ingredient in keeping up with competition in the globalization and
attracting foreign capital. Such sustainable business practices will in turn complement the public
sector's efforts in delivering environmental and social public goods, such as cleaner air and
water, and community developments.

(5) Facilitating human capital development-private participation in the social sector

38. 
The growing population, improving average income, changing demography, and stronger
demand for a highly skilled workforce to sustain competitiveness will continue to put pressures
on Mexico's health care and education systems. Mexico has made steady progress, particularly
in improving access to basic services. The tight fiscal conditions will continue to constrain
public spending, and it will therefore be necessary to rationalize and optimize the allocations of
public resources and use private sector resources. The issue is not a matter of private versus
public efficiency or quality of services, but how to optimize complementary roles of the public
and private sectors, and maximize the results.
39. 
Health sector. Mexican health care has significantly improved over the past decades. 3 0
However, demand for healthcare services still exceeds provision, as the population continues to
increase and age, and a growing segment of the population has higher expectations in terms of
quality of care. The private sector accounts for around 50 percent of healthcare expenditures, 31

30. Between 1970 and 2000, life expectancy at birth increased from 61.0 years to an estimated 75.3 years, while
the infant mortality rate fell from 72 per 1,000 live births to 16 per 1,000.
31. As for the public sector, the Instituto Mexicano de Seguro Social (IMSS) and the Instituto de Seguridad y
Servicios Sociales de los Trabajadores del Estado (ISSSTE) are the two main public providers of health care
(they account for nearly 75 percent of the government's healthcare spending). In 1999, they officially covered
45 million people and 10 million people, respectively (out of a total population around 100 million). 
In
addition, some healthcare services are provided by the Defense and Navy Ministries, the state oil company
(PEMEX), state organizations such as the Institute for Indigenous Peoples (INI), and the national system for
Integrated Family Development (DIF) and, fnally, by private institutions.

86

Annex B 10

indicating its already significant role. An important element in sector reform going forward is
the changing role of government, from one of directly providing all healthcare services to
ensuring a coherent framework for the system that can be accessed by the population in a cost-
effective manner.
40. 
The efficiency of the private health care sector in Mexico needs to be greatly improved.
The number of people covered by private insurance has grown rapidly (some 60 percent over the
past five years), but is still small. Only 4 percent of the population have private medical
insurance, with a much larger group paying directly out-of-pocket. 
It is estimated that the
private sector has around 2,500 hospitals and that it performs a third of all medical activities in
the country. Private hospitals are typically small in size (the large majority have less than 15
beds), and have a limited range of medical equipment. Private investment could potentially
greatly improve the efficiency and quality of services. However, it appears that the private
sector thinks that the government should provide clearer direction in the reform and about the
role of the private sector in the system.
41. 
Education. Mexico has made significant progress in the provision of education,
particularly in universal access. Mexico's agenda in the education sector is therefore shifting
toward the quality of services. This is a critical area for Mexico, as its labor demands shift to
higher skills to keep pace with accelerating technological progress and global competition. The
private sector has potential for a larger role, particularly in higher education, vocational training,
introduction of information technology for education, and distance learning.
42. 
In addition to companies directly involved in education, the corporate sector has been
playing an indirect role in education and human capital development. While comprehensive data
are not available, observers note that a large number of Mexican firms offer in-house training
courses. Many large firms also maintain formal agreements with educational institutions for the
purpose of accessing experts for training courses, accepting internships of students, and
occasionally employees teaching at one of the institutions. Workers' skills are also upgraded
through on-the-job training, particularly in industries that require technological complexity and
sophistication. As the Mexican corporate sector moves higher in the value chain in its products
and services, such internal education, and partnership with educational institutions, will become
increasingly important.

III. 

The World Bank Group's Private Sector Strategy

Toward higher, more equitable growth through
enhanced competitiveness and human capital development

43. 
The WBG's Private Sector Strategy (PSS) for Mexico is based on the diagnosis and
vision outlined above. The WBG's principal objective in private sector development in Mexico
is 
to help the country move toward higher, more equitable growth 
through enhanced
competitiveness and human capital development. This cuts across three of the five main threads
of the CAS: (a) consolidating macroeconomic gains, (b) accelerating growth through enhanced
competitiveness, and (c) reducing poverty through human capital development. Together, the
PSS supports the WBG's overarching objective of poverty reduction in Mexico.

87

Annex B 10

44. 
Comparative advantages of IBRD and IFC. IBRD and IFC will follow a division of
labor that is practical, and according to each institution's comparative advantages. 
In general,
IBRD's comparative advantages lie in its assistance on macroeconomic stability, knowledge
building and transfer, sectoral policy advice, and capacity building. 
IBRD has also been
effective in advancing policy dialogue with the Mexican authorities and facilitating open and
constructive policy discussions 
in Mexico. 
IFC's advantages lie primarily 
in specific
transactions, catalyzing financing where IFC's presence adds value. IFC's strength is derived
from its practical knowledge of the financial and corporate sectors, dialogue with international
and local private investors, hands-on experiences in local constraints to private investment, and
accumulated international knowledge and expertise.
45. 
In Mexico, as in other middle-income countries, demand for IFC services fluctuates with
the extent of its comparative advantages vis-a-vis other sources of financing and know-how
available for the private sector. As noted earlier, top firms have gained access to external
financing, and with the country's investment-grade credit ratings, access is expected to further
improve for large firms. IFC's role in providing financing for these firms is becoming limited.
Investment financing for the rest of the corporate sector is expected to remain scarce, and IFC
maintains a unique role in providing long-term financing suitable for their investments. The
limited tenor of financing provided by domestic commercial sources, due to their funding
constraints and market conditions, is a critical issue for sustained growth of the Mexican
corporate sector. This is also true for private external financing, which offers at best medium-
term financing (three to five years) that could subsequently pose refinancing risks, as the
financial market to emerging economies opens and closes capriciously. In addition to the ability
to provide long-terrn financing, IFC's role is becoming stronger with the private sector's growing
awareness of the need for know-how in order to improve competitiveness. 
In particular, the
growing acknowledgement of IFC's leadership position on sustainability issues, corporate
governance, corporate strengthening through restructuring, and local supplier linkages, 
is
expected to increase the demand for IFC in these areas. This aspect of IFC's knowledge sharing
is expected to become more important in Mexico, particularly for relatively large and medium-
sized firms that seek to enhance their competitive position.
46. 
IBRD/IFC Collaboration. 
In Mexico, the collaboration between IBRD and IFC has
progressed over time. The two institutions have long worked together, particularly in the
financial sector, infrastructure, SMEs, and the social sector. IBRD's assistance in enhancing the
regulatory and supervisory environment and the strengthening of the banking sector and financial
sector infrastructure are helping set the stage for IFC's increased involvement in direct and
indirect assistance 
to viable Mexican financial 
intermediaries, 
including capital market
institutions. IBRD's assistance in urban development and housing is also complemented with
IFC's assistance 
in developing housing finance 
institutions and mortgage markets. 
In
infrastructure, a number of subsectors where IBRD's assistance has helped improve the
regulatory framework have provided increasing opportunities for IFC's sequential involvement
in helping structure and mobilize a financial package for pioneering private infrastructure
projects. IBRD's nonlending services in SME development benefits from IFC's complementary
experiences with impediments to private sector development generally, and with SMEs. This
IBRD activity would in turn support IFC's increasing focus on assisting SMEs and middle-
market companies through financial intermediaries. IBRD's assistance in reforms in the social
sector continues to be supplemented by the IFC's support for private service providers, helping
enhance public-private complementarities.

88

Annex B IO

47. 

The following section outlines the focus of each WBG institution.

IBRD

48. 
Summary. IBRD's role in supporting broad-based, private-sector-led growth is aligned
with the preceding diagnosis. 
Foremost, IBRD's strategy focuses on supporting 
the
government's efforts to consolidate the recent macroeconomic gains. It is aimed at supporting
the efforts to deepen fiscal and other reforms that are associated with the continuation of prudent
macroeconomic management. At the same time, IBRD focuses on enhancing Mexico's
competitiveness and supporting human capital development. 
IBRD's activities in this latter
category are expected to be primarily in the financial sector, housing, infrastructure, and the
social sector. The Bank's intervention is expected to encompass both the federal and state levels,
in support of decentralization in Mexico.
49. 
Financial sector. 
In the financial sector, IBRD will continue to focus on close
monitoring of the financial system, and addressing the remaining weak areas that are likely to
hinder further financial sector deepening and limit its efficiency. The continuation of financial
sector monitoring will be provided through AAA services. 
IBRD's activity in the remaining
issues of the sector would focus on regulatory improvements, market efficiency and development,
and sector reforms, particularly at the state level and for underserved rural areas. First, IBRD
will focus on further strengthening of the bank supervisory framework, and of the financial
sector infrastructure that supports financial and capital markets transactions. The latter includes
improvements in information disclosure practices on such transactions and the strengthening of
property, collateral, and credit registries. Second, IBRD expects to assist in reorientation, reform
and/or restructuring of major public development banks 
(NAFIN, BANOBRAS, and
BANCOMEXT 3 2 ) where new legislation is likely to be proposed to more sharply delineate the
essential functions of these banks and ensure that they complement and support the activities of
the financial system. The third area will aim at supporting required policy and institutional
reforms in rural finance, including reform and restructuring of BANRURAL 3 3 and putting in
place an appropriate regulatory and supervisory framework to oversee rural finance institutions.
An operation to support reforms in the state level pension systems to adjust their design
parameters and practices and thereby help achieve financial sustainability will also be considered
in the outer year of the CAS period if the states show the readiness to embark on such programs
following the reforms implemented in the national level pension systems.
50. 
Housing/housing finance. Building on sector work on urban development and low-
income housing issues, which has recently been completed, IBRD expects to continue to focus
on support for a major national urban housing upgrading initiative. The program will take into
account the key issues identified in both these pieces of sector work, including those related to
management of major metropolitan areas in a way that carefully balances urban development
with environmental sustainability, urban land management, and institutional reforms and
rationalization of low-income housing subsidies. The Bank's assistance in this area, in tandem
with IFC's activity in housing finance, is expected to have important linkages with further

32. NAFIN-Nacional Financiera, S.N.C.; BANOBRAS-Banco Nacional de Obras y Servicios Nblicos, S.N.C.;
BANCOMEXT- Banco de Comercio Exterior.
33. BANRURAL-Banco Nacional de Credito Rural, S.N.C.

89

Annex B 10

development of housing finance markets through increasing access to housing, demand for
financing, and improvements in the housing finance market structure.
51. 
Infrastructure and energy. 
IBRD's priority in infrastructure and energy focuses on
enhancing Mexico's competitiveness and improving access to, and quality of, infrastructure
services. An active dialogue with the government is already in progress on a major national
program aimed at the modernization of water and sanitation systems throughout Mexico. The
activity in this area is expected to address required institutional reforms; improvements in the
regulatory frameworks at the national, state, and local levels of government; measures to induce
water conservation; and enhanced private sector participation 
in water and sanitation
development. In transport, IBRD will aim to support the government's program of rationalizing
the highway finance system. This is a critical area for the development of Mexico's transport
system, which has received increased private sector participation, but lags in the area of
highways due to the past difficulties. IBRD's assistance is expected to help improve the design
and financial engineering of private highway concessions, as required to ensure the financial and
physical sustainability of the highway system. A related objective would be to achieve the
maximum synergy between the old and new parts of the national, state, and local road networks.
In the energy sector the Bank will support the expected major reform actions in the petroleum,
natural gas, and electricity sectors being contemplated by the government. Such an operation is
expected to be supported by an AAA service for energy sector review. 
In addition, a
complementary GEF project, together with a parallel Bank technical assistance operation, is
being developed to supplement the mainstream power sector reforms with support to an off-grid
rural electrification program, and technical and advisory assistance to the government is
envisioned in developing strategy for increasing the participation of renewable energy sources in
the sector.
52. 
To ensure that the diverse infrastructure development initiatives and associated sector
policy and institutional reforms perneate effectively to the state and local levels of government,
the Bank is developing, in close collaboration with concerned government entities, a State Level
Decentralization APL operation. The Bank would focus on support for the design and
implementation of infrastructure development and related reform programs at the state and
municipality levels across a broad range of sectors, covering water and sanitation, electricity,
transport, telecomnmunications, and so forth. 
Eligibility of the states and sectors will be
determined on the basis of an assessment of the quality of the sector strategy proposed to be
undertaken by the state or local government and of the overall fiscal management at the
decentralized level as reflected by objective indicators and financial market ratings of the state's
or municipality's credit. Strategy documents prepared by the state or local government would
elaborate on proposed sector priorities, policy, institutional, and regulatory reforms, actions to
improve access to the poorer segments of the population in the particular state, and means to
foster private sector participation.
53. 
IBRD's services in support of private sector development are also envisioned to include
analytical work for the development of small and medium enterprises, a review of trade and
competitiveness issues, and a diagnosis of private sector development issues in the southern
states, through southern states development strategy and policy notes. In addition, the Bank will
support a National micro- and small business development program, with a special focus on
addressing the constraints faced by smaller enterprises in achieving their full economic potential
and helping create employment. The program will include business development and advisory

90

Annex B 10

services, including via improved access to IT and e-government services, youth employment
initiatives to reduce administrative obstacles in small enterprise operations 
("red tape") and
complementary financing.
54. 
Health and education. IBRD will continue to offer a range of lending and nonlending
services to assist Mexico in the execution of social sector reforms. 
IBRD will continue to
address major issues with respect to private sector development in the context of its overall
assistance for these sectors, and focus primarily on helping develop an environment conducive to
further private participation and stronger public-private partnership. 
In both health and
education, improvement in quality of services continues to be a major focus.

IFC

55. 
IFC will play a key role in the implementation of the WBG's Private Sector Strategy.
IFC's strategy is closely aligned with that of the Bank, and is centered around the following four
themes:
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 

Fostering financial sector development and more evenly distributed access to financing
Enhancing international competitiveness of the private sector
Promoting investments in areas newly opened for private sector participation
Promoting sustainable development and good corporate governance.

Each of the four objectives is mutually reinforcing, and individual IFC projects may pursue more
than one objective. For example, IFC's support for providing SMEs with access to financing
through a financial intermediary could entail capacity building in the financial sector for catering
to underserved segments of the private sector and at the same time support export-oriented SMEs
investments for modernization. Helping an IFC client improve sustainable development or
corporate governance practices may lead to companies gaining access to new export markets or
new sources of financing, thereby enhancing their competitiveness.
56. 
Strategy implementation under the last CAS. 
IFC's activity in Mexico over the
previous CAS period has been consistent with the strategy set out in the previous CAS. IFC's
activity followed three priority themes: (a) helping the Mexican private sector gain greater and
more evenly distributed access to external private financing, (b) helping improve the efficiency
of domestic financial intermediation and helping mobilize domestic resources, and (c) helping
private firms grow and improve their international competitiveness. These translated into IFC's
sectoral focus on financial sector development, support for middle-market firms, private
infrastructure, and the social sectors. In addition, sustainable development, an area that has not
been explicitly identified by the previous CAS, has received increased emphasis. During fiscal
1999 to date, IFC approved operations totaling US$907 million, including syndications of
US$301 million, for 27 projects, of which 10 were in general manufacturing and services
(middle-market firms), 8 were in the financial sector, 5 in infrastructure, 2 in health and
education, and 2 in the area of environmental sustainability. During the period, IFC has
continued to expand into new areas. This is reflected in more recent project approvals, in such
areas as hospitals and primary schools (fiscal 2000), a private railway project in Chiapas (fiscal
2000), housing 
finance 
(fiscal 2001), microfinance 
(fiscal 2001), and environmental
sustainability, such as projects for cleaner fuel (compressed natural gas) for automotives (fiscal
2001), and sustainable forestry products (fiscal 2002).

91

Annex B1O

57. 
As of February 28, 2002, IFC's disbursed portfolio in Mexico stood at US$708 million
for its own account, representing 7.4 percent of the total portfolio, and US$301 million for
participant banks. Overall, IFC's portfolio in Mexico is of high quality and has managed to
withstand the economic cycles over the past years. As of February 28, 2002, only 0.6 percent of
IFC's loan portfolio in Mexico was in nonaccrual status, ranking among the top in the quality of
country portfolio of this size. 
This performance was attributable to Mexico's flexible
macroeconomic management and increased private sector resilience, and to IFC's project
selection, due diligence, and early involvement in project structuring. IFC's strategic emphasis
during the previous CAS period on "frontier" (or "riskier") types of projects and sectors in
general has not to date affected the overall quality of the Mexico portfolio. However, IFC's
experience shows that identifying viable and profitable investments in the poorer south is more
difficult than initially expected. IFC's coinvestment facility with an equity fund in Chiapas has
not been successful, and there have been few good opportunities for direct investments in the
area. The fund has had difficulty in finding feasible investment opportunities with an adequate
risk return profile. The main reasons for the fund's lack of investment included a generally
difficult business environment, frequent changes in both State administration and policies, and
the fund's small size that could not easily attract strong fumd management.
58. 
Balancing portfolio quality, profitability, and outreach. With the combination of
declining capital flows to developing countries, stress on IFC's own portfolio, and the recent
economic slowdown, maintaining the quality of both the existing portfolio and projects at entry
is expected to become increasingly important for the implementation of IFC strategy. 
IFC's
profitability continues to be an important signal to private markets that there is gcod business to
be done in developing countries. 
IFC's overall profitability at the corporate level has been
coming under pressure due to adverse overall portfolio developments. Maintaining the existing
strong performance of portfolios of Mexico's size will be increasingly important for IFC's
overall performance and profitability. An essential element of maintaining good portfolio
quality is to continue to book good quality assets, while older quality assets mature and exit.
Operational efficiency-transaction costs per booked volume-also affects profitability. As IFC
seeks to extend its reach to a broader base of the private sector, in particular smaller (and often
riskier) companies and pioneering (and often complex) projects, IFC is increasingly faced with
the need to balance its multiple objectives. In Mexico, IFC expects to address this issue with the
combination of several types of activities: 
(a) reaching smaller firms through financial
intermediaries; (b) direct financing of larger clients, where IFC's role is essential with its
otherwise unavailable long-term financing and best practice expertise (for example, corporate
governance and sustainability); and (c) targeted direct intervention with smaller projects in high
impact areas (for example, microfinance), which have high probability of success.
59. 
The overall volume and composition of IFC's activities during the CAS period will
depend largely on market conditions, the level of the Mexican private sector's access to
international financial markets, and progress in reform. Experiences show that the availability of
alternative financing fluctuates substantially over a CAS period, and IEC will respond to such
changes, doing less or more, depending on market demand and IFC's additionality (Table 8). In
general, IFC's role in Mexico is stronger when and where access to international financial
markets is limited. The role that IFC can play for financing blue-chip firms that have attained
access to external long-term financing has become limited over the past several years. IFC's role
has remained strong for the rest of the private sector, and new areas that may become open for
private sector participation.

92

Table 8. Mexico: IFC Approvals and Private Debt Flows (US$ millions)
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 

IFC Gross Approvals in Mexico 
Net Private Debt Flows to Mexico 

607 
1,627 

259 
2,954 

245 
13,243 

131 
8,111 

Annex B 10

2000 

401 
-629 

2001

332
807

Note: All years are fiscal years for IFC, and calendar years for debt flows. There is a six month lag between the two.

60. 

Operationally, the four main themes of IFC strategy in Mexico will be translated into more

detailed sectoral focus, as outlined below.

(1) Fostering financial sector development and more evenly distributed access to financing

61. 
Financial sector. Limited access for the private sector to investmnent capital, and low
domestic financial intermediation, is a core issue in Mexico's private sector development. IFC's
approach under this theme is twofold: (a) reach out to enterprises that lack access to term-
financing through local financial intermediaries, and (b) support transactions that help develop
the domestic financial sector. 
In its first approach to the financial sector strategy, IFC will
continue to provide investment financing for the corporate sector through intermediaries in the
form of credit lines and risk sharing facility. These credit facilities are expected to address
SMEs, local enterprises that develop supply linkages to exporting firms, industrial infrastructure,
housing, and financial and corporate restructuring of second-tier and mid-sized firms that need to
strengthen their balance sheet under the economic slowdown. 
IFC will also look to large
companies for intermediating its funds to their SME suppliers.
62. 
The second thread of IFC's financial sector strategy involves direct assistance to financial
intermediaries that are important for the development of local markets. The increased foreign
participation will likely limit IFC's role in the banking sector to inducing these banks to engage
in high-impact, underserved areas. Credit lines and capital strengthening of local banks (for
example, tier-two capital financing) are expected to remain an area for IFC assistance in
enhancing local bank capacity. Credit lines assist in bank development through transfer of credit
methods, culture, and IFC best practices and experiences, and the capital strengthening is still
needed for part of the banking sector to meet international standards of capital adequacy.
63. 
IFC's focus will continue to be on the development of nonbankfinancial intermediaries
and domestic securities markets. IFC's approach in this area is to help develop the originators of
securities, institutional investors in these securities, and liquid markets. In this regard, housing
finance is a particularly important area (see below), as are pension funds, mutual funds, and
insurance companies. Credit enhancement and local currency facilities are also important. The
current market conditions that substantially differentiate risk classes would likely lead to demand
for guarantees and other credit enhancement products that could help (creditworthy but not well
known) borrowers gain access, by helping issue securities with higher risk ratings. Debt issues
denominated in local currency would help develop local markets by providing scarce corporate
securities. With the recent improvements in the legal framework for secured lending, bankruptcy,
and corporate governance standards, IFC will also look for opportunities in leasing, factoring,
private equity funds, venture capital, and other capital market institutions, which would support
growth of middle-market firms and SMEs. In addition, support for the development of local
capital markets is expected to be provided through institution building of local financial
infrastructure, such as brokerage firms, rating and valuation agencies, and so forth.

93

Annex B 10

64. 
Housing finance. 
IFC focuses on developing both primary and secondary mortgage
markets. Support for SOFOLs and other banks reentering the primary mortgage market is an
important element of IFC's approach in housing finance, since they foster the origination of
quality mortgages, particularly on the open market. Helping SOFOLs diversify their funding
sources is also important in this regard, and for the development of the social market, and IFC
will continue to support this effort, as with its financing of Su Casita (see Box 1). In this context,
IFC will also look at premortgage (or bridge) funding facilities, which are needed in Mexico.
IFC will also explore opportunities to develop a secondary mortgage market. With its
experiences in helping develop a secondary mortgage market company in several other countries,
IFC is well positioned to extend its assistance in this area to other countries, including Mexico.
IFC involvement in this area may also involve technical assistance in identifying an appropriate
market structure and addressing other structural issues. 
In addition, IFC will explore
opportunities to support intermediaries that are specialized in restructuring and scrutinizing
distressed assets, for example, nonperforming mortgage portfolios of IPAB.

Box 1. Supporting the Housing Finance Sector: Su Casita
Hipotecaria Su Casita, established in 1994, is Mexico's second-largest SOFOL. Su Casita's primaiy
business is the origination and servicing of FOVI mortgages. Su Casita was the first SOFOL to originate and

service FOVI mortgages, which limit the price of the homes SOFOL can finance to a maximum of US$45,000.
Over the past six years, Su Casita has experienced an annually compounded growth rate of over 100 percent, and Su
Casita's profitability has also remained very high.

In fiscal 2001, IFC invested approximately US$10 million to acquire a 14.4 percent share of Su Casita.
The IFC funds were used to help expand Su Casita's mortgage operation. Su Casita now originates and services
loans in 23 states with a network of more than 80 branches, with 46,000 loans serviced. EFC is also investing
approximately US$2 million in a mezzanine tranche of a Su Casita bond issue, the first major mortgage-backed
bond issue in Mexico. The bonds will be backed with mortgages issued by Su Casita directed to lower-middle-
income households. The total bond offering was approximately US$20 million-equivalent with a 10-year maturity.
Su Casita is positioning itself to be a key leader in the industry, particularly for the low-income housing
market. IFC's investment in Su Casita is supporting the development of the housing finance sector in Mexico. It is
also sending a signal to the market of its confidence in the Su Casita bond issue, and has attracted additional
investors. Like Su Casita, other SOFOLs in housing finance are still heavily dependent on FOVI. Su Casita is one
of the SOFOLs that has approached IFC for alternative market-based financing. IFC continues to look to extend its
support to others in the sector.

65. Microfinance. 

Commercially oriented microfinance 
institutions (MFIs) are also
important financial 
intermediaries 
in private sector development 
in Mexico. 
They are
particularly important in terms of employment generation, their reach to the urban and rural poor,
and their substantial developmental impact for a relatively small amount of investment for
international financial institutions. 
IFC has invested in Mexico's leading MFI, Compartamos,
and the initial results are very encouraging 
(Box 2). 
IFC will continue to support
microenterprises through this investment and possible new opportunities in the microfinance
sector. It will also look to projects that reach out to lower-income groups through other means,
as it has done with Coppel (fiscal 2002 approval), a medium-sized retail chain that also provides
consumer finance for its low-income customers.

94

Annex B1O

Box 2. Financiera Compartamos

Financiera Compartamos is a regulated, for-profit entity, incorporated in December 2000 to take over the
microlending operations and portfolio of a Mexican non-governmental organization (NGO). 
In April 2001, IFC
made a US$660,000 equity investment for 10 percent of the shares of Compartamos, and a five-year, US$1 million
loan to the company.
By September 2001, Compartamos grew to having over 82,000 clients and a loan portfolio of US$19
million equivalent. The average loan to the borrowers is currently US$240, underscoring Compartamos' penetration
of the low-income strata of Mexico's population. Compartamos operates 34 branches in 11 Mexican states,
including the underprivileged states of Oaxaca and Chiapas, and 3 branches in metropolitan Mexico City.

Compartamos' shareholders include Compartamos AC, an investment vehicle of the original NGO;
individual Mexican investors; Accion; Profund; and IFC. USAID and CGAP have provided funding and technical
assistance to Compartamos. Through its seat on the nine-member board of directors, IFC is expanding its
knowledge of the field and sharing best financial and corporate practices. 
IFC is also helping establish a new
environmental management system for microfinance.

(2) Enhancing international competitiveness of the private sector

66. 

This covers a broad range of IFC activity:
(a) Backing companies that strengthen Mexico's international competitiveness
and generate growth and employment
(b) Agribusiness, to foster rural development
(c) Investing in physical infrastructure that improves competitiveness.
67. 
Backing companies that strengthen competitiveness. 
IFC continues to support firms
that lack access to long-term financing, are likely to create employment, and are investing to
improve international competitiveness. 
IFC will consider direct financing support for these
second-tier and middle-sized firms, which are important contributors to growth. Mexico has a
large pool of these firms that are fundamentally creditworthy, but lack access to investment
financing. Under the current economic slowdown, these firms are focusing on a limited scope of
new investment. IFC will support such investments, and as the economy recovers during the
CAS period, support expansion and modernization programs of these firms. 
IFC's support will

also be provided for strengthening their corporate and financial structure. There are a number of

firms that are fundamentally good business, but are under the current credit conditions resorting
to short-term borrowing, which is not suitable for long-term investment programs. 
IFC will
explore ways to strengthen these firms through long-term financing, restructuring advice, and
guidance for corporate governance and management practices.
68. 
Agribusiness. The development of the agribusiness sector is important for Mexico's
broad-based private sector development. Many agricultural activities take place in the rural
areas, and are important for poverty reduction in Mexico. There could be many opportunities in

this sector in Mexico, in particular activities that could gain competitiveness through reform.

IFC will look for opportunities to support the sector by strengthening basic services necessary to

its development. 
It will specifically focus on (a) investments in agricultural logistics (for
example, silos, warehouses, cold storages, port facilities); 
(b) competitive agribusiness

enterprises, particularly those with strong linkages 
to smaller firms and fanners; (c) the
promotion of schemes to improve farmer access to pre- and postharvest financing (for example,

95

Annex B 10

warehouse receipts); and (d) the promotion of novel insurance instruments to reduce farmer
vulnerability to price and weather risks.
69. 
Transport and telecommunications. 
IFC's support will continue to be directed toward
the development of a transport system and telecommunications. These infrastructure subsectors
play a critical role in enhancing Mexico's competitiveness by providing more efficient services
with higher quality. IFC has invested in ports, railways, and roads, and will continue to look for
opportunities to support further improvements in transport, in particular, logistics, intermodal
facilities, airports, and other modes of private transportation. In telecommunications, including
information technology, IFC will pursue projects which would increase competition in the sector,
and for which IFC's additionality would be significant.

(3) Promoting investments in areas newly opened for private sector participation

70. 
IFC's activity under this theme will depend on the pace of reform in energy (power, oil,
and gas), petrochemicals, water and sanitation, and health and education. There is a large
potential for private sector participation in all of these sectors, and adequate reform could present
large demand for IFC services. As noted in the diagnosis, the energy sector's investment and
financing needs are large, and the sector is likely to benefit substantially from private
participation. 
IFC has already invested in several power generation projects under Mexico's
Independent Power Producer (IPP) program, and is expected to provide continued support in this
area. Further involvement in the rest of electricity sector will depend on a reform with an
adequate incentive framework for private sector participation. The oil, gas, and petrochemicals
sectors await further opening for private sector participation. As in the power sector, the
potential for private investrnent is very high. 
IFC will focus on pioneering projects for
demonstration effects, as the sector broadens private participation in both production and
distribution (including gas distribution, and oil and gas service contracts). 
In water and
sanitation, the extent of private participation will be determined by reform in the tariff structure,
and the development of regulations governing private sector participation, particularly at the
subnational level. The development of financing mechanisms suitable for this sector is also
important, particularly because revenues are denominated in the local currency, and private
financing in this sector involves subnational risks. Multilateral institutions, including IFC, have
a potential role in providing 
local currency funding facilities and credit enhancement
mechanisms that help subnational governments attract private sector financing.
71. 
Social sector. 
IFC expects to continue to expand its activities in this area in Mexico.
The development of the social sector is critical for enhancing Mexico's competitiveness and a
broad sharing of the benefits of growth. IFC has already provided financing for two projects in
this sector-one in education and the other in health care (Box 3). IFC will focus on a wide
range of activities in this area, including higher education, vocational schools, distance learning,
and private hospitals, medical equipment leasing, medical supplies, and laboratories.

96

Annex B 10

Box 3. IFC Projects in the Social Sector: Hospital ABC and Education
Hospital ABC. The American British Cowdray Hospital (Hospital ABC) is a not-for-profit tertiary
hospital, with a strong reputation for ethics. The Hospital also provides extensive charity services to the poor in a
dedicated clinic and a wide range of in-house training and research programs. In fiscal 2000, IFC provided a US$34
million loan, including a syndication of US$14 million for a project to build a new facility in a growing area of
Mexico City (Santa Fe), which focuses primarily on upgrading emergency services and complementing existing
operations. The new facility will include a specialized ambulatory care center, 24-hour emergency services, 60 beds
for hospitalization, a preventive medicine center, and a welfare clinic.
The project is helping Hospital ABC provide quality services to a larger share of a growing population,
while containing cost escalation. The project is also supporting an expansion and upgrading of Hospital ABC's
welfare clinic that provides healthcare services to poor people (earning less than US$500 per month) who live within
a three-mile radius of the Hospital and do not have access to any medical facilities. In 2000, the Hospital performed
over 18,000 consultations, 330 surgeries, and 265 hospitalizations under their charity program.
Proyecto Educaci6n. This US$27.7 million project involves the first and second stages of a four-stage
plan to construct and operate five private schools in the interior of Mexico. 
IFC investment includes two loans
totaling US$9.7 million for the first two stages of the Project. The first stage, to build facilities from preschool
through fourth grade at the five schools, will cost an estimnated US$18.6 million. The second stage, to accommodate
growth into fifth and sixth grades, is expected to cost an additional US$9.1 million. These two stages are expected
to create capacity for 5,200 students from preschool through primary school. The entire four-stage construction plan
will provide education through high school for up to 9,000 students.
The schools will provide quality bilingual education in five smaller cities of the country, where access to
similar affordable education is either scarce or nonexistent. In doing so, it will help alleviate some of the burden on
the public system. It is also expected to create employment for approximately 170 teachers, as well as directors and
staff. At least 5 percent of the poorest students who enroll in Project schools will receive full scholarships.

(4) Promoting sustainable development and good corporate governance

72. 
In Mexico, IFC will increase its focus on sustainable development and corporate
governance. 
IFC has recently been developing expertise in sustainable development and
corporate governance, and is now seen as an international 
leader in this area. 
IFC 
is
experiencing greater demand in Mexico, and has already supported two projects in sustainable
development (Box 4). These projects have presented opportunities for IFC to demonstrate that
sustainable business practices also make a good business case and add value to firms pursuing
such practices. 
IFC expects to continue supporting projects in this area in Mexico. 
In both
environmental sustainability and corporate governance, IFC activity could involve relatively
large companies, with which IFC could introduce visible demonstration impact on the Mexican
corporate sector. In corporate governance, IFC, along with IBRD, will continue to collaborate
with the OECD (for example, corporate governance roundtables) and in other activities that
increase awareness of this issue.

97

Annex B IO

Box 4. Environmental Sustainability Projects: Ecomex and Puertas Finas

Ecomex. Ecomex was founded in 1997 to operate in the Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) conversion and
dispensing businesses in the metropolitan area of Mexico City. The company currently runs two CNG dispensing
stations and a workshop that offers services for the conversion of vehicles from gasoline to CNG. Ecomex has
converted more than 800 microbuses, and its long-term strategy is to expand and further develop its target market to
include taxis, buses, and official vehicles.

IFC's investment (in fiscal 2001) consisted of a US$8.5 million loan and a US$1.5 million equity
investment in 7.5 percent of Ecomex. The project supported by IFC involves the construction of five CNG
dispensing stations and the provision of working capital to finance the conversion of microbuses. Due to the high
cost of engine conversion and the limited means of most microbus owners, Ecomex fnances the entire cost of
conversion and then recovers it by requiring microbus owners to commit to a take-or-pay contract for the purchase
of specified quantities of CNG on a monthly basis.

The Ecomex project represents a notable example of IFC's efforts to support private sector initiatives with
strong sustainable development impact and a good business case. The project provides significant environmental
benefits to reduce local air pollution in Mexico City. Ecomex's pioneering work is expected to result in the creation
of sustained demand for CNG, and is in line with the Mexican authorities' program for better air quality in the
region. Additionally, the innovative financing scheme associated with microbus conversions provides for savings
by vehicle owners, which will then be used to replace Mexico City's fleet of old microbuses with a new fleet of
more efficient CNG-run buses.
Puertas Finas. With a US$13 million loan, IFC is helping Puertas Finas, a local group of companies that
produce wood products. The objective of the project is to increase the production capacities of the company's
existing door plants and add new plants and retail stores in various locations, restructure some short-term bridge
loans, and upgrade environmental facilities at the plants. Puertas Finas has requested certification from the Forest
Stewardship Council (FSC) to obtain a Chain of Custody Certification for its operations. Puertas Finas has already
obtained more than 70 percent certification from the FSC. Such certification identifies part of Puertas Finas'
production as using only woods derived from environmentally sustainable methods. With this certification, the
company would be able to access European markets, and to continue supplying to the U.S. and Canadian markets,
which are changing their buying policies to purchasing only certified products. IFC is also working with Puertas
Finas to strengthen its relationship with the local communities from which the company buys its woods on a long-
term basis. Puertas Finas is a traditional family-owned business, and thus IFC is also assisting Puertas Finas in
improving governance and management practices.

98

,,, 

, 

Ooo X 

IBRD 2354

M E X I C O

* .2;; 

.

-. -

-, 

-

U 

* 

.

,, 4 

.- 

1' 

x: 

-

-

-

!-I; 

I: 

z 

1 

-~~~- 

~~~

*~~ 

~~~ 

\ 
I 

1 

11x_ 

A 

-

s 

0'O 

*_ d0

* 

pA 

4 

-- 

~ ~ ~ i: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
, ~~~~A 

N Li I 

. .a 
I AP

I 

_ 

.'IOodE 

_ 

_ 

_ 

___- * r r 
7 
^ 1 

\ 

_ 

, 

L, 

I i 

r; 

rl1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
o' 
] ri':;.o

-

.

*t 

S- 

-

--

' 

-

"II, 

, 

= 

-

;= 

- ;

-I. 

, 

.

, r.;|;rz:z 
i ,.

-

*~~~~~~~~~~44 

~~~~~~'A CAT CAS

00- 

',-,,,- 

.k 

-'; 

04, _ 

0 

-- 

.

;, 

,-_ 

;, 

,

.04-,~ ~ 

~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~- 

, 

I 

-.

' 

-" 

' -

, 

.tz&if8

-~~ 

A , 

I 

,;' 

. .. ; 

; 

-

-

;A~-

~~~~~~~~~~ 

;- 

,.,,, 

i 

'" 
;^S|-, 

_- 

t 

' .444 

r 

irf ED a-.oF

1 U/S~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1A

I7 -4

-.2- ' 

, 

.. 

' 

-

<,ls. 
.. _~
-. 

_Q

1

^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.L:.0 

1. 

,'. 

1. 

*: ' 

-

.01

. ,,., 

.. 
-- -

,. 

tUArEMALAM-

.
-- .

4 

.O .

.04._ 

-K. 

.... 

' 

.

J

*~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 

I. 
:tlir 

I 

*- 

FEHONDURAS

FEBRUARY 1992

