Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 29038-KE

M ~ M O R A ~ U
OFMTHE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA
May 19,2004

Country Department 5
Africa Region
The International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f their
official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank’s authorization.

DATE OF LAST COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
September 1998

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Kenya Shilling (KSh)
US$1 = KSh 78.33 (May 2004)
Fiscal Year

July 1-June 30

ACRONYMS ANI) ABBREVIATIONS

AfDB
AGOA
ASAL
CAS
CDD
CEM
CFAA
CPAR
CPPR
COMESA

cso

DFID
EAC
EC
EPSRC
FSAP
IP-ERS
EAC
ESW
EU
FLSTAC
GDLN
GEF
GDP
HIVIAIDS
IDA
IDF
IFC
IFMIS
IGAD
ILO
IMF
JICA
MAP

African Development Bank
African Growth and Opportunity Act
Arid and semiarid lands
Country assistance strategy
Community driven development
Country economic memorandum
Country financial accountability assessment
Country procurement assessment report
Country portfolio performance review
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
C i v i l society organizations
United Kingdom Department for International Development
Eastern Africa Community
European Commission
Economic and Public Sector Reform Credit
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Investment Program for the Economic Recovery Strategy
East African Community
Economic and sector work
European Union
Financial and Legal Technical Assistance Credit
Global Development Learning Network
Global Environment Facility
Gross domestic product
Human Immunodeficiency VirusIAcquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome
International Development Association
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
Integrated financial management information system
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development
International Labor Organization
International Monetary Fund
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Multi-Country Aids Program

M&E
MDGs
MIGA
MSME
MTEF
OED
PER
PPIAF
PRGF
PRSC
PRSP
PSAC
PSIA
SME
SW A p
StatCap
UNESCO
USAID
WBI

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leader:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Monitoring and evaluation
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Micro, small and medium enterprises
Medium-term expenditure framework
Operations Evaluations Department o f the World Bank
Public expenditure review
Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Programmatic Structural Adjustment Credit
Poverty and social impact analysis
Small and medium enterprises
Sector Wide Approach Program
Statistical Capacity Building Program
UnitedNations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
United States Agency for International Development
World Bank Institute

IDA
Callisto Madavo
Makhtar Diop
Geoffrey Bergen

IFC
Assad Jabre
Haydee Celaya
Hillmare Schulze

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used b y recipients only in
the performance of their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed
without W o r l d Bank authorization.

THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Contents
Executive summary ........................................................................................................................

.

...................................................................................................................

i

1 INTRODUCTION
1
A . EconomicDevelopments ................................................................................................. 2
B. Social Developments ....................................................................................................... 3

2

.

3

.

4

.

..........................................................

KENYA’S ECONOMIC RECOVERY STRATEGY
A . IP-ERS pillar 1: Economic growth with macroeconomic stability .................................
B. IP-ERS pillar 2: Equity and poverty reduction................................................................
C . IP-ERS pillar 3: Improving governance ..........................................................................
D. Summary o f IP-ERS staff assessment .............................................................................

............

5
5
7
9
9

THE BANK GROUP’S PROPOSED COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
10
A . Strengthening public sector management and accountability .......................................
11
B. Reducing the cost o f doing business and improving the investment climate ................ 13
C. Reducing vulnerability and strengthening communities ...............................................
19
D. Investing in people ........................................................................................................ 22
E.
Lending scenarios .......................................................................................................... 25
F.
Lending triggers............................................................................................................. 26
G. Nonlending programs .................................................................................................... 27

..............................................................................................

IMPLEMENTING THE CAS
28
A . Progress under the last CAS .......................................................................................... 28
B. Improving portfolio implementation ............................................................................. 29
C.
Partnerships ................................................................................................................... 30
D. Risks and constraints .....................................................................................................
31
E.
CAS monitoring and evaluation.................................................................................... 33

Boxes
Box 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:

Kenya: Core labor standards ..........................................................................................
Kenya membership o f international and regional economic agreements .....................
The Bank’s knowledge strategy in Kenya ....................................................................

5
18
29

Matrixes
Matrix 1:
Matrix 2:
Matrix 3 :
Matrix 4:

Strengthening public sector management and accountability .................................. 13
Reducing the cost o f doing business and improving the investment climate........... 19
22
Reducing vulnerability and strengthening communities ..........................................
Investing in people ................................................................................................... 24

Tables
Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4:
Table 5:
Table 6:

IP-ERS targets and Millennium Development Goals (select indicators) ................... 4
Macroeconomic framework 2002103-2006107 .......................................................... 6
Proposed lending scenarios. fiscal years 2004-07 (US$ millions) .......................... 26
Lending triggers ....................................................................................................... 27
Nonlending work program, fiscal 2004-07 .............................................................
28
31
Partnership in implementing the IP-ERS .................................................................

1

Annexes
A n n e x 1: F r a m e w o r k for a Results Based CAS
A n n e x 2: CAS Consultations fiscal 2004-07
A n n e x 3: K e y Economic and Program Indicators: Change from Past C A S
Standard CAS Annexes

This Country Assistance Strategy was produced under the general direction o f Makhtar Diop, Country
Director, by a team led by Geoffrey Bergen, Country Program Coordinator. The team included Wendy S.
Ayres, Fred Kilby, Christine Cornelius, Nyambura Githagui, Praveen Kumar, Philippa Amiri, Albertus
Voetberg, Andrew Follmer, Sibel Kulaksiz, James Emery, Hillmare Schulze, David Potten, Michael Mills,
Ronnie Hammad, Joel Maweni, Michael Fuchs, Dileep Wagle, Qimiao Fan, Christiane Kraus, Manuel de la
Rocha, Jaime Biderman, Jit Gill, Catherine Gachukia, Pascale Dubois, Shamis Salah, and Katy Roffe. Benno
Ndulu, Peter Harrold, and Shanta Devarajan acted as peer reviewers.

EXECUTTVE SUMMARY
Country context. Once the most prosperous country in East Africa, Kenya’s economic
1.
performance worsened markedly in the 1990s due to inefficient use o f public resources, loss o f
economic competitiveness, soaring costs o f doing business, deteriorating security conditions, and loss
of donor funding, which led to a significant fall in external capital inflows during the 1990s. Poor
governance practices led to a deterioration in the Bank Group’s relations with Kenya, and it was in a
low case lending scenario for several years. However, the elections o f December 2002 brought to
power a new government, and the positive steps it has taken since arriving in office have created a
much better environment for development results to occur. The government has started to reverse the
poor governance practices o f the past and enacted several key pieces o f anti-corruption legislation. It
has taken steps to improve public sector management. I t has prepared i t s Investment Program for the
Economic Recovery Strategy for Wealth and Employment Creation (IP-ERS) with the full
participation o f parliament, nongovernmental organizations, development partners, and other
stakeholders (its PRSP), discussed by the Bank’s Board on M a y 6,2004 and by the Fund’s Board on
M a y 10,2004. I t has reached agreement with the IMF on a new Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility (PRGF) program, moved decisively on improving relationships with donors, and developed
new strategies for economic and social development.
*.

Kenya’s InvestmentProgram for the Economic Recovery Strategy. Kenya’s development
objectives are articulated in the IP-ERS around three interlinked pillars: strengthening economic
growth, enhancing equity and reducing poverty, and improving governance. Based upon a highly
participatory process, the IP-ERS envisages a strengthening o f the macroeconomic framework, an
improved fiscal stance, and the unleashing o f private sector participation and investment. To improve
equity and reduce poverty, it focuses on universal primary education, improved access to basic health,
expanded productive capacity in agriculture, development o f the arid and semi-arid lands, and
upgrading living conditions for the urban poor. To enhance governance, the program proposes far
reaching reform o f the judiciary, strengthening o f the rule o f law and security, and implementing
reforms in public administration to achieve increased transparency and accountability. The new
government has also taken steps to improve public sector strategy,
11.

iii.
The World Bank Group’s strategy. This joint Bank-IFC CAS (which also had the full
participation o f MIGA and WBI) i s closely aligned with the government’s IP-ERS. It i s resultsbased’, and i t s results framework draws selectively upon that o f the IP-ERS. I t proposes to help
Kenya achieve i t s development objectives through four basic areas o f support, reflecting the Bank
Group’s comparative advantage in i t s partnership with government and other donors: (a) strengthening
public sector management and accountability, parastatal reform and privatization, and monitoring and
evaluation capacity; (b) reducing the cost o f doing business and improving the investment climate,
including support for restructuring the financial sector, promoting private sector development,
improving infrastructure as the basis for economic growth, and reducing barriers to trade; (c) reducing
vulnerability and strengthening communities, including support for increased agricultural productivity
and competitiveness, improved environmental management, strengthened local governments, and
reducing poverty in the poorest rural areas and urban slums; and (d) investing in people, including
support for an improved understanding o f poverty, the health sector, the education sector, and the
national fight against HIVIAIDS.

This i s not a formal results-basedpilot CAS, and does not include a CAS completion report. Because this i s a
strategy o f re-engagement, the approach will be to take advantage of results-based methodology to provide the
information for a full CAS completion report upon submission o f the next CAS.
1

Lending program. The new government’s reforms have allowed Kenya to move from a low
iv.
to base case lending scenario under the previous CAS. The base case lending program assumes
continued sound public sector management and macroeconomic performance, improvements in
infrastructure service provision and in financial intermediation, and improved portfolio
implementation. Under this scenario, the Bank Group would undertake operations in key sectors
identified in the IP-ERS, presenting four or five projects a year to the Board, with an emphasis in the
first two years o f the program on restoring infrastructure, increasing agricultural productivity, and
providing technical assistance and support for capacity building. This would be supported by core
diagnostic economic and sector work (ESW) that would permit Kenya to attain a first Poverty
Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) in fiscal 2007. IFC’s program will complement IDA’Sto: (a)
strengthen public-private dialogue on improving the investment climate and assist with
implementation o f key reforms; (b) attract the private sector to provide infrastructural services and
utilities, including energy and telecommunications; (c) help build and expand services o f competitive
financial institutions; (d) encourage development o f micro, small, and medium enterprise through
expansion and integration o f financing and technical assistance interventions; and (e) promote
nontraditional exports.

v.
The high case would be triggered by (a) significant progress in reallocating public
expenditures towards core poverty programs and in public sector financial management, (b)
establishment o f appropriate regulatory frameworks for infrastructural services, (c) reduced state
control o f the banking sector, (d) strengthened local government capacity, (e) increased access o f the
poor to basic health services, and (f) sustained improvement in the portfolio. Under this scenario,
support for the education SWAP would be doubled, from US$50 million to US$lOO million, and
support for the health sector through a SWAP would rise from US$30 million to US$SO million. A
lendingtotal o f up to U S $ l .1 billion i s envisaged under this scenario.

A l o w case scenario would be triggered by poor macroeconomic performance, failure to
vi.
follow through with implementation o f key policy reforms underpinning IP-ERS goals, or poor
implementation o f Bank-supported projects or programs. Under this scenario, the Bank Group would
provide funds at a significantly reduced level in support o f operations in the social sectors or to reduce
poverty among vulnerable groups. A lending total o f no more than US$365 million i s envisaged under
this low case scenario.
vii.
Nonlending program. The proposed nonlending work program i s designed to: (a) support
efficient public allocation o f funds to priority development areas, (b) expand on the analytical work
already initiated in fiscal 2003 on poverty analysis, particularly in the rural sector; (c) expand on the
findings o f the C E M to better understand the sources o f growth and competitiveness; (d) better
understand barriers to trade; (e) support growth in agricultural and livestock production; and (g)
deepen knowledge of labor markets. In preparation for an eventual PRSC, core diagnostic economic
and sector work has already been carried out, or i s planned for the near term, including a C F A A
conducted in fiscal 2001, the C E M completed in fiscal 2003, and annual PERs. A CPAR and updated
CFAA will be carried out in fiscal 2005, as will a poverty analysis. The Kenya country team i s
significantly increasing its output o f economic and sector work to inform both policy and public
dialogue on key development issues.
Implementationo f the portfolio. Improved implementation o f the Bank-supported portfolio
viii.
i s a major theme o f this CAS. The new government’s commitment to improving portfolio
performance was demonstrated during the Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) that was
held in January 2004-the f i r s t CPPR since 1997. An action plan was developed and the CPPR
committee will monitor progress and report on a quarterly basis to government permanent secretaries.

...
- 111
ix.
Risks. This CAS recognizes that there are risks in a situation such as Kenya’s. These include
risks relating to political factors, to weak capacity, to poor governance, and t o external shocks. The
CAS proposes a number o f mitigating measures, which serve to reduce the Bank Group’s exposure to
risk.
x.
CAS monitoring and evaluation. Monitoring o f the Bank Group’s effectiveness will take
place both at the project level and at the level o f the overall assistance program. The core CAS
benchmarks are derived from IP-ERS targets. These benchmarks reflect the selective areas o f Bank
involvement under the CAS, cover the key challenges that Kenya must address and for which the
Bank Group i s best placed to assist; and are achievable within the CAS timeframe. At the mid-point
of the CAS period, the Bank will review the indicators and targets to assess progress in implementing
the assistance program, and adjust the Bank Group’s strategy as necessary.

M E M O ~ D U OF
M THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF “ Y A
1. INTRODUCTION
On December 27,2002, Kenyan voters elected their first new president in 24 years, thereby
1.
ending the political domination o f the party that had ruled Kenya since independence. The new
government has made a clear break from the past. Importantly, i t has demonstrated in many ways i t s
commitment to eliminating corruption and restoring the rule o f law-an entirely home-grown program to
improve governance. It has enacted the Anti-Corruption Act, the Public Officer Ethics Act, and the
Public Audit Act, and expects soon to enact legislation aimed at improving public procurement and
financial management. I t has appointed new senior staff to key positions in government, including the
parastatals, and commissioned auditors to identify fraud and corruption in the public sector. Kenya has
initiated a thorough investigation o f the Goldenberg kick-back scandal o f 1992 that sparked a financial
crisis and created a rift with key donors. A number o f senior judges which the government alleged to
have been implicated in corruption have also been dismissed.
The new government has also taken steps to improve public sector strategy. It has prepared i t s
2.
Investment Program for the Economic Recovery Strategy for Wealth and Employment Creation (IP-ERS)
with the full participation o f parliament, nongovernmental organizations, development partners, and other
stakeholders (its PRSP), discussed by the Bank’s Board on M a y 6,2004 and by the Fund’s Board on May
10,2004. I t has reached agreement with the IMF on a new Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
(PRGF) program, moved decisively on improving relationships with donors, and developed new
strategies for economic and social development. Finally, it has demonstrated i t s commitment to shift
expenditure towards programs that benefit the poor, most notably through i t s universal free primary
education program.
T w o decades o f economic mismanagement have left much o f Kenya’s infrastructure in shambles
3.
and its institutions weak. With the right investments and policy and institutional reforms, Kenya has
significant potential for growth. Good governance will also improve the distribution o f income. Kenya
has one o f the most vibrant and sophisticated private sectors in Africa, which i s ready and able to respond
to an improved investment climate. Kenya’s transportation network o f air, sea, and road links already
serves the entire East Africa region, With improvements in management, private sector involvement and
new investments, the network could help to reduce transportation costs across the region, strengthen
access to the markets o f Kenya’s poorest regions, revitalize the East African Community (EAC), and
foster wider regional integration.

To help Kenya realize i t s potential, the country assistance strategy (CAS) proposes an ambitious
4.
program for the reengagement o f the Bank Group with Kenya that i s aligned with the government’s PERS and that i s rooted in i t s results-based framework, from which the CAS’S own result-based
framework i s drawn. Together with the active portfolio, planned new IDA lending will support the Kenya
IP-ERS objectives o f stimulating growth with equity, reducing poverty, and consolidating improvements
in governance. New lending will consist primarily o f project-specific credits grounded in sectorwide
approaches that the government i s developing with its development partners. The program will also
include adjustment credits aimed at strengthening budgetary management, financial accountability, and
policy and institutional reforms. These will improve the investment climate, and prepare the foundation

1

-2for Poverty Reduction Support Credits (PRSCs) and budget support from other donors. N e w lending will
be significant at the beginning o f the CAS period to support urgently needed reforms and rehabilitation o f
infrastructure, and to compensate for the Bank’s exceptionally small active portfolio, a legacy o f seven
years o f low case lending. Remaining in the base case will be subject to sustaining progress in public
finance management, policy reforms in support o f private sector led growth, better public service
delivery, and improved portfolio implementation. Moving to the high case will provide 30 percent more
IDA resources for Kenya than the base case. This will require in addition to meeting base case triggers,
the government to make significant progress in reallocating public expenditures towards core poverty
programs and in public sector financial management, and to make sustained improvement in
implementing Bank-supported projects.
In response to the need for a unified strategy o f the World Bank Group, this CAS has been
5.
developed jointly with the IFC and MIGA to ensure that our programs are mutually reinforcing,
particularly with regard to improving the environment for investment and private sector-led growth.
Kenya enjoys a strong private sector in comparison to many African countries and i s a priority country for
the IFC, and such a unified strategy can help ensure that assistance i s delivered effectively and efficiently.

A.

Economic Developments

6.
Once the most prosperous country in East Africa, Kenya has experienced economic decline, a fall
in living standards, and deterioration in the quality o f its institutions. Kenya’s overall economic
performance worsened markedly in the 1990s due to inefficient use o f public resources, loss o f economic
competitiveness, soaring costs o f doing business, deteriorating security conditions, and loss o f donor
funding, which led to a significant fall in external capital inflows during the 1990s. Average GDP growth
declined from about 7 percent in the 1970s to just over 2 percent during the 1990s, falling below the
average population growth rate o f 2.6 percent. Per capita income o f US$360 in 2003 was lower than i t s
level in 1990.2

7.

Public resources have been usedprimarily for wages and debt service rather thanfor capital
investment and operations and maintenance. At 2 1 percent in 2002, Kenya mobilizes a higher share o f
revenues to GDP than most countries o f Sub-Saharan Africa. If allocated appropriately, these resources
would be adequate to finance critical social services and a significant share o f needed investment in
infrastructure. During the 1990s, however, public sector wages (currently around 8.4 percent o f GDP)
and interest payments on domestic debt absorbed about half o f total government expenditures, leaving
few resources for capital expenditures or delivery o f essential services for poverty reduction. Spending
on public sector wages rose from 29 percent o f total government expenditures in 1990 to 35 percent in
200 1. Thus central government capital expenditures fell from about 20 percent o f government
expenditures in 1990 to 11 percent in 2001, or ftom 6 percent o f GDP in 1990 to 3 percent o f GDP in

2001.

Lack of investment in in~astructurea n d p ~ b l i cservices has worsened the climate for private
8.
investment, reduced access to services by the poor, and con~ibuted
to growing regional inequities. The
public sector continues to dominate the delivery o f energy, telecommunications, transportation, and water
services. The lack of investment in utilities and infrastructure during the last decade combined with their
poor management has significantly constrained the growth o f the economy by increasing costs to
businesses and reducing competitiveness. Utilities and infrastructure now require substantial new
investment if they are to deliver services efficiently and reliably. Given the government’s budgetary

* Much o f the data presented in this section i s drawn from the Kenya Country Economic Memorandum, “Kenya:
A Policy Agenda to Restore Growth,” World Bank Report 2580-KE, August 18,2003.

constraints, most o f the new investment will need to come from the private sector, underscoring the need
for divestiture and private sector participation programs.
E~ternal~nancin
declined.
g
During the 1990s, official transfers to Kenya fell as donors
9.
channeled resources for development through NGOs rather than through government. Lack o f support
from donors resulted in a net outflow o f long and medium-term official capital averaging almost 2 percent
o f GDP a year during 1995-200 1. Performance in attracting and retaining private external financing has
been equally poor. During the 1990s, the ratio o f foreign direct investment to GDP was only 0.4 percent
compared with the 1.9 percent Sub-Saharan Africa average.
Kenya has the potential for much higher growth and reduction ofpoverty. Unlike many other
10.
African countries, Kenya has diverse sources o f growth in the primary, manufacturing, and services
sectors, and a relatively vibrant and sophisticated private sector that is prepared to invest. The good
performance o f some sectors and f i r m s during the 1990s indicates that with the right policies, institutions,
and investments, Kenya can again become a major economy in Africa. Agricultural subsectors that have
little direct government involvement, notably smallholder tea, smallholder dairy, and floriculture and
horticulture have responded dynamically to market opportunities, This growth has occurred despite
declining world prices in some markets (tea, for example) and a very competitive environment in others
(horticulture). Kenya has also become a leader in the race to benefit from the U.S. African Growth and
Opportunity Act (AGOA), and the garment industry i s enjoying a spectacular recovery. Factors such as
efficiently run export processing zones, good air and sea transport links to Asia and the United States, and
a skilled workforce have contributed to the good performance o f the garment industry. These attributes
could become important in attracting other businesses as the investment climate improves. Finally, a
number o f initiatives to restructure public enterprises are now under consideration. Reforms should
enable the enterprises to become more efficient and more competitive. The enactment o f the privatization
bill, anticipated soon, will hrther help Kenya to reestablish i t s regional primacy as a competitive open
economy and destination for investment.

11.
Both developmentpartners and private investors are again starting to support Kenya’s
development. The new government’s reform program aimed at stabilizing the economy and increasing
the confidence o f donors and investors i s already having a positive effect. The IMF Board approved the
PRGF program on November 22,2003, and the Bank released the second tranche o f i t s Economic and
Public Sector Reform Credit (EPSRC) soon after. Private sector investment increased somewhat in 2003
and donors are showing renewed interest after years o f suspended or diminished funding programs.
Donors pledged up to US$4 billion for three years at the Consultative Group meeting held in November
2003, subject to rapid and substantial progress in public sector reform and improvements in the design
and delivery o f basic services for the poor. In January 2004 the Paris Club agreed to reschedule about
US$350 million o f Kenya’s arrears and maturities falling due between January 1,2004, and December 31,
2006, freeing additional resources for priority programs.
B.

Social Developments

Poverty rose in Kenya during the 1990s and health and other social indicators deteriorated. The
12.
IP-ERS estimates that the proportion o f the population living in poverty rose from about 49 percent in
1990 to more than 56 percent in 2003. In step with poor economic performance, key social indicators
also worsened during the 1990s. Enrolment rates in primary school declined during the 1990s, although
this has been reversed with the introduction o f the free primary education program. L i f e expectancy fell
from 57 years in 1986 t o 47 years in 2000,just above what it was in 1960. The total fertility rate i s up
from 4.7 children per woman in 1990 to 5 children in 2003, the proportion o f births attended by a skilled
health worker f e l l from 50 percent in 1990 to 42 percent in 2002, and the infant mortality rate rose from
63 per 1,000 live births in 1990 to 78 in 2002 (table 1). Although Kenya’s constitution prohibits

-4discrimination on the basis of gender, i t s provisions are not adequately enforced and inequities persist in
the civil and labor codes (see box 1). On average, women have fewer years o f schooling, lower health
status, and a heavier work load than men (in rural areas women work 13 hours compared with 8 hours for
men).
Table 1: IP-ERS targets and Millennium Development Goals (select indicators)
~

1.

3.

2002’

IP-ERS target*

Target (2015)

49

55

41

24.4

47

44

34

23.5

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger

Poverty head count (%)
Nutrition, undernourished as percentage of total
population

2.

1990

Achieve universal primary education

Net primary enrollment ratio (YO)

n.a.

70.0

85

100

Youth literacy rate (% ages 15-24)

89.8

95.8

n.a.

100

95.0

98.0

93.4

98.6

ma.

100

Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)

97

122

100

32

Infant mortality rate (per 1,000)
Immunization, measles (% of children under 12
months)

63

78

n.a.

21

78

78

n.a.

100

Matemal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births)

1,300 (1995)

590

560

395

Births attended by skilled health staff (YOo f total)

50

44

n.a.

100

Promote gender equality and empower women

Ratio of girls to boys in primary education (YO)
Ratio of young literate females to males (“%I ages
15-24)

Reduce gender
gap.

100

4. Reduce child mortality

5. [mprove maternal health

6. Combat HIVIAIDS, malaria and other diseases

Prevalence of HIV, total (% o f adult population)

5.1

10.2

9.4

Have halted by
2015, and begun
to reverse
incidence.

45

57

n.a.

12.5

8

10

n.a.

8

52

n.a.

0.3

6.4

n.a.

7. Ensure environmental sustainability
Access to an improved water source (YOof population)
8. Develop a Global Partnership for Development
Telephone mainlines (per 1,000 people)
Fixed line and mobile telephones (per 1,000 people)

Personal computers (per 1,000 people)
1. Figures in italics are from 2001.
2. IP-ERS targets are for 2006-08.
n.a. means not available.
Sources: World Bank World Development Indicators Database, UNAIDS, UNESCO.
~~

Make available
the benefits o f
new
technologies.

-

These trends are directly linked to issues ofpublic management. For example, Kenyan citizens
13.
spend over 6 percent o f GDP on private health services, which suggests that if government spending were
focused on primary health facilities and cost-effective preventive programs such as immunization, health
outcomes would have significantly improved during the past decade. Instead public spending has focused
on curative care delivered in hospitals, which benefits the relatively few. Government spending on

-5education amounts to about 7 percent o f GDP, most o f which has been used to finance teachers’ salaries.
This has led to inequities in enrolment and educational quality, as communities that could not afford to
finance school construction did not benefit from state support. Parents were also obliged to pay for a
variety o f incidental expenses, including textbooks, effectively pricing poorer families out o f the
educational system.
14.
The d i ~ ~ i b u t i of nincome is unequal. The distribution o f income in Kenya i s rather unequal as
shown by i t s Gini coefficient in 1997 o f about 0.42. Geographical variations in the distribution o f poverty
are also large, with about three quarters o f the poor living in rural areas. The arid and semiarid lands and
Western and Nyanza provinces o f Kenya have particularly high proportions o f people living below the
poverty line, a result o f disproportionately l o w investments in infrastructure and public services in these
regions since independence. Kenya ranked 146 out o f 175 countries listed in UNDP’s 2003 Human
Development Report. This i s worse than i t s 1998 ranking o f 137 out o f 174 countries, reflecting the
steady decline in the quality o f public services.
Box 1: Kenya: Core labor standards
Kenya has ratified seven of the eight fundamental conventions of the International Labor Organization related to core labor
standards including: (a) Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining Convention (ratified in 1964); (b) Forced Labor
Convention (ratified in 1964); (c) Abolition of Forced Labor Convention (ratified in 1964); (d) Equal Remuneration
Convention (ratified in 200 1); (e) Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention (ratified in 2001); (0 Minimum
Age Convention (ratified in 1979); and (8) Worst Forms o f Child Labor Convention (ratified in 2001). Kenya has not yet
ratified the Freedom of Association and Protection o f the Right to Organize Convention.
Child labor. Although the proportion o f children (10-14 years of age) who work has declined from 41.3 percent in 1995 to
39.2 percent in 2000 and to 38.3 percent in 2002, child labor i s common, especially in the informal sector. About 1.9 million
children 5-17 years are in the labor force, including children working without pay (1998199 child labor survey, Central
Bureau of Statistics, 2001). To address this issue, the government (a) enacted in 2002 the Children’s Act, which provides the
framework for universal primary education; (b) introducedthe school feeding program targeting poor regions; (c) established
the textbooks fund, which helps poor students purchase learning materials; and (d) created the bursary fund, which helps poor
students meet some o f the costs related to secondaly school attendance.
Gender discrimina~ion.The constitution of Kenya prohibits discrimination on the basis o f gender. However, its provisions
are not effectively enforced. Women experience a wide range of both legal and actual discriminatory practices. The
government has committed itself to eliminating discrimination in its legislation, policies, and programs. It has approved the
national gender and development policy, which aims to provide equal opportunities to men and women.
Forced Labor: While there i s no indication of forced labor in Kenya, the InternationalLabor Organizationhas criticized

certain legal provisions which provide chiefs in rural areas with the possibility of using forced labor. The government has
repealed the laws concerned. In its latest report, the govemment indicates that comprehensive revision of the labor law will
be undertaken in consultation with partners and with the technical assistance of the International Labor Organization.

2. KENYA’S ECONOMIC RECOVERY STRATEGY
15.
The IP-ERS provides a frank analysis o f the challenges in Kenya and lays out the government’s
strategy to address these challenges. The strategy centers on three interlinked pillars: strengthening
economic growth, enhancing equity and reducing poverty, and improving governance. The IP-ERS
contains a comprehensive results-based logical framework that lays out how the IP-ERS priority
programs will contribute to the achievement o f specific targets, including the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs).

A.

IP-ERS pillar 1: Economic growth with macroeconomic stability

16.
Following two decades o f weakening economic growth, l o w productivity and high
unemployment, the f i r s t priority o f the IP-ERS i s to rapidly achieve high economic growth, critical for

-6attaining all o f the government's other developmental objectives. The strategy calls for redefining the
role o f the state from producer to facilitator o f private sector-led growth investment. To this end, the
government commits to maintaining a stable macroeconomic framework, to strengthening public
expenditure management, to reforming the financial sector, and to encouraging private sector
participation in the provision o f transportation, water, energy, and telecommunications services.

17.
~ a c r o ~ c o n o mstability,
ic
i m p r o v e d ~ s c aand
~ monetary policy, and improved quality and
quantity of expenditures in priority sectors are key. The macroeconomic framework underpinning the IPERS (table 2 ) foresees a steady pick-up o f growth from 1.3 percent in 2002103 to 2.5 percent in 2003104
and to 4.9 percent in 2006107. Most o f this will likely come from rapid short-term growth in
manufacturing and services following improvement in governance and the investment climate. In tandem
with the increase in the growth rate, gross investment i s expected t o rise sharply. Most o f the increase in
investment will be financed by concessional external assistance. This will permit the government to
reverse i t s past dependence on domestic borrowing and thereby free additional bank lending for the
private sector. The overall government budget deficit, including grants, i s projected to remain at about 3
to 4 percent o f GDP to fund government spending in priority sectors during the initial years o f the
program, before declining to 2.6 percent in 2007108 as revenues rise. The external current account deficit
i s projected to rise rapidly from 1.3 percent o f GDP in 2002103 to about 10 percent o f GDP by 2006107
due to increases in imports associated with renewed public and private investment.

2002103

2003104

2004105

2005106

2006107

16.5
14.9

20.4
15.7

23.3

24.4

24.8

Gross national saving

17.6

18.5

19.7

Total revenue

20.8

20.8

21.7

22.3

22.4

Total expenditure
Overall balance (excluding grants)

26.2

27.1

27.5

26.4

26.6

-5.4

-6.3

-5.8

-4.1

-4.2

Overall balance (including grants)

-3.9

-4.1

-3.6

-2.3

-2.5

Net domestic borrowing
Financing gap

4.3
0, I

1.3
1.2

1.3
2. I

0.1
3.0

0.1
3.2

Total donor support (grants and loans)

2.2

6.6

9.6

9.9

9.6

-1.3

-5.4

-9.1

-10.1

-9.8

24.3

23.8

23.4

21.7

20.0

36.0

35.0

35.0

35.0

35.0

actual

In percentage of nominal GDP

Gross investment

Current external balance, including oflcial
transfers
Net present value of domestic debt (end o f
period)
Net present value o f external debt (end of
veriod)

Source: Kenya IP-ERS and IMF and Bank staff estimates.

-7-

18.
ExternalJinancing and debt sustainabili~.Kenya’s outstanding stock o f external debt at the end
o f 2002103 stood at US$4.7 billion (36 percent o f GDP) with IDA debt obligations accounting for almost
50 percent o f the total. During the 1990s the government continued to service its debt, bringing down the
debt service payments from 34 percent o f export o f goods and services in 1990 to 11 percent in 2003.
The debt service to exports ratio i s expected to decline steadily to about 7.2 percent in 2008 and then edge
upwards thereafter. In 2003, the net present value o f debt-to-exports ratio was 109 percent. It i s expected
to remain stable in view o f the recent agreement o f the Paris Club to reschedule debts under Houston
terms to contribute to the financing plan envisaged under the IMF program. The potential for high levels
o f concessional support that could be made available during the next five years will also be an important
stabilizing factor.
19.
Reforms ofpublic expenditure management are planned to improve allocation of resources. To
establish expenditure management consistent with sustained growth and poverty reduction, the
government w i l l implement a tight fiscal policy which reduces domestic debt, refocuses on expenditures
in favor o f development and poverty reduction, and improves the efficiency o f public spending. Annual
public expenditure reviews (PERs) will provide the basis for restructuring expenditures, for deepening the
medium-termexpenditure framework (MTEF) budget process, and for monitoring progress on
expenditure management reform. The government has also prepared an action plan for enhanced
financial management in the public sector that incorporates recommendations o f the country financial
accountability assessment (CFAA) and o f the public expenditure management assessment and action
plan. Finally, the government has enacted legislation aimed at strengthening public audit, and i s awaiting
enactment o f bills addressing public financial management and procurement.
Restructuring theJinancia1 sector, improving the investment climate, and promoting private
20.
sector p u r t i c ~ a t i o nin provision of in~astructuralservices are intended to boost private invest~entand
improve delivery of services. Financial sector reforms aim to encourage private savings and investment
and to reduce the abnormally high spread between lending interest rates and deposit rates that reflects a
legacy o f nonperforming loans in state-owned and small commercial banks. N e w regulations will
strengthen the supervisory and enforcement capacity o f the Central Bank o f Kenya by transferring
banking system licensing, regulatory and disciplinary authority from the Ministry o f Finance to the
central bank, tighten provisioning regulations to conform to international best practice, and implement
legislation against money laundering. Actions to improve the investment climate will focus on improving
infrastructure. The government recognizes that greatly increased private sector participation i s necessary
to mobilize resources for investment in infrastructure and improve the efficiency with which resources are
used. T o this end, the government plans to reform the regulatory and legal framework to facilitate private
sector participation in provision o f services. The government i s also developing a public-private
partnership program targeting key utilities and infrastructure service providers, and i s awaiting enactment
of the privatization bill, which will establish a strong privatization commission and create the basis for a
transparent and accountable privatization process.

€3.

IP-ERS piilar 2: Equity and poverty reduction

The IP-ERS objectives for equity and poverty reduction are to ensure that all Kenyans have
2 1.
access to basic services and to opportunities to participate productively and self-reliantly in employment
and wealth creation. The strategy calls for free primary education, increased basic health services (with
planning for a national social health insurance fund), continued efforts to reduce the spread o f HnrlAIDS,
and increased productivity o f rural farm and nonfarm enterprises. Targeted programs include community
driven development in the arid and semiarid areas o f Kenya, and programs t o improve access to services
and living conditions o f slum dwellers.

-8I n education thefocus is on providing universal access to+ee primary education, while
22.
gradually expanding access to secondary education. The government’s first act after taking office in
January 2003 was to institute fiee primary education, Enrolment increased b y 1.5 million children in
2003. As a result, Kenya i s likely to meet the MDG for education, provided suitable programs are
developed to meet the needs o f pastoralists and to overcome cultural barriers that discourage parents in
some communities from sending girls to school. Priorities are now to raise enrolment o f disadvantaged
areas and groups through targeted programs such as mobile schools in the arid and semiarid lands (with
only 20 percent o f children enrolled), and improving quality and efficiency o f resource use through
teacher training and redeployment. Over time access to secondary education will also be increased to
meet the growing demand from primary school graduates,

23.
I n health, thefocus is to enhance the accessibility and a ~ o r d a b i l i t yof basic health services,
especially for the poor and vulnerable. Improving health outcomes requires significantly increasing
public expenditures on health services. It will also mean reallocating resources from curative services to
preventive and basic health services, coupled with other measures to reduce or eliminate out-of-pocket
expenditures by the poor. The Ministry o f Health w i l l develop a national health sector strategy in
consultation with development partners, which will also present options for reducing out o f pocket
expenditures for the poor, including through the proposed national health insurance scheme.
Thefight against HlV/AIDS is a top priority for the government. The objective i s to prevent
24.
further increases in HIV prevalence and address the alarmingly high prevalence rate among teenage girls.
The government i s implementing a comprehensive multisectoral national strategy in the fight against
HNIAIDS (National Strategic Plan on HIVIAIDS, 2002-05). To strengthen policy formulation and
oversight, the government has recently established a cabinet subcommittee on HIVIAIDS, chaired by the
president, and i s in the process o f defining the division o f responsibilities between the cabinet committee
and the National AIDS Control Council.
Improvements in the policy environment for agriculture w i l l aim at increasing agricultural
25.
productivity and improving incomes for the poorest. Reforms o f research and extension aim to strengthen
the link between farmers’ demands and supply o f improved technology and advice, while increasing the
effectiveness o f public investment by restructuring and rationalizing the network o f agricultural research
institutes. Policy and institutional reforms are planned for key commodities such as coffee to increase the
competitiveness o f Kenya’s products on international markets and to increase the share o f the auction
price reaching small farmers. Reforms o f public expenditure for agriculture are intended to Significantly
increase the share allocated for priority programs, requiring in turn the rationalization o f agricultural
parastatals.
Targetedprograms aim at reducing poverty of particularly disadvantaged communities. A
26.
particularly noteworthy feature o f the IP-ERS i s the prominence it gives to addressing the needs o f
pastoralists, a previously neglected but particularly vulnerable and poverty-stricken group. The arid and
semiarid lands (ASAL) program combines investment in infrastructure with human resource development
and security enhancement, funding small-scale infrastructure and social safety nets, education for
pastoralist children, and improved food security. The IP-ERS also includes programs to improve the
quality o f life in urban slums by expanding the water and sanitation and electricity networks, upgrading
slum roads, and creating schools and health clinics. Regulatory and institutional reforms will increase the
security o f tenure of residents and encourage the expansion o f privately-built and financed low cost
housing.

-9C.

IP-ERS pillar 3: Improving governance

The IP-ERS recognizes that poor economic governance, including high levels o f corruption and
27.
poor management o f public resources, has been a major drag on Kenya’s economic and social
development. The government i s committed to eliminating corruption, restoring the rule o f law and
bringing about equitable development that favors all citizens. It has enacted and i s implementing the
Economic Crimes Act (2003), which provides for the establishment o f an Anti-Corruption Commission.
It created a new department o f governance and ethics in the Office o f the President. T o reduce corruption
in the public service, the government enacted the Public Officers Ethics Act in 2003, which requires all
public officials (including the president), employees, and their families to declare their assets. The
government has also taken several actions to improve the dispensation o f justice, O f key importance i s
the establishment o f the Ministry o f Justice and Constitutional Affairs, which i s responsible for policy on
administration o f justice, law reform, anti-corruption strategies, integrity and ethics, legal sector reform,
legal aid and advisory services. Finally, it is improving the quality o f police work through training,
improving living conditions for the police, and increasing the linkages and accountability o f the police to
the communities in which they work.
Establishing a monitoring and e v a l ~ a t i o n ~ a m e w oas~ kan integral element of improved
28.
governance. The strategy calls for establishing a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
framework that will help to strengthen public oversight o f government spending and will provide vital
feedback required to refine government policies and programs. T o this end, the government has
established a comprehensive framework for monitoring and evaluation in the IP-ERS that includes: (a) a
results-based framework that identifies targets and specifies indicators and data sources to monitor
progress towards them; (b) the implementation o f the national strategic statistical plan to ensure a
consistent flow o f survey and census information; (c) the strengthening and integration o f administrative
management information systems to supply the government with day to day programmatic information;
(d) the development o f a medium-term research agenda to inform the government on the effectiveness o f
policies and programs; (e) the development o f institutional mechanisms t o ensure effective feedback o f
(M&E) results into management, planning and budgeting; and (f) expansion o f participatory mechanisms
including the approval o f a public information access policy. It i s also preparing a policy for public
access t o information, which i s critical to improve transparency and accountability,

D.

Summary o f IP-ERS staff assessment

29.
The IP-ERS provides a sound basis for Bank Group and other donor support. I t s primary
strengths lie in i t s strong emphasis on improving governance and restoring the rule o f law, and the scope
o f the participatory process through which the strategy was prepared. Also important i s i t s focus on
results through inclusion o f a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation framework with targets that
refer to the MDGs as benchmarks and a time frame for achievement. The staffs note, however, several
shortcomings that will need to be addressed during implementation. First, its analysis o f poverty needs
to be strengthened by expanding the information base through surveys and strengthening the analysis o f
the determinants o f poverty. Second, the strategy could better prioritize policy actions to accelerate
growth and reduce poverty and provide a more precise identification o f core pro-poor spending
programs. Third, a sector strategy for health remains to be formulated, and a strategy for education
completed that would map out programs for accelerating the pace for achieving the MDGs. Fourth, the
strategy could better articulate a process for the prioritization o f public actions that are in turn linked to
the budget and medium-term expenditure framework. Fifth, the actions contemplated to build capacity
in key areas need to be clearly spelled out, including the support envisaged from the donor community.
Sixth, systems for monitoring poverty outcomes are weak and need to be strengthened. Finally, the
outcomes o f the future consultation processes and poverty diagnoses need to be better described, linked
to, and reflected in the selection o f targets, policy priorities, and budget allocations.

- 103.

THE BANK GROUP’S COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

30.
This CAS i s a strategy o f reengagement. The environment for stimulating growth with equity and
reducing poverty in Kenya through Bank programs has become considerably better during the past year
due to the new government’s actions aimed at improving governance and implementation, and to its focus
on results.

3 1.
An entirely new generation o f projects and programs will be put in place that are closely aligned
with Kenya’s IP-ERS, and that incorporate lessons from the past to improve implementation and results.

The projects and programs will build on lessons learned from a full program o f analytical work,
developed with a view to understanding the complex relationship between economic growth, poverty
reduction, and governance. Project lending in sectors with sound policies and strategies (for example
transport and energy) w i l l help to strengthen institutions and financing mechanisms that deepen and
nurture good governance. Adjustment lending w i l l support critical policy reforms in public sector
management and the financial sector. Technical assistance projects will develop, and assist in
implementing, public sector reforms, privatization, and legal and financial sector reforms. In line with
our commitment to donor harmonization, subsequent interventions will support sectorwide approaches in
health and education, catalyzing budget support for implementation o f the P - E R S through PRSCs.
The ongoing~ghtagainst corruption is a cross-cutting issue. The Bank Group considers it an
32.
imperative to support the government in i t s effort to stop corruption by incorporating anti-corruption
measures wherever possible in its projects. This includes operations, such as the legal reform component
o f the Financial and Legal Technical Assistance Credit (FLSTAC, 2005) project discussed below, that
build capacity against corruption in a targeted manner. I t also includes mainstreaming throughout the
Bank’s portfolio measures to improve safeguards within government at the central and local levels. It
means careful attention at the time o f project and program preparation to safeguard measures, including
having the Bank’s Institutional Integrity Department participate in the design phase o f projects. It also
means ensuring that M&E systems both within Bank projects and within government contain means for
monitoring against risks o f corruption. And it means promoting transparency and open communication
with stakehoiders about budgetary issues, procurement, and project management. It i s vital that Kenyans
own these measures, and that they genuinely support and complement Kenya’s own anti-corruption
program.

33.

The Bank Group’s country assistance strategy i s organized around four themes, representing i t s
comparative advantage vis-a-vis other donors: strengthening public sector management and
accountability, reducing the cost o f doing business and improving the investment climate, reducing
vulnerability and strengthening communities, and investing in people. Activities o f the four themes
contribute to each of the three pillars o f Kenya’s IP-ERS, summarized in a matrix at the end o f each
section. In addition to specific operations targeting one or more objectives o f the IP-ERS, the Bank will
support the IP-ERS generally in i t s operations as cross-cutting issues. Thus, for example, Bank
operations to improve public sector management, simultaneously address issues o f economic growth, o f
equity and poverty reduction, and o f improved governance. By making explicit the links between Bank
supported sector activities and IP-ERS goals, the matrixes below provide the skeleton for the set o f CAS
outcomes and outcome indicators presented in annex 1. Specifically, each outcome in this table i s
mapped into column four o f the Kenya framework for results-based CAS, with at least one relevant
indicator.

- 11 A.

Strengthening public sector management and accountability

The fundamental challenge facing the government i s to restructure the public sector to channel
34.
resources to invest in critical infrastructure and to deliver social services that benefit the poor. This
requires better strategic budgeting and rethinking the core functions o f government, a policy-making
process that reflects the trade-offs between different programs, and reform o f the civil service to produce
a more efficient and effective public administration. It also involves a significant strengthening o f civil
society’s oversight o f government spending. Finally, it implies a substantial reform o f parastatals to
allow government to focus on i t s core role o f formulating policy, preparing and enforcing regulations, and
facilitating private sector investment.
Public sector management

35.
The Bank i s supporting the government’s reform program in several ways. I t s Public Sector
Management Technical Assistance Program, due to end in fiscal 2005, i s providing support for civil
service reform and capacity building, internal auditing, development o f the MTEF, implementation o f the
integrated financial management information system (IFMIS), and development o f improved procurement
practices. The project also supports reforms o f key judicia1 systems, such as court recording and case
management. During the CAS period, the new Public Sector Reform Technical Assistance project will
build upon the progress made under the current project, supporting government-wide reforms such as
rationalization o f the functions and structure o f government ministries; c i v i l service reforms;
strengthening o f the Kenya Revenue Authority, and public expenditure management, including deepening
o f the MTEF and extension o f the IFIMIS throughout the government. This project will also provide
support for regulatory reform and for capacity-building to lay the groundwork for parastatal reform and
privatization (see below).

The Bank i s providing analytical support for implementation o f a robust public expenditure
36.
review process that examines in depth the value and efficiency o f public spending, and budget
performance. This will lead to preparation o f joint government-donor PER reports as the basis for the
MTEF program. As part o f the annual PER work, the Bank will also assist line ministries, particularly in
health, education, and agriculture, to develop sectoral expenditure programs. T o improve transparency,
the results o f the public expenditure reviews will be discussed with stakeholders in civil society and the
relevant parliamentary committees. Ministerial public expenditure reviews will also explicitly take into
account and inform the growth and poverty reduction objectives o f the IP-ERS. Consistent with these
objectives, and as a vital underpinning to future PRSCs, the Bank will carry out a country procurement
assessment review (CPAR) in fiscal 2005 jointly with the government as part o f the PER work.
Looking forward, the Bank will prepare a Programmatic Structural Adjustment Credit (PSAC) for
37.
fiscal 2005. The PSAC, complemented by annual PERs, i s expected t o help the government to improve
its budget and financial management, including the capacity to track poverty-related spending, to attain
high levels o f fiduciary accountability and transparency, and to shift spending towards activities that
benefit the poor. The PSAC i s also expected to initiate reforms in agriculture and publicly operated
utilities in anticipation o f privatization. These improvements will prepare the foundation for a Banksupported PRSC in fiscal 2007 and for budget support from other donors.
Parastatal reform and privatization

Parastatal reform will make an important contribution to growth and governance by increasing
38.
the efficiency and competitiveness o f public enterprises, and by reducing opportunities for
misappropriation o f public funds. It will also indirectly promote equity and poverty reduction by

- 12reducing the fiscal burden that the state incurs from investing in loss-making enterprises that could be
operated on commercial terms by the private sector.
Rather than support the parastatal reform and privatization process via a single credit, which
39.
would not adequately address the large number o f differences between enterprises according to sector,
and which would risk imposing a single plan on parastatals undergoing reform and privatization a i
different paces, the Bank will support parastatal reform through i t s budget support, technical assistance
projects and sector operations under an overarching strategy for private sector development. The PSAC
will support parastatal reforms and provide technical assistance to prepare the ground for the privatization
o f telecommunications and railways concessioning. The Public Sector Reform Technical Assistance
Project (fiscal 2006) will seek to strengthen the investment climate, implementing the policy conclusions
o f ESW in this area (discussed below). Because the Bank’s support for parastatal reform i s embedded in
different sector operations, this project will also serve to provide the core institutional and regulatory
support on which the success o f these efforts will depend. T o strengthen governance, this project will
reinforce the key institutions responsible for implementation o f the program, support training on
regulatory and other issues, assist the preparation o f corporate restructuring and privatization plans,
strengthen the capacity and design o f regulatory bodies, and improve consultative mechanisms between
public and private actors. Bank-financed projects will address parastatal reform in various sectors. For
example, the Energy Sector Recovery Credit (fiscal 2005) will facilitate the privatization o f the Kenya
Power and Lighting Company; and the FLSTAC (fiscal 2005) will facilitate divestiture o f the state’s
remaining ownership stakes in banks. The PRSC scheduled for fiscal 2007 will provide support for
further deepening o f the institutional and regulatory environment for investment and private sector
growth, and will focus in particular on privatization o f Kenya’s agricultural parastatals.
Monitoring and evaluation

The Bank Group and development partners are assisting the government to establish the
40.
framework for monitoring and evaluation o f policy and expenditure decisions through a number o f
initiatives. An IDF grant i s helping both to strengthen the statistical system and to build capacity for
policy analysis using tools o f monitoring and evaluation. A grant from the Environmentally and Socially
Sustainable Trust Fund for the Africa Poverty and Data Initiative i s strengthening linkages between data
producers, data users, and policy makers and i s financing research in areas such as measuring poverty. A
grant from the Norwegian Trust Fund i s financing the piloting o f approaches o f participatory monitoring
and evaluation. Other partners, notably United Kingdom Department for International Development
(DFID) and UNDP, are assisting the government develop and implement the monitoring and evaluation
framework. The Statistical Capacity Building Project (StatCap, fiscal 2005), to be financedjointly by
IDA and other development partners, will support implementation o f the national statistics strategic plan,
focusing on increasing capacity o f the Central Bureau o f Statistics and government agencies to regularly
collect and disseminate information. Support for public expenditure reviews and expenditure tracking
w i l l provide information for the preparation o f the budget, All new projects will contain activities and
indicators that will permit later evaluation o f their impact. Several trust funds are financing impact
evaluations o f education interventions and other priority areas.

Matrix 1: Strengthenir

public sector mana !merit and accountability3

I
Public sector management

Portfolio
Public Sector Management
Public Sector Reform
(proposed follow-on project)
PSAC
PRSC
AAA
AnnualPER
CPAR
CFAA

Parastatal reform

Portfolio
a Public Sector Reform
AAA
AnnualPER
CEM
Financial Sector Assessment
Program.

Monitoring & evaluation

Portfolio
a Statistical Capacity Building
AAA
Strengthening M&E
PAD1
a ParticipatoryM&E
Poverty and Data Initiative.

B.

Pillar 1: Sustainable
Economic Growth
Reduce net domestic
borrowing.
Create and maintain
infrastructure,

Reduce the fiscal
burden o f transfer to
parastatals.
Enhance transparency
and competitiveness in
transactions (IFC)
Reduce costs and
improve quality of
infrastructural services.
Produce increasingly
good quality annual
progress reports for the
IP-ERS.

Pillar 2: Equity and
Poverty Reduction

Pillar 3: Improved Governance

Improve poverty and
growth effectiveness of
public spending.,

Improve transparency in budget
reporting
Enhance linkages between
budgeting, planning and
monitoring
Strengthen incentive structures
for managementperformance,

Improve service delivery
to the poor and reduce
fiscal burden.

Strengthen regulatory framework
Reduce opportunity for
misappropriationof public funds
by reducing the role o f the state in
production and marketing.

Improve poverty and
growth effectiveness o f
public spending.

Improve accountability in the
management o f public resources
Improved quality of, timeliness,
and access to information.

Reducing the cost o f doing business and improving the investment climate

The high cost o f financial and infrastructural services in Kenya i s deterring private sector
4 1.
investment required for growth and shutting out the poor from accessing the services, according to a
recent investment climate survey carried out by the Bank. Barriers to trade also raise the cost o f doing
business by preventing the allocation o f resources to their most efficient use, providing opportunities for
corruption, and raising the prices o f many goods consumed by the poor. Improving the business climate
will require reform o f financial services, policies for private sector in provision and management o f
infrastructural services, and trade policy.
R e s t r u c t u r i n g ~ ~ a n c services
ial

The Kenyan authorities recognize that sustainable economic recovery depends o n a vibrant and
42.
integrated financial sector that supports the mobilization o f adequate resources to finance required
investment. Despite its strong potential, the Kenyan financial system i s fragile, with the banking system
burdened by a large stock o f nonperforming loans that are heavily concentrated in state-influenced banks.
This misallocation o f scarce resources i s one o f the most significant impediments to the development o f
the financial sector and to economic growth itself. The IP-ERS outlines a series o f policy actions aimed
at removing bottlenecks that impede the effective functioning o f the financial sector, including resolving
the problem o f nonperforming loans, divesting the government’s ownership stakes in the banking
industry, implementing measures designed to enhance competition, and strengthening the regulatory
framework.
3

The matrix can be read both row by r o w to understand each sector contribution to the three pillars, and
column by column to understand the set of activities geared towards achieving each specific goal.

- 14The Bank Group program for the financial sector combines diagnostic work and financial
43.
assistance t o implement reforms and to build institutional capacity. The Bank jointly with the IMF
recently completed a comprehensive assessment o f the sector under the FSAP. Based on the Bank’s
ongoing dialogue with the Kenyan authorities and the findings o f the FSAP, the Bank i s designing two
financial sector operations. The FLSTAC will support the building o f capacity to deliver financial
services and to rapidly and fairly adjudicate disputes. The Financial Sector Adjustment Credit (FSAC,
fiscal 2006) will support policy and institutional reforms, including divestiture o f the state’s remaining
ownership stakes in the banks, enhanced banking supervision, and design o f a policy to expand access to
financial services, including in rural areas. Discussions have begun on a possible pension reform
program, focusing on measures to address the government’s significant contingent pension liabilities.
The IFC i s promoting the development o f the financial sector by developing instruments such as
mortgage and asset backed securities to deepen the capital market, supporting housing finance
institutions, and developing risk capital facilities to expand financial services for small and medium
enterprises.
As noted above, the Bank i s working in close collaboration with the IMF to prepare and
44.
implement the FSAP. In addition, DFID-which i s focusing on increasing access o f the poor to financial
services-is currently collaborating with the Bank in the preparation o f the FSAC and the FLSTAC.
France’s Agence Frangaise de DCveloppement has expressed interest injoining the Bank and DFID in
supporting the FLSTAC. The U N D P i s targeting access to finance o f small and medium size enterprises.
USAID i s piloting a transferable warehouse receipt system for use by small farmers in Nakuru. Money
laundering i s a serious concern in Kenya. Although the Bank does not have a comparative advantage in
addressing the issue in the Kenyan context, donors are collectively addressing the issue through support
for financial sector reforms.
Promoting private sector development

45.
Underpinningthe IP-ERS growth objective i s a central role for a reanimated private sector. The
government recognizes the critical importance o f reviving private sector activity and investment, while
reducing the role o f the state in productive enterprises to increase the competitiveness o f the economy, to
reduce the cost o f doing business, to improve the investment climate, and t o free government resources
for use on priority programs. The Bank Group strategy for private sector development has been
developed jointly with the IFC, MIGA, and the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF),
building on the comparative advantage o f each organization. An internal coordination group has been
established to guide the work o f all units, which operates in addition to the broader donor coordination
group on private sector development.
46.
The Bank strategy consists of a series o f sequenced activities. Several studies have been
completed or are underway to improve understanding o f the obstacles to private sector development and
the policies needed to address them. The investment climate assessment completed in fiscal 2004 i s
providing a greater understanding o f the factors that determine investment and business activity in Kenya.
The administrative barriers study being conducted by the Bank Group’s Foreign Investment Advisory
Service (a joint IFC and Bank program) will shed light on the administrative and regulatory costs o f doing
business in Kenya. Building on both these studies, the Bank i s carrying out economic and sector work on
growth and competitiveness to be completed during fiscal 2004. This will identify measures needed to
strengthen the competitiveness o f the private sector, including actions to reduce inefficiencies in the
supply chain, to upgrade skills, and to reduce administrative and other impediments to private sector
investment. Throughout the CAS period, the Bank will continue to seek out and support strong private
sector companies in export orientated sectors such as agribusiness, tourism and light manufacturing.
MIGA i s conducting an East Africa benchmarking study o f foreign investment competitiveness (fiscal
2005) that w i l l include Kenya. MIGA i s also providing technical assistance t o Kenya’s investment

-15promotion intermediaries through ongoing support for the Export Promotion Zone Authority and through
additional work f o r the formulation o f a strategy to attract foreign direct investment. The Bank Group has
worked closely with the private sector in designing the analytical work and will ensure that they are
actively involved in the policy consultations that flow from this effort. An increased role o f the private
sector in provision and management o f infrastructure i s also being actively pursued. With the help o f
grants from the Public-Private PPIAF, the government has completed a study on options for
concessioning o f trunk roads and a study on the legal and regulatory framework for the transport sector.
Public-private partnerships are being created to provide water and energy services. The IFC i s the
transaction adviser for concessioning the Kenya Railways jointly with Uganda Railways.
Directly related to the government’s goal o f creating jobs, the Micro, Small and Medium
47.
Enterprise Development Project (MSME, fiscal 2005)-a joint initiative o f the Bank and IFC being
piloted in eight African countries-is aimed at promoting the creation and growth o f MSMEs. The
project will offer support for business development, will strengthen linkages to providers o f financial
services and to markets, and will support measures to streamline procedures for starting and operating
businesses, such as licensing and inspections. An important focus o f this project will be to encourage
MSMEs to grow and to graduate from informal to formal status. In addition t o this joint Bank-IFC
project, the I F C will pilot a new approach to deliver comprehensive support to small and medium
enterprises through the Small and Medium Enterprises Solution Centers, These centers will combine
existing facilities with other business services to strengthen access o f small and medium enterprises to
business information and financial services. The centers will also help to improve the business
environment for small and medium enterprises and will incorporate the new risk capital facilities.
48.
Also in support o f the government’s goal o f promoting private sector development, the Bank i s
helping to improve communications and dialogue between the government, the private sector, civil
society, development partners, and others. With the PPIAF, the Bank hosted in M a y 2003 a high-level
conference in Nairobi focusing on private sector participation in infrastructure, The Bank has arranged
for monthly meetings with the Private Sector Alliance, Kenya’s principal organization representing
businesses and investors. The IFC in February 2004 organized a follow up workshop on private sector
participation in infrastructure for government technical leaders, and in M a y 2004 co-hosted with the
Financial Times a conference on improving the investment climate and promoting new approaches to
private provision of infrastructure, The Global Development Learning Network i s piloting the use o f
advanced technologies to improve communication among decision-makers.
Creating inj?as~ucture
for growth

49.
A key IP-ERS objective i s to create infrastructure that reduces the cost o f doing business, while
linking poor regions of the country to the broader economy. The Bank’s program has sought to target
interventions that can address issues o f regional inequality and expand access to underserved and poorer
groups. Learning from experiences of privatization in Kenya and elsewhere, the program emphasizes the
need for a strong regulatory framework, so that the benefits o f liberalization will reach all Kenyans. It
also recognizes the importance o f offering a range o f options for private sector participation, rather than a
single model which may be politically difficult to implement. Project specific interventions include
measures to build strong regulatory and cost recovery systems, to improve sector governance, and to
ensure that service providers are accountable.
Transport Inj?astructure. Kenya has a comprehensive multimodal transport infrastructure system
50.
of roads, railways, maritime transport, and pipeline transport and air transport networks, which
contributes an estimated 8 percent t o GDP. Upgrading the Northern Corridor road network that links
Kenya with Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, and the Democratic Republic o f Congo and improving the
efficiency o f the port at Mombasa will reduce transportation costs throughout East Africa, improving the

- 16global competitiveness o f the region and fostering regional integration. Improving management o f the
railways i s expected to be a major catalyst to regional integration and growth. A joint concession for
Uganda and Kenya Railways was launched in January 2004. A j o i n t implementation strategy has been
worked out by I F C and harmonization o f issues achieved.

5 1.
The government has already prepared the institutional foundation for rebuilding transport
infrastructure by implementing key policy and institutional reforms that are necessary to ensure that once
rehabilitated, the road network i s properly managed and maintained. The Kenya Roads Board, which
oversees financing, delivery and management o f roads and provides the strategic direction for investment
and maintenance planning, was established in 1999. The Kenya Roads Fund collects about U S $ l 10
million per year from a dedicated fuel levy, sufficient for routine and periodic maintenance o f the
strategic network provided that maintenance i s well planned. The adoption o f the Roads 2000
maintenance strategy that relies on labor-based techniques i s already having a positive effect on
maintenance o f rural roads, rural employment, and rural poverty.
52.
The Bank will support the government’s program through i t s Northern Corridor Transport
Improvement Project (fiscal 2004). The project will finance the reconstruction o f about 360 kilometers o f
key sections o f the road east and west o f Nairobi. It will also facilitate private sector participation in the
financing, construction and management o f the road through concessioning o f the proposed Nairobi
southern bypass on a build, operate, and transfer basis. It will support introduction o f long-term
performance-based contracting, and assist with the implementation o f key institutional and policy
reforms, including the establishment o f an autonomous roads agency. The Bank i s working closely in the
sector with other development partners, including the European Commission, Germany, France, DFID,
the Nordic Development Fund and USAID.
53.
The project will also provide support for upgrading Nairobi’s Jomo Kenyatta International
Airport to address the threat o f terrorism and to meet International C i v i l Aviation Organization and
Federal Aviation Authority security class one status, which would permit the operation o f direct flights
between the United States and Kenya. Improving airport security, safety and other c i v i l aviation services
at major airports in Kenya are critical for revitalizing tourism, one o f Kenya’s most important industries
and enhancing horticultural exports which are currently a major foreign exchange earner. Upgrading the
airport i s also essential for maintaining Nairobi’s position as the major airline hub in East Africa, which
brings a great deal o f business to the country. The proposed improvements will also facilitate the export
o f fresh flowers, vegetables, and other goods to the US. and other international markets.
Energy. Improving energy infrastructure is another priority. Only about 15 percent o f
54.
households have access to electricity. Improving the delivery o f energy services to enhance their
availability and reliability, and t o increase the contribution o f modern energy forms to the country’s
energy balance i s at the core o f the government strategy for the sector, This entails promoting least cost
sources o f power supply through regional integration and development o f domestic renewable energy
sources, reducing system losses, improving revenue collection, and enhancing corporate governance for
energy producers and distributors. Expanded private sector participation is at the heart o f the agenda.
This will involve the privatization o f the Kenya Power and Lighting Corporation, the Kenya Pipeline
Company, and the National Oil Corporation o f Kenya.

The Bank i s supporting the commercialization o f the power utilities, regulatory reforms, private
55.
sector participation, and the expansion o f power generation through its ongoing Energy Sector Reform
and Power Development Project. The follow-on Energy Sector Recovery Credit (fiscal 2005) will
finance investments to improve efficiency o f power production and distribution; to develop a framework
for public-private partnerships for geothermal resource-based power supply; to promote public-private
provision o f infrastructure for supply, storage, and transportation o f liquefied petroleum gas; to improve

- 17power sector management and corporate governance in the Kenya Power and Lighting Corporation; to
strengthen the sector regulatory framework; and to build capacity o f the regulatory agency and the
Ministry o f Energy.

56.
The Bank i s funding the preparation o f the E A C power master plan. This could lead to a regional
power operation during the CAS period to connect the E A C member states among themselves and to the
existing southern African power pool (through construction o f the Nairobi-Arusha power line) to help the
government implement i t s strategy o f sourcing power from least cost sources. Similarly, the proposed
extension o f the petroleum products pipeline to Uganda, for which both the Kenyan and Ugandan
governments have signed a memorandum o f understanding and for which private sector participation i s
envisaged, would require multilateral support should the scheme prove to be economically viable, World
Bank Group support (possibly MIGA insurance and an IDA partial risk guarantee and IFC financing) to
facilitate the structuring o f the project and selection o f sponsors w i l l be explored. Finally, preparation for
a rural energy development program w i l l begin towards the end o f the CAS period to assist the
government in expanding access to energy to rural areas.
Water supply and s a n ~ t a t ~ o
services
n
and water resources ~ a n a g e ~ eThese
~ t . too are high
57.
priorities for the government because o f their direct impact on people’s health, agricultural productivity,
and the environment. Government enacted the new Water Act in 2002 aimed at expanding access to safe
water and sanitation services and at improving water resources management. Critical challenges include
developing a sound institutional framework for both water supply and sanitation and water resources
management. Investing in infrastructure, improving management o f catchments and floodplains,
conserving wetlands, effectively allocating water, controlling pollution and aquatic weeds are all needed
to mitigate the effects o f excessive rains and drought.

58.
The Bank program includes several carefully sequenced activities to improve access to clean
water and sanitation services and to enhance management o f water resources. The Nairobi Water and
Sewerage Institutional Restructuring Project (fiscal 2004) aims to build a strong governance, institutional
and service delivery framework that will enable the efficient and sustainable delivery o f water and
sewerage services in Nairobi. The broader Nairobi-Mombasa Water Supply and Sanitationl Watershed
Resources Development and Management Project (fiscal 2007) will build on this institutional framework
to significantly increase access to water and sanitation in urban areas. It will also support development o f
a sound water resources management and development framework, including institutional reforms for
equitably allocating water, resolving conflicts, protecting catchments and wetlands, and controlling over
pumping o f groundwater, pollution, and the spread o f invasive weeds.
Reducing barriers to trade

Regional integration and trade i s very important for Kenya. Kenya’s trade with other African
59.
countries i s growing much faster than trade with other parts o f the world. Already Uganda and Tanzania
are major and growing markets for Kenya’s exports o f manufactures and services. Further regional
integration would also quickly stimulate growth for Kenya as a regional hub.
The government plans to liberalize i t s trade regime in the context o f the planned formation in
60.
2004 o f a customs union with Tanzania and Uganda in the context o f the EAC. External tariffs will be
either significantly reduced or eliminated among the member states, and all suspended import duties and
remaining discretionary duty exemptions will be removed. The government has also developed a national
export strategy and i s establishing an export council under the leadership o f the ministry o f trade and
industry, to consist o f relevant government bodies and the private sector. The government i s also
expected to promote export growth and diversification through macro policies to sustain a competitive

-18exchange rate, through improvement o f infrastructure to facilitate trade (the Northern Corridor and other
roads, aviation services, the port, and the railway), and through improved security.

Box 2: Kenya membership o f international and regional economic agreements
During the past decade Kenya has pursued an active policy o f engagement in regional and bilateral trade
agreements. The country i s currently a member o f various international and regional economic organizations,
including the EU-Africa Caribbean Pacific (ACP) Cotonou Agreement, EAC, COMESA, Inter-Govemmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), and the N i l e Basin Initiative,
Kenya i s a signatory o f the Cotonou Agreement between the EuropeanUnion and the ACP countries, which
replaces the Lome Convention. As part o f the agreement it benefits from special trade preferences granted by
the E U and from resources from the European Development Fund. One o f the objectives o f the Cotonou
Agreement i s that the ACP member states enter into regional economic partnership agreements with the EU,
which should lead to the gradual establishment o f bilateral free trade areas through a transition period starting
in 2008. Although negotiations have not yet started at the sub regional level, Kenya will participate through its
membership in the eastern and southern Africa group.
At the regional level, Kenya together with Uganda and Tanzania form the EAC. The present EAC i s a revival
o f the previous East African cooperation agreement between Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda, which collapsed in
1977 and was reestablishedin the 1990s. The objective o f the new EAC treaty, which entered into force in July
2000, i s to develop policies and programs aimed at widening and deepening cooperation among the three
member countries. In this endeavor, the three countries have committed to the form a customs union by 2004,
which i s then to evolve into a common market, a monetary union and ultimately, a political federation o f East
African states by 2020. Kenya i s seeking further reductions in nontariff trade barriers and exceptions in the
trade regime, which will facilitate regional integration.
Since its relaunch in 2000, the EAC has successfully implemented many o f the provisions o f its treaty. Areas
where significant progress on regional coordinatio~harmonizationhas been achieved are monetary and
financial policy, fiscal policy and taxation, capital markets development, and Lake Victoria management. The
customs union protocol was signed by the three countries in March 2004 and i s expected to be launched by
September 2004. It provides for the establishment o f a common external tariff by July 2004 and the formation
o f a regional free trade area, to be achieved gradually over a five-year period, A n East African passport was
launched in 200 1 but i s s t i l l not in full use.
Kenya i s also a member o f COMESA, which was initiated in Kampala in 1993 as the successor organization o f
the Preferential Trading Area. COMESA currently comprises 20 member countries. I t s main agenda is to
deepen and broaden the integration process among member states through the facilitation and promotion o f
regional trade and investment. In October 2000, nine COMESA members, including Kenya, establishedthe
COMESA free trade area, with the rest expected to join during the next couple o f years. COMESA members
have also agreed to move to a customs union by 2004, which includes the establishment o f a common external
tariff.
The N i l e Basin Initiative i s a regional partnership that was established in February 1999 by the riparian states
o f the N i l e basin to pursue a cooperative approach for the use and development o f the common N i l e Basin
water resources. Kenya i s also one o f the seven member countries o f the IGAD, which was established in
January 1986 in Djibouti with the purpose to alert the international community and members to humanitarian
emergencies in the region. Under the auspices o f IGAD, Kenya i s playing a key role in facilitating the peace
processes underway in the subregion, especially in Sudan and Somalia,

61,
Kenya i s actively participating in various arrangements fostering regional integration and
cooperation, o f which the most important are the EAC and the Common Market o f Eastern and Southern
Africa (COMESA) (see box 2). In addition to the trade agenda, the East Africa integration process i s
progressing well in a number o f important areas such as regional environmental management projects

- 19(Lake Victoria environmental management and the GEF-supported West Indian Ocean Marine Electronic
Highway and Coastal and Marine Protection Project), infrastructure cooperation (EAC Regional Road
Network Program, Regional Power Pool Program, and the Submarine Fiber Optic Cable Project), and
capital markets development.
The Bank i s supporting the trade agenda and regional integration in several ways. I t i s preparing
62.
a diagnostic trade integration study, focusing on the impact o f policy reforms on trade. For the EAC it
has carried out an analysis on the likely revenue effects o f implementation o f the planned common
external tariff. The Bank i s also planning an E A C trade and transport facilitation project. This will
support the E A C member states and its secretariat in Arusha by providing technical assistance and
capacity support for the new E A C customs administration and support for investment in key regional
transport facilities (ports, roads, and the rail corridor). In addition, the Bank i s supporting environmental
management o f the shared Lake Victoria resource, through the second phase o f the multicountry Lake
Victoria Environmental Project (fiscal 2006).
Matrix 2: Reducing the cost o f doing
- business and improving the investment climate
Financial services
Portfolio
FSAC
FSLTAC
AAA
Financial sector assessment
Post-FSAP capacity enhancement
program.

Pillar 1: Sustainable
Economic Growth
Deepen financial
intermediation.

Pillar 2: Equity and Poverty
Reduction
Expand access to financial
services.

Pillar 3: Improved
Governance
Enhancedeconomic
governance of the banking
sector.
Reduced state-controlled
banking sector.

Reduce transport and
telecom costs and
improve reliability of
energy.
Improve environment
for small and medium
enterprise growth.

Generate employment in the
formal sector,

Strengthen regulatory
ffameworks o f energy and
water.

Infrastructural Services
Portfolio
Northern Corridor Transport
Improvement.
Energy Sector Recovery.
Nairobi Water and Sewerage
Institutional Restructuring.
Nairobi and Mombasa
WSSiWRMislum upgrading.
AAA
Water Resources Management

Reduce costs of doing
business.
Enhance Kenya’s role
as regional trade hub.
Strengthen Kenya’s
links to international
markets by enhancing
security.

Link poor Western region to
main areas o f economic activity.

Strengthen institutional and
regulatory framework to
improve sustainability
(maintenance)
Improve sector management
through private sector
participation.

Trade
Portfolio
Regional Trade Facilitation
EAC Trade and Transport
AAA
Diagnostic trade integration study
EAC common external tariff
revenue implications.

Strengthen regional
links.

Improve the allocation o f
resources.

Private sector investment
Portfolio
MSME Project(Banki1FC)
SME Solution Center (IFC)

AAA
Growth and Competitiveness
Investment Climate Assessment.

C.

Reducing vulnerability and strengthening communities

63.
The great majority o f Kenya’s poor live in rural areas, and significant reductions in poverty will
not be possible without raising their incomes. This will require increasing agricultural productivity and

- 20 competitiveness, improving environmental management, strengthening local governments, and
implementing measures targeted at poor regions and communities.
Increasing agricultural productivity and competitiveness

The Bank i s supporting measures to increase agricultural productivity and competitiveness in
64.
several ways. The Bank along with other donor partners will contribute to knowledge that will add in a
substantial way to the policy dialogue with government through an analysis o f agricultural markets and
rural service delivery, an agricultural policy review, an analysis o f the linkages between poverty and
agricultural growth, and studies on cotton, tea and horticulture, This process has already started with a
stocktaking workshop, which has created a forum for researchers, policy analysts and policy makers to
share results o f their analytical work.
65.
Through the Public Sector Reform Technical Assistance Project, the Bank i s supporting
analytical work that will assist the government in defining the core functions o f government in agriculture
and rural development, and lending that will allow the government to restructure key agricultural
parastatals. The annual PER exercise will also assist the government to better target resources towards
core functions o f the state. As reforms are deepened, it i s expected that budget support operations,
including the PRSC, w i l l address the unfinished policy and institutional reform agenda, with the Bank
playing the key role in coordinating activities o f development partners. The PRSC (fiscal 2007) will also
provide support for the restructuring of agricultural parastatals. The major donors working in agriculture
and rural development, including the European Union, DFID and USAID, are working together on policy
and institutional reform and on improving mechanisms to reduce risk and vulnerability.
Through the Agricultural Productivity Project (fiscal 2004) the Bank will support the
66.
transformation o f Kenya’s research and extension system to a more demand driven, farmer-led and
pluralistic system. Recognizing that this process takes time, it i s providing the support through an
Adaptable Program Loan that includes extensive policy and institutional reforms in addition to
investments. The project expands on 12 years o f continued IDA and donor support to the Kenya
Agricultural Research Institute (KARI). The regional trade facilitation project will contribute to
agricultural productivity by increasing competition in input markets and by increasing access to export
markets for goods in which Kenya has a comparative advantage.
Improving environmental management

67.
The Bank i s planning analytical work during the CAS period to look at environmental
management issues such as water resources management and coastal zone management. Alongside the
work o f other development partners, this i s expected to help improve governance and management o f
Kenya’s natural resource base. This work will also contribute to efforts to increase the contribution o f
forests and other important natural resources to the economy as well as to protect the biodiversity upon
which Kenya’s tourism industry depends. Another study will examine the relationship between economic
growth and environmental management. The GEF component o f the Lake Victoria Environmental
Management Project remains open until the end o f December 2004, as the three riparian countries prepare
the second phase o f this operation which focuses on establishing institutions for the sustainable
management o f the lake and i t s catchment area. The Western Kenya Integrated Ecosystem Management
Project, supported by the GEF, will seek t o improve management o f soils, water, and biodiversity, while
raising the productivity o f agriculture.

Strengthening local governments
Strengthening local government i s recognized by Kenyans as an important factor in improving
68.
delivery o f services. The current constitutional review process i s proposing a strengthened devolution o f
power to local government, redefining the current dualistic system o f locally elected councils and the top
down structures o f provincial administration and line ministries. The Bank i s assisting this process in
several ways. I t financed jointly with DFID an assessment o f local service delivery and local
governments in Kenya that identified the demands on local government to deliver services, and the
technical and financial resources at their disposal to meet the demands. Analytical work scheduled for
fiscal 2006 will examine the impact o f decentralization on the effectiveness o f public spending in
delivering services to the poor. Technical assistance i s strengthening local authorities to effectively carry
out their responsibilities. The proposed Public Sector Reform Technical Assistance Project (fiscal 2006)
and the PRSC (fiscal 2007) will draw on analytical work carried out in 2000 focusing on strengthening
legal, institutional, technical and procedural reforms at both the central and local levels. Once the legal
structures are agreed and set in place through the new constitution, and minimal reforms are implemented,
Bank resources will fund basic infrastructure. The Bank’s support to local government i s reinforced and
complemented by the Bank’s community driven development (CDD) operations and i t s proposed urban
slum upgrading pilots, which are aimed at building local institutions and strengthening communities.
Reducing poverty in Kenya’s poorest regions and urban slums
The Bank i s supporting rural development in Kenya’s poorest regions. Through the Arid Lands
69.
Resource Management Project Phase 2, the Bank i s using a multisectoral, district based, C D D approach to
reduce poverty in the arid and semiarid districts o f Kenya. This successful approach, focusing on
management o f natural resources and drought and on rural service delivery, i s being expanded from 11 to
22 districts. The Bank will further support an expansion o f the C D D approach through a planned Western
Kenya Community Driven Development operation (fiscal 2007). This will target Nyanza and Western
provinces, areas that are especially hard hit by the MVJ’AIDS pandemic and a degrading natural resource
base.
Depletion of the natural resource base poses a real threat to rural livelihoods. The Western Kenya
70.
Integrated Ecosystem Management Project together with the Agriculture Productivity Project and the
Western Kenya C D D Project are expected to contribute to reducing risk and vulnerability and improving
food security.

71.
The Bank i s addressing urban poverty through several interlinked activities. I t i s supporting
studies on youth and urban poverty, It will jointly with partners be piloting operations in slum areas o f
Nairobi. Finally, it will strengthen institutions that deliver services in the slums through its proposed
Public Sector Reform Technical Assistance Project, discussed above.

Women are more likely than men to be poor, and, vulnerable to adverse shocks than men. All the
72.
Bank’s projects to reduce poverty in Kenya’s poorest regions and slums include activities to reduce
gender inequities. For example, the Arid Lands project uses participatory techniques to ensure that
women’s preferences are taken into account in all decisions regarding project-supported activities. The
project i s also leading by example, by ensuring equal opportunity o f employment for project staff.
Similarly, the Agricultural Productivity Project i s making a special effort to recruit women extension
officers-a proven approach for reaching women farmers. A proposed IDF grant will support drafting o f
legislation to strengthen women’s rights, and help t o strengthen the Federation o f Women Lawyers o f
Kenya. The FLSTAC will include a component addressing women and the law t o help ensure that laws
in Kenya do not disadvantage women.

- 22 -

Matrix 3: Reducingvulnerability and strengthening communities
Agricultural competitiveness
Portfolio
Agricultural Productivity
Regional Trade Facilitation
AAA
Agricultural growth and
poverty impact
Environmental management
Portfolio
Lake Victoria
Energy Sector Recovery
Nairobi-Mombasa WSSJ
Watershed Resources
Development and Management
Western Kenya Integrated
Ecosystem Management
AAA
Water resources management
Environment and growth.
Strengthen communities and
local governments
Portfolio
Public Sector Management TA
Public Sector Reform TA
PRSC
Arid Lands Phase 2
Western Kenya CDD.
AAA
PER and decentralization
impact
Poverty assessment.

D.

P i l l a r 1: Sustainable
Economic G r o w t h
Improve development
and adoption of
agricultural technology.

Pillar 2: E q u i t y and
Poverty Reduction
Support agricultural markets
reforms to increase
proportion o f end market
value received by
smallholders.

Pillar 3: Improved
Governance
* Support restructuring of
agricultural boards to
decrease misappropriations

Establish the framework
for improved fisheries
management.

Increase development
prospects in one o f the
poorest regions

Improve water resource
management and regulation
to address competing
demands.

Improve service delivery
to poor regions and
communities,

Improve service delivery to
poor regions and
communities.
Reduce regional disparities.
Strengthen emergency
response.

Strengthen local
government capacity,
predictable flow o f
resources, and downward
and upward accountability.
Support community-based
decision making and local
accountability structures.

Investing in people

U n d e r s t a ~ d poverty
~n~

Understanding o f the dynamics, depth, and distribution o f poverty in Kenya i s limited. The Bank
73.
and development partners are now supporting the government in significantly deepening the knowledge
of poverty. The Bank supported the Strategic Gender Assessment, launched in fiscal 2004, that reveals
the high poverty and vulnerability of many Kenyan women and describes the discrimination that girls and
women face in gaining access to health and education services, and ultimately to employment
opportunities. The Bank and partners are supporting the Central Bureau o f Statistics in producing poverty
maps. The f i r s t volume was completed in fiscal 2004 and the second volume i s planned for fiscal 2005.
The Bank i s also assisting the Central Bureau o f Statistics to conduct an integrated household budget
survey. This w i l l provide the baseline data that will enable the government to monitor the impact o f i t s
policies and programs on poverty. During fiscal 2005, the Bank plans to support analytical work to better
understand the relationship between agricultural productivity and poverty reduction. The Bank plans to
carry out a poverty and social impact analysis (PSIA) o n various groups o f potential changes in maize
prices arising from trade and marketing reforms. This complements PSIA work being carried out jointly
by the IMF and DFID to assess the impact o f greater regional integration arising from the establishment
of the E A C customs union. These studies are expected to identify the intended and unintended
consequences o f policy interventions before, during, and after implementation on the well-being o f
various social groups and to include measures to mitigate them. During fiscal 2006, the Bank w i l l draw

-23

-

on the results o f the integrated household budget survey to undertake a comprehensive poverty analysis
that will be used to guide future Bank assistance to Kenya.

Health
Another high priority reflected in the IP-ERS i s health sector reform with the objective o f
74.
significantly improving health outcomes, especially o f the poor. The Bank considers gains in human
health crucial elements o f a comprehensive approach to poverty reduction and i s supporting the
government’s strategy through analytical work, capacity building, and targeted interventions. Analytical
work i s focusing on a pharmaceutical sector review (fiscal 2005), and on a comprehensive health sector
public expenditure review. Ongoing projects include the Decentralized AIDS and Reproductive Health
Project. This seeks to improve mother and child health through more integrated delivery o f child
survival, reproductive health, and HIVIAIDS services. This project i s also helping to increase the
efficiency o f the government in delivering these services, including through decentralization o f service
delivery. This operation i s preparing the ground for the Bank’s support to the health sector through a
SWAP in fiscal 2006 that will be developed in partnership with all major stakeholders in the sector. This
will be based on an agreed health sector strategy, a medium-term expenditure program, and include
annual expenditure reviews, and a joint M&E framework. The elaboration o f a new national health
strategy has recently started. While the credits for the sector will provide flexible, programmatic support
for annual work plans agreed at annual joint reviews, IDA funds are expected to support primarily the
ministry’s decentralization program and the reform o f the medical supplies subsector. A successful
SWAP will establish the foundation, through capacity building and institutional strengthening, for
possible future support to the sector through a PRSC in fiscal 2007. A large number o f bilateral and
multilateral donors, organized in the donor coordination group on health and HIVIAIDS, share the vision
o f jointly supporting the government’s health strategy and MTEF, either through parallel or cofinancing
mechanisms, and are harmonizing their procedures to achieve this.

HIV/AIDS
Government action i s starting to prove effective in the fight against HIVIAIDS. The HIVIAIDS
75.
prevalence rate among women attending prenatal clinics fell from a peak o f 10.2 percent in 2002
(corrected estimate) to 9.4 percent in 2003. The IP-ERS recognizes that building on this success i s
critical for both economic growth and human development in Kenya. A priority now i s t o prevent new
infections among the particularly vulnerable groups: the youth, women, and the poor. Caring for Kenya’s
nearly one million AIDS orphans poses a major challenge, Although many organizations are supporting
orphans and vulnerable children, a mechanism i s needed to coordinate the multiple initiatives. Another
challenge i s monitoring and evaluating HnrIAIDS prevalence and i t s impact. While the sentinel
surveillance system in Kenya functions well, other aspects o f the HIV epidemic and its impact on the
macroeconomy, the private sector, and households are captured with far less accuracy and frequency.
76.
The Bank i s vigorously supporting the government’s program. Kenya was the first country to
access funds under the Africa Region’s Multi-Country AIDS Program (MAP). The project serves as the
model for many subsequent MAPS. The Bank supports the National AIDS Control Council and i t s
provincial, district, and local-level bodies and line ministries in the mainstreaming o f HIVIAIDS-related
activities. I t also supports initiatives o f civil society, the private sector, and research organizations. By
December 2003, the Bank had supported some 1,400 community-level initiatives, which has opened
many new channels for preventing the spread o f the disease. While the ongoing M A P project has
achieved much in terms o f social mobilization, enormous challenges remain for the follow-on M A P 2
project (fiscal 2006). Consistent with the IP-ERS, this new project will continue its focus on prevention,
while also supporting new initiatives t o reach the vulnerable groups and to increase access to
comprehensive care and treatment by those already infected. The Bank jointly with other partners i s also

- 24 developing a strategy to ensure that orphans receive the care and schooling that they need to reduce their
vulnerability and flourish as adults. The IFC w i l l contribute to efforts through its IFC Against AIDS
program that provides private f i r m s practical guidance on a range o f options for designing and
implementing education, prevention, and care programs for employees and their communities.
Education

Education, particularly primary education, i s a top priority o f the government. The Bank i s
supporting the government’s strategy through recently completed analytical work on primary and
secondary education, through support to the ministerial PER, and through i t s ongoing Early Childhood
Development Project and the new Free Primary Education Project (US$50 million grant). I t will in the
future take an increasingly programmatic approach to the sector. The Bank’s strategy will also focus on
issues o f sector financing, governance, decentralization and more efficient service delivery, and include
the close monitoring o f progress towards selected targets.

77.

78.
Financial support will focus initially on the primary and secondary levels, with support for
technicallvocational and higher education awaiting further analytical work. Capacity will be strengthened
through activities o f the World Bank Institute and a proposed IDF grant t o provide support for improved
sectoral planning and budgeting activities. Sectonvide support through a SWAP i s planned for fiscal
2006. This will lay the groundwork for future support to the sector through a PRSC by strengthening
monitoring and evaluation, financial management, and the planning and allocation o f expenditures. The
evolution in the sector will also require expanded, more detailed sectoral expenditure reviews, as
alignment o f expenditures with the strategy will be a key determinant o f partner support for the sector.
Matrix 4:

Investing in

:ople
Pillar 1: Sustainable
Economic Growth

Enhance procurement
systems,

Reduce death and
disability.

Reduce losses o f income and
assets due sickness and
death.

Maintain coordinated and
nonpoliticized
administration of
HIV/AIDS programs.

Improve educational
attainment,

Increase access to education
for the poor.
Decrease regional disparities
in educational attainment.

Strengthen reporting
mechanisms.

Improve access to health
services.

HIVlAIDS

Portfolio
MAP
e Decentralized Reproductive
Health and HIViAIDS
MAP2
AAA
PER
Youth development

Education

Portfolio
Free Primary Education
Early Childhood Development
Education SWAP

e

Pillar 3: Improved
Governance

Increase access to basic
health services, especially
targeted to the poor.
Reduce out-of-pocket
expenditures by the poor.

Health

Portfolio
Health SWAP
DecentralizedReproductive
Health and AIDS Project
PRSC
AAA
PER
Pharmaceutical study.

Pillar 2: Equity and
Poverty Reduction

AAA

PER
Youth development
Education sector review.

The Bank i s playing a key role in coordinating partner activities in response to the government’s
79.
request. The Ministry o f Education, Science and Technology has already reinvigorated the system o f

- 25 coordination with external partners, and i s convening regular meetings with development partners to
consider priorities and possibilities for harmonization, and to review options for the design o f the planned
SWAp. The governments o f Canada, Japan, Germany (through Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau, KW),
Sweden, United Kingdom, the United States, UNICEF, UNESCO, the European Commission and the
African Development Bank have all been represented in the donor discussions. It i s also hoped that
Kenya may qualify for inclusion in the education for all fast track initiative as that program i s expanded
and mainstreamed.

E.

Lending scenarios

Base case lending scenario. Because the new government took charge o f the development
80.
agenda and moved quickly to make key reforms in policy and governance, Kenya has moved from a low
to a base case lending scenario. Significant improvements in portfolio implementation together with
tighter financial management, procurement and audit procedures delivered a higher level o f confidence in
the country’s ability to implement i t s portfolio successfully. The base case lending program o f about
US$870 million (fiscal 2004-07) assumes continued sound macroeconomic performance and timely
implementation of the IP-ERS. Under this scenario, IDA would support operations in key sectors
identified in the IP-ERS, presenting four or five projects a year to the Board (excluding regional projects),
with an emphasis in the first two years o f the program on support for technical assistance and capacity
building. The exception to this would be the two major infrastructure investment programs (Northern
Corridor and Energy Sector Recovery) where the need i s urgent, and where the Bank considers the key
institutional and regulatory prerequisites for project success to be in place.

8 1.
High case lending scenario, The high case would be triggered by (a) significant progress in
reallocating public expenditures towards core poverty programs and in public sector financial
management, (b) establishment o f appropriate regulatory frameworks for infrastructural services, (c)
reduced state control o f the banking sector, (d) increased access o f the poor to basic health services, and
(e) sustained improvement in the lending portfolio. Under this scenario, support for the education SWAP
would be doubled, from US$50 million to US$lOO million, and support for the health sector through a
SWAP would rise from US$30 million to US$SO million. Sound institutional and policy reform and
implementation performance in infrastructure would lead t o a near doubling o f support for water and
sanitation services and slum upgrading in Nairobi and Mombasa from US$30 million to US$50 million.
A lending total o f up to US$l.1 billion i s envisaged under this scenario.
82.
Low case lending scenario. A low case scenario would be triggered by poor macroeconomic
performance, failure to follow through with implementation o f key policy reforms underpinning IP-ERS
goals, or poor implementation o f Bank-supported projects or programs. Under this scenario, the Bank
would provide funds at a significantly reduced level in support o f operations in the social sectors or to
reduce poverty among vulnerable groups. A lending total o f no more than US$365 million i s envisaged
under this l o w case scenario.
IDA grant allocation. In accordance with the IDA 13 implementation guidelines, Kenya will
83.
receive a portion o f i t s future IDA allocation in the form o f grants. The total fiscal 2004 grant allocation
o f US$30.7 million has been allocated to finance the Global Development Learning Network Project
(US$2.7 million), the Nairobi Water and Sewerage Institutional Restructuring Project (US$15 million),
and the Agriculture Productivity Project (US$13 million). For subsequent years, the IDA grant allocation
will be distributed in conformity with the IDA grant allocation guidelines, focusing on programs that
target poverty such as the Education SWAp.

~
~~

~

- 26 -

Table 3: Proposed lending scenarios, fiscal years 2004-07 (US$ millions)
Operation

Base Case

FY04
Northern Corridor Transport
Water Services-Nairobi
Agriculture Productivity
Global Development Learning Network Learning
FY05
Financial and Legal Sector Technical Assistance
Energy Sector Recovery
Statistical Capacity Building
Programmatic Structural Adjustment Credit (PSAC)
FY06
Financial Sector Adjustment Credit
Education SWAP
Health SWAP
MAP
Public Sector Reform Technical Assistance (Private
Sector DevelopmentlLocal Government)
FY07
PRSC (PSDILocal Govt, possibly Health)
Western Kenya CDDNulnerability
Water ~ S S ~ R M ) / S l uUpgrading
m

Joint IFClPSD Initiative
MSME Project(FY05)
Regional Projects
EAC Trade and Transport (FY06)
Lake Victoria (FY06)
Total FYO4-FYO7:

F.

High Case

Of which
Low Case IDA Grants'

207.0
15.0
40.0
2.7
264.7

207.0
15.0
40.0
2.7
264.7

20.0
75.0
20.0
75.0
190.0

20.0
75.0
20.0
75.0
190.0

115.0

65.0
50.0
30.0
20.0

100.0
100.0
80.0
20.0

50.0
30.0
20.0

40.0
205.0

40.0
340.0

40.0
140.0

0

100.0
45.0
30.0
175.0

200.0
45.0
50.0
295.0

45.0
30.0
75.0

0

20.0

20.0

20.0

5.0
10.0
869.7

5.0
10.0
1124.7

5.0
10.0
365

15.
13.
2.
30,

20.0
75.0
20.0
0,

30

Lending triggers

The triggers for the base and high case lending scenarios cover some of the major areas o f the IP84.
ERS that the joint staff assessment highlighted as needing to be improved in annual progress reports.
They also address elements o f Kenya's country policy and institutional assessment rating that could be
improved. The Bank would move to a low case scenario if the basic triggers for remaining in the base
case scenario are not sustained. Rather than constituting a checklist, the following triggers are indicative
o f broader areas of reform and w i l l serve as a basis for judging appropriate lending levels.

IDA Grant allocation beyond FY05 will be decided under IDA 14.

-27-

Public sector
management

I

Capacity for budget execution and service
delivery expanded (increased number of
satisfactory ratings of the Public
Expenditure Management Assessment and
Action Plan).
Macroeconomicframework satisfactory
with progress in increasing public
investment as share of total spending.
(based on staff assessment).

Quality o f public spending improved
(budget allocated for core poverty
programs increased).
Accountability in use of public resources
improved (implementation o f enhanced
public sector financial management plan).

Reducing the cost of doing business and improving investment climate
Infrastructure

Lowered cost o f transportation (cost o f
transoortine a ton o f freight from
Mombasa to Nairobi falls).

Appropriate and institutional regulatory
framework for kev infrastructureservices
established (regulatory frameworks
conducive to private sector participation
in water, energy, transport and telecoms).

Financial sector

Financial intermediationdeepened
(domestic credit to private sector
increased from current level of private

State control in banking sector reduced
(state controlled share in the banking
sector falls below current level of 20%.).

Education and health

Free primary education program
satisfactorily implemented (primary
school net enrolment rates increase from
70 percent).

Access to basic health services
specifically targeted to the poor increased
(PER reflects increased spending on
programs benefiting the poor).

G.

Nonlending programs

85.
Nonlending activities. The proposed nonlending work program i s designed to: (a) support
efficient public allocation o f funds to priority development areas, (b) expand on the analytical work
already initiated in fiscal 2003 on poverty analysis, particularly in the rural sector; (c) expand on the
findings o f the C E M to better understand the sources o f growth and competitiveness, (d) better understand
barriers to trade, (e) support growth in agricultural and livestock production, and (g) deepen knowledge o f
labor markets. In preparation for an eventual PRSC, core diagnostic economic and sector work has
already been carried out, or i s planned for the near term, including a C F A A conducted in fiscal 200 1, the
C E M completed in fiscal 2003, and annual PERs. A CPAR and updated CFAA will be carried out in
fiscal 2005, as will a poverty analysis. The Kenya country team i s significantly increasing i t s output o f
economic and sector work to inform both policy and public dialogue on key development issues.
However, lack o f data i s a constraint. T o address this, it i s pursuing a two-track approach: (a) investing in
national statistical capacity through the StatCap project (fiscal 2005) to develop a basis for core poverty

-28diagnostics; and (b) working with local and international researchers who are actively collecting and
analyzing data from surveys carried out by universities and research institutes.

Table 5: Nonlending work program, fiscal 2004-07
FY04

FY05

FY06

FY07

4. IMPLEMENTING THE CAS
A.

Progress under the last CAS

86.
The September 1998 CAS was predicated on a low case scenario for Kenya that had been brought
about by a history o f failure in the implementation o f structural reforms and a large and growing concern
with governance issues.’ The principal focus o f that CAS was economic governance, and reforms were to
take place in the following broad areas: (a) public sector restructuring; (b) public expenditure
management reform; and (c) strengthening o f accountability mechanisms. The responsibility o f designing
the reform program was left to the government with relatively little assistance from the Bank. Broadbased participation was seen to be the key to foster ownership and commitment, which would be
reinforced through closer collaboration among all development partners. The 1998 CAS triggers that
would allow Kenya to move from the low case to the base case scenario were closely tied to progress in
improving economic governance. Until such triggers would be met, little new lendingwould be
provided.
Government reacted to the 1998 CAS triggers by embarking on the reforms required to gain
87.
access to enhanced funding. These included reducing the number o f ministries from 27 to 15,
streamlining the budget process and introducing the MTEF, and strengthening accountability institutions.
These efforts were underpinned by the appointment o f a team o f senior civil servants-including the head
o f civil service, the permanent secretary, and financial secretary in the Ministry o f Finance-who were
charged with implementing the reform program. Based on Kenya’s performance in implementing the
reform program, the Bank’s Board approved in 2000 the EPSRC for US$l50 million, followed by the
Emergency Power Credit for US$72 million, two healtWHIVlAIDS projects for a combined amount o f
US$lOO million, and a Regional Trade Facilitation Credit for US$25 million. Although the EPSRC’s first
tranche o f ~ $ 5 million
0
was disbursed, the former government’s failure to implement policy reforms
that were agreed conditions to the credit-notably, anti-corruption legislation-delayed the release o f the
second tranche.

This section draws heavily on the Country Assistance Evaluation o f the 1998 Kenya CAS produced by
the Operations Evaluation Department.
5

- 29 Box 3: The Bank’s knowledge strategy in Kenya
A key feature of the Bank‘s strategy in Kenya i s using the lending program to build understanding o f what
strategies work best for reducing poverty; in particular via monitoring and evaluationtechniques. The Arid Lands
Resource Management Project regularly collects data on the livelihoods and well being of pastoralist families and
information on the financial sustainability of pastoralist associations that are organizing services. The lessons
learned from this project will help inform a proposed community driven development program in the western
regions of Kenya. The Bank i s also working closely with a team of academic researchers who are undertaking a
rigorous randomized evaluationof NGO programs in Busia, western Kenya. The team has already demonstrated
the cost effectiveness of deworming medicine as a means of improving school attendance. This will be included
as a component o f the education SWAP. Work i s underway also to test the impact o f girls scholarships, early
child nutrition programs and AIDS awareness programs that hold promise for scale up. More generally the Bank
i s trying to establish much stronger l i n k s with and between local and intemational researchers, data authorities
and policymakers. Under the Poverty Analysis and Data Initiative (PADI), the Bank has been promoting policyoriented quantitative research, intended to build capacity for poverty analysis that will feed into the evaluation o f
the PRSPs of member countries. The Bank also supports the African Economic Research Consortium (AERC), a
not-for-profit organization devoted to advanced policy research and training. The principal objective i s to
strengthen local capacity for conducting independent, rigorous inquiry into problems pertinent to the management
of economies in sub-Saharan Africa.
World Bank Institute (WBI) activities are fully integrated in the CAS. During the CAS period particular areas o f
focus include capacity building (a) o f government through training and through mainstreaming o f the rapid results
approach, (b) in the financial sector following the recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Program
(FSAP), (c) of the private sector on corporate governance and business ethics; and (d) of the public sector,
strengthening program costing, supporting stakeholder participationin the review process, and strengthening
parliamentary oversight of budget formulation and execution. WBI i s also strengthening the capacity of the
media to contribute to the economic Dolicv debate in Kenya.

The new government broke the impasse o f Kenya’s relations with the Bank and other donors.
88.
Motivated by its promises for a bold anti-corruption stand, it quickly initiated a program to fight
corruption. These included all the conditions necessary for release o f the second tranche o f the EPSRC
(US$50 million), and for meeting the 1998 CAS triggers for moving from a l o w t o a base case scenario.
As a result, the Bank disbursed the second tranche o f the credit. I t also moved ahead with two new
poverty targeted operations, both o f which were approved by the Board on June 19,2003. These were the
Arid Lands Resource Management Project Phase 2 for US$60 million to support community-driven
development in Kenya’s poor northeastern region, and the Free Primary Education Project for US$50
million (grant), in support of the new government’s free primary education policy. The IFC portfolio has
declined from a high of US$120 million to a US$110 million. With the general decline in investment
flows, new IFC financing also declined. IFC did finance the competitively bid Tsavo power, the first
project-financed independent power producer in East Africa. IFC also supported the growth o f the export
horticulture sector, promoted the emergence o f commercial microfinance institutions, financed new
aircraft for the successfully privatized Kenya Airways, and initiated the privatization o f Kenya Railways.
B.

Improving portfolio implementation

89.
The current Kenya portfolio comprises 11 investment projects for a total commitment o f US$532
million, with an undisbursed balance o f US$235 million. The l o w number o f projects i s the result o f
Kenya being in the l o w case for the past seven years. Seven o f these projects (64 percent o f the portfolio)
will close within the next 18 months. Thus, the proposed lending program represents a new generation o f
projects, which are being designed on the basis of lessons o f the past, and provide a unique opportunity to
align our program with the government’s IP-ERS.

- 30 90.
A recurrent theme o f OED evaluations has been that development impact and sustainability o f
Bank projects in Kenya i s l o w because key policy changes that were agreed as part o f the project were not
implemented. Moreover, the financial sustainability o f projects was impeded either because reforms to
ensure the financial viability were not undertaken or the project did not receive the necessary and timely
budgetary allocations and expenditure releases! However, we have seen a definite trend by Government
to improve portfolio performance over the last three years. Specific actions include improving flow o f
donor funds in special accounts by bringing these accounts onshore and, more specifically, under the
control o f the project implementing entities; improving efficiency in payment processing, and enhancing
joint government Bank portfolio monitoring. As a result o f these initiatives, the disbursement ratio
increased from 12 percent in fiscal 1998 to 24 percent in fiscal 2003. The share o f problem projects
decreased from 43 percent in fiscal 1998 to 27 percent in fiscal 2004, while the share o f projects at risk
declined from 79 percent in fiscal 1998 to 45 percent in fiscal 2004, Action plans have been developed
for the five projects at risk, three o f which will close by the end o f fiscal 2004.
More recently, the government demonstrated its commitment to improving portfolio performance
9 1.
during the CPPR that was held in January 2004-the first CPPR to be held since 1997. The CPPR
reached agreement on several key issues, including using private auditors, strengthening project
management units through competitive selection for civil servant project coordinators, allowing funds to
flow directly from Treasury to projects, and establishing a mechanism for the direct involvement o f high
level officials within line ministries overseeing project implementation in order to ensure accountability.
The CPPR action plan that was developed will be monitored by the CPPR committee who will report on a
quarterly basis to government permanent secretaries.
92.
Thus, during the CAS period, the strategic thrust o f portfolio improvement will include: (a) risk
mitigation, especially with respect to high risk, high impact operations and cross-cutting systemic risks;
(b) satisfactory implementation o f the CPPR agreed actions, focusing on results and impact; and (c)
continuous improvement o f OED ratings by focusing attention on operations reaching maturity that will
be completed during the CAS period to ensure that results are achieved and mechanisms are in place to
ensure sustainability. CPPRs will be held annually to strengthen the linkages o f the ongoing portfolio
with the country program, with particular emphasis on M&E to ensure an improved and sustained level o f
portfolio performance.

C.

Partnerships

Partnerships between the Bank and official multilateral and bilateral development agencies are
93 *
excellent in Kenya. The Bank Group’s working relations with other donors i s referred to in the
presentation o f the CAS lending program above. Importantly, the Bank Group’s collaboration with the
two next largest donors after itself-the EU and DFID-has been evolving into several cofinancing and
other collaborative undertakings. Relations with other donor agencies are also excellent. The Bank
chairs the Donor Coordination Group for Kenya, which i s the main forum for the dialogue on donor
harmonization, alignment, and coordination. Kenya i s a signatory o f the Rome agreement on donor
harmonization, and the Bank i s taking a lead role in improving coordination at both the general and
sectoral level. The Bank organized and co-chaired with the government the Consultative Group meeting
held in Nairobi, November 24-25,2003. One o f the four major themes o f the meeting was donor
coordination against a background of many years under the previous government when the ability to
coordinate was undermined by the reduction or withdrawal o f many donor programs. The government
agreed to convene meetings with the donors every two months, to discuss and reach agreement on
A meeting o f the Informal Subcommittee o f the Committee on Development Effectiveness was held on
December 8,2003 to discuss the 2001 Country Assistance Evaluation prepared by OED, and a note on recent
developments.

-31 coordinated interventions in support o f the implementation o f the IP-ERS. Following the recent meeting
o f the Strategic Partnership for Africa partners committed themselves to implement the harmonization
agenda.

IP-IP-ERS Area

Multilaterals

Bilaterals

World Bank, IMF, EC
World Bank, IMF
World Bank, EC, AfDB, Arab Bank for
Economic Developmentin Africa, UN
World Bank, EC, IMF
World Bank, IFC, EC, UN
World Bank, IFC, EC, Organizationof
PetroleumExporting Countries, AfDB
World Bank, IFC
World Bank, UN, African Development
Bank

DFID, Germany, Netherlands, Sweden
DFID, France, AfDB
Denmark, France, Italy, Japan, Germany,
Netherlands, Norway, DFID, U S
DFID
Finland, France, Germany, Spain, Japan
China, France, Japan, Germany, Sweden,
Denmark
Netherlands, DFID, US
Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Sweden (also representing DFID),
Saudi Fund for Development

Equity and poverty reduction
Agriculture and rural development

World Bank, UN, EC

Education

World Bank, Organization of Petroleum

Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France,
Germany, Japan, Sweden, DFID, US
Austria, Canada, Germany, Japan, Saudi

Health and population

World Bank, UN
UN
woirld Bank,. EC,, UN

HIViAIDS

WOlrld Bank, EC, UN

Forestry

World Bank, UN, EC

Water resources management

World Bank, AfDB, UN

Environment

World Bank, EC, UN

Housing
Rural energy

UN

Public service reform

World Bank, EC, IMF, UN

Public expenditure review
Anti-corruption, legal sector reform

World Bank, UN, EC, IMF
World Bank, EC, IMF, UN

Economic management and policy
Financial sector reforms
Private sector development
Trade policy reform
Energy
Roads
Air transport
Water supply and sanitation

D.

I
I

DFID, Germany, US, Finland, Sweden
France, Japan
Belgium. Denmark, Germany. Italv. Jauan.
.
Sweden,’DFID, US
Canada, France, Germany,
- Italy,
. Japan,
DFID, US, Sweden
Austria, Finland, Germany, Japan, Sweden,
Belgium, Norway, DFID
Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany,
Japan, Netherlands, Sweden, DFID, US
Belgium, Denmark, France, Italy, Japan,
DFID
Germany
France, Finland, Spain
_,

_ ,

,

I

Denmark, Finland, Italy, Netherlands,
Sweden, US
Germany, Sweden, DFID, US
Austria, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Italy,
Netherlands, Sweden, DFID, U S

Risks and constraints

The decision to quickly scale up Bank Group assistance to Kenya carries risks, and it i s
developing specific measures to guard against these. Specific risks include:
94.

Political economy. A particular concern i s that the required consensus to move forward with
95.
politically difficult reforms will be difficult to reach. Another potential risk i s o f “capture” o f key policy
areas by interest and pressure groups. Critical reforms o f government and parastatal institutions can be ‘
delayed or entirely derailed by those with a stake in the status quo. Trade policy reforms could be
blocked by protectionist interests. The Bank Group will address these risks by improving and expanding
i t s efforts at communications, emphasizing the costs o f continuing with the economic status quo, the Iong-

- 32 term benefits o f reforms, the benefits to the poor o f a more equitable pattern o f public expenditure, and
opportunities for accelerating growth through greater private sector involvement in infrastructure. Better
dissemination o f E S W will be an important vehicle o f this enhanced communications effort, but it will
also involve proactive efforts, with assistance from the Africa Region External Affairs and Partnerships
Group and from WBI to reach out to parliamentarians, the private sector, civil society, academics and o f
course the media. T o the extent feasible this effort will be undertaken in collaboration with other donors.

96.
Capacig. There i s an urgent need to rebuild Kenya’s institutional capacity, and failure to do so
constitutes a major area o f risk. Kenya i s a paradox in that it has a large number o f highly trained and
experienced civil servants, yet its institutions remain weak following years o f mismanagement and poor
incentives for performance. In addition, the fragmentation o f decision making and lack o f
communication between government ministries and departments can lead to considerable delays in policy
formulation and program implementation. The Global Development Learning Network Learning and
Innovation Loan i s helping t o develop mechanisms o f communication among policy makers. With
assistance from WBI, and through projects, training, and analysis support will be provided to build both
human and institutional capacity. The Bank’s dialogue will emphasize support for strengthened interministerial coordination in the PER and MTEF process, encouraging stronger planning o f finance
functions, and the need for strong collaboration in the process o f implementing sectoral operations
derived from the IP-ERS as an incentive for promoting ample and coordinated donor support.

97.

Governance. Any failure to change past patterns o f corruption and “capture” o f the state
apparatus by entrenched and powerful interests would derail the development process and diminish
Kenya’s external credibility. In addition, an inherited culture o f poor governance and o f top down micro
management on the part o f senior officials could lead to poor execution o f agreed policies, To counter
this risk, the Bank will strive to strengthen government fiduciary safeguards and practices. The Bank will
follow through on actions identified in the course o f the C F A A and CPAR work to be carried out in fiscal
2005, focusing on the installation o f institutional safeguards against abuse, but also on building the
capacity (making use of the PSAC scheduled for fiscal 2005) to ensure that basic fiduciary measures are
carried out. The Bank will ensure that anti-corruption safeguards are incorporated within Bank-supported
projects during the preparation phase, and the Department o f Institutional Integrity will be involved as
part o f project teams during their initial phases. Monitoring and evaluation will be a feature o f the Bank’s
program both at the general level, and at the level o f individual Bank-supported operations. The Bank has
supported the development o f a result-based and monitorable framework for the IP-ERS, from which the
CAS’S own result-based framework i s drawn. In addition, all efforts will be made to incorporate
widespread public understanding of, and participation in, the monitoring and evaluation o f results within
the frameworks o f both the IP-ERS and this CAS, as agreed during CAS consultation with civil society
and the private sector.

98.
External factors. Terms o f trade shifts, particularly coffee and tea, continue t o affect rural
incomes and Kenya’s balance o f trade. International terrorism has seriously hampered recovery o f
tourism, and international perceptions could continue to hamper both tourism and investment. The
weather, particularly the altemating cycles o f floods and drought, continue to affect agricultural
production. Market integration poses fiscal risks and puts additional pressure on firms in previously
protected industries. Nonrenewal o f the AGOA, which has underpinned the expansion o f exports and
related employment in the Kenyan garment industry, also poses a risk to the viability o f the garment
sector in Kenya. Although AGOA will not expire until 2008, at the end o f 2004 countries will have to
use US or African cloth to qualify for preferences under AGOA. T o address these risks, the Bank will
complement the efforts o f other donors focusing on security issues by investing in improvements to the
airport and port o f Mombasa that include security upgrades in line with international standards. In order
to offset revenue declines associated with trade and commodity-related shocks, the Bank would plan for

-33

-

fast disbursing budget support along with other donors, and it will support infrastructure improvements
that help to lower the domestic costs o f production.

E.

CAS monitoring and evaluation.

99.
Monitoring the Bank’s effectiveness will take place both at the project level and at the level o f the
overall assistance program. The core CAS benchmarks are derived from IP-ERS targets. These
benchmarks reflect the selective areas o f Bank involvement under the CAS, cover the key challenges that
Kenya must address and for which the Bank i s best placed to assist, and are achievable within the CAS
timeframe. At the midpoint of the CAS period, the Bank will review the indicators and targets to assess
progress in implementing the assistance program, and adjust the Bank’s strategy as necessary,

James D. Wolfensohn
By:
Shengman Zhang
Washington, DC
May 19,2004

Peter L. Woicke

I

.-E

I
I

8

h

V

a

.c

U

?

a

e

W

.

I

..

cn
m

.

e

t-

m

>I

00

m

1

-r-

.

G

i.
i
Z

f

i
i

C
i

i

i

5

;

.

6

i
I
P

b

. .

.

v1

0

U

3

5

C

3

tM
e
PI
v)

0

d

9

e

e

e

e

e

e

- 9 5

e

e

0

e

e

N
d

/d
e

e

e

m

d

e

e
I

e

e

9.

e

e

I

*

*

C

E
L

i

s

I

c
c

I
i

L

!

t

I

i;

3
i

P

k

-+--

!
I

ANNEX 2
REPUBLIC OF KENYA
CAS CONSULTATIONS
The World Bank’s program in Kenya has historically been highly consultative. The previous CAS
(1998) involved extensive consultations with civil society, and the Bank also closely followed the
participatory process organized by the government around the formulation o f the PRSP in 2001-2002.
The Bank has a full-time Social Development Specialist at i t s Nairobi office, who liaises regularly
with civil society. Virtually all projects that have been prepared over recent years, including the
current pipeline, have undertaken significant consultations with beneficiaries, stakeholders and
government. As a consequence, overall relations and communications with NGOs and communities
are very good. The previous CAS consultations were carried out in a context where political will to
implement reforms was limited. For the present CAS, the Bank has sought to build upon the existing
good level o f communication with NGOs, while extending the dialogue to the private sector and the
new parliament. Importantly, the Bank has sought to build a high degree o f dialogue, understanding
and ownership around the CAS with the government at both the technical and higher levels.
Discussions with all these different groups took place at the following occasions, and focused on the
following issues:
Government. The Bank launched i t s discussions with government at the technical level with a WBIfacilitated workshop in Nairobi, January 15-16,2004. This focused on the applications o f “Rapid
Results” methodology to help prioritize and operationalize the IP-ERS, followed by discussion o f the
objectives o f the Bank’s CAS and how its own results matrix aligned with the IP-ERS. This
workshop, which was organized by the Ministry o f Planning, involved 150 different government
officials representing all line ministries with a stake in development operations, and included the
active participation of several Permanent Secretaries as well as representatives o f donor organizations.
The workshop succeeded in developing a much more highly prioritized IP-ERS that i s linked to the
national budget, and which has been used as the basis for finalization o f the IP-ERS. It also
introduced this core group of mid-level technical officials from within government to the CAS and
how i t s results orientation connects to their own strategy document.

The CPPR held January 26,2004 also constituted a part o f the Bank’s outreach t o government on the
CAS, In this event, attended by several ministers and permanent secretaries, the Bank discussed in
detail with the representatives o f key line ministries problems with implementation o f the portfolio,
and the Bank communicated the importance o f implementation in ensuring continued access to IDA
funding. The rich discussion led to agreement on an action plan for improving implementation and
assignment o f accountabilities within government for seeing the plan through.
On January 20,2004, the Bank organized a meeting with several key ministers and permanent
secretaries to review the CAS, in particular the lending program and triggers as well as specific results
to be achieved in support of IP-ERS goals. At this time, the Bank also presented the country policy
and institutional assessment ratings for Kenya, and linked them to the CAS process via the need to
improve certain outcomes as reflected in triggers. The government officials present endorsed the CAS
program and approach, and provided useful feedback on specific areas o f the CAS, including the need
to reinforce its coverage on the environment and on local government in the context o f
decentralization.

48

Parliament. A breakfast meeting with the Parliament’s Budget and Finance Committee was held on
21 January 2004. The Bank presented i t s CAS lending and Nonlending program, and as the topic was
new to most Parliamentarians, provided a briefing on the Bank’s genera1 approach and goals in Kenya,
The discussion focused on issues relating to the need to improve trade and the environment for the
private sector, fiscal management and stability, and managing internal debt. In addition, a good part of
the discussion focused on building routine communications links with parliament in order to establish
a more regular dialogue, provide information on the Bank and general development issues, and clarify
possible areas o f misunderstanding. It was agreed that the Bank will coordinate with WBI in
establishing a schedule o f presentations and meetings.
Private sector. The Bank has forged a reinvigorated relationship with the private sector, which has
been greatly facilitated by the unification o f several previously competing private sector associations
within the Private Sector Alliance, which the government recognizes as i t s principal interlocutor for
purposes o f its own dialogue with the business and investor community. Representativeso f the
private sector participated fully in the Bank-PPIAF organized conference in May 2003 on private
sector participation in infrastructure (discussed in the CAS section on private sector development). In
July 2003, a number of key representatives o f the business community met with Mr. Wolfensohn
during his visit to Kenya. In the context o f the CAS, the Private Sector Alliance met with the Bank
Group, including its Bank-IFC-PPIAF private sector development team, and discussed the Bank’s
CAS strategy for private sector-led growth, including a presentation by the Bank o f i t s investment
climate assessment for Kenya. Among key issues o f concern discussed were the low access to credit
particularly by small entrepreneurs, the need for the government to move ahead quickly with i t s
agenda for privatization and for improving the investment climate, and the need for the Bank to
support small and medium enterprises with their capacity and access to business services, A key area
o f discussion was the regularization o f the dialogue that has started so promisingly with the Bank, and
agreement was reached on a schedule o f monthly meetings around specific agenda items.
Civil Society, NGOs, and community organizations. As noted above, the Bank’s interactions with civil
society have occurred on a continuous basis for an extended period o f time. Civil society and
communities are regularly consulted in the course o f project preparation and implementation. A key
challenge, which has been discussed on several occasions with NGOs i s to involve them more fully in
participatory monitoring and evaluation, and an IDF grant i s being deployed in specific application to
this objective. With regard to the CAS the following meetings were held in the course o f CAS
formulation to discuss i t s content:
4

4

e
4

Meeting with Kenya NGO Coalition, Nairobi, 14 January, 2004
Meeting with Western Kenya NGO Coalition, Kisumu, January 19,2004
Meeting with community organizations participating in the Arid Lands Project, Wajir, 29-30
January, 2004
Follow-up workshops with NGOs in Nairobi and Kisumu focusing on capacity-building needs
o f NGOs, led by WBI, April 2004.

Each o f these meetings contained significant representation from women’s organizations. Several
major areas were discussed in depth on these occasions:
The Bank’s supportfor improving government capacity: CSOs were particularly concernedthat the
Bank have in place support mechanisms that addressed the government’s present low capacity in
budget and expenditure management, as well as in terms o f project implementation. An important
aspect o f this capacity i s that o f communications with civil society and communities, which i s

49

currently lacking, making it difficult for these organizations to make their contribution to
development.
Capacity building for civil society organizations. These organizations are eager to play a major role in
development, but often lack adequate capacity. They see an important role for the Bank in supporting
this capacity.
Articulation between the P M P and IP-ERS. CSOs had considered themselves very well consulted in
the earlier PRSP process, but were concerned that they had not had adequate opportunity to interact
with government in the PRSP’s reformulation in the form o f the IP-ERS. They therefore did not feel
as high a degree o f ownership in this document, and expressed concern about whether they had a
significant role to play in its implementation.
Financial services to the poor. CSOs were universally concerned about the lack o f financial services
particularly to the poor, and fully endorsed the Bank’s commitment to support reform o f the financial
sector, urging only that there be a genuine focus in i t s operations on increasing the access o f the poor,
and women in particular.
Reversing inequities andfocusing on the needs of vulnerable populations. CSOs approved o f the
Bank’s focus on identifying and addressing inequities, for example via the poverty mapping exercise,
and on targeting its interventions in infrastructure particularly to the poorest populations. They
emphasized in particular the need to address issues o f concern to women and youth as key populations
which are highly marginalized in the delivery o f basic services.
HIVAIDS. CSOs endorsed the Bank’s continuing commitment to help Kenya battle HIVlAIDS and
particularly approved o f the way in which the Bank has sought to implement i t s MAP in Kenya
through CSOs engaged in the fight against the disease. They stressed that in a second phase, even
greater effort should be made to focus on women.
Co~~unity-drive
development.
n
CSOs endorsed the C D D approach, in which many have
participated, and urged the Bank to expand i t s work in this area, while extending its capacity-building
efforts to NGOs to ensure they are able t o play a productive role.
Decentralization. CSOs pointed to the importance o f the present constitutional debate over the degree
of devolution o f powers, and urged the Bank to support the decentralization process, with an emphasis
on building local government capacity, as well as that o f community-based CSOs so they can help in
the process.
The Bank’s results-based approach. CSOs fully approved o f the Bank’s results orientation and
expressed high interest in participating in monitoring and evaluation o f outcomes. In this regard, they
also articulated their interest in the government’s previous outreach to them soliciting their
involvement in participatory M&E around the IP-ERS. They expressed some disappointment,
however, in that this seems to have slipped from the government’s agenda, and asked that the Bank
take this up as a priority topic to be resolved.
Ongoing consultations: NGO leaders expressed their appreciation for the Bank’s commitment to
including them in major development forum, including having NGO leaders attend the Consultative
Group meeting on 24-25 November, 2003. They requested a deepening o f this form o f consultation
and inclusion at all possible opportunities where they might present c i v i l society’s views o n key
development issues.

50

c\:

d

c
d

P
P

o(

CI

m 9 Y

r

- 2 2

P

- 9 o !

+

m

o

f

Kenya at a glance
POVERN and SOCIAL
2003
Population, mid-year (mil/ions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Kenya

SubSaharan
Africa

income

32.0
390
12.5

689
450
311

2,495
430
1,070

2.1
2.7

2.4
2.5

I.9
2.3

Low-

Average annual growth, 1997-03
Population (%J
Labor force (%)

5/19/04

Developmentdiamond'

I

55
36
46
78
22
57
15
94
95
93

33
46
103
58
37
67
94
60

31
59
79
42
76
37
94
100
88

T
GNI
per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1997-03)
Poverty (% of population below national poverfy line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (yean)
Infant mortality (per 7,000 live bitths)
Child malnutrition (W of children underst
Access to an improved water source (% ofpopulation)
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

Life expectancy

Gross
primary

nrollment

Access to improved water source

-

I

Kenya
Low-incomegroup

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1983

1993

2002

2003

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmentlGDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP
Gross national savingslGDP

6.0
20.9
25.9
20.4
16.3

5.8
17.6
38.9
22.4
20.5

12.3
13.6
26.6
9.5
14.1

13.4
16.5
27.5
9.5
14.9

Current account balancelGDP
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debllGDP
Total debt Servicelexports
Present value of deWGDP
Present value of debvexports

4.4
2.5
60.6
34.8

2.9
3.6
123.7
29.9

0.5
0.7
48.9
20.4

-1.5
0.6
43.8
21.5

1983-93

1993-03

2002

2003

2003-07

4.1
0.7
7.1

1.8
-0.4
0.6

1.o
-0.9
5.0

I .3
-0.6
5.7

3.8
1.2
8.0

1983

1993

2002

2003

34.2
19.4
11.8
46.4

31.5
16.9
10.0
51.6

16.4
19.0
13.0
64.6

17.1
19.7
13.4
63.2

62.9
16.4
26.2

63.0
14.5
34.0

70.5
19.0
29.8

19.1
32.2

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and sewices
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

(avenge annual growth)
Agriculture
Industcy
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment

1983-93

199343

2o02

I

Economic ratios'

I

Trade

Domestic
savings

Investment

Indebtedness

-Kenya

Low-income group

Growth of investment and GDP (%)
15
10

5
0

5

-GDI

-O'GDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)

2.3
4.1
4.8
4.7

1.5
1.4
1.4
2.5

0.6
1.1
1.2
1.3

1.1
0.7
0.0
1.5

4.9
4.0
1.3

1.9
5.3
2.6

-13.7
4.3
-1.8

14.1
1.7
13.6

2o
IO

-"
-20

-Exports

*Imports

Note: 2003 data are preliminary estimates. Group data are for 2002.
*The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its incomegroupaverage, If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

52

I

II

1

Kenva
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE

1983

1993

2002

2003

15.0
11.8

46.0
25.7

2.0
8.7

9.4
3.4

24.5
0.8
-5.3

29.5
2.3
-1.0

21.4
0.2
0.7

20.8
0.1
-3.9

1983

1993

2002

2003

980
179
232
113
1,361
120
545
204

1,103
62
177
241
1,606
75
407
329

2,169
54
84
467
3,058
146
741
754

2,514
61
95
504
3,599
153
787
856

92
96
96

80
86
93

98
108
91

108
120
89

1983

1993

2002

2003

1,552
1,687
-135

2,238
1,953
285

3,281
3,670
-389

3,674
4,303
-629

Net income
Net current transfers

-190
63

-360
241

-122
577

-179
805

Current account balance

-282

185

66

-203

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

484
-222

157
-323

-45
-21

399
-196

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ miiiions)
Conversion rate (DEC, /ocal/US$j

406
13.3

489
58.0

1,067
78.6

1,564
75.9

1983

1993

2002

2003

3,624
506
334

7,115
566
1,631

6,031
13
2,447

5,854
5
2,560

Total debt selvice
IBRD
IDA

553
53
3

672
155
18

676
13
59

799
9
64

Compositionof net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

0
191
59
9
0

65
151
-40
2
0

89
-97
-1 1
50

232
51
-80
60

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

76
120
18
102
38
64

115
226
107
119
66
53

0
66
54
12
18
-6

0
159
54
105
19
86

Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
[% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplusldeficit
TRADE

(US$ mj//ions)
Total exports (fob)
Petroleum
Coffee
Manufactures
Total imports @if)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (1995=100J
Import price index /1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ mi///onsj
~xportsof goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millionsf
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
18RD
IDA

Development Economics

I

Inflation (36)

-GDP

deflator

I

*CPI

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
4,000

T

97

98

99

00

Exports

01

02

Wlmpork

Current account balance to GDP (X)
I T

Composition of 2003 debt (US$ mill.)
G:756 A 5

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C-IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G .Short-term

5119104

53

-

CAS Annex 8 2 Kenya
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 05/06/2004

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$lproject)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2001

2002

2003

2004

15
3.8
20.0
22.0
26.7
25.0
49.2

13
4.8
30.8
57.2
38.5
60.8
25.0

12
4.4
16.7
19.9
41.7
45.8
24.0

11
4.5
27.3
36.2
45.5
71.3
24.8

No
972
65

No
1167
78

No
1182
79

Yes

-

-_
__

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
92
8
3,016.5
195.8
57.6
37.5
51.7
19.8

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b, Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
C. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andlor implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

54

-

-

CAS Annex 6 3 IBRDllDA Program Summary Kenya
As Of Date 0510612004

Proposed IBRDllDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal year

Prcj ID

2004

Kenya Northern Corridor Transport
GDLN
Agriculture Productivity Project
N'rbi. Water & Swr'age Inst. Restr.Proj.
Result

2005

207.0

H

M

2.7
40.0
15.0

M
H
H

M
M
M

H
H
H
H
H

M
M

20.0
20.0
75.0
20.0

Energy Sector Recovery
Financial and Legal Sector TIA
Result

M
H

M

210.0

Lake Victoria 2

10.0
65.0

Financial Sector Adjustment Credit
Education SWAP

50.0
5.0

EAC Trade and Transport (Regional)
Health SWAP
MAP II

2007

Implementation b
Risks ( H M )

264.7
75.0

Programmatic Structural Adjustment Credit
MSME Initiative
STATCAP

2006

Strategic Rewards b
(Hnvl/L)

US$(M)

H
H
H
H

M
M
M
M
M

Public Sector Reform TA

40.0

H
H
H

Result

30.0
20.0

H

H

PRSC I
Western Kenya CDD

220.0
100.0

H

H

45.0

H

M

Water (WSSNVRM)
Result

30.0
175.0

869.7

Overall Result

55

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Kenya
Kenya - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2001-2004

IFC approvals (US$m)

Sector (YO)

Agriculture and For
Chemicals
Finance & Insurance
Food & Beverages
Transportation and
Wholesale and Retai

2001

2002

45.89

7.77

1

55

67
33
101

Total

Investment instrument(%)

Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

33
34
33
0
100

Total

45

2003

2004

15.00 26.00

100
100

100

100

100

100
14

100

85
100
15

114

100

200

42.19 123.70 123.70 121.05

M I G A guarantees (US$m)

56

-

-

CAS Annex B4 Summary of Nonlending Services Kenya
Product
Recent completions
Interim PRSP
Water Sector Review
CFAA
Community Driven Development
Local Government Restructuring
Transport Sector Strategy
Urban Water
Country Gender Assessment
Country Economic Memorandum
Public Enterprise Review
Social Expenditure Review
Reform and Restructuring
Watershed Management

As Of Date 05/06/2004

Completion F Y

Cost (US$OOO)

Audience a

Objective

FYOl
FYOl
FY02
FY02
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY04

312
190
125
150
75
50
50
25
250
60
75
50
150

GlDlBlP
GlDlBlP
GlDlB
GlDlBlP
GlDlBlP
GlDlB
GlDlB
GlDlB
GlDlB
GIB
GlDlBlP
GlDlB
GlDlB

BIC
BIC
AIC
AIBlC
AlBlC
AIC
AIC
AIC
AIC
AIC
AIBlC
AIC
AIC

Underway
Public Expenditure Review
Education Sector Review
RPED-Investment Climate Assessment
Energy Sector Review
PRSP
Country Assistance Strategy
Pharmaceutical Study
Youth Development Agenda
Growth& Competitiveness

FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY05
FY05
FY04

175
100
50
60
250
200
50
125
175

GlDlBlP
GlDlB
GIB
GlDlB
GlDlBlP
GlDlBlP
GlDlB
GlDlB
GlDlB

AIBlC
AIC
AIC
AIC
BIC
B
AIC
AIC
AIC

Planned
PEFA
Agriculture Markets & Policy Review
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
Telecommunications Study
Urban Poverty Issues

FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05

300
200
150
50
100

GIDIBIP
GlDlB
GlDlB
GIB
GlDlB

AIBlC
AIBlC
AIBlC
AIBlC
AIBlC

a. Government (D), donor (D), Bank (B), public dissemination (P).
b, Knowledge generation (A), public debate (e), problem-solving(C).

57

Kenya Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same regionlincomegroup

1970-75

1980-85

1995-2001

SubSaharan
Africa

13.7
3.6
12.9
8.1

19.9
3.6
19.8
6.9

30.7
2.4
34.3
4.3

673.9
2.5
32.3
5.1

2,505.9
1.9
30.8
3.5

460

430

2.8

LOW.
income

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (X annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Totai feltility rate (births per woman]
POVERW
(% of popu/afion)
National headcount index
Urban haadcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

52 7
43 1
52 6
250

300

350

6

20
24

159
136

INCOMElCONSUMPTIONDlSTRlEUTlON
Share of income or conSUmptiOn
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

44.5
5.6
51.2

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (Oh of GDP)
Education(% of GDP)
Social security and welfare (56 of GDP)

60

61

64

18

2.5
3.4

1.1

88
93
83

91
92
89

69
68
69

52

57
88
42

58
83
46

76

63
70

76
76
22

58
53

60
61

57

Net primary school enrollment rate

(“A of age group)
Totai
Male
Female
Access to an improved Water source
(% of populafion)
Total
Urban
Rurai
lmmunlzation rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition(% under 5 years)

90
70

Life expectancy at birth
(ye&
Total
Male
Female

52
51
55

55
59

46
46
47

46
45
47

59
58
60

85
I36

68
106

78
122

105
171

80
121

467

417

578

520

312

379

339

529
1,300
44

461

256

Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 pOpUlatiOn)
Maternal (modeled,per 100,000live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (X)

Note: 0 or 0,O means zero Or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series batwean 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97: ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies between tha estimates of schoolage population
and reported enrollment date
2003 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

58

-

Kenya K e y Economic Indicators

Indicator
Yational accounts (as OO/ o f GDP)

1999

Actual
2000
2001

Estimate

2002

2003

Projected
2004
2005

100
23

100
20

100
19

100
16

100
16

100
16

100
16

Industry

18

19

18

19

19

19

19

Services

59

62

63

65

65

65

64

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

90
15
0
15

94
15
0
15

95
14
0
14

90
13
0
13

89
14
0
14

89
19
0
19

87
24
0
24

(GNFS)~
Imports (GNFS)

25
31

26
36

26
36

27
30

26
31

21
35

27
39

Gross domestic savings

10

6

5

10

11

11

13

Gross national savings'

15

13

11

14

14

14

15

10559

10440

11234

12330

14015

14574

15425

360

350

3 50

360

390

430

460

-0.2
0.7

1.1
2.2

1.o
-0.3

1.3
0.9

2.6
2.8

3.5
3.4

-0.9
7.8
-2.3

-0.9
-64.0
60.9

-0.5
1717.0
-349.9

0.8
-1.7
-1.7

1.9
-1.6
-1.6

Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

EXPOI~S

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
G N I per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1982 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
1.3
Gross Domestic Income
-1.4

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1982 prices)
-1.0
-2.4
Gross domestic product at market prices
-42.9
98.6
Total consumption
32.9
-26.5
Private consumption
Balance o f Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB

2687
1755

2743
1773

2968
1881

3281
2169

3674
2514

3864
2640

409 1
2807

Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

3312
2679
-626
634
-234

3757
3033
-1015
884
-284

4002
3176
-1033
807
-398

3670
3058
-389
60 1
66

4303
3599
-629
630
-203

5142
4362
-1278
566
-886

6012
5 164
-1921
566
-1536

42

127

50

50

60

60

102

-135

116

-37

-98

51

-5

-64

-68

-148

-191

-2 1

-196

-252

-389

-5.9

-9.7

-9.2

-3.2

-4.5

-8.8

-12.5

-5.2

-4.9

11.6

16.7

5.8

4.5

4.8

-5.2
-5.1

-5.9
5.8

20.8
7.3

5.3
-6.9

-4.2
5.9

6.2
22.6

6.9
19.3

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd
~ e m o r a n d u mitems

Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR82 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

59

-

Kenya Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

1999

Actual
2000
2001

Public finance (as “Yo of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
26.5
Current expenditures
21.1
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
4.8
Capital expenditure
4.8
Foreign financing
-0.9
Monetary indicators
M2IGDP
Growth o f M2 (Yo)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth ( “ 3 )
Price indices( YR82 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

2002

Estimate
2003

Projected
2004
2005

22.9
19.8
3.1
2.4
-2.3

24.4
22.6
1.8
3 .I
2.4

21.4
21.2
0.2
2.6
-0.5

20.8
26.2
0.1
3.7
0.2

20.8
21.1
1.8
5.0
0.6

21.1
21.5
2.1
6.2
1.3

42.0
2.1
163.5

39.5
0.8
74.5

36.5
2.5
-364.8

36.2
8.8
36.9

37.1
7.3
33.1

31.5
9.5
109.2

38.1
9.3
325.0

121.1
101.2
119.6
119.9

128.1
108.3
118.9
128.0

122.3
105.6
115.8
134.6

120.8
109.3
110.5
131.8

132.3
121.4
108.9
139.8

132.9
120.0
110.7
144.1

134.9
119.1
113.2
148.5

5.8
5.1

10.0
7.3

5.8
9.6

2.0
8.7

9.4
3.4

1.0
5.7

3.5
3.7

GDP at factor cost
“GNFS“ denotes “goods and nonfactor services.“
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use o f I M F resources.
Consolidated central government.
“LCU” denotes “local currency units.“ An increase in US$/L,CU denotes appreciation.

60

Kenya - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

1999

Actual
2000
2001

2002

Estimate
2003

Projected
2004
2005

6450

6159

5562

6031

5854

5784

5685

-262

49

-193

-127

-47

-69

-99

700

525

494

459

510

382

335

237.3

220.9

184.7

181.9

157.4

147.5

136.6

TDOiGDP

61.1

59.0

49.5

48.9

36.9

25.8

18.8

16.4

13.8

43.8
13.7

39.7

TDSlXGS

9.7

8.0

ConcessionalirDO

64.0

66.4

70.8

65.3

24.9

24.4

26.8

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators

(%I

TDOKGSb

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DSipublic DS
Preferred creditor DSipublic

12.1

11.1

6.7

3.6

2.0

1.1

0.3

41.2

45.7

39.8

35.2

32.3

33.7

37.3

DS (%)c
IBRD DSKGS

2.6

1.7

0.8

0.4

0.2

0.1

0.0

IBRD TDO (US$m)d

91

47

23

13

2262

2263

2447

1
2564

0

2220

5
2560

IDA TDO (US$m)d

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferredcreditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for InternationalSettlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

61

2554

P

r!
(n

k

CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Kenya
Kenya
Statement o f IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As o f 313 112004
(In U S Dollars Millions)
Held
F Y Approval
1980
1982
1998
200 1
1/3/1982

1994
1996199
2003
1983191
2000
1994196
1972
2000
2000
1997
1997
1996
2000
1998
2000
1997
1997
1999

Disbursed

Company
Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
DBK
0
1.31
0
0
0
1.31
0
0
0.8
0
0
0
0.8
0
0
Diamond Trust
0
GBHL
0
3
0 2.33
0
3
0
2.33
Gapco Kenya
15
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
IPS(K)
0
4.5
0
0
0
0.69
0
0
IPS(K)-Allpack
0
0.36
0
0
0
0.36
0
0
IPS(K)-Frigoken
0
0.06
0
0
0
0.06
0
0
0
0.11
0
0
0
0.11
0
0
IPS(K)-Prem Food
Intl Hotels-Ken
4.29
0
0
0 4.29
0
0
0
0.43
0
0
0
0.12
0
0
0
K-Rep Bank
Kenair
0
0
0
15
0
0
0 6.41
0
0.03
0
0
0
0.03
0
0
LIK
Mabati
5
0
4.5
0
5
0
4.5
0
12.64
0
0
0 12.64
0
0
0
Panafkican
0.04
0
0
TPS (Kenya)
0
0.04
0
0
0
17.24
0.83 1.17 19.25 17.24
0.83 1.17 19.25
Tsavo Power
0
0
0 0.51
0
0
0
AEF A A A Growers
0.5 1
AEF Ceres
0
0
0 0.93
0
0
0
0.93
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
AEF Deras Ltd,
AEF Equitea
0.3
0.12
0
0
0.3
0.12
0
0
2.5
0
0
0
2.5
0
0
0
AEF Lesiolo
0.24
0
0
0 0.24
0
0
0
AEF Locland
1.21
0
0
0 1.21
0
0
0
AEF Magana
0.18
0
0
0 0.18
AEF Makini
0
0
0
AEF Redhill Flrs
0.27
0
0
0 0.27
0
0
0
0
0 1.41
0.67
0
0
0.67
1.41
ANSPAR

Total Portfolio:

80.05

9.26

8.67 19.25 66.46

Approvals Pending Commitment
2003

Kenair

Total Pending Commitment:

Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0
0
0
0
0

0

0

63

0

5.14

8.67 19.25

-

CAS Annex 610 Kenya
CAS Summary of Development Priorities
AS

Country

Network area

performance ’

of 06/06/04

Major issue

Country
priority’

Bank
priority’

High
High
High
Moderate

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction
Economic policy
Public sector
Gender

Poor
Fair
Fair
Good

High Inequality
Structure of Public Spending
High Wage Bill
Legal Framework

Moderate
High
Moderate
Moderate

Human Development Department
Education
Heailh, nutrition & population
Social protection

Fair
Fair
Good

Efficiency& Financing
Expenditure Framework
Natural Disasters

High
High
Moderate Moderate
High
High

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
Rural development
Environment
Social development

Fair
Fair
Good

InstitutionalReform
Governance Issues
Youth 8 Unemployment

High
High
Moderate Moderate
Moderate Moderate

Banking Sector
High Transactions Costs
Low Access & Poor Reliability
High Cost 8 Unreliable Service

High
High
High
High

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financialsector
Poor
Private seclor
Fair
Fair
Energy & mining
Infrastnicture
Poor

Reconci/iation
of country and
Bank priorities

High
High
High
High

a. Use ’excellent,” ‘good.” ’fair,” or ‘poor,”
b. Indicate piindpal country-specific problems ( e , ~ .for
, povelty reduction, ‘rural poverty;’ for education. ’femals secondary completion;’ for environment, ’urban air pollution-)
c. To indicate priorily, use “iow: ’modemte,’Or’high,’
d. Give erplanation,if prionties do not agree: for example, another MDB may have the lead On the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

64

