Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank Group

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 28791-TUN

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF TUNISIA

June 3, 2004

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS
Unit of Currency = Tunisian Dinar (TD)
1US$ = 1.30 TD (average March 2004)

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAA
AAEU
AFD
AfDB
AIDS
ALMP
APL
CAE
CAS
CASAR
CFAA
CITET
CPAR
CPPR
DDO
DPR
DS
EC
ECAL
EIB
EQIP
ESW
EU
FEMIP
FDI
FSAP
FY
GDP
GEF
GNFS
GTZ
HIV
IACE
IBRD
ICA
ICT
IDF
IFC

Analytical and Advisory Activity
Association Agreement with European Union
French Development Agency
African Development Bank
Acquired Immune-Deficiency Syndrome
Active Labor Market Policy
Adaptable Program Loan
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Assistance Strategy Achievement Report
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Tunisia International Center for Environmental Technologies
Country Procurement Assessment Review
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Deferred Drawdown Option
Development Policy Review
Debt Service
European Commission
Economic Competitiveness Adjustment Loan
European Investment Bank
Education Quality Improvement Project
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Facility for Euro-Mediterranean Investment and Partnership
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Goods and Non Factor Services
German Agency for Technical Corporation
Human Immune-Deficiency Virus
Arab Institute of Heads of Enterprises
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Investment Climate Assessment
Information and Communication Technology
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation

IMF
JBIC
KfW
MDA
MDG
M&E
MENA
MFA
MCI
MLT
MOU
MTEF
NPL
NRMP
OED
ONAS
PER
PESW
PIC
PPI
QAG
R&D
ROSC
SIL
SME
SONEDE
SWAP
TA
TDO
UN
UNDP
UNIFEM
WB
WBI
WSIP
WSIS
WSSP
WTO

International Monetary Fund
Japanese Bank for International Corporation
German Development Credit Agency
Master Derivatives Agreement
Millennium Development Goals
Monitoring and Evaluation
Middle East and North Africa
Multi-Fiber Agreement
Middle Income Countries
Medium and Long Term
Memorandum of Understanding
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
Non Performing Loan
Natural Resources Management Project
Operations Evaluation Department
National Sanitation Utility (Tunisia)
Public Expenditure Review
Programmatic Economic and Sector Work
Public Information Center
Private Participation in Infrastructure
Quality Assurance Group
Research and Development
Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes
Sector Investment Loan
Small and Medium Enterprise
National Water Distribution Utility (Tunisia)
Sector Wide Approach
Technical Assistance
Total Debt Outstanding and Disbursed
United Nations
United Nations Development Program
United National Development Fund for Women
World Bank
World Bank Institute
Water Sector Investment Program
World Summit on Information Society
Water Supply and Sewerage Project
World Trade Organization

MANAGERS AND STAFF RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS CAS (IBRD)

Vice President
Country Director
Task Manager

Christiaan Poortman
Theodore Ahlers
Cécile Fruman
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The World Bank greatly appreciates the collaboration with the Tunisian government in the
preparation of this CAS. The document benefited from extensive and thoughtful discussions with
government representatives. The additional contributions by those who were consulted during preparation
of the CAS are equally appreciated.
The preparation of this CAS has truly been a team effort, which included hands-on involvement
of the entire Tunisia country team as well as staff from other units of the World Bank Group. Many team
members and other staff made substantial contributions – in participating in CAS and country team
meetings and retreats, in drafting parts of this document, in providing comments and advice, in translating
or reviewing translations into French – to jointly develop the strategy presented here. Although it is
impossible to name them all, they are all to be thanked and congratulated for their excellent collaboration
and teamwork. A special thanks goes to Aristomene Varoudakis, Lead Country Economist for Tunisia,
who shared his wisdom and excellent analysis of the situation in Tunisia, Sybille Crystal, Operations
Analyst, who provided invaluable support and quality inputs throughout the process, and Micheline
Faucompre, Program Assistant, who demonstrated great commitment in managing the organization of
team meetings and editing of the document.

NOTE: While this CAS adopts a results-based format, it is not an official results-based CAS pilot.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i

I.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

1

A.
B.

Political and Social Context
Recent Economic Developments and Policies

1
4

II.

NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENDA AND MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS

8

A.
B.

Tunisia’s Tenth Economic Development Plan: Progress and Challenges Ahead
Medium-Term Macroeconomic Prospects

8
11

III.

TUNISIA-WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP FOR FY05-08

13

A.
B.
C.

Review of Past Bank Performance
Key Features of CAS
Expected Outcomes of CAS and Bank Support

14
18
20

IV.

VEHICLES FOR WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP WITH TUNISIA

26

A.
B.
C.
D.

Bank Instruments
Outreach, Communication and Capacity Building
Development Partners
Lending Scenarios

26
29
30
32

V.

RESULTS-BASED MONITORING AND EVALUATION: PARTNERSHIP
FOR MEASURING RESULTS

34

MANAGING RISKS

35

VI.

CAS ANNEXES:
Annex 1: CAS Results Framework
Annex 2: 2000 CAS Achievement Report

36
44

CAS TABLES
Annex A1: Tunisia At a Glance
Annex B2: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex B3: Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program FY04-07

77
79
80

Annex B3: IFC and MIGA Program FY01-04
Annex B4: Summary of AAA Program
Annex B5: Social Indicators
Annex B6: Key Economic Indicators
Annex B7: Key Exposure Indicators
Annex B8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA/Grants)
Annex B8: Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex B9: CAS Summary of Development Priorities (this annex is replaced by Annex 1CAS Results Framework)

81
82
83
84
86
87
88

BOXES:
Box 1: Millennium Development Goals: Summary of Tunisia’s Progress
Box 2: Key Goals in the 10th Economic Development Plan
Box 3: Main Results of the 2000 CAS
Box 4: Areas of Support under the Employment PESW
Box 5: Proposed Key Analytical and Advisory Activities for Agriculture and Water
Box 6: The New Neighborhood Initiative – What’s at stake?

2
8
16
17
23
31

FIGURES:
Figure 1: Headcount Poverty Index in Tunisia
Figure 2: Average Annual Real GDP Growth – Tunisia and Comparators
Figure 3: Tunisia – Inflation and External Balance
Figure 4: Fiscal Deficit in % GDP
Figure 5: Foreign Debt in % of GDP
Figure 6: Private Investment
Figure 7: Illustrative Results Framework

1
4
4
6
6
7
22

TABLES:
Table 1: Base-case Scenario – Selected Macroeconomic Indicators
Table 2: External Financing Plan
Table 3: Portfolio Management Indicators
Table 4: Indicative Base Case Assistance Program

12
13
17
27

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i.
Tunisia continues to make significant progress in economic and social development. Sustained
structural reform efforts since the early 1990s, prudent macroeconomic policies, and deeper trade
integration in the global economy have created an enabling environment for growth of the private sector
and improved competitiveness of the economy. Growth has been resilient, even when Tunisia faced an
unfavorable external environment such as in 2002, reaching 5.5 percent in 2003. This has fostered
positive social achievements in health, education and social protection which place Tunisia ahead of
countries at similar income levels, and in a good position to achieve the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). In particular, poverty was sharply reduced from 8 percent of the population in 1995 to 4 percent
in 2000. Tunisia has made substantial progress in closing gender gaps in education, reducing fertility and
building strong legal rights and privileges for women. Tunisia has also embarked on the path of
environmental sustainability thanks to a strong institutional setup and legislative framework coupled with
a well designed sustainable development policy.
ii.
In a context of heightened international competition, three key challenges remain to meet the
goals of the 10th Economic Development Plan (2002-2006). The first and most pressing challenge is to
reduce unemployment which remains high, at around 15 percent, reflecting demographic pressures and
increased competition (completion of the free trade zone for manufacturers with the European Union
(EU) by 2008, EU enlargement in 2004 and elimination of Multi-Fiber Agreement quotas in 2005). This
will require improving the investment climate for the private sector and the quality of economic
governance. The second challenge is to improve the quality, relevance and financial sustainability of the
education sector and strengthen innovation systems and scientific and technological research educational
system in order to establish a knowledge economy. Tunisia’s education sector faces an important
challenge as a result of demographic transition (rapidly rising enrollment rates in secondary and tertiary
education), at a time when it is critical to further improve learning achievements and foster better linkages
between education, research and the labor market if Tunisia is to have the skills to compete in the global
knowledge economy. The third challenge is to strengthen the performance of social programs while
maintaining budget balances. Here too, demographic trends and transformations in the labor market due
to competitive pressures pose great challenges for health, social protection, and pension systems. At the
same time, non-discretionary spending introduces serious rigidity in the public expenditure system which
is focused on the short-term.
iii.
The World Bank’s country assistance strategy (CAS) proposes to help the Government of
Tunisia in addressing these three challenges:
§

Strengthen the business environment to support the development of a more competitive,
internationally integrated private sector and improve competitiveness of the Tunisian economy.
Bank support will be directed to achieve six CAS outcomes which are essential to raise the rate of
private sector investments: (1) improved incentives framework and increased transparency and
predictability of the regulatory framework; (2) reduced transaction costs for firms, leading to
increased production and exports; (3) improved delivery/efficiency of infrastructure services by
public and private firms; (4) improved competitiveness of agriculture while ensuring that social and
environmental concerns are properly addressed; (5) banking sector more responsive to the needs of
the private sector; (6) more dynamic local public and private financial markets.

§

Enhance skills and employability of graduates and labor force in a knowledge economy. Bank
support will be devoted to help to: (1) improve quality and relevance of all levels of the education
system; (2) improve financial sustainability of the education system; and (3) improve linkages

ii
between research, higher education and the market place leading to greater innovation and
competitiveness of firms.
§

Improve the quality of social services through enhanced efficiency of public expenditures. Three
CAS outcomes have been identified: (1) increased budget flexibility and better fiscal mobilization to
reduce public debt; (2) performance budgeting and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) operational in
key line ministries; and (3) improved coverage, quality, and financial sustainability of health, social
protection, and pension systems.

iv.

Building on lessons learned from the past, this CAS is based on the following guiding
principles: a greater focus on results and quality; strengthened partnerships and outreach; and
additional flexibility in the approach and choice of instruments. The CAS results framework provides
the Bank and the Government with a mechanism for monitoring progress towards achievement of CAS
outcomes. Since this is the first attempt to systematically identify results and indicators, the process will
be refined during CAS implementation as part of a joint learning exercise. The CAS proposes enhanced
cooperation with development partners, and in particular the European Union, and a broader program of
outreach. It is intended to be sufficiently flexible to respond to evolving Government priorities and needs
over the implementation period. The instruments proposed to support the strategy are: analytical and
advisory assistance, including programmatic economic and sector work; simplified sector investment
lending and adjustment lending; extending programmatic lending such as sector-wide approaches
(SWAps); IBRD guarantees and hedging products; some IFC and MIGA support; and technical assistance
adapted to the needs of a middle income country (i.e. to improve debt management and to help structure
an adequate portfolio of IBRD financial products and services).

v.

For the CAS period FY05-08, a flexible base case program of $200 to $300 million a year on
average is proposed in order to support the key development objectives of the CAS. The base case
lending scenario aims to provide enough flexibility to respond to opportunities for high quality lending
and help support the reforms needed for Tunisia to sustain growth. The proposed lending amounts and the
attached flexibility are consistent with sound risk management in view of the expected development
progress and poverty reduction and the projected improvement of IBRD exposure indicators. The base
case program would include at least one policy based operation, Economic Competitiveness Adjustment
Loan (ECAL) IV, focusing on private sector development and the financial sector - and possibly two.
Borrowing in excess of the CAS limits could be envisaged in specific circumstances, using the Bank’s
special lending instruments, to help Tunisia cope with increased financing needs due to external shocks
and other unpredictable factors. A low case lending scenario – not to exceed $100 million in investment
lending only - would result from difficulties in maintaining a stable macroeconomic framework or a
slowdown in the pace of structural reform.
vi.
The program is designed to mitigate risks that could limit the effectiveness of Bank support and
to enhance monitoring and evaluation of CAS outcomes. The program could face risks related to
Tunisia’s greater integration into global markets; macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities; the lack of
political will for reform or slow pace of change; and regional and country instability. Risk management
measures are described for each risk area. Enhanced monitoring of CAS outcomes will contribute to
mitigating risks at the project level by enabling Bank teams to respond to problems as they occur and
provide quality support on a more timely basis. This will be done in partnership with the Government and
other development partners, by relying on existing mechanisms for data collection, and helping to
strengthen existing systems and institutions.

iii

vii.
The following issues, given their importance to the proposed strategy, are suggested for Board
discussion:
§
§
§

The consistency of the assistance program with Tunisia’s development challenges.
The adequacy of the core design elements of the CAS to increase the effectiveness of Bank
interventions in Tunisia, in particular the proposed results focus, the greater emphasis on partnerships
and the use of programmatic support.
The adequacy of the proposed lending scenarios in order to provide greater flexibility in
accomodating the needs of a sophisticated middle income country.

-1-

I. COUNTRY CONTEXT
A.

Political and Social Context

1.
The stability which characterizes the political scene in Tunisia is likely to continue during the
CAS period. As a republic with a strong central authority vested in the President, Tunisia has experienced
political stability at a time when its neighborhood has been experiencing significant turmoil. Tunisia has
committed itself to deeper international integration; it was the first MENA country to sign an Association
Agreement with the EU (AAEU) in 1995 and continues to lead efforts to revive the five-nation Arab
Maghreb Union. President Zine al-Abedine Ben Ali has been in power since 1987 and will run for a
fourth five-year term of office in the fall of 2004. Past positive development outcomes have fostered a
large middle class that will press for more participation in the development process, greater transparency
and accountability through a strengthened role of civil society and the private sector.
2.
Tunisia has made steady and rapid progress on the social development front. Health levels have
consistently improved, as indicated by increasing life expectancy to 72.1 years, close to high-income
country standards, and falling infant, child and maternal mortality rates. At the same time, health
insurance coverage has become practically universal: the state provides free or subsidized health care to
the lowest income groups, while the rest of the population are covered by one of the social insurance
funds. Primary education became nearly universal and illiteracy is close to becoming eradicated among
younger generations, although disparities still remain in female and male literacy rates. Although
challenges remain in improving the quality and ensuring the financial sustainability of social sector
policies, overall, these achievements have placed Tunisia ahead of countries at similar income levels, and
in a good position to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) (Box 1).
3.
Poverty was sharply reduced in the
F i g u r e 1 : H e a d c o u n t p o v e r t y i n d e x i n T un i s i a ( % o f p o p u l a t i o n )
second half of the 1990s. The core poor (those 1 8
living below a poverty line reflecting a minimum 11 64
consumption expenditure level) made up only 1 2
4 percent of the population in 20001, equivalent to 1 0
8
some 400,000 people, down from about 8 percent
6
in 1990 and in 1995. Similarly, the share of poor
4
2
and economically vulnerable (those living below
0
the upper poverty line), fell from 17 percent in
1990
1995
2000
Core poor rural
Core poor urban
1995, to 10 percent in 2000 (Figure 1). The trends
Economically vulnerable rural
Economically vulnerable urban
of falling poverty over the second half of the 1990s
hold for both urban and rural areas and are visible in all administrative regions. Poverty reduction reflects
strong per capita consumption growth between 1995 and 2000, and the weaker, but pro-poor growth, of
the 1990-95 period which favored the poorer groups to a higher degree as consumption expenditures of
the poorest decile of the population grew above average. Sustained growth in consumption expenditures
and the strong progress on social indicators have been instrumental in bringing a significant number of
people out of poverty and economic vulnerability. During the second half of the 1990s, income
distribution has improved slightly as indicated by the Gini coefficient which has progressed from 0.417 in
1995 to 0.409 in 2000.

1

Based on World Bank Poverty Update Report, August 2003.

-2-

Box 1 : Millennium Development Goals
Summary of Tunisia’s Progress
Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Target 1: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than one dollar a day.
Target 2: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger.
1990
Population below $1 a day (%)
..
Percentage share of income or consumption held by poorest 20%
..
Prevalence of child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
10.3
Population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption (%)
..

1995
2.0
5.7
9.0
..

Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education
Target 3: Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling.
1990
1995
Net primary enrollment ratio (% of relevant age group)
93.5
97.8
Percentage of cohort reaching grade 5 (%)
86.6
91.0
Youth literacy rate (% ages 15-24)
84.1
89.7

2001
..
..
4.0
..

2001
99.2
93.1
93.8

Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women
Target 4: Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education preferably by 2005 and to all levels of education no later than 2015.
1990
1995
2001
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
81.9
89.1
99.9
Ratio of young literate females to males (% ages 15-24)
81.0
87.6
92.0
Share of women employed in the nonagricultural sector (%)
..
..
..
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)
4.0
7.0
12.0
Goal 4: Reduce child mortality
Target 5: Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-five mortality rate.
Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality ratio (per 1,000 live births)
Immunization, measles (% of children under 12 months)

1990
52.0
37.3
93.0

1995
37.0
30.5
91.0

2001
27.0
21.0
92.0

1990
..
69.0

1995
70.0
80.5

2001
..
89.9

1995
..
60.0
..
..

2001
..
..
..
36.9

Goal 5: Improve maternal health
Target 6: Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)

Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Target 7: Have halted by 2015, and begun to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS.
Target 8: Have halted by 2015, and begun to reverse, the incidence of malaria and other major diseases.
1990
Prevalence of HIV, female (5 ages 15-24)
..
Contraceptive prevalence rate (% of women ages 15-49)
50.0
Number of children orphaned by HIV/AIDS
..
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
..

Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
Target 9: Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programs and reverse the loss of environmental resources.
Target 10: Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water.
Target 11: By 2020, to have achieved a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers.

Forest area (% of total land area)
Nationally protected areas (% of total land area)
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP $ per kg oil equivalent)
CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation (% of population)
Source: World Development Indicators database, January 2004

1990
3.2
..
5.4
1.6
75.0
76.0

1995
..
0.3
6.6
1.8
..
..

2001
3.3
0.3
7.5
1.8
80.0
84.0

-34.
Consolidating progress made in poverty reduction remains an important priority because
economic vulnerability is important, especially in urban areas, and core poverty remains entrenched in
rural areas. Fifty percent of the economically vulnerable lived in urban areas in 2000, up from 43 percent
in 1990. The distribution of the core poor remained stable over time, with, in 2000, 74 percent living in
rural areas, about the same as in 1990. The core poor made up 8.3 percent of rural population, a rate twice
as high as the national average. A fairly high proportion of people remain clustered above, but close to,
the poverty lines. A total of 40 percent of the rural population and 15 percent of people in Metropolitan
areas have consumption levels that are inferior to double the lower poverty line. Tunisia’s high exposure
to volatility (droughts) and external shocks (tourism, exports) may thus affect poverty outcomes in
unpredictable ways. Poverty trends are not known for the 2001-2003 period in the absence of yearly
surveys 2, but they may have increased given the economic downturn of 2001 and 2002.
5.
The Tunisian authorities continue to emphasize the role of women and girls in socio-economic
development. As a result of past investment in human capital, Tunisia has made substantial progress in
closing gender gaps in education, reducing fertility and building strong legal rights and privileges for
women. Considerable progress was achieved in reducing female illiteracy rates (from 96 percent in 1956
to 38 percent in 2001), yet these are still slightly higher than those of men and above those of countries in
Tunisia’s comparator group (20%).3 Over the last decade, female school enrollment rates have in many
instances surpassed those of male enrollment rates, while in the 2000-2001 academic year, slightly more
than half of all university students were women. However, rural-urban discrepancies remain, and where
families face socio-economic difficulties, it is often the boy rather than the girl who will be able to go to
school. Reducing rural female illiteracy has become the focus of current government literacy programs.
Moreover, at both secondary and tertiary levels, women mostly enroll in traditional fields of study and are
less present in the scientific and technical fields.

6.
Labor force participation by women is high by regional standards, but Tunisia’s important
potential to integrate women into the economy has yet to be fully realized. Women’s labor force
participation has increased over the last decades to 26 percent but is below potential, and labor force
participation by women with higher education has declined to 55 percent in 2001, from 58.5 percent in
1997. The relatively weak maternity leave regulations and the limited coverage provided by the child care
system are likely to impede labor force participation by women. Restrictive employment termination
regulations that usually protect primary workers (essentially male and more experienced workers) may
also limit the demand for female workers.
7.
Tunisian has also embarked on the path of environment sustainability. Tunisia has maintained
during the last five years a high level of public expenditures devoted to environmental protection and
natural resources management, estimated at over 1 percent of GDP, equivalent to some European
countries. This has led to substantial progress in natural resource management and environmental
protection as measured by the annual cost of environmental degradation which was estimated at 2.1
percent of GDP in 1999 or close to $440 million, the lowest among the MNA countries 4. Despite such
progress, Tunisia faces some important challenges in natural resources management (soils and water),
costal protection, solid waste management and, particularly, in integrating long term environmental
impacts in its sector development strategies and in engaging public consultations on environmental
investments.

2
3

4

The next household budget survey is scheduled for 2005 and will constitute the basis for new poverty estimates.
World Bank. 2003. World Development Indicators. Tunisia’s comparator group is the lower middle income
countries which are those that have a Gross National Income per capita of more than $745 and less than $2,975.
World Bank, METAP. 2003. Republic of Tunisia: Cost of Environmental Degradation.

-4B.

Recent Economic Developments and Policies

8.

Coordinated policy reforms and a well performing public administration have supported
economic and social progress in Tunisia. First, the successful stablization of 1987 and subsequent
prudent macroeconomic policies have created an enabling environment for growth of the economy and of
the private sector. Second, sustained structural reform efforts since the early 1990s and deeper trade
integration in the global economy have created the right conditions for increased productivity and
improved competitiveness of the economy. Finally, the economic reforms were supported by a well
performing public administration. According to the recent MNA Governance Report5, Tunisia scores
significantly higher than the average of lower middle income countries in the world on the quality of its
public administration, reflecting the capability of the administration to formulate and implement sound
policies, and the respect for institutions that govern interactions between citizens and government.
9.
Social progress has been underpinned by fast and sustained growth since the mid-80s. GDP
grew on average by 4.3 percent annually since the initiation of structural adjustment in the mid 1980s, and
growth accelerated to 5.2 percent during the Ninth Development Plan (1997-2001). Growth outpaced
MENA and middle-income countries’ average since 1987, even though it was slower than in other fast
growing countries 6 (Figure 2). In 2002, Tunisia faced an unfavorable external environment— sluggish
growth in the EU and the prolonged effect of September 11, 2001 and the Djerba bombing in 2002 on
Figure 2 : Average annual real GDP growth--Tunisia and comparators (in%)
tourism and transport, leading to a drop in exports,
9
and severe drought for a third year in a row. But
Tunisia
MENA (excluding Tunisia)
the economy remained broadly resilient, with 8
Middle Income Countries
growth slowing down to 1.7 percent, from 4.9 7
5 High growth
6
percent in 2001. Thanks to favorable rainfall in the
2002-03 season, agricultural output recovered 5
strongly, boosting GDP growth to 5.5 percent in 4
2003. However, reflecting weak domestic demand, 3
non agricultural GDP grew by only 3.5 percent, 2
the same pace as in 2002, below the goals set in 1
Tunisia’s Tenth Economic Development Plan 0 1982-1986 1987-1991 1992-1996 1997-2001 2002-2003
(2002-2006).
10.
External and internal balances have been preserved, providing a sound framework for private
sector growth. The country’s sound economic management has helped overcome several shocks, such as
the Gulf war in the early 1990s, the 1997 East Asia crisis, the geopolitical uncertainties from terrorism
and the Iraq war, and the droughts which regularly
Figure 3 : Tunisia--Inflation and external balance (1990-2003)
afflict Tunisia’s agriculture. Prudent demand 15
CPI Inflation, 5 fast-growing
management helped bring inflation down, to levels 10
comparators
below those seen in other fast-growing countries
5
CPI Inflation Tunisia
(Figure 3). Tunisia’s current account deficit was also
0
kept under control, at around 3 percent of GDP for
-5
most of the late 1990s. After a rise in the current
Current account balance (in % of GDP)
account deficit during 2000-2002, due to domestic -10
Trade balance (in % of GDP)
demand pressures and external shocks, the current
-15
account deficit was again reduced in 2003 and foreign
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
exchange reserves have stabilized at the equivalent of
three months of imports since early 2003.
5
6

World Bank. 2003. Better Governance for Development in the Middle East and North Africa: Enhancing Inclusiveness and
Accountability, MENA Development Report. Washington, D.C.
The five high-growth countries used in the analysis are Malaysia, South Korea, Thailand, Mauritius and Chile.

-5-

11.
Although growth has been strong, unemployment remains high, at around 15 percent,
reflecting demographic pressures, the decrease in the employment intensity of growth, and increased
competition. Strong labor force growth is expected in the years ahead given the demographic lag and
increasing labor force participation by women. While unemployment remains the highest among those
with primary schooling or less (86 percent of the unemployed), in recent years, job creation for skilled
workers has slowed, so that unemployment of people with formal education has increased. The lower
employment intensity of growth reflects faster labor productivity growth, which supports competitiveness
and real incomes growth, but also the impact of distortions in the labor market. In the coming years,
tensions in the labor market will also be intensified by the shedding of labor out of agriculture (22 percent
of total employment) and traditional industries such as textile (10 percent of total employment). The
completion of the free trade zone for manufactured products as part of the AAEU will raise important
employment challenges for import-competing industries, while the phasing out of the multi-fiber
agreement (MFA) quotas for textile and clothing by 2005 will deprive Tunisia from preferential access to
EU markets for these products and expose it to increased competition from lower-cost producers. The
experience of other textile exporting countries which are also facing strong international competition
indicates that this situation could lead to the loss of an estimated one third of Tunisia’s employment in the
textile industry, or about 100,000 employees, mostly women.
Trade policies—setting the stage for a more competitive economy
12.
Tunisia is making considerable progress towards greater trade openness in the context of the
Association Agreement with the EU. Tunisia’s strategic move of deeper trade integration with the EU is
promoting private sector development in a more competitive environment, which eventually holds the
promise of enhancing efficiency and improving prospects for growth. The AAEU includes provisions for
a phased establishment of a free trade zone for manufactures over a 12-year period (1996 to 2008).
Implementation of the tariff dismantling schedule under the AAEU is on track with around 55 percent of
the tariff reductions already in place. Tariffs have been totally dismantled for capital goods since 1996,
and raw materials and intermediate goods since the year 2000. Import duties on consumer goods and
imported goods that are also produced locally have been cut by about one half and one fourth respectively
by the end of 2001.
13.
However, despite progress in nominal tariff reduction, the trade regime remains protected, and
Tunisia still lags behind in regulatory reform to open services to competition. The level and the number
of schedules of Most favored nation (MFN) tariffs were reduced in 2003, but these tariffs remain high, as
is their differential with respect to preferential tariffs applied to imports from the EU. Some items still
remain subject to import licenses or technical specifications, particularly consumer goods that compete
against locally produced equivalents manufactured by "developing" industries (e.g. textiles). Imports of
several products, such as drugs, cereals, coffee, and tea, remain monopolized by state trading boards or
public enterprises. Most importantly, services liberalization remains limited; while Tunisia has granted
WTO commitments for tourism, financial services and communication services, market opening is
proceeding slowly, and the absence of commitments in other key sectors, such as transport and
distribution, is of concern.
Macroeconomic policies—prudent and forward looking
14.
Fiscal consolidation has progressed but a primary structural budget deficit still persists. A
sizeable primary budget deficit of 2.1 percent of GDP in 1990-91 was turned into a 1.3 percent surplus by
1994 (Figure 4).

-6The fiscal stance has been somewhat eased since
the mid 1990s and a rapid reduction of public
debt would call for creating an appropriate
primary budget surplus. The fiscal stance was
tightened in the 2002 and 2003 budgets, but
owing to slow growth and sluggish fiscal
revenues, the budget deficit (excluding
privatization receipts and grants) was only
marginally reduced to 3.3 per cent of GDP in
2003, from 3.8 percent in 2001, while the
primary budget remained in deficit, at 0.3
percent of GDP. The 2004 budget aims at a
reduction of the budget deficit to 2.7 percent of
GDP.

Figure 4 : Fiscal deficit in % of GDP
(excluding grants and privatization receipts)
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-1 0
1973

1976

1979

1982

1985

1988

Overall Fiscal deficit

1991

1994

1997

2000

Primary Fiscal Deficit

2003
(est)

La
tv
ia

C
ro
at
ia
Th
ail
an
d

Tu
ni
sia

Li
S
th
lo
va uan
kR
ia
ep
ub
lic

P
ola
nd

an Me
d xi
To co
ba
go

Tr
ini
da
d

C
hin
So
a
ut
h
A
fric
a

15.
Over the past two decades, Tunisia successfully controlled the public debt burden, while
pursuing a prudent debt management policy. Because of the structural current account deficit and the
persistent primary budget deficit, public debt hovered at around 60 percent during the 1990s (of which 38
percent foreign and 22 percent domestic debt in 2002). Tunisia’s total foreign debt (public and private)
amounted to 54 percent of GDP in 2002. In recent years, the debt service ratio was brought down to a
Figure 5 : Foreign debt in % of GDP
more comfortable 15 percent of exports. Tunisia is
among the few emerging market borrowers that have 80
investment grade rating, allowing borrowing at long 60
maturities and under relatively favorable conditions. 40
However, Tunisia’s foreign debt remains high in 20
0
international comparison, especially compared to
countries with a similar sovereign rating (BBB-, BBB,
and BBB+) (Figure 5). A faster reduction of public
debt could yield substantial benefits in terms of cost of
access to international capital markets.
16.
Monetary and exchange rate policies have supported macroeconomic stability, while
responding to changing conditions. The monetary policy framework aims to preserve the internal and
external value of the dinar, by maintaining low inflation and preserving the external balance. To rein in
the growth of domestic demand, monetary policy was tightened in 2001, with the Central Bank drastically
cutting its refinancing to commercial banks. The tightening of monetary policy was eventually reflected
into a better alignment of credit expansion with the growth in domestic demand, and allowed an easing of
monetary conditions in 2003. Targeting a constant real effective exchange rate has contributed to
maintaining a good level of competitiveness and the prudent budget management has provided a
necessary anchor for this exchange rate policy. In particular, exchange rate depreciation has not been
substituted for fiscal and monetary adjustment to absorb the pressures from the current account. The real
exchange rate rule was implemented in a more flexible manner in 2002 and 2003, as the government
allowed some real exchange rate depreciation in response to increased competitive pressures from
countries with exchange rates tied to a weaker dollar, and in order to support Tunisia’s ongoing trade
liberalization and the preparation for a more flexible exchange regime and a more open capital account in
the future. However, exchange rate devaluation has not been substituted for budgetary and monetary
adjustments to absorb pressures on the current account.

-7-

Policies to promote a dynamic private sector—a mixed picture
17.
The Government has maintained a long standing commitment towards promoting private
sector development. The Tunisian authorities have maintained a policy of generous privileges for
investments in selected economic activities and for exporting by supporting the creation of “offshore”
firms.7 Over the years this strategy has helped address the import substitution bias of Tunisia’s trade
policy and thus contributed to promoting export-oriented growth. Measures have also been implemented
to reduce the costs of doing business: registration is fast and the number of procedures reasonable, the
number of customs documents has been reduced, and a new system of normalized and simplified
documentation for external trade transactions has been put in place. The Government has also sponsored
various funds to support bank lending to SMEs and start-ups, and has put in place a regulatory framework
for the development of venture capital.
18.
But compared to other high-growth countries, Tunisia suffers from a structural private
investment gap. Despite solid macroeconomic fundamentals and structural reforms, Tunisia’s growth has
relied more on public investment, and private investment remains compressed at around 14 percent of
GDP, significantly below the investment ratios seen in
Figure 6: Private investment in % of GDP
fast-growing comparators (Figure 6). One reason for the 30
5 high -growth
low private investment ratio is the limited competitive 25
Tunisia
openness of services markets and network industries, in
20
particular ICT and transport, which keeps the cost of
backbone services high, hinders competitiveness, and 15
deprives Tunisia from significant opportunities for private 10
investment. Still another reason is heightened uncertainty
5
of the business environment, reflecting the surrounding
risks in Tunisia’s changing economic environment. But
0
1970 -74 1975 -79 1980-84 1985-89 1990 -94 1995-99
these factors only partly explain the large private
investment gap in Tunisia.
19.
Weaknesses in economic governance, in particular regarding the predictability and
transparency of the regulatory framework and limited market contestability, constitute an important
constraint to private investment. Strong government interference in the economy and the strategy of
providing generous privileges for selected sectors run the risk of locking the country into threatened
activities, such as textiles and clothing, which may leave Tunisia ill-positioned in the face of stiffer
international competition. Discretionary intervention by the government, low levels of public
accountability, voice and participation contribute to weakening the investment climate and strengthening
the hand of “insiders”, mostly in the absence of strong competitive forces.8 This contributes to reducing
market contestability and discouraging risk-taking by less well-connected entrepreneurs. Examples of
lack of transparency and predictability of the regulatory framework include: the process for obtaining
prior authorization for private sector investments in the sectors where private investment is restricted and
7

8

“Offshore” enterprises refers to firms that produce solely for exportation and are granted significant tax exemptions and
financial incentives. “Onshore” enterprises are those that produce for the local market and do not benefit from the same level
of exemptions.
According to the MENA study on Governance referred to previously, Better Governance for Development in the Middle
East and North Africa: Enhancing Inclusiveness and Accountability, Tunisia scores slightly higher the MENA average but
lower than the world average of lower middle income countries on public accountability, voice and participation. The index
of public accountability assesses the process of selecting and replacing those in authority. It measures the quality of
governance according to the inclusiveness of access to basic political and civic rights and the relative strength of external
accountability mechanisms. It also captures the transparency and responsiveness of the government to its population and the
degree of political accountability in the public sphere.

-8for majority ownership of Tunisian firms by foreign investors; the practice of limiting the amount of VAT
reimbursements to non-exporting firms (onshore sector), which are submitted to the unpredictability of
tax controls; the absence of sufficient safeguards for taxpayers facing tax controls and the absence of
administrative appeal processes for taxation matters; the inconsistency by which auditing rules are applied
to firms which borrow significant amounts; and the absence of a legal framework on concessions which
would clarify the rules of engagement for private firms participating in infrastructure investments.
20.
Despite the economy’s strong fundamentals, commercial banks continue to be burdened with
large non performing loans (NPLs). NPLs were reduced to about 19 percent of bank assets in 2001, from
over 30 percent in 1993, but increased to above 22 percent since 2002, reflecting the exposure of banks to
the tourism sector. The level of provisioning of commercial banks’ NPLs remains low, at 44 percent in
2002, reflecting heavy reliance on real estate collateral in calculating the required provisions, even though
realizing real estate collateral suffers from long delays in judicial procedures. Large, under provisioned
NPLs increase the cost of bank intermediation, reduce access to finance for SMEs, and create a negative
perception of the Tunisian banking system.
II. NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENDA AND MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS
A.

Tunisia’s 10th Economic Development Plan: Progress and Challenges Ahead

21.
Tunisia’s medium-term development agenda has been elaborated in the 10th Economic
Development Plan, covering the period 2002-2006. The 10th Plan aspires to place Tunisia on a
convergent path with more developed countries during the next two decades. The 10th Plan is underpinned
by a development framework that highlights detailed macroeconomic and sectoral goals over the period
2002-2006 (Box 2) and envisions three main goals:
§
§
§

Accelerating the pace of growth, to reduce unemployment, boost incomes, and consolidate
Tunisia’s progress in the reduction of poverty;
Fostering the emergence of a knowledge economy, to take advantage of Tunisia’s valuable human
resources and facilitate integration in the global economy;
Upholding social achievements by ensuring that all social groups participate in the benefits of
economic and social development.
Box 2 : Key goals in the 10th Economic Development Plan

§
§
§
§
§
§
§
§
§
§
§

Achieving average annual growth of 5.5 percent—largely driven by growth in services, projected at 7.5 percent per
year;
Creating 380,000 new jobs, to meet 95 percent of the expected increase in the supply of labor, and reduce
unemployment to about 13 percent;
Promoting private investment, to raise its share in total investment to 58.5 percent by 2006 from 53 percent in 2001, by
opening up still protected sectors to private initiative;
Promoting exports, a key underpinning of Tunisia’s growth, to achieve average annual growth of about 6 percent;
Bolstering the domestic savings ratio to 25 percent in 2006, from 23 percent in 2001, to preserve the economy’s
macroeconomic balance;
Promoting agricultural development, by 3.5 percent growth per year, while preserving natural resources;
Fostering the growth of the ICT sector, a main underpinning of competitiveness and the economy, to increase its
contribution to GDP to 7 percent in 2006, from 3.3 percent in 2001;
Reducing illiteracy to 16 percent in 2006, from 24.7 percent in 2001;
Increasing enrollment to higher education to 30 percent in 2006, from 23 percent in 2001, with the number of graduates
increasing to 55,000, from 29,000 in 2001;
Increasing the number of people covered by a social protection regime to 90 percent of the population by 2006, from
84.3 percent in 2001;
Increasing rural electrification to 95 percent in 2006, from 47 percent in 2001.

-9-

22.
Half way through the implementation of the 10th Plan, more remains to be done to achieve the
projected goals. First, economic growth and job creation have not been as strong as expected and there is
a need to encourage additional private investment in order to meet the targets set in the Plan. Second,
important measures must be taken in order to foster the emergence of a knowledge economy, such as:
modernization of ICT infrastructure and services; improvements in the quality, relevance and financial
sustainability of the education sector; and increased performance of innovation systems and scientific and
technological research. Finally, in order to ensure that all the population benefits from economic and
social progress, many important measures need to be taken in the years ahead to improve the
sustainability and quality of health services and the pension system, and the effectiveness of labor market
programs and existing safety nets, while maintaining current account and budget balances. These
challenges are analyzed in more detail below.
Challenge 1: Boost growth and reduce unemployment by fostering development of the private
sector
23.
Private firms operating in Tunisia face numerous obstacles. In addition to high government
interference in private investment decisions as previously described, firms face high transaction costs for
business entry, operation and exit, and costly customs procedures; inefficiencies in trade logistics and in
supply chains; and high costs for infrastructure services such as telecommunications, energy and water
supply due to limited administrative and financial autonomy of public utilities and limited competition in
the provision of these services. Entrepreneurs operating in some sectors, such as agriculture, face multiple
challenges to increase their competitiveness. In particular, there is a bias against agricultural exports
created by the protection of import substitutes through tariffs and subsidies which favor the production of
lower value cereals as opposed to higher value fruits and vegetables, in which Tunisia has a comparative
advantage. The reduction of these tariffs and subsidies would have to be carefully managed and
accompanied by social protection measures, particularly for small to medium size producers in arid and
semi-arid areas, to avoid aggravating rural poverty. Greater incentives for more efficient use of the
country's scarcest natural resource, water, also need to be provided in irrigated areas, while efforts are
made to upgrade the quality of agricultural research and extension services throughout the country.
24.
While the Government has taken important steps to strengthen the supervision of the banking
system, increase provisioning and reduce the level of non performing loans in public banks, modernize
the infrastructure and the regulatory framework of financial markets, private firms are still
constrained in their access to finance. Access is limited by high levels of NPLs, lack of venture-capital
and long-term financing, as well as weak corporate transparency and financial disclosure. Improved
governance, both of domestic banks and non financial enterprises, along with better corporate
transparency and financial disclosure, are at the core of the reform agenda. Actions currently being taken
by the Central Bank to establish a system of internal controls in banks in order to improve their ability to
measure, supervise and manage banking risks should lead to greater transparency and better governance.
In this respect, creating and implementing a regime for anti-money laundering and combating the
financing of terrorism is key to improve governance as well as building confidence in the banking
industry and non-banking financial sector, and thus to enhancing the business climate. The 2003 law on
anti-terrorism and money laundering goes in the direction of complying with the recommendations of the
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF). In addition, a law is currently being drafted
which is expected to lead to greater transparency and accuracy of financial reporting as well as better
enforcement of private sector accounting and auditing standards. Actions are also planned to modernize
the commercial registers. At the same time, energizing the domestic finance markets is key to promote
diversification of the sources of finance for private investment, better mobilize long-term savings, reduce
refinancing and currency risks for public debt, and avoid overstretching of the banking system.

-10-

Challenge 2: Establish a Knowledge Economy by improving the quality, relevance and
financial sustainability of the education sector and by strengthening innovation systems and
scientific and technological research
25.
Tunisia’s education sector faces a critical challenge as a result of demographic transition.
Thirty-five years of declining birthrates are now resulting in a reduction in the lower basic education
student population, while secondary and higher education student numbers are growing rapidly as a result
of increasing completion rates. Projections covering the period 2000-2010 show that basic education
student numbers will decrease by 40 percent (or 470,000 students) and secondary education student
number will increase by 80 percent (or 310,000 students). Students enrolled in higher education are
projected to increase from 260,000 in 2003 to 400,000 in 2010. This trend challenges the education and
vocational training systems to effectively accommodate the demand growth, while increasing quality and
maintaining expenditures at current levels. Indeed, Tunisia’s share of public spending on education is
already high compared to other middle-income countries (27 percent of total public expenditures and
7.2 percent of GDP in 2003) and cannot be expected to increase much. This challenges the Government to
reduce inefficiencies, increase autonomy of universities and other educational institutions while
introducing an incentive system which rewards good performers, and roll out cost-effective solutions that
would guarantee the fiscal sustainability of its ambitious reform program.

26.

Learning achievements, better linkages between education and the labor market, and scientific
research and innovation need to improve markedly if Tunisia is to have the skills to compete in the
global knowledge economy. Recent performance in international standardized testing was poor,
reinforcing concerns about the quality of education. Ensuring that all children successfully complete the
two cycles of basic education remains a challenge, as the repetition and drop-out rates in upper basic
education remain high (9.7 percent dropouts and 19.5 percent repetitions). Failures at the higher education
level are important: repeaters represent about 20 percent of students, exam rates were about 66 percent in
2002. The increase in unemployment of the educated labor force in the 1990s suggests that the education
system is not adapting the skills of the future labor force to the needs of the labor market. While
investments in scientific research have increased and measures have been taken to bolster the knowledge
economy, public research remains largely disconnected from private sector needs and applications, and
linkages between universities, the private sector and international R&D remain weak.
Challenge 3: Strengthen the performance of social programs while maintaining budget
balances
27.
Demographic trends and transformations in the labor market due to competitive pressures pose
great challenges for health, social protection, and pension systems. Despite significant progress, the
total out-of-pocket expenditures (not counting social insurance premiums) comprises almost 50 percent of
all health expenditures, burdening the poor who are likely to spend a significant proportion of their
income on private health care. In addition, quality and efficiency of health care services remain a major
challenge and health care costs are increasing rapidly as the population ages. Implementation of the social
health insurance reform is urgent and will need to tackle the financial risk protection concerns. The
government plays a central role in social protection through large public sector employment, heavy
regulation of the labor market, and tight control of vocational training, active labor market programs
(ALMPs) and social safety nets. Spending on ALMPs is high (1.5 percent of GDP9) and increasing, yet,
targeting of these programs is not adequate. The bulk of the programs benefit the post secondary
graduates, which account for only 6 percent of the unemployed, while the pool of unemployed is
9

This figure includes pre-employment training as part of the AMLPs which is consistent with international definitions.

.

-11dominated by those with primary schooling or less (86 percent of the unemployed). Coverage of the
unemployed is weak and will become increasingly an issue as some of the traditional industries lay off
employees when faced by greater international competition. 10 The two pension funds are in a delicate
financial situation which will deteriorate further with the rising proportion of old people in the population.
Currently 33 percent of the population over 60 years old are receiving pension benefits, compared to 15
percent in 1984, and this is projected to increase rapidly. To ensure the financial equilibrium of the
existing system, contributions rates will need to increase substantially but high payroll tax may
discourage job creation and put Tunisia at a disadvantage with respect to its competitors. In addition,
there is room for improving the management of the two pension funds by clarifying mandates and
accountability.
28.
Non-discretionary spending introduces serious rigidity on the public expenditure system which
is characterized by a short-term focus and numerous tax exemptions and preferential regimes. Large
non-discretionary components, comprising wages, interest payments, and social entitlements, account for
over 70 percent of total public expenditures and about 24 percent of GDP. Non-discretionary items cannot
be easily trimmed in adversity without threatening social stability and/or the country’s creditworthiness.
Of particular concern is the government wage bill, which, at close to 12 percent of GDP, is among the
highest in MENA and is steadily rising at the expense of social transfers and interest payments. Existing
rigidities in the budget limit the room for fiscal maneuver in the face of shock, with the authorities only
being able to respond by cutting public investment and more generally development expenditures with a
detrimental impact on growth potential and social programs which already face a series of challenges.
While public spending systems, control of public funds, and the accountability arrangements for their use
are already quite strong, implementation of performance-based budgeting reforms, envisioned by the
Government, would call for a more supporting institutional environment, in terms of the quality of budget
formulation and execution. The Tunisian tax burden is not very high by international comparison, but its
distribution appears to be uneven, both between labor and capital income and across taxpayers. Serious
non neutralities exist in the taxation of corporate income and in indirect taxation that undermine the
fairness of the tax system, narrow the tax base, create complexities that increase the cost of tax
administration, and weaken incentives for tax compliance.
B.

Medium-Term Macroeconomic Prospects
Base Case Scenario

29.
In a base case medium-term scenario, Tunisia could witness a relatively healthy growth,
despite stiffer international competition, provided that reforms to enable a new development model are
stepped up. The competitive pressures which could have a negative effect on non-agricultural growth in
the coming years include: the possible loss of market share in traditional export sectors because of the
elimination of MFA quotas and EU enlargement, increased imports during the completion phase of the
free trade zone with the EU that may displace domestic production, and the slow-down of some key
sectors such as tourism. In order to mitigate these pressures, Government will need to considerably
strengthen the program of structural reforms, while ensuring macroeconomic stability in the face of an
uncertain external environment, strengthening the investment climate and the soundness of the banking
system, and speeding up the pace of liberalization in sectors still under state control. This would allow
growth to continue at an average rate of 5 percent a year, at a similar pace than in the past, but less than
the 5.5 percent anticipated in the 10th Plan (Table 1). In this scenario, exports could grow steadily due to
the development of new engines of growth (in particular in services and the ICT sector), although at a
more moderate pace due to the existing competitive threats. Consumption would keep growing at a
healthy rate, though slower than in the past, reflecting the impact of persistent unemployment on
10

World Bank. June 2003. Report No. 25456-TUN. Republic of Tunisia : Employment Strategy.

-12household incomes. Improvements in the business environment could lead to a progressive increase of the
investment-to-GDP ratio over the 2004-08 period.
Table 1 : Base-case scenario—Selected Macroeconomic Indicators (percentages)
Actual
1999 2000
2001
Growth Rates
Real GDP
Real Consumption
Real Gross Domestic Investment
Export Volume, GNFS
Import Volume, GNFS
GDP deflator
Ratios to GDP
Gross Domestic Investment
Gross Domestic Savings
Fiscal Balance (excl. grants)
Public Debt
External Current Balance

Est.
Projected
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008

6.1
5.4
4.9
4.7
3.0
3.1

4.7
5.3
6.9
7.7
9.9
3.3

4.9
5.3
6.2
12.1
13.4
2.7

1.7
4.0
-6.0
-2.1
-2.4
2.3

5.5
5.8
1.0
4.0
2.3
2.3

5.3
5.8
4.7
6.0
6.5
2.4

5.0
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.1
2.2

4.8
4.7
5.6
5.5
5.7
2.4

4.7
4.3
6.0
5.2
5.2
2.7

5.2
5.2
6.3
5.6
6.0
2.8

26.3
24.1
-3.9
60.0
-2.2

27.3
23.8
-3.8
60.7
-4.2

27.8
23.3
-3.8
62.4
-4.3

25.2
21.0
-3.5
61.6
-3.5

24.1
20.5
-3.2
61.0
-3.2

24.0
20.3
-3.2
55.8
-3.2

24.1
20.4
-3.1
54.5
-3.1

24.3
20.6
-3.0
53.9
-3.1

24.6
20.9
-2.9
53.1
-3.0

24.9
21.0
-2.9
52.4
-3.0

30.

The projected growth would be insufficient to reduce unemployment. Given the relatively low
elasticity of employment relative to growth observed in recent years, and assuming no growth of
employment in the public sector and agriculture, the unemployment rate could increase to approximately
16.4 percent during the CAS period. On current trends in labor force growth and participation rate,
reducing unemployment to 13 percent by 2008 (from 14.3 percent in 2003) would call for growth of about
6.5 percent per year. All else equal, this would require a broad reform program to significantly improve
the business environment and ensure adequate financing of private investments, leading to a much
stronger private investment effort equivalent to about 7 percentage points of GDP.
31.
Current account pressures could intensify, while some loss of fiscal revenues is expected. The
base case scenario assumes that the Government will resolutely engage in fiscal consolidation in order to
offset pressures on public finances and to maintain the deficit of the current account at approximately 3 to
3.2 percent of GDP. Such action should result in reducing the budget deficit (central government only,
excluding privatization receipts and grants) to under 3 percent of GDP by 2008, which would require
important efforts to rationalize public expenditure and enlarge the fiscal base as tax revenue collection
declines due to the final removal of tariffs on imports from the EU. This effort of budgetary consolidation
would reduce the public debt to GDP ratio to approximately 52 percent.11 Inflation, as measured by the
GDP deflator, is expected to increase slightly but still remain contained, due to a prudent monetary policy
stance.
32.
Financing needs are projected to increase and will rely on access to international markets. The
base case scenario projects total financing needs of about $13 billion over the period 2004-08, about 30
percent higher than in the preceding five years, owing to high debt repayments and a constant current
account deficit (Table 2). After a peak in 2003, debt service as share of GDP is also expected to decline
over the projection period, freeing up resources and allowing the reserves to be maintained at an
equivalent of three months of imports. The external debt to GDP ratio is expected to decline between
2003 and 2008. Financing needs would also be likely to increase if the move to a more flexible exchange
rate were to require, during the transition period, a higher level of foreign exchange reserves. An increase
of foreign exchange reserves would also be required in case Tunisia were to adopt a more open regime for
private capital movements. The base case scenario envisages a steady inflow of foreign direct investment
11

In the absence of decisive fiscal consolidation, the budget deficit would increase to approximately 3.5 percent of GDP and
the current account deficit could rise to 4 percent of GDP by 2006 due to liberalization of imports from EU and the risk of
reduced growth of exports, while the debt to GDP ratio would remain at 2003 levels.

-13(FDI) resources, although the pace will critically depend upon maintaining privatization efforts and
further improving the environment for doing business.
Table 2 : External Financing Plan (US$ millions)
Financing Needs
Current Account Deficit
Debt Amortization
Reserves Accumulation
Financing Sources
MLT Loans
Multilateral
o/w: IBRD
Official Bilateral
Private Creditors
Foreign Direct Investment
Capital Grants
Other Capital Flows, net

1999
2130
443
1034
653
2130
1526
536
210
256
734
337
73
194

Actual
2000
1955
821
1374
-240
1955
1597
419
136
281
897
731
3
-376

2001
2077
863
959
255
2077
1842
689
293
325
828
443
53
-261

2002
2003
746
1108
149
2003
1874
563
117
202
1109
801
76
-748

Est.
2003
2610
774
1307
529
2610
2657
723
251
486
1447
504
129
-678

2004
2507
799
1586
121
2507
2544
669
102
397
1478
600
106
-743

2005
2482
800
1435
247
2482
2196
643
212
304
1249
622
105
-439

Projected
2006
2607
842
1641
125
2607
2030
647
226
302
1082
637
104
-164

2007
2694
858
1547
289
2694
2137
517
243
331
1289
616
104
-163

2008
2372
922
1258
192
2372
1710
420
239
331
960
669
104
-111

High and Low Case Scenarios
33.
External or domestic risks could cause growth to fall by one to two percentage points below the
base case scenario, resulting in higher unemployment and impeding the development of social
programs. Two main developments could trigger lower growth. First, a combination of unfavorable
external shocks could hit the economy, with growth slowing temporarily or persistently, depending on the
duration of the shocks. The economy’s resilience would partly depend on the quality of policy adjustment
(as in 2002), and partly on the strength of the investment climate and the soundness of the banking
system. Second, a slowdown of reform efforts, in particular a failure to strengthen the investment climate
as needed in the face of stiffer competition, would create unsustainable external and budget imbalances,
increase public and foreign debt, and lead to increasing unemployment and lower FDI inflows. In this
context, if borrowing conditions on international capital markets were to become tight, Tunisia would
face difficulties in meeting its financing needs.

34.

Swift action on the reform front would result in a higher growth, leading to a reduction in
unemployment. Favorable exogenous factors, such as good rainfall and strong EU growth, could boost
growth beyond the base case scenario during the projection period. A resolute acceleration of structural
reform efforts, with the aim of considerably strengthening the investment climate and creating more
opportunities for private investment, could also lead to higher growth. Leveling the playing field in
investment incentives, liberalizing all of the currently protected markets, ensuring pro-competitive
regulation, and taking ambitious steps in privatization of public enterprises would lay the ground work for
stronger growth. In such a high-case scenario, growth could increase by one percentage point above the
base case projection.
III. TUNISIA-WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP FOR FY05-08

35.

The World Bank’s partnership with Tunisia for FY05-08 aims to support the Government of
Tunisia in addressing the key challenges of the 10th Plan and beyond. To do so, the CAS relies on:
lessons drawn from past Bank performance (part A); guiding principles for the CAS which build on the
Bank’s comparative advantage (part B); and a results-based strategy which focuses on achieving three key
strategic objectives (part C). The CAS is also supported by a strong body of analytical work prepared for
Tunisia in FY02-04: Development Policy Review, Poverty Update, Employment Strategy, Private
Participation in Infrastructure Study, Tourism Strategy, Report on Observance of Standards and Codes

-14(ROSC) on Accounting and Auditing, Country Financial Accountability Assessment, Country
Environmental Performance Analysis, Country Procurement Assessment Review, and Strategy for Public
Debt Management. It also draws on the four MENA regional reports prepared in 2003 and which are all
highly relevant for Tunisia (Governance, Trade, Gender and Employment), as well as the recent report on
Enhancing World Bank Support to Middle-Income Countries.
A.

Review of Past Bank Performance

Country Assistance Evaluation
36.
OED’s Country Assistance Evaluation (CAE) rates Bank support overall as satisfactory,
institutional development impact as substantial, and sustainability of achievements as likely. During the
OED review period (1990-2003), the Bank’s programs successfully promoted policy reforms in trade
liberalization, private sector development and financial sector. Bank assistance also contributed to
significant progress in the rural and social sectors. The Bank’s major contribution in the rural sector was
in putting Tunisian agriculture on the path of liberalization, supporting reform measures which
contributed to increasing farm incomes in remote areas, and improving resource management
sustainability. With Bank support, Tunisia made impressive progress in almost all areas covered by the
MDGs, already meeting some targets, and the country is likely to meet others by 2015. While IBRD
funding only represents 3 percent of net receipts of external financial resources and 0.7 percent of GDP,
the Bank has served as a significant catalyst for mobilizing resources, leveraging nearly US$1 on every
IBRD dollar.12 OED rightly emphasizes Tunisia’s own role in this success through strong ownership and
broad political consensus, a well-developed human resource base, and stable macroeconomic
environment.
37.
The recommendations of the CAE have been endorsed by the Country Team and reflected in
the CAS. The three key recommendations of the CAE are covered under the three strategic objectives
pursued by the CAS, as follows: (i) continue to support improving the environment for private sector
development and enhancing competitiveness (CAS Strategic Objective 1); (ii) continue support for social
sectors (Strategic Objectives 2 and 3); (iii) help strengthen rural institutions to support efficient output and
input markets while maintaining social and political stability through better targeted safety nets (Strategic
Objectives 1 and 3). OED also recommended to adopt a results-based approach, which was done for the
CAS. In terms of activities, the CAE recommended that the Bank undertake a Rural Sector-Wide Review
and a Public Expenditure Review (PER), both of which are planned in the CAS .
2000 CAS Achievement Report (see full report in Annex 2)
38.
The CAS Achievement Report (CASAR) concludes that the country strategy presented a well
thought out strategy in support of the national objectives spelled out in the 9th Development Plan
(1997-2001). During implementation of the CAS, the country team was responsive to the new priorities
which emerged from the 10th Development Plan (2002-06), particularly in support of the emphasis on
employment. While the CAS covered the FY00-02 period, the Bank continued to operate in FY03 and
FY04 under the same CAS as its key strategic thrusts continued to be relevant to social and economic
circumstances in Tunisia. As such, the CASAR measures results for the full period that the CAS was
implemented: FY00 to mid-FY04 (December 2003).

12

World Bank, OED. Tunisia Country Assistance Evaluation. Net receipt of external financial resources, average for 19962001 (Table 1.5 of CAE).

-15-

39.
The 2000 CAS made a satisfactory contribution to Tunisia’s development, with steady –
although at times slower than anticipated – progress demonstrated in many reform areas, albeit
difficult economic circumstances during the period. However, because the 2000 CAS was not designed
using a results framework, it difficult to demonstrate the full extent of the outcomes achieved. Had
outcomes been made fully explicit and quantifiable and outcome data collected in a systematic fashion
during CAS implementation, it would certainly have been possible to demonstrate more results than those
documented in the CASAR. In many outcomes, the Bank may have been overly optimistic when
estimating the time frame needed and the readiness of government for reform. The main documented
results for the three CAS pillars are listed in Box 3.
40.
While recognizing the developmental results of Tunisia, the CAE and the CASAR point to
shortfalls which pose risks to sustaining Tunisia’s development performance. These mirror the
challenges identified in Chapter 2, namely the need to promote private sector development, to reform the
financial sector, and to improve the overall efficiency and fiscal sustainability of social expenditures. The
CAE adds that in the rural sector, addressing issues such as land tenure, rural finance, non-farm rural
development and research and extension will be important, as these are areas where past Bank assistance
programs were less successful.
Program Implementation Progress
41.
The Tunisia portfolio has maintained a strong performance during the past four years. Since
FY00, quality of the portfolio has remained consistently high and above MENA averages. OED evaluated
a sample of 11 completed projects during FY00-03 and concluded that in 91 percent of the cases, quality
at entry and supervision was satisfactory, as well as the Borrower’s performance for preparation and
implementation of projects. Satisfactory project outcomes and likelihood of sustainability were also rated
satisfactory in 82 percent of the cases. The Quality Assurance Group (QAG) reviewed quality of
supervision in 22 projects, 90 percent of which were rated satisfactory. During FY00-03, the portfolio
comprised 21 projects on a yearly average, but with numerous project closings in FY03 and FY04, the
number of projects in the portfolio will be brought down to 11 by end FY04. This provides a unique
opportunity for this CAS to be strategic in the choice of new activities.
42.
Continued close follow-up and action from project teams ensured prompt resolution of
occasional project management issues, but widespread delays in implementation have led to slow
disbursement in FY00-02 and repeated closing date extensions. High proactivity rates and relatively low
portfolio riskiness rates are indications of the quality of the portfolio and attention of project teams to
resolving issues (Table 3). In addition, no project is currently classified at risk in the Tunisia portfolio.
While the disbursement ratio surpassed the Bank’s projections in FY00, it slowed down in FY01 and
FY02, and only picked up again in FY03. Of the 20 projects that were planned to close during the FY00mid FY04 period, only two closed on their original closing date: ECAL II (adjustment loan) and the
Municipal Development II project (financial intermediary loan). Projects were extended anywhere from 5
to 24 months, with a few extended twice. Repeated extensions put the average age of the Tunisia portfolio
above the Bank and the Region’s averages for FY00-04 (average age of 4.6 years in FY04 for Tunisia
opposed to 3.9 Bank-wide and 4.3 for MNA). A Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) mission
in June 2003 identified the key reasons for delays in project implementation (overly ambitious project
timetables, insufficient planning and project preparation, and lack of attention to identifying project-level
results and indicators during the preparation phase). The CPPR proposed specific recommendations to
address these issues and to ensure timely implementation of projects, many of which have already been
implemented, in particular in terms of capacity building (see CASAR in Annex 2).

-16-

Box 3: Main results of the 2000 CAS
Pillar I: Support Human Development by Consolidating Long-term Development
•
•

•

•
•

Progress towards universal completion of basic quality education was steady but the target for this outcome has not been
fully met. It is estimated that the persistence rate13 will increase from 42 percent in 1999 to 55 percent by 2004, a substantial
increase but short of the targeted 73 percent.
The implementation of a new health insurance program was not achieved, and the Bank did not have the right instruments to
influence this result. However, the Bank’s loan to the health sector was successful in improving the quality of care, building
stronger institutions, and enhancing the allocative and technical efficiency and sustainability of the public health care
system.
Good progress was made towards promoting integrated water resource management and community participation, and
protecting water and the environment. Water issues are no longer addressed in isolation, but in the broader context of
environmental management and rural and agricultural development, with a shift from water supply management to water
demand management. Progress has been made in scaling up participatory approaches which aim to enhance responsibility of
users and improve the delivery of services.
The outcome of creating an institutional framework conducive to sustainable development of public transport in major cities
- including larger private sector involvement - has not been realized. The intermediate outcome of achieving lower costs of
transport has been only partially reached.
Progress was made towards consolidating municipal and urban development, and has been most significant in improving
infrastructure and municipal services. However, the consolidation of municipal finance has not been fully achieved, and, as
a consequence, the financial situation of Tunisian municipalities remains weak.

Pillar II: Integration of Tunisia into EU Markets by Supporting Economic Reforms.
•
•

•

Progress has been made to strengthen the financial sector but the CAS outcome has not been fully achieved, mainly because
it was a broad and ambitious expectation in a three-year period; even more so considering the policy and institutional
reforms needed to achieve it, and the gradual approach of the Government to the reform process.
The ambitious CAS outcome to boost private sector investment climate and streamline the business environment has only
partially been achieved. Under ECAL III, actions taken have been in the direction of improving the private investment
climate but one of the CAS milestones - that investment incentives for offshore-onshore enterprises be streamlined by CAS
completion - has not been met.
The outcome to modernize and liberalize public sector agencies and improve their service coverage and cost recovery which covered in particular the liberalization and modernization of telecommunications and water and sanitation - has not
been fully achieved. Reforms for telecommunications liberalization have been substantial but more remains to be done.
Water tariffs represented 96 percent of the average water cost in 2002, a good improvement compared to the 1997-99 CAS
baseline of 87 percent, but short of the CAS target of 110 percent. On the sewerage side, the cost recovery ratio declined to
65 percent in 2002.

Pillar III: Modernization of institutions and technological base through new initiative
•
•

13

The outcome of promoting export development by trade facilitation has been mostly achieved. The institutional framework
for exports has been modernized and trade facilitation has been automated resulting in greater transparency customs
transactions and enhanced export development.
Preserving Tunisia’s cultural heritage and diversifying tourism products has been partially achieved, as actions have been
taken towards the achievement of intermediate outcomes, starting with the strengthening of the heritage preservation
agency’s capacity to promote its assets, find new markets, and manage cultural tourism.

The persistence rate is the proportion of Grade 1 students who complete Grade 9 successfully in 12 years or less (i.e.
maximum of 3 repeats in the course of the basic education cycle). The figure for 1999 refers to students who entered Grade
1 in 1989, and the figure for 2004 refers to students who entered Grade 1 in 1994 and who will complete Grade 9 anywhere
from 2003 to 2007.

-17-

43.

The AAA program has been mostly demand-driven, of high quality, and has played an
important role in supporting the reform process, but its dissemination has been limited. Demonstrating
great maturity in planning for development and in interacting with the Bank, the Tunisian authorities have
been explicit in their requests for assistance and have carefully reviewed and critiqued all documents
submitted to them. Most of the recent AAA products - DPR and the PPI, Employment and Tourism
Studies - have been read, discussed and endorsed at the highest levels of Government. The Tunisian
authorities generally value the Bank’s analysis and ability to support recommendations with cross-country
experience. The two AAA reports reviewed by QAG during the period - the financial sector assessment
program and the ICT report - received a rating of highly satisfactory and satisfactory respectively. Client
feedback supports the fact that the Bank’s AAA has led to actions on reform and implementation of new
policies. Although the quality of AAA in Tunisia is high, one of its limitations is that it has had a
restricted dissemination outside of Government. This can be explained by the nature of the documents
(demand-driven, policy documents) and by limited willingness, resources and expertise to reach out to a
broader audience.
Table 3: Portfolio Management Indicators
Indicator

Projected Targets (FY00
CAS)
FY00
FY01 FY02
18
18
18
25
20
20

FY00
23.9
32.3

FY01
18.3
25.8

FY02
15.2
29.6

FY03
27.2
36.1

FY04*
22
25

Projected
Targets
(FY04 CAS)
FY05 – FY08
22
20

5
5
100

4.2
4.2
100

4.8
4.8
100

21.1
21.1
100

5.6
5.6
100

0
5
100

5
5
100

Disbursement ratio (%)
Disbursement Lag ; Orig.
(%)
% Projects At Risk
5
% Problem Projects
5
Realism Index
100
* As of December 31, 2003.

5
5
100

Annual Performance

44.
The MENA region has piloted one of MNA’s first Programmatic ESWs, a multi-year program
for analytical work, TA and capacity building in Tunisia. Following a request from Government to
provide assistance on employment, it was agreed to use a sequenced process, based on a strong
participatory approach to build consensus. A program was designed with emphasis on sector work
(diagnosis, reform options, policy advice) and capacity building. The first stage activity (sector work on
diagnostic analysis and policy recommendations) was completed in June 2003 and the Government
identified five areas for further Bank support over the next 2 to 3 years (Box 4). A Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) should be formalized by mid-2004. The benefits of the PESW are the ability to
agree jointly on a work program that supports important reforms and to mobilize commitment, expertise
and resources in a multi-year framework.

Box 4 : Areas of Support under the Employment PESW
The five areas of potential collaboration, that are expected to be reflected in the MOU between the Government and the Bank are
the following:
1. Development of macro tools to evaluate impact of different sectoral patterns of growth on employment, in connection with
Tunisia’s integration into global trade;
2. Implementation of a business environment survey with an employment module;
3. Better understanding of the characteristics and constraints of the SME in terms of employment creation;
4. Improvement of the information system at household and enterprise level and introduction of dissemination mechanisms;
5. Development of evaluation studies to assess the impact of employment programs (ALMP, and pre-employment and inservice trainings) and review of policy options, based on international experience, to improve the social protection system
for those at risk of losing their job.

-18-

45.
Given alternative sources of financing at spreads lower than IFC’s, the Corporation's role has
diminished in Tunisia, while MIGA has not underwritten projects in Tunisia during the past four
years. IFC's portfolio is small, standing at US$7.5 million at end-March 2004, in equity positions. Since
FY02, IFC has actively worked to exit a number of equity stakes, some of which the Corporation has held
for over ten years and which have performed very poorly. IFC would be interested in investments in
Tunisia if the Corporation's position changes and it can play a developmental role where commercial
financial institutions are not providing services. In this context, IFC’s focus in Tunisia will be on new
products or sectors such as ICT and large and complex private sector infrastructure investments. On May
6, 2004, the Board of Directors approved an investment of $50 million in the Banque internationale arabe
de Tunisie (BIAT), the country’s largest private commercial bank. This investment will provide
innovative Tier II financing to this bank and allow it to meet growing demand from private sector clients
while at the same time improving key financial ratios and specifically taking additional provisions against
non-performing loans. MIGA’s activities have been limited to profiling potential investment opportunities
in Tunisia through its online investment services and information portal for international corporate
investors.
B.

Key Features of CAS
Comparative Advantage and Guiding Principles

46.
The Bank’s comparative advantage in Tunisia resides in its ability to support challenging and
sensitive reforms, the credibility of its advice, and the quality of its expertise and knowledge in support
of innovative approaches. The instruments upon which these rely are a mix of high-quality lending and
demand-driven advisory products and services which introduce comparators from other middle-income
countries with relevant experience. Through its AAA, the Bank has demonstrated that it is able to support
policy decisions and reforms, while encouraging the Government and key stakeholders to address
sensitive but critical issues such as economic governance. The Bank’s investment lending provides
additional rigor in planning, execution, evaluation and safeguards and, through AAA and TA embedded
into loans and regular supervision missions, provides intense knowledge-sharing around innovative ideas
and cutting-edge practices. These aspects are appreciated by our client, and often outweigh the delays
incurred due to relatively complex Bank procedures.
47.
Building on lessons learned from the past, this CAS is based on the following guiding
principles: a greater focus on results and quality; increased programmatic selectivity; strengthened
partnerships and outreach; and additional flexibility in the approach and choice of instruments. These
principles will be discussed in further detail but are briefly summarized here.
§

§

Results and quality: The CAS results framework provides the Bank and the Government with a
mechanism for monitoring progress towards achievement of CAS outcomes. It allows for timely
identification of issues, problem solving and decision making, as well as for documenting successes
and best practices. This raises accountability for teams and should lead them to make adjustments in
the program to ensure that the best quality service is delivered to the client, at all stages of lending
and analytical activities.
Programmatic selectivity: Programmatic selectivity aims at supporting a group of actions across
sectors rather than isolated one-off interventions, moving the debate from more limited sectoral
objectives to broader cross-sectoral outcomes. The expected outcomes constitute organizing
principles through which the Country Team can decide which activities best support core
development objectives over the medium-term.

-19§
§

Partnerships and outreach: The CAS proposes enhanced cooperation with development partners,
and in particular the European Union (see section IV.C). This partnership will be one of the vehicles
for increasing the Bank’s outreach efforts with civil society (see section IV. B).
Flexibility in approach and instruments: Tunisia is a mature client of the Bank. It has been a
member in good standing since 1952 and a stable borrower. As a result, the Bank has had sustained
engagement in Tunisia and has good knowledge of the development challenges. In order to remain a
partner of choice for this investment grade middle income country, the Bank will show flexibility in
CAS implementation to accommodate requests of support which may not have been identified in this
CAS, assuming that these are areas where the Bank has a comparative advantage. The Bank will also
offer a more flexible range of instruments and better tailor products and services to meet the client’s
needs (see section IV.A).
Consultations

48.
A limited number of consultations were organized for this CAS and contributed to identifying
the expected CAS outcomes. A two-day workshop with over 50 Government officials from all key
Ministries was held in December 2003. It was an opportunity to discuss and validate the key findings of
the DPR which constitutes the analytical base for the CAS, and to discuss key CAS outcomes for a fouryear horizon. A similar workshop was organized in March to discuss the draft CAS and collect the
Government’s comments. Additional consultations were held with ten line ministries, three unions
(women, workers, and agriculture and fisheries), and business leaders during a workshop organized by the
Arab Institute of Heads of Enterprises (IACE). Two workshops co-organized by the Bank provided an
opportunity to hear the views of stakeholders on private participation in infrastructure and environmental
sustainability.
49.
The consultations with the private sector validated the critical importance of improving
economic governance and the business environment in order to enhance growth and employment.
Representatives from the private sector illustrated, through real situations, the bottlenecks and hurdles
private entrepreneurs have to overcome, namely: numerous administrative burdens; insufficient use of
information technology due to high costs and ways in which electronic communications are controlled; an
environment that does not foster innovation, and inadequate transparency and predictability of the
business environment because rules and regulations are not perceived as applying in the same way to all
actors.
50.
Consultations also validated the importance of continuing to support women’s participation in
the Tunisian economy and society. Although Tunisia is at the fore in terms of women’s participation in
economic and political spheres, many interlocutors stressed that much still remains to be done in order for
women to reap the full benefits of progress and actively contribute to economic growth. They strongly
suggested that Bank projects and analytical work should continue to systematically support women’s
interests.
Results Framework
51.
The Results Framework for the Tunisia CAS seeks to clearly indicate intended outcomes of the
Bank’s strategy, in line with the country’s priorities (see Annex 1 and Figure 7). It identifies: (i) three
key strategic objectives related to long-term national development goals as articulated in the 10th
Development Plan; (ii) twelve associated CAS outcomes that the Bank can directly help to realize; (iii)
related indicators and intermediate outcomes (milestones) that will be monitored to measure achievement
of the CAS outcomes; and (iv) the mix of Bank products and services that are intended to best contribute
to these outcomes, as well as other donor interventions. The framework also articulates the explicit link

-20among all the activities supported by the Bank - lending and analytical work, ongoing and proposed –
since it is the combination of these that will lead to outcomes. The long-term national goals are derived
from the 10th Plan. Since this is the first attempt in a CAS with Tunisia to systematically identify results
and indicators, the process will be refined during CAS implementation as part of a joint learning exercise.
In particular, some indicators identified in the results framework will have to be better defined. The CAS
progress report in 2006 will offer an opportunity to do this as well as to adjust the Results Framework,
and in particular to reflect changes in national goals coming out of the preparatory work for the 11th
National Plan (2007-2011).
52.
The Results Framework is ambitious, and coordinated efforts on several fronts will need to be
undertaken to achieve it. The CAS assumes that the twelve CAS outcomes can be achieved if the key
reforms suggested in this document are implemented, allowing Tunisia to face the important challenges of
the years ahead. Tunisia’s past development experience seems to indicate that this is feasible as the
country has demonstrated steady results over the years, good planning and administrative capacity, and an
ability to tackle complex reforms. In addition, country ownership of the development and reform agendas
is high, as is Tunisia’s capacity to mobilize and coordinate support from development partners.
Furthermore, the outcomes correspond to areas where the Bank has been supporting Tunisia and has both
local and global knowledge and expertise to support the achievement of these outcomes. Finally, the
framework also acknowledges that other development partners will support achieving the outcomes and
identifies their role.
53.
The Results Framework provides strategic direction but is not a blueprint for action. In line
with the recommendations of the World Bank MIC strategy14, the CAS framework is intended to be
sufficiently flexible to respond to evolving Government priorities and needs over the CAS period, and
leave ample scope for dialogue to appropriately design future investment and adjustment lending
operations. Also, the CAS does not present a final list of Bank Group activities for the next four years as
doing so would be neither feasible nor advisable given the flexibility required in being responsive to a
middle-income country. Illustrative lending and AAA programs are suggested for each of the three
Strategic Objectives, with more certainty for the next one or two fiscal years (Table 4).
C.

Expected Outcomes of CAS and Bank Support
Strategic Objective 1: Strengthen the business environment to support the development of a
more competitive, internationally integrated private sector and improve competitiveness of the
Tunisian economy

54.
Improved incentives system and increased transparency and predictability of the regulatory
framework (CAS Outcome 1.1.). Key options to address the challenges identified above would include:
progressively harmonizing corporate incentives and tax system in order to level the playing field between
onshore and offshore firms; continuing liberalization of foreign investment, in particular by progressively
reducing restrictions to majority capital ownership by foreign investors such as requirements for prior
approvals which could be replaced by technical specifications by sector; strengthening the Competition
Authority and competition regulatory framework; and upgrading the capacity of the judiciary in terms of
processes, institutions and human resources to ensure a more predictable, equitable and effective
enforcement of laws and regulations. Other options in terms of fiscal reform include: a comprehensive
examination of tax system; harmonization of the corporate tax system to improve its neutrality and
eliminate existing distortions; phasing out the “forfaitaire” tax system for self-employed and SMEs. The
Bank proposes to assist the Government through analytical work and the ECAL IV and ECAL V
14

“Enhancing World Bank Support to Middle Income Countries – Revised Version”, April 20, 2004., SecM2004-0071/1.

-21adjustment loans which will probably benefit from parallel financing from the EU and AfDB given
successful cooperation under ECAL III. The proposed Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) would be
conducted in a participatory fashion in order to strengthen Tunisia’s capacity to conduct future such
surveys to assess perceptions of local and foreign investors regarding the business environment,
benchmark Tunisia with other middle-income countries, and establish temporal comparisons. A Legal and
Judicial Sector Assessment could be conducted as it would provide a valuable understanding of the sector
as well as an identification of the potential constraints to private sector development. It could lead to
technical assistance and capacity building.
55.
Reduced transaction costs for firms, leading to increased production and exports (CAS
Outcome 1.2.). Options to achieve this include dismantling key import monopolies; revising the Customs
Code; modernizing the commercial registries; and continuing to reduce tariffs on imports outside of the
EU. The Bank will support this agenda through: ECAL IV and V; the ongoing Export Development
Project and the new operation under preparation; the proposed Information Society project which would
support firms in harnessing ICT to improve market access; possible analytical work and lending in
support of SMEs; possible ESW on trade facilitation and logistics improvements. The ICA will inform
the Bank’s work and will, in particular, shed light on specific barriers that women entrepreneurs and
SMEs face. In order to help achievements on this outcome, the Bank expects to work with the EC and
AfDB.
56.
Improved delivery/efficiency of infrastructure services by public and private firms (CAS
Outcome 1.3.), enabling the growth of private sector firms, as well as benefiting Tunisian citizens by
contributing to enhancing their quality of life. Through sustained engagement in infrastructure and the
recent PPI study15, the Bank is in a position to support the government to: make public utilities more
efficient; improve the regulatory framework; and enhance private sector participation in infrastructure.
The Bank will support this agenda through ongoing projects (Transport Sector Investment I and II,
Greater Tunis Sewerage, Municipal Development III); new lending (Urban Water Supply Loan in
preparation, possible transport project to support reform of Tunis urban transport services); ongoing GEF
project on Solar Water Heating and proposed project on Energy Efficiency; ESW on infrastructure (PPI,
competition and regulation, and specific sectors such as electricity and gas, ports and airports); World
Bank Institute (WBI) capacity building program on regulation of PPI; and possible World Bank Group
guarantees in support of specific operations. This is an area where collaboration is expected to continue
with the EC, AfDB, and could be developed with EIB. In addition, the Bank could support the
implementation of the reform program suggested in the tourism strategy through a technical assistance or
a sector investment loan, which would complement the ongoing Cultural Heritage project (and a possible
repeater operation).

15

In order to support the objective of the 10th Plan to increase private participation in all sectors, including infrastructure, the
Government called on the Bank and EC to conduct an in-depth study on PPI, which took two years to produce following a
participatory process involving key ministries, and was discussed in an open forum in December 2003. The PPI study makes
horizontal and sectoral recommendations which the Government is in the process of reviewing before adopting a PPI
strategy and action plan.

-22Figure 7: Illustrative Results Framework

Increased
sustainable
growth leading
to more job
opportunities …

Objective 1: Strengthen the business
environment and improve the
competitiveness of the Tunisian economy

Improved incentives
system and increased
transparency and
predictability of
regulatory
framework
(1.1)
Reduced transaction
costs (1.2)
Improved delivery of
infrastructure
services by public
and private firms
(1.3)

Increased
competitiveness of
agriculture while
enhancing social and
environmental
sustainability (1.4)
Banking sector more
responsive to needs
of private sector
(1.5)
More dynamic local
public and private
financial markets
(1.6)

…while maintaining
macro economic
stability and
upholding social
achievements.

Objective 2: Enhance skills and
employability of graduates in an
increasingly knowledge-based economy

Improved quality
and relevance of all
levels of the
education system
(2.1)
Improved financial
sustainability of the
education system
(2.2)

Improved linkages
between research,
higher education,
and the marketplace
(2.3)

Objective 3: Improve the quality of social
services through enhanced efficiency of
public expenditures

Increased budget
flexibility and better
fiscal mobilization to
reduce public debt
(3.1)
Performance
budgeting and M&E
operational in key
line ministries (3.2)

Improved coverage,
quality and financial
sustainability of
health, and pension
systems (3.3)

-23Improved competitiveness of agriculture while ensuring that social and environmental
concerns are properly addressed (CAS Outcome 1.4.). This outcome targets a specific sector because this
is a sector that faces important challenges in terms of competitiveness and social and environmental
issues. It is also a sector that the Bank has been supporting for several decades and in which it has a
strong involvement. Intermediate outcomes that the Bank could support in order to assist Tunisia to
improve competitiveness of agriculture include: making regular adjustments of irrigation water tariffs to
better reflect costs; reorganizing and regionalizing agricultural research to make it more responsive to
farmers’ demands; and improving statistics and information to better inform production and investments
choices. World Bank support for the next four years will include: ongoing and proposed portfolio of loans
for agriculture and natural resource management with particular emphasis on water and land conservation
(Natural Resource Management, Water Sector Investment, and proposed repeater projects, Agriculture
Support Services, Northwest Mountainous and Forestry Areas Development); GEF projects (Protected
Areas Management, and proposed Golfe de Gabes Marine and Coastal Resource Protection Project and
Africa Stockpile Project (regional program) which will assist Tunisia in meeting the objectives of the
Stockholm convention on eliminating persistent organic pollutants); strategic environmental assessments
in the agriculture and tourism sectors, and one to measure impacts of climate change on natural resources
management; TA and AAA on environment for harmonizing environmental impact assessment systems,
mainstreaming environment in sectoral policies, and developing environmental indicators related to
MDG#7; Rural Sector-Wide Review as suggested by CAE and requested by Government; and ESW/TA
for water resource management (Box 5). Gender issues will continue to be given priority in all of the
Bank’s lending and analytical work given the central role that women play in these sectors. For this
outcome, the Bank expects to work in collaboration with the EC, AfDB, AFD, GTZ and KFW.
57.

Box 5: Proposed Key Analytical and Advisory Activities for Agriculture and Water
To address the concern of OED and the Government that the Bank has not conducted a rural sector-wide review in 21 years, such
a review is proposed during the CAS period. The review will analyze key challenges faced by the rural sector such as natural
resource management and water pricing, rural unemployment and under employment, lack of safety nets for rural population,
constraints faced by women, competitiveness of agriculture (product quality and standards, foreign market access - in particular
EU, liberalization of food marketing), delivery of agricultural support services, and increased participation and decentralization
of decision making. The review will also address challenges for which Bank support has not been as effective according to the
CAE, namely access to rural finance and land consolidation and tenure security. The review will provide recommendations for
future reform for the Government and for future Bank operations.
Given that the Government and other partners have conducted numerous studies on water in recent years, the Bank does not
propose a comprehensive water sector review but rather a mix of policy notes, TA and capacity building in order to support the
Government in making necessary reforms in this area. This support will complement work conducted under Bank projects in the
rural (Water Sector Investment) and urban space (Greater Tunis Sewerage, Urban Water Supply project under preparation). It
will help the Government to enhance sustainability of water through: the design of effective institutions, policies and regulations
(i.e. updating the Water law which dates back to 1975); better integration of rural and urban concerns (now under one same
Ministry); enhanced cost recovery and efficiency of water supply and irrigation, while protecting low income users; more private
participation in the sector; optimization of existing hydraulic infrastructure assets and water conservation; empowerment of water
user associations; and improved water quality and reuse management. The work will require a concerted effort between Bank
teams working on rural and urban water and sanitation.

58.
Banking sector more responsive to the needs of the private sector (CAS Outcome 1.5.). In order
to address the key constraints faced by the banking sector, the Bank will support the Government’s efforts
to: set and enforce provisioning targets; strengthen the protection of creditors’ rights in bankruptcy by
simplifying and improving bankruptcy procedures; improve financial information on the quality of
borrowers by aligning national accounting and auditing standards with international standards; strengthen
incentives for the rigorous application of high quality financial reporting and auditing standards in the

-24private sector; gradually enact legislation to reach greater compliance with International Financial
Reporting Standards and strengthen institutions to enforce these standards;16 reinforce the existing credit
registry; and promote enhanced competition in the banking sector. These reforms would allow banks to
take more risks in financing private enterprises, including small and medium enterprises, on the basis of a
sound assessment of the enterprises’ business plan. World Bank support will mostly be mobilized through
ECAL IV and V, coordinated with other donors supporting the financial sector (i.e. AfDB, EC and AFD),
and follow-up technical support to the ROSC on Accounting and Auditing.
59.
More dynamic local public and private financial markets (CAS Outcome 1.6.). Examples of
areas where the Bank could support reforms over the next four years include: implementing the new law
on business groups to facilitate the creation of a larger number of companies for listing on the stock
exchange and to strengthen corporate transparency; passing regulations to promote development of life
insurance; and improving regulation of secondary market for government securities. The actions listed
above to improve corporate transparency will also support achievement of this outcome. Main Bank
instruments in support of these reforms are: ECAL IV and V; an IDF grant for public debt management;
the financial TA support for public debt management and local debt market development described in
greater detail in section IV.A.; and study on non-banking financial sector.
Strategic Objective 2: Enhance skills and employability of graduates and labor force in a
knowledge economy

60.
Improved quality and relevance of all levels of the education system (CAS Outcome 2.1). The
Bank is well positioned to help the Government of Tunisia achieve this outcome through its long and
successful cooperation with Tunisia in the field of education (the first education loan of the Bank was for
Tunisia in 1962). During the CAS period, the Bank will support the efforts of the Ministries of Education
and Higher Education to roll out competency-based education to upper basic education by 2008; pilot
demand-side financing; redesign the vocational training tax after analyzing the costs and benefits of the
current system; and reduce obstacles for provision of in-service training by firms. Bank support could also
help enhance participation of communities in the decision-making process at school level through
capacity building; introduce greater financial and personnel management and pedagogic autonomy of
universities and other post-secondary training institutions; and design and implement an active policy to
support lifelong learning. Instruments in support of this outcome are: EQIP II (Education Quality
Improvement Program) approved in March 2004 and a possible third operation in FY08; the Higher
Education Project II and the third of this series which is under preparation for FY06; a proposed
vocational training project (FY08); and AAA in frontier areas such as lifelong learning and the future of
vocational training. This outcome will also be informed by the Employment PESW and the ICA. The
Bank will ensure that the support it brings to education reinforces the achievements of Strategic Objective
1. This will be achieved by ensuring that educational programs are responsive to the needs of the private
sector, and of particular sectors such as tourism and agriculture. Collaboration will continue with the EC,
AfDB, AFD which are active in support of education and training.
61.
Improved financial sustainability of the education system (CAS Outcome 2.2). This will be
achieved through a set of measures such as: updating the tuition fees policy; increasing the share of
student services outsourced; and increasing the share of educational expenditures funded from non-public
16

The ROSC on Accounting and Auditing suggests ways in which Tunisia can design and strengthen the suitable institutions
to implement and enforce principles which draw upon internationally accepted practices, including relevant portions of the
European Union law, also known as the acquis communautaires.

-25sources (i.e. private providers of education). Bank support to achieve this outcome will come through the
same lending instruments mentioned above as well as a study of the economics of education which will
rely on data collected through a public expenditure review.
62.
Improved linkages between research, higher education and the market place leading to greater
innovation and competitiveness of firms (CAS Outcome 2.3). This will entail reorganizing and
modernizing research institutions; supporting innovation and job creation through additional technoparks;
addressing obstacles and enhancing incentives for innovation and scientific research; and publishing an
annual report on knowledge economy to measure results achieved and set future policy directions. The
“Knowledge for Development” (K4D) program of WBI conducted in 2003 an assessment of progress
made by Tunisia towards becoming a Knowledge Economy which provides a solid analytical base for
future interventions. A component on innovation is also planned for the Information Society Project. In
all activities, special attention will be paid to the role of women in research and to fostering specific
applications which benefit women.
Strategic Objective 3: Improve the quality of social services through enhanced efficiency of
public expenditures
63.
Increased budget flexibility and better fiscal mobilization to reduce public debt (CAS Outcome
3.1.). The Bank has begun to work with the authorities on improving the management of public
expenditures and has collaborated with the Ministry of Finance to develop a debt management strategy.
The Bank is well placed to continue this assistance and support the Government during the next four
years to progressively reduce the multiplicity of the VAT regimes in order to broaden the tax base and
narrow the statutory tax rates, and reorganize and modernize debt management institutions by 2006.
Activities in support of these reforms will be: Public Expenditure Review (PER), IDF grant for debt
management, TA support for public debt management and local debt market development, and possibly
analytic work on options for civil service reform and examination of tax system. The PER is of particular
importance as it could help build capacity to prioritize public spending and provide the basis for measures
to efficiently address social expenditures. Bank staff have developed strong expertise in the areas of
budget reform and could help provide the analytical basis for assistance for other development partners.
In particular, AfDB has expressed interest in supporting this effort. It is proposed that the PER be
followed by a programmatic ESW in the field of public finance management to support the Government’s
efforts in implementing the reform agenda.
64.
Performance budgeting and M&E operational in key line ministries (CAS Outcome 3.2.). The
Bank will support the Government in taking the following actions: preparation of medium-term fiscal
framework setting overall macroeconomic and fiscal policy parameters for the budgets; integration of
recurrent and investment budgets at all stages of budgetary cycle in order to support implementation of
performance budgeting by 2008; evaluation of at least two performance budgeting pilots in line
ministries; and evaluation of efficiency for at least five public investment programs. Activities in support
of this outcome will be: ECAL IV and V, PER, follow-up work to the CFAA, and additional ESW and
TA as needed.
65.
Improved coverage, quality, and financial sustainability of health, social protection, and
pension systems (CAS Outcome 3.3.). The following will contribute to achieving this outcome: (i)
Health: comprehensive health insurance reform passed by 2008, improving coverage, financial risk
protection, and benefit packages; actions toward better regulation of private health providers taken by
2008; enhanced information systems put in place by 2007; and pre-requisites for well-functioning private

-26insurance market in place; (ii) Social Protection and Active Labor Market Policies: initial plans made to
achieve better balance between economic and social needs through less direct protective measures inside
the firm and more effective social protection outside the firm; (iii) Pension: strategy for reform developed
by 2006 and reform program launched by 2008. Bank support to achieving this outcome will be organized
around: AAA (PER with special focus on social sectors, health sector review (to be completed in FY04),
employment PESW, and strategy note on pension reform); capacity building (such as on impact
evaluation of training and social programs); and possible future lending (health and SME/employment
loan). The Bank’s support in health and other sectors will also include awareness raising activities and
policy dialogue on HIV/AIDS. Indeed, although Tunisia’s prevalence rate among the population is low
(0.06% in 2001, UNAIDS data), the unreliable surveillance system could mean that serious outbreaks in
certain populations could be missed. The Bank proposes to support Tunisia to ensure that it acts now to
keep the prevalence rate low. In addition, gender issues are of key importance in the social areas and will
be given particular attention in all Bank activities. Analytical work on gender (in particular a country
gender assessment focusing on the role of women in the labor market) could be carried out.
IV. VEHICLES FOR WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP WITH TUNISIA
A.

Bank Instruments
Analytical and Advisory Services

66.
The Bank will continue to invest in producing high-quality, demand-driven AAA while
strengthening systems to maximize and measure impact and being proactive in putting forward critical
issues that are relevant to the reform process in Tunisia. The Bank will continue to mobilize its best
expertise to ensure quality and timeliness of AAA in response to Government demand, and will continue
to pilot the PESW approach. It will strengthen its role as key partner in support of difficult but critical
reforms by challenging the Government and other key stakeholders to think about new options for reform,
take stock of support for the reforms, identify appropriate entry points and sequence interventions so that
they add incremental value. As part of the monitoring of CAS outcomes (see section V), task teams will
be asked to document in a more systematic fashion how a given AAA product or process contributes to
reaching CAS outcomes.
67.
A technical assistance program will be conducted jointly with the IMF, with the aim of
assisting the Government to improve debt management and to develop the local debt market. The
program will support reforms and capacity building, in coordination with the IDF grant for debt and
budget management, based on diagnostic work already carried out as part of ECAL III, in cooperation
with the Ministry of Finance. The program aims to improve the country’s capacity in central government
debt management, in particular the development of the domestic debt market.

-27Table 4: Indicative Base Case Assistance Program17

FY05

FY06

FY07

Lending Operations

Amount
(in $M)

ECAL IV
Information Society project

150 to 200
15 to 20

GEF projects (grants):
Golfe de Gabes
Energy Efficiency
Africa Stockpile –(regional
operation)

6.1
8.5
5

Urban Water Supply
Higher Education Reform III
Natural Resource Mgmt. II
Tourism

ECAL V
Water Sector Investment II
SME/Employment

50 to 70
50 to 60
30 to 40
40 to 50

150 to 200
50 to 70
30 to 50

AAA and trust funds
Core diagnostic and Other diagnostic
Public Expenditure Review
Investment Climate Assessment
Country advisory and Policy notes
PESW on Employment
Study on non-banking financial sector
Additional demand-driven policy notes
Technical assistance/Trust funds
TA program on public debt management and development of local debt market
(with IMF)
TA for production of an annual report on knowledge economy and support on
scientific research policies and innovation
Trust fund for statistical capacity building
IDF for Public debt management, and Women and regional development
Core diagnostic and Other diagnostic
Follow-up on Investment Climate Assessment
Country advisory and Policy notes
Rural Sector-Wide Review
PESW on Employment
PESW on Public finance management
Dialogue on Pension reform
Infrastructure / Water Notes
Economics of Education Note
Additional demand-driven policy notes
Technical assistance/Trusts funds
TA on social and environment safeguards
TA on procurement and financial management certification
TA support for financial market integrity
Trust fund for statistical capacity building,
IDF for Public debt management
Core diagnostic and Other diagnostic
CAS Progress Report
Country advisory and Policy notes
PESW on Employment
PESW on Public finance management
Strategy Note on Pension reform
Study on lifelong learning and vocational training
Strategic environment assessments (tourism, agriculture, climate change)
Additional demand-driven policy notes

FY08

17

Tunis Urban Transport
Health Sector
Education Quality Improvement
Project III
Vocational Training

for all:
200 to 300

Trust funds
IDF for Public debt management
Core diagnostic and Other diagnostic
Development Policy Review
Country advisory and Policy notes
PESW on Public finance management
PESW on Employment
Follow-up support on knowledge economy and innovation
Additional demand-driven policy notes

Given the flexibility that will be sought in the Bank program in order to respond to evolving Government priorities and
needs, this table proposes illustrative lending and AAA and is subject to change during CAS implementation. Lending
amounts are indicative and are within the base case lending scenario proposed in Section IV. D. Several of the AAA
products will require work over more than one fiscal year; their expected delivery date is shown here.

-28-

Lending and Other Financial Products
68.
Tunisia is a good candidate for scaling up the Bank’s interventions through further reliance
on country systems. Early findings of these Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR), Country
Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA), and Country Environmental Performance Analysis
(CEPA) indicate that Tunisia’s fiduciary and safeguard procedures are well designed and its laws and
capacity are of high quality. However, improvements have to be made in how the laws and regulations are
implemented, in particular in reducing delays in executing decisions (procurement), in modernizing the
accounting and control systems to adapt to the emerging needs, and in improving the disclosure of
environmental assessments. The CFAA indicates that Tunisia’s budget process is governed by clear rules
and procedures; budget execution provides timely and reliable budget reporting; and the control
framework is comprehensive. Thus, Tunisia represents a moderately low to low fiduciary risk. The good
performance of the Bank’s portfolio in Tunisia also points to strong implementation capacity at the level
of the ministries. This has enabled the government to successfully implement sector wide approaches in
areas such as water, in particular through the Water Sector Investment Program which includes three
donors (AFD, WB, AfDB) in addition to the government, produces common reporting (except for the
annual audit), and relies on existing institutional arrangements. In such an environment, the Bank will
increasingly move towards relying more on country institutions and procedures, strengthening the
capacity as needed, and focusing less on individual transactions.
69.
The Bank will extend the use of programmatic lending and SWAps during the CAS period,
given Tunisia’s adequate institutional capacity to implement this type of projects. Under SWAp
arrangements, Bank teams will certify country procedures in procurement, financial management and
safeguards in given sectors and will design programs to strengthen country practices and capacity for
greater development effectiveness. This will be carried out through technical assistance on procurement
and financial management, and on social and environmental safeguards. Efforts to strengthen financial
management will focus on improving reporting and controls to meet the needs of performance based
budgeting being progressively implemented by Government. The European Commission is piloting a
SWAp for the higher education sector, and this could open the way for other such SWAps in the future to
reduce the transaction cost to both the borrower and the development partners. Adjustment lending will
continue to be a key instrument to support Tunisia’s reform agenda. In addition to structural adjustment
lending, the Bank will explore the possibility of using Programmatic adjustment lending for the ECAL
loans in order to best support reforms that involve multi-year policy changes and institution building.
70.
In order to best respond to Tunisia’s needs, the Bank will strive to simplify and reduce the cost
of traditional sector investment lending. Bank teams will work with the client to design investment
projects that are simple, realistic regarding the types and pace of reforms that are feasible in the mediumterm, and not overloaded with sector conditionality. Teams will make the most of the Bank’s
simplification agenda and the positive changes made to some of the policies, such as the eligibility of
expenditures, the audit and flexible reporting policies, to reduce transactions costs and ensure that both
new and repeater projects are easier and quicker to process. Bank funded projects in Tunisia will continue
to be implemented through the existing government systems with no parallel systems set except for
reporting and auditing. To support environmental programs in Tunisia, the Bank will continue to make
available financing from the Global Environment Facility (GEF). Tunisia has successfully implemented
several GEF projects, and several more are planned under the CAS.

-2971.
The Bank will step up its assistance to the Government to structure an adequate portfolio of
IBRD financial products and services. The cooperation will focus on the potential use of existing IBRD
financial products to manage Tunisia’s financial risks, in line with the government’s debt strategy. While
the Government has diversified the funding sources of its program over the last few years, tapping the
financial markets efficiently, IBRD borrowing has contributed to lowering the cost and risk structure of
its overall funding program and has provided Tunisia with a stable and reliable source of funding. For its
new IBRD loans, Tunisia has moved to the Fixed Spread Loan (FSL) with embedded risk management
tools that the Government has used effectively to manage the currency, interest rate and rollover risks. In
addition, Tunisia was the first country to sign a Master Derivatives Agreement (MDA) with the World
Bank in March 2003. The MDA gives Tunisia access to a range of hedging products (e.g., currency
swaps, interest rate swaps and interest caps and collars) linked to existing World Bank loans, as well as
technical support of the World Bank’s Treasury staff. These hedging products would further enhance
Tunisia’s capacity to manage the financial risks in their debt portfolio. Tunisia could also consider the use
of the Deferred Drawdown Option (DDO) to manage the liquidity risk emanating from unexpected
shocks.18
72.
Within the agreed upon lending envelope, IBRD loans, guarantees and hedging products could
be applied at two levels (country portfolio and individual projects) and two dimensions (existing
portfolio and new pipeline). At the country portfolio level, well structured IBRD financial products could
support Tunisia’s debt management strategy by providing means to better manage risks inherent in the
portfolio of IBRD debt. This could be achieved through the use of: (i) traditional IBRD lending as
needed; (ii) guarantees; and (iii) IBRD intermediation for long dated derivatives transactions. For
example, the customized repayment schedule could be used to reduce the rollover/refinancing risks of the
government and the use of the currency, and interest rate hedging products could help the Government
manage the financial risks of their overall debt portfolio. In the case of the development of the local debt
market and, potentially, the local currency swap market, Tunisia might choose to use the local currency
financing of IBRD to further reduce its currency risks. At the project level, the Government will be able to
use flexible features embedded in lending products along with IBRD hedging products and guarantees to
maximize developmental impacts of certain programs by achieving the desired cost/risk structure of
certain existing projects or structuring more adequate financing for new projects (i.e. projects with longer
loan maturities, up to 25 years).
B.

Outreach, Communication and Capacity Building

73.
This CAS puts a renewed emphasis on outreach and communication. The CAS consultations
reaffirmed the importance of reaching out and listening to different voices. All stakeholders expressed
great interest in interacting more with the Bank to debate development issues and have greater access to
Bank reports (global, regional and national). The main vehicle for outreach efforts will be conferences
and workshops on topics of relevance for Tunisia’s or the region’s social and economic development (i.e.
conferences on the four MNA regional studies of 2003 and the MNA report on HIV/AIDS), ongoing
consultations in the Bank’s activities, and strengthening the Public Information Center (PIC) which is
housed within the library of the University of Tunis. Consultations around the CAS will continue after
18

A DDO gives IBRD borrowers of a single-tranche adjustment loan the option of deferring the loan’s disbursement for up to
three years, provided that overall program implementation and the macroeconomic framework remain adequate. Exercising
the DDO gives borrowers access to long-term IBRD resources to maintain ongoing structural programs if market borrowing
becomes difficult and a financing need materializes. In this way, a DDO can facilitate a more effective response by the Bank
in the event that temporary market access constraints might become prolonged and a borrower might need to rely more on
the IBRD than previously anticipated to meet ongoing funding needs.

-30publication in order to interact with those met during the CAS process and share the Bank’s strategy with
a broader audience. In addition, Bank teams working on lending and analytical work will be encouraged
to identify mechanisms early on for engaging with civil society and strengthening participatory processes.
Several of the Bank’s rural development programs have been successful in this respect and lessons
learned should be applicable to projects in other sectors. The PIC’s impact will be increased by generating
greater awareness of its services among students and other stakeholders. The Bank’s outreach efforts will
be conducted jointly with local and development partners such as the European Commission Delegation
in Tunis which is proactive in its outreach efforts and has expressed willingness to co-organize events
with the Bank.
74.
The Bank will continue to support capacity building within Bank funded projects and will
capitalize on Tunisia’s role as a “hub” for capacity building within the MENA region and sub-Sahara
Africa. As it is currently done within each project, the Bank will continue to support learning
opportunities for key stakeholders in technical skills or on reform issues through participation in training
or conferences and study tours. The Bank will also increasingly support learning efforts across projects, in
areas such as M&E, impact evaluation19, and fiduciary and safeguard procedures. As a well-performing
middle-income country, Tunisia has a wealth of experience to share with countries that are undertaking
reforms in areas where Tunisia has been successful such as education, health, environmental protection,
rural development, etc. The Bank has established partnerships with several training institutes and research
organizations 20, which will be called upon to play an active role in regional networks of research and
training institutes supported by the Bank, and in particular by WBI which has established a hub in
Marseilles, France in March 2004. In addition, the Joint Africa Institute of AfDB-WB-IMF has
temporarily relocated to Tunis (from Abidjan) and will be seeking additional opportunities to work with
Tunisian partners in a broad range of sectors.
C.

Development Partners

75.
Cooperation with development partners has been close in the past years and will continue to be
enhanced during this CAS period. Bank teams will continue to work with bilateral donors (AFD and
GTZ, in particular), Arab funds (such as Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development), the Islamic
Development Bank, and multilateral initiatives such as the Mediterranean Environmental Technical
Assistance Program (METAP 21). The focus of the cooperation will be on upstream collaboration on
assistance strategies, joint analytical work, and - to the extent possible - greater harmonization of
procedures to minimize the cost and burden of borrowing for the Tunisian government and obtain greater
leverage than through traditional parallel financing. The temporary relocation of the AfDB to Tunis and
the expanded role that the European institutions play in Tunisia also provide opportunities for increased
cooperation. The Bank will also continue to collaborate closely with the IMF which conducts regular

19

20

21

A course on impact evaluation of training programs was successfully delivered in January 2004 in Morocco to over 80
participants from Tunisia and Morocco. This was the fruit of a close collaboration between MNA, WBI and WB’s Human
Development Network, and future such events will be organized during the CAS period.
Such as the Tunisia International Center for Environmental Technologies (CITET), the Center of Arab Women for Training
and Research (CAWTAR) which is the implementing agency for the MNA Gender and Development Network, supported
by the Development Grant Facility., Institute of Development Finance of the Arab Maghreb (IFID) and IACE, individually
and through regional networks such as the Mediterranean Development Forum (MDF).
METAP was established in 1990 to bring together 14 Mediterranean countries to cope with and reduce the effects of
environmental degradation. It pools resources from EC, EIB, UNDP, and Swiss Development Cooperation. CITET hosts the
METAP Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Regional Unit and provides EIA training and TA in setting up national
EIA systems.

-31monitoring missions (in the context of the Article IV of the IMF Articles of Agreement) and provides TA
for monetary and exchange rate policy.
76.
The proposed program of cooperation between the EC and the World Bank would seek to
enhance upstream coordination, joint analytical work and project financing, and outreach. The
European Commission and the World Bank are complementary institutions in Tunisia and there is great
willingness among the two institutions to capitalize on each other’s comparative advantages. The EC
draws its main comparative advantage from the fact that it is a key strategic partner for Tunisia given the
importance of EU in economic and political relations, in particular through the AAEU. EC has a support
program of euros 144 million for 2005-2006 and has increasingly decentralized its staff and decisionmaking (40 staff at the Delegation in Tunis). The EC values the partnership with the Bank, particularly
because of the depth and quality of analysis Bank teams bring to key reform issues. Both parties have
agreed to engage in dialogue during formulation of their respective country assistance strategies in order
to identify opportunities for collaboration as early as possible. This would lead to greater collaboration on
analytical work, possibly through pooled resources. The Bank could work with the EC to support the
Government in defining and implementing its action plan for the “New Neighborhood” policy of the EU
(Box 6). Joint financing is expected for ECAL IV and the higher education SWAP, while additional
sectors could be identified in the next few years.
Box 6 : The New Neighborhood initiative -- what's at stake?
In the context of EU enlargement in May 2004, the European Commission recently launched a comprehensive reassessment of its
assistance strategy towards neighboring countries. The EU Council approved in June 2003 a foreign policy framework entitled
‘Wider Europe-Neighborhood Policy’ and a Task Force was set up within the EC. This policy framework sets out terms of
engagement for the coming decade with Russia, the Western NIS 22 and the Southern Mediterranean Region (SMR)23, which do
not currently have a perspective of membership in the EU but will soon find themselves sharing a border with an enlarged Union.
The new policy framework aims to build a zone of political stability and shared prosperity—a ‘ring of friends’—around the
Union by encouraging political, economic and social reform with the promise of deeper economic integration with the EU. More
specifically, the policy framework sets out a process akin to the Accession model, whereby progress on national Action Plans and
progressive liberalization would be rewarded with Neighborhood Agreements giving the neighbors a stake in the EU’s internal
market. This new Policy suggests that, in return for concrete progress demonstrating shared values and effective implementation
of political, economic and institutional reforms, all the neighboring countries should be offered the prospect of a stake in the
EU’s internal market. This should be accompanied by further integration and liberalization to promote the free movement of
persons, goods, services and capital (four freedoms).
A strategy paper will outline the broad policy lines of the initiative, including the horizontal and political elements of the EU
‘offer’ to partners. Benchmarks will be set to evaluate progress in key areas (like market economy, approximation to EU
standards, etc). Progress on political reform will also be assessed, in terms of democracy, rule of law and human rights. While
the details of the strategy as still being discussed, the important features are emerging: (i) financial assistance is to be more
strongly focused on socio-economic reforms; (ii) new Neighborhood Agreements will improve on current Association
Agreements, and; (iii) the principle of ‘differentiation’ would allow the Commission to reward fast-reformers with privileged
economic integration and financial assistance and should trigger competitive liberalization among peers.

77.
The European Investment Bank is stepping up its investments in Tunisia through the EuroMediterranean Facility for Investment and Partnership (FEMIP) program, opening up new
opportunities for collaboration. The FEMIP was launched in October 2002 in order to increase EIB
lending to Mediterranean countries to euros 2 billion a year and to expand areas of investment.
22
23

Ukraine, Moldova and Belarus.
The Southern Mediterranean countries are: Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Palestinian Authority,
Syria and Tunisia.

-32Traditionally, EIB has invested in infrastructure and financial sector, but is now expanding investments in
support of human development (health and education), private sector development, and South-South
collaborative projects. For instance, EIB’s 2003 portfolio in Tunisia includes a loan of euros 110 million
for the health sector and euros 150 million for a global fund to support Tunisian enterprises. EIB has
expressed interest in working closely with Bank in jointly designing and financing projects, and providing
coordinated support in the form of TA for implementation. This collaboration will be explored in greater
depth during the CAS period in order to identify specific projects for collaboration.
78.
Collaboration with the African Development Bank will be reinforced through regular contacts,
upstream coordination, joint analytical work, and parallel project financing. AfDB’s temporary
relocation in Tunis provides greater ease for regular contacts. Upstream coordination was initiated
through discussions of early drafts of this CAS, and AfDB will solicit Bank views on its upcoming
strategy paper (planned for 2005). Areas for joint analytical and project work include public expenditure
review, ECAL IV, infrastructure, and rural development.
D.

Lending scenarios

79.
For the CAS period FY05-08, a flexible base case program of $200 to $300 million a year on
average is proposed in order to support the key development objectives of the CAS. The base case
lending scenario aims to provide enough flexibility to respond to opportunities for high-quality lending
and help support the reforms needed for Tunisia to sustain the growth levels described in the base case
and high case medium-term scenarios described in Section II.B. While Tunisia still faces a number of
vulnerabilities that call for further strengthening the macroeconomic fundamentals, and while outstanding
IBRD and preferred creditor exposure is high, the proposed lending amounts and the attached flexibility
are consistent with sound risk management in view of the expected development progress and poverty
reduction and the projected improvement of IBRD exposure indicators. The program is superior to
lending levels of prior years since IBRD lending to Tunisia averaged $160 million a year during the
FY00-03 period, slightly below the lower limit of the base case envelope of $200 million a year. The base
case program would include at least one policy based operation, ECAL IV, focusing on private sector
development and the financial sector, and possibly a second one (ECAL V). The lower limit of the
lending envelope aims to secure needed support to achieve the three strategic objectives of the CAS under
the policy performance indicators laid out in the results matrix, while the higher limit would enable the
Bank to support accelerated structural reform as described below. Under the proposed lending scenario
($200 million per year), IBRD’s exposure indicators will slightly improve, with IBRD debt to GDP
declining from 7.5 percent in 2003 to 5.5 percent in 2008 and share of IBRD debt in total external debt
declining from 12.7 percent in 2003 to 10.9 percent in 2008. IBRD debt service to total public debt
service is also projected to decline (Annex B7). Under the upper limit of the base case scenario, IBRD
debt to GDP is projected to marginally decline to 6.5 percent by 2008, while the share of IBRD debt in
total external debt will only fall to 12.5 percent.
80.
An acceleration of structural reforms, beyond the pace envisaged under the CAS expected
outcomes, would allow an increase in the base case lending program up to an upper limit of $300
million per year. Fast disbursing loan commitments, including adjustment lending, could reach a
maximum of $600 million over the whole CAS period, of which a maximum of $300 million for the first
half of the period (FY05-06). Enhanced lending would facilitate the implementation of complex reforms including the financing of the associated adjustment costs. The Bank would be watching for accelerated
reforms in the following key areas: investment climate, privatization of key public enterprises such as
utilities and banks, liberalization of trade regime, and reform of social security and pension. Progress in

-33any of these areas, as gauged by the following policy performance indicators, would allow the Bank to
move toward the upper limit of the base case, as long as the Government is undertaking the necessary
fiscal consolidation effort to allow a rapid reduction of public debt and hedge more effectively against
external vulnerabilities:
§

§
§
§
§
§

A radical reform of the framework of investment incentives that would level the playing field for all
firms and investors. This would entail unifying the corporate tax rate for offshore and onshore firms
to a tax neutral rate, significantly below the current statutory corporate tax rate. The risk that some
footloose offshore firms may chose to relocate in other countries would warrant enhanced support by
the Bank.
Significant privatization measures, especially in public utilities still in public hands, bringing
proceeds to above 1.5 percent of GDP per year.
An ambitious liberalization of the trade regime for non EU imports, along with a dismantling of key
state import monopolies.
Measures to improve the flexibility of the labor market, by reducing protection inside the firm while
increasing protection outside of the firm through the implementation of appropriate safety nets
(including unemployment insurance).
Privatization of major banks and reforms aiming at strengthening the banking system by improving
the provisioning of NPLs.
Initiation of social security and/or pension reforms.

Borrowing in excess of the CAS limits could be envisaged in specific circumstances by using
special structural adjustment loans to help Tunisia cope with increased financing needs due to external
shocks and other unpredictable factors. In the past, Tunisia has coped successfully with external shocks
thanks to a sound macroeconomic framework and policy adjustment carried out in a timely manner.
Support by the Bank would be conditional on maintaining a satisfactory macroeconomic framework. The
Bank would coordinate with the IMF to ensure that such a framework was put in place.
81.

A low case lending scenario would result from difficulties in maintaining a stable
macroeconomic framework or a slowdown in the pace of structural reform . The Bank would move to a
low case lending scenario in the event of significant deterioration of the main macroeconomic indicators
(especially the fiscal deficit to GDP ratio, the public debt to GDP ratio, the external current account
deficit to GDP ratio) compared to the base case scenario (Tables 1 and 2), which would place Tunisia in
the low case medium-term scenario described in Section II.B. Another reason to move to the low case
would be significant delays in simplifying investment incentives and addressing the level and
provisioning of NPLs in the banking system. In this situation, the lending program would be focused on a
few investment-type operations and would not exceed $100 million a year.
82.

-34-

V. RESULTS-BASED MONITORING AND EVALUATION: PARTNERSHIP FOR
MEASURING RESULTS
83.
Monitoring of the CAS will rely on existing mechanisms for data collection, M&E linked to the
10th Plan, and outcome and output indicators available in the Bank portfolio of projects and analytical
services. Tunisia has made significant progress in focusing on results in the 10th Plan. In order to monitor
achievements, the Bank will rely on the annual progress reports of the Plan as well as the comprehensive
assessment published at midway, all of which mostly indicate achievements on inputs and deliverables,
but also highlight a certain number of outputs and outcomes. Many indicators in the results matrix (Annex
1) are available at the project level because the results chain links outcomes at the project level with CAS
outcomes and indicators. Monitoring of CAS outcomes will be conducted by members of the country
team and rely on better data collection at the project and AAA level to demonstrate results. A harmonized
system of results reporting will be developed and will create an additional incentive for project teams to
manage for results. The strengthening of the M&E architecture will serve as the basis for self-assessment
in the CAS Progress Report to be prepared in 2006 and the CAS Completion Report to be prepared in
2008. Future CPPRs should also be aligned with the results framework in order to deal with risks and
systemic issues that might hinder achievement of the outcomes. Results of these assessments will feed
into the next CAS cycle.
84.
While Tunisia has good M&E capacity, the Bank will help support strengthening of existing
systems and institutions. To address demand for capacity building in M&E expressed during the CPPR
mission of June 2003, a first mission was conducted in January 2004. Recommendations for future
support during the CAS period include: increase attention to M&E at every stage of project cycle and
encourage broader participation of all stakeholders in defining results and performance indicators; adopt
simplicity in project design and development objectives as this has proven to be highly correlated with
achievement of intended results; shift the focus of supervision missions from control to partnership for
measuring results by using a harmonized M&E framework that can be monitored by project teams and the
Bank at the same time; create an M&E network of resource people. Efforts will also be conducted to
improve capacity in conducting impact evaluations of programs and in using M&E information in the
management of programs and projects.
85.
The greatest impetus for strengthened M&E at the national level will come from progress in
performance-based budgeting, relying on a medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF). The MTEF
will formulate indicators against which expenditure efficiency can be evaluated over the medium term.
Positive outcomes would include: allocation of resources to strategic priorities between sectors; increased
commitments to predictability of both policy and funding so that ministries can plan ahead and programs
can be sustained; increased incentives for efficient and effective use of funds. Tunisia has already started
results-based budgeting in the higher education sector, and the University of Sfax is the first pilot.

-35-

VI. MANAGING RISKS
86.
The Bank’s program over the next four years faces country risks related to Tunisia’s greater
integration into global markets, macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities, and the lack of political
will for reform or slow pace of change. Greater integration into global markets, in particular, the tariff
reductions scheduled in the AAEU and loss of tax revenues on external trade, will increase exposure to
volatility, enlarge the financing needs in the budget and put pressure on both current account and budget
deficits. Risks also arise from “homegrown” macroeconomic vulnerabilities, which may give rise to
contingent and implicit liabilities of the state. 24 This two types of risks can be mitigated through the
implementation of a multi-faceted reform program as described in the CAS. Given economic and political
uncertainties, the Government may choose to slow down or hold back on important reforms in an effort to
maintain internal stability. Yet, if lack of reforms in important areas such as improving economic
governance and social protection lead to increased unemployment and reduced living conditions, social
unrest could result. The Bank can play a role in mitigating this risk by continuing to demonstrate the
expected benefits of the reform agenda through high-quality analytical work, and helping to build
coalitions of support within Government and civil society at large.
87.
The program also faces risks pertaining to regional and country instability. Regional instability
in the Middle East and North Africa and increased concerns of terrorism attacks could affect Tunisia in
the coming years: tourism may fail to reach the expected levels, Tunisia may lose some of its
attractiveness for foreign investors, and internal security and controls may be reinforced. At the same
time, internal stability may be increasingly threatened. As Tunisia faces key challenges ahead - further
integration in the international economy, greater access to information as Tunisia transitions towards a
knowledge economy, potentially rising unemployment - the pressure for greater democracy,
accountability, and freedom of speech is likely to increase and could lead to social tensions if not
accommodated. The Tunisian Government is well aware of these risks and is taking action to mitigate
them. In particular, Tunisia plays an important role in international affairs to help ensure greater regional
stability and continues to maintain internal stability through sound economic management, social
progress, and strong security aimed at containing extremism. The Bank will monitor the political situation
in the region and in the country carefully in order to be prepared to respond to changes.
James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Shenghman Zhang
Washington DC
June 3, 2004
24

Possible sources include: (i) the under-provisioned, non-performing loans accumulated by the banking system, and by public
banks in particular; (ii) the unfunded liabilities of the pay-as-you-go pension system; (iii) guarantees on the foreign-currency
debt issued by public enterprises; (iv) performance guarantees to private providers of infrastructure services, through BuildOperate-Transfer (BOT) or Build-Lease-Transfer (BLT) agreements, if not properly designed; (v) foreign exchange
guarantees may generate fresh debt if adjustment to persistent external shocks were to partly rely on exchange rate
depreciation.

- 36 CAS Annex 1 - TUNISIA FY05-FY08 CAS
Results Matrix
Strategic Objective 1: Strengthening the Business Environment and Improving the Competitiveness of the Tunisian Economy

Outcomes influenced by the CAS Program during the 4
year period

Long-Term Development Agenda for Tunisia

Tunisia 10th Plan Goals

Increased sustainable growth
through greater participation of
firms, in particular SMEs, in all
sectors

Major Issues which hinder the
ability to achieve the National
Goals

CAS Outcomes that the Bank
expects to influence through its
interventions in 4-year period
and outcome-level indicators

Intermediate outcomes to track
implementation towards
expected CAS outcomes

Bank and Partner
interventions for each strategic
objective

•

1.1. Improved incentives system
and increased transparency
and predictability of the
*
regulatory framework

•

Comprehensive examination of
tax system.
Leveling of playing field between
onshore and offshore firms
through progressive
harmonization of incentives and
corporate tax system.
Continued liberalization of
foreign investment.
Competition Authority and
competition regulatory
framework strengthened.
Upgrading the capacity of the
judiciary.

Ongoing Lending:
• Export Development
• Transport Sector Investment I
and II
• Greater Tunis Sewerage
• Municipal Development III
• Cultural Heritage
• Natural Resource Management
• Agriculture Support Services
• Water Sector Investment
• NW Mountainous and Forestry
Areas Development
• Protected Areas Management
(GEF)
• Solar Water Heating (GEF)

Key import monopolies
dismantled.
Revised Customs Code adopted
by Parliament.
Commercial registries
modernized.
Continued reduction of tariffs on
imports outside of the EU.

Ongoing AAA and TFs:
• IDF on public debt management
• IDF for women and regional
development

Annual growth rates of 5,5 % in
2004-2006.
Private investment reaches 58,5% of
total investment in 2006.

•

Lagging local and foreign
investment due to high
discretionary intervention by
government and regulatory
uncertainty, perceived lack of
transparency and preferential
treatment of certain firms, and
weak market contestability.
Incentives and taxation favor offshore firms.

•

As measured by annual FDI
inflows increase by 15-20% by
2006, and 50% by 2008.
(baseline: $650 million average
2002-2003).

•

•
•
•

Increased production and
exportation of services and
products by firms, especially by
SMEs in higher-value added
segments

•

•
Annual growth rates of services of
7,5% in 2004-2006, increasing to x%
by 2008.
Annual growth rates of exports of
goods and services of 6% in 20042006, increasing to x% by 2008.
Reduced unemployment from 15% to
13% by 2006.

*

Bank Assistance

•
•

High transaction costs for
business entry, operation and
exit; high cost of customs
procedures.
Efficiencies in trade logistics and
supply chain need to be enhanced
in order to avoid exposing
Tunisian firms to lost export
opportunities.
Exports concentrated in sectors
(40% clothing) and markets
(75% EU).
Insufficient private investments
in R&D, innovation, quality
standards, and marketing.

1.2. Lower transaction costs
• Number of procedures to start a
business reduced from 10 to 4 by
2008.
• Minimum capital requirement
reduced from 352% of GDP per
capita in 2002 to below 50% by
2008.
• Cost of closing business reduced
from 8% of estate to 6% by 2006
and 4% by 2008.
• Customs clearance and technical
controls delays reduced from an
average of 8 days in 2003 to 2
days in 2008.

•
•
•
•

Proposed Lending:
• ECAL IV with EC and
AfDB(FY05), ECAL V (FY07 )
• Export Development II (end of
FY04)
• SME/Employment (FY07)
• Tourism TA or SIL (FY06)
• Urban Water Supply (FY06)
• Information Society (FY05)
• Tunis Urban Transport (FY08)
• Repeater projects: Natural
Resource Management (FY06),
Water Sector Investment (FY07),
Cultural Heritage (tentative)

This outcome will mostly be influenced by measures taken under ECAL IV and V. Since preparation of ECAL IV only started in March 2004, the intermediate outcomes and indicators have been kept
broad and will be refined during implementation of the ECAL loans. The CAS completion report will reflect these changes. This also stands true for CAS outcomes 1.5., 1.6. and 3.1.

- 37 CAS Annex 1 - TUNISIA FY05-FY08 CAS
Results Matrix
Long-Term Development Agenda for Tunisia

Tunisia 10th Plan Goals

Modernization of infrastructure
services to increase quality and
efficiency, and opening of
investment to private sector
Growth of ICT sector by 21% in
2004-2006 to increase its
contribution to GDP by 7 percent in
2006 (up from 3.3 percent in 2001).

Major Issues which hinder the
ability to achieve the National
Goals

CAS Outcomes that the Bank
expects to influence through its
interventions in 4-year period
and outcome-level indicators

•

1.3. Improved delivery/efficiency of
infrastructure services by public
and private firms

•
•

Transport sector value added
increases to an average of 5.5% per
year during Plan period.

Electricity average annual growth
rate of 7.2% within Plan period to
increase energy sector value added
by an average of 4.3% per year.

•
•

Increase energy efficiency and
develop renewable energy sources.

•

Increase rate of rural electrification
from 91,7% in 2001 to 95% in 2006.

•

Average growth of 4.9% of tourism
industry (hotels, cafes and
restaurants). Increase of hotel
occupancy rate of 55% while
increasing number of beds by 38,000
during the Plan period.

Outcomes influenced by the CAS Program during the 4
year period

•

•

•
•
•

Low levels of administrative and
financial autonomy of public
utilities.
Insufficient cost recovery due to
tariffs not aligned with cost of
service.
“Contrats-programmes”
(contracts between Government
and utilities) are not sufficiently
designed as output-based
contracts and implementation
often does not follow agreements
made (i.e. financial compensation
of certain public service
mandates not always honored).
Labor costs represent high share
of operating expenses of public
utilities.
Lack of business mentality,
“client” orientation, and feedback
mechanisms in public utilities.
Limited openness to competition
in infrastructure leads to high
costs of services.
Lack of appropriate legal and
regulatory framework (i.e.
concession law) hinders private
investment.
Government commitment to
liberalize still tentative yet tariff
increases and capacity for
additional public funding for
these sectors are constrained.
Tourism receipts volatile and
dependant on international
context. Market shares are
decreasing.
Financial and environmental
sustainability of many hotel units
precarious.
Low rates of occupancy and low
revenue per tourist.
Tunisia tourism shows little
product variety and low image.

Telecoms and ICT
• Increase in share of ICT sector in
GDP by 2% in 2008.
• Number of fixed and mobile
telephone lines as % of
population reaches 60% by 2008
(up from 32% in 2003).
• 30% of population uses the
internet by 2008 (up from 6% in
2003 ).
• 4,000 internet hosts are based in
Tunisia by 2008 (up from 1,625
in 2003).

Transport
• Container terminal of Rades
privatized by 2006 and CentreEst airport put in concession by
2006.
• Subcontracting of urban transport
services (passenger-km) of 3%
by Société des transports de
Tunis by 2006.
• Labor costs of Société nationale
des chemins de fer tunisiens
(national railways) < 50% of total
operating expenses by 2006.

Energy
• Increased gross investment in
energy efficiency in Tunisian
industry corresponds to $20
million for 2005-2008.
• Energy saving of at least 10 ktoe
per year.

Intermediate outcomes to track
implementation towards
expected CAS outcomes

Public Sector
• Steps towards greater disclosure
of information on public
enterprises (financial statements,
audits, key performance
indicators) taken.
• Government reviews tariff
regulations for services not open
to competition ( regulated by
“contrats- programmes”) and
enforces compliance with quality
of service standards.
Regulatory Framework
• Government establishes
benchmarking for all sectors.
• Legal and regulatory framework
for private sector participation
adopted for transport, electricity
and telecom (concession law or
other form).
• Regulatory institutions set up
(energy, transport) or
strengthened (telecom).
Private Sector Participation
• Government adopts a strategy
and action plan for accelerating
participation of the private sector
in infrastructure by end 2005 and
rolls out a communication
strategy by 2006.
• Announcement of ICT
liberalization plan.
• Establishment of a sustainable
energy efficiency market for
Tunisian industry.

Bank Assistance

Bank and Partner
interventions for each strategic
objective

Proposed GEF:
• Golfe de Gabes (GEF)
• Energy Efficiency (GEF)
• Africa Stockpile (GEF)
Proposed AAA, TA and TFs:
• Employment PESW
• ICA with focus on gender and
employment dimensions
• Study on non-banking financial
sector
• TA support for public debt
management and local debt
market development
• TA support for financial market
integrity
• ESW and TA on infrastructure
(PPI, regulatory issues, sector
specific support, i.e. transport);
WBI capacity building program
on regulation of PPI
• ESW and TA on water
• Rural Sector-Wide Review
• TA on social and environment
safeguards (also applies to
strategic objectives 2 and 3)
• TA on procurement and financial
management certification (also
applies to strategic objectives 2
and 3)
• Strategic Environment
Assessments
• Additional demand-driven policy
notes
• Other WBI programs, activities
conducted jointly with Joint
Africa Institute

- 38 CAS Annex 1 - TUNISIA FY05-FY08 CAS
Results Matrix
Long-Term Development Agenda for Tunisia

Tunisia 10th Plan Goals

Major Issues which hinder the
ability to achieve the National
Goals

Outcomes influenced by the CAS Program during the 4
year period
CAS Outcomes that the Bank
expects to influence through its
interventions in 4-year period
and outcome-level indicators

Intermediate outcomes to track
implementation towards
expected CAS outcomes

Water Supply and Sanitation
• Average water tariff/average cost
increases to 110% in 2008 (2002:
98)
• Average sewerage tariff/average
cost increases to 80% in 2008
(2002: 67.6)
• Unaccounted for water reduced
to 18% in 2008 (2002: 20.1%)

Agricultural growth of 3.5% a year
while preserving natural resources.

Agriculture
• Agriculture facing
competitiveness challenges due to
increased international
competition and fast changing
environment.
• Agriculture is vulnerable to
environmental degradation.
• Water subsidization runs counter
to the objective of increasing
water tariffs and water saving
devices to improve efficient use.

EC
• Operations support for
implementation of association
agreement, “mise a niveau” of
enterprises and industry,
competitiveness, promotion of
foreign investments, technical
assistance for privatization, rural
development, natural resource
management and water
management.
• Collaboration with Bank
expected on ECAL IV and PPI
(possible use of grants to support
legal and regulatory reforms).

Tourism
• Increase of tourism receipts by
tourist of 5% by 2008 (baseline:
400 TD per tourist in 2002).
• 4 million visitors on cultural sites
by 2008 (up from 3 million in
2003).

Tourism
• Public tourism institutions
(ONTT, AFT, cultural heritage
management institution)
reorganized by 2006.
• New marketing plan for tourism
adopted by 2006.

1.4. Increased competitiveness of
agriculture while enhancing social
and environmental sustainability.

•

•
•

•
Improved irrigation efficiency
from 85% in 2003 to 105% in
2008.
(Other indicators to be proposed
following the completion of the
Rural Sector-Wide Review and
reflected in CAS Progress
Report).

Bank and Partner
interventions for each strategic
objective

Partners:

Municipal Infrastructure
• 100% of municipalities with
financial situation problems have
restructuring plan contracts.
• 1 private concession project
financed by 2005, 3 by 2008 in
municipalities.

Increased competitiveness of core
sectors such as agriculture while
preserving natural resources

Bank Assistance

Regular adjustment of irrigation
water tariffs to better reflect
costs.
Agricultural research and
extension is responsive to
farmers’ production constraints
and improved by 2007. (e.g.
adapting crop varieties to
associated climatic variability,
research on irrigation techniques
appropriate to each crop and
region).

EIB
• Portfolio of loans to private and
public enterprises ( i.e. cement
and steel companies) and for
infrastructure (energy, transport,
water supply, solid waste, etc);
lines of credit (“global loans”) to
support SMEs and private firms.
• Areas of possible collaboration
with WB: municipal
development, tourism, water and
infrastructure.
AfDB
• Loans in financial sector, “mise a
niveau” of firms, infrastructure
(transport, water supply, solid
waste, electricity), rural
development, water resource
management; line of credit to
SMEs.
• Future collaboration expected on
ECAL IV.

- 39 CAS Annex 1 - TUNISIA FY05-FY08 CAS
Results Matrix
Long-Term Development Agenda for Tunisia

Tunisia 10th Plan Goals

Major Issues which hinder the
ability to achieve the National
Goals
•

•
•
•

•

Financial sector modernized and
more efficient

•
•

Outcomes influenced by the CAS Program during the 4
year period
CAS Outcomes that the Bank
expects to influence through its
interventions in 4-year period
and outcome-level indicators

Continued subsidization of wheat
maintains an incentive system that
favors the cultivation of cereals, a
lower value crop.
Agricultural producers are not
making the most of export
opportunities with EU.
Rural poverty and vulnerability
remains high.
Research and extension not
sufficiently demand-oriented and
not well translated into extendable
messages.
Land tenure and access to rural
finance could be improved.

High levels of non-performing
loans (> 20% of assets), low
provisioning (44%).
Lack of venture capital and long
term financing; insufficient
access to credit for SMEs due to
high collateral requirements.

Intermediate outcomes to track
implementation towards
expected CAS outcomes

Bank and Partner
interventions for each strategic
objective

•

AFD
• Supports « mise a niveau » of
firms, industrial zones, urban and
rural development.
• Areas of possible future
collaboration: water, tourism,
financial sector.

KfW and GTZ
• Water resource management,
environment

1.5. Banking sector more
responsive to needs of private
*
sector
• Level of NPLs reduced from 22%
in 2002 to below 17% in 2008.

•
•
•

•
•
•

•
•

*

see previous footnote.

Issuance in primary market
limited and inactive secondary
market.
Rigid monetary framework that
does not allow sufficient interest
rate flexibility and prevents
development of active money
market.
Anemic private securities market.
Weak corporate transparency.

Agriculture and fisheries
statistics and information more
widely used for production and
investment choices and risk
management.

JBIC
• Loans in power, water and other
infrastructure sectors.

•

Diversified, dynamic financial
markets for government and
private securities

Bank Assistance

1.6. More dynamic local public and
private financial markets *
• Increase number of firms listed in
stock exchange from 42 in 2003
to 60 by 2008.
• Flexible money market interest
rate created by 2007.
• Share of bond issues and
increases in equity capital
through the stock exchange goes
from 6% of gross investment in
2002 to 10% in 2008.

•

•
•

Central Bank sets and enforces
provisioning targets by 2005.
Regulations on corporate
bankruptcy revised by 2007.
Regulation enacted to strengthen
corporate transparency (financial
disclosure and auditing).
National accounting and auditing
standards aligned with
international standards.
Credit registry strengthened.
New law on business groups is
implemented and facilitates
creation of larger number of
companies for listing on stock
exchange.
Regulations passed to promote
development of life insurance.
Improved regulation of secondary
market for government securities
adopted by 2007.

UNIFEM
• Study on gender implications for
economic reform

- 40 CAS Annex 1 - TUNISIA FY05-FY08 CAS
Results Matrix
Strategic Objective 2: Enhancing Skills and Employability of Graduates and the Labor Force in a Knowledge Economy
Outcomes influenced by the CAS Program during the 4
year period

Long-Term Development Agenda for Tunisia
Tunisia 10th Plan Goals

Improved efficiency of education at
all levels and increased
employability of graduates.

Major Issues which hinder the
ability to achieve the National
Goals

CAS Outcomes that the Bank
expects to influence through its
interventions in 4-year period
and outcome-level indicators

Intermediate outcomes to track
implementation towards
expected CAS outcomes

Bank and Partner
interventions for each strategic
objective

•

2.1. Improved quality and
relevance of all levels of the
education system
• Primary completion rate
increases from 87% in 2003 to
90% by 2007.
• Secondary education completion
rate 50% by 2008.
• At least 40% of university
students graduate from 2-year
degree programs by 2006.
• Student to computer ratio drops
to 15:1 in secondary schools by
2008.

•

Ongoing lending:
• EQIP I and II
• Higher education II
• Agriculture Support Services

Rapidly increasing numbers of
students in secondary and higher
education.
High levels of public spending on
education (7.2% GDP in 2003).
Large share of recurrent
resources on salaries to the
detriment of other pedagogical
inputs.

2.2. Improved financial
sustainability of the education
system
• Share of budget for non-salary
current expenses remains at least
at 2.5% for primary and 6.5% for
secondary.
• 50% of student services
outsourced by 2008.

•
•

Public research insufficiently
linked to private sector needs and
applications.
Weak linkages with higher
education institutions and private
sector.
Low levels of spending in R&D.
Insufficient linkages with
international research and
development.

2.3. Improved linkages between
research, higher education and the
marketplace leading to greater
innovation and competitiveness of
firms.

•

•
Enrollment in higher education
increases to 30% in 2006.
•

Improved resource mobilization to
meet demographic challenges.

•
•
•

Modernized scientific and
technological
Research infrastructure and more
dynamic innovation capabilities.
1 % GDP spent on research by 2004
and 1.3% by 2008

Bank Assistance

•
•
•
•

Learning achievements need to
be improved in context of
knowledge economy.
Weak link between education
system and labor market resulting
in high unemployment of young
graduates, in particular women.
Lifelong learning opportunities
limited: insufficient adult
learning and labor market
training for unemployed or atrisk adults.

•

Share of students graduating with
scientific and technological
qualifications increases to 42%
by year 2008.

•
•

•

Competency based education
rolled out to upper basic
education by 2008.
Demand side financing piloted in
at least 10% of private
institutions by 2007.
Government addresses obstacles
that impede in-service training
development (through review of
financing options for in-service
training, particularly for SMEs,
and reform of vocational training
tax, including gender issues).
Share of Ministry of Education
operational budget allocated to
activities managed at school level
maintained at current levels.

Tuition fees policy updated.
Incentives designed to increase
the share of educational
expenditures for non-public
sources and outsource student
services.

Proposed Lending:
• EQIP III (FY08)
• Higher education III – possibly
jointly with EC as SWAP (FY06)
• Vocational training (FY08)
• Information Society Loan with
component on innovation (FY05)
Proposed AAA and TA:
• Economics of education study
linked to public expenditure
review
• ICA
•
•
•

•

•

•
•

public institutions in charge of
research reorganized and
modernized by year 2008.
4 new technoparks created
leading to creation of 2,000 jobs
in the private sector by year
2007.
Completion of an audit of
obstacles for innovation by 2005.
Enhanced incentives for
innovation by 2006.

Employment PESW
Study on lifelong learning and
vocational training
TA for production of an annual
report on knowledge economy
and support on scientific research
policies and promotion of
innovation
Additional demand-driven policy
notes

Partners:
EC
• Supports professional training,
higher education (SWAP 2004),
preparing support for secondary
education. Close collaboration
with World Bank.

- 41 CAS Annex 1 - TUNISIA FY05-FY08 CAS
Results Matrix
Outcomes influenced by the CAS Program during the 4
year period

Long-Term Development Agenda for Tunisia
Tunisia 10th Plan Goals

Bank Assistance

Major Issues which hinder the
ability to achieve the National
Goals

CAS Outcomes that the Bank
expects to influence through its
interventions in 4-year period
and outcome-level indicators

Intermediate outcomes to track
implementation towards
expected CAS outcomes

Bank and Partner
interventions for each strategic
objective

•

•

•

EIB
• Has expressed interest in
investing in education and
training – possible collaboration
with WB.

At the graduate level, female
students are less visible in the
scientific and technical fields.

•
•

Employment rates among these
graduates increases to 90% by
year 2006 (87% currently).
Doubling of number of start-ups
by year 2008.
Increase of 50 % of private sector
investment in R&D by year 2008.

•

Completion of an audit of
research organizations (technical
centers, public laboratories,
university units) by 2006.
Publication of a yearly report on
knowledge economy and
innovation by 2006.

AfDB
• Higher education loan ongoing.
Cooperation with WB.
AFD
• Vocational training support
ongoing.
JBIC
• Possible investments in
technoparks.

- 42 CAS Annex 1 - TUNISIA FY05-FY08 CAS
Results Matrix
Strategic Objective 3: Improving the Quality of Social Services through Enhanced Efficiency of Public Expenditures

Long-Term Development Agenda for Tunisia
Tunisia 10th Plan Goals

Macro-economic balances
maintained to enhance economy’s
ability to manage external shocks.

Major Issues which hinder the
ability to achieve the National
Goals

CAS Outcomes that the Bank
expects to influence through its
interventions in 4-year period
and outcome-level indicators

Intermediate outcomes to track
implementation towards
expected CAS outcomes

•

3.1. Increased budget flexibility
and better fiscal mobilization to
*
reduce public debt
• Wage bill reduced to and kept
below 40% of total central
government expenditures by
2008 (from 46% in 2003).
• Total public debt reduced to
under 55% of GDP by year 2008
(from 61% in 2003).
• Interest payments reduced to
10% of total central government
expenditures starting from year
2006 and kept below thereafter
(from 11.5% in 2003).

•

3.2. Performance budgeting and
M&E operational in key line
ministries
• Program and performance
budgeting piloted in two large
ministries by 2006 and rolled out
to key line ministries by 2008.

•

Savings increase by 7% a year in
2004-2006 to 25.2% of GDP in 2006.
•
Inflation rate stays within limit of
3%.
Budget deficit reduced to 2% by
2006.

Outcomes influenced by the CAS Program during the 4
year period

•

Large, non-discretionary
expenses (wages, interest
payments, social entitlements )
account for over 70% of total
public expenditures and wage bill
is growing.
Tax system suffers from a
number of exemptions and
multiple preferential treatments.
Public debt remains high.

Current deficit reduced to 2.4% of
GDP by 2006.

•
•
•

Budgetary cycle insufficiently
integrated with medium-term
economic planning exercise.
Limited integration between
recurrent and investment budgets.
Social security funds and
municipal budgets not
consolidated with overall budget.

•
•

•

•
•

*

see previous footnote.

Initial plans made for reduction
of multiplicity of the VAT
regimes reduced to broaden the
tax base and narrow the statutory
tax rates.
Debt management institutions
reorganized and modernized by
2006.
Reduction of share of nondiscretionary items in total public
expenditures (from over 70% in
2002).

Medium-term fiscal framework
prepared by 2006 setting overall
macroeconomic and fiscal policy
parameters for the consolidated
general government budget.
Recurrent and investment
budgets integrated at all stages of
budgetary cycle in order to
support implementation of
performance budgeting by 2008.
Evaluation of performance
budgeting pilot in two ministries
conducted by 2007.
Efficiency of five public
investment programs evaluated
by year 2008.

Bank Assistance

Bank and Partner
interventions for each strategic
objective
Ongoing Lending : none
Ongoing AAA or TA:
• Capacity building on impact
evaluation with WBI
• Trust fund for statistical capacity
building
• IDF for public debt management
and for women and regional
development
Proposed lending:
• ECAL IV
• Health TA or SIL (FY08)
• SME/Employment (FY07)

Proposed AAA and TFs:
• Public Expenditure Review
• PESW on public finance
management
• Employment PESW
• Strategy Note on Pension Reform
• TA support for public debt
management and local debt
market development
• Additional demand-driven policy
notes

- 43 CAS Annex 1 - TUNISIA FY05-FY08 CAS
Results Matrix
Long-Term Development Agenda for Tunisia
Tunisia 10th Plan Goals

Improve living standards for all in
context of changing demographics.
90% of population covered by social
protection regime by 2006.

Outcomes influenced by the CAS Program during the 4
year period

Major Issues which hinder the
ability to achieve the National
Goals

CAS Outcomes that the Bank
expects to influence through its
interventions in 4-year period
and outcome-level indicators

Intermediate outcomes to track
implementation towards
expected CAS outcomes

•

3.3. Improved coverage, quality,
and financial sustainability of
health, social protection and
pension systems

Health
• Stakeholder support leads to
comprehensive health insurance
reform passed by 2008 improving
coverage, financial risk
protection, and benefit packages.
• Actions toward better regulation
of private health providers taken
by 2008: accreditation programs
in place based on transparent
criteria, regulation mechanisms
defined.
• Pre-requisites for wellfunctioning private insurance
market are in place: required
changes to legal and regulatory
framework are known, capacity
to regulate improved.

•
•
•

•
•

•
•
•
•

Aging population (close to 10%
of population is over 60) leading
to greater pressure on pension
and health systems.
High levels of private health
expenditures (50%).
Quality of care provided in public
sector perceived to be inferior to
that provided by private sector.
Quality and efficiency of health
care stands to be improved due to
over-use of some institutions
(university hospitals) and underuse of others (local hospitals).
Government plays central role in
social protection through close
regulation of labor market.
High amount of ALMP spending
on post secondary graduates
(80% of spending for 6% of the
unemployed).
Need better impact evaluation of
ALMPs.
Bulk of social protection
provided by enterprises.
Little use of user surveys or
feedback mechanisms.
Need to ensure financial
sustainability of pension systems
and improve coverage.

Health
• Health care expenditures increase
by no more than 10% from 2004
to 2008 ( vs. 215% increase
between 1987-1997).
• Share of private expenses for
health care reduced from 49% in
2002 to 40% in 2008.
• 10 % of regional and university
hospitals accredited by 2008
(baseline: 0).
Social Protection
• Number of ALMPs is
consolidated or reduced, based on
evaluation of impact and costeffectiveness.
Pension
• Reform program launched by
2008.

Social Protection and Active Labor
Market Policies (ALMPs)
• Initial plans made to achieve
better balance between economic
and social needs (i.e. more
efficient and effective social
protection system inside and
outside the firm).
Pension
• Strategy for pension reform
developed by 2006.

Bank Assistance

Bank and Partner
interventions for each strategic
objective
Other Activities:
• WBI program on health sector
reform
Partners:
• EC: Support to reform of health
insurance and employment
(Agence de l’emploi).
•

EIB: Loan for health sector
(infrastructure and equipment),
2003.

- 44 -

Annex 2: Tunisia 2000 CAS Achievement Report

Date of CAS:
Progress Reports:

April 27, 2000
None required

Period Covered by the CAS:
July 1999-June 2002 (FY00-02)
Period Covered by this Report: July 1999-December 2003
Report Completed by:
Rosalia Rodriguez-Garcia, Consultant, and
Cecile Fruman, Senior Country Officer
Date:
January 10, 2004
Summary of Report
1.
This CAS Achievement Report (CASAR) aims to assess the effectiveness of the
2000 CAS for Tunisia in bringing about the expected results and to highlight the key lessons
that have been learned during this period and up to December 2003. The findings of this
report have informed the new CAS. The CASAR is not a formal evaluation; it is a selfassessment tool for the Country Team and relies on an analysis of key reference documents
which include the 2000 CAS, AAA reports listed in Appendix Table 4, Project Appraisal
Documents, Project Supervision Reports, Implementation Completion Reports, CPPR, QAG
and OED reports, and other relevant documents such as WB and UN data and reports on
MDGs in Tunisia, and Tunisia’s 10th Plan.
2.
This Achievement Report looks at the CAS from the perspective of the Bank’s
Results Framework. The framework starts from the country’s vision and goals for national
development, followed by a diagnosis of country conditions and options, and the design of
the World Bank’s country strategy, based on results or outcomes to be achieved by the end
of the CAS period. Because the Tunisia CAS did not identify a set of core measurable
outcomes, the authors of this report have extracted the likely outcomes from the CAS
document. The report assesses the results achieved under each of these outcomes by tracking
the key indicators and milestones laid out in the CAS. However, the report was constrained
by lack of data on indicators which made the measurement of results difficult.
3.
Since 2000, Tunisia has sustained a very good economic and social performance by
maintaining a stable macroeconomic framework, placing strong emphasis on social
achievement and implementing gradual structural reforms. Real GDP grew at an average of
5.2 percent per year during 1997-2001 compared to 2.8 percent during 1982-86; fiscal
deficits were maintained at an average of 3.2 percent; inflation was cut to an average of 2.9
percent; and poverty was reduced to 4.1 percent. This evidence also points to areas were
achievements fell short of expectations. For instance, private investments reached only 53.2
percent of total investments in 2002, less than the projected 56 percent; an increase in
vulnerability1 from 14 percent in 1990 to 17 percent in 1995 suggests that some structural
determinants of poverty remain; and the unemployment rate of 14.3 percent in 2003 remains
high considering a decade of robust growth and job creation.

1

Vulnerability is measured by the number of people having expenditures of about 30 percent above
the poverty line. The share of vulnerable in total population rose from 1.1 million people in 1990 to
1.5 million in 1995.

- 45 4.
This report concludes that the 2000 country strategy reflected a good understanding
of national challenges, was relevant to and aligned with longer-term development goals as
spelled out in the 9th Development Plan, and presented a well thought out strategy to achieve
assistance goals. Deliberations for the 10th Development Plan (2002-06) began during the
CAS period, and the Bank was responsive to the new priorities, particularly in support of the
emphasis on employment. At CAS design, it became clear to the Bank that Tunisia was
facing major challenges - heightened international competition, upholding social cohesion,
sustaining environmental protection, and upgrading governance - and that Tunisia’s
response to these challenges would affect the sustainability of reforms. The CAS recognized
the conundrum that Tunisia faced as to the appropriateness of an economic governance
model that, while it had served well in the past, may not be the most dynamic and flexible
model for steering the national development agenda in a fast-moving environment. It also
acknowledged that strains in infrastructure, services and the banking sector, low response of
private investments, and employment pressures were already being felt in the economy.
5.
The assistance program has shown progress - sometimes substantial - towards
achieving the CAS outcomes, but has not achieved all the outcomes. Had outcomes been
better defined and collected in a systematic fashion during CAS implementation, it would
have been possible to demonstrate more results than are documented in this report. The
available data indicates that the instruments used to support the strategy have been
appropriate overall. The analytical work has been highly demand-driven, and has provided a
solid basis for policy dialogue with the Government and relevant – albeit at times too
ambitious - advice on implementation of reforms. Many of the analytical pieces were
effective in identifying priorities and guiding lending. New lending commitments since 2000
supported financial and private sector development (39 percent of lending volume),
agriculture and rural development (25 percent), urban development and transport (21
percent), and education (15 percent). Lending instruments have remained quite traditional in
their approach, relying mostly on sector investment loans, with some innovation in terms of
programmatic lending (i.e. adaptable program loans for education and transport). Regarding
adjustment lending, lessons can be drawn from ECAL III which covered too many areas and
included too many conditionalities, at times ill-defined. Partnerships with other donors (EU,
AfDB, AFD, in particular) have been good and have contributed to the achievements of
many of the CAS outcomes.
I.

The Tunisian Context and Longer-Term National Development Goals

6.
Tunisia is a middle-income country with a population of 9.8 million (about 3.4
million or 35 percent rural), a per-capita income estimated at US$ 2,000 in 2002, and one of
the fastest growing economies in the MENA region. Sound stabilization and economic
adjustment policies, started in Tunisia in 1987, provided the impetus for economic growth.
The success of this phase of reforms emphasizing internal liberalization gave way to the next
phase emphasizing external liberalization. In 1995, the signing of a 12-year Association
Agreement with the European Union (EU) for manufacturing goods exemplified Tunisia’s
external liberalization policies aimed at establishing free trade. The Government’s longstanding commitment to social development resulted in marked overall improvements in
living conditions, social and economic indicators, a plunge in fertility rate from 3.4 percent in
1990 to 2.1 percent by 2000, and a decline in poverty levels from 40 percent in the 1960s to
11 percent by 1985 and 4.1 percent by year 2000.
7.
Tunisia became a member of the World Bank in 1958 and has engaged in a longstanding and stable relationship with the Bank. Since the initiation of economic reforms in

- 46 the late 1980s, the Bank has been assisting Tunisia to: i) maintain a stable macroeconomic
framework; ii) improve resource allocation by gradually liberalizing prices, trade and
investment controls; and iii) decrease the emphasis on the public sector to free up resources
for the private sector.
8.
Tunisia’s efforts to liberalize its economy in the mid-90s placed greater demands for
efficiency and enhanced competitiveness, at a time when the Government was already facing
tough demands: stiffer global competition on export markets offshore, and increased labor
force participation demands, particularly by youth, onshore. This situation was reflected in
the 9th Development Plan (1997-2001), as the goals were stated to be: (1) modernizing and
gradually opening up the economy to competition while increasing employment; (2)
maintaining macroeconomic stability; and (3) strengthening the social agenda (education and
health, poverty reduction, upholding the equity of women) and environmental management.
The logic of these priorities was that a steady reduction of fiscal deficits, a more educated
and skilled manpower, higher level of employment, financial sustainability of the health and
social sectors and social security system, and enhancement of environmental conservation,
were critical actions to strengthen the ability of Tunisia to consolidate and expand on past
gains and compete in the global markets. In implementing the liberalization reforms, the
government’s overriding concern was to avert major reversals in the country’s many
achievements on the social and environmental fronts. According to the 2000 CAS, Tunisia’s
development objectives and priorities were consistent with its situation, and realistic and
attainable given the country’s solid track record.
9.
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) (see Box 1 of CAS) were not
identified as such in the 9th Plan. However, Tunisia’s achievements in human development
are impressive in promoting gender equality, reducing child mortality, and improving access
to water and sanitation, and particularly, in staying on-track to meet the MDG of universal
primary education by 2015, with almost all 6-year olds enrolled in first grade. By 2001, the
ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education was 0.97 to 1. During the 19952001 period, prevalence of child (under 5) malnutrition and infant mortality decreased,
access to water and sanitation improved and life expectancy continued to increase to
industrialized countries levels. The number of people with fixed line and mobile telephones
increased three-folds and those with personal computers four-fold. This evidence suggests
that Tunisia has made very good progress towards many of its development goals.
10.
Key findings of the Tunisia 2003 Poverty Update are worth noting as they provide
insights into some of the outcomes of the national development agenda in the period roughly
covered by the 2000 CAS. These include: i) poverty stagnated between 1990 and 1995 but
felt markedly between 1995 and 2000, reaching 4.1 percent in 2000; ii) high and pro-poor
growth provided the basis for poverty reduction between 1990 and 2000 but the slow-down
in growth in 2001 and 2002 raises concerns for the sustainability of poverty reduction
(although the fact that growth resumed steadily in 2003 is encouraging); iii) social indicators
show that Tunisia has made progress in terms of improving overall living conditions for the
poor, beyond the alleviation of extreme poverty. However, two factors indicate that poverty
reduction remains an important priority: (i) the level of rural poverty remains double the
national rate (rural areas comprise 74 percent of the poor but only 35 percent of residents);
and (ii) a fairly high proportion of people are clustered closely above the poverty line.

- 47 -

II.

Country Assistance Strategy Progress and Outcomes2

A. Methodology: Explaining outcomes, indicators and milestones
11.
Although the CAS did not clearly identify outcomes or explain how results would be
monitored, it did identify indicators and milestones. There were eleven indicators (“core
performance indicators”) that measured primarily longer-term development goals such as
poverty or infant mortality (see Tables 1 and 2). All indicators showed ambitious – but not
totally unrealistic – targets for a 3-year period. Some data3 are available to indicate
achievement of – or progress towards achieving – CAS shorter-term goals and contribution
of the CAS to the national agenda. Needless to say changes in those indicators can not be
fully attributable to the Bank’s contribution in a 3-year period. The CAS identified nine
milestones (see Appendix Table 2 ), which were not quantitative in nature and combined
outputs with intermediate outcomes. They represented key stepping stones towards the
achievement of CAS outcomes and country goals. 4
12.
Consequently, in alignment with the 9th Development Plan (1997-2001), the
overarching objective of the 2000 CAS was growth and equity to help reduce poverty from
7.6 percent (1997-99) to 6.5 percent by 2002. The CAS took a broad approach to supporting
poverty reduction that reflected the Bank’s view of the country’s stage of development and
emerging challenges. In dialogue with the Government, it was recognized that poverty
reduction, in the wake of increased competition, needed to focus on labor-intensive growth,
employment, and vulnerability issues, including promotion of greater coverage by the social
protection system and community-based approaches in poverty areas. As a consequence, the
Bank’s assistance strategy emphasizing policy analysis and dissemination, was built upon
three main pillars to support:
(a)

(b)

2

3

4

human development by consolidating Bank’s past involvement in
human resources development, natural resources management, transport, rural
and municipal development, and community participation to strengthen policy
formulation and management;
integration of Tunisia into EU markets by supporting economic reforms to
strengthen the financial system, enhance the competitiveness of the economy,
liberalize public agencies, improve private sector participation in the
economy, and increase employment, while also putting in safeguards against
the transitional costs of adjustments, and

See Appendix for CAS Results Summary (Table 1), CAS Milestones (Table 2), Planned Lending
Program and Actual Deliveries (Table 3), Planned AAA Program and Actual Deliveries (Table 4) ,
and Co-financing in Tunisia FY00-04 (Table 6).
Data are collected by sector, which means that data are scattered, not always consistent among
sources, and are not presented in a way that corresponds directly to the CAS priorities and outcomes.
Also, the choice of indicators made at the time of CAS may not have been the most appropriate to
measure outcomes (e.g. persistence rate).
In addition, the CAS document includes a program matrix with progress indicators. Some of these
indicators show quantitative targets, while many others are qualitative in nature or refer to
programmatic milestones. The appropriateness and relevancy of some of the indicators in the matrix
to the Bank's shorter-term goals for the country are unclear. The confusion about indicators is
compounded by the fact that there is not a systematic approach to the presentation of indicators
related to the objectives and expected CAS outcomes. In the text, the CAS document identifies a
three-pronged approach or pillars, while the CAS summary matrix shows 15 different areas of work
not categorized by pillars.

- 48 (c)

modernization of Tunisia’s institutions and technological base by launching
new initiatives of catalytic nature to strengthen export development, preserve
Tunisia’s cultural heritage, and examine the development potential of the
information and communication sector.

13.
Outcomes for each of the three pillars are analyzed as to the main objective, the
assistance instruments that supported the pillar, the achievements related to the CAS
outcomes, the indicators and the CAS intermediate outcomes shown as milestones, as well as
borrower’s overall performance for the pillar. An effort has been made to focus on the
instruments that inform the different outcomes, rather than on each particular project or loan.
It is understood that activities in any particular pillar are likely to contribute to outcomes in
other pillars, that CAS activities build on each other, and that each outcome is likely to be
influenced by more than one instrument and by activities in other pillars. Thus, pillars are not
seen in isolation or separated from each other, but as the main arteries through which efforts
and resources flow in the direction towards achieving the CAS goals. CAS results are
summarized in Appendix Table 1.
B. Pillar I: Support human development by consolidating long-term development
14.
This pillar grouped traditional sectors of Bank’s involvement: mainly, human
resources development (education), health, natural resources management (water), transport,
rural development, and municipal and urban development. The overarching goal of this pillar
was to support continued human development and poverty reduction by consolidating Bank’s
past involvement to strengthen policy formulation and management in selected areas. This
was congruent with the Government’s goal of strengthening the social agenda and
environmental management, as stated in the 9th Development Plan. Table 1 below shows the
indicators identified in the CAS as the Bank’s contribution to the longer-term development
agenda and their values for 2000.
Table 1. Performance Indicators Identified in the 2000 CAS for Pillar I
Indicators
• Decrease % of population below the national
poverty line
Urban poor
Rural poor

Baseline
(97-99)
7.6
6.0 (95)
15.8 (95)

Target
(2002)

Outcome
(Year)

6.5
-

4.1 (00)
3.1 (00)
8.3 (00)

• Increase persistence rate to school grade 9*.

42

73 (04)

55 (04)

• Decrease infant mortality per 1000 live births*

30

20

26 (00)

• Increase access of rural population to safe water
54 (90)
58 (00)
%*
Table notes:
1.
Data in the Outcome Column is from WB’s MDGs Tunisia Country Profile, 2003, and WB Tunisia
Poverty Update, 2003.
2.
The * means that these are MDGs).
3.
Source for persistence rate: Ministry of Education and Training. The figure in the outcome year is an
estimate for 2004.
4.
Figures between parenthesis refer to the year of the data.

- 49 Assistance instruments
15.
The instruments foreseen for this pillar stressed analytic and advisory services and
sector investment loans. The AAA program in support of this pillar was carried out as
planned. It included a Water Sector Study conducted during the previous CAS as well as a
Social Conditions Update in 2000, which reviewed selected social policies (health, education
and social insurance system), and a Poverty Update (2003, after CAS period), which
analyzed recent poverty trends in Tunisia, depicted a profile of the poor, and proposed
critical actions to assist the Tunisian authorities in their efforts to upgrade the poverty
monitoring system. Financial support was provided through three new loans: (i) FY00 Water
Sector Investment (ii) FY00 Education Quality Improvement Program, and (iii) FY01
Transport Sector Investment II. Two more loans were approved in FY03: The Northwest
Mountainous and Forestry Areas Development and the Municipal Development III. In
addition, there were many on-going projects in the areas of higher education, health, natural
resources and municipal development.
Pillar I outcomes
16.
Relevant outcomes and milestones that were extracted from the CAS document for
this pillar are:
Outcomes
§
Move towards universal completion of basic quality education (grades 1
through 9).
§
Complete the development and initiate the implementation of the new health
insurance program.
§
Promote integrated water resource management and protect water and the
environment.
§
Create an institutional framework conducive to sustainable development of
public transport in major cities, including larger private sector involvement.
§
Consolidate municipal and urban development, including municipal finance
and decentralization.
Milestones
§
Start updating poverty analysis based on new population census.
§
At least satisfactory rating and sustainability of reforms under planned
Education Quality Enhancement Project.
§
Agreement with Government and EU to initiate implementation of health
insurance reforms.
§
Agree on community-based programs in the Northwest region.
Outcome: Move towards universal completion of basic quality education (grades 1 through
9).
17.
The target for this outcome has not been fully met. At this point, it is estimated that
the persistence rate5 will increase from 42 percent in 1999 to 55 percent by 2004, a
substantial increase but short of the estimated 73 percent. However, considering the time
5

The persistence rate is the proportion of Grade 1 students who complete Grade 9 successfully in 12
years or less (i.e. maximum of 3 repeats in the course of the basic education cycle). The figure for
1999 refers to students who entered Grade 1 in 1989, and the figure for 2004 refers to students who
entered Grade 1 in 1994 and who will complete Grade 9 anywhere from 2003 to 2007.

- 50 period of the CAS, the question can be raised as to whether the target set for 2004 was overly
optimistic, or whether better results could be reached with better loan performance.
18.
The quality of education6 outcomes were influenced by the performance of the
Education Quality Improvement Program (EQIP I, APL, FY00-05), a performance-based
program that drew on international standards of quality to assess results, and contributes to
the development of human resources, a key goal of the national development agenda. The
design of EQIP I drew heavily on the Bank’s long experience with education, and benefited
from strong implementation guidance by the Ministry of Education. Throughout the first 2-3
years, the rating of project implementation has been consistently satisfactory, as well as the
progress towards development objectives. Thus, the milestone of maintaining a satisfactory
rating has been reached.
19.
The QAG assessment found the project’s quality at entry satisfactory. Nevertheless,
the report pointed to some weaknesses and recommended that attention be paid to the costeffectiveness of the interventions, and to policy dialogue with the Government on matters
related to resources (e.g. number of teachers) and financial sustainability.7 These issues have
been addressed in the economic analysis of the education sector that provides the framework
for the second loan of the education APL, EQIP II, negotiated in January 2004.
Outcome: Complete the development and initiate the implementation of the new health
insurance program.
20.
This outcome has not been achieved. The health insurance reform has been widely
debated but had not been approved by Parliament. This is a socially and technically complex
issue, and more delays are expected. The expected milestone of establishing an agreement
between the Government and the EU to initiate implementation of health insurance reforms
has been achieved. However, because the EU funds are contingent upon Parliament
approving the new law/reform, the first tranche of funds has not been disbursed. The EU
funds are not for implementation of the insurance program but rather to provide budget
support conditional upon the reform taking place.
21.
The health insurance objective was not linked to the Health Sector loan (FY98-03)
with the Ministry of Health, which focused on institutional strengthening, improving
management and cost control, and the overall quality of services. The goals of this loan were
relevant to the Government needs during the CAS period, congruent with the CAS focus to
strengthen local institutions identified in pillar III, and have contributed to the achievement
of CAS objectives. Mainly, the allocative and technical efficiency and the sustainability of
the public health care system have improved alongside a reduction of government’s
contributions to regional hospitals as the social security fund has taken over funding
obligations, and the quality of care has improved significantly, due in part to new equipment
and infrastructure, and in part to management reforms and training.

6

7

Another education sector project was active during the CAS: the Higher Education Support Reform
loan (FY98-03) which is due to conclude in December 2003. Results information is not conclusive.
See: Quality at Entry Assessment (QEA), World Bank, May 17, 2001. The QEA is an annual
exercise conducted by the Quality Assurance Group to measure the quality-at-entry of projects
approved by the Bank in the previous calendar year.

- 51 Outcome: Promote integrated water resource management and community participation,
and protect water and the environment.
22.
This outcome was influenced by six projects: Water Sector Investment (WSIP,
FY00-06), Natural Resources Management III (NRMP, FY97-04), Northwest Mountainous
Areas Development (FY94-01), Northwest Mountainous and Forestry Areas Development
(FY03-09), Water Supply and Sewerage (WSSP, FY94-03), and Greater Tunis Sewerage and
Water Reuse (FY97-04). The two first projects built on the agriculture sector investment loan
that concluded in FY02 and the two Northwest projects on the first of the series which closed
in FY90. While the WSIP focused on water as the most scarce natural resource, the NRMP
focused mostly on land issues such as preventing land erosion, protecting pasture lands and
promoting the productive capacity of the land. The last two projects focused on improving
water and sanitation in urban settings.
23.
The achievement of this outcome is progressing well. First, water issues are no
longer addressed in isolation, but in the broader context of environmental management and
rural and agricultural development. Second, Bank activities have supported Tunisia’s shift
from water supply management to water demand management, a sound strategic move that
has placed Tunisia ahead of the rest of the region in terms of water conservation; almost all
water resources are managed through an integrated infrastructure that takes into account
environmental concerns, and 67 percent of irrigated surfaces use water-saving equipment
(2001). Third, considerable progress has been made in conserving other fragile and scare
natural resources such as land and coastal areas and energy, in particular through fiscal
incentives and subsidies.8
24.
According to the Tunisia Poverty Update, access of population to safe water
increased from 75 percent in 1990 to 80 percent in 2000, and access to improved sanitation
has also increased from 76 percent in 1990 to 84 percent in 2000. When data are
disaggregated for rural and urban populations, during the same period, rural access to
improved water source increased from 54 percent to 58 percent and access to improved
sanitation from 48 percent to 62 percent. Ratios for urban population have increased from 91
percent to 92 percent for access to improved water source and access to sanitation has
remained at a high 96 percent. While it is impossible to say how much of these changes can
be attributable to Bank’s contribution, the Bank’s multiple loans have had an impact. As an
example, during the length of the WSSP, SONEDE (Société nationale d’exploitation et de
distribution des eaux, the national water supply utility) has increased coverage in water
supply by 21 percent, with more than 200,000 people in rural areas connected to the water
network, and ONAS (Office national de l’assainissement, the national sewerage utility) has
increased its coverage in urban sewerage by 43 percent as well as the volume of wastewater
treated.
25.
In addition, WSIP, NRMP, and Northwest projects have been instrumental in
piloting and, subsequently, scaling up participatory approaches which aim to enhance
responsibility of users and improve the delivery of services. Under the NRMP, over 100
participatory plans for integrated rural development with emphasis on conservation of natural
resources have been completed; the WSIP has supported the emergence and strengthening of
water user associations; while the Northwest projects have assisted in creating active forestry
groups with collective interest and agricultural development groups. All of these projects
have stressed the importance of female participation in the planning, execution, operations
and maintenance, and monitoring and evaluation of integrated rural development activities.
8

Tunisia Country Environmental Analysis, Draft, December 2003.

- 52 Based on these experiences, the Government has extended participation of local populations
in most of its rural development programs. While more remains to be done, it is possible to
conclude that the CAS outcome of promoting greater community participation has been
achieved.
26.
The work of the Bank and the Government in the water and natural resources is an
example of a successful partnership. The AAA link with the lending program was enabling
and allowed the Bank to push for reform. For instance, the Water Sector Study informed the
preparation of the Water Sector Investment Project and led to the creation of the Office of
Water Management (Bureau de la Planification et des Equilibres Hydrauliques). This unit
has slowly begun operations, and needs to be strengthened substantially to be fully
operational.
Outcome: Create an institutional framework conducive to sustainable development of public
transport in major cities, including larger private sector involvement.
27.
The achievement of the CAS outcome is in process, but the intermediate outcome of
achieving lower costs of transport has been only partially reached. However, the following
measures have already been achieved: signature of “Contrat Programmes” (multi-year
framework contracts between Government and state-owned enterprises) with regional urban
transport companies; completion of severance programs aiming to increase efficiency and
adequate staffing of those companies; presentation to Parliament of a new Transport Law
reforming the institutional organization and establishing new financing mechanisms of urban
transport. The potential for achieving the outcome in the coming years is good and will be
influenced by the performance of the Transport Sector Investment loans I (FY98-05) and II
(FY01-06).
Outcome: Consolidate municipal and urban development, including municipal finance and
decentralization.
28.
This CAS outcome was supported by the Municipal Finance Development II project
(FY97-03) which aimed to strengthen the institutional environment for the delivery of
municipal basic services and infrastructure. Aspects of this outcome have been achieved,
mainly, those related to consolidating development by improving infrastructure and
municipal services. However, consolidation of municipal finance has not been fully
achieved, and, as a consequence, the financial situation of Tunisian municipalities remains
weak. This issue is being addressed in the follow-up loan approved in December 2002.
Efforts to enhance community participation in investment decisions and maintenance of
infrastructure have been considerable.
Borrower performance
29.
Although not all outcomes have been fully achieved, borrower performance in this
pillar has been satisfactory, reflecting a good level of institutional management capacity.
Government counterparts demonstrated good ownership of the programs and sufficient
administrative capacity. However, there were important delays across the board. Adoption
and implementation of many reforms was slower than expected, and extensions of project
closing dates were granted to the majority of projects because development objectives were
not fully met by the initial closing date. This statement is also relevant to the other pillars and
will be analyzed in further detail (see paragraph 74).

- 53 -

C. Pillar II: Integration of Tunisia into EU markets by supporting economic reforms
30.
This pillar was aligned with the Government’s 9th Development Plan’s goals of
modernizing and gradually opening up the economy for competition, and maintaining
macroeconomic stability. It aimed at deepening the financial sector, boosting private sector
development by streamlining the business environment and facilitating private sector
participation in infrastructure via concessions, further privatization of state enterprises, and
job creation. Table 2 shows the indicators identified in the CAS that contributed to the
national development agenda.
Table 2. Performance Indicators Identified in the 2000 CAS for Pillar II

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Indicators

Baselin
e
(97-99)

Target
(2002)

Outco
me
2001

Outcome
2002

Increase share of private sector banks in
total of bank assets %.
Increase private investment in % GDP*
Increase proceeds from privatization in
% GDP.
Decrease unemployment rate %.
Increase the labor force covered by
social insurance schemes % (pension
and health).
Average water tariff as % of average
cost.
Increase market share of unleaded
gasoline %.

48

60

12.1
0.5
(95-98)
15.9

15.4
1.0

45

50

60

60

87

110

105

98

4

20

n/a

n/a

54
15.3

14.7
0.6
14.9

15

Table notes:
1. Data in the Outcome Columns for 2001 and 2002 is from WB’s MDGs Tunisia Country Profile, 2003, and WB
Tunisia Poverty Update, 2003, as well as Annuaire Statistique de Tunisie and data contributed by SONEDE and
ONED (water tariffs).
2. The * means that these are Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
3. Figures between parenthesis refer to the year of the data.

Assistance instruments
31.
The Bank’s strategy for this pillar relied on the provision of policy-based support on
a two-year cycle through Economic Competitiveness Adjustment Loan II (ECAL II) - active
at the time of CAS preparation - and ECAL III approved in FY02. Another loan, the
Agricultural Support Services loan (FY01-07), aimed at developing organizational structures
for producers in order to better compete in local and international markets.
32.
Pillar II was also supported by a substantial set of analytical products and an
extensive policy dialogue component. Not all AAA products resulted in specific loans and
activities, but by and large, they all contributed to a better understanding of the Tunisian
situation and timely advice to Government in order to underpin policy alternatives and
strategic options in support of the national development agenda. Among the key reports
were: the Social and Structural Review (2000) and the Private Sector Investment Study
(2000) which underpinned the ECAL III adjustment loan and triggered the preparation of the
External Sustainability Study (2000); the Agricultural Competitiveness Study (2000) and
Policy Note (focusing on transitional issues, 2001) that put forward a strategy for agriculture

- 54 liberalization with measures to mitigate adverse social effects; the Financial Sector
Assessment Program (FSAP, 2001) conducted with the IMF; the Trade Strategy (2001); the
Foreign Investment Advisory Service report on investment promotion (2002, part of ECAL
III); and the Private Participation in Infrastructure (PPI), Employment, and External Debt
Management Strategies (2003).
Pillar II outcomes
33.

The following outcomes and milestones have been extracted from the CAS:

Outcomes
§
Strengthen the financial sector.
§
Boost private sector investment climate and streamline the business
environment.
§
Modernize and liberalize public sector agencies.
§
Enhance the competitiveness of agricultural producers.
§
Increase employment opportunities.
Milestones
§
Completion of financial sector reforms under ECAL II and agreement to
deepen reforms in selected areas.
§
Streamline investment incentives for offshore enterprises vs onshore9.
§
Agree with Government on recommendations through planned policy note on
employment.
§
Agree on social protection strategy to increase targeting and costeffectiveness of social protection system.
Outcome: Strengthen the financial sector.
34.
This outcome has not been fully achieved, mainly because it is a broad and ambitious
expectation in a three-year period; even more so considering the policy and institutional
reforms needed to achieve it, and the gradual approach of the Government to the reform
process. This outcome was informed by the 2001 FSAP and influenced by the performance
of ECAL II and ECAL III. Financial sector reforms under ECAL II were achieved as planned
and the Government agreed to deepen reforms in selected areas under ECAL III, thus
meeting the CAS milestone.
35.
At CAS design, it was expected that ECAL III, the third in a series of adjustment
loans to support competitiveness of the Tunisian economy, would either (i) advance financial
sector reform or (ii) support measures to enhance private sector development and
participation in the provision of infrastructure, depending on the readiness of the
Government. As approved in December 2001, ECAL III was an ambitious program, covering
three broad sectors with the following aims: strengthening the financial sector, promoting a
business environment conducive to private investments, and liberalizing the information and
communication technology sector, while maintaining a stable macroeconomic framework.
The first tranche of the loan ($130 million equivalent) was disbursed at approval. The loan
was meant to close in June 2003 but a six-month extension was granted in order to allow
more time to complete the reform program. As a result, the financial sector and investment
9

Offshore enterprises refers to firms that produce solely for exportation and are granted significant
tax exemptions and financial incentives. Onshore enterprises are those that produce for the local
market and do not benefit from the same level of exemptions.

- 55 climate tranches of €44.5 million each were disbursed, respectively, in September and
December 2003.
36.
The expected outcomes of the financial sector tranche of ECAL III have been met:
the legal framework of the insurance sector has been modernized through revisions to the
laws; reform of the automobile insurance sector was undertaken; automobile insurance
tariffs were increased in an effort to ensure sustainability of the sector; and four undercapitalized insurance companies are in process of being restructured. The biggest lossmaker, El Ittihad, was restructured and a new, fully capitalized, mutual company has been
established. This radical transformation has been accepted by the sector and the Government
has committed itself to put in place a demanding supervision of the insurance sector.
37.
However, looking to the future, many weaknesses remain in the financial sector
(large share of non performing loans in commercial banks with low provisioning, anemic
private securities market, limited issuance in the Government securities market, etc.) that will
need to be addressed in order to achieve the broader outcome of strengthening the financial
sector.10
Outcome: Boost private sector investment climate and streamline the business environment.
38.
While progress has been made, this ambitious outcome has not been fully achieved.
Under ECAL III, progress on boosting the private sector investment climate has been slowest
and the pace of reforms uneven, but the actions taken have been in the direction of improving
the private investment climate:
§

The Government prepared a study and action plan on investment promotion
and incentives but has not met one of the CAS milestones - that investment
incentives for offshore-onshore enterprises be streamlined by CAS
completion. The Government has expressed concerns about the negative
impact on offshore investments if incentives are realigned at this time when
private investment in Tunisia has been performing worse than expected.
Instead, the Government proposes to create a level playing field between the
offshore and onshore sectors through gradual reforms to be adopted by 2008
by which date the free trade zone with the EU will have been established.The
action plan does however identify a number of measures that address other
important determinants of private investment (namely transactions costs of
doing business, market contestability and financing mechanisms) and
constitutes a useful basis for future discussions on investment promotion and
incentives in the context of the new CAS and preparation of a forthcoming
operation (ECAL IV).

§

The Government adopted a Code of legal tax rights and procedures that
clarifies the relationships between the tax authorities and the taxpayers.

§

Accounting standards setting forth the rules and methodologies governing the
consolidation of financial statements and the treatment of corporate
conglomerates have been adopted.

§

An amendment law to the Company Law has been drafted and will reinforce
recent legal developments governing the accounting and auditing profession
in Tunisia and further expand shareholder rights and transparency. The

10

These weaknesses are outlined in the Development Policy Review which supports the new CAS.

- 56 amendment law, when adopted, will constitute a necessary and very positive
development, in line with modem corporate law approaches.
§

One commercial bank was privatized (UIB) and one is in the process of being
privatized (Banque du Sud), reducing the share of the commercial banks still
in public hands to below 50 percent.

§

One condition was not met and required a waiver: the privatization of a large
public enterprise. The Government selected for partial privatization (up to 35
percent) the Société Nationale de Distribution du Pétrole (SNDP), the largest
distributor of petroleum products (40 percent of the market) but the process of
selection of an investment bank to assist the Borrower in the privatization of
SNDP was only launched in December 2003.

39.
The outcome of boosting private sector investment climate was also supported by the
Industry Support Institution project (FY97-04). This project aimed to put in place an efficient
and market-responsive system of technical support agencies, providing assistance to the
industrial sector, in particular SMEs and firms seeking to become more internationally
competitive. While progress was made in restructuring existing support agencies and creating
new ones which have improved their outreach and the quality of their services to firms, the
project development outcomes were not met by the revised closing date (December 31, 2003)
because of governance issues in the agencies which jeopardized their ability to be “efficient
and market-responsive”.
Outcome: Modernize and liberalize public sector agencies and improve their service
coverage and cost recovery.
40.
This outcome - which covered in particular the liberalization and modernization of
telecommunications and water and sanitation - has not been fully achieved. Reform of
telecommunications was informed by the ICT strategy paper and supported by ECAL III. All
reforms under the ECAL III tranche on telecommunications liberalization have been
achieved and outcomes include: competition has been introduced in the wireless component
of the telecommunications sector leading to greater access to mobile telephony, better
services and lower prices; the legal and regulatory framework for ICT has been strengthened
(adoption of implementation regulations for new telecommunications code and of law
concerning exchanges and electronic commerce, creation of National Telecom Agency, etc.);
and a telecom sector liberalization timetable has been prepared. However, the telecom
tranche of ECAL III was not disbursed because the Bank did not receive the documentation
required to demonstrate that the Global System for Mobile Communications license (wireless
telecommunications) was tendered following a transparent and competitive process. Growth
of mobile telephony has been remarkable, with close to 2 million subscribers by end 2003, an
increase of 240 percent over 2002. However, Tunisia still lags behind in other key ICT sector
development indicators (low number of internet servers and hosts per capita, limited access
to data networks and international information systems by the general public) and
international communications costs remain high. More remains to be done to liberalize
telecom services.
41.
In terms of service improvement of water and sanitation, SONEDE, the national
water supply utility, and ONAS, the national sewerage utility, have continued improving
their service delivery and internal management as reflected in high coverage levels, and
continuous supply and relatively low unaccounted for water (about 21 percent, the best in the
region). Two Bank projects - the WSSP (FY94-03) and the Greater Tunis Sewerage and

- 57 Water Reuse project (FY97-05) - have been accompanying the two utilities toward
improving service coverage, cost recovery and sector efficiency.
42.
The average water tariff represented 96 percent of the average water cost in 2002, a
good improvement compared to the 1997-99 CAS baseline of 87 percent, but short of the
CAS target of 110 percent. On the sewerage side, as the demand for sewerage collection and
wastewater treatment services rose, the cost recovery ratio declined to 65 percent in 2002.
ONAS’s low cost recovery level has translated into the present trend of increasing
Government subsidies for the sewerage sector and ONAS’s deteriorating financial position.
Given the past good performance of these public utilities, the Government has been reluctant
to consider broader sector reforms or a larger role for the private sector in the provision of
these services. Facing the future challenges in the sector will however require greater cost
recovery levels and increased efficiency of operators.
43.
Modernization and institutional strengthening continued in other sectors with the
Ozone Depleting Substances loan (FY94-10) and the Protected Areas Management project
(FY02-09). The latter was launched in December 2002 and it is too early to assess any
progress.
Outcome: Enhance the competitiveness of agricultural producers.
44.
There is no hard data to determine the status of this outcome at this point, and no
intermediate outcomes were identified in the CAS. This outcome would be influenced by the
Agriculture Support Services project (FY01-07) implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture,
which is piloting an approach to improve the institutional services provided to farmers,
promote participation by producers, and facilitate information flow. The project was
launched with a workshop in January 2002, but delays in procuring goods, in particular
services such as technical assistance and training, and in implementing reforms have been
such that the project will take longer to reach its development objectives than initially
anticipated.
Outcome: Boost employment opportunities.
45.
The CAS goal of decreasing unemployment from 15.9 percent in 1997-1999 to 15
percent by 2002 has been partially achieved. The unemployment rate was reduced to 14.9
percent in 2002 and 14.3 percent in 2003. However, the targets set in the 10th Plan (creation
of 380,000 to 400,000 new jobs between 2002 and 2006) will not be met as the rate of job
creation is insufficient to absorb a rapidly growing workforce.
46.
The intermediate outcome of reaching agreement with Government on the
recommendations of the Employment Strategy (2003) and a strategy to address
unemployment is nearly achieved. The Employment Strategy identifies strategic actions to
support the Government in reaching the 10th Development Plan goal of “meeting the jobcreation challenge” by creating 400,000 new jobs between 2002 and 2006 (i.e. 80,000 per
year), an increase from the 67,000 new jobs a year planned in the 9th Plan. Access to reliable
data11 combined with the analytical strength of the Bank have resulted in a comprehensive
report that identifies benchmarks against which to assess future performance in this area. The
11

For this study, the Government made available, for the first time, important micro-level data that
permitted a more in-depth analysis of the job situation in Tunisia. This can be seen as a measure of
the trust the Government places in the Bank and a demonstration of the high value-added the Bank
brings to analyzing and advising on such a difficult issue.

- 58 report provides the Government with a tool from which to design a coherent program for the
future which will include continuing World Bank support. The Bank partnership in this area
will be formalized with the Government upon signing of a Memorandum of Understanding
which will cover a 2 to 3-year program of activities.12
47.
The Employment and Training project (FY96-03) was one of the building blocks of
the Government’s strategy to reform training and employment, which succeeded in
establishing the concept of how training services should be structured to respond to the needs
of the private sector, while preparing adolescents and youth for employment. The strategic
thrusts of vocational training include strong partnership with the private sector, a new way to
operate training (i.e. enterprise-based and new model to managing training centers), and the
reform of the curriculum to be competency-based. The program was financed jointly with the
EU and the French Development Agency. There have also been significant outputs in this
project which should pave the way for achieving CAS outcomes. For instance, under the
project, 30,000 were enrolled in training centers, and 30 percent of those were in enterprisebased training, surpassing the expected 25 percent, and more than 300 enterprises have been
approved for training programs. However, there is no data on how many graduates were
actually (and formally) employed thanks to this program.
48.
The outcome of reaching agreement on a social protection system has not been
achieved. The Social Protection Policy Note planned for in the CAS was never conducted,
although some components of the note were: the review of active labor policies was
conducted under the Employment Strategy; an IDF grant13 was used to strengthen the
technical capacities of the agency responsible for social security reforms (Centre de
Recherche et des Etudes sur la Sécurité Sociale under the Ministry of Social Affairs and
funded three studies on pensions (extension of coverage, reform options for pension system
and development of the social security data base system). The Bank has proposed to carry
out a policy note on pensions reform and is waiting for confirmation from the authorities.
The review of the social safety nets did not take place.
Borrower performance
49.
Borrower performance in advancing economic reforms has been satisfactory but has
not furthered reforms in the manner that the vision of the 9th and 10th Development Plans and
the strong administrative capacity of Tunisia warrant. However, given the unusual external
forces playing against Tunisia during this period, the performance of the borrower has not
been wanting as Tunisia has shown a strong ability to manage the economic downturn. The
Government can be commended on the way in which it adjusted policies and actions to
respond to external shocks and put the country back on the path to high growth.
50.
Despite that progress has been made in this pillar, there is room for substantial
additional work in support of the 10th Development Plan and beyond. Policy dialogue needs
to expand to include issues of public expenditure management to ensure that the Government
can make informed decisions about the management and allocation of financial resources
that are consistent with their own strategic priorities. Furthermore, there are lessons to be
12

13

The employment strategy was the first element of a new AAA product being tested in the MENA
region, the Programmatic Economic Sector Work (PESW). PESW provides a framework for
knowledge-based work which is agreed upon with Governments and to which Governments actively
contribute. This – still to be tested – mechanism is intended to support demand-driven, countryowned work, in a coherent program in order to produce more meaningful and lasting results than
one-off activities.
The IDF grant closed in 2003 and was rated satisfactory.

- 59 drawn by the way the latest adjustment loan, ECAL III, was designed. In retrospect, it seems
that ECAL III - with its long list of conditions to be met - proposed a piecemeal approach to
reform and therefore offered little leverage. Teams working on future adjustment operations
may find it advantageous to identify and resolve critical prerequisites of reform, increase
selectivity, and make explicit that institutional reform at the top level includes enabling
institutional change at the lower levels.
D. Pillar III: Modernization of Tunisia’s institutions and technological base through
new initiatives
51.
This pillar was in line with the national goal of achieving international market
integration through increased competitiveness of the economy, liberalization of the services
sector, and modernization of institutions.
Assistance instruments
52.
This pillar was informed by several studies: the External Sustainability Study and
Private Sector Assessment update, both of 2000, the Information and Communication
Technology Strategy of 2002, and a Tourism Development Strategy in 2002-2003 which is
likely to contribute to strengthening the potential for achieving the CAS outcome of
sustainable cultural tourism development. In addition, an impact analysis of the trade
facilitation was conducted in 2003, identifying key results and providing elements for the
next CAS. The pillar outcomes were supported by two projects: the Export Development
loan (FY99-05) and the Cultural Heritage Management loan (FY01-07), both planned in the
CAS. A question remains as to whether these activities were “new initiatives of catalytic
nature to strengthen local institutions and mobilize external finance”. Indeed, while they
ventured into new areas of support and have helped support local institutions, they have not
been very innovative, nor have they helped catalyze additional levels of external finance.
One area that the CAS had identified for possible future support was training of judges in the
context of reforms of legal and regulatory frameworks, but this did not take place.
Pillar III outcomes
53.
There were no milestones identified for this pillar; rather this pillar contributes to the
broader goals mentioned above. The priority CAS outcomes that could be extracted for this
pillar were to:
§
Promote export development by trade facilitation.
§
Preserve Tunisia’s cultural heritage and diversify tourism products.
§
Support Tunisia’s quest to modernize its technological base by exploring new
niches for sector development.
Outcome: Promote export development.
54.
Interventions to reach this outcome included promoting public-private partnerships,
facilitating trade by simplifying import-export related procedures, and improving access to
pre-shipment finance, especially for SMEs. The promotion of export development is a very
broad goal, and achievement of this goal has been good to the extent that trade facilitation
contributes to it.
55.
Through the Export Development loan (FY99-05), several trade facilitation
intermediate outcomes were achieved in a significant way, mainly, the creation of market

- 60 institutions for trade promotion and trade finance, the automation of export and importrelated transactions and the simplification of trade procedures, thereby increasing the
preparedness of Tunisia for trade access and response. For the first time in Tunisia, export
promotion has been contracted to a private firm (instead of a traditional public sector
promotion agency) and the Tunisian companies pay for export services which are marketbased, demand-driven and relevant to the success of the firms. Banks have started financing
pre-shipment working capital needs of emerging exporters. Mechanisms to develop local
expertise to help SMEs cultivate export markets have been put in place.
56.
Tunisia Trade Net, a semi-public agency, was created to develop an electronic data
interface between all agencies involved in international trade procedures and to expedite
trade document flows. It is now fully operational and the platform is being considered for the
implementation of e-procurement services and other e-government applications, in Tunisia as
well as in other countries (Cameroon for example). Automation has decreased the average
time taken to clear goods once unloaded from anywhere between 8 and 18 days in mid-1990s
to between 2 and 5 days, and customs clearance time has been reduced from 2-3 days to 15
minutes. Achievement of other intermediate outcomes, such as pre-shipment export finance
have not yet occurred due in great part to changes in the management of the executing
agency for this component.
57.
Given that interventions are continuing until 2004 and are moving in the right
direction, there is reason to believe that the expected CAS outcome of export development
through trade facilitation will be reached. This outcome also contributes in full to the goals of
Pillar II by enhancing firm competitiveness.
Outcome: Preserve Tunisia’s cultural heritage and promote diversified tourism products.
58.
The diversification of tourism products is being accomplished by supporting
sustainable cultural tourism development. The CAS priority outcome of cultural tourism
development has not yet been reached, essentially because it is too early to measure results of
the Cultural Heritage Management loan which was approved in 2001. However, actions have
been taken towards the achievement of intermediate outcomes, starting with the
strengthening of the heritage preservation agency’s capacity to promote its assets, find new
markets, and manage cultural tourism. At this point, there is a new organizational
framework; studies of the legislative framework for cultural management and national
museum policies are under way; and contracts are being awarded for the design of
improvements of cultural sites. Project outcomes have not been significantly affected by the
down-turn in tourism due to the repercussions of the events of September 11, 2001, the war
in Iraq and other events in the region.
59.
The tourism strategy which was elaborated jointly with Government in the course of
2002 and 2003 provides the building blocks for achieving the priority outcome. The Tunisian
Government has requested a follow-on loan to help with the implementation of the strategy.
Outcome: Support Tunisia’s quest to modernize its technological base by exploring new
niches for sector development.
60.
Only the information and communication technology (ICT) sector strategy
contributed to this outcome. This AAA was driven by the Government’s desire to create
appropriate conditions for private sector involvement, increase the contribution of this
industry to economic growth and employment generation in line with the objectives of the

- 61 10th Plan (2002-06) and the move toward a knowledge economy. The 10th Plan sets an
ambitious goal for the ICT sector to increase its share of revenue in GDP from 3.3 percent in
2002 to about 8 percent in 2006 and to generate one out of every fours jobs in the ICT sector
by end 2006. The Government has started implementing some of recommendations spelled
out in the strategy paper, in particular the liberalization of wireless telecommunications
which has contributed to increasing the share of revenue in GDP to close to 4 percent in
2003.
61.
A QAG assessment of the ICT report suggests that the dialogue with the Government
on this issue is by itself an achievement, and highlights the comprehensiveness of the report
and the country team’s ability to capitalize on a window of opportunity opened by the
Government’s request. It also cautioned about the ambitious targets that are featured in the
ICT strategy paper and the need to be somewhat more modest and realistic in signaling to the
Government what is likely to be achieved. Bank staff stressed that this was done and that the
Government is now in the low-case scenario. The higher scenario that was also included in
the ITC report was designed with the ambitious targets of the 10th National Development
Plan in mind. 14
Borrower performance
62.
Borrower performance in this pillar has been satisfactory. Faced with increasing
international competition, the Government is committed to modernize its institutions and
technological base and make Tunisia a choice destination for tourists. The assistance
program of lending and AAA has worked particularly well to strengthen policy dialogue and
Government’s investment in the outcomes of this pillar.
III.

Summary Assessment of CAS Performance

63.
During the assessment period, the assistance program has shown progress,
sometimes substantial progress towards the CAS outcomes, but – based on the information
available – has not achieved all the outcomes (see Appendix Table 1). Nevertheless, many
intermediate outcomes (milestones) have been achieved and there might be more outcomes
achieved than those acknowledged in this report. There has been progress, albeit slowly, in
all three pillars and across pillars.
64.
The nature of the Bank’s dialogue with Tunisia has been constructive and collegial,
the product of a long and mutually rewarding collaboration. The Bank has been responsive to
Government demands but, by the same token, may have lost out on opportunities to push the
Government to fulfill its own potential by arguing for deeper reforms in difficult areas. Bank
staff believe that Tunisia’s vision and capacity could propel the country not just to do more,
but to do better.
65.
Institutional development impact of Bank’s assistance: Since 2000, the Bank’s
assistance has helped support institutional strengthening and change at the level of
government agencies. Institutions serving the private sector have been significantly
transformed (i.e. creation of market institutions for trade promotion and finance), while other
entities such as those dealing with primary education, water management or community/rural
development have raised the bar of quality and participation; liberalization has progressed, in
particular in telecommunications; services have been modernized (i.e. computerization of
14

The ICT paper proposes two scenarios (low and high) and five options for reform according to
growth targets and resources.

- 62 trade transactions); changes in policy, regulatory and the legal environment have been
significant, in particular under ECAL III. The Bank has played an important role in testing
new approaches for community-based participation in the development process. From the
vantage point of the achievement report, however, it is difficult to assess how far changes
promoted by the CAS have penetrated the culture of national institutions or the relations
between the public and private sectors.
66.
Assessment and mitigation of risks: The 2000 CAS showed a good understanding
of the main uncertainties affecting Tunisia. These were: (i) the dependence of foreign
exchange earnings on one dominant market (the EU represents 80 percent of Tunisia’s
exports), (ii) the adequacy of foreign exchange reserves in the event of significant shocks,
(iii) fiscal risks from budget rigidities and contingent liabilities; (iv) vulnerability to
droughts; and (v) social risks arising from the regional situation and from within the country.
As stated earlier in this report, there has been an important unfavorable situation in the region
for the past few years and most of the risks identified in the CAS did materialize. However,
the Government performed very well in tempering the risks by maintaining internal stability
and sound economic management. The Bank showed willingness to accompany the
Government to help mitigate uncertainties, including by offering to increase the amount of
ECAL III, but this was not done because the Government preferred other sources of funds
and reductions in the budget.
67.
Sustainability of CAS outcomes: The sustainability potential of CAS outcomes is
high, for three reasons: (i) the CAS has been responsive to the development objectives laid
out in the 9th and 10th Plans and supported the national development agenda, (ii) the level of
ownership of reforms and programs is strong in Tunisia, and (iii) the Tunisian authorities
have demonstrated a strong ability to weather external shocks through sound economic
management, while maintaining a focus on social progress and internal stability. Tunisia
exemplifies the Bank concept of “client in the driver’s seat” that takes ownership for the
national planning process, for the implementation of reforms and programs, and for donor
coordination.
68.
A number of issues may affect sustainability of CAS outcomes. First, market trends
in Europe may play against Tunisia’s competitiveness efforts. Second, geo-politics in the
region may dampen tourism and trade. Third, pressure for greater democracy, freedom of
speech and transparency is likely to increase and could lead to social tensions if not
accommodated And, needless to say, risks may come from major changes in policy
directions or the reform agenda.
69.
Outreach, dissemination, and capacity building: During CAS implementation,
outreach efforts were not as strong as anticipated. Seminars were organized to discuss draft
AAA reports or disseminate their findings, but their audience was generally limited to
Government officials, with little participation of civil society. This can be explained by the
nature of certain reports (confidential policy and strategy notes) and by the Bank’s restricted
access to key stakeholders outside of Government. The Bank’s limited presence in Tunisia
(liaison office with one person) has also hampered its ability to reach out to a broader group
of constituencies. In addition, Bank teams may have been reluctant to organize dissemination
activities, working under the assumption that these would not bring much value to the
process or could be ill-perceived by Government officials. Dissemination of Bank documents
has been however well conducted by the Public Information Center established within the
library of the University of Tunis. Capacity building activities were conducted in most
projects but WBI’s role was limited, even more so as Tunisia was not selected as a WBI

- 63 focus country in 2002 and Tunisia does not have a Global Development Learning Network
center. However, WBI and other Bank units have well established relations with training and
research institutes in Tunisia such as the Tunisia International Center for Environmental
Technologies , the Center of Arab Women for Training and Research , the Institute of
Development Finance of the Arab Maghreb and the Arab Institute of Heads of Enterprises (,
individually and through regional networks such as the Mediterranean Development Forum .
IV.

Bank Performance Related to the 2000 CAS

70.
The country strategy made compelling arguments for a shift towards the utilization
of more analytical work but did not rationalize greater selectivity in the lending or articulate
the added value of AAA not only to policy dialogue but also to implementation of reforms
and results. It did not elaborate either on on-going loans or analytical services – precisely the
components of previous country strategies that are the most likely to provide evidence of
results in the current CAS given the implementation time required by most projects. As a
result, it is easier to see the new priorities and interventions but much less the incremental
value of the country strategy; even though the latter comes across forcefully when explained
by the country team.
A. Portfolio quality
71.
Based on prior good performance of the Tunisia portfolio characterized by a low
riskiness, strong ownership by the country of the projects’ objectives, and good
administrative capacity to prepare and implement projects, no major changes in the portfolio
management strategy were anticipated in the 2000 CAS. During CAS implementation, the
lending program was delivered to a large extent according to plan, with some delays, but
with only one project dropped (SME support planned for FY02) (see Appendix Table 3).
Recognized by the Bank as historically one of its best portfolios, Tunisia has maintained a
strong performance during the past four years. Since FY00, quality of the portfolio has
remained consistently high and above MENA averages (Table 3 below). OED evaluated a
sample of 11 completed projects during FY00-03 and concluded that in 91 percent of the
cases, quality at entry and supervision was satisfactory, as well as the Borrower’s
performance for preparation and implementation of projects. Satisfactory project outcomes
and likelihood of sustainability were also rated satisfactory in 82 percent of the cases. The
Quality Assurance Group (QAG) reviewed quality of supervision in twenty-two projects, 90
percent of which were rated satisfactory. Bank inputs and processes were judged satisfactory
in all except for two.
Table 3: OED Evaluation Findings of Evaluated Projects
(Projects exiting portfolio FY90-03)

Country

Tunisia
MENA
Algeria
Egypt
Jordan
Morocco
Bankwide

Satisfactory
Likely
Substantial Impact
Outcome (%)
Sustainability (%)
(%)
Net
O/w
Commitment Adjustment
Net
O/w
Net
O/w
Net
O/w
(US$M)
(US$M) Commitment Adjustment Commitment Adjustment Commitment Adjustment

2,367
15,974
3,253
2,025
1,534
4,736
251,234

967
5,276
1,099
150
870
1984
87,978

81.8
71.1
45.8
83.2
93.6
67.2
75.9

86.5
72.1
41
100
100
67.6
76.9

83.8
52.1
7.2
39.5
79.5
38
65.5

100
56.5
0
0
90.8
46
71.9

41
35
21
34
49
58.9
43

17
41
27
100
63
51.4
44

Note: Sustainability and institutional development impact ratings have been in use only since FY98. Source: OED, BW.

- 64 -

72.
Continued close follow-up and action from project teams ensured prompt resolution
of occasional project management issues, as reflected in the 100 percent proactivity ratio in
FY00-01 and FY03-04 (Table 4). No proactivity was recorded in FY02 since the Industry
Support Institution project was still in problem status at the end of the FY. The project closed
in FY04 with an unsatisfactory rating after a one-year extension of its closing date. Three
more projects were downgraded to problem projects in FY02, leading to a sharp but
temporary increase in terms of portfolio riskiness (21.1 percent in terms of number of
projects at risk and 19.4 percent in terms of commitments at risk). The riskiness level in
FY03 returned to a level close to the ones of FY00-01 (less than 5 percent in terms of
number and amount). As of January 2004, no project was classified at risk in the Tunisia
portfolio.
Table 4: Portfolio Management Indicators
Indicator

Projected Targets (CAS)

Actual Performance

FY00

FY01

FY02

FY00

FY01

FY02

FY03

FY04

18

18

18

23.9

18.3

15.2

27.2

22

25

20

20

32.3

25.8

29.6

36.1

25

5

5

5

4.2

4.8

21.1

5.6

0

5

5

5

4.2

4.8

21.1

5.6

0

Realism Index

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

Proactivity
Index

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

Disbursement
Ratio (%)
Disbursement
Lag; Orig. (%)
% Projects At
Risk
% Problem
Projects

73.
Notwithstanding the good quality of the portfolio, widespread delays in
implementation have led to slow disbursement and repeated closing date extensions
(Appendix Table 5). While the disbursement ratio surpassed the Bank’s projections in FY00,
it slowed down in FY01 and FY02, and only picked up again in FY03. In FY04 at mid-year,
the disbursement ratio was at 11 percent. Regarding extension of closing dates, of the 19
projects that were planned to close during the FY00-03 period, only two closed on their
original closing date: ECAL II (adjustment loan) and Municipal Development II (financial
intermediary loan). Projects were extended anywhere from 5 to 24 months, with a few
extended twice. In FY04, ECAL III was extended by six months in order to give the
Government additional time to complete the agreed reform program. Repeated extensions put
the average age of the Tunisia portfolio above the Bank and the Region’s averages for FY0004 (Table 5).
Table 5: Average Age of Projects in Tunisia
Fiscal
Year
Bank
MENA
Tunisia

FY99

FY00

FY01

FY02

FY03

FY04

3.8
4.0
3.7

3.8
3.8
4.4

3.9
4.1
4.5

4.0
4.2
4.7

3.9
4.2
4.6

N/a
4.3
4.6

- 65 -

74.
A Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) mission in June 2003 identified
the key reasons for delays in project implementation and proposed a set a recommendations
to ensure timely implementation of projects:
§

overly ambitious project timetables: this was already identified as a cause for
concern in the previous CAS, yet was insufficiently addressed in ongoing and
new operations. Bank teams continued to underestimate the time required to
execute projects, given the time-consuming nature of institutional policy
changes and the changing nature of projects, geared more towards supporting
decentralized and participatory approaches, and innovative pilots.

§

insufficient planning and project preparation: implementation could be made
more efficient through better integration of counterpart teams in project
preparation which requires early staffing; better defined communication and
decision-making channels; and institutional arrangements better suited to
implementation challenges.

§

shortcomings in Bank support, in particular frequent changes in task
management with hasty handover from former to current staff, and decrease
in quality of staffing of Bank supervision teams which sometimes lack
specialists who can advise Tunisian counterparts on difficult reform or
implementation issues.

§

Lack of attention, in many projects, to identifying project-level results and
indicators during the preparation phase. Logframes are often not developed in
a participatory manner with key stakeholders and therefore not owned by
project staff and beneficiaries; indicators are too numerous, difficult to
monitor and not always the most relevant; staff capacity is insufficient; and
M&E is perceived as a pro forma activity to satisfy requirements rather than a
dynamic management tool.

75.
Action has already been taken to address these issues and will continue under this
CAS. During the CPPR, several training modules in procurement, disbursement, financial
management, and the project cycle with focus on M&E, were offered and well attended.
Further modules in M&E, results management and procurement have since been offered and
other such modules will be made available in the coming years.
76.
During the CAS period, the choice of lending instruments was quite conventional as
most lending operations were designed as Sector Investment Loans or using instruments
already tested (ECAL III as third Adjustment Loan and Municipal Development III as third
Financial Intermediary Loan). Adaptable Program Loans (APL) were introduced in transport
(before the CAS period, in 1998) and basic education (during the CAS period) but without
great success as the instrument did not fully deliver on its promise to provide “greater
flexibility in adapting project design and financing over time to meet agreed development
objectives as borrower conditions and partnerships evolve over time”15 The second phase of
the Transport APL was approved with a waiver as the triggers to move onto the second phase
were not all met and its processing was not significantly simplified over the processing of a
new operation.

15

“Adaptable Lending – New Investment Opportunities”, World Bank, August 14, 1997

- 66 B. AAA program
77.
The AAA program has played an important role in supporting the reform process
during the FY00-02 period and beyond. Close to 20 sector studies, policy notes and strategic
documents were produced, either as stand-alone activities to enhance knowledge and guide
policy dialogue (employment and tourism strategies) or to underpin the design of projects
(see Appendix Table 4). Various capacity building and policy workshops as well as technical
assistance visits complemented analytical work and deepened policy dialogue.
78.
The AAA program for Tunisia is mostly demand-driven. Demonstrating great
maturity in planning for development and in interacting with the Bank, the Tunisian
authorities have been explicit in their requests for assistance and have carefully reviewed and
critiqued all documents submitted to them. Most of the recent AAA products - DPR and the
PPI, Employment and Tourism Studies - have been read, discussed and endorsed at the
highest levels. The Tunisian authorities generally value the Bank’s analysis and ability to
support recommendations with cross-country experience, even though the Bank may be
overly optimistic in its assessment of the timeframe required for reform to take place.
79.
Unfortunately, there seems to be no formal mechanism to determine the impact of
AAA which constitutes a significant shortcoming when trying to document their contribution
to CAS outcomes. Only anecdotal information is available to document whether AAA
products led to changes in policies or to effective implementation of reforms, or whether
advisory services have contributed to foster achievement of expected outcomes. What is
known is that because much of the AAA is demand-driven and addresses specific reform
issues, it is generally not broadly disseminated outside of the realm of key policy makers.
Only two AAA reports were reviewed by QAG - the financial sector assessment program and
the information and communication technologies report – and received a rating of highly
satisfactory and satisfactory respectively.
C. Aid coordination and country dialogue
80.
Tunisia possesses strong institutional capacity for donor coordination. External
finance as well as technical assistance from a variety of creditors and donors is coordinated
by the Ministry of Development and International Cooperation.
81.
The CAS intended that the Bank would continue cooperation with the IMF, the
European Union, and other bilateral and multilateral donors to complement Tunisia’s
development efforts. This has materialized through the co-financing (parallel financing) of
several projects. Both the EU and the AfDB co-financed ECAL III while the AfDB also cofinanced ECAL II. The French Agency for Development (AFD) co-finances the Municipal
Development III project and the Global Environment Facility co-finances the Protected
Areas Management project (See Appendix Table 6.) The Bank also support scaling up of
approaches tested by other donors, such as a teaching methodology pilot supported by
UNICEF technical assistance which EQIP I took to scale. With the IMF, the Bank has had an
excellent collaboration as evidenced by frequent exchanges of information and joint work on
FSAP and debt management. Finally, The UNDP houses the World Bank office in Tunis.
82.
The Bank works in complementary fashion with other donors, building on each
other’s comparative advantages. For instance, the Bank works closely with the EC in areas
where it is strong such as trade and governance, and outreach with civil society. EC and
AfDB, in turn, look to the Bank for leadership in economic reforms, recognizing the Bank’s

- 67 strength in conducting quality analysis, influencing policy decisions, and designing and
supervising policy-based lending. In designing its adjustment operations for the education
and health sectors, the EC has drawn on the project objectives, triggers and indicators laid
out in the Bank loans for these respective sectors. The Bank has collaborated with the AFD
on studies in areas of common interest such as municipal development and finance, and
tourism. The country team recognizes that strategic aid cooperation provides a powerful
vehicle for examining challenging issues and influencing policy decisions in Tunisia. There
is a recognition that given that the Bank’s presence in Tunisia is limited16, strategic
cooperation with other donors is an key element to gathering local knowledge and
contributing to the country dialogue in an meaningful way.
83.
The CAS mentioned the role of the IFC in fostering private sector development,
especially in promoting private sector investment in infrastructure and supporting small and
medium enterprises (SMEs). However, given the costs of IFC financing, IFC has recognized
that it is not an attractive lender for Tunisia, and has not made Tunisia a priority country for
intervention.
V.

Key Considerations for Next CAS

84.
Looking to the future, the quality of the country assistance program for Tunisia can
be strengthened by:
§

Enhancing the Bank’s role as key partner for reforms, by providing high
quality technical advice and adequate levels of finance in support of difficult
but critical reforms. This will require working with Government and other key
constituencies to take stock of support for key reforms, identify appropriate
entry points, and sequence interventions so that they add incremental value.

§

Ensuring that the next CAS is outcome-driven and that data are collected to
document the achievements of results.

§

Articulating the explicit link among all the activities supported by the Bank –
lending and AAA, old and new. This would strengthen the incremental World
Bank support to help accomplish specific and clearly defined outcomes, and
ensure that the total adds up to more than the sum of its parts. This will entail
designing new activities that build on ongoing or past ones and showing the
linkages in the CAS.

§

Addressing the recurring problem of project extensions by having a more
realistic assessment of timeframes required to implement reforms and conduct
developmental activities, and by providing better support to the Tunisian
authorities to manage implementation of operations once they are approved.

§

Supporting flexibility in approach and instruments: Tunisia being a mature
and stable client of the Bank as well as an investment grade middle-income
client, the next CAS should emphasize the need to be quick to respond to
requests with quality advice and lending. The CAS should also support
greater flexibility in lending instruments that rely more on Tunisian fiduciary
and safeguard procedures and contribute to strengthening these.

16

The World Bank has a one-person liaison office in Tunis which conducts program coordination and
supports HQ staff in project development and supervision, AAA and policy dialogue.

- 68 §

Ensuring that AAA, while remaining responsive to Government demands, also
supports policy dialogue and reform in difficult areas. The Bank would be
remiss if it does not put forward critical issues, global trends and crossnational best practices that are relevant to the reform process in Tunisia, but
that the Government may not be aware of or willing to address yet. This
would exemplify and strengthen the role of the Bank as a catalyst and broker
of innovations and new practices, which would inform and expand the way
the Government perceives its needs and options.

- 69 Appendix Table 1: Summary Tables of the Tunisia 2000 CAS Achievement Report
Results
Framework

At CAS Design

Longer-term country 9th Development Plan (1997-2001)
- Modernize and gradually open
development goals
up the economy to competition.
- Maintain macroeconomic
stability.
- Strengthen the social agenda
and environmental
management.
- Generate employment.

Country issues that
affect goal
achievement and
sustainability

CAS outcomes and
results:
àContribution to
national development
agenda

Status at Completion
-

GDP grew at an average of 5.2%
during the 9th Plan, fell to 1.7% in
2002 but grew at 5.5% in 2003.
- Current account deficits were
maintained at an average of 3.8% of
GDP.
- Inflation was cut to 2.4% in 20022003.
- Poverty was reduced to 4% in 2000
(core poor).
- Unemployment remains high at
14.3% (2003).
- Vulnerability to drought.
Same, plus
- Foreign exchange earnings
- Heightened regional instability due
dependent on the EU market
to 9-11-01 events, Djerba bombings
(80%).
and Iraq war.
- Adequacy of foreign reserves
- Less demand for Tunisian exports by
in event of significant shocks.
EU due to down-turn in global
- Fiscal risks from budget
economy.
rigidities.
- Increased competition in
- Competitive pressures resulting
international markets.
from market integration.
- Continued dependence of public
- Regional instability.
agencies on Government subsidies,
- Gradualism in carrying out
meaning liberalization has not been
reforms.
fully achieved.
Reduce poverty through:
- Deepened policy dialogue
- Human development by
underpinned by a substantial AAA
consolidating Bank’s support
program and continued IBRD
of social sectors.
lending.
- Integration of Tunisia in EU
markets through economic
reforms.
- Modernization of Tunisian
institutions and technological
base through new initiatives.

-

-

-

-

-

-

Lessons Learned and
Considerations for next CAS
Tunisia has implemented an
impressive array of reforms and
has demonstrated resilience to
downturns in the economy.
But Tunisia needs to pursue
liberalization of its economy in
order to enhance global
competitiveness and reduce
unemployment.

Risks were well assessed in CAS
and have been well managed
overall by the Tunisian
Government. Bank has shown
willingness to help mitigate
uncertainties.
Tunisian economy has shown
resilience to external challenges.

Poverty has been reduced
considerably but remains a rural
phenomenon (74% of poor is in
rural areas) and vulnerability
remains a concern (large numbers
above but clustered close to
poverty line).
Outcome data needed to provide
evidence of achievements.

- 70 Results
Framework
CAS outcomes and
results: àSpecific
CAS outcomes
through lending and
AAA

At CAS Design
Pillar I outcomes:
. Support human development by
improving basic education and
health services and the
environmental and sustainable use
of resources.

Status at Completion
-

-

School persistence rates improved.
Access to safe water and sanitation
improved and integrated approach to
water resource management and
protection established.
Improved efficiency of health
services.
Expanded use of community
participation in rural projects.

Lessons Learned and
Considerations for next CAS
All pillars
-

Pillar II outcomes:
. Support Tunisia’s competitiveness
in the EU market and economic
reforms by improving the financial
sector and business environment
for the private sector, employment
and social security.

-

-

-

-

Pillar III outcomes:
. Support Tunisia’s quest to
modernize its technological base
and strengthen its institutions to
promote tourism, export
development, and to explore new
niches for sector development.

-

-

Financial sector reforms under
ECAL III have been conducted.
Some measures to boost private
sector development have been
achieved.
Institutional framework and
legislation for the liberalization of
the wireless and fixed telephone
lines are in place.
Government has agreed with overall
recommendations of the policy note
on employment.
Social protection agenda in
discussion (pension, safety nets,
active labor market policies).
Institutional framework for exports
has been modernized; automation
and facilitation of trade are
promoting export development.
Tunisia’s cultural tourism products
and institutional capacity have been
strengthened.
Improvements in modernization of
Tunisia’s technological base.

-

-

-

Project implementation has been
good overall but closing dates of
almost all projects have been
extended. Attention to this issue
will need to be given in next CAS
in order to have more realistic
appreciation of implementation
requirements.
AAA program has been of high
quality and demand-driven.
Efforts need to be made to
strengthen monitoring and
evaluation of the impact of AAA.
Need to emphasize community
participation in development and
enhance outreach efforts.
M&E needs to be strengthened in
individual projects and in next
CAS by improving results-based
logframes, choice of indicators,
data collection, and data
utilization for management and
supervision.
Next CAS should show the link
between national agenda, CAS
goals and CAS outcomes.

- 71 Results
Framework
Bank’s performance

At CAS Design
-

-

-

§

Quality of
assistance

-

Status at Completion

CAS aligned with 9th National
Development Plan and
responsive to 10th Plan.
CAS supported the most
complex reforms.
CAS did not articulate ongoing portfolio with new
projects.
CAS did not clearly identified
outcomes.
CAS aimed at promoting
participatory approaches to
development.

-

Quality of assistance of past
CAS satisfactory.

-

-

-

-

-

-

§

Aid coordination
and country
dialogue

-

Collaboration with EU, AfDB,
French Development Agency,
IFC, and others.

CAS remains relevant.
CAS consistent with evolution of
national and Bank’s agendas.
AAA supported national reform
agenda and substantive dialogue with
the Government.
Loans by and large have performed
satisfactory, though with delays and
extensions.
Difficult to provide evidence of
outcomes.
OED and QAG ratings of projects
high.
100% proactivity rate during most of
CAS period.
Slow disbursements except in FY00.
Portfolio characterized by
widespread delays and repeated
closing date extensions.

Continued close collaboration with
EU.
EU and AfDB co-financed ECAL III.

-

-

-

Lessons Learned and
Considerations for next CAS
Sustainability of CAS strong
because of national ownership and
CAS responsiveness to national
agenda.
Unclear whether loans have
performed as well as national
capacity warrants.
Beware and avoid piecemeal
approach of assistance by
incorporating on-going and new
lending and non-lending activities
within the strategy of the next
CAS.

-

Need to add a results focus to
Bank’s supervision.

-

Next CAS needs to define more
clearly a strategic approach to aid
coordination to leverage different
strengths.

- 72 Appendix Table 2: Tunisia 2000 CAS Milestones (Intermediate Outcomes)
(see page 34 of CAS)

Area

Intermediate Milestones
-

Pillar I:
Poverty Reduction

-

Pillar I:
Basic education and
health services

-

Pillar I:
Environment and
sustainable use of
resources
Pillar II:
Financial sector and
business environment
for the private sector

-

-

Pillar II:
Employment and
social security

-

-

Status at Completion

Update poverty analysis based on new census.
Agree on community-based
program in NW region.

Poverty Update done in 2003.
Loan for NW region approved in
2003.

Obtain satisfactory rating of EQIP.
Agreement with Government and
EU to initiate implementation of
health insurance reforms.

-

Achieved.

-

Begin implementation of demand
management of water resources
under the Water Sector Investment
loan.
Completion of financial sector
reforms under ECAL II and
agreement to deepen reforms in
selected areas.
Streamlined investment incentives
for offshore/onshore enterprises.
Agree with Government on
recommendations through planned
policy note on employment.

-

Signed but 1st tranche not
disbursed because it is contingent
upon Parliament approval of
reforms.
Achieved.

-

Done.

-

Agree on social protection strategy
to increase targeting and costeffectiveness of social protection
system.

-

Some improvements but not at the
level expected.
The Government has agreed with
overall findings of employment
study and MOU for PESW
planned to be signed in Q2 of
2004.
The social protection strategy note
was partially completed.
Analytical work has been
conducted on active labor
policies, and some on pensions,
but the Government has not
implemented a comprehensive
reform program.

-

Note: The CAS milestones are shown along five areas, instead of the three CAS pillars. No milestones were
specifically identified for pillar III. Activities in this pillar contribute to the overall national goal of poverty reduction
and increased competitiveness of the economy.

- 73 Appendix Table 3. Tunisia – Planned IBRD/IDA Lending Program
and Actual Deliveries (FY00-04)
CAS Plans (04/27/00)
FY
2000

2001

Project
Education Quality
Enhancement (EQIP I)
Water Sector Investment I
Transport Sector Investment
II
Subtotal
Cultural Heritage
Agricultural Support Services
ECAL III

US$(M)
IBRD
IDA

Achievement Report (01/10/04)
US$(M)
Status
IBRD IDA

75.0
100.0

0.0
0.0

Actual
Actual

99.0
103.0

0.0
0.0

33.0

0.0

Forwarded to FY01

..

..

208.0
30.0
35.0
150.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Subtotal
Actual
Actual
Forwarded to FY02

202.0
17.0
21.3
..

0.0
0.0
0.0
..

37.6

0.0

75.9
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
..

0.0
..

252.5

0.0

252.5
530.4
78.4

0.0
0.0
0.0

34.0
112.4

0.0
0.0

130.3
242.7

0.0
0.0

Additional Actual Projects:
Transport Sector Investment

2002

Subtotal
SME Support
Urban Water Supply
Municipal Development III

215.0
50.0
100.0
50.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Subtotal
Dropped
Dropped. New project
planned for FY06
Forwarded to FY03
Additional Actual Projects:
ECAL III

2003

2004

Subtotal
Total FY00-02
Not covered in the CAS

Not covered in the CAS

200.0
623.0

0.0
0.0

Subtotal
Total FY00-02
Municipal Development III
NW Mountainous and
Forestry Areas Dev.
Subtotal
To be delivered by end of FY:
Education Quality
Enhancement II (EQIP II)
Total FY03-04

- 74 -

Appendix Table 4: Tunisia - Planned AAA Program and Actual Deliveries (FY00-04)

CAS Plans (04/27/00)
Fiscal Year

Achievement Report (01/10/04)

Product

Status (a)

2000

Social & Structural Review
Private Sector Assessment
Update of Social Conditions
Agricultural Competitiveness Study
External Sustainability Study

Actual – October 1999
Actual – March 2000
Actual – June 2000
Actual – June 2000
Actual – January 2001

2001

Tenth Plan Policy Notes
Policy Note on Employment
Financial Sector Assessment Program (with IMF)
Policy Note on Information Technology

Not conducted
Actual – June 2003 (FY03)
Actual
Actual – January 2002 (FY02)
Additional Actual Products:
Agricultural Competitiveness Policy Note
On Transitional Issues – July 2001

2002

Decentralization Study/Municipal Finances
Policy Note on Land Issues
Comprehensive Development Review
Social Protection Strategy Note

Actual – June 2002
Actual – June 2002
Not conducted
Not conducted
Additional Actual Products:
Trade Strategy

2003

Not covered in CAS

Foreign Investment Advisory Service Report –
December 2002
Debt Strategy Report – May 2003
Tourism Strategy – June 2003
PPI Strategy Note – June 2003
Employment Strategy – June 2003
Environmental Strategy – June 2003

2004

Not covered in CAS

Poverty Note
Development Policy Review – Nov. 2003
Higher Education Strategy
ROSC Accounting and Auditing
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Review
(to be concluded in FY05)

(a) Actual, Dropped, or Forwarded to a different FY.

- 75 -

Appendix Table 5: Tunisia
Analysis of Project Extensions
Approval
Date

Original
Closing Date
Revised
No. extension
No.
Closing Date as of begin. of Closing Date
months of
last CAS
ext.

PROJECTS WHICH WHERE MEANT TO CLOSE DURING CAS
PERIOD
PRIVATE INVESTMENT CREDIT
12/09/93
31/12/1999

Age

12/31/00

2

12

7.1

12/31/01
12/31/00

1

18

7.4

1

18

7.1

05/31/01

1

5

8.1

12/31/00

12/31/01

2 mini.

36

9.8

12/31/00
06/30/01

06/30/01
06/30/01

2

21

6.1

06/30/01

1

12

7.5

06/30/02

06/30/01
06/30/02

12/31/02

1

6

4.9

06/13/96

06/30/02

06/30/02

06/30/03

1

12

7.0

07/28/94

06/30/02

06/30/02

06/30/03

1

8.9

06/30/00
06/30/00

SECONDARY EDUCATION

08/23/94

06/30/00

AGRIC. SECTOR INVESTMENT

11/18/93

06/30/99

SECOND FORESTRY DEVELOPMENT

05/11/93

12/31/00

12/31/00
12/31/00

HIGHER EDUCATION RESTRUCTURING

03/31/92

12/31/98

RURAL FINANCE

05/23/95

09/30/99

ECAL II

04/20/99

06/30/01

DEV.OF MTS NW REGION

12/23/93

06/30/00

ASIL 2

01/29/98

2ND EMPLOYMENT & TRAINING
WATER SUPPLY/ SEWERAGE

2.2

RURAL ROADS

01/31/95

12/31/02

12/31/02

06/30/03

1

12
Average
age:
without
Adj. Op.
6

HEALTH SECTOR LOAN

03/10/98

12/31/02

12/31/02

12/31/03

1

12

5.8

INDUSTRY SUPPORT INSTITUTIONS

06/13/96

12/31/02

12/31/02

12/31/03

1

12

7.6

TRANSPORT SECT INVESTMENT

06/23/98

12/31/02

12/31/02

12/31/04

1

24

6.5

HIGHER EDUC. II

03/17/98

12/31/03

12/31/03

12/31/04

1

12

6.8

NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

05/13/97

06/30/03

06/30/03

1

12

7.1

MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT II

06/24/97

06/30/03

06/30/03

06/30/04
06/30/03

PROJECTS WHICH WERE MEANT TO CLOSE SINCE CAS PERIOD

PROJECT EXTENDED AFTER CAS PERIOD
05/20/99

03/31/04

03/31/04

NEW PROJECTS APPROVED DURING CAS PERIOD
WATER SECTOR INVESTMENT PROJECT
6/22/2000

6/30/2006

EDUCATION EQIP I

6/27/2000

6/30/2005

TRANSPORT SECTOR INVESTMENT

4/19/2001

6/30/2006

CULTURAL HERITAGE

6/12/2001

6/30/2007

AGRIC. SUPPORT SVCS

6/26/2001

6/30/2007

ECAL III
NW MOUTAINOUS AND FOR. AREAS
DEV.
MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT III PROJECT

12/20/2001

6/30/2003

10/31/2002

12/31/2008

12/5/2002

6/30/2008

GEF- PROTECTED AREAS MGMT.

6/27/2002

8/31/2008

GEF and MT
SOLAR WATER HEATING

11/02/94

06/30/04

06/30/04

OZONE DEPLETING SUBS

06/14/94

12/31/00

12/31/03

09/30/2004

12/30/2003

Notes: Bold indicates a closing date extension.
Only Adjustment operation (ECAL II) and Financial Intermediary loan (PDM II) not extended.

7.6
8.4

6.0
Average
age:

EXPORT DEVELOPMENT

6.9

1

6

2

24

6.9

- 76 -

Appendix Table 6: Co-financing in Tunisia FY00-04
Financier

Fiscal Year

2000

2001

Project

2002

2003

2004

Total

Project Co-financing Amounts

AfDB

ECAL III

194.1

194.1

EC:
Europeaid
France:
AFD
GEF

ECAL III

71.9

71.9

GEF
Foreign
Multi.Inst.
Germany:
KfW
Foreign
Sources

Total

Municipal
Dvpt III
Protected
Areas Mgmt
Gulf of Gabès
(projected)
Protected
Areas Mgmt
Water Sector
Investment
Agriculture
Support
Services

46.6

46.6

5.3

5.3
6.1

0.1

0.1

17.5

17.5
4.4

17.5

6.1

4.4

4.4

271.4

46.6

6.1

346

-77 CAS Annex A1

Tunisia at a glance
Tunisia

M. East
& North
Africa

Lowermiddleincome

9.9
2,210
21.9

306
2,240
685

2,408
1,400
3,372

1.2
2.4

1.9
2.8

0.9
1.2

..
67
73
21
4
80
26
117
120
115

..
58
69
44
..
88
35
96
100
92

..
49
69
32
9
81
13
112
113
111

POVERTY and SOCIAL
2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Development diamond*

Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1997-03
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1997-03)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Illiteracy (% of population age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

GNI
per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source
Tunisia
Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1983

1993

2002

2003

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investment/GDP
Exports of goods and services/GDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savings/GDP

8.4
33.5
34.4
25.1
26.6

14.6
29.2
40.4
21.7
20.0

21.0
25.2
44.8
21.0
21.6

23.8
24.1
44.8
20.5
20.9

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debt/GDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debt/GDP
Present value of debt/exports

-6.9
2.5
48.6
19.2
..
..

-8.8
2.9
59.5
20.8
..
..

-3.5
2.4
60.1
13.5
60.6
117.8

-3.2
2.5
58.7
16.0
..
..

1983-93

1993-03

2002

2003

2003-07

3.8
1.5
7.3

4.8
3.4
5.4

1.7
0.5
-2.1

5.5
4.2
4.0

4.9
3.6
5.7

1983

1993

2002

2003

Economic ratios*

Trade

Domestic
savings

Investment

Indebtedness
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

Tunisia
Lower-middle-income group

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

12.4
32.5
14.2
55.1

14.7
28.0
17.1
57.3

10.3
29.3
18.6
60.4

12.5
28.7
18.3
58.8

Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

57.9
16.9
42.7

62.0
16.3
48.0

62.6
16.5
49.1

65.2
14.3
48.5

1983-93

1993-03

2002

2003

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

5.3
3.7
1.7
3.4

2.9
4.8
5.4
5.2

-11.0
3.2
1.9
3.6

26.0
3.2
3.4
2.9

Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

2.8
3.0
2.6
4.1

4.8
4.3
4.0
4.9

3.9
4.3
-6.0
-2.4

5.9
5.2
1.0
2.3

Growth of investment and GDP (%)
10
5
0
-5

98

99

00

01

02

03

-10

GDI

GDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)
15
10
5
0
98

99

00

01

02

03

-5

Exports

Imports

Note: 2003 data are preliminary estimates. Group data are for 2002.
* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

-78Tunisia
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
1983
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

1993

2002

2003

Inflation (%)
5

..
12.7

4.1
4.7

2.8
2.3

2.6
2.3

4
3
2
1
0

30.3
5.7
-4.2

27.6
4.8
-2.8

24.8
4.7
-3.1

23.9
4.0
-3.0

1983

1993

2002

2003

1,860
832
82
908
3,103
434
347
795

3,746
454
436
2,387
6,149
417
455
1,515

6,857
641
489
5,272
9,503
653
886
2,236

7,686
749
562
5,886
10,524
704
1,015
2,432

..
..
..

82
95
86

154
109
141

166
118
140

1983

1993

2002

2003

2,869
3,567
-698

5,769
6,678
-909

9,539
10,431
-893

10,682
11,548
-866

Net income
Net current transfers

-267
387

-971
597

-984
1,130

-1,031
1,124

Current account balance

-578

-1,283

-746

-774

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

563
15

1,322
-39

895
-149

1,303
-529

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

574
0.7

864
1.0

2,301
1.4

2,820
1.4

1983

1993

2002

2003

4,059
434
67

8,694
1,595
54

12,625
1,464
35

13,973
1,779
33

638
65
1

1,352
263
2

1,438
233
2

1,909
286
2

98

99

00

01

02

GDP deflator

03

CPI

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Fuel
Agriculture
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
97

98

99

00

01

Exports

02

03

Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

Current account balance to GDP (%)
0
97

98

99

00

01

02

03

-1
-2
-3
-4
-5

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

Composition of 2003 debt (US$ mill.)

A: 1,779
B: 33

D: 2,626

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

28
238
263
184
0

103
375
-98
562
20

114
42
824
795
6

..
392
956
..
..

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

144
90
32
57
34
24

189
248
149
99
117
-18

34
117
156
-39
79
-118

..
251
207
44
81
-37

Development Economics

G: 598

F: 6,083

E: 2,854

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

5/6/04

- 79 CAS Annex B2 - Tunisia
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 04/05/2004

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b

2001

2004

f

2002

2003

21

19

18

16

4

4.2

4

4.4

Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c

4.8

21.1

5.6

0

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c

3.5

19.4

2.2

0

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d

4.8

21.1

5.6

0

Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d

3.5

19.4

2.2

0

18.3

15.2

27.2

17

Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)

no

no

yes

no

Supervision Resources (total US$)

1572

1592

1653

1089

Average Supervision (US$/project)

58

72

75

57

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
87

14

3489.2

865.1

% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number

17.2

14.3

% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

14.1

18.7

Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
f. Two GEFs and one MT included. Data as of April 5, 2004.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

- 80 CAS Annex B3 - Tunisia
Bank Group Program Summary
As of Date 04/05/2004
Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a
US$(M)

Strategic Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

EXPORT DEVELOPMENT II

36

H

M

Result

36

2005

INFORMATION SOCIETY (S)
ECAL IV
Result

50
150
200

H
H

M
H

2006

HIGHER EDUCATION REFORM SUPPORT II
NATURAL RESOURCE MGMT. II
URBAN WATER SUPPLY
Result

50
40
70
160

H
H
H

M
M
H

2007

WATER SECTOR INVESTMENT II
EDUCATION QUALITY IMPROVEMENT III
ECAL V
Result

50
50
150
250

H
H
H

H
M
H

RESULT

646

Fiscal year

2004

Proj ID

a. This table represents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L)
Notes:
* A second Education Quality Improvement project has already been approved by the Board in FY04.
** Two GEFs are scheduled to be approved in FY05 (Gulf of Gabes for $6.1 million, and Energy Efficiency Program/
industrial sector for $ 8.5 million).

- 81 CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Tunisia
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2001-2004
As of 04/05/2004

IFC approvals (US$m) *

2001

2002

2003

2004

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Sector (%)
Investment instrument(%)
MIGA guarantees (US$m) **

* IFC data as of February 29, 2004. A BIAT II project is likely to go to the Board in Q4FY04, with
an IFC exposure of $50 million.
** In June 2002, MIGA issued three guarantees, totaling US$63.8 million, for a Tunisian investor
(Tunisie Telecom) for its investment in a GSM project in Mauritania.

- 82 CAS Annex B4 - Tunisia
Summary of Non-lending Services
As of 04/05/2004
Product

Completion
FY

Cost
Audience a.
(US$000)

Objective b.

Recent completions
Debt Management Study

FY03

117

Govt., Bank

Problem-solving

Tourism Strategy

FY03

154

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

PPI Strategy Note

FY03-04

241

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

Poverty Note

FY03-04

88

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

Environmental Strategy

FY03-04

69

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Public
dissemination, Problem-solving

Higher Education Strategy

FY03-04

70

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

Employment Strategy

FY03-04

348

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

FY04

165

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

Development Policy Review
Underway
FSAP follow-up

FY04

80

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

Country Procurement Assessment
Review (CPAR)
Country Financial Accountability
Assessment (CFAA)
ROSC Accounting / Auditing

FY04

100

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

FY04

85

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

FY04

70

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

Health Sector Review

FY04

100

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

Public Expenditure Review

FY05

200

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

ROSC Insolvency / Creditor rights

FY05

100

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

Investment Climate

FY05-06

150

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

Rural Sector Wide Review

FY05-06

120

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

Planned

Infrastructure / Water

FY05-06

150

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

EU New Neighborhood Policy

FY05-06

120

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

PESW - Employment Strategy

FY05-08

600

Govt., Bank

Knowledge generation, Problem-solving

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

- 83 CAS Annex B5 - Tunisia
Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)
Under 5 (per thousand live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same region/income group

1970-75

1980-85

1995-02

M. East
& North
Africa

5.6
1.8
49.8
5.9

7.3
2.6
53.8
4.3

9.8
1.2
66.8
2.1

306.2
1.9
58.0
3.2

2,410.7
1.0
49.4
2.1

..
..
..

..
..
..

7.6
3.6
13.9

..
..
..

..
..
..

770
..
..

1,160
53
54

1,990
123
111

2,070.0
..
..

1,390
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

41.7
5.7
47.9

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
4.4

..
..
3.7

2.9
..
6.0

2.9
5.3
..

2.7
4.7
..

76
89
62

93
99
87

99
100
99

82.2
84.9
79.4

93
92
93

..
..
..

..
..
..

80
92
58

88.2
95.5
77.6

81
95
70

..
..
20

65
70
..

92
96
4

92.3
92.4
..

85
84
11

59
58
59

65
64
66

73
71
75

68.6
67.2
70.1

69
67
72

104
151

55
76

21
27

36.7
53.8

30
37

276
249
..
..

232
214
..
..

169
99
70
90

192.8
143.3
..
..

212
131
..
..

CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data.

Lowermiddleincome

04/20/04

- 84 CAS Annex B6 - Tunisia
Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
a

Gross domestic product
Agriculture
Industry
Services

1999

Actual
2000
2001

Estimate
2002
2003
2004

Projected
2005
2006
2007

2008

100
13
28
59

100
12
29
59

100
12
29
60

100
10
29
60

100
12
29
59

100
12
29
60

100
11
29
60

100
11
29
60

100
11
29
60

100
11
29
60

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

76
26
4
21

76
26
4
22

77
26
5
21

79
25
4
21

79
24
7
17

80
24
7
17

80
24
7
17

79
24
6
18

79
25
6
18

79
25
6
18

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

43
45

44
48

47
52

45
49

45
48

45
48

45
48

45
49

45
49

45
49

Gross domestic savings

24

24

23

21

21

20

20

21

21

21

c

24

23

24

22

21

21

21

21

22

22

Gross national savings

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

20,799 19,468 19,977 21,024 23,820 24,962 26,076 27,420 28,821 30,836
2,080

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at MP
6.1
Gross Domestic Income
6.4

2,080

2,060

1,990

2,180

2,380

2,530

2,610

2,700

2,840

4.7
4.4

4.9
4.5

1.7
1.7

5.5
5.3

5.3
5.4

5.0
5.0

4.8
4.8

4.7
4.8

5.2
5.3

3.7
4.1
4.2

0.5
2.8
2.7

4.2
4.5
4.6

4.0
4.5
4.8

3.7
3.7
3.7

3.4
3.3
3.3

3.4
3.0
3.0

3.8
3.8
3.9

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1990 prices)
Gross domestic product at MP
4.7
3.5
Total consumption
4.0
4.1
Private consumption
4.4
4.2
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
b

Exports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB

8,793
5,873

8,606
5,840

Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

9,248
8,015
-455
902
-443

9,311 10,423 10,431 11,548 12,058 12,622 13,349 14,063 15,080
8,093 8,997 8,980 10,061 10,501 10,995 11,635 12,259 13,149
-705
-905
-893
-866
-925
-968 -1,031 -1,071 -1,179
825
983 1,130 1,124 1,150 1,174 1,193 1,270 1,305
-821
-863
-746
-774
-799
-800
-842
-858
-922

Net foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reserves d
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (CIF)

9,518
6,606

9,539 10,682 11,133 11,654 12,318 12,992 13,901
6,857 7,686 7,941 8,236 8,656 9,076 9,640

337
492
267

731
223
-373

443
883
-208

801
866
-772

504
665
134

600
207
113

622
343
83

637
232
97

616
438
93

669
352
93

-653

240

-255

-149

-529

-121

-247

-125

-289

-192

-2.2

-3.6

-4.5

-4.2

-3.6

-3.7

-3.7

-3.8

-3.7

-3.8

6.7
5.8

7.3
6.5

15.7
13.6

1.9
-2.4

4.0
2.2

5.5
6.6

5.4
6.3

5.0
5.8

4.7
5.3

5.0
6.1

(Continued)

- 85 Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

1999

Actual
2000
2001

2002

Estimate
2003
2004

2005

Projected
2006
2007

2008

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices) e
Current revenues
23.9
Current expenditures
20.6
Current budget balance
3.3
Capital expenditure
7.2
Foreign financing
1.4

24.0
19.9
4.1
7.9
-0.2

24.4
19.4
5.0
8.7
3.8

24.4
20.1
4.3
7.8
2.3

23.9
19.9
4.0
7.3
5.9

23.6
19.6
4.0
7.2
3.9

23.5
19.6
3.9
7.0
3.6

23.2
19.5
3.7
6.7
2.3

23.1
19.3
3.8
6.7
3.1

23.2
19.4
3.8
6.8
2.3

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)

51.9
19.5

54.5
13.5

55.8
10.3

55.9
4.0

56.2
6.3

56.8
9.1

56.8
7.3

56.8
7.3

56.8
7.5

56.8
8.1

Price indices( YR90 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index

129.2
136.4
94.8

119.8
129.3
92.6

117.1
126.5
92.5

119.3
129.4
92.2

128.5
140.2
91.7

125.8
137.2
91.7

123.9
135.2
91.6

124.0
135.2
91.7

124.2
135.4
91.7

125.7
136.9
91.8

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

101.5

99.7

97.4

96.2

96.2

96.2

96.2

96.2

96.2

96.2

2.7
3.1

3.0
3.3

1.9
2.7

2.8
2.3

2.6
2.3

2.2
2.4

2.1
2.2

2.3
2.4

2.6
2.7

2.6
2.8

Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

GDP at market prices
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Central Government Financial Operations
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

- 86 CAS Annex B7 - Tunisia
Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

1999

Total debt outstanding and

Actual
2000
2001

2002

Estimate
2003

2004

2005

Projected
2006

2007

2008

11,880

10,629

10,876

12,625

13,973

13,729

14,169

14,490

15,025

15,476

529

232

1,030

866

1,348

957

760

389

590

452

1,485

1,861

1,327

1,438

1,909

2,198

2,025

2,233

2,191

1,898

122
57
15
22

112
55
20
24

103
54
13
24

118
60
13
23

117
59
16
23

110
55
18
24

109
54
16
23

106
53
16
22

104
52
15
20

100
50
12
18

19

13

18

17

18

16

19

17

17

25

49
3
1,323
6
11
36
1

37
2
1,211
6
11
35
1

44
2
1,297
6
12
36
1

49
2
1,464
7
12
35
1

42
2
1,779
7
13
40
1

38
2
1,652
7
12
36
1

42
2
1,633
6
12
35
1

37
2
1,645
6
11
34
2

37
2
1,698
6
11
35
2

43
2
1,687
5
11
35
2

41

39

37

35

33

30

28

26

24

22

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)

a

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
c

Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%)
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)
IBRD TDO (% of GDP)
IBRD TDO / Total TDO
IBRD TDO / Preferred Creditor TDO
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equitye
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements. Public creditors include Multilateral, Bilateral, Private Guaranteed, and IMF debt.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

- 87 CAS Annex B8 (IFC) for Tunisia
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 02/29/2004
(In US Dollars Millions)
Held
FY Approval

Company

1998/00/01
1995
1986/92/98
1998

Loan

Equity

Disbursed

Quasi

Partic

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic

BIAT

0

2.5

0

0

0

2.5

0

0

Maghreb IM Bank

0

0.3

0

0

0

0.3

0

0

SITEX

0

2.9

0

0

0

2.9

0

0

Tuninvest

0

4.3

0

0

0

4.3

0

0

Total Portfolio:

0

10.1

0

0

0

10.1

0

0

- 88 CAS Annex B8 - Tunisia
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)
As of 04/05/2004

Closed
Projects

111

IBRD/IDA
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid

266.4
6.6
4,054
2,950.5
4,320.5
2,957.1

Total Undisbursed (Active)

554

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

4.3

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

558.3

Active Projects

Difference Between
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P005591
P005589
P005741
P005750
P048825
P055814
P050945
P082999
P005731
P046832
P005736
P072317
P048315
P043700
P064082
P035707

OZONE DEPLETING SUBS
SOLAR WATER HEATING
HIGHER EDUCATION REFORM SUPPORT I
AGRIC. SUPPORT SVCS
CULTURAL HERITAGE
EXPORT DEVELOPMENT
EDUCATION PAQSET I
EDUCATION PAQSET II
GREATER TUNIS SEWERAGE
MUNICIPAL DEV. III
NATURAL RESOURCE MGMT
NW MOUNTAINOUS AND FORESTRY AREAS
PROTECTED AREAS MGMT.
TRANSPORT SECTOR INV
TRANSPORT SECTOR INVESTMENT II
WATER SECTOR INVESTMENT PROJECT
Overall result

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
#
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

S
S
S
S
S
S
HS
#
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

1994
1995
1998
2001
2001
1999
2000
2004
1997
2003
1997
2003
2002
1998
2001
2000

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig.

Frm Rev'd

-1.5
0.3
31
4.7
5.2
12.2
1.4

0.5

7

0.5
0.3
35
25.3
22.2
12.2
47.9
128.8
23.7
88.2
6
38
4.8
11.5
34.6
80.6
559.6

33.6
14.6
8.7
2.3
1
13.6
13.2
10.2
150.5

6.1

3.8
7.4
80
21.33
17
35
99
130.3
60
78.39
26.5
34
5.1
50
37.6
103
772.1

16.3

7

a. Intented disbursements to date minus disbursements to date as projected at appraisal
b. Following the FY94 Annual Review of Portfolio Performance (ARPP), a letter based system was introduced (HS= Highly Satisfactory, S = Satisfactory, U = Unsatisfactory, HU = Highly Unsatisfactory):
see proposed improvements in Project and Portfolio Performance Rating Methodology (SecM94-901), August 23, 1994.

3.6

0.4

6.4

-0.1

16.9

