Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 28693-SK

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
WITH
THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC

May 6,2004

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
(Exchange Rate as of April 30,2004)
Currency Unit = Slovak Koruna (SK)
U S S l = SK 33.83
SK1 = U S O . 0 2 9

GOVERNMENT’S FISCAL YEAR
January 1 to December 3 1

ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS
AAA
CAS
CAP
CPS
EAGGF
EBRD
EFSAL
EIB
ER
SF
EU
FDI
FSAP
GDP
ICR
IDF
JI
NBS
OECD
OED
PAYG
PCF
PPF
QAG
RDF
RON1
SAL
SDF
SECALS
SME
SWAP
TA

Analytic and Advisory Activities
Country Assistance Strategy
Common Agricultural Policy
Country Partnership Strategy
Agriculture Guidance and Guarantee Fund
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Enterprise and Financial Sector Adjustment Loan
European Investment Bank
Emission Reductions
Social Fund
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Gross Domestic Product
Implementation Completion Report
Institutional Development Fund
Joint Implementation
National Bank o f Slovakia
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Operations Evaluation Department
Pay-as-you-go
Prototype Carbon Fund
Project Preparation Facility
Quality Assurance Group
Regional Development Fund
Regulatory Office for Network Industries
Structural Adjustment Loan
Social Development Fund
Sector Adjustment Loans
Small and Medium Size Enterprise
Sector Wide Approach
Technical Assistance

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Manager:

The World Bank Team

Shigeo Katsu
Roger Grawe
Ingrid Brockova

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC-WORLD BANK
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .............................................................................................................
I.
I1.

I11.

INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................

1

COUNTRY CONTEXT ........................................................................................................

1

A.
B.
C.

1
1
2

Three Challenges Facing Slovakia ...............................................................................
Sectoral Aspects o f the Three Challenges ....................................................................

3
4

PAST WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE AND LESSONS LEARNED ....................................

6

A.
B.
C.
V.

Recent Political Developments ....................................................................................
Recent Economic Developments .................................................................................
Social Development .....................................................................................................

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES: COUNTRY’S DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND
PROGRAM..........................................................................................................................
3

A.
B.
I V.

i

Past World Bank Assistance: Lending .........................................................................
Past World Bank Assistance: AAA ..............................................................................
Lessons from the Past, Perspectives for the Future ......................................................

THE SLOVAKIA-WORLD BANK PARTNERSHIP FY05-07 ...........................................

A.
B.
C.

D.
E.
F.
G.
H.

6
7
8
IO

Context ....................................................................................................................... 10
The Outlines o f a Program o f Assistance ................................................................... 10
Macro/Sector Fiscal Reforms to Support Prudent Macroeconomic Management and
. .
Fiscal Consolidation ................................................................................................... 11
Structural Reforms to Enhance Competitiveness ....................................................... 11
Poverty Reduction and Social Inclusion ....................................................................
12
Current Perspective on Lending .................................................................................
13
Results Focus and Country Program Monitoring ....................................................... 13
Partnerships................................................................................................................ 14

VI.

CREDITWORTHINESS AND RISK MANAGEMENT......................................................

16

VI1.

CONCLUDING REMARKS ..............................................................................................

17

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in
the performance of their official duties I t s contents may n o t be otherwise disclosed

.

BOX
Box 1: EU Financial Support for the New Member States ................................... ............. ....... 15

ANNEXES
Annex A1 :
Annex B2:
Annex B3:
Annex B3:
Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8:
Annex B8:
Annex B9:
Annex B 10:
Annex B l l :

Slovak Republic at a Glance
Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD Program Summary
IFC Program Summary
Summary o f Non-Lending Services
Social Development Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRD)
Statement o f IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Bank Engagement
Summary o f Development Priorities
Consultations o n the Country Partnership Strategy

Map

IBRD 32523

THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC -WORLD BANK
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i.

The Slovak Republic has made great strides in implementing reforms since the FYOl
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), and on May 1, 2004, acceded to membership in the
European Union (EU). A new framework to govern relations between the World Bank and
Slovakia i s now needed, one that moves beyond the old lender-borrower relationship to a
partnership which recognizes Slovakia’s new status. While financial support will have i t s place,
the emerging partnership i s based on facilitating knowledge-sharing and policy advice. Building
on this approach, the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) proposed for FY05-07 focuses on
analytical work and technical assistance operations designed to assist Slovakia to reach i t s goals,
while leaving open the possibility for broader financial support should the Partnership determine
it useful to meet specific needs.
11.
The reforms o f the past few years have put Slovakia on a fm footing for future
progress. Slovakia achieved sustained growth in excess o f EU GDP growth rates as public
expenditures declined to an average 39 percent o f GDP for 2001-2003, while the fiscal deficit
was reduced to 3.6 percent o f GDP in 2003. The deficit i s expected to further decline to 3 percent
o f GDP b y 2007, and Slovakia i s on target to meet this as well as other components o f the
Maastricht criteria. Slovakia’s reform program to support growth, reduce the deficit, and develop
a vigorous market economy i s impressive, and includes the introduction o f sweeping fiscal
reforms and large-scale privatization o f public sector assets with substantial foreign participation.

...

Slovakia now faces three broad development challenges. The f i s t i s to continue the
prudent management o f the economy and meet obligations under the Stability and Growth Pact
as Slovakia seeks to achieve full benefits from i t s membership in the EU b y adopting the Euro.
The recent fiscal reforms have created a strong platform for fulfilling this agenda. A second
challenge i s to converge to European income levels and be fully competitive in European and
world markets, and to build the capacity to productively use newly available EU resources.
Structural reforms to improve labor and capital mobility will be important in t h i s regard. The
third challenge i s to reduce poverty and unemployment and to address the marginalization o f the
Roma. Unemployment i s much too high at over 17 percent, and, while absolute poverty i s low,
there are deep pockets o f poverty, particularly among the unemployed, households living in poor
regions, and the Roma minority, who comprise nearly 11 percent o f the population. Labor market
reforms are needed, small and medium size enterprise (SME) development (which should
normally generate a high proportion o f new jobs) i s lagging, and education reforms are only just
beginning while lack o f education remains a key determinant o f unemployment and poverty.
111.

iv.
While these are significant challenges, Slovakia has already demonstrated how much
can be accomplished in a short period o f time. With the continued commitment o f the authorities,
Slovakia should proceed in the future as it has in the past, addressing these challenges b y
formulating and implementing practical and effective solutions. As a partner in development, the
Bank stands ready to assist, where needed, in these efforts.
World Bank assistance has played an important role in helping Slovakia to achieve i t s
goals. The objectives set out in the last CAS have been met and in some instances, exceeded, and
ongoing projects have satisfactory ratings or better. Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAA)
V.

- 11 have played an important role, i s considered a best practice example b y the Bank, and i s much
appreciated by the Government. The Bank needs to continue to provide excellent policy advice to
continue to be relevant.
vi.
For the future, assistance will be formulated in the context o f the Partnership Strategy
guided b y agreed criteria. Such assistance should: (a) have a high payoff in terms o f either equity
or growth, (b) complement other sources o f funds or expertise, (c) reflect the Bank’s comparative
advantage, and (d) have an impact in the near or medium term, other factors being equal. AAA
w i l l continue to be an important part o f the partnership because o f i t s impact o n Slovakia and
because lessons learned in Slovakia are applicable in less advanced countries.

vii.
There are a variety o f ways in which the World Bank could assist Slovakia to meet
the challenges outlined above. The World Bank could assist with reforms to enhance
competitiveness in selected aspects o f private sector development (financial deepening, SMEs),
rural development, labor markets, legalljudicial, and education. It could also assist in poverty
reduction and social inclusion through proposed work on a poverty assessment and poverty
alleviation, education, as well as work to reduce the marginalization o f the Roma.
viii.
For the present, two projects are under preparation: a Social Development Fund
Project and a Legal and Judicial Reform Project. While demand for AAA and technical
assistance i s high, demand for additional World Bank finance i s now low, as Slovakia has
excellent access to capital markets. As the World Bank reduces the non-financial costs o f
borrowing by simplifying and aligning i t s procedures with EU and country practice and more
effectively introduces i t s products in line with the “Management Action Plan for Enhancing
World Bank Support to Middle Income Countries” (Sec M2004-0071/1, April 20, 2004),
effective demand for financing could grow in the future. An important initiative i s the Bank’s
proposed approach to lending to the EU8. The EU8 Technical Assistance Loan Facility’ could be
accessed b y Slovakia to provide technical assistance beyond the limited capacity o f the World
Bank’s administrative budget in relation to any o f the development challenges that Slovakia faces
for which it wishes to draw on World Bank support. In addition, sector-wide approaches, pooling
World Bank, Government, and possibly the h d s o f European institutions could be useful to
promote or maintain policy or institutional reforms and thereby leverage EU funding, and/or to
provide financial support to activities not eligible for EU funds.
ix.
Slovakia has made notable progress in recent years. I t s accession to the EU both
certifies this progress and presages continued achievements in the future. As Slovakia assumes a
new status, it i s now appropriate for Slovakia and the Bank to enter into a new phase o f their
partnership. To meet this challenge, the World Bank will endeavor to respond quickly and
flexibly to Slovakia’s development needs. Through this engagement, the World Bank can also
help Slovakia share i t s development experience with other countries and lay the groundwork for
i t s eventual transition to donor status.

’ See “Framework for World Bank Support to EU8 Countries,” draft Board Paper, May 2004.

Proposed Agenda for Board Discussion
I s the proposedpost-Accession strategy for Slovakia congruent with the country's
requirements and the World Bank's capacities?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTIONAND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
WITH THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC
I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The Slovak Republic has made great strides in implementing reforms since the FYOl
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), and on May 1, 2004, acceded to membership in the
European Union (EU). A new framework to govern relations between the World Bank and
Slovakia i s needed, one that moves beyond the traditional provider-client relationship to a
partnership which builds on the progress that Slovakia has achieved. While financial support will
have i t s place, the emerging partnership i s based o n facilitating knowledge-sharing and policy
dialogue. The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) proposed for FY05-07 focuses o n analytical
work and technical assistance operations designed to assist Slovakia to reach its goals, while
leaving open the possibility for broader financial support should Slovakia determine it useful to
meet specific needs.
11.

COUNTRY CONTEXT

A. RECENT POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS
2.
Since winning i t s second term in September 2002, the Government has b&n
implementing an ambitious reform program with considerable success. However, the four-party
coalition lost i t s parliamentary majority in December 2003, although defecting members o f
Parliament have stated that they are likely to continue to vote with the Government during the
remainder o f i t s four year mandate. W h i l e Slovakia has achieved an impressive reform record,
political views in the country have been divided; for example, the EU accession vote was decided
b y a relatively small margin. Popular support for the reform has been variable, especially when
reforms to improve the functioning o f markets have reduced directed benefits, such as the
adjustment in welfare payments to reduce them below minimum wage levels, or the initiative to
introduce limited tuition payments for tertiary education which has been shelved for the time
being. The recent election o f Ivan Gasporavic, who was supported by the Parliamentary
opposition, as President combined with the minority position o f the Government, could slow
down the pace of reform. O n the other hand, a referendum in April 2004, to limit the term o f the
Government, was defeated, which increases the probability that the Government will remain in
office for i t s elected term to mid-2006. The Government i s committed to press ahead with i t s
reform agenda and there i s little risk o f reversal or abandonment o f that agenda given the
irreversible nature o f the key reforms and core o f support for reform in the coalition.

B. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
3.
Progress has been exemplary since the last CAS (January 2001). At that time, gross
domestic product (GDP) growth was modest and appeared unsustainable given policies and
structural imbalances then in place. Few structural reforms had been implemented, fiscal policy
risked high deficits while monetary policy needed for stability resulted in high interest rates,
foreign direct investment (FDI) was low, and unemployment was high.

-2-

4.
Since then, GDP growth has exceeded 4 percent per year, higher than i t s neighbors and
well above the EU GDP growth rate o f 0.7 percent for 2003. Public expenditures have declined
from over 55 percent o f GDP in the early 1990s to an average o f 39 percent o f GDP for 20012003, and are now much lower than the average for EU8 countries. The fiscal deficit was
reduced from 5.7 percent o f GDP in 2002 to only 3.6 percent o f GDP2 in 2003. Further
improvement i s needed because part o f the reduction was due to one-off effects, and Slovakia
will incur some expenditures to meet EU accession requirements and the introduction o f the
second pillar to the pension system. Taking these into account, the deficit i s expected to grow to
4 percent o f GDP but then decline to 3 percent o f GDP b y 2007, to meet one o f the key
Maastricht criteria and help pave the way for the planned introduction o f the Euro.’
5.
A sweeping tax reform was introduced in January 2004, comprising a tax rate o f 19
percent on all personal and corporate incomes, but with an increased deductible allowance for
l o w income earners. Virtually all tax exemptions were eliminated - gift and inheritance taxes
were abolished while real estate transfer tax will be abolished in the beginning o f 2005. A
uniform value-added tax rate o f 19 percent i s applied to all products, resulting in a major shift
from direct to indirect taxes. This simplification o f the tax regime should improve govemance
aspects related to taxation, and further improve Slovakia’s competitiveness for foreign
investment. The reform i s designed to be fiscally neutral, but the impact o f such large changes i s
difficult to predict. While the early results are encouraging, the Government will need to be
ready to react in case revenues do not meet projected levels.
6.
Core inflation has been kept at about 3 percent in 2003 and overall inflation was limited
to 8.6 percent as a result o f fm monetary policy which contained second-round effects o f
increases in administered prices. The trend appreciation o f the currency has been kept broadly in
line with productivity gains despite large inflows o f FDI. As a result, the current account deficit
has been reduced from 8 percent o f GDP in 2001 and 2002 to less than 1 percent o f GDP in 2003.
Foreign exchange reserves are robust: the equivalent o f 6 months o f imports.

C. SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
7.
Slovakia needs to reduce unemployment and poverty, while addressing the particular
issue o f the marginalization o f the Roma community. Slovakia’s poverty profile i s similar to that
~
poverty i s low, but there are deep pockets o f poverty,
o f other EU accession c ~ u n t r i e s .Absolute
particularly among the unemployed, households living in poor regions-especially in Eastern
Slovakia-and the Roma minority, who comprise nearly 11 percent o f the population. Poverty i s
most severe in geographically isolated and marginalized Roma settlements in Eastem Slovakia
which commonly lack basic infrastructure and utilities. Unemployment reaches nearly 100
percent in many o f these settlements and education levels and health status indicators are low.
For example, only 3 percent o f Roma children complete secondary education. At least one-third
o f the long-term unemployed are Roma. The Government has established an office for Roma
According to ESA 95 methodology.
In addition to the Maastricht criteria (fiscal deficit <3% o f GDP, public debt less than 60 percent o f GDP, l o w
inflation and long- t e r m interest rates, and exchange rate stability), further reforms will be needed to enable a
successfbl introduction o f the Euro including increased labor market flexibility and financial sector reforms.

Slovak Republic: Living Standards, Employment and Labor Market Study (Report No. 2235 1-SK, February
2002). A full Living Standards Measurement Study i s planned for FY05.

-3affairs headed by a senior official (and supported by an Institutional Development Fund (IDF)
grant in FY02) which i s responsible for coordinating policy o n Roma across the Govemment
(and for coordinating the activities o f the Government related to the Decade o f Roma Inclusion
which grew out o f the Budapest Roma conference cosponsored by the World Bank and Soros
Foundation in 2003). However the political influence o f the Roma i s dissipated and none o f the
coalition partners (and even less the opposition parties) consider the Roma as part o f their
political base or responsibility.

8.
Unemployment i s s t i l l high at over 17 percent for 2003, although it declined b y about 1
percentage point from 2002. Conversely, employment i s low, at 57 percent, one o f the lowest
observed in OECD countries. Low-skilled workers are falling out o f the job market as about a
quarter million low-skilled jobs disappeared during 1994-2002. There are large gaps between
workers in the high productivity FDI sector and, in general, domestic (including state-owned)
enterprises. Despite recent reforms, employment i s s t i l l skewed towards the public sector, with
general govemment accounting for over 20 percent o f all jobs.
9.
Slovakia has taken several legislative steps to promote gender equality, and follows the
recommendations o f the 4th UN World Conference in Beijing as well as EU regulations. A
National Action Plan for Women was introduced in 1997 and Parliament adopted the Concept o f
Equal Opportunities for Men and Women. Although, implementation o f the new laws has been
slow in dealing with gender disparities, available data indicate that gender disparities are not a
major problem.
10.
The recent tax reform creates strong incentives for business creation and selfemployment; but further measures are needed. High welfare benefits approximating the
minimum wage and high levels o f social security contributions and health care benefits have
diminished labor force participation. Recogruing this, welfare benefits have recently been
reduced from the equivalent o f about 100 percent o f the minimum wage to about 50 percent o f
the minimumwage. Recently enacted pension reform laws increase the retirement age to 62 (and
modemize the pay-as-you-go (PAYG) pillar including through the creation o f a mandatory
second pillar). Sick pay benefits are being reduced to levels consistent with other market
economies while co-payments have been introduced, all o f which will reduce labor costs, thereby
increasing labor demand. This package o f reforms should have a positive impact on employment;
but the rationale for these reforms i s not well understood by the population suggesting the need to
increase communication to help ensure their success. For the future, an enhanced focus on
education and training i s a high priority, as are other measures to induce growth in SMEs and
other sectors not directly linked to FDI.

111.

DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES: COUNTRY’S DEVELOPMENT
OBJECTIVES AND PROGRAM

A. THREE CHALLENGES FACING SLOVAKIA
Slovakia now faces three broad development challenges. The f u s t i s to manage the
11.
economy prudently and meet obligations under the Stability and Growth Pact as Slovakia seeks
to achieve full benefits from i t s membership in the EU by adopting the Euro. These require
further reductions in the fiscal deficit to meet the ceiling o f less than 3 percent o f GDP, managing
public debt to remain under 60 percent o f GDP, keeping inflation under control so that it does not
exceed by more than 1.5 percent the average o f the three best performers in the EU, maintaining

-4-

long-term interest rates at no more than 2 percent above the interest rates o f the three lowest
inflation countries, and, finally, maintaining exchange rates within the ERM2 for at least 2 years.
12.
A second challenge i s to converge to European income levels and be fully competitive in
European and world markets, and to build the capacity to be able to productively use newly
available EU resources productively. As it does so, Slovakia w i l l need to implement structural
reforms to improve labor and capital mobility thereby enabling the economy to function
efficiently after adoption o f the Euro when active monetary policy will no longer be an option.
Another aspect o f this challenge i s to enhance communications to build a broader consensus in
support o f reform.
13.
The third challenge i s to reduce poverty and unemployment and to address the
marginalization o f the Roma. Unemployment i s much too high - and reciprocally, employment
i s too low. Labor market reforms are needed. SME development, which should be a major
source o f new employment and innovation, i s lagging and Slovakia’s overall long term
competitiveness, both for foreign and domestic investment beyond the currently highly
successful automotive sector, needs to be reviewed and appropriate reforms introduced. Lack o f
education i s a key determinant o f unemployment and poverty, and education reforms are only
just beginning. Many Roma children s t i l l do not attend school regularly or those that do are often
misplaced into l o w quality special schools or classes intended for the mentally and physically
disadvantaged.

B. SECTORAL ASPECTS OF THE THREE CHALLENGES
14.
Slovakia needs to build on recent public sector expenditure reforms in order to meet the
Maastricht Criteria. A new pension system was approved in 2003, but implementation will need
to proceed quickly as the new system i s to be operating from January 2005. Systemic reform o f
social assistance i s being implemented to improve work incentives and reduce the poverty trap
(see para. 7). Information technology reforms are needed as the country moves to a unified
contribution system. Fiscal decentralization to improve effectiveness and accountability i s needed
with devolution o f responsibilities to regional and local political units. These and other reforms
need to be carefully explained to the public to broaden understanding and support. This i s an
example o f an area where enhanced Government communications are key to carrying reforms
forward.
15.
Health sector reforms have been introduced (including co-payments, improved patient
management, better control on expenditures for pharmaceuticals) but recently, the pace o f reform
has slowed. As in the case o f pension reforms, Govemment communication o f the benefits o f
health sector reforms needs to be improved to garner support for the key elements o f the reform
program, such as hospital restructuring and improved provider payments methods, among others.
16.
Education sector reforms have begun but further progress i s needed to achieve
competitiveness and improve social inclusion. The Ministry o f Education’s analytical and
decision-making capacity needs to be strengthened. Excess capacity in primary and secondary
schools i s being addressed by local decisions to determine which facilities would be closed,
based on national criteria. Tertiary education has been a free good which has limited the
availability o f resources. The introduction o f tuition reform at the tertiary level remains a priority
for the Government despite some political opposition. An implementation strategy for life long
learning, including the modernization o f the vocational education system, needs to be developed.

-517.
Public administration reform has been pursued by the Govemment, but further reforms
are needed. The merit basis for staffing needs to be enhanced as there are too inany senioritybased pay steps. Limited flexibility prevents needed staffing changes. Training for civil servants
needs to be enhanced.
18.
The judicial system needs to improve i t s efficiency and effectiveness to become more
responsive to the needs o f society and the market. This requires enhanced capacity in the areas o f
human resources, and information and document management. The market for legal services i s
too exclusive and the poor especially need to be given greater access to this system through
better targeting o f legal aid. A regulatory impact assessment i s needed to better evaluate the
impact o f laws.
19.
Energy sector reforms have proceeded quickly with substantial privatizations o f
distribution companies, the implementation o f a regulatory framework, and the development o f
an energy efficiency strategy. There i s a need to continue ongoing work to improve the
regulatory framework for electricity distribution and gas, develop an implementation framework
for renewable energy, and prepare an energy efficiency action plan.
20.
Wide-ranging financial sector reforms have been introduced with the private banking
system now operating in a reasonably competitive framework. However, further reforms are
needed to create a more conducive environment for financial sector growth. Creditor rights need
to be strengthened, the quality o f financial statements needs to be improved, and credit
information needs to be made more accessible. Non-bank sources o f finance need to be
developed, including leasing, factoring, ventuse capital, commercial paper and bond markets. A
strategy should be formulated to promote the development o f a capital market. Financial sector
oversight should be further strengthened, including through effective implementation o f an
integrated supervision structure under the auspices o f the National Bank o f Slovakia (NBS),
adequate enforcement o f newly applicable international accounting and auditing standards, and
enhanced supervision o f the insurance sector and o f both the new mandatory and existing
voluntary private pension funds.
21.
There i s a need to continue to improve the investment climate, especially to support the
development o f SMEs as an engine o f growth. The regulatory framework should be fiather
streamlined and simplified to reduce the adnlinistrative burden that affects the SME sector
disproportionately. This reform would include further simplification o f licensing, permit and
inspection procedures.
In agriculture, Slovakia will need to build o n an important array o f reforms (such as
22.
removing the large farm bias and the emphasis on self-sufficiency while observing a hard budget
constraint) b y implementing the single area payment scheme under the Common Agricultural
Policy (CAP), improving market linkages, enhancing the competitiveness o f agriculture, and
promoting rural development through efficient structural policies.

23.
While Slovakia i s developing programs to W h e r improve i t s transportation,
communications, and other linkages to i t s western neighbors as part o f i t s EU accession program,
it should also evaluate the need for regional linkages to make sure that development opportunities
are not unduly constrained.
24.
Slovakia i s subject to periodic and devastating floods along the Danube and i t s
tributaries. In response, it has begun implementation o f a well formulated flood protection

-6program. But the pace o f investment needs to be accelerated given the apparent increased
frequency o f severe and costly floods throughout the region.
25.
Finally, the Govemment faces the challenge o f improving communications to promote
public understanding o f and support for structural reforms. The pace o f change in Slovakia and
the perception o f declining welfare for many regions and segments o f the population has
dominated public perception o f reform and i t s large net benefits. A clear presentation o f the
benefits o f reform i s needed, with best-practice comparisons to Slovakia’s European neighbors.
While these are manifold and significant challenges, Slovakia has already demonstrated
26.
how much can be accomplished in a short period o f time. With the continued commitment o f the
authorities, Slovakia should proceed in the future as it has in the past, addressing these challenges
b y formulating and implementing practical and effective solutions. As a partner in development,
the World Bank stands ready to assist where needed in these efforts.

IV. PAST WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE AND LESSONS LEARNED
A. PAST WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE: LENDING
27.
The Bank’s f i r s t CAS for Slovakia covered FYO1-03. The CAS proposed assistance to
help Slovakia complete transformation reforms, strengthen govemance and build institutions,
improve social security, enhance human development, and meet environmental standards. At
that time, the new Government was planning a rapid acceleration o f reforms to move Slovakia to
the f i r s t rank o f EU accession candidates. The authorities also aimed to improve fiscal
consolidation to reduce a large deficit, among other objectives. Although there had been an active
advisory and technical support program from the late 1990s, there were no projects under
implementati~n.~
The CAS proposed a lending program o f US$415 million, including an
Enterprise and Financial Sector Adjustment Loan (EFSAL) in support o f sweeping banking and
corporate sector reforms, and a number o f investment projects: Social Benefits Reform
Administration, Public Finance Management, Judicial Reform, and Social Sector Investment.
28.
The EFSAL was approved in FY02 for Euro 200 million (US$177.3 million equivalent),
and has played an important and wide-ranging role in the reform and restructuring o f the banking
system, strengthening bank regulation and supervision, implementing a strategy to work out the
large stock o f non-performing claims taken o f f the books o f the state banks, introducing a new
banking law, measures to improve bank accounting and auditing, bank closure and deposit
insurance, and improving the legal framework for bankruptcy, collateral claims, and the laws
dealing with corporate govemance, among others. The third tranche o f the loan was released
(with full compliance) on April 21,2004, ahead o f Slovakia’s accession to the EU.
29.
The FY02 Social Benefits Reform Administration project was approved for Euro 23.2
million (US$23.5 million equivalent), with the objective o f strengthening institutions (to support
pension reform design, human resource training, and public information), establishing a unified
contribution collection system, and developing a client database and other information systems.
The FY03 Public Finance Management Project was approved for Euro 5.0 million (US$5.5
million equivalent) and i s now playing an important role in improving budget processes,
strengthening the macro-economic analysis and forecasting capacity o f the Ministry o f Finance,
Earlier projects included the successfully implemented S A L , telecommunications and rehabilitation loans.

-7strengthening debt management and treasury capability, and supporting effective coordination o f
the overall reform effort. The Social Sector Investment Project proposed in the F Y O 1 CAS was
modified in concept and focused to address Slovakia’s priorities and constraints as the FY04
Health Sector SECAL for Euro 55 million (US$62.9 million), accompanied b y a Health Sector
Technical Assistance (TA) Loan for Euro 10.58 million (US$12.58 million). These projects
support the Govemment’s comprehensive health reform with measures on both the demand and
supply side to lower costs, reduce expenditures leading to fiscal sustainability while restructuring
the delivery o f health services to improve quality including measures to improve access for
vulnerable groups. The accompanying T A loan i s an important indication o f the importance that
the Slovak Govemment attaches to getting the best technical advice to support i t s reform agenda.
30.
The five ongoing projects are rated satisfactory in terms o f meeting development
objectives and implementation progress, and the one (of three) closed project evaluated by OED
was rated highly satisfactory (see annex B2).

B. PAST WORLD BANK ASSISTANCE: AAA
3 1.
Non-lending assistance has played an important role in Bank support for Slovaha, and
has had an important impact on policy reforms in priority sectors, as indicated b y the Quality
Assurance Group’s (QAG) rating o f the overall quality o f AAA as “highly satisfactory.” The
Development Policy Review (Report No. 26607, June 2003) proposed a range o f reforms to
promote structural transformation, new expenditure strategies, and improved governance, many
o f which served as a basis for government programs. In agriculture, the report “Food and
Agriculture inthe Slovak Republic: The Challenges o f EU Accession” (White Cover, September
2002) proposed a series o f reforms (remove current policy emphasis on self-sufficiency, prepare
for the adoption o f EU agricultural policies o n accession, eliminate agricultural policy bias in
favor o f large farms, impose hard-budget constraints, and facilitate the adoption o f EU
compliance in food safety standards b y Slovakia’s food processing industry). The report was
translated into Slovak and its recommendations were adopted almost in their entirety. In April
2004, an international workshop was organized to share the experience and challenges o f
preparing for EU accession with Slovakia’s neighbors, and to discuss programs and policies,
including Bank assistance, for the future. The two FlAS studies in 2000 and 2001 analyzed the
regulatory and administrative burdens for foreign and domestic investment and recommended
reforms, many of which have been introduced. The “Living Standards, Employment, and Labor
Market Study” (Report No. 22351, February 2002) provided new information on poverty and led
to systemic reforms o f social assistance and labor market policies which improve work incentives
while strengthening support to the poor. The study o n “Poverty and Welfare o f Roma in the
Slovak Republic” (Report No. 28768, April 2002) was the f i s t study to address Roma issues as a
poverty and economic development issue, and led the Govemment to request support for a Social
Development Fund which will support demand-driven development initiatives from the
marginalized communities.
32.
The Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) provided a comprehensive review o f
financial sector strengths and weaknesses, supported the implementation o f the reform agenda
under the EFSAL, and highlighted key additional policy challenges for further development o f
the financial system going forward. In energy, the Bank has assisted in providing options on
institutional structures to support a new regulatory framework, assisted in the privatization o f
distribution companies, and provided support for the formulation o f a national energy strategy,
while working with a bilateral donor (Austria) in developing a renewable energy plan.

-833.
IDF grants have also been an important component o f the Bank’s assistance strategy.
The IDF grant for Bankruptcy Reform assisted with the preparation o f a new modem draft
bankruptcy law, and the design o f a regulatory framework for bankruptcy trustees. I D F grants
have also played important roles in assisting judicial and legal reform, accounting and auditing
reform, and capacity building for the Roma office. An I D F grant for Infrastructure Regulatory
Reform i s assisting the newly established independent regulator, the Regulatory Office for
Network Industries (RONI). An FY04 grant will support the Government’s efforts to strengthen
institutional capacity to formulate and implement a communications strategy for the reform
agenda.

C. LESSONS FROM THE PAST, PERSPECTIVES FOR THE FUTURE
34.
The World Bank has fulfilled and in many respects exceeded the program outlined in the
FYOl CAS. Virtually all products envisioned in the last CAS have been delivered, with
appropriate modifications as needed, and these have played an important role in assisting
Slovakia to perform as well as it has, which i s very well indeed. O n the basis o f this performance,
Slovakia deserves to be robustly supported by the Bank in the critical period o f i t s initial
membership years in the EU. Although Slovakia enjoys good access to capital markets at this
point in time, it wishes to remain fully engaged with the Bank in recognition o f the complex
development challenges ahead. Should Slovakia’s per capita income continue to grow at recent
rates so that it appears to be firmly on a convergence path within the EU and it makes continued
progress on structural reforms, it i s likely that our future partnership would strongly emphasize
Slovakia’s emerging role as a donor.
During the period of this partnership framework (FY05-07), Slovakia welcomes World
35.
Bank technical assistance and modest amounts o f lending. Both are seen as useful to bring OECD
and other comparator country experience to bear on the problems Slovakia wishes to address,
provided the Bank’s technical assistance continues to meet high performance standards. The
Govemment’s desire for rapid reform design and implementation i s constrained b y capacity,
since there are real constraints on the speed with which public administration can be reformed
and rectified. The Bank plays, and would continue to play, an important role in supplying
technical assistance to address this constraint. In a similar vein, the Bank i s able to assist
Slovakia to improve multi-sectoral coordination which constrains effective reform.
36.
In addition, Government communication o f the reform agenda i s not strong, with
consequent lack o f understanding o f goals, nature, and benefits o f economic reforms among
stakeholders and beneficiaries. Bank participation in and endorsement o f the reform program i s
important in buttressing Government’s communications with the public and securing support for
the reforms.
37.
To continue to provide excellent policy advice and remain relevant, the Bank will align
i t s support with Slovak/EU priorities consistent with Bank corporate priorities. Such advice
should continue to be solid technically and draw o n the best experience o f OECD countries
which Slovakia i s trying to emulate. For advice to be useful, the Bank has to move exceptionally
quickly given Slovakia’s rapid formulation and implementation o f reforms. The “EU 8
Framework6” paper proposes a new framework to facilitate the rapid flow o f Bank technical
assistance, including pre-approval b y the Board o f an envelope within which individual country
~

See “Framework for World Bank Support to EU8 Countries,” draft Board Paper, May 2004.

-9loans would be made through streamlined approval procedures covered b y standard loan
documentation in line with horizontal APLs.

38.
Beyond small amounts o f lending for technical assistance, however, Slovakia’s demand
for Bank funding will be shaped b y the competitiveness in underlying financial terms relative to
other funding sources, balanced by i t s flexibility as a risk management tool. The financial terms
available in the future on international capital markets will evolve based on general market
conditions and the perception o f specific country risk. Slovakia has, in recent years, improved
substantially the terms o f its market access and has been able to borrow on the bond market
recently at rates 30 or more basis points below the all-in costs o f IBRD lending. O n the other
hand, IBRD’s Fixed-Spread Loan has several embedded flexible features that can make it a useful
tool for public debt risk management. Indeed, not only does the Fixed-Spread Loan offer a large
number o f possibilities in terms o f customizing the repayment profile at loan negotiation, it also
permits changes to the financial characteristics o f all or part o f the loan throughout i t s life
(currency, interest rate fixing/unfixing, interest rate caps and collars).
39.
There is currently ongoing work with Slovak public debt management authorities to
gain better mutual understanding o f the possibilities stemming from the above, which would
allow a clearer formulation o f the Bank’s financial role in o f the Country Partnership
Strategy, including options presented below.
\

40.
Separately from the purely financial terms, there are the additional indirect costs o f
borrowing from the Bank, such as the number o f steps needed to satisfy Bank requirements for
each operation, and the time needed to complete them. In the context o f the “Framework for
World Bank Support to EU8 Countries,” the Bank will endeavor to reduce these indirect costs as
fully and quickly as possible. Under this approach, the Bank would accredit counterpart
institutions in Slovakia for investment or policy support lending (as in the case o f technical
assistance discussed above) for financial management, procurement, and safeguards. In so doing,
the Bank’s Institutional Fiduciary Assessments will bear in mind harmonizatiodalignment with
the EU, and reliance on prior assessment/certification work done b y EU institutions, as well as
the EU’s mandatory requirements for Slovakia to comply with EU directives. Based on demand,
the Bank could then respond rapidly with streamlined approval procedures for such operations
which relied on such accredited institutions.
41.
With this new framework, access to policy lending in support o f either new reforms or
existing good policies would be conditioned on the country’s performance at the sector level for
SWAPSor SECALS while maintaining satisfactory macroeconomic progress in line with the
country’s own convergence program. There are two ways in which the Bank-Slovak partnership
might proceed in this case. First, the Bank can bring value added by assisting Slovakia to access
EU funds which w i l l become available to Slovakia as a new member state; in particular, the
Structural and Cohesion Funds. In order to be able to utilize this EU funding, Slovakia will need
to generate projects and programs which qualify for funding, and the Bank may be o f assistance
in some o f these, for example, b y using the Bank’s project modalities where appropriate. In this
context, the Bank could provide TA to build capacity at the local level for developing and
managing the project necessary to access structural funds and use them well.7 Further, the Funds
require co-financing ranging from 50 to 85 percent, which the Bank could assist in providing.

’

For example, the proposed Social Development Fund would support building regional and local institutions
which will develop, propose, and implement projects under EU funds.

- 10Such potential Bank financial support for Slovakia would take the form o f co-financing in
support o f maintaining or implementing policy and programs. The Bank could o f course also
provide financial assistance outside o f co-financing, should that be desired.
42.
Operations which are selected for inclusion in the program should meet certain criteria.
The reforms that they support should have a high payoff in terms o f either equity or growth.
Bank assistance should not duplicate other sources o f funds or expertise and Bank assistance
should reflect the Bank’s comparative advantage. Reforms to be supported by the Bank should
have a near or medium term impact, other factors being equal.

43.
In addition to lending, A A A has been and w i l l continue to be an important aspect o f the
Partnership. Slovakia i s a best practice example in the use o f AAA. In addition to the benefits
which AAA brings to Slovakia, there i s a payoff to the Bank in pursuing AAA in Slovakia
because o f the lessons learned which are applicable in less advanced countries. Nevertheless in
the context o f our evolving partnership the Bank would look to Slovakia to take on an increasing
share o f the costs o f AAA both through cost sharing and borrowing for T A if particular activities
grew beyond the Bank’s budget constraints. In addition, costs will also be reduced by grouping
AAA as appropriate into regional studies (as i s currently planned in FY05-07 for studies on
public expenditure/fiscal reforms and labor markets).
V. THE SLOVAKIA-WORLD BANK PARTNERSHIP FY05-07
A. CONTEXT
44.
The macroeconomic scenario o n which the Slovakia-World Bank partnership i s
predicated assumes continued economic growth exceeding the average for EU countries, l o w
inflation, continuing substantial FDI flows, current account deficit averaging about 3 percent o f
GDP through 2007, and the Government’s fiscal deficit declining to 3 percent o f GDP in that
year. All o f this would be satisfactory progress towards meeting the Maastricht criteria and
subsequently joining the European Monetary Union.
45.
Within this scenario, Slovakia could finance a majority o f i t s fiscal deficit b y borrowing
extemally, with the implication that it would borrow at least US$1 billion per year on external
markets. The strategy i s to borrow in Euros, so that as the country moves towards the adoption
o f the Euro, risks are minimized. This i s consistent with exploring borrowing opportunities with
the Bank which can, o f course, lend in Euros. Should Slovakia determine that it would like to
draw more substantially on this partnership, the framework could accommodate lending in the
range o f US$lOO-150 million per year. The following sections outline how such a scenario might
play out, depending on Slovakia’s more precise determination o f i t s needs in the context o f i t s
partnership with the World Bank.

B. THE OUTLINES OF A PROGRAM OF ASSISTANCE

46.

The Bank and the Government have identified a number o f areas which in effect
constitute a menu from which the authorities would determine priorities in the light o f
pressing needs and perceived advantages o f Bank involvement considering the range o f
instruments available. These can be grouped into three broad headings: a) continued macro
and fiscal measures to support prudent and sustainable fiscal management; b) further

- 11 structural reforms to enhance competitiveness; and c) poverty reduction and social inclusion.
Priorities for Bank engagement are anticipated in each broad category.

C. MACRO/SECTOR FISCAL REFORMS TO SUPPORT PRUDENT
MACROECONOMIC MANAGEMENT AND FISCAL CONSOLIDATION
47.
The ongoing Public Finance Management loan i s supporting the implementation o f
important fiscal reforms. For the future, the proposed cross-country Public Finance Management
Review should offer a further set o f reforms to restructure expenditures and reduce the fiscal
deficit to meet the Maastricht criterion. There are three aspects which need to be addressed.
First, assistance to continue reforms in key sectors, including health, education, and social
benefits. Second, to help strengthen the structures needed for effective fiscal decentralization.
Third, to review public administration and identify further reforms to promote an improved costeffective structure. Looking beyond the proposed Public Finance Management Review, there
may be scope for policy-based lending to support the implementation o f fiscal reforms, especially
should these be consistent with Slovakia meeting the priorities identified in the EU’s Annual
Report.
D. STRUCTURAL REFORMS TO ENHANCE COMPETITIVENESS
There will be need for sector reforms to increase productivity and efficiency, beyond the
48.
fiscal aspects that may be addressed b y the macro/fiscal work noted above. These include
addressing issues in:

(4

Financial and enterprise sector reforms, building on the reforms supported by the
EFSAL and the implementation o f reforms identified in the earlier FIAS reports.

Creditor rights, credit and financial statement information and corporate govemance all
need to be strengthened further to facilitate more rapid growth o f financial intermediation
in support o f private sector growth. A corporate govemance assessment for banks i s
planned for FY05 which would assist in defining the need for further improvements.
SME sector administrative and structural constraints need to be addressed. The FIAS
reports need to be updated and the Bank could help develop a methodology for selfassessment by the Govemment o f the administrative and regulatory barriers to
investment. Support for reforms in these sectors could be in the form o f analytical work
or technical assistance, or in the form o f co-financing EU structural funds combined with
support for specific policy reforms.

(b)

Labor market mobility constraints and policies which aflect employment. A proposed

(4

Legaldudicial reforms. A project (FY05) i s under preparation which could include

(4

Education sector reform.

regional Labor Market Review would look at ways to support the development o f a more
fully competitive labor force with l o w unemployment in the new EU members.

capacity building, improvedjudicial infi-astructure, and reforms to improve the market for
legal services. A project preparation facility (PPF) advance if requested would help
accelerate project preparation and jump start f i r s t phase investment support for
restructuring and upgrading the judicial system.

Ongoing T A addresses: (i)measures to improve the
responsiveness o f higher education to the needs o f the global information society; (ii)
the

- 12 design and implementation o f student admission and financing policies; and (iii)the
development o f a life long leaming system in line with other OECD countries and with
the Lisbon agenda.
Agriculture and rural development which might focus on assistance in implementing the
single area payment scheme under the CAP, improving market linkages, and/or
promoting rural development in the poorest rural areas o f the country, specifically in

southeastem Slovakia.

Flood protection which would involve support for the implementation o f a flood
protection program, including advance waming systems and specific containments to
protect flood-prone urban areas where damage costs are highest.
Improvements in the knowledge economy. This would build on the results o f the recent
Slovakia Knowledge Economy (KE) workshop and ongoing work in education reform.

The aim would be to improve national institutions and programs to enhance the
transmission and local adaptation o f knowledge and technology to the productive sectors.
Thus, the Bank will seek to assist in building on the ongoing reform to increase capacity
and efficiency to enable Slovakia to better tap into the global knowledge economy.
Energy sector pricing and regulation. Building o n the successfully completed and
ongoing IDF grants, there i s scope for hrther work on gadelectricity pricing, regulation

in the context o f continuing support for the RONI, and to support Slovakia’s further
integration into EU networks.

There could also be scope to assist Slovakia to further promote the use of renewable
energy and improve energy efficiency. Through the Prototype Carbon Fund (PCF) and
related carbon finance vehicles, the Bank could be an important partner in efforts to
develop the Slovak Republic’s carbon trading market through project development,
capacity building and replication o f best practices. Potential has been identified for a
PCF-financed Renewable Energy project to support a package o f small scale renewable
energy sub-projects including geothermal, wind and mini-hydro. Further potential
opportunities exist to provide PCF support to sustainable waste management and
renewable energy projects and projects in the forestry/ land management and transport
sectors.

E. POVERTY REDUCTION AND SOCIAL INCLUSION

49.
The Bank-Slovak partnership has been working to prepare assistance in developing and
implementing policies and programs to address the inclusion o f vulnerable and marginalized
groups and communities in local govemance processes and development. This would improve
access to economic and employment opportunities and social services, and further build capacity
for excluded communities to propose and implement projects, and work with local governments.
Specific issues could be covered as follows:
i) Poverty Assessment. There i s a need to update information o n poverty and identify
areas where interventions may be warranted, which would be addressed by the Living
Standards Measurement Study (FY05). This would also build urgently needed
capacity within the Govemment for monitoring living standards and the impact o f

- 13 policy changes through T A to the statistical office and line ministries (especially the
Ministry o f Labor, Social Affairs and Family). Slovakia will also need regular high
quality household surveys for monitoring progress on the EU social inclusion process
(e.g. the “Laaken” indicators o f poverty and welfare). Finally, the Poverty
Assessment will more clearly identify disparities which may be emerging as a result,
for example, o f reforms affecting public sector employment.

ii) Poverty alleviation. There i s a need to improve the prospects o f disadvantaged
portions o f the population: (i)
through economic development and employment; (ii)
improving basic communal services and community drastructure; (iii)alternative
community-based social care services; and (iv) monitoring, and evaluation. The
proposed Social Development Fund (SDF) project (FY05) would address these
objectives. The specific components o f the SDF would be: (i)
economic development
and employment; (ii)
basic communal services and community infrastructure; (iii)
alternative community-based social care services; and (iv) project management,
monitoring, and evaluation. Finally, the project would include technical assistance for
capacity building as well as targeted support for developing Roma communities.

iii)Education. Beyond improving competitiveness and enhancing l i n k s to the knowledge

economy noted above, the World Bank could provide financing for the development
o f higher and vocational education institutions and teacher training as part o f an
education modernization program. For the present, the focus i s on AAA to address
higher and vocational education reform issues, including the need to develop linkages
between education, research and innovation, and subsequently to pursue project
formulation as and when requests develop.

iv) Decade of Roma Inclusion. The World Bank will support Slovakia’s participation in
the regional initiative, the “Decade o f Roma Inclusion 2005-2015.” The objective o f
this activity i s to accelerate progress in improving the welfare o f Roma in the region
through setting quantitative national targets for improving economic status and social
inclusion o f Roma, and developing and implementing national action plans to achieve
those targets.

F. CURRENT PERSPECTIVE ON LENDING

50.
As noted above, two potential projects are at an advanced stage o f preparation: Judicial
Reform and the SDF. Both are primarily oriented toward T A and capacity building. Beyond
these, the Bank would be prepared to assist financially in other areas o f the partnership
framework. Future financial assistance could be provided under the proposed EU8 Technical
Assistance Loan Facility to assist with institution and capacity building and the EU8 sector wide
approach (SWAP) to pool World Bank financial support with Government funds related to
priority programs or sectors. This approach could support policy reforms as well as continuation
o f existing good policies and investment programs, and could be used to co-finance and/or prefinance EU Structural and Cohesion Funds.
G. RESULTS FOCUS AND COUNTRY PROGRAM MONITORING

5 1.
Given the approach outlined above, the Bank’s role in the Partnership will evolve and in
any case be supportive o f the Govemment’s efforts. Country performance will be the result o f

- 14many factors on which the Bank will have only a selective impact. Since the nature o f the
Bank’s relationship with Slovakia precludes precise programming o f tasks, it i s not possible to
project specific outcomes. However, there are two broad possibilities. First, the Bank assistance
program could be limited to T.A. lending and AAA, should Slovakia determine that Bank
lending i s not sufficiently competitive with other sources o f finance available in the market or
from other institutions. Program monitoring will then need to be tailored to the impact o f
increased knowledge and policy advice. Second, should the Government conclude that the
features now available in Bank lending products make the Bank more financially competitive
(para. 38 above), Bank lending for investment programs and implementation o f policy reform
would be a more likely possibility.
52.
In either case, the Bank should be evaluated on the extent to which it has reduced the
non-fmancial costs now associated with i t s lending (see para. 40). This would entail prequalifying counterpart institutions in Slovakia, and aligning Bank procedures (including financial
management, procurement, environment, and social safeguards) to the extent possible with EU
policies and procedures. The Bank should also be evaluated on i t s effectiveness in responding
quickly to requests for technical assistance lending which may occur.
53.
Project-specific evaluation criteria will also be developed for projects which are
implemented. For example, in the case o f the proposed SDF Project, outcome indicators would
be the number o f sub-projects implemented jointly by local governments and communities and
the number o f beneficiaries participating in projects supported by the SDF.
54.
The second case i s one in which Slovakia determines that Bank lending i s competitive
with i t s other sources, either in strict financial terms or if the Bank’s presence enhances, by a
sufficient margin, Slovakia’s access to EU funding or provides other benefits to offset any
fmancial disadvantage. In this case, it would be appropriate to have overall macro outcomes as a
monitoring indicator, with a special focus on the fiscal deficit which would be gradually reduced
and maintained to achieve the Maastricht criterion o f 3 percent o f GDP. In addition, key sectoral
indicators should be developed which would complement the overall fiscal indicator. This would
be determined according to the specific sector or sectors in which policy support was being
extended.
55.
The case o f Bank lending to co fmance EU support i s slightly different. Here, the Bank’s
contribution would be to the formulation o f programs suitable for EU financing (and Bank cofinancing). However, sector specific outcome indicators would be developed concerning the
sectors being supported. The Bank would need to be competitive fmancially for this to
materialize, or almost competitive with incremental costs offset by the value o f project
formulation under the Bank’s program. Aligning and making maximum use o f Slovakia’s
implementation o f EU policies and procedures with the Bank’s as discussed above in para. 40
would be very helpful inthis regard.

H. PARTNERSHIPS
56.
Support to Slovakia as it progressed toward EU membership has been closely coordinated
with the European Commission (EC) under a Memorandum o f Understanding (MoU) signed in
response to the EC’s Agenda 2000 which called upon IFIs to assist in the enlargement process.
The signatories to the M o U include the EC in liaison with EIB, the World Bank, the EBRD, IFC,
the Nordic Investment Bank, the Nordic Environment Finance Corporation, the Council for

- 15 Europe Development Bank, and the Black Sea Trade and Development Bank. Regular meetings
o f the parties to the M o U help ensure the complementarity o f the respective assistance programs,
smooth implementation and enhanced effectiveness o f their cooperation.
57.
The EU program o f assistance i s wide-ranging and w i l l play a major role in Slovakia’s
development, and so i s presented in some detail below. The Bank w i l l continue to work closely
with the EU to ensure that i t s operations are as closely aligned as possible to EU support.
58.
Pre-accession EU assistance to Slovakia under the PHARE program (to help implement
the acquis communautaive, strengthen administrative capacity and help countries to develop
well-prepared investment and institution building projects) totaled Euro 63 1.5 million during the
1992-2003 period. Under SAPARD (Special Accession Program for Agriculture and Rural
Development), with Euro 38.2 million allocated since 2000, the main priorities have been
improving agricultural production, upgrading agri-food enterprises to EC standards, and
increasing competitiveness. Slovakia has also benefited from ISPA allocations (Instrument for
Structural Policies for Pre-Accession, for infrastructure projects) o f Euro 171 million to support
one motorway and three railway projects, and another Euro 175.6 million for environment.
59.
Slovakia has been allocated EU financing for 2004-2006 as follows: (i)Structural Funds,
Euro 1,186.89 million, and (ii)
Cohesion Funds, Euro 570.5 million. Accessing these funds will
require budgetary realignment to accommodate requirements, in addition to pre-financing and
other expenditures related to EU membership.
Box 1: EU Financial Support for the N e w M e m b e r States
Recognizing that in some cases the new members require additional support to strengthen administrative
capacity to implement and enforce EU legislation and to foster exchange o f best practices among peers, a Euro
426 million Transition Facility has been established for the new member states until the end o f 2006. I t is
intended to help strengthen administrative capacity to implement E C legislation and has no overlap with the
areas covered by the Structural Funds. In addition, like all other EU member countries, the EU8 w i l l have
access to four EU Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund.

The EU Structural Funds totaling Euro 14.1 billion &om mid-2004 through 2006 are summarized below:
0

0

0

the Euronean Regional Development Fund (ERDF) aimed at promoting economic and social cohesion
within the EU by reducing imbalances between regions o r social groups;
the Euronean Social Fund (ESF) designed to prevent and combat unemployment, as well as develop human
resources and promote integration into the labor market;
the Euronean Apricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGFF) to promote structural reforms in the
agriculture sector and to develop rural areas; and
the Financial Instruments for Fisheries Guidance (FIFG) to promote structural reforms in the fisheries
sector.

EU Structural Funds are allocated as follows:
0

4

70 percent for regions whose development i s lagging behind (objective 1);

11.5 percent for economic and social conversion in areas experiencing structural difficulties (objective 2);
12.3 percent to modemize training systems and create employment outside the objective 1 regions where
such measures form part o f the strategies for catching up (objective 2); and
5.35 percent for four “community initiatives” seeking common solutions to specific problems, such as
cross-border and inter-regional cooperation.

The EU Cohesion Fund totaling Euro 7.6 billion from mid-2004 through 2006 i s designed to finance projects to
improve the environment and develop transport infrastructure in EU8 countries with per capita GNP below 90
percent o f the EU average. In this way, the Cohesion Fund contributes to sustainable development o f concerned
EU regions as well as strengthening cohesion within the EU.

- 1660.
The EIB offers Slovakia subsidized credits and has been very active. The EBRD has also
been active, having lent Slovakia Euro 625 million, invested Euro 218 million in equity, and put
in place guarantees worth Euro 108 million, for a total exposure o f Euro 952 million, in support
o f projects with a total value o f Euro 3,280 million.
61.
The IMF continues to play a major role in assisting Slovakia. The Article I V
consultations and reports play a central role in monitoring developments, identifying needed
reforms, and recommending improvements. The IMF has also pursued special reports on fiscal
and other matters. As a member o f OECD, Slovakia also benefits from the regular, in depth
analyses o f OECD staff and the collective evaluation process.
VI. CREDITWORTHINESS AND RISK MANAGEMENT

62.
At the macro level, Slovakia i s strongly creditworthy because o f i t s sound
macroeconomic management and i t s reform program which has attracted large inflows o f FDI.
Total debt outstanding i s 57 percent o f GDP in 2003 and i s projected to decrease to 52 percent o f
GDP b y 2007. Debt service i s only 15 percent o f exports o f goods and services, projected to
decline to 6 percent in 2007. Even though the recent increase in the dollar value o f debt has not
led to an increase in debt/GDP, this was due largely to the appreciation o f the Koruna, although
this appreciation in turn reflected real productivity increases. The NBS has been successfully
implementing a policy o f allowing for appreciation related to such productivity increases, but
also seeks to avoid large currency swings and a sharp appreciation that could undermine
competitiveness. While current levels o f debt and debt service do not raise any serious issues, the
Government intends to continue to manage debt very carefully in the future in order to be able to
meet the Maastricht criteria, and i s being supported inthis by the Bank.
63.
The large inflows o f FDI which have played a central role in the expansion o f the
automobile industry have raised some concems about creditworthiness were there to be a
downtum in this industry. However, these large inflows need to be put into perspective. The
volume o f FDI in Slovakia i s over US$9 billion,* o f which US$1.8 billion i s in the banking
sector, and US$7.3 billion in the corporate sector. Within the corporate sector, US$3.3 billion i s
in manufacturing, including automobile manufacturing, more than US$1 billion in electricity,
gas, and water supply, and another U S $ l billion in wholesale and retail sales, including
automobile repairs. In sum, something less than half o f FDI has gone to the automobile sector.
While a serious downturn in this sector would have a noticeable impact on the economy, such
risks should be manageable. More important than the macroeconomic risks are risks arising from
the fact that three-fourths o f automobile sector investment i s in the Bratislava region, so that a
downtum would pose problems for this region. Thus, prudent macroeconomic management
would call for the development o f infrastructure in other regions o f the country to relax
constraints on development there. While FDI i s certainly most beneficial to Slovakia, the current
patterns o f investment do exacerbate regional disparities. Programs to redress these disparities
require even more attention in the future than they have received in the past.
64.
Potentially large capital inflows are likely to continue complicating the conduct of
monetary policy. While the NBS should focus i t s policy on securing a l o w rate o f inflation, large
capital inflows may lead to excessive upward pressure on the exchange rate which could
undermine extemal competitiveness. The key to reducing incentives for speculative capital
See National Bank o f Slovakia, Monetary Survey, January 2003.

- 17inflows lies in a sustained reduction in the fiscal deficit and lower interest rates as well as
allowing sufficient exchange rate flexibility. Sterilized interventions may also be warranted in the
short term, although they are unlikely to be effective over time and further could undermine the
income position o f the NBS.
65.
W h i l e a precise lending program i s not proposed within the Partnership framework, for
purposes o f creditworthiness analysis, a Bank lending program in the range o f US$lOO-150
million annually was projected, the maximum amount o f lending foreseen in the scenarios
outlined above. Again, to test creditworthiness, the extreme assumption was made that all o f this
would be fast-disbursing. World Bank debt i s now less than 1 percent o f total debt outstanding
and disbursed, and, under these assumptions, would rise to 2.5 percent o f total debt by 2007,
while IBRD debt service, which i s now only 2.3 percent o f public debt service, would increase to
3.3 percent o f public debt service b y 2007. IBRD debt service would be the equivalent o f about
0.1 Iercent o f the value o f exports o f goods and services through 2007. These key indicators are
we1 within the bounds o f creditworthiness.

VII.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

Slovakia has made notable progress inrecent years. I t s accession to the EU both certifies
66.
this progress and presages continued achievements in the future. As Slovakia assumes a new
status, it i s now appropriate for Slovakia and the Bank to enter into a more mature partnership.
To meet this challenge, the World Bank needs to strengthen i t s capacity to respond quickly and
flexibly to Slovakia’s development needs. Through this engagement, the World Bank can also
help Slovakia share i t s development experience with other countries and lay the groundwork for
i t s eventual transition to donor status.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:
Shengman Zhang
Washington, D.C.
May 6,2004

Annex A1
Page 1 o f 2

Slovak Republic at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2003
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Slovak
Republic

Europe &
Central
Asia

Uppermiddleincome

5.4
4,870
26.4

476
2,160
1,030

331
5,040
1,668

0.1
0.6

0.1
0.4

1.2
1.8

4/29/04

Development diamond*

Life expectancy

T

Average annual growth, 1997-03

Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1997-03)

Gross
primary

Zapita

Poverty (% of population below nationalpoverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 7,000 live bifths)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% ofpopulation)
Illiteracy (% of population age 75+i
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

58
73
7

63
69
25

75
73
19

84

91
3
102
103
101

90
7
105
106
105

i

Access to improved water source

-

Slovak Republic

-Upper-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1993

2002

2003

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmenVGDP
Exports of goods and servicesiGDP
Gross domestic savingsiGDP
Gross national savingsiGDP

1983

13.4
24.7
56.7
20.3
20.8

24.2
29.3
71.8
22.2
21.1

32.5
25.3
78.0
23.8
24.2

Current account balanceiGDP
Interest paymentsiGDP
Total debffGDP
Total debt service/exports
Present value of debtiGDP
Present value of debtiexports

-4.0
1.1
25.4
7.7

-8.0
3.8
53.8
18.9

-0.9
1.6
34.1
9.4

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

1983-93

1993-03

2002

2003

2003-07

-6.4
-6.5

4.0
3.8
9.3

4.4
4.3
5.5

4.2
4.1
22.6

4.8
4.7
8.9

..
..
..

5.7
33.1
18.6
61.1

4.1
28.6
20.1
67.4

3.7
29.7
19.5
66.6

..
..

54.9
24.8

56.9
20.9

55.3
20.9

1993-03

2o02

2003

2.6
2.0
5.5
5.2

-1.6
0.7
-1.2
6.6

4.4
9.2
6.6
2.0

4.1
2.9
5.1
9.3

5.2
4.7
2.2
5.2

-0.3
3.2
-9.7
13.8

Economic ratios*

Trade

Domestic
savings

Investment

Indebiedness
-Slovak

Republic

~~

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of qoods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

9.6

’:
:::
20

-301

-GDI

&GDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)

30T

-Exports

-imports

Note: 2003 data are preliminary estimates.

’ The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

I

Annex A1
Page 2 o f 2

Slovak Republic
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflatw

1983

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Other agriculture
Commodity 2
Manufactures
Total imports (cifl
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

2003

1983

23.2
28.5

3.3
4.0

8.5
4.7

46.5
-3.1
-31.2

44.8
-0.7
-5.7

38.3
-1.1
-3.6

1993

2002

2003

5,447

14,382

21,838

4,554
6,379
556
1,324

12,584
16,499
850
2,211

19,510
22,479
987
2,705

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

2002

1983

2003

7,398
8,061
-594

17,151
18,827
-1,676

25,117
25,524
-407

-38
100

-456
193

-120
223

Current account balance

-532

-1,939

-277

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

587
-55

5,585
-3,646

1,509
-1,232

Memo:
Reserves includinggold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, /oca//US$)

450
30.8

9,091
45.3

12,126
36.8

1983

1993

2002

2003

399
0
0

3,393
151
0

13,188
204
0

18,322
179
0

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

43
0
0

587
9
0

1,885
31
0

3,734
33
0

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

-1
5

529
96
364
166
-263

107
-78
1,447
4,007
552

-73
-1,852
580
-621

55
40
0
40
9
31

24
0
22
-22
9
-31

0
0
24
-24
9
-33

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

0
0
0
0
0
0

25 000 T

98

99

00

Exports

2002

Net income
Net current transfers

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)

97

133
140
95

1993

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

i

Inflation (%)
l5
T

Government finance
(% of GDP, indudes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplusideficit
TRADE

1993

01

02

Imports

Current account balance to GDP (Oh)

Compasition of 2001 deM (US$ mill.)

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

D -Other multilateral

E - Bilateral

F - Private
G - Short-term

4/29/04

1

Annex B2
Page 1 o f 1

Slovak Republic
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
as o f M a r c h 31,2004
_______

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number o f Projects Under Implementation a

2002

2003

2004

2005

2

3

5

5

0.6

1.1

1.3

1.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Percent o f Problem Projects b y Amount

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Percent o f Projects at Risk b y Number

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Percent o f Projects at Risk by Amount

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yedno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

0.0

0.0

2.9

4.5

no
62
31

no
206
103

Yes
380
76

333
67

Average Implementation Period (years)

Percent o f Problem Projects by Number " '

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% o f OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% o f OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
3
1

130.4
0.0
0.0

50.4
0.0
0.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for FY04 and FY05).

b. Average age o f projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent o f projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andor implementation progress (IP).

d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio o f disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance o f the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning o f the year: Investment projects only.

f. FY05 data are projections.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Yes

Annex B3
Page 1 o f 2

Slovak Republic
IBRD Program Summary
as o f March 31,2004

Proposed IBRD Lending Program '
Fiscal year

2005

Proj ID

US$(&?

Social Development Fund

10.0
7.0
17.0

Judicial Reform

Subtotal

Strutegic
Rewards b

(H/M/L)
H
H

Implementation b
R i s k (H/ML)

L
H

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next fiscal year.

b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be

high (H), moderate (Mj, or l o w (Lj.

Annex B3
Page 2 o f 2

Slovak Republic
IFC and MIGA Program, FY 2001-2004
2001 2002 2003 2004

70.0

0

5.0

100
100

0
0

100
100

Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other
Total

0
71
29
0
100

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
100
100

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

10.8

0.8

0.9

IFC approvals (US$m)
Sector (YO)
Finance & Insurance
Total

0

Investment instrument(%)

(gross exposure)

0.0

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1
Slovak Republic
Summary o f Nonlending Services
as o f March 31,2004

Product
Recent completions
Development Policy Review
Food & Agriculture: Challenges o f EU Accession
FSAP Follow-up T A Integrated Supervision
Energy T A
RomdSocial Development Fund T A

Completion
FY

Cost
(US$OOO) Audience a

Objective b

2003
2003
2003
2003
2003

198
150
52
52
41

G
GIDIPD
GIB
GIDIPD
G/B/D

KGIPS
PS
KGIPS
KGIPS
KGIPDIPS

Underway
Pension Reform
Cities o f Change
Education Policy Note
CG Assessment
Knowledge Economy Seminar
CG Assessment (Real Sector & Pension)
Living Standards Measurement Study
Flood Technical Dialogue
Agriculture Policy Dialogue
Energy EU Accession T A
National Energy Efficiency Follow-up
FSAP Follow-up TA Integrated Spn

2003-04
2003-04
2003-07
2004
2004
2004
2004-05
2004-06
2004-07
2004-07
2004-07
2004-07

72
36
475
15
8
15
210
76
280
70
100
180

GIB
GIDIBIPD
GIB
GIDIPD
GIDIPD
G/B
GIDIPD
GIBID
GIB
G/D/B/PD
GIDIBIPD
GIB

KGIPDIPS
PDIPS
KGIPD
PS
PS
KGIPS
KGIPS
KGIPS
KGIPDIPS
KGIPS
KGIPS
KGIPS

Planned
Audit o f Firms T A
CG Module for Banks
CG Module for Insurance Companies
CFAA
Institutional Fiduciary Assessment for Procurement
Public Finance Management - Cross Country
Labor Market Review - Cross Country

2005
2005-06
2005-06
2005-07
2005-07
2005-07
2005-07

15
90
75
90
30
750
175

GIDIPD
GIDIBIPD
GIDIPD
G
GIB
GIDIBPD
GIDIBIPD

KGIPS
KGIPDIPS
KG/PD
KGIPS
KGIPS
KGIPDIPS
KGIPDIPS

a. Govemment, donor, Bank, public dissemination.

b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Annex B5
Page 1 o f 1
Slovak Republic Social Development Indicators
Same regiodincome group

Latest single year

Europe & Central
1970-75

1980-85

1995-2001

Asia

Upper middleincome

POPULATION
Total population mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% m i u a l average for pencd)
Urban population (% o f population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

4.7

5.2

s.4

474.6

0.9

0.8

0.1

0.1

503.6
1.3

46.3

54.2

57.6

62.8

77.2

2.6

2.2

1.3

1.6

2.3

3,760

1,970

4,550

POVERTY (% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNI per capita (USS)

159

Consumer price index (1995=100)
34

Food price index (1995~100)

232

INCOMEiCONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Share o f income or consumption
Gini index

25.8

Lowest quintile ( % o f income or consumption)
Highest quintile (%of income or consumption)

8.8
34.8

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)

5.3

4.0

3.5

Education (% o f GDP)

4.2

4.4

4.4

10.6

8.8

Social security and welfare (% o f GDP)

Net primary school enrollment rate
(96 of age group)
89

96

Male

89

97

Female

90

95

Total

Access to an improved water source (YOof population)
100

91

88

100

96

94

100

83

69

Measles

99

9s

94

DPT

99

94

94

Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate (% under 12 months)

Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)

9

Life expectancy at birth (years)
70

71

73

69

72

Male

67

67

69

64

68

Female

14

75

77

13

75

Infant (per 1,000 live births)

23

16

8

31

23

Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)

26

19

9

38

27

Male (per 1,000 population)

226

210

317

218

Female (per 1,000 population)

105

83

137

114

Total

Mortality

Adult (1549)

Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)

14

Births attended by skilled health staff (%)
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97; ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepanciesbetweenthe estimates o f school-age population
and reported enrollnmt data. Source: 2003 World Development IndicatorsCD-ROM, World Bank.

Annex B6
Page 1 o f 2

-

Slovak Republic Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as %
’ of CDP)

1999

2000

Actual
2001

2002

Estimate
2003 2004

Projected
2005 2006

2007

100
5

100
5

100
5

100
4

100
4

100
4

100
4

100
4

100
4

Industry

36

32

31

31

30

30

29

29

28

Services

59

63

64

65

66

66

67

67

68

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

77
30
10
20

76
26
13
13

78
29
6
23

78
27
5
22

76
26
3
22

17
26
4
22

78
26
4
22

77
26
4
22

77
26
4
21

E X P O ~ ~(GNFS)~
S

Imports (GNFS)

61
66

71
73

73
82

72
79

78
80

7s
78

76
80

78
81

80
82

Gross domestic savings

23

24

22

22

24

23

22

23

23

Gross national savings‘

23

23

21

21

24

24

22

23

23

20381 20218

20887

24184 32519 34312 36212 38217

4025 1

3900 3860

3830

4050

4920

5189

5468

5165

6064

3.8
1.6

4.4
5.1

4.2
3.6

4.0
2.0

4.0
1.6

4.0
5.8

4.5
4.0

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market pric
1.4
1.9
3.1
4.3
Total consumption
0.1 -0.3
4.6
4.9
Private consumption
2.7 -1.0
5.1
4.8

4.1
0.6
-0.4

3.8
2.1
2.3

3.9
3.7
4.4

3.9
4.5
5.5

4.5
3.3
4.1

Gross domestic producta
Agriculture

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (“A, calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market pric
1.5
2.0
Gross Domestic Income
-0.1
2.2

Balance of Payments (US%millions)
~ x p o r t s(GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB

12292 14118
10229 1 1872

15134
12645

17151 25117 25768 27440 29765
14365 21838 22185 23639 25615

32327
27986

Imports (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net Income Receipts
Net current transfers
Current account balance

13166
11321
-874
-301
196
-980

14584
12777
-466
-353
118
-702

16780
14770
- 1646
-313
212
- 1746

18827 25524 26645
16497 22479 23403
-407 -877
-1676
-456
-120
-84
193
249
158
-1939
-277 -803

33166
29320
-840
-172
151
-860

92
160
1384 2723
76 1 1904
248 -497
28 1
-30
-33 -467
-92 -793

78
1314
1542
-22 1
60
-28 1
720

107
4559
4007
-102
-78
-24
1020

100
-40
580
-348
-7
-341
1797

264
1320
1405
-297

Net official capital grants
Net total private investment inflows
Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital flows, net
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Current account balance (YOo f GDP)
External debt (% olGDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YROO prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

28874 30894
25471 27190
-1433 -1129
-107
-113
156
154
-1384 -1088

-297
500

390
1386
1477
322
-10
332
500

436
800
897
241
-8
249
500

404
598
684
224
68
156
500

0

72 1

824

143

3646

1232

984

1215

888

866

-4.8
51.6

-3.5
53.4

-8.4
52.9

-8.0
54.5

-0.9
56.3

-2.3
54.0

-3.8
53.4

-2.8
52.6

-2.1
51.7

..

5.0

13.7

6.3

5.5

22.6

8.6

11.3

10.1

..

-6.7

10.5

11.0

5.2

13.8

8.3

11.2

10.8

Annex B6
Page 2 o f 2

Slovak Republic - K e y Economic Indicators
(Continued)

1999

Indicator

Actual
2000
2001

2002

Esbmdte
2003

2004

ProJectzd
2005
2006

2007

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Current revenues
49.4
Current expenditures
47.0
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
2.4
Capital expenditure
9.9
Foreign financing
7.1

47.3
46.7
0.6
13.3
12.3

45.1
45.3
-0.1
6.2
6.0

44.8
45.6
-0.7
5.5
5.7

38.3
39.4
-1.1
3.3
3.6

35.9
37.3
-1.5
3.9
4.0

36.3
37.9
-1.5
4.2
3.9

35.9
37.7
-1.8
4.2
4.0

35.4
36.6
-1.2
4.1
3 .0

Monetary indicators
M 2 FlowIGDP
Growth o f M 2 (%)
Pnvate sector credit growth
total credit growth (%)

6.1
11.2
4.1
6.1

14.0
0.3
9.1

7.7

6.8
11.9
0.0
13.3

3.0
5 .0
11.7
0.0

4.1
6.4
9.7
16.9

4.5
8.0
8.0

4.5
8.0
5.3

4.3
7.5
5.2

4.0
7.0
5.3

88.0
90.5
97.2

100.0
100.0
100.0

106.3
111.0
95.7

112.1
116.8
95.9

137.4
133.0
103.3

149.2
144.0
103.7

166.1
160.1
103.8

182.9
177.4
103.1

203.7
195.3
104.3

Real exchange rate (US$:LCU)'

90.8

100.0

109.2

106.4

82.2

85.2

89.9

91.7

93.4

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

10.6
6.5

12.0
8.5

1.3
4.2

3.3
4.0

5.5
4.7

7.8
4.5

3.7
3.0

3.2
3.0

2.8
2.3

'

Price indices( YROO =loo)
Merchandise export price index
.Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms o f trade index

a. GDP at market prices

b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."

c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants
d. Includes use o f I M F resources.
e. General government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local cumncy units." An increase in US$/'LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Page 1 o f 1

-

Slovak Republic Key Exposure Indicators

Total debt outstanding and

10518

10804

11043

13188

18322

18525

19347

20088

20812

248

-497

-221

-102

-348

-291

322

24 1

224

1612

2298

1954

1885

3734

2805

1752

2459

2082

85.6
51.6
13.1

76.5
53.4
16.3

73.0
52.9
12.9

76.9
54.5
11.0

72.9
56.3
14.9

71.9
54.0

10.9

70.5
53.4
6.4

67.5
52.6
8.3

64.4
51.7
6.4

4.9
19.7

3.8
30.1

3.3
9.3

3.5
10.4

2.3
6.9

1.6
11.2

6.2
21.5

3.8
13.8

3.3
13.4

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

219

184

205

204

119

275

355

428

487

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)"
Total debt service (TDS)

(Ussm)"
Debt and debt service indicators

("/I

TDOIXGS~
TDOiGDP
TDSIXGS
ConcessionaliTDO

IBRD exposure indicators (YO)
IBRD DSipublic DS
Preferred creditor DSipublic

DS (%)"
IBRD DSiXGS

IBRD TDO ws%mId

O f which present value of

guarantees (US$m)
Share o f IBRD portfolio (YO)

IDA TDO (US$mId

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed. use o f I M F credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports o f goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for Intemational Settlements.
d. Includes present value o f guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Page 1 o f 2

Slovak Republic

Operations Portfolio (IBRD)
as o f M a r c h 31,2004
Closed Projects
IBRD/IDA *

3

Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
o f which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active & Closed)
o f which has been repaid

134.5 1
0.00
130.43
57.33
264.95
57.33

Total Undisbursed(Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed(Active & Closed)

201.28
0.00
201.28

Diff. Between

Active Proiects

Project ID/Project Name

Last PSR

Original Amount

Expected &L Actual

Supervision Rating

in US$ Millions

Disbursements a'

Dev.

ImD.

Objectives

Progress

FY

IBRD

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

PO64542

EFSAL

S

S

2002

177.30

80.19

PO65954

Health Reform

S

S

2004

62.92

70.08

PO82879

Health TA

S

S

2004

12.38

13.48

PO69864

Public Finance Mgt

S

S

2003

5.45

5.56

0.44

S

S

2002

23.50

31.98

13.89

281.55

201.28

59.93

PO38090 Social Benefit Reform
Overall Result

a. Intended disbursementsto date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

43.35
2.25

Annex B8
Page 2 o f 2

Slovak Republic
Statement o f IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
as o f February 29,2004
(In US Dollars Millions)

Held

Disbursed

FY Approval Company
Loan Equity Quasi Partic
Loan Equity Quasi Partic
1999
SEF West Exp-Imp 0.79
0
0
0 0.79
0
0
0
Total Portfolio:

0.79

0

0

0 0.79

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan
None

Equity Quasi Risk Mgt Partic

0

0

0

Annex B9
Page 1 o f 1

Slovak Republic - Bank Engagement

Priority

Ongoing Activities

Proposed New
Activity

Fiscal
Consolidation

1. Lending: Public
Finance, Health
Pensions
2. T.A.: Education

1. AAA: EU8
Comparative
Fiscal Study

1. Lending: EFSAL
2. T.A. Education,
Convergence:
Competitiveness Legal Sector, Energy
Sector, Agriculture

Social Inclusion

SDF Project
Preparation

AAA: EU8
Comparative
Labor Market
Study

Possible New Activity (T.A.
loan and/or budget support)

Legal,Judicial
Reform,
Infrastructure (flood protection),
energy sector, financial sector

1. SDF Project
2. AAA: Poverty Fiscal Decentralization
Assessment

Additional Possible
Areas for Lending or
budget support

1. Assistance to meet EU
Acquis Communautaire;
2. Cofinance EU
Structural Funds (Le. for
private sector/SME
development);
3. Knowledge economy
(La. or budget support)

Annex B10
Page 1 o f 1

Network Area

I

Slovak Republic - Summary o f Development Priorities
Country
D--r-rmanceflj

Mujor Issuef2J

Ir=rJ”

Poverty Reduction and Economic Management
Poverty Reduction

Good

Economic Policy

Excellent

Public Sector

Good

Gender

Good

Education

good

Health, Nutrition, and
population

Good

Social Protection

Good

Rural Development

Social exclusion
Unemployment
Fiscal
sustainability
Public
administration,
centralization

I H I

Major CPS focus

H

H

H

H

Labor force
participation

L

L

Inclusion,
competitiveness ,
sustainability

M

H

L o w efficiency,
fiscal
sustainability,
excess capacity

H

Fiscal

H

Fair

Rural areas
underserviced

Environment

Fair

Social Development

Poor

Financial Sector

Good

Private Sector
Energy& mining
Infrastructure

Good
Good
Good

I

Reconciliation of
Bank and County
Prioritied51

County Priority/;?] Bunk Priorityf4j

I

CPS focus

H

I

M

L

EU &nding,programs

Legal framework

M

L

EU standards, fimdinj

Social exclusion
o f Roma

H

H

H

H

H
H
M

H
H
M

, sustainability

Competitiveness,
access
Governance
Regulation
Management

[ 11Use “excellent”, “good”, “fair”, or “poor”.
[2] Indicate country specific problems
[3] To indicate priority use “low”, “moderate”, or “high”
[4]To indicate priority use “low”, “moderate”, or “high”.
[5] Give explanation if priorities do not agree.

EBRLl, EIB lead

Annex B11
Page 1 o f 3
Slovak Republic: Consultations on the Country Partnership Strategy

As part o f the preparation o f the CPS for 2005-2006, a program o f consultations on the draft Strategy
with the representatives o f Slovak civil society was launched in Slovakia. The primary purpose o f the program
was to seek inputs from a wide spectrum o f stakeholders in regard to the future activities o f the World Bank in
Slovaha. The Bank team also used this opportunity to meet its partners including in the remote regions o f the
country.

The draft CPS document was prepared following discussions with the representatives o f the
Government o f Slovakia and leading opinion makers. As background, a baseline survey was conducted covering
a nation-wide sample o f 1,040 respondents. The survey showed that more than half o f the country's population
(59 percent was aware o f the World Bank. Among those who heard about the Bank, 59 percent had a
favorable opinion, while 13 percent held unfavorable opinions. The World Bank i s regarded less favorably in
comparison to the EBRD, but more favorably than the IMF.
Almost half o f the respondents were unable to identify the World Bank's activities in Slovaha and
more than 30 percent could not see a link between the World Bank's operations and the reforms program o f the
Slovak Government.
The CPS consultation process consisted o f several feedback instruments/ events: (i)
presentation o f
the Strategy to the government officials at the Joint Portfolio Review Meeting in February 2004, (ii)
electronic
consultation through the Country Office website (March-April 2004), (iii)
a series o f consultation meetings held
in three major cities in Slovalua: Kosice, Banska Bystrica and Bratislava (March 29- April 2, 2004).
Both, the Slovak and English versions o f the Strategy were placed on the Country Office website in
the beginning o f March 2004 and were subjected to comments by wider public. In addition, the draft CPS in
Slovak was distributed along with invitation letters to more than 700 individuals and organizations prior to the
consultation meetings. This public access resulted in a number o f comments submitted b y representatives o f the
N G O sector, local governments, and academics. All comments were made available on the World Bank web
site.

For the consultation meetings, a methodology was developed b y representatives o f the World Bank,
in cooperation with the Bank's key N G O counterparts in Slovakia, a Slovak consultancy company hired as an
independent facilitator for the CPS consultations. Information about the public consultations was also placed on
the Country Office website as well as on the information server o f the civil society organizations in Slovakia
www.chanaenet.sk.

Up to 60 people participated in each o f the three consultation meetings bringing together
representatives from the N G O sector, local governments, academics, business, and media. Each meeting
consisted o f two parts. The first session focused o n the socio-economic analysis o f the Slovak economy and
the challenges to be addressed. In this regard, the participants were encouraged to review the analysis provided
in the CPS and comment on issues that were either omitted or insufficiently addressed. The second session
centered on how these challenges could be addressed and the possible role o f the World Bank in this process.
Discussions following each o f the presentations took place in one or two w o r h n g groups established o n the
basis o f main themes introduced in the CPS. The w o r h n g groups then reported their observations and
recommendations during the plenary session.
In the process o f consultations the Bank indicated that all the comments and views made b y the
participants would be recorded, analyzed and discussed among the sector staff. They were also informed that
the comments would be conveyed to the Slovak government.

Participants felt that the draft CPS presentation was a good starting point for consultations and that
the analysis o f the social and economic situation in Slovalua included in the document was comprehensive and

Annex B l 1
Page 2 o f 3
objective. Participants also appreciated some o f the special points o f concern, including poverty,
unemployment, and minorities. Overall, i t was agreed that the presentation o f the positive and negative aspects
o f the ongoing transformation o f public administration formed an important cornerstone o f the analysis.
However, the claim was made that the CPS should note that corruption and clientism i s not sufficiently
combated, and many institutions are too weak to redress this problem.
There was some concern about aspects o f the analysis which were felt to be missing or
underemphasized, including: [a) the brain drain, especially the number o f people with university education
who leave Slovakia, (b) gender issues, and the greater impact on women than on men in implementing
education, social, pension and health reforms, (c) impact o f long term unemployment (economic,
psychological, and social), [d) the need to give a better qualitative as well as quantitative description o f
poverty, [and that social safety nets have been weakened for fiscal reasons while subsidies increased for large
corporations), (e) analysis o f the role o f life-long learning; and (i)
transparency o f the ongoing reforms, and
the causes o f insolvency o f the health service. The participants also felt that the CPS should look at income
distribution with a view to assessing changes needed to sustain long-term support for the reform.' The strong
decline in the support o f the Government coalition was caused b y the fact that structural reforms were not
adjusted to the situation faced b y low and middle income classes. Social inclusion and poverty reduction
strategies should be introduced before transformation programs are started, to prevent rather than trying to
undo the problems they create.
Concerning the proposals made in the CPS presentation, most o f participants felt that a number o f
recommendations could be improved. They felt that the CPS should present a more integrated and
coordinated view o f all the ministries in the context o f a long term vision o f growth and development.
Concerning the energy sector, the participants suggested a stronger focus on renewable energy while greater
emphasis might be given to the use o f nuclear energy. Generally, adequate supply o f electricity should be
ensured. The CPS might look more closely at agriculture and how to strengthen rural development. The CPS
might also re-evaluate the impact o f the introduction o f uniform VAT.
Concerning health care reform, participants felt that the Bank had appropriately emphasized the need
to ensure a balance between supply and demand, but that the implementation o f health sector reform suffered
from poor communication resulting in a general perception o f a lack o f coordination." It was emphasized that
the quality o f service should be enhanced, possibly by creation o f a specialized institution to evaluate service
delivery. Both quality and quantity needed to be taken into account in health care financing. It would also be
important to analyze the existing labor market for the medical professions in order to better accommodate the
needs o f the health sector. Primary health care should become a vehicle to better address poverty.
Education was another important focus o f discussion. While the Government had accepted the
concept o f reform through the year 20 10, implementation was inadequate. Education expenditures
accounted for only a small percentage o f GDP. Resources flowing to science and research should be
increased, especially since their share in GDP was lower than in Poland, Hungary, or the Czech Republic.
There was a high degree o f mistrust in the academic community towards the Ministry o f Education
concerning implementation o f accepted targets. I t would be important to depoliticize the quality assessment
system for the universities b y creating an independent body rather than leaving this with the Ministry o f
Education. The Government should enable and encourage the flow o f funds to universities, including from
external sources. There was also some support for funding university tuition from the state budget. The
participants felt that stronger support should be given to enriched/accelerated education for talented and
gifted children, especially outside Bratislava where such facilities were particularly lacking. Primary
education should be emphasized to better address poverty/social inclusion.

The proposed L S M S (Living Standard Measurement Study) for FY05 would address this point.
lo
This

i s to be addressed by the DGF (Development Grant Facility) for communications

Annex B11
Page 3 o f 3
Education reforms being implemented had addressed low teachers’ salaries, lack o f resources for
research and development and libraries. Facilities were so poor that i t would be difficult to implement a
merit based faculty selection. Any plan to introduce tuition payments for university students should be
accompanied b y a carefully formulated plan to assist poorer students Adult education was not laclung as
many schools and businesses had established Lifelong Learning Institutes. But there was little demand for
these due to costs, insufficient assistance from employers, and little social impact. A system i s needed to be
implemented to support efforts o f adults striving for a university degree.

With respect to Slovalua’s development agenda, inclusive development should also promote equality
between men and women. There i s a need to pro-actively reduce gender disparities, takmg account o f
gender analysis under all reforms. The CPS sh.ould also take into account the aspect o f poverty among
females and the increasing income gap between women and men. Concerning social benefits reform, the
new system to be launched in January 2005 should take account o f gender analysis and adopt measures to
prevent the poverty o f females in retirement age groups. A gender mainstreaming strategy as well as gender
budgeting should be adopted, and a gender analysis system and related measures for government reforms
introduced. Eventually, the expected broad outcome from the World Bank-Slovak partnership should be the
reduction o f gender disparities and equal opportunities for men and women.
Concerning public administration, reforms to derogate responsibilities to regional authorities had not
been accompanied b y fiscal decentralization. There i s also some duplication between the central and regional
administrative authorities. The civil service was overstaffed with continuing staffing increase, without
commensurate increases in administrative capacity. Service standards were low, and the administration was
heavily politicized.
Concerning private sector development, there was a need to remove administrative constraints and
otherwise improve the environment for SME development.
There were also a number o f suggestions concerning poverty and social inclusion. The CPS should
look at regional disparities and regional development patterns which lead to the marginalization o f
particular social groups. Many measures o f the Government (e.g. FDI incentives) promoted rather than
reduced regional disparities. Unemployment needed to be tackled through sustainable job-creation in rural
areas. Grants and loans by the World Bank through commercial banks could be important if transparency
and involvement o f local stakeholders was assured. Assistance should be allocated regionally. Quality
standards needed to be introduced in social services. Some participants felt that independent institutions
should be developed to provide information and counseling in the social and legal spheres. There was also a
suggestion for a law to be passed to protect vulnerable groups. Regarding the Roma in particular, examples
o f successful projects for the Roma population should be more broadly disseminated. Ecological
agriculture for the Roma should be supported.
Education for Roma children i s not satisfactory and should be enhanced, from pre-school through
university. For example, many Romas attend primary schools for handicapped children. A task force o f
Roma experts i s needed to comment on and improve the National Action Plan for Roma Communities.
For the future, institutions needed to be strengthened through transparent technical assistance and
twinning. The World Bank’s activities should help ensure transparency, partnership, sustainability, and
implementation o f environmental and social impact assessments. A thorough evaluation o f past and
ongoing structural reforms which were supported by the Bank should be carried out b y an independent
agency.
Following the consultations, comments were placed on the World Bank’s Slovak Country Office
website.

MAP SECTIOK

