Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of

The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 20161-TN

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF TUNISIA

March 28, 2000

Maghreb Department
Middle East and North Africa Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performanceof their official duties. Its contents may not otherwisebe disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

CURRENCYEQUIVALENTS
Unit of Currency = Tunisian Dinar (TD)

*

Period Average Exchange Rates (TD per US dollar)
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000*
0.946
(0.973
1.106
1.139
1.184
1.274
Rate for 2000is averageJanuaryI-March25.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AfDB
APL
BOT
CAS
CPPR
DS
ECAL
EIB
ENV
EU
FY
GDR
GEF
GNFS
GOT
GTZ
IDF
IFC
IsDB
JBIC
KfW
LACI
MENA
METAP
MLT
MNCMG
MNSRE
NGO
OED
PAD
PHRD
PPI
PSA
SME
SSR
ST
TD
WSIL

Analytical and Advisory Activity
African Development Bank
AdaptableProgram Loan
Build Operate Transfer
Country Assistance Strategy
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Debt Service
Economic Competitiveness Adjustment Loan
European Investment Bank
Enviromnent Department, World Bank
European Union
Fiscal Year
Global Depository Receipt
Global Environment Facility
Goods and Non-factor Services
Goverrnent of Tunisia
German Agency for Technical Cooperation
Institutional DevelopmentFund
International Finance Corporation
Islamic Development Bank
Japanese Bank for International Cooperation
German Development Credit Agency
Loan Administration Change Initiative
Middle East and North Africa Region, World Bank
Mediterranean Technical Assistance Program
Medium and Long Term
MENA Country Management Unit for the Maghreb
MENA Sector Management Unit for Rural Development, Water and Environment
Non-governmental Organization
Operations Evaluation Department
Project Appraisal Document
Policy and Human Resources Development
Private Participation in Infrastructure
Private Sector Assessment
Small and Medium Enterprises
Social and Structural Review
Short-term
Tunisian Dinar
Water Sector Investment Loan

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Team Leader:

Kemal Dervis
Christian Delvoie
Hassan Fazel

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Table of Contents
Page
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY..................................
L COUNTRY CONTEXT
LONG-TERM
PROGRESS
.1
A. THESETTING:
B. KEYCHALLENGES
AHEAD
Heightened International Copetition.
UpholdingSocial Cohesion
Sustaining Environmental Protection
UpgradingGovernance

.1
3
4
.5
.9
.9

H. MACROECONOMICPERFORMANCE,PROSPECTS AND RISKS.10

A. RECENTEcONOMICPERFORMANCE

...
ENVIRONMENT
ANDECONOMIC
OUTLOOK
B. EXTERNAL
Medium-term Prospects..
Risks and Vulnerabilities

M.

.

10
11
1
14

.

TUNISIA'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA AND THE BANK'S CAS.15

A. TUNISIA'S
DEVELOPMENT
AGENDA.
B. IMPLEMENTATION
OFBANK
GROUP'SPREVIOUS
CAS.17
C. PROPOSED
COUNTRY
ASSISTANCE
STRATGY
ConsolidatingLong-term Development.
Supporting Economic Reforms.23
New Initiatives
.24

15
..

20
21

IV. BANK GROUP COUNTRY PROGRAM.25
A. VEHICLES
FORBANKASSISTANCE
..
Portfolio Management and Performance.25
Proposed Program.............
Lending Instruments.27
B. LENDING
SCENARIOS
ANDTRIGGERS
..
C. PARTNERS
ANDPARTICIPATION
..
Coordinationwith Other Donors.30
ParticipatoryProcess .31

25
:

26
28
30

V. COUNTRY RISK MANAGEMENT.31
.31
A. COUNTRY
CREDITWORTHINESS
Bank Lending Flows and E3xposure.32
Risks and Uncertainties.32
.. ......................................
B. PERFORMANCE
MONITORING
ANDEVALUATION

33
33..........................

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents ma not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

Text Tables

Page

Table 1: SELECTED MACROECONOMICINDICATORS..................................................... 12
Table 2: MEDIUM-TERMFINANCING PLAN: BASE CASE (US$ Million) .......................... 12
Table 3: EVOLUTION OF BANK LENDING INSTRUMENTS IN LAST CAS ....................... 18
Table 4: PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT INDICATORS .......................................................... 25
Table 5: BANK TIME AND RESOURCE COSTS OF LENDING TO TUTNISIA
...................... 26
Table 6: PROPOSED BASE CASE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM .............................................. 27
Table 7: WORLD BANK LENDING AND EXPOSURE (BASE CASE).................................. 32
Table 8: CORE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS ..........................................................
.33
Table 9: CAS MONITORING INDICATORS - INTERMEDIATEMILESTONES ........ .........34
Text Figure/Box
Figure 1: SELECTEDPERFORMANCE INDICATORS ........................................................... I
Figure 2: TRENDS IN LABORFORCE AND GRADUATE ENROLLMENTS
........................
8
Box 1: PROGRESS IN POVERTY ALLEVIATION............................................................

Annexes
Annex A2
Annex B2
Annex B3
Annex B4
Annex B5
Annex B6
Annex B7
Annex B8
Annex B9a
Annex B9b
Annex B IO
Annex B 11
Map

Country at a Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bank Group Program Summary
Summary of Non-lending Services
Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Key Economic Indicators
Key Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio
CAS Program Matrix: Diagnosis
CAS Program Matrix: Program
CAS Summaryof Development Priorities
CAS Review of Environmental Issues
IBRD 24726R

6

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENTOF THE
INTERNATIONALBANK FOR RECONSTRUCTIONAND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCESTRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF TUNISIA
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i. Stressing equitable development and macroeconomicprudence over a long period,
Tunisia has progressed remarkably to lower middle-income country status. Since
independence, real per capita incomes have grown over two and a half times while social
and economic well-being have improved significantly: poverty incidence has dropped
from 40% to 7%; almost all children enroll in primary school; life expectancy has grown
from 50 to 70 years; and the status of women has improved steadily, with women now
comprising a third of the labor force. Tunisia has also built up the strongest policy and
institutional framework for sustainable development in the region. With a liberalized
offshore sector in place since the 1970s, Tunisia opened its economy further when, in
1995, it signed a partnership agreement, including free trade provision, with the EU.
ii. Given Tunisia's limited markets, the EU agreement and, more generally, outwardlooking economic policies, are critical to stimulating higher growth and employment,
which is paramount among the country's development objectives for the medium term.
At the same time, the agreement poses challenges for Tunisia well beyond trade
measures. The heightened international competition will require it to develop a more
dynamic private sector; strengthen further its human capital base; and consolidate its
sound management of natural resources. This, in turn, will need a new framework for
economic governance, so far substantially led by the public sector, towards more neutral
and predictable policies for the private sector, coupled with increased participation of the
civil society in the development process.
iii. To team up with Tunisia in this endeavor, and in line with Government requests,
this CAS document proposes the following areas for Bank Group support:
* Consolidating long-term development through activities in sectors of traditional
Bank involvement, mainly human resources development, natural resources
management, transport, and rural and urban development;
* Supporting economic reforms to enhance competitiveness and increase
employment,with safeguards against transitional costs of adjustments;
* New initiatives of catalytic nature to strengthen local institutions, launch new
developmentniches (e.g., informationtechnology), and mobilize external finance.
The program is fully consistent with Tunisia's poverty reduction strategy. In line with
the country's stage of development and emerging challenges, the CAS takes a broad
approach to poverty reduction; it focuses on labor-intensive growth, employment and
vulnerability issues in the wake of increased competition, and refinement and greater
coverage of the social protection system, while promoting decentralized and communitybased approaches in poverty pockets.

ii

iv. The above proposal ties in closely with other donor programs in the country. It
also ensures continuity with the last CAS (FY97-99), the implementation of which
proceeded closely as planned. The main objectives of the last CAS (deepening structural
reforms to foster competition; human capital development towards middle-income
standards; modernization of key infrastructure services, and environmental management)
were met, with the exception that the pace of private investment remained gradual.
v.
The lending program proposed for FY2000-02 maintains the level of commitments
of previous years, averaging about US$200 million per year. It would sustain the change
in the mix of instruments begun with the last CAS, with fewer traditional projects and
more sector investment loans and adaptable programs loans. The lending program would
be applied flexibly, especially regarding the share of policy-based operations, depending
on the speed of reforms and the possible impact of fluctuations in the external
environment.
vi. Given Tunisia's access to external finance, the Government places greater weight
on policy dialogue than on the level of financing. To that end, the proposed strategy
emphasizes, even more than in the last CAS, non-lending services, analytical work and
seminars, with a view to broadening our dialogue and increasing the role of civil society
in the development process. The use of sector approaches, dialogue on the reform
program, and innovative projects in new areas would also serve as catalyst for bilateral
funding and private investments, thus complementing external finance available to the
country. Core performance indicators and intermediate milestones for assessing CAS
effectiveness are summarized in Tables 8 and 9 in the text.
vii. The strategy put forth in this document is subject to risks that include: (a) the
dependence of foreign exchange earnings on sources exposed to a foreseeable shock
(textile exports) or fluctuations (tourism and workers' remittances); (b) fiscal risks from
budget rigidities and contingent liabilities; (c) periodic droughts; and (d) the ability of
domestic manufacturing sector to adjust to competition from tariff-free imports. It is
expected that these risks would be mitigated by Tunisia's track record of sound economic
management and, correspondingly, the readiness of its partners, including the Bank
Group, to provide appropriate assistance.
viii. The following issues, given their importance to the proposed strategy, are
suggested for Board discussion:
*
*

consistency of the assistance program with Tunisia's development challenges;
shift in assistance instruments towards non-lending services linked to sector
investment lending operations.

I. COUNTRYCONTEXT
A. THE SETTING: LONG-TERM PROGRESS
1.
Tunisia has been a member of the World Bank Group in good standing since 1958.
During this time, the country has pursued equitable development, even in times of crises,
and has registered sound, steady long-term economic performance (Figure 1). Since
independence, real per capita incomes have grown over two and a half times and all
indicators of social and economic well-being have improved significantly: poverty
incidence has dropped from 40% to 7%; almost all children enroll in primary school; life
expectancy has grown from 50 to 70 years; and the status of women has improved
steadily, with women now comprising a third of the labor force.
Figure 1: SELECTED PERFORMANCE INDICATORS

Life Expectancy and Infant MortalityRates
Net PrimarySchool Enrollment
(9 of age gro-'p)
9

~

~

eo

s

00

150

1'"e

.0

00
7o -

o

-

Fm,ala

,,,01155-l

5
c)z

-0ijgt

00

*910

1070

101

1400

195

sos

1990

20~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.

,

079

1975

1900

1505

U.N. Human Development Index
1.000

Poverty Incidence

(Ovlom1=hi9h development)

(% o? Populatlon
below poverty line)

0.900
0.80s
0.695
0.700
0.600

O.S66

0.000
0 400
0.300
0 200

0.000
1980

1975

190s

1997

1990

1

(in 1990 dinars)

1507-0.

1975

1900

1909

1990

l-0

FiscalDeficit/ GDP (%)

RealGNP per capita

1970

'ala

1995

1997

1999

199

1955

2

2.
Women in Tunisia have strong legal rights and privileges, enjoying equal rights in
virtually every respect under the law, including improving provisions for inheritance. The
legal advances from 1992, when Tunisia became the first country in the MENA region to
establish a unit in the Prime Ministry devoted to women's issues, have helped to
strengthen further the socioeconomic position of women in the country. Several
institutions have been established over the years to enhance opportunities for females.
These include:
*

l'Union Nationale de la Femme Tunisienne, which promotes rural education, health
care and micro-enterprise development for women and young girls;
* La Chambre Nationale des Femmes Chefs d'entreprises, which provides management
training and helps women prepare investment proposals;
* Le Centre de Recherche, d'Etude, de Documentation et d'Informnationsur Ia Femme
(CREDIF), a scientific organ of the Ministere des Affaires de la Femme et de la
Famille (MAFF), that maintains a database and conducts studies on women and
tracks the status of women in the country;
- L'Observatoire National de la Femme set up by CREDIF to provide decision- makers
pertinent indicators on the evolution of women's status; and
* La Cellule d'Evaluation d'Impact des Projets de Developpement sur la Femme,
charged to promote the needs of women in development and assess the impact of
development projects on women.
In addition to the advances such as the above, efforts are also being directed to increase
women's access to credit, and to continue lowering the gender gap in high-level jobs in
government and the corporate sector.
3.
Tunisia followed a state-led model of development until the mid-1980s under
President Bourguiba. During that time Tunisia was at the vanguard of countries in the
region in promoting human resources development, with particular emphasis on gender
equity. In the mid-1980s, the economic management doctrine began turning around
when growing financial imbalances, a poor crop year and the collapse of oil prices all
came to a head in 1986, followed a year later by accession to power by President Ben Ali.
Tunisia then initiated economic reforms aimed at: maintaining a stable macroeconomic
framework; improving resource allocation by gradually liberalizing prices, trade and
investment controls; and decreasing the emphasis on the public sector to free up
resources for the private sector. The reforms, supported by a series of Fund and Bank
programs, proceeded at a gradual but steady pace, consolidating past progress further,
although the state continued to keep a prominent position in the economy.
4.
Tunisia is now entering a new phase of development. In 1995 it became the first
country in the region to sign a landmark partnership agreement with the European Union
(EU), including provisions for a phased establishment of a free trade zone for
manufactures over a 12-yearperiod, from 1996 to 2008. The EU agreement will propel
the country towards fuller integration in the world economy. In view of Tunisia's limited
markets, the agreement is critical to stimulating higher growth and to improving further
the country's living standards. But, at the same time, the agreement poses challenges for
Tunisia which go well beyond trade measures. The onset of heightened international

3

competition will require Tunisia to strengthen its human capital base, increase labor
flexibility, and develop a more dynamic private sector. This in turn will put pressure on
the internally driven and directed model of governance so far adopted (see below). Such
considerations are all reflected in Tunisia's Ninth Five-year Development Plan spanning
1997-2001, and are reinforced in the President's electoral program of October 1999. The
Bank's last CAS for Tunisia, presented to the Board in June 1996, also acknowledged the
same considerations and designed a program to begin responding to them.
5.
The new CAS is underpinned by three major activities initiated in FY99. These
included a Social and Structural Review (SSR); an update of Private Sector Assessment
(PSA); and an update of Social Conditions (whose main conclusions are incorporated in
the SSR) all intended to take stock of the reforms that had been under implementation.I
These works form the basis of our assessment of the key challenges ahead for Tunisia
and the proposed Bank program to help address them.
B. KEYCHALLENGESAHAD
6.
With only modest resource endowment, Tunisia has made excellent progress thus
far in terms of economic and social achievements. While accomplishing all these, it
developed a style of economic governance characterized by:
*
*
*
*

*

a consultative approach to making and implementing policy, with private sector and
trade union views incorporated in government deliberations;
a broad-based participatory process in preparing its five-year development plans,
providing major directions on development priorities;
a highly competent and centralized public administration;
a gradual process of designing and implementing economic and social reforms,
emphasizing progressive liberalization and strong focus on smoothing out social costs
of adjustments; and
all the above, under continued close guidance and direction from the central
administration.

7.
The crux of the issue now is whether this model will remain applicable in future.
In the short term, it appears, the model could continue serving the country well. But in
the long term, a premium will need to be put on increased flexibility in a fast evolving
world. Already strains are starting to be felt in infrastructure services, the banking sector,
and the slow response of private investments. Tunisia's past success has also fostered a
large middle class that, with the country's young demographic structure, will press for
more decentralizedgovernance. Employment pressures are now evident, and are likely to
strengthen unless there is greater flexibility in the labor market and new opportunities are
opened. The Government has always adjusted to new challenges in the past. It is aware
of these new demands, and is currently reviewing its response as it prepares its new Tenth
Development Plan. Key challenges are outlined below.

' Report numbers 20163-TUN and 20173-TUN.

4

Heightened InternationalCompetition
8.
Even within the slow pace of economic opening agreed with the EU (12 years), it
had been expected that private investment in Tunisia, and the share of foreign direct
investment therein, would be brisk. In fact, however, private investment increased just
slightly, from 48% of total investment in 1995 to 51% in 1998. In the same period, the
share of foreign direct investment fell from 16% to 12% of total private investment in the
country. The reasons for this slow response of private and foreign investment are
elaborated in the Private Sector Assessment. Basically, the private sector is hamstrung
by complex incentives at the discretion of public officials, costly infrastructure, weak
corporate governance, and lack of training and expertise of lawyers, judges and court
staff expected to handle an ever increasing number of complex business legislation.
Meanwhile, the conditions that made Tunisia's success possible in the recent past are
being fundamentally altered by developments in the international markets.
9.
Tunisian producers will face much stronger competition in their export markets,
following the elimination of the Multi-Fiber Agreements (textiles and leather make up
50% of Tunisian merchandiseexports), and in the local market, with the implementation
of the free trade provisions of the agreement with the EU. Beyond the agreement with
the EU, and those with Egypt, Morocco and Jordan, trade liberalization will need to be
extended on a multilateral basis to avoid distortions associated with partial trade
liberalization. This too will increase competition. In such an atmosphere, rather than the
finely targeted incentives and discretionary interventions used in the past, a predictable
and clear policy environmentwill be more critical to facilitating enterprise adjustment.
10. As another aspect of international competition, the profitability of Tunisian
enterprises will increasinglydepend on the cost and quality of infrastructure and financial
services. The agreement with the EU is expanding access to inputs at world prices to the
on-shore sector of the economy, and thus differences in competitiveness between
Tunisian producers and their competitors will be largely determined by cost and quality
of nontradables. Yet infrastructure services, especially in transport, telecommunications
and information, are provided mostly by the public sector in markets that are neither
competitive nor contested and lag those available to competitors in many other emerging
market economies. While the trade regime in Tunisia has become increasingly
liberalized, progress on trade facilitation has been slow. The administration of customs
clearance, port logistics and procedures, and quality checks overburden resources and
prove costly to both the Government and the private sector.
11.
The financial sector is dominated by the banking system and a strong government
presence within it, with public banks representing 52% of total bank assets and set to
drop to 47.7% under ongoing reforms. In addition, despite important progress in the
liberalization of the financial sector (e.g. in 1996, mandatory lending requirements to
priority sectors and central bank rediscounting facilities at preferential rates 'were
eliminated) some interest rate restrictions on deposits remain, and the central bank's
priority refinancing facilities for certain sectors of the economy (e.g. agriculture) still
influence bank credit allocation.

5

12. The problems of the financial sector in recent years have included the large size of
non-performing loans in bank portfolios and the weakness of their capital base. The
share of bad loans in total commitments in banks decreased from 37% in 1993 to 24.4%
in 1999,2 but remains large as a share of GDP (8.4% in 1999). And while private banks
have generally exceeded the minimum capital adequacy requirement, public banks had
generally remained undercapitalized with an average capital adequacy ratio estimated at
4.7 % at the end of 1997. Since then, public banks have been strengthening their capital
base towards satisfactory levels in terms of prudential norms.
13. Government has recently taken steps to restructure the non-performing loans of
state owned enterprises, which accounted for about one third of total non-performing
loans. For non-performing loans of the private sector, Government has established the
framework to create private loan recovery agencies. One such agency was created very
recently and has already recovered 90 million dinars. Given the size of the nonperforming loans, however, sustained vigilance will be essential for this mechanism to
prove effective, and sound governance will be crucial in future to avoid a recurrence of
this problem.
14. On governance, the authorities are committed to strengthening operations and
management further by overhauling the banking law, tightening bank supervision,
merging selected development banks with commercial banks, and privatization. The
authorities also plan to soon adopt a new bank accounting framework in line with
international standards, and establish a more reliable and efficient inter-bank payments
system. When implemented, such measures would improve the services provided to
private businesses by increasing both competition among banks and their ability to
assume commercial risks. However, bringing the quality and choice of financial services
available to private enterprisesin Tunisia to the level available to competitors will require
a more deep-rooted liberalization of the financial sector, including entry of foreign banks.
Upholding Social Cohesion
15. Social achievements and equity are among Tunisia's greatest assets, which have
distinguished it from other countries in the region and ensured internal cohesion. With
increasing international competition and closer integration with Europe, the enhancement
of those achievements are more important now with the presence of a strong middle class
(nearly 80% of the country's population) and a young population (64% of the population
under 35 years of age). This can be accomplished via: (i) further reduction of poverty
and particularly vulnerability, (ii) spreading high-quality education and health care, (iii)
employment growth and (iv) a sustainable and effective social protection system.
16. Further Poverty Reduction. Tunisia has had an impressive record of poverty
reduction over the years (see Box I below). Indeed, even in the process of severe
stabilization in the mid-1980s, the government's program promoted growth via laborintensive export activities and safeguarded its traditional pro-poor expenditure policies.
The decreasehas beenfasterfor commercialbanks,whereinthe proportionof doubtfulclaimsin
total commitmentsdroppedfrom 34%in 1993to 17.3%in 1999.
2

6

Box 1: PROGRESS IN POVERTY ALLEVIATION
Dimensionof Poverty.Tunisiahas hadan impressiverecordof povertyreductionoverthe years,cuttingthe incidenceof
poverty(usingthe nationalpovertyline) from40%in 1960to 11%by 1985andfurtherto 7.4%by 1990. At thesametime,
the growth rate of populationdeclinedand life expectancyincreasedmarkedly,regionaldisparitieswere reduced,and
improvements
achievedin education,
accessto healthcareandbasicinfrastructure.
Thedistributionof incometoo improved
whenthe Gini Coefficientfell from0.434 in 1985to 0.401in 1990. Between1990and 1995,the latest year for which
householdconsumptiondataareavailable,the incidenceof povertyhoveredaroundthe 7 percentmark,eventhoughreal
GDP per capita grew over3 percentper year. In absoluteterm the numberof poorincreasedfrom 600,000in 1990to
690,000in 1995.Giventhatthe distribution
of consumption
is quitesteepnearthe povertyline, manyhouseholds
can be
vulnerableto slidingbackinto lowincomes.
Poverty Reduction: Recent Trends
12T

T044

11.2
112

- 043

8

+

4

74

7.6

74

\

76

t04A2

N No

t O42

o f P o o r, in

(ihs)

4Chrcvry o t
2

o

In T

_ t0702 ;t-

°
1985

t1990

Pov
;

e

I;;-y;:00
1995

rmaiy a
0.40i:
: t . -.
039

.

+

no

(hs

n i

ncidence,

o

°39G in i C o e ffic ie n t o f
in c o m e d is tr ib u tio n
( r h s)

Characteristics of th7epoor. In Tunisia, poverty remains primarily a rural phenomenon: in 1995, the incidence of rural

povertywas 13.9%compared
to 3.6%inurbanareas,andmorethan70%of the poorlive in ruralareas.Geographically,
the
incidenceof povertyis highestin the mountainousNorth-West,and abovethe nationalaveragein the hilly and desert
areas of the Center-Westandthe South. On averagethe poorhouseholds,bothurbanand rural, have morehousehold
members,and in particularmorechildren,than the non-poorhouseholds.
Thereis also a strongassociationbetweenlack
of humancapitaland povertyin both ruralandurbanareas(over60%of poorhouseholdheadshave noformaleducation
comparedto about 40%for non-poorhouseholds).
Poorruralhouseholdsengagedin productionactivitiestypicallyhave
accessto land, but their landholdings
are small(averaging2 hectares),rarelyirrigated,and oftenexhibitlow productivity,
especiallyin rain-fed areas.The urban poor are mostly wage earnersin low-skilloccupations. They face thin job
prospectsas employmentopportunities
havebeenshiftingtowardhigherskills while,owingto highdropoutratesfromthe
primaryschoolsystem,the ranksof unskilledworkingagepopulationhavegrown.
Key Issues. Tunisiahas beencommitted
to pro-poorpoliciesthroughoutits developmentprogramvia extensivehealth,
educationand basicinfrastructure
coverage,integratedruraldevelopment
programsin the poorestareas,wide array of
public interventions,includingmicro-credit,social type fund, and food subsidies. Currentissues are: (i) povertyhas
reacheda hardcore nexus; (ii) programshave becomecostlyand sometimesduplicative;and (iii) the issueof relative
povertyis becomingmorecomplex.Withdemographicshifts,issuesareshiftingtowardurbanareas(unemployment
and
idle youths), issues of quality in education (high drop out rates, especially among girls) and shifts in health patterns and
coverage. In addition, there is a need to review the financial viability of the social protection strategy of the country.
Interventionsto reach the hard core poor also need to shift towards decentralized and NGO outreach efforts, with focus
on increased participation of the low-income communities themselves.

Link with Bank Group Program. The Bank has been an active partner in the whole human development effort of the
Government,with strong focus on participatoryapproaches in rural areas and in developing programs in poor and marginal
regions. Ongoing activities with specific poverty focus include the North West Mountainous Development Project, the
Forestry Project and the Natural ResourcesManagement Project. This focus will continue in all our new rural development
projects, including the Water Management and the AgriculturalSupport Services projects under preparation. Over the CAS
period, we also intend shifting our approach progressivelytowards the urban poor and unemployed, and take a broader
approach to poverty reduction, namely, focus on growth and employment issues, followed by refinement and greater
coverage of the social protection system. We will also focus on quality issues in education, and shifting health patters.
Finally, we will maintainthe outreachand participatoryapproachesaireadyinitiated in our recent rural projects.

Although poverty in Tunisia is low and comparable with higher income countries,
between 199O and 1995, the latest year for which household consumption data are
available, the incidence of poverty (using the national poverty line) hovered around the 7
percent mark, even though real GDP per capita grew over 3 percent a year. Thus,
contrary to past performance, economic growth in the first half of the 1990s did not lead
to further significant reduction of the incidence of poverty. It is not clear whether this

7

marked a change in the pattern of growth in Tunisia, or whether it was only a transitory
phenomenon, linkedto large weather fluctuations.
17. More effective anti-povertyinterventions will require more timely and more widely
shared information, as well as closer involvement of the affected communities in the
design and management of anti-poverty interventions. That poverty incidence remained
around 7 percent despite rapid economic growth in the first half of the 1990s is not
surprising, because targeting anti-poverty interventions becomes harder as poverty
incidence falls. Yet, informationon the characteristics of the poor, the causes of poverty,
and the relationship between skills and opportunities has not been widely available thus
far, despite efforts to collect household-level data. This information is expected to be
available following the census planned for next year.
18. Two other aspects of the poverty situation now cause concern in Tunisia. One is
the appearance of poverty in urban fringe areas, and of large segments of young
graduates not finding jobs. The other is a recently observed increase in vulnerability, as
measured by the number of people having expenditures about 30% above the poverty
line. Thus defined, the share of vulnerable in total population rose from 14% in 1990 to
17% in 1995 (from 1.1 million to 1.5 million people). The challenge thus is to address
the remaining structural determinants of poverty by promoting community-based
interventions and increasing the efficiency of the social protection mechanisms to avert
slide-backs of those already out of poverty.
19. Education and Health Care. From a broader perspective of social betterment,
Tunisia--in view of its limited market and resources-has rightly placed great emphasis on
the development of its human resource base, in particular education and health.
Following on the issue highlighted in the last CAS, education completion rates have
improved somewhat but are still considered low. A great challenge in basic education is
ensuring that children entering each cycle complete their school satisfactorily, with an
adequate minimum level of quality and an emphasis on excellence for all.
20. Tunisia's public health system provides free or highly subsidized health care to
40% to 50% of the population, though only 7% fall below the poverty line. Yet, public
health services are under-financed, available resources are not efficiently used, and the
quality of services does not meet the population's expectations. The organization of the
health sector and the health insurance mechanisms are fragmented and financially nonviable. These challenging deficiencies require strategies to improve efficiency in resource
allocation and utilization,enhance the quality of services, and ensure the sustainability of
the health system. This will also require careful integration of the private sector in
financing and providing health services.
21. Employment and Labor Market. At around 16% overall, unemployment remains
high,3 especially for first-timejob seekers and new graduates, despite a decade of robust
Tunisianlaborstatisticscounta setof inactivepeople,mostlyhouseholdworkers,as unemploved,
althoughtheywouldnotbe countedas suchelsewhere.Thlistendsto overestimatethe numberof
unemployed.Applyingthe measurement of unemploymentcommonlyusedin other countriesto the 1989
3

S
growth and job creation and fairly stable participation rates. Compared to the early 1980s
when only 60% of annual additional demand for jobs could be met, Tunisia currently
meets around 90% of such demand. But, the pressure for jobs is expected to intensify
over the next five to ten years with an impending bulge in the working age population
and in the output of higher education institutions (Figure 2). The Government is acutely
aware of this issue, which the President has termed the nation's "absolute priority". Thus
labor market policies in Tunisia now face two main challenges-.(i) facilitating efficient
employment creation for new job seekers; and (ii) reducing the costs of adj'ustmentsand
competition on workers through efficient labor market programs, such as public works,
unemployment benefits, employment services and training.
Figure 2: TR-ENDSIN LABOR FORCE AND GRADUATEENROLLMENTS

6.000 -

405000 B55000-

2c 6.0

E305000 255000

4.000 -

~~~~~~~~~~~W
205000 1~~~~~~~~~~~55000

0 3.000-

~~~3.000

-

2.000 -

i 05000

Year

I

~~~~~~55000~~

22. Social Protection. Tunisia's social protection system compares favorably with
those of many countries with higher income levels. But it needs to be more efficient, cost
effective, affordable and adapt to new needs of the economy. Social insurance benefits
(pension, health insurance and family allowance) are available to the working population
through membership, and the system covers about 80% of the labor force. Contributions
are adjusted periodically to maintain financial equilibrium. But the system involves
inefficient cross-subsidizationamong various benefits (pension and family allowance).
The progressiveaging of the work force, coupled with poorly designed pension parameters,
will likely imply increase in expenditures,which will in turn require h~igherpayroll taxes or
budget transfers in the fuiture unless structural reforms to promote long-term private
savings (e.g., non-mandatory private supplementary pension schemes) are introduced to
safeguard the long-term fiscal viability of the social insurance system.
23. Finally, although social assistance programs (particularly direct transfers) are propoor and continue to play an important role in poverty alleviation, their targeting needs to
be improved. These programs involve high administrative costs and there is scope for
improving their coverage. The remaining challenges include: (i) developing a unified
framework for social assistance programs, and (ii)exploring partnerships with other
agencies and the civil society at large to implement the programs.

data indicated a lower unemploymentrate of about 11.2% as compared to the official rate of 16.2%. This
said, high unemployment remains an issuefor first-timejob seekers.

9

Sustaining Environmental Protection

24. The growth of industry, tourism and vehicle traffic, which are concentrated along
the coast, accompanied by the rapid growth of Tunisia's urban population (from 36% of
total in 1960 to 50% in 1975 and an estimated 60%-65% at present), have combined to
exert tremendous pressure on the country's land and water resources, and have
contributed to the increase of air pollution in the coastal cities. A key priority is water in
view of Tunisia's limited resources. The water sector has always been at the center of
Government's development agenda. Its strategic importance is more pronounced in
agriculture, which consumes 85% of water resources. As such, it has benefited from
considerable public investments, which have translated into major water mobilization
infrastructure thereby reducing the country's vulnerability to irregular rainfall, bringing
irrigation potential to nearly 350,000 hectares, and potable water to meet the demands of
close to 80% of rural households, all urban households, tourism and industry.
25. A strong institutional setup and legislative framework, coupled with a strong
sustainable development policy, has also brought Tunisia to the forefront of the MENA
Region in natural resources management and environmental protection. Annex B 11
elaborates Tunisia's achievements in this area. While these efforts have provided
important gains, it has become clear to Government that if current trends persist, water
supply will be insufficient to meet growing demand by 2015 as, by then, Tunisia would
have mobilized its full potential while demand for water would continue to increase. In
this context, the challenge will be to act on a recently adopted new vision, the main
principles of which are to move from resource mobilization to demand management,
integrated management of ground and surface water, and water conservation. An
additional challenge would be to mainstream environment in the transport and tourism
sectors by decreasing the sulfur and lead content in fuel oil and gasoline respectively, and
by assisting in the development of integrated coastal zone management of the tourist
cities.
Upgrading Governance

26. The Tunisian government has developed a strong consultative approach and gone a
long way to ensure debate and participation in its economic decision making process.
But this process is mostly directed by the central administration. External contestability
has been subdued, due to security concerns caused by instability in neighboring countries
and a weak press. With the strong results in favor of President Ben Ali in the presidential
elections of October 1999, the emergence of a large and stable middle class, and the
easing of regional tensions, conditions seem right for a more active participation of civil
society in the development process. This development will be vital to promote stronger
governance in a more open environment, and all the more crucial as social tensions are
bound to occur during this transition.
27. The outsiders' image of the country's governance is that the system is overly
controlling and close-knit, increasingly at variance with the needs of a growing middle
class and globalizing economy. However, by and large, the rule of law prevails, a
consultation mechanism on economic issues exists, albeit centrally-orchestrated, and the

10

population values the all-round stability and prosperity engendered by successive
governments. Corruption has not posed any major risk to Bank Group projects so far,
and national and international surveys indicate that the extent of corruption has remained
ielatively low. Nonetheless, even minor perception of corruption is worrisome. The
government will need to address this issue through (i) a more transparent business
environment, (ii) a broadening of dialogue with the private sector, and (iii) progressive
engagement with the civil society.
28. It will also be crucial to ensure scrutiny of public policies in a transparent and open
manner. While the Tunisian administration has always enjoyed a strong reputation of
competence and propriety, much remains to be done to simplify bureaucratic procedures
and ensure a fair playing field, necessary to attract a much higher level of private
investments. In addition, there is a need to ease up information disclosure and
dissemination policies and to enable formation and functioning of independent research
bodies and think tanks. The Government recognizes these challenges and is starting to
open up its development programs to NGOs and local participation, while studying ways
to decentralize decision-making progressively, and streamline the business environment
for private investments. Furthermore, Government has moved to increase the
transparency of policies, including through the publication of the vIF Staff Report for
the 1999 Article IV Consultation, the participation in the IIM pilot project on the
transparency of economic policies and the intention to subscribe to the IMP's Special
Data Dissemination Standards.
29. In the end, a more open and diverse civil society could greatly contribute to
meeting successfully the challenges posed by the changing external environment, the
remaining incidence of poverty, the aspirations of Tunisia's middle class and its younger
generations entering the labor force. Tunisia has in fact demonstrated its flexibility and
capacity to learn from and absorb lessons of experience, but always in its own cultural
context, wherein social consensus is a key characteristic. This is what the Bank has to
work with and listen to, for it has ensured social stability and continuity in decision
making, and has underpinned the country's solid record of economic management so
important to future prospects and risks.
II. MACROECONOMICPERFORMANCE,PROSPECTSAND RISKS
A. RECENTECONOMICPERFORMANCE

30. In the absence of major shocks, Tunisia was able to register sound economic
growth in recent years, marked by a balanced macroeconomic stance, and backed by
productive investment in social and physical infrastructure. Overall, during 1997-99, the
first three years of its ongoing 9 th Plan (1997-2001), the country improved upon the
outturn of the 8thPlan (1992-1996). Real GDP per capita grew an average 4% a year in
1997-99 (compared to 3% during 1992-1996). This was not sufficient, however, to make
a dent in the rate of unemployment,which remained around 16% in the period.

I1

31. On the financial side in 1997-99, fiscal consolidationefforts were kept up. Despite
the onset of tariff cuts in the context of the EU agreement, annual fiscal deficits averaged
3.6% of GDP (3.7% during 1992-1996), and the external current account deficit averaged
3.2% of GDP (5% during 1992-1996). Inflation dropped to average 3.3% a year (4.9%
during 1992-1996). The limited exposure of the economy to short-term capital flows
helped Tunisia endure the turmoil in international capital markets. When conditions
hardened in 1998, the country refrained from borrowing; this decision was helped by
proceeds from privatization of two cement plants, finance available from official sources
(including from the World Bank) and use of official reserves. Official reserves thus
declined from about 3 months to 2.2 months of imports of goods and services at the end
of 1998, but turned up to an estimated 2.4 months of imports of goods and services by the
end of 1999. External debt amounted to an estimated US$10.8 billion at the end of 1999,
equivalent to about 51% of GDP, down from about 60% of GDP in the early 1990s. Short
term debt was about US$ 1.1billion at end-1999, equal to 1.3months of imports.
B. EXTERNALENviRoNENT ANDECONOMICOUTLOOK
32. As a small open economy in an increasingly global world economy, Tunisia's
external environment over the medium term is likely to be characterized by a mix of
better trading opportunities and stronger global competition, satisfactory growth
performance in Europe--the main trading partner--in the short term, uncertainty about
future developments on international financial markets, and emerging hopes of stability
in the country's immediateneighborhood.
33. Against this backdrop, and the risks described below (see paragraph 44), Tunisia's
macroeconomic performance over the medium term will be mostly conditioned by the
country's policy response to the growing competition facing it, especially as, starting in
2000, a progressive industrial displacement will arise with the next round of tariff
adjustments under the agreement with the EU. This will in particular require a major
overhaul of the business environmentand incentives regime, as discussed earlier.
Medium-term Prospects
34. Base case scenario. The base case scenario envisages that the structural reforms
introduced in the second half of the ending decade would be sustained, and that policy
measures in the government's ongoing reform programs in the financial, trade, and
transport sectors would be fully implemented. With such measures as well as broader
ones to improve overall governance and the private sector incentive framework, the base
case scenario assumes that private sector confidence in the policy environment would
improve--or at the minimum be maintained--so that investment intentions would remain
high. It is expected the government would continue supporting private firms to upgrade
their capacities and shift attention increasingly to improving the business environment for
all existing and potential firms. The privatization programwould be pursued as in recent
years and would generate sufficient foreign investment, though not on a consistent basis.
35. The overall productivityof the economy--total factor productivity growth--could be
maintained at recent levels of 1.5 percent to 1.9 percent. The investment to GDP ratio is
likely to increase slightly from its current level of 28.9%, due to ongoing projects under

12
the 9h Plan and private investments to upgrade capacities in the manufacturing sector.
Public and private savings would increase so that, as a ratio to GDP, the current account
deficit would not widen dramatically. In the absence of major shocks to the economy,
and provided there is adequate policy response to the competitive pressures and an
improved business environment, during the CAS period, real GDP may grow on average
in the range of 5 to 6 percent per year, similar to the growth path of the late 1990s.
Table 1: SELECTED MACROECONOMICINDICATORS

Actual
Est.
Projected
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
GrowthRates (%)
Real GDP
RealConsumptionpercapita
ExportVolume,GNFS
IrnportVolume,GNFS
GDPdeflator
Ratiosto GDP(%)
GrossDomesticInvestment
GrossDomesticSavings
FiscalBalance(excl.grants)
ExternalCurrentBalance

7.1
2.5
-0.8
-3.3
4.4

5.4
2.9
10.5
8.9
4.0

25.0
23.5
-5.1
-2.6

26.7
24.2
-4.2
-3.3

5.0
3.3
3.9
4.2
3.6
27.5
24.5
-2.8
-3.4

6.2 5.6
4.1 4.6
4.2 4.7
6.4 5.8
3.4 3.6
28.9
26.0
-3.7
-2.9

5.7
4.3
5.1
5.5
3.6

28.9
25.5
-3.2
-3.7

5.8
4.0
6.0
5.6
3.6

29.0 29.1
25.2 25.3
-3.0 -3.0
-4.0 -3.9

36. The fiscal picture, while sustainable, would still exhibit rigidity in public
expenditures due to the large size of the wage bill (30% of all expenditures in 1999).
Monetary policy is likely to maintain a tight stance, keeping CPI inflation around 3
percent and the exchange rate would be managed flexibly to keep the real exchange rate
constant. With a sound macroeconomicframework and the continued implementation of
structural reforms, Tunisia should be able to mobilize sufficient external resources to
meet its financing needs (see Table 2).
Table 2: MEDIUM-TERMFINANCING PLAN: BASE CASE (US$ Million)

Actual

Financing Needs

CurrentAccountDeficita/
Debt Amortization
ReservesAccumulationb/
Financing Sources

Est.

Projected

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

1892

1892

1523

1975

2704

2225

2284

513
982
397

615
941
336

680
1030
-187

618
1072
284

845
1394
465

979
1040
206

1050
1027
207

1892

1892

1523

1975

2704

2225

2284

MLTLoans
1506 1481
856 1467 2062 1627
Multilateral
504 352
302
551
683
575
Of which: IBRD
202
127
141
209
210
190
OfficialBilateral
181
335
172
531
598 551
PrivateCreditors
821
794
382
385
781
501
ForeignDirectlnvestment
261
355
697_1 411
532
480
CapitalGrants
46
95
82
85
110
118
STCapital&Adjustments
79
-39 -112
11
0
0
a/ Excludesofficialtransfers(grants),whichare shownamongfinancingsources.
b/Includesrepurchasesfromthe IIM'F.
c/Includes$359millionfromsale of two cementplants.

1643
523
192
472
648
515
126
0

13

The size of non-debt creating private financing (mainly foreign direct investment) will,
however, depend on privatization efforts, and the cost of debt-creating private financing
will depend in part on developments in other emerging market economies. In the base
case scenario, the debt to GDP ratio is projected to continue declining to about 48% in
2002, helped by continuing efforts at fiscal consolidation. After peaking in the year
2000, external debt service ratios are expected to decrease from 2001, thereby freeing
foreign exchange and permitting an increase of reserves to a level equivalent to 2.6
months of imports of goods and services (from an estimated 2.4 months at the end of
1999).
37. Low case scenario. The Tunisian economy faces a number of risks and
vulnerabilities described in the next section. If one or more of these risks were to
materialize and persist, the outlook of the economy may change. In addition to the
shocks to which the economy can be 3ubiected in the short to medium term, the
implementation of structural policies has important bearing on medium-term outlook. In
this regard, the Government's track record is encouraging and, from all indications, the
policy stance remains in favor of continued reforms.
38. If reform efforts were slowed down, however, a low case scenario could result.
First, for example, doubts about foreign competition in the banking sector might slow the
ongoing liberalization of that sector. Second, the privatization program might be slowed
if conditions offered by international investors are not deemed attractive by the
authorities, or if a worsening of labor market outcomes heightens labor union opposition
to privatization. Third, if some domestic firms fail to adjust to increased competition,
their ability to repay their bank loans will be impaired, there may be some output loss,
and employment opportunities may be reduced. A slow industrial restructuring would
decrease further opportunities for reducing the inflexibilityof fiscal expenditures if--in an
atmosphere of sluggish employment--the government were inclined to postpone actions
to reduce the relative size of the civil service.
39. In the low case scenario, real GDP growth could decline to around 4 percent per
year. Moreover, if borrowing conditions on international markets remain tight, Tunisia
would face difficulties in meeting its financing needs. Foreign direct investment would
be lower as a result of slow privatization and limited investment opportunities. Attempts
to tap into external reserves would risk increasing the vulnerability of the country to
sudden reversals of capital flows. Above all, a low case outcome would jeopardize the
prospects for job growth in the country. Indeed, to meet the priority objective of
reducing unemployment, Tunisia needs to transition onto a higher economic growth path.
40. High Case scenario. In some year(s) of the CAS period, real GDP growth could
be higher than in the base case, given exogenous factors such as good agricultural
production and favorable ecoromic conditions in the EU. Favorable economic conditions
in the EU would increase both external demand for Tunisia's products (due to higher
purchasing power in export markets), and domestic demand (through higher workers
remittances).

14
41. Higher growth can be induced, beyond the CAS period, if the policy groundwork is
laid now for private domestic and foreign investment to respond to dramatic
improvements in the business and regulatory environment. Were the country to
accelerate and deepen structural reforms to improve rapidly its competitiveness in a
stable macroeconomic framework during the CAS period, economic growth could be
sustained subsequently at more than 6 percent in the mediumto long term.
42. The policy bulwark for an eventual high growth scenario would involve the
authorities moving swiftly to implement the structural reforms that are underway,
including privatization of public enterprises and strengthening of the banking sector
through a combination of increased liberalization, privatization,and tighter regulation. In
addition, the authorities would introduce quickly new structural reforms to: improve the
business environment for all existing and potential firms; improve access to credit,
particularly for small and medium enterprises (SME); and strengthen the civil service
while reducing state intervention in the economy. On the macroeconomic front, the
authorities would adopt measures to strengthen the monitoring of contingent liabilities, as
well as external risks and vulnerability. Government would also adopt a strategy for
assets and liabilities management that is consistent with the evolving borrowing
conditions on the internationalfinancial markets.
43. Financing needs are likely to increase in the high case to meet greater import (for
productive investments) and reserve requirements (to reduce vulnerability to external
shocks). But these financing needs could be met readily from non-debt creating and
debt-creating sources alike. Privatization revenues could be higher than in the base case
scenario by as much as US$100 million a year. International financial markets, to which
Tunisia has good access, would be more likely to lend larger amounts at lower spreads to
the country (provided there are no overwhelming adverse developments in other
emerging market economies). Higher official lending is also likely to be available to
finance faster and deeper reforms.
Risks and Vulnerabilities

44. From the macroeconomicangle, the main uncertainties affecting Tunisia would be:
(i) the dependence of foreign exchange earnings on one dominant market (the EU
represents nearly 80 percent of Tunisia's exports), and on sources that are subject either
to a foreseeable shock (textile export earnings with the phase-out of the MFA) or to
fluctuations (tourism receipts and workers' remittances); (ii) the adequacy of foreign
exchange reserves in the event of significant shocks; (iii) fiscal risks from budget
rigidities and contingent liabilities; and (iv) vulnerability to droughts.
45. The authorities have been addressing the first element of risk and vulnerability by
gradually diversifying the export base. Following the EU partnership agreement, the
government is pursuing bilateral trade agreements so as to allow for a geographical
diversification of trade (such agreements have been signed with Egypt, Morocco and
Jordan). Regarding the second element, the authorities plan to increase the country's
foreign exchange reserves. Tunisia will therefore require access to foreign capital to
finance current account deficits that may arise from increased competition and to meet

15

reserve targets. Yet, while Tunisia has reasonable access to international financial
markets, borrowing conditionsfor emerging markets remain volatile. A large increase in
Tunisia's borrowing requirementscould therefore lead not only to an increase in external
indebtedness, but also to a deterioration in the external debt profile by rates and possibly
by maturity, unless privatizationis speeded up to generate higher income.
46. The third element of risk is due to the fact that fiscal consolidation could be
hampered by the weight and rigidity of the government wage bill and interest expenses
and also possibly burdened by contingent liabilities. Together, the government wage bill
and interest expenses take up 50% of total revenue, with the wage bill unlikely to decline
in the near term. The government has tried to limit net hiring, but this has been difficult
in the face of pressure for new personnel in the social sectors. A more effective measure
in this regard would need to be through a comprehensivecivil service reform.
47. As to contingent liabilities,the 1996 budget had to take on TD969 million (5.2% of
GDP) generated by consumer subsidy policy. In 1998, bad loans of state enterprises,
amounting to about TD800 million (3.5% of GDP), had to be assumed. In future, as
elaborated in the SSR, contingent liabilities could arise from five potential sources: the
banking system, government guarantees, the social security system, insurance funds, and
public enterprises. Regulatory weaknesses that could lead to the occurrence of
contingent liabilities in the future have been ameliorated in recent years, including by
measures agreed under the ECAL II. These steps could be reinforced with the
establishment of one focal point in the Tunisian administration for the early identification
and monitoring of contingent liabilities, as increased competition heightens the risk that
some contingent liabilities may become actual liabilities.
48 The fourth element of risk and vulnerability is due to the fact that the Tunisian
economy is subject to large fluctuations in agricultural production, which in turn depend
heavily on weather conditions. The impact of fluctuations of agricultural production on
overall GDP remains strong, even though the average share of the agricultural sector in
GDP has been declining and the dependence of agriculture on rainfall has eased, in part
owing to increased reliance on irrigation. Drought years in Tunisia also influence the
import bill for cereals in particular. While such a risk clearly exists, temporary increases
in cereal imports have been accommodated easily in the past with the country's financial
reserves, given that cereal imports account, even in drought years, for at most five
percent of imports.
1II. TUNISIA'S DEVELOPMENT

AGENDA AND THE BANK'S CAS

A. TUNISIA'S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

49. Tunisia's development agenda for the medium term is contained in its 9th
Development Plan covering the period 1997-2001. The main elements of the
Government's program in the 9thPlan are:
*

modernizing and gradually opening up the economyto competition;

16
* maintaining macroeconomicstability; and
* strengthening the social agenda and environmental management.
50. The Government has deployed partnership agreement with the EU as an important
reform measure and signal to introduce competition in Tunisia. Having brought financial
imbalances and inflation under control, Tunisia's strategy for sustaining macroeconomic
stability involves steady reduction of fiscal deficits to a level comparable to its principal
trading partner, the EU, and cautious monetary policies to ensure low inflation and a
viable balance of payments. In implementingthe liberalization reforms, the government's
overriding concern is to avert major reversals in the country's many achievements to-date
on the social and environmental fronts. Accordingly, the 9 th Plan aspires to higher levels
of employment, improved educationattainment rates, financial sustainability of the health
and social security systems, and enhancement of environmental conservation and natural
resource management.
51. After extensive mid-termreview of the 9thPlan last year, the objectives of the Plan
were reaffirmed and refined in October 1999 in a major policy announcement by the
President, who outlined the following priorities:
*

*

*

*

*
*
*

Increasing employment, in particular to cater to a labor supply bulge expected during
2000-04. A National Employment Fund, to be financed by voluntary donations,
privatization proceeds and the government budget, has been established to assist job
seekers with training, work programs and seed capital to set up businesses. To
underpin job growth, a drastic simplification of administrative procedures for
establishing businesses is envisaged, along with an acceleration of the privatization
program and greater encouragementof foreign investment.
Consolidating education reforms and attainments, especially at the basic level,
preventing drop-out from schools before the age of sixteen, strengthening pre-school
education, and promoting facilities for distance learning.
Intensifying investment in information technology and telecommunications, and
raising investment in scientific and technological research to 1 percent of GDP in five
years (from a currently estimated rate of around 0.5 percent of GDP).
Increasing the competitiveness of the economy to meet the challenges of
globalization while augmenting employment and incomes. This would be pursued
with further economicreforms, stable finances, and increased investment, particularly
in the private sector.
Continuation of poverty reduction measures, including improved access to basic
services and greater coverage of social security arrangements.
Upholding the equality of women in all walks of life, preserving the importance of
family, and promoting cultural activities.
Encouraging regional growth with increased public investments in the regions,
provision of fiscal incentives to private investors there, and extending regional
autonomy in economic affairs.

52. Tunisia's development objectives and priorities are consistent with its situation.
They are also realistic and attainable, given the country's solid track record and its strong
macroeconomic fiundamentals,marked by steady long-term growth of per capita incomes

17
and low inflation. What is at issue principally is the speed and spread of reforms,
especially in freeing up the private sector and in deregulating public monopolies.
Provided the incentives and the business environment are streamlined radically, as the
Presidential program listed above indicates, both the domestic and foreign private sector
would respond to the opportunities for investment and growth in the country.
53. The liberalization and upgrading of service monopolies is critical to the country's
competitive performance in international markets. Tunisia's proximity to Europe is a
major advantage, but high transport costs and outdated communications and information
technology reduce their competitive edge. The private sector can help contribute to the
State's development of trade-related infrastructure, particularly in transport and
telecommunications. Again, with priority accorded to this issue in the Presidential
program, there should be good prospects for renewed efforts to vitalize critical services.
In this regard, it is noteworthythat the government has now officially launched a mise a
niveau program for the services sector, aiming to raise standards to international norms as
Tunisia prepares to open the sector to foreign competition.
B. INPLEMENTATION

54.
*

OF BANK GROUP'S PREVIOUS CAS

In the last CAS period (FY97-99),the Bank program was designed to support:
structural reforms that would: strengthen the government's commitment to
competition, create a policy environment that opens up activities to the private sector
in production/provision of goods and services, and enable enterprises to compete on
an equal footing with foreign companies. This element of Bank strategy was
anchored in Tunisia's partnership agreement with the EU and has been implemented
in close working relationshipwith the EU-;

* human capital development to move Tunisia towards middle income country
standards of education attainment rates, qualified manpower, and financially sound
health and social security systems;
* modernization of services that would improve efficiency in key areas, especially
transportation and banking, and that would improve the delivery of technical and
agricultural support services; and
e

environmental management and the application of appropriate values for scarce
natural resources.

55. In delivering the above program, the last CAS had intended to: (a) shift lending
instruments towards fewer traditional projects and more sector investment loans, and (b)
place greater emphasis on non-lending instruments. The aggregate turnout in terms of
lending amounts and instruments was close to what had been intended, as shown below
in Table 3. An active program of non-lending services was also delivered, including 18
reports, sector notes and workshops covering trade, private sector development, public
expenditures, public administration, education, NGO participation, transport, water and
agriculture. In addition, grant-funded activities (PHD, GEF, IDF and METAP) helped
to prepare projects, carry out pilot projects or complement economic and sector work.

18
And an Information Center was established at the Library of the Law and Economics
University in Tunis.
Table 3: EVOLUTION OF BANK LENDING INSTRUMENTS IN LAST CAS
FY90-96
Period before
Last CAS
Traditional Projects
Policy-based Operations
Sector Investment Loans
Loan Commitments
Total during Period
Average Annual

Last CAS Period
(FY97-99)
Planned
Actual

(In Percent of Total Comraiitments)
54
25
14
33
25
36
13
50
50
(In US$ Million at current prices)
1383
659
658
198
220
219

56. As detailed below, the implementation of the last CAS was by and large on track
and satisfactory. Also, OED reviews during the period confirmed satisfactory outcomes
of completed projects. However, while the reform program supported during the last
CAS has been broadly appropriate, there is concern that the pace of adjustment should
have been faster to foster increased private investments. The main achievements and
shortcomings in the four principal elements of the Bank Group program in FY97-99 are
summarized below. Additional information on Bank Group performance is listed in
Annex B9a.
57. Deepening Structural Reforms. The Bank financed three operations (ECAL 1FY97, ECAL II-FY99 and an Export Development Project-FY99) in the last CAS period
to support trade policy reforms and to promote privatization, private investment, and
improved competitiveness. These three operations accounted for about 40% of new
lending. ECAL I supported (i) implementation of tariff reductions and changes in the
value-added tax system; (ii) privatization and a legislative agenda for private sector
development; and (iii) transport deregulation. OED review of the operation indicated a
highly satisfactory outcome, though some measures were delayed to build a constituency
for difficult reforms in ports and the company code.
58. IFC activities during the last CAS were focused on financial sector development,
and some key industries, such as textiles. In the financial sector, IFC's strategy has been
to create new institutions, and support existing ones to expand their range of services and
encourage them to lend to under-served segments of the economy. IFC recently
approved the first Global Depository Receipt (GDR) from Tunisia, for $60 million by
Banque Internationale Arabe de Tunisie, and has become a shareholder of the bank
($2.25 million). In an effort to reach out to SMEs, rFC invested in Tuninvest to set up a
private equity fund worth $25 million. The fund focuses on corporate restructuring and
start-up projects with primarily small and medium sized enterprises.
59. While the reform program supported during last CAS has been appropriate, the low
level of private investments indicate that the pace of adjustment should have been faster.

19

The rapidly changing world scene calls for faster action now to curtail the role of the state
in the economy, boost the environment for private sector development, increase the
confidence of foreign investors, and increase investment in the export sector. Further
reforms along these lines are recommendedin the recent PSA.
60. Human Resources Development. The Bank has long supported projects in Tunisia
in the social sectors. Nearly 20% of new commitments in the last CAS period were in the
social sectors. In health, Bank support has provided financing to reform the sector and
improve its efficiency, and technical assistance and internationalexperience to reinforce
the private sector, and strengthen public health organization and management. Major
issues remaining include health finance reform and gearing up the sector to cope with the
epidemiologic and demographictransitions under way in the country. In education, Bank
involvement has been long and wide-ranging. After addressing the needs of primary and
secondary education, Bank support expanded to vocational training and reform at the
tertiary education level. Education has been and remains a key focus of the Bank in
Tunisia. Following a major analytical work on sector issues, discussed in a nationwide
seminar, future priorities will include enhancing quality, reducing drop-out rates and
modernizingthe education system in line with new technologies.
61. Modernization of Services. In this area, the last CAS had envisioned efficiency
improvements in key sectors especially transportation, water and sewage, agriculture, and
telecommunications. Almost 30% of new commitments during the CAS period were
targeted for this objective. The strategy in transport has been to reduce the importance of
the public sector in service delivery, foster competition by eliminating public
monopolies, commercialize the railways company, and reduce the sector's fiscal burden
on the government. This strategy is being supported by an ongoing APL and components
under the Export Development Project aimed at reducing transit times in ports and at
modernizing Customs procedures. The results are already evident, as indicated by the
sharp drop in shipping rates (by 40%) following deregulation. Improvements in ports
have, however, been lagging due to protracted discussions with dock workers.
62. The utilities in water and sewerage are performing very well. During the last CAS
period, two new projects were approved: Municipal Development II and Greater Tunis
Sewerage. The Second Municipal Development Project, is assisting municipalities in:
reducing regional disparities, improving efficiency in the management of local
government operations, promotingdecentralization, and increasingthe autonomy of local
governments. The project will also increase the percentage of urban population with
piped discharge and the percentage of the rural population with access to piped water.
The Greater Tunis Sewerage Project was designed to improve municipal services in
Tunis by promoting efficient re-use for agricultural purposes of effluent from sewage
treatment plants, by reducing urban and coastal pollution, and by introducing new sewage
treatment technology and environmental monitoring. This project has a full-fledged
agricultural component and uses treated wastewater from a treatment plant to be built by
the private sector on a BOT basis. Overall progress in promoting private participation in
infrastructure (PPI) has, however, remained relatively slow compared to other countries.

20
63. Environmental Management and Agriculture. Tunisia leads the MENA region
with regard to environmental protection. The strong institutional setup and legislative
framework have both contributed to this success. Tunisia also has a strong policy for
sustainable development in place. The Government's commitment for environmental
protection is reflected through the substantial increase in the budget allocated to the
sector in the most recent five-year development plan. The Bank Group and Government,
however, recognize that there are still outstanding issues in this area, such as industrial
pollution, over-exploitation of range-land and degradation of marginal lands, and the
need to improve the long term efficiency and sustainability of agriculture and forestry. In
the last CAS period, 10% of lending was devoted to natural resources management and
agriculture.
64. Over the last three years, the emphasis of the Bank in agriculture has followed a
three-pronged approach: (i) elaboration of a long-term strategy to deal with water scarcity
and water management; (ii) rural development in marginal and poor areas, with focus on
environmental protection and participatory approaches; and (iii) agricultural
competitiveness, mostly through studies, dialogue and seminars. The Government is
concerned for now at stemming the flow of rural-urban migration, and hence keen on
integrated development of poorer rural areas. It recognizes that in the long run, Tunisia's
major growth potential lies in urban and coastal areas and in those agricultural subsectors possessing comparative advantage to withstand the progressive liberalization of
the agriculture sector in the context of the EU agreement and the country's membership
of the World Trade Organization.
C. PROPOSED COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

65. Tunisia has done extremely well in addressing poverty, in raising living standards,
and in promoting human development (see Box 1, page 6). With the country's strong
progress thus far in this area and in view of the country's emerging challenges, the CAS
envisages taking a broader approachto poverty reduction, namely: focus on vulnerability,
growth and employment issues, followed by refinement and greater coverage of the
social protection system, while addressing poverty pockets through decentralized and
community-based approaches.
66. The country now faces new challenges in integrating its economy to the world
economy and in addressing the needs of a young urbanized population entering the labor
force in greater numbers. The previous CAS sought to back up this new development
phase through: (i) support for policy reform; (ii) continued emphasis on human resources
development; and (iii) addressing longer term issues, such as environment and water
management in particular. Drawing on this experience and on recently completed
analytical works (SSR and PSA), the current CAS seeks to continue and strengthen the
work initiated in the last CAS. Based on discussions with Government, the proposed
Bank assistance program would follow a three-pronged approach, as follows:
Consolidating long-term development through activities in sectors of traditional
Bank involvement, mainly human resources development, natural resources
management, transport, rural development, municipal development;

21

*
*

Supporting economic reforms to enhance competitiveness and increase
employment, with safeguards against transitional costs of adjustments;
New initiatives of catalytic nature to strengthen local institutions, launch new
development niches (e.g., informationtechnology), and mobilize external finance.

ConsolidatingLong-term Development
67. Tunisia has by and large completed putting in place basic physical infrastructure
for long-term development. Where major physical investments are still needed, the
Govemment has identified alternative sources of official or private financing. In
recognition of this situation, and to focus further our approach, our strategy will be to
phase out of traditional investments in areas such as energy, roads, and housing and other
social infrastructure. Instead, we would consolidate our past involvement to strengthen
policy formulation and management in selected sectors, namely education, health, water
resources, and rural and urban development. In these sectors, our involvement would
also stress non-lending services and sector investment loans so as to: (a) incorporate
limited, well-focused, sector policy objectives with modernization investments; and (b)
expand the use of private concessions, particularly for transportation, waste water
treatment, electricity and possibly telecommunications. This proposed approach would
make the most of the Bank's comparative advantage in having spearheaded policy
dialogue in the selected sectors, and in bringing to bear cross-country experiences.
68. In human resources development, a program of education sector reforms has been
drawn up under the Education Quality Enhancement Project (FYOO). The program will
focus on improving education quality and support Government efforts to: ensure
universal completion of basic education (Grades I through 9); provide a greater number
of students, from a wider range of backgrounds, with opportunities for post-basic
education; and modernize the sector to improve output quality. Given a well-developed,
long-term strategic vision, particularly for basic education, the need for deeper reflection
on reform at the post-basic levels, and the schedule for preparation of Tunisia's 10th
Development Plan, the operation has been prepared as an Adaptable Program Loan.
69. Bank involvement in the health sector has supported investments, restructuring and
reforms in the past and, most recently, has collaborated closely with the EU, which is
financing a major health insurance policy reform. In addition to the epidemiological and
demographic transitions, the upcoming health insurance reform will force structural
changes in terms of sector management,financing, and service delivery. The focus of the
government--and hence the Bank--in the next few years will be to complete the
development and initiate the implementation of the new health insurance program,
coupled with the requisite restructuring of the different health organizations. The
ongoing health sector project will provide the main platform for dialogue on these issues.
70. In the water sector, and generally in environment and natural resources
management, following intensive dialogue during the last CAS on a broad strategy for the
water sector, the first phase of a Water Sector Investment Loan (WSIL) is proposed for
FYOO. The WSIL will support Tunisia's intention of shifting emphasis from supply
(water mobilization) to demand management through financial, pricing, technical, legal,

22
and institutional measures. Given the wide availability of bilateral assistance in the
environment sector, there is little scope for Bank lending operations. Hence our
assistance will be limited to policy dialogue and grant-funded activities with GEF and
METAP resources to maintain environmental focus on: protection of human health from
water and air pollution and soil degradation; prevention of further degradation of
Tunisia's natural, cultural and coastal resources; and integration of the environment into
the specific sectors of waste management, tourism, transport and trade. Notably, the
Bank will continue to support through METAP and the Development Grant Fund, the
establishment of a regional environment assessment center in the Centre International
des Technologies de l'Environnement de Tunis(CITET) to provide training and technical
support in environment assessment to METAP countries.
71. In transport, we propose to advance the support already initiated for sector reform
and modernization that has thus far involved liberalization and commercialization of
ports, railway and urban transport. In the CAS period, the support will be advanced with
the second phase of the Transport Reform and Investment Loan (FYOO). The operation
will aim to create an institutional framework conducive to sustainable development of
public transport in major cities. It would involve: (a) regrouping and decentralizing
planning and regulatory functions under new urban transport authorities toward better
management of transport needs, integration of transport and urban development and more
coordinated transport services; (b) streamlining subsidization of urban public transport
toward better coverage of public service obligations and elimination of implicit subsidies
to inefficient bus operations through targeting them better and cost containment; and (c)
allowing for a larger private sector involvement through concession of lines and
subcontractingservices by the public bus companies.
72. In rural development, priority interventions in the coming years would include: (a)
non-lending services to suggest a feasible pace of agricultural liberalization, which is
envisagedunder the agreement with the EU, accompanied with an operation proposed for
FYO1to modernize agricultural support services, and (b) possible operations in the outer
years to improve living conditions in rural areas, especially the more remote,
disadvantaged locations, through community-based development and with due
consideration to gender issues. A possible priority area in this regard would be to
consolidate efforts undertaken through our North-West Mountainous Development
Project (FY94), located in one of the poorest regions in Tunisia.
73. In the longer run, Tunisia's growth poles would appear to be in the urban areas and
along the coast. With nearly two-thirds of the country's population now urbanized and
with unemployment pressures felt in urban peripheries, municipal and urban development
needs to be consolidated in the CAS. This would be pursued with: (a) maintaining
involvement in municipal development projects, (b) reviewing municipal finances and
decentralization, and (c) preparing to expand integrated urban development in lowincome areas.

4

A complete report, Environmental Input to the Tunisia CAS, was prepared by a special mission mounted by the
Environment Department in June 1999. The full report is available on request.

23

Supporting Economic Reforms

74. Following approval in FY99 of the ongoing ECAL II, which addresses the financial
sector, support for enhancing the competitiveness of the Tunisian economy would be
maintained with ECAL III proposed for FYO1 and a proposed ECAL IV for FY03
(policy-based support on a two-year cycle). With reforms of ECAL II under way,
progress is needed next to deepen the financial sector, and boost private sector
development by streamlining the business environment. ECAL III then would underpin
macroeconomic reform and seek to either (i) advance financial sector reforms by:
furthering consolidation and privatization of public sector banks, restructuring the
finances of SMEs, and reforming the insurance, housing finance and capital markets; or,
(ii) depending on the readiness of Government, support measures to enhance private
sector development through a comprehensive reform of the incentive regime with a view
to streamlining it to create a level playing field for private investments ( investment code,
tax code, social security legislation and taxation). The operation would also support
increased private sector participation in infrastructure via concessions and further
privatization of state enterprises. An important objective in such an operation would be
to further improve economic governance in the country's financial and private sectors.
75. An important challenge for Tunisia will also be to improve the cost/quality mix of
infrastructure services through private participation. Should the Government wish, this
could be a major area for Bank group involvement. In this area, with contributions from
some of our ongoing operations (Greater Tunis Sewerage-FY97, Water Supply and
Sewerage-FY95, Transport Sector Investment Loan I-FY98), detailed measures have
already been elaborated for increasing competition and/or contestability through
deregulation, privatization and private provision. The next set of proposed operations
would encourage private sector participation in the provision of infrastructure (PPI)
beyond a pilot basis. In addition, we would be prepared to review with Government
prospects for addressing the opening of the telecommunications and information
technology sectors in view of their potential major impact on Tunisia's competitiveness.
76. The IEC intends to pursue institution building in the financial sector through, for
example,the possible creation of a discount house, consumer credit agency and insurance
company. IFC could also support consolidation in the banking sector as the Government
moves forward in its reform program. The development of the IFC portfolio will depend
on the pace of the privatization program and the Corporation's ability to find projects of
interest to which to lend in hard currency. In infrastructure, IFC is interested in
supporting the government with advisory work and by mobilizing resources, especially in
power and telecommunications sectors. Looking forward, the IFC and Bank aim to work
together to foster private sector development, especially in promoting private investment
in infrastructure and supporting SMEs. To that end, IFC staff participated in the
preparation of the PSA (FY99-00) and would provide additional downstream assistance
to implement the recommendations of the report. The rationalization and streamlining of
private sector incentives suggested in the PSA are expected to generate greater
opportunities for MIGA guarantees, where appropriate, as well as further IFC operations.

24
77. The Government's development program envisages that employment generation,
labor flexibility, and the quality of the labor force will pose major challenges in the
transition to a more open economy. In Tunisia's situation, these issues have important
bearing also on the country's poverty focus. Accordingly, we would increase our support
in this area, first through sector work and dialogue, and possibly lending thereafter, with
particular attention accorded to the costs of adjustment and gender equity in view of the
likely impact of adjustments on labor-intensive activities, such as textiles, where the
majority of workers are women. Our ongoing program already includes operations
supporting technical upgrading, vocational training and export development, especially
for small and medium firms.
78. Building on the above, we propose preparing a Policy Note on Employment that
would include analyses and reviews of the causes of unemployment, the income group,
gender and location of the unemployed, the duration of unemployment endured, current
labor legislation, and active labor market policies and prospects, including issues of
transition and the impact of liberalization. Interventions in this area could include
policies to: deal with redundancies, encourage firms to invest in on-the-job training,
promote entrepreneurs and deal with specific gender impacts. Based on such work, we
would develop specific IFCfBank interventions to support SMEs and exports and,
possibly, active labor market programs, as well as overall social security policy issues
which could be supported through future operations.
New Initiatives
79. Along this facet, we would undertake operations and activities of catalytic nature to
strengthen local institutions and mobilize external finance. The Export Development
Project, approved in FY99, is one such operation. It focuses on promoting public-private
partnership, providing financial and technical assistance to: improve access of Tunisian
firms to export outlets and buyers; provide more access to pre-shipment export finance,
especially for SMEs and emerging exporters; and facilitate trade by simplifying import
and export-related procedures. Another operation, being appraised for consideration in
FY01, is a Cultural Heritage Project which, with bilateral co-financing, would reinforce
preservation of Tunisia's cultural heritage assets, with links to employment generation for
women, developing tourist attractions,and diversifying the country's tourism products.
80. Other new initiatives would aim to identify issues, options and operations to
underpin Tunisia's quest to modernize its technological base and harmonize its
institutions with those of its global partners. In this connection, we envisage preparation
of a policy note on information technologies, allied with reforms in telecommunications,
to expand the impact of new technologies on the population. Clearly, areas to be
considered include:. (i) distance learning and education; (ii) technological parks and
impact of liberalization on SMIEs;and (iii) "government on line" initiatives. Options and
strategies also need to be considered for external trade in a competitive environment, and
to prepare the country's entrepreneurs and institutions as Tunisia undertakes phased
liberalization of the services sector, this being the next agreed stage of implementation of
the partnership accord with the EU. Another area pertains to strengthening public
administration in aspects bearing upon the business environment, as for example,

25

modernization of Customs and tax administration; training of judges in the context of
reforms of legal and regulatory frameworks; and business registration and reporting
procedures. We are continuing discussions in these new areas and, following our
dialogue and sector work, would be in a position to suggest suitable collaboration and
instruments of assistance in our country program.
IV. BANK GROUP COUNTRY PROGRAM
A. VEHICLESFOR BANK ASSISTANCE
Portfolio Management and Performance
81. Recognized by the Bank as historically one of its best portfolios, Tunisia has
maintained a very strong performance during the past three years. The current portfolio
comprises 20 projects for a total net commitment of US$1,360 million and an average
project age of 3.9 years. Infrastructure, agriculture, and financial and private sector
development each represent 24% of the portfolio, and human development projects 28%.
82. The strong ownership by the country, the excellent quality of the dialogue between
the Government and the Bank and the good administrative capacity of the Tunisian
institutions are the main factors underlying the highly satisfactory performance of the
portfolio. Slow disbursement and occasional project management issues arise, but close
follow-up in the country and by the Bank generally ensures that problems are addressed
promptly. This is reflected in a 100% proactivity ratio in the last three years. A 100%
realism index, together with the good quality at entry and supervision assessments given
by QAG exercises confirm the satisfactory performance of the portfolio. OED
performance reviews of completed projects have tended to demonstrate satisfactory
outcomes and high likelihood of sustainability.
Table 4: PORTFOLIOMANAGEMENT INDICATORS
Indicator

Indicator
DisbursementRatio (%)

Disbursement
Lag(/o)
% ProjectsAt Risk
% ProblemProjects
RealismIndex
ProactivityIndex

Asat ActualPerformances

As at 7/1/98
Tunisia MENA
14.2
19.7
36.8
28.7
19.5
0
0
16.8
100
86.4
100
80

ProjectedTargetsfor
|
Tunisia,FY2000-02
As at 7/1/99
7/1/00
7/1/01
7/1/02
Tunisia MENA
17.2
15.5 |
18
18
18
29
28
25
20
20
5
16.2
5
5
4.8
5
5
5
4.8
15.4
100
94.7
100
100
100
100
100
95
100
100

83. The maturity of the country-Bank dialogue has enabled the composition of the
portfolio to evolve. New lending has increasingly adopted a sector approach, thus
combining progress in the strategic reform and policy agenda with a certain flexibility in

the identification of the specific investments to be financed over the life of the loan. The
Transport Sector APL (FY98) is demonstrating the merits of this instrument, which we
intend to adopt in fiture sector interventions.

26

84. Despite the excellent portfolio status and prospects, the disbursement performance
of investment loans has been weak in recent years. The disbursement ratio improved
from 14% in FY98 to 17% in FY99, but was still below the 18% we had planned. The
annualized ratio for FY00, based on the performance in the first 6 months, is over 19%.
But performance is uneven, with 3 projects showing an annualized disbursement ratio of
12%, while other projects are substantially above that level. A CPPR carried out in
February 2000 determined that, overall, disbursement lags were related frequently to
optimistic assessments of the time required to execute the projects. The portfolio review
recommendedthat close attention be paid in the future to agreed disbursement projections
presented in PADs, especially during the initial years, and that we continue in particular
to monitor closely the new sector loans.
85. In terms of project preparation, the time taken from appraisal to Board and from
Board approval to effectiveness declined each year during the last CAS period, FY97-99.
Moreover, these improvements occurred in conjunction with an average lending cost
decline of about 20 percent.
Table5: BANKTIMEA-NDRESOURCECOSTSOF LENDINGTO TUNISIA

AverageTime Appraisalto Board(months)
lAverage TimeBoardto Effectiveness(months)
DirectCosto Lending ($000per project)

FY96

FY97

FY98

FY99

17.0
5.0
437

22.8
8.4
457

8.5
3.9
283

5.5
3.5
312

86. No major changes are anticipated in the portfolio management strategy in the
coming years. We will continue to use quality at entry as a main tool, by focusing on
realistic objectives fully owned by the Government. On the supervision side, we will try
to contain costs by promoting increased utilization of qualified local consultants, who are
readily available in Tunisia.
Proposed Program

87. The key priority placed by the Government on Bank assistance is for policy
dialogue on macro-economic and sector issues, and longer term development strategies;
and on our catalytic role in institution building. Resource transfer is considered less
important in view of the bilateral and capital market financing available to Tunisia. As a
result, non-lending services have increasingly become and will continue to be the
instruments of choice to support the implementation of structural reforms. Lending
services will support this "know-how transfer" effort, support continuing dialogue, and
focus on institution-building to reinforce the implementation capacity of new agencies.
Strong emphasiswill be placed on:
* policy analysis and strategic sector work, which the Tunisians expect from the Bank;
* dissemination efforts (seminars, round-tables, work-shops). These types of services
were used effectively in the last CAS period. In view of the Tunisians' interest in

27
cross-country experiences in addressing complex problems, well-organized and open
forums and study tours can be extremely useful tools. The World Bank Institute
(WBI) would have a significant role in dissemination work and capacity building, in
addition to its regional networking role, such as through the Mediterranean
DevelopmentForum;
* continued close co-operation between the Bank Group, the EU, and other bilateral
and multilateral donors. Since signature of the partnership agreement between the EU
and Tunisia, co-operationwith the EU has increased significantly;
* flexibility. Tunisia is a mature borrower with a strong institutional capacity. We
review each year our portfolio, lending and sector work programs, and adapt it
regularly to both changing circumstances and priorities. Thus the priorities identified
should be seen as broad directions, within which we will exercise flexibility as
policies for the le Plan solidify; and
* increased dialogue to open up participation of the civil society in the development
process. An IDF grant to support local developmental NGOs is already under
consideration.
88. The base case program of operations and key analytical and advisory activities
(AAA) proposed for FY2000-02 are summarizedbelow.
Table 6: PROPOSED BASE CASE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Lendin_/Grant Operations

Analytical &Advisorv Activities

FY2000
Education Quality Enhancemnexlt
($75 Mn)
Water Sector Investment I ($100 Mn)
Transport Sector Investment II ($33 Mn)

Social & Structural Review (started FY99)
Private Sector Assessment (started FY99)
Update of Social Conditions (started FY99)
Agricultural Competitiveness Study (started FY99)
External Sustainability Study

Cultural Heritage ($30 Mn)
Agricultural Support Services ($35 Mn)
ECAL III ($150 Mn)
GEF - Protection Gulf of Gabes
GEF - Biodiversity Protection

Tenth Plan Pohcy Notes
Policy Note on Employment
Financial Sector Assessment Program (with IMF)
Policy Note on Information Technology

SME Support ($50 Mn)
Urban Water Supply ($100 Mn)
Municipal Development III ($50 Mn)

Decentralization Study / Municipal Finances
Policy Note on Land Issues
Comprehensive Development Review
Social Protection Strategy Note

FY2001

FY2002

FY2003

(Tentative)
Higher Education or Health Sector
Integrated Rural or Urban Development
ECAL IV

Lending Instruments

89. The lending program proposed for the FY2000-02 period maintains about the same
level of commitments as in previous years, averaging about US$208 million per year, and
would also sustain the change in the mix of instruments begun with the last CAS, with

28

fewer traditional projects and more sector investment loans and adaptable programs
Broad policy based adjustment operations will be less prevalent than in the past, but still
important to implement needed reforms, accounting for about 25% of the program.
Traditional projects would incorporate pilot-type and catalytic operations, and several
projects would also promote decentralizationtrends and community based actions. We
would, however, wish to emphasize flexibility, especially in the share of policy-based
operations, depending on the speed of reforms and on the possible impact of fluctuations
in the external environment.
90. The delivery of the proposed Bank Group assistance will continue to abide by our
fiduciary provisions. To support the trend towards sector lending, and in view of
Tunisia's strong capacity, we have turned increasingly towards country-wide reviews to
support our assessments. Thus far in Tunisia, no major issues have arisen on
implementation of Bank Group policies on procurement, financial management, the
environment, and social and resettlementprocedures.
*

Tunisian procurement legislation is generally in line with Bank guidelines and the
standards for handling procurement responsibilities are acceptable. In the few cases
where rules and procedures are not acceptable to the Bank, implementing agencies
have agreed to apply the procedures that we recommend.
* A Country Profile of Financial Accountability (CPFA) prepared in FY2000
confirmed that basically rigorous standards exist and suggested strengthening of the
Government auditors. The CPFA will determine the agenda on financial management
over the next three years. An IDF grant under implementation is already supporting a
priority program for modernizing the Government's auditors, the Inspection Generale
des Finances.
* We have analyzed the environment assessment procedures of the Govemment and
found them generally consistent with the relevant operations policy (OP 4.01) of the
Bank. We will continue to work with the Ministry of the Environment on improving
the content of the environment management plans to harmonize them fully with OP
4.01, thus facilitating Bank endorsement of the environment assessment reports on
specific projects.

* Most recently, in the course of preparing the PSA, we conducted an informal
assessment of legal and judicial issues; this will be followed up with the government
to provide any possible assistance that mighi-be requested.
* Social assessments and resettlement procedures are generally handled adequately,
though some policies need to be refined further to make them fully consistent with
Bank procedures; and
* Public expenditure reviews are also carried out regularly as part of our sector loans.
Social expenditures receive high priority and are generally adequate.
B. LENDINGSCENARIOSANDTRIGGERS

91.
Tunisia has always demonstrated great stability in its assistance requests for Bank
lending. For the CAS period FY2000-02, a base case program of around $200 million
per year is proposed, in line with past commitments.Together with the ongoing portfolio,

29
this would translate into gross disbursementsaveraging somewhat below $200 million
per year,. The authorities also emphasizecontinued policy-based support to maintain
dialogue and momentum in the reform program. The base case would include one such
operation (for $150 million) focusing on private sector development and/or the financial
sector.
92.
A low case program could result from two factors: (i) if the pace of structural
reforms slows down, our proposed policy-based operation would be likewise delayed;
and (ii) if the country decides on alternative sources of funding, in view of the large
amounts available to it from concessional sources. A low case program, per se, is highly
unlikely, as Tunisia has demonstrated firm commitment in its reform program in the past,
as well as continued close attention to social balance in its development strategy. Still, in
the unlikely event of key policy reversals (e.g., backtracking on reforms supported by our
Economic Competitiveness Adjustment Loans), our lending would be scaled back,
focusing on one or two investment-type operations targeted at the social sectors.
93.
*

Two scenarioscould result in a high case program:
an acceleration of structural reforms. Should the Government decide to accelerate
reforms on a broad front the Bank may want to (i) increase the amount of the policybased operation scheduled in the base case; (ii) accelerate the next operation; and/or
(iii) increase the support needed to smooth out the cost of adjustments (e.g., safety
net, active labor programs). In such cases, our program could go up to $300 million
per year, still a reasonable lending level in view of the country's prudent external debt
management and our country commitment levels.

* a temporary tightening of external financial markets or a slow down in export
receipts due to regional uncertainty. Thus far, Tunisia has weathered external shocks
(the Gulf War, instability in neighboring countries, severe droughts, tightening of
financial markets following the East Asia crisis) reasonably well. Regional political
uncertainties, however, combined with Tunisia's rather strong dependence on
tourism receipts and workers' remittances to fill the trade deficit, mean that for the
foreseeable future it would be important for the Bank and other donors to increase
assistance levels in such events. The Bank would coordinate with the Fund to ensure
that an appropriate macroeconomic framework was in place. If significant policy
adjustments were required to restore macroeconomicbalance and confidence, a Fundsupported program would provide the framework for Bank policy lending.
94. A strong acceleration of reforms in key areas would warrant a higher lending level
on a temporary basis to help defray the transitional costs of rapid adjustment, as Tunisia's
external position remains vulnerable (see paragraph 44). Also, the Government and other
partners would expect the Bank to be at the forefront in contributing to the design and
financing of accelerated reforms. More specifically, events such as the following would
trigger a high case lending scenario:
* an acceleration of the implementation of the free trade provisions of the
agreementwith the EU;

30

*
*

*

*
*

a substantial increase in privatization measures (proceeds increasing from the
average 0.5% of GDP realized in 1995-98to between 1% to 2% of GDP);
financial sector reforms beyond those under ECAL II, involving further
liberalization of the sector and privatization, decisive measures to develop the
market for corporate securities, and reforms of the insurance industry and pension
funds;
liberalization and privatization of selected transportation and telecommunication
services, and the opening up of the telecommunications sector to private
operators;
initiation of social security reform and/or civil service reform;
initiation of labor market reforms, and active labor market policies.
C. PARTNERS AND PARTICIPATION

Coordinationwith Other Donors
95. Tunisia has built up one of the strongest institutional capacity for donor
coordination within the MENA region. The programming of external finance as well as
technical assistance from a variety of donors and creditors is coordinated by a central
ministry, with close links to the country's medium-term financing plan and development
priorities. This facilitates considerably the consultations, exchange and coordination
among the external agencies themselves, and between these agencies and the
Government.
96. Besides the traditional coordination between the Bank Group and the JIMF,since
the negotiations on the EU partnership agreements, our program has been closely
coordinated with the EU, which has provided parallel financing along each of our two
competitiveness adjustment policy loans to-date. ECAL II (FY99) was also co-financed
by the AfDB. We have also developedjoint approaches with other donors in almost all
sectors where we are involved. The CAS program matrix (Annex B9b) provides details
of how the major development partners' programs fit into various strategic areas. The
move towards program loans has served as a framework for other financing; for instance,
the EU recently made a sector policy-based loan in health and is considering such lending
in education and transport. Once institutional capacities are strong enough, the Bank
would withdraw from the sector, as is happening with roads and energy, focusing instead
on new areas (e.g., cultural heritage and export development) or on evolving longer term
developmentneeds (rural, urban or human resources development, for instance).
97. The strong institutional capacity of the Government is well recognized by all
external agencies. The EU is spearheading its new sector strategy in Tunisia, and Japan
has made the country one of its few beneficiaries eligible for annual program reviews.
Our program is also closely coordinated with the EIB, the GTZ, KfW, Kuwait Fund, the
UN Agencies and key bilateral donors, among them France, Italy, Japan and Switzerland.
The experiences have been encouraging and have promoted stronger dialogue with the
Government, and the arrangement is being used as a prototype for other countries in
the region.

31

Participatory Process
98. Traditionally our principal interlocutor on the CAS in Tunisia has been the
Government. The government does have long-established mechanisms for coordinated
consultations within the country and with external agencies. Consultations with the
private sector, the NGO community and the academic community have progressively
increased over the last few years, through seminars and round table discussions. Against
this backdrop,the participatory process followed in developing the CAS included:
* discussionswith representatives of the trade unions and employers;
* a workshop in Tunis involving selected local NGOs;
* focus group discussions concerning the impact and the priorities for reforms. This
exercise was conducted in Tunisia by the Region's social assessment unit in
conjunctionwith the preparation of the SSR;
* sector-by-sector discussions on medium-termstrategies with Tunisian officials in line
agencies as well as central Ministries and agencies.
* in-country dissemination activities associated with the SSR, the PSA and the Social
ConditionsUpdate, all among the important building blocks of the proposed CAS;
* discussionswith donor and creditor representatives; and
* to round off, the customary discussion of the draft CAS document with Government
prior to its finalization and submissionto the Board.
V. COUNTRY RISK MANAGEMENT
A. COUNTRY
CREDITWORTHNESS
99. Tunisia's creditworthiness is strong, reflecting a long record of prudent
macroeconomic policies and sound debt management. The country enjoys investment
grade ratings by major rating agencies, including Moodys (Baaa3) and Standard and
Poors (BBB-).5 This has allowed Tunisia good access to capital markets. The country
is moderately indebted, with total debt estimated at US$10.8 billion at end-1999 or about
51 percent of GDP. Almost 80 percent of this debt is long term, public and publicly
guaranteed. The share of preferred creditor debt service in total debt service is somewhat
high (42 % in 1999) as past loans of such creditors are being amortized. In the aftermath
of the East Asia crisis, Tunisia refrained from borrowing, but conditions have softened
since then; in July 1999 Tunisia raised 225 million euros at a spread of 280 basis points
over equivalent German bonds.

5 Long-term foreign currency debt ratings. Moody's as of March 27, 2000; and Standard and Poors as of
March 24, 2000.

32

Bank Lending Flows and Exposure

100. The financial impact of the Bank base case lending program on net transfers and
exposure is summarized in Table 7. With Tunisia's improved access to capital markets
and the availability of new grant financing from the EU, resource transfers from the Bank
are becoming less important. Consequently bank exposure has declined steadily since
1995. It is estimated that Bank exposure (debt outstanding) in Tunisia at the end of the
year 2000 would be US$1.3 billion, or 1.1 percent of the total portfolio.
Table7: WORLDBANKLENDINGANDEXPOSURE(BASECASE)
Actual
Lending Flows
Disbursements
Repayments
Net Disbursements
Interest
Net Transfers
IBRD Debt Outstanding
Exposure Ratios
IBRDDS/PublicDS
IBRD Debt Service/Exports
Pref. Cred. DS/Public DS

Est.

1995

1996

1997

138
203
-65
129
-194
1717

202
187
15
115
-101
1610

127
173
-46
103
-148
1434

23.7
3.8
46.2

21.9
3.3
47.9

20.9
3.0
48.6

1998

1999

Projected
2000

(In US$ million)
141
209
210
176
176
196
-35
33
14
89
92
121
-124
-59
-107
1458
1323
1337
(Percentages)
20.4
16.8
15.7
2.8
3.0
3.0
49.4
42.4
37.5

2001

2002

2003

2004

190
205
-15
119
-135
1322

192
203
-11
117
-128
1310

185
199
-14
116
-130
1296

204
1841
20
115
-95
1316

19.3
2.9
45.2

19.0
2.6
44.0

17.9
2.4
43.0

17.0
2.1
42.01

Risks and Uncertainties

101. The risks associated with Tunisia's external environment and fiscal structure, and
the prospects for their mitigation, were described earlier (see paragraphs 44-48). The
Bank's program could be subject to social risk too arising from the regional situation and
that within the country. In the past, regional instability led Tunisian authorities to be very
cautious and gradual in implementing reforms. So far, Tunisia has maintained internal
stability through sound economic management, social progress, and strong security aimed
at containing extremism. The risks from the region appear lower now with improving
situations in neighboring countries.
102. Within the country, the competitive pressures resulting from globalization and
privatization have been accompanied by rising uncertainty about job tenure and changing
wage differentials across workers. Already a source of tensions, such developments
might intensify as Tunisia deepens its partnership with the European Union and becomes
more integrated in the world market. It should be noted, however, that greater integration
is also likely to enhance opportunities, especially for entrepreneurs and higher-skill
workers, which underscores the need to continue developing private enterprise and the
education and training sector emphasized in the proposed Bank program.

33

B. PERFORMANCEMONITORING AND EVALUATION

103. To monitor progress towards achieving the objectives outlined in the CAS, a twotier monitoring framework is proposed. The first tier consists of core performance
indicators (outcome indicators) given in Tables 8 below. These indicators, to be refined
with additional data availability, have been designed from available baseline values and
reasonable medium-term targets. They cover the following key areas: (i) poverty
reduction efforts; (ii) improvements in the financial sector, and in the business
environment for the private sector, especially SMEs; (iii) broad-based job growth, and
increased coverage of social protection schemes in a viable manner, (iv) human resource
development initiatives that increase basic education completion rates, and upgrade the
quality of health services; and (v) environmental management which promotes the
sustainable use of resources through appropriate pricing.
Table 8: CORE PERFORMANCEINDICATORS
Area

Proposed Monitoring Indicator

Values
Baseline Target
Poverty Reduction
. % of population below national poverty line
7.6
6.5
Financial sector and business * Share of private sector banks in total bank assets (%)
48
60
environment for the private . Privateinvestment in % GDP
12.1
15.4
sector
. Proceeds from privatization % GDP 1995-98
0.5
1.0
Employmentand social
. Unemployment rate %
15.9
15
security
*
% of population covered by social insurance schemes
45
50
(pension and health)
Basic education and health .
Persistence rate c to grade 9, %
42
73
services
. Infant mortality rate, per thousand live births
30
20
.
Access of rural populationto safe water %
80
90
Environment and sustainable * Average water tariff in % of average cost
87
110
use of resources
* Market share of unleaded gasoline %
4
20
aRefer to valuesbetween1997and 1999,exceptfor proceedsfromprivatization,
whichis averagefor 1995to 1998,and
povertyincidence,whichrefersto 1995.
Referto year2002,exceptfor the persistencerate to grade9, whichrefersto 2004.
Both baselineand targetvaluesare irrespectiveof thenumberof repetitions.
I____________________________________________

104. The second tier of indicators comprises intermediate milestones related to the Bank
Group's dialogue and program with the government aimed at bringing about the
development outcomes. The intermediate milestones, also subject to refinements, cover
the same key areas as the core performance indicators, and would be useful for selfevaluation; an initial set is presented in Table 9 below.

I

34

Table 9: CAS MONITORING INDICATORS- INTERMEDIATE MILESTONES
AREA

PRELIMINARYMILESTONES

PovertyReduction

.
.
Financialsectorandbusinessenvironment .
for the privatesector
*

Startupdatingpovertyanalysisbasedon new census
Agreeon community-based
programsin NW region
Completionof financialsectorreformsunderECALII
andagreementto deepenreformsin areas suchas
insurance,capitalmarkets,housingfinance,SMEcredit.
Streamlinedinvestmentincentivesfor offshore/onshore
enterprises

Employmentandsocialsecurity

Basiceducationandhealthservices

Environmentandsustainableuse of
resources

.

Agreewith Govermnenton recommendations
through
plannedPolicyNoteon Employment
. Agreeon socialprotectionstrategyto increasetargeting
andcost-effectiveness
of socialprotectionsystem
* At leastsatisfactoryratingand sustainabilityof reforms
underplannedEducationQualityEnhancementProject
* Agreementwith governmentandEU to initiate
implementationof healthinsurancereforms
. Beginimplementation
of demandmanagementof water
resourcesunderthe firstphaseof plannedWaterSector
InvestmentLoan

105. In conclusion, Tunisia's development program for the medium term anticipates
continued economic reforms, including close integration with the EU and other external
partners, to spur the growth of output and employment in a stable social setting and
viable financial framework.
The program also places high priority on human
development and continued poverty reduction. These are sound objectives, attainable by
decisive actions to strengthen economic governance, boost private sector incentives, and
increase civil society and community-based participation in the development process. It
is proposed that the Bank Group support this process, exercising flexibility in lending
instruments, an increased emphasis on non-lending services, and close collaboration with
all partners to complement the country's development efforts.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
By: Shengman Zhang

Attachments
Washington, D.C.
March 28, 2000

ANNEX A2
Page I of 2

Tunisia at a glance
M. East
& North
Tunisia
Africa

POVERTYandSOCIAL
1998
Population,
mid-year(millions)
GNPper capita(Atlasmethod,US$)
GNP(Atlasmethod,US$billions;

Lowermiddleincome

9.4
2,050
19.2

285
2,050
586

908
1,710
1,557

1.6
2.9

2.2
3.0

1A1
1.5

Development
diamond'
Lifeexpectancy

Averageannualgrowth,1992-98
Population(0)
Laborforce(%)
Most recent estimate (latestyear available, 1992-98

GNP
per

I

capita

Poverty(% of populationbelownationalpovertyline,
Urbanpopulation(%of totalpopulation;
Lifeexpectancyat birth(years)
Infantmortality(per 1,000livebirths)
Childmalnutrition(%of childrenunder5)
Accessto safewater(%of population)
Illiteracy(%of populationage 15+)
Grossprimaryenrollment(%of school-age
population;
Male
Female

7.6
64
70
30
9
90
33
117
120

58
67
49
14
81
38
96
103

113

89

Gross
primary
enroliment

,

,-

'*.

58
68
38
Accessto safewater

..

75
14
103
105

-Tunisia

Lower-middle-income
group

100

--- Lower-m

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERMTRENDS
1978

1988

1997

1998

GDP(US$ billtons)
GrossdomesticinvestmentlGDP
Exportsof goodsand serviceslGDP
GrossdomesticsavingslGDP
GrossnationalsavingslGDP

6.0
30.8
31.0
230

10.1
20.7
42.0
21.1
21.7

18.9

20.0

26.7
43.9
24.2
23.4

27.5
42.5
24.5
24.1

CurrentaccountbalancelGDP
Interestpayments/GDP
TotaldebtVGDP
Totaldebt service/exports

-9.2
1.8
49.3
12.4

1.0
3.7
67.5
21.9

-3.3
2.5
59.9
15.3

-3
2.8
52.6
17.4

..

Present value of debtGDP
Present value ot debtlexports

..
..

55.7
114.2

1997

1998

1998-02

4.6
2.7
4.8

5.4
4.4
10.5

5.0
3.8
39

5.8
4.1
5.0

..
..

Economicratios'

Trade

Domestic
Domes

Investment

Indebtedness
1978-88 198-98

(averageannualgrowth,
GDP
GNPper capita
Exportsof goodsandservices

3.9
1.1
3.8

Tunisia
Lower-middle-income
group

-

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
1978

1988

1997

1998

Growthof Investmentand GDP(%)

of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

15.1
26.4
11.1
58.5

11.8
30.6
16.8
57.6

13.3
28.5
18.4
58.1

12.4
28.4
18.21
59.1

20

Privateconsumption
Generalgovernment
consumption
Importsof goodsandservices

60.7
16.3
38.7

62.3
16.6
41.7

62.8
13.0
46.4

62.5
13.0
45,5

-20

1997

1998

Growthof exportsand Imports(°h)

(averageannualgrowth,
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

1978-88 1988-98
(averageannualgrowth,

20

2
90

9o
-

2.7
3.6
5.6
4.4

4.4
4.6
3.4
4.7

2.9
5.6
7.1
6.0

-1.0
'5
4.9
15L
3.8
6.5 sD

Privateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Grossdomesticinvestment

4.4
5.0
-2.1

4.6
0.9
5.5

4.3
5.0
5.6

5,0
4.7
5.5

Imports of goods and services
Gross national product

1.3
3.8

4.1
4.6

8.9
6.0

4.2
5.4

GDI

--

97

9

GDP

o
93

94

95

-*

Exports

-

-mports

*The diamondsshowfourkeyindicators
in the country(inbold)compared
with itsincome-group
average.If dataare missing,thediamondwill
be incomplete.

ANNEX A2
Page 2 of 2

Tunisia
PRICES and GOVERNMENTFINANCE
Domestic prices

1988

1978

(% change)
Consumer prices

ImplicitGDPdeflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, inceltes cu.0entgrants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

1 Inflation (%)

1997

1998

3.7

3.1

0

4.0

3.6

4- _

8

6.5

7.7

.717.2

2

..
..
..

28.3
4.9
-4.7

28.7
3.4
-3.9

3.6
29.0
4.2
-2.4

(US$ millions)
Total exports
Fuel
Agriculture
Manufactures

1978
1,126
433
57
590

1988
2,396
385
181
1785

1997
5,679
556
283
3,759

1998
5,722
367
193
3,804

Totalimports

2,162

3,692

8,106

7,872

254
226
678

554
243
618

745
644
1,860

655
375
1,814

o

i
93

94

G[P

96

96

97

deflator

-C

CPI

98

TRADE

Food
Fuel and energy
Capitalagoods
Export price index (1995=t100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

..

..

97

..
..

..
..

103
94

Export and import levels (USSmill.)
10oooo
.
8,0000.
6,000

000

ElB.F

L

i

2,000

0
92

92
95
97

93

94

95

96

rcExports

97

98

r Imports
.

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)

1978

1988

1997

1998

Current account balanceto GDP(Y)

Export of goods and services
Imports of goods and services

1,848
2,423

4,242
4,206

8,304
8,771

8,479
9,077

-.

Resourcebalance

-575

36

-467

-598

23

Net income
Net current transfers

-216
240

-498
558

-903
754

-858
776

-41

Current account balance

-551

96

-615

-680

-7

Ftnancing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

651
-100

282
-378

951
-336

493
187

-10

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$rmillions)
Conversion rate (DEC, locaV/US$)

..

..

0.4

0.9

1,989
1.1

1,854
1.1

1978

1988

1997

1998

2,941
189
67

6,799
1,019
62

11,321
1,434
45

10,489
1,458
43

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

260
28
2

1,058
199
2

1,413
265
3

1,632
265
2

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment

28
170
335
91

124
209
37
110

95
104
587
355

82
-136
194
697

0

0

0

0

241
173
112
61
89
-28

167
127
175

0

~

.. 9.5

9j1:1

L

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ milbions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA

Portfolio equity

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Netflows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

Composition of 1998 debt (USSmill.)
|

|
l,11

At458

1

F: 2,731

67
35
13
22
16
5

-48
103
-151

222
141
178
-37
89
-126

0 43
0.39

D:1,420

E: 3,590

A - 18FD
8 - IDA
C-IMF

0 - Other multilateral

E- Bilateral
F - Private
0 -Short-term

__1

3/22/00

CAS Annex B2 - Tunisia
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average ImplementationPeriod (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,c
Percent of Projectsat Risk by Number a d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources(total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proi Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

1997

18
2.87
5.56
4.46
5.56
4.46
23.66

1998

1999

2000

20
3.06
0
0
0
0
14.22

21
3.55
4.76
4.66
4.76
4.66
17.2

20
3.98
5
3.6
5
3.6
18.0

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
8
73
2629.2
419.28
16.4
0
11.95
0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementationprogress (iP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursementsduring the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.

ANNEX B3
Page 1 of 2

Tunisia - Bank Group Program Summary, FY2000-2002
Proposed IBRD Base-Case Lending Program, FY2000-20022

Fiscalyear

Project

US$(M)

2000

EducationQualityEnhancement
Water SectorInvestmentI
TransportSectorInvestment11
Sub-total

75.0
100.0
33.0
208.0

H
H
H

H
M
M

2001

CulturalHeritage
AgriculturalSupportServices
ECALIII
Sub-total

30.0
35.0
150.0
215.0

H
H
H

M
H
M

2002

SMESupport
UrbanWaterSupply
MunicipalDevelopmentIII
Sub-total

50.0
100.0
50.0
200.0

H
H
H

M
M
M

Total,FY 2000-02

StrategicRewards b Implementationb
(HIMIL)
Risks(H/MIL)

623.0

a. Thistablepresentsthe proposedprogramfor the nextthreefiscal years.
b. Indicateswhetherthe strategicrewardsand implementationrisksare expectedto be
high(H), moderate(M), or low (L).

ANNEX B3
Page 2 of 2

Tunisia - IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1997-1999

IFC approvals (US$m)

1997

1998

1999

3.00

10.76

032

93

100

Sector (%)
Financial Services
Mining & Minerals
TEXTILESTextiles

100

Total

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

7

Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total
IIGA guarantees (US$m)

64.80

64.80

0.00

ANNEX B4

Tunisia - Summary of Non-lending Services
Product

Completion
FY

Cost
(US$ Th)

Audience'

Objectiveb

Recent Completions (direct cost)
Education Sector Strategy
Trade Strategy

1999
1999

176 Gov't, donors, Bank
148 Gov't, Bank

Knowledge generation
Knowledge generation

Underway (direct cost)
Social and StructuralReview

2000

236

Knowledge generation

Private Sector Assessment Update

2000

Update of Social Conditions
Agricultural Competitiveness Study
Country Assistance Strategy

2000
2000
2000

Planned (net of sustaining costs)
SSR Dissemination
Extemal SustainabilityStudy
Tenth Plan Policy Notes
Policy Note on Employment
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Policy Note on Information Technology
DecentralizationStudy/MunicipalFinance
Policy Note on Land Issues
ComprehensiveDevelopmentReview
Social Protection Strategy Note

a
b

2000
2000
2001
2001
2001
2001
2002
2002
2002
2002

Government, donors, Bank, or public dissemination.
Knowledge generation,public debate, or problem-solving.

Gov't, Bank, Public
dissemination
185 Gov't, Bank, Public
dissemination
47 Gov't, Bank
98 Gov't, Bank
87 Gov't, donors, Bank

Knowledge generation,
problem solving
Knowledge generation
Problem solving
Knowledge generation

52 Public dissemination Knowledge generation
170 Gov't, Bank
Problem solving
250 Gov't, Bank
Knowledge generation,
problem solving
150 Gov't, Bank
Problem solving
150 Gov't, Bank
Knowledge generation
150 Gov't, Bank
Knowledge generation
150 Gov't, Bank
Knowledge generation
160 Gov't, Bank
Knowledge generation
320 Gov't, Bank
Knowledge generation
160 Gov't, Bank
Knowledge generation

ANNEX

Tunisia - Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group

1970-75

1980-85

1992-97

5.6
2.1
49.8
6.2

7.3
3.1
53.8
4.9

9.2
1.5
63.3
2.8

..

11.2

7.6

..

4.6
19.1

3.6
13.9

..

53
54

108
108

..

0.43

Middle East & Lower-middleNorth Africa
income

POPULATION

Totalpopulation,mid-year(millions)
Growthrate (%annualaverage)
Urbanpopulation(% of population)
Totalfertilityrate(birthsper woman)

279.6
1.8
58.4
3.6

2,282.9
0.9
42.4
2.2

110

116

POVERTY

(%of populaton)
National headcount index

Urbanheadcountindex
Ruralheadcountindex
INCOME
Consumerpriceindex(1995=100)
Foodpriceindex(1995=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index

Lowestquintile(%of incomeor consumption)
Highestquintile(%of incomeor consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)

Education(% of GNP)
Socialsecurityand welfare(%of GDP)
Netprimaryschoolenrollmentrate
(%of agegroup)
Total
Male

Female
Accessto safewater
(%of population)
Total

Urban
Rural

..

..

6.0
42.0

..
..

.,

3.0

..

2.6

5.2
4.4

5.8
3.7

6.7
5.4

5.2

5.1

..

93

98

87

99

99

99

91

..

87

96

83

49

89

90

..

78

92
17

98
79

100
76

..
..

65
70

92
96

88
90

93
93

20

..

9

14

17

56
55
56

63
63
64

70
68
71

67
66
68

69
67
71

110
201

59
75

30
33

49
63

36
44

276
249

227
224
1,000

171
153
170

190
164

200
142

..

Immunization rate

(% under12months)
Measles
DPT

Childmalnutrition(%under5 years)
Lifeexpectancyat birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant(perthousandlive births)
Under5 (per thousandlivebirths)
Adult (15-59)

Male (per1,000population)
Female(per 1,000population)
Maternal(per100,000livebirths)
1999WorldDevelopment
IndicatorsCD-ROM,WorldBank

..

B5

ANNEX B6

Tunisia - Key Economic Indicators:

Indicator

1994

Actual
1996

1995

Base Case

1997

Page 1 of 2

Estimate
1999

1998

Projected
2001

2000

2002

National accounts (% of GDP)

100

100

too

100

100
o

too

too

100

Netindirecttaxes
Agriculture

13
13

13
11

11
14

13
13

13
12

12
13

12
13

12
13

12
14

Industry

29

29

28

29

28

28

28

28

28

Services

45

46

47

45

46

47

47

47

46

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Govermment investment
Private investment
(includes some public enterprises)
Change in stocks

79
27
4
23

79
24
4
20

77
23
5
18

76
25
5
20

75
25
6
21

74
26
7
22

75
26
7
22

75
27
7
22

75
27
7
22

-3

1

2

2

2

3

3

3

3

Exports of goods & services
Imports of goods & services

45
48

45
49

42
44

44
46

43
45

42
45

42
45

41
45

42
45

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings'

21
20

21
20

23
22

24
23

25
24

26
26

25
25

25
25

25
25

15,626
1740

18,029
1820

19,587
2000

18,900
2080

19,951
2050

21,146
-

22,688
-

24,581

26,657

3.3
3.9

2.2
2.1

7.1
8.2

5.4
3.8

5.0
4.3

6.2
6.2

5.6
5.4

5.7
5.8

5.8
5.8

1.6
1.7
1.5

0.8
1.4
1.0

5.6
2.5
1.4

3.8
2.9
2.7

3.3
3.3
3.4

4.5
4.1
4.7

4.1
4.6
5.6

4.2
4.3
4.3

4.3
4.0
3.5

6,901
4,643
7,571
6,210
-670
735

7,979
5,469
8,811
7,458
-832
772

8,249
5,637
8,553
7,915
-304
822

8,304
5,679
8,771
8,106
-467
754

8,479
5,722
9,077
7,872
-598
776

8,870
5,959
9,484
8,255
-614
933

9,467
6,360
10,254
8,935
-787
856

10,191
6,843
11,123
9,725
-932
886

11,067
7,451
12,060
10,577
-993
908

Current account balance
(including official transfers)
Net foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & omnmissions)

-551

-731

-467

-520

-598

-533

-735

-861

-924

442
578
253
325
95

283
539
74
466
60

261
524
94
431
79

355
540
104
436
-39

697
-174
-135
-39
-112

411
396
226
170
11

532
668
521
147
0

480
587
357
229
0

515
616
208
408
0

Change in reservesb
(- denotes increase)

-564

-151

-397

-336

187

-284

-465

-206

-207

Gross domesticproduct

to

Memorandumitems
GDP (US$ miilion at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)
Real annual growth rates (%)
GDP at market prices
Gross Domestic Income
Real annual per capita growth rates (%)
GDP at market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption
Balance of Payments (millions of US$)
Exports of goods & services
Merchandise FOB
Imports of goods & services
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers

ANNEX B6

Tunisia - Key Economic Indicators: Base Case
(Continued)
Indicator

1994

Actual
1995
1996

Estimate
1998

1997

Page 2 of 2

1999

Projected
2000
2001

2002

Memorandumitems
Resourcebalance(% of GDP)

-4.3

-4.6

-1.6

-2.5

-3.0

-2.9

-3.5

-3.8

-3.7

Real annual growthrates (%)
Merchandiseexports
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandiseimports

2.5
-13.1
-19.3
-1.0

10.2
-0.6
18.3
6.3

-5.2
-5.1
-4.5
-10.8

-3.1
-3.3
-5.4
0.5

2.0
-3.1
2.5
14.8

4.8
6.1
4.5
6.2

4.5
6.4
4.4
5.8

5.1
5.8
4.3
5.8

6.3
5.2
6.2
5.9

31.7
26.6
5.0
7.1
1.4

30.2
27.2
3.0
7.2
2.9

30.5
28.1
2.4
7.4
2.8

28.7
25.3
3.4
7.3
2.4

29.0
24.8
4.2
6.9
0.4

27.7
24.1
3.6
7.3
2.5

27.7
23.6
4.1
7.3
3.9

27.7
23.4
4.3
7.3
3.7

27.7
23.5
4.2
7.2
3.6

43.1
7.8
131.0

42.3
6.0
113.1

43.0
13.6
27.4

45.7
16.5
83.3

44.3
5.3
125.9

43.5
7.8
143.7

43.5
9.4
90.5

43.5
9.5
90.5

43.5
9.6
90.5

Merchandiseexportprice index
Merchandiseimportpriceindex
Merchandisetermsof trade index
Real exchangerate (US$/LCU)d

120.4
102.2
117.8
97.9

128.7
115.4
111.5
100.0

137.0
126.4
108.4
100.7

145.4
129.8
112.0
100.6

143.7
118.5
121.2
100.5

142.9
117.0
122.1
100.5

145.9
119.7
121.8
100.5

149.4
123.2
121.3
100.5

153.0
126.5
121.0
100.5

Consumerpriceindex(% change)
GDP deflator(% change)

4.7
4.4

6.3
5.5

3.8
4.4

3.7
4.0

3.1
3.6

3.0
3.4

3.8
3.6

3.8
3.6

3.7
3.6

Publicfinance(% of GDP)'
Currentrevenues(incl. grants)
Currentexpenditures
Currentsurplus(+) or deficit (-)
Capitalexpenditure
Foreignfinancing
Monetaryindicators
M2/GDP
Growthof M2(%)
Private sectorcredit growth/total creditgrowth(%)
PriceIndices(1987 = 100)

a.
b.
c.
d.

Includesnet unrequitedtransfersexcludingofficialcapital grants.
Includesuse of IMF resources.
Refersto ConsolidatedCentralGovemmentaccounts
"LCU"denotes "localcurrencyunits."An increasein US$/LCUdenotesappreciation.

ANNEX B7

Tunisia - Key Exposure Indicators: Base Case

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a
Net disbursements (US$m)Y
Totaldebtservice(TDS)
(US$m)Y
Debt and debt service indicators (%)
TDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO

1994

Actual
1996

1995

1997

Estimate
1999

1998

9,609

10,914

11,464

11,321

448

753

692

603

1,457

1,480

1,466

1,413

10,489

Projection
2001

2000

2002

10,834

11,490

12,105

12,752

(224)

344

625

559

610

1,632

1,717

2,054

1,714

1,714

125.5
61.5
19.0
31.8

123.3
60.5
16.7
28.6

124.4
58.5
15.9
25.4

122.8
59.9
15.3
23.1

112.0
52.6
17.4
24.0

110.2
51.2
17.5
24.1

109.4
50.6
19.6
23.8

107.1
49.2
15.2
22.4

104.0
47.8
14.0
20.2

21.8
39.3

23.7
46.2

21.9
47.9

20.9
48.6

20.4
49.4

16.8
42.4

15.7
37.5

19.3
45.2

19.0
44.0

3.9
1715

3.8
1717

3.3
1610

3.0
1434

2.8
1458

3.0
1323

3.0
1337

2.9
1322

2.6
1310

..

..

..

..

52

50

47

45

43

41

39

37

35

IFC (US$m) (FY)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equityd

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
3

0
11

0
0

..

MIGA (FY)
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

0

65

65

65

65

0

..

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public DS (%)
IBRD DSIXGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)'
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)'

..

..

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Includes present value of guarantees.
d. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

..

..

..

ANNEX B8
Page 1 of 2

Status of Bank GroupOperationsin Tunisia
OperationsPortfolio
ClosedProjects

Last PSR

Board

Supervision Rating b/

Date

Fiscal
Year ActiveProjects
1992
1993
1994
1994
1994
1995
1995
1995
1995
1996
1996
1997
1997
1997
1998
1998
1998
1998
1999
1999

DifferenceBetween
ExpectedandActual

89

P005726
P005725
P005733
P005721
P005748
P005749
P005743
P005720
P005680
P005745
P040208
P046832
P005736
P005731
P005741
P050418
P005746
P043700
P053255
P055814

HIGHER EDUCATION
SECOND FORESTRY DEVELO
DEV.OF MTS NW REGION
TN-AGRICULTURAL SEC INV
TN-PRIVATE INVESTMENT CR
RIJRAL ROADS
SECONDARY EDUCATION
TN-RURAL FINANCE
TN-WATER SUPPLY AND SEW
2ND EMPL. & TRG.
TN-INDUSTRY SUPPORT INST
MUNICIPAL DEV. II
NATURAL RESOURCE MGM
TN-GREATER TUNIS SEWERA
HIGHER EDUC. II
TN-ASIL2
TN-HEALTH SECTOR LOAN
TRANSPORT SECTOR INV
TN-ECAL II
TN-EXPORT DEVELOPMENT

DvlpetIpeetto
Oevesope
Objectives
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
HS
S

Implemenstion
Progress
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
U
S
HS
S

to date minusactualdisbursementsto date as projectedat appraisal.
a. Intendeddisbursements
b. HS = highly satisfactory, S = satisfactory, U = unsatisfactory, HU = highly unsatisfactory.
Note Disbursement data are updated at the end of the first week of the month.

Disbursements_
_

Original Amount in US$ Millions

IBRD
69.72
62.36
25.81
116.17
118.8
48.06
91.04
65
55.83
52.39
29.89
66.87
22.42
50.81
71.15
36.37
44.48
44.47
135.29
35

IDA
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Cancel.
0
3.4
1.48
0
0.23
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Undisb.
28.24
34.71
4.8
8.5
4.56
7.26
31.7
31.13
18.73
42.78.
27.42
31.53
20.98
48.82
69.59
23.89
43.06
33.52
67.64
34.65

Orig. FrmRev'd
32.4
25.6
3.93
9.57
5.41
-3.99
33.27
31.13
10.6
19.71
15.96
11.26
5.54
11
6.26
15.05
17.41
23.84
8.16
3.65

11.4
-0.9
1.99
-3.23
3.18

n
0
5.3
0
5.98
C
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

ANNEX B8
Page 2 of 2

Tunisia
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 12131199

(In US Dollars Millions)
Held

Disbursed

FY Approval Company
Loan Equity Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0
0
0.32
0
0
0
0.29
BIAT
0
1998/00
0
0
1993 Ideal Sanitaire
0
1.02
0
0
0
1.02
0.33
0
0
1995 Maghreb IM Bank
0
0.33
0
0
0
0.77
0
0
1986/92/98 SITEX
0
0.77
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.59
0
0
1973/75
Sousse-Nord
0
0.59
0
0
0
2.36
0
0
1998 Tuninvest
0
4.65
Total Portfolio:

0

7.68

0

0

0

5.36

0

0

ANNEX B9a
Page 1 of 19
Tunisia - CAS Program Matrix'
Diagnosis
Developmentl

World Bank Group (WBG)
CountryPerformance
Indicators2
4
Performance'
Institutions
Policies
_ Tunisia I Benchmark
Overview.Tunisia has had an impressiverecord of povertyreductionover the years, owingto the government'sand the
Povertyand Social
public's long-standingcommitmentsto social development. Tunisiais also far ahead of most MENA countries in
Development
promoting women as equal partners in the developmentprocess. Progresstowards poverty reductionwas halted in the first
half of the 1990s, mainlydue to droughts.With the incidenceof poverty now around 7%, further progresswill depend on
better targeting of anti-povertyinterventionsand on developing effectivesocial protectionto avert any slide-backs.
The institutionalbase
In the last CAS period, as before then, an
.6
..
mprovingaccess to
Poverty incidence (% 1995)
importantelement of the Bank Group
basic services and social and capacityfor
..
1.61
Povertygap (national poverty
cooperationstrategy in Tunisia has been
designingand
conditionshas been a
line) 1995
to promote human capital developmentto
..
priority for public policy implementingsocial
22.5
Child malnutrition:height for
move Tunisia towards middle income
policiesare wellin Tunisia. Between
age (% under 5 yrs 1995)
developed, includingthe country standardsof educationattainment
0.0
-2.0 1960and 1990,the
Child mortality gap (yrs, malerates, qualified manpower,and financially
incidenceof poverty fell BanqueTunisienne de
female 1998)
Solidarit6. Indeed,the
soundhealth and social security systems.
..
from 40% to about 7%
2.3
% share of income: lowest 10%,
Nearly a quarter of lendingto-date has
of the population. At the remarkableprogress to
1990
been devoted to social and human
date would not have
..
same time, the growth
30.7
% share of income: highest 10%,
been possibleotherwise. resourcedevelopmentsectors.
rate of populationfell
1990
0.0
5.3 and life expectancyrose An importantarea for
Children 10-14in labor force (%
A series of analyticaland advisory
improvementis the
markedly; regional
of age group 1997)
activities, includingsectorreports,
disparitieswere reduced; statisticalinformation
poverty and social assessment,and inand improvementswere availableat household
country seminars and workshops,have
level to undertake inmade in education,
been undertakento underpin the design
access to health care and depth assessmentsof
and quality of lending in the social
basic infrastructure.
poverty, inequalityand
employmenttrends. The sectors.
Future efforts call for re- limiting factor here is not
lack of well-managed
Overall, the Bank Group has continuously
focusinganti-poverty
backed Tunisia's programsin poverty
surveys that collect
programs,increasing
labor marketflexibility, relevant and comparable reductionover the years. The country's
information,but rather
programshave enabled Tunisiato
addressingthe social
distinguishitself among developing
dimensionsof increased the lack of timely
exploitationof the data
countries and emergingmarket economies
competitionand
by governmentagencies for its success in sustainingsocial
strengtheningsocial
and poor dissemination achievementseven in the processof
protection,
within the communityof implementing severe stabilizationand
adjustmentmeasures.
concermedexpertsboth
ifinTuniisiaand abroad.
Areas

ANNEX B9a
Page 2 of 19
Development

l

World Bank Group (WBG)
CountryPerformance
Indicators2
3
4
Performance
Institutions
Policies
lTunisia Benchmark
Overview. Tunisiahas pursued prudent macroeconomicpolicies for over a decade, and is a regionalsuccess story
Macro economy
recording sound financialbalances,decliningdebt and inflation,and sustainedgrowth of average per capita income. The
tasks ahead include the need to preservethe stabilityof Tunisia's external accountsand reestablishinga comfortablelevel
of reserves; continued fiscal consolidation;and consolidatingthe disinflation gains achieved over the last CAS period. The
Bank Group,cooperatingwith other creditors--notablythe IMF, the EU and the AfDB--continuesto support
macroeconomicpolicy reformswith adjustmentoperations and analyticaland advisory activities.
Planning instituitionsare The WBG has stressed and supported
200
The ongoing5-yr
05
Per capita GNP ($Atlas method, well-organizedto collect macroeconomicreforms through
DevelopmentPlan
1998)
structuraland sector adjustmentloans.
informationand to
3.2
-0.8 (1997-2001)stresses
Real Per Capita GNP Growth
The operationscompleted to date have
design and project
liberal policies and
(annual %, 1993-98)
been assessedas satisfactory,and the
policies. Performance
export-ledgrowth,with
an average growth rate
monitoringand program reforms implementedunder various
operations are considered likelyto be
of 6% per year, based on adjustments,however,
an increasein total factor are weak, especiallyat
sustained.
sector levels.
productivity.
Under coordinationof the Ministry of
InternationalCooperation,the WBG has
Central monetary
3.5 Traditionallycautious
3.6
Inflation,GDP deflator(% 1998)
monetarystance has cut managementinstitutions conductedmacroeconomicpolicy
dialogue continuouslywith the Ministry
inflation and kept it in
are strong and wellof Economic Development,the Ministry
coordinated.
check.
of Finance and the Central Bank. These
Budget preparationand
dialoguesoccur in close consultations
-3.1
-4.8 Financialpolicies are
Fiscal Balance/GDP(% 1996)
with the IMF and other externalpartners
executionbodies are
67.5 geared towards
55.3
Gov't Debt/GDP(% 1996)
and have been underpinnedby formal and
.. maintaininginternaland well-managed.
-3.4
Curr. Acc't Bal./GDP(% 1998)
informal economicstudies. Where the
Traditionallymicro114.2
135.4 external stability,in a
PV of External Debt (% of
authoritiesidentified any needsto
managed and ex-ante
context of declining
Exports 1997)
strengthen local policy planningand
1.0
1.1 public and externaldebt controls are gradually
Aid (% of GDP1997)
being replacedwith
analysis capabilities,the WBGhas
ratios.Wage bill and
successfulefforts of the
provided support with IDF funds as well
interesttake up half of
as in-countryand regionaltraining
Cour des Comptesto
governmentrevenues.
modernizeex-post audit organizedby the World Bank Institute.
and control along
internationalstandards.
Areas

ANNEX B9a
Page 3 of 19
Areas

Education and
Knowlcdge

Gross primary enrollment rate,
female(% 1996)
Gross primary enrollmentrate,
male (% 1996)
Gross secondary enrollmentrate
(% 1996)
Youth illiteracyrate, female (%
1997)
Public expenditureon education
(% of GNP 1996)
Scientistsand engineers (per
millionpeople 1992)
R&D expenditure(% of GDP
1995)

Development
Indicators2
CountryPerformance
World Bank Group (WBG)
4
Tunisia Benchmark
Policies
Institutions
Performance'
Overview. Educationhas been one the most importantareas of progress in Tunisia over the past few decades.
Achievementsin educationhave not only helped reduce poverty,but also createdan increasinglyeducated and productive
workforce. Recently,Tunisiahas begun facingthe more complex challengesof efficiencyand quality to provide the skills
required to accommodaterapid modernizationand externalopening of the economy and changes in local life styles. The
country has also to addressthe issueof high drop-outrates, especiallyin basic education.
112.6
120.1
64.6
15.2
6.7
388.0
0.3

88.9 Primary educationhas
almost universal
102.6 coveragenow, and there
is very little differencein
60.4 enrollment rates between
boys and girls.
27.4
In the 1990s,schooling
5.4 has become mandatory
up to age 16 (or 9 years
..
of schooling)
..

Greatestchallenge in
basic educationnow is
ensuring all children
who enter each cycle
completetheir schooling
satisfactorily,with an
adequateminimumlevel
of qualityand an
emphasison excellence
for all instead of for the
few.
Highereducationin the
country is a wellperformingsystem but,
with enrollments
expectedto double over
the next decade, this
systemwould be
strained. To meet fiture
challenges,the system
needs: less rigid

To a largeextent, the
successof the Tunisian
educationsystemhas
been made possibleby:
government'sclear longrange vision of its
objectivesand a wellarticulated,
comprehensivestrategy;
ownershipof new
conceptsthroughoutthe
system, through
extensiveconsultations;
developmentof a strong
national capacityfor
sectorplanning, policy
analysisand
implementation;and
Governmentwillingness
to evaluate policies and
programs,modifythem
as appropriate,and take
difficultpolicy decisions
as necessary.

The BanikGroup has supportedthe
priority given by Tunisiato educationand
knowledgedevelopmentover a period of
more than 30 years. Tunisia receivedthe
first ever World Bank loan for education
in September 1962,and the most recent
loan, Higher EducationII, was approved
in March 1998. The evolutionof Bankfinancedprojects, girded by analytical
studies, reflects the changes in education
strategy of the Bank as well as the
developmentof Tunisianpolicies in
education and training.
Around the mid-1980s, despite almost
universal access to primary education,the
educationsystem still sufferedfrom high
dropout and repeater rates and low intercycle transition rates. Placementrates for
vocational training graduateswere low,
reflecting poor labor marketlinkages.
And academicsecondary and higher
educationwere geared to meeting the
staffing needs of the public sector, and
budget constraintson higher education
had seriously eroded its quality. In this
situation,the Bank supported
Government'scomprehensivereform of
its education,training and employment
promotion policies with a series of four
projects from 1989to 1994. These
projects were characterizedby their subsector coverage and their innovative
approaches.

ANNEX B9a
Page 4 of 19
Areas

Development
Indicators2
4
-Tunisia 1 Benchmark

CountryPerformance
Institutions
Policies
channeling/assignment
of students; greater
decentralizationof
decision-makingfor
universities;and viable
measures for financing
its expansion,including
increasedprivate
participation..

World Bank Group (WBG)
3
Performance

A program of
partnershipbetween
vocationaltraining
centersand private
industrieshas recently
been implemented.

Rural Strategy

Rural populationbelow national
poverty line (% 1995)
Rural populationdensity
(people/sqkm arable, 1996)
Rural population(% of total)
Electrificationrate in rural areas
(% in 1994)
Accessto potable water in rural
areas (% in 1998)

Overview. Rural populationhas declinedover the past 20-25 years, from 55% of total to 35%. A similartrend has
occurred in the workingpopulation,with the employed labor force in agriculturedecliningfrom 42% of total to 22%. The
contributionof agricultureto GDP, meanwhile, has droppedless rapidly, from 17% to 13%,as past rural strategy
channeled substantialresourcesto sustainingthe role of agriculture,especiallyto attain food security and to contain the
externaltrade deficit. The sectornow faces major constraintsby way of availablewater and land resources, looming
competitionas Tunisia opens up its economy and the attendant social strains during transition.The incidence of poverty in
rural areas is nearly 14%,comparedto 4% in urban areas.
About 22% of bank lending to-datehas
The public sector
..
Tunisiahas undertaken
13.9
been devoted to agricultureand rural
institutionalmachinery
reforms in agriculture
areas, and there are at present seven
for the rural sector was
195.8 since 1989. Input
46.6
built up overthe yearsto active operations in the sector, including
subsidieshave been
... substantially reduced for undertake a vast array of in forestry and rural roads.
35
functions. The reforms
fertilizers,animal feed,
..
63.7
The Bank has supportedagricultural
under way this decade
seed, chemicals,
reformsalso with non-lendingsector
have sought to increase
irrigation,and
..
80
work and the policy dialogue therefrom.
the involvementof the
mechanizedservices.
While inuch progress has been achieved
Provision of agricultural private sector (see
in subsidy and input marketing reforms,
preceding column).
support serviceshave
the dialogue remains active on reforms in
been openedup, with the While extension,
veterinary and laboratory food marketing,issues of comparative
supply of farm inputs,
advantageand international
servicesare still
collectionof produce,
competitiveness,and land titling and
provisionof mechanized essentiallyprovided by
tenure.
plowingand harvesting, the state, servicesby

ANNEX B9a
Page 5 of 19
Areas

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia Benchmark'

CountryPerformance
Policies
Institutions
and fisheryport services private extension agents
now all privatized.
and veterinarianshave
Progress has been slower been growing. Most
in liberalizingfood
recently, the importance
marketing,wherein the
of integrating
state remains involvedin managementof ground
cereals, olive oil, sugar, and surface water
tea, coffee, tobacco and resourceshas been
wine. The lack of
recognizedand is
security of tenure,
expectedto form a key
fragmentationof
element of a long-term
holdings,and land titling sector strategy.
and registration
problems are longstanding constraintsnow
being addressed

3

World Bank Group (WBG)
3
Performance

cautiously.

Urban Strategy

Overview. Tunisiais among the most urbanized countriesin the MiddleEast and North Africa region. Tunisia's
capabilities in detailed urbanplanning (amenagementdu territoire)has proved an effective instrumentfor mastering fast
urban growth and avoidingthe growth of slums. Urban housing recorded impressiveadvances in the past, ti1l990. Since
then, the housing situation has becomeincreasinglydifficult,with the type of housing produced by the privatesector
increasinglyunaffordableand/or unattractiveto many households. To improve the situation,the strategicareas of housing
finance and urban land marketwould need to be resolved. Tunisiawill also have to face the challenge of growing periurbanizationaccompaniedwith increasingperi-urbanpoverty due to inflows of populationfrom rural areas.
Urban population(% of total
4.
58.4 Urban policies in Tunisia Tunisiaat independence The Bank's long-standinginvolvementin
1998)
are reflectedby the
inheriteda highly
the urban sector has included seven
3.6
..
responsibilitiesvested in centralizedand powerful operations committedto-date, and
Urban populationbelow national
poverty line (% 1995)
municipalities,namely: national administration
additionalones under preparation. The
a) local implementation and very weak local and activities and investmentssupported thus
far have includedurban planningand
of nationaldevelopment regionalgovernment
plans and definitionof
units. The municipal
transport, municipalservices,public
five-yearmunicipal
structureis more than a
sector institution building and a line of
investmentprograms,
centuryold; its rules and credit to the HousingBank.
and b) managemenitof
regulationswere updated
municipal affairs,
in 1975, again in 1985
In the context of past projects, numerous
involvingmainitenianice and, more recently,in
studies have been carriedout to refine
of local roads and public 1991and 1996.
urban strategy and implementation;e.g.
ameniities,hotuselhold
improvementof urban planning laws,
waste collection,road
rental housing policy, managementof
system alignment,
Public sector institutions urban development,town policy strategy,

ANNEX B9a
Page 6 of 19
Areas

Labor Market

Male unemploymentrate
(% 1997)
Female unemploymentrate
(% 1997)
Female participationrate
(% of labor force 1998)

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia Benchmark4

World Bank Group (WBG)
CountryPerformance
3
Performance
Institutions
Policies
standardizedcity legend, housing costs
zoning, sanitationplans, have been built up over
and prices, housing strategy,plan for
the past 20 years to
and managementof the
developmentof GreaterTunis, analysis of
civil registry. In view of include a National Real
watersheds,local tax reform, urban
EstateCorporation,for
the importantgap
services provisionand cost recovery,and
home construction,the
between the role
Urban Rehabilitationand municipalproceduresand projects
assignedto the
manuals.
RenewalAgency to
municipalitiesand their
renovate urban areas, the
delivery abilities,the
Government,throughits Land Development
Agency for site
MunicipalInvestment
Program,has focused on developmentand the
increasingthe efficiency Housing Bank. The
performanceof these
of municipalitiesand
bodies has been mixed
regionalcouncils in
and there is a clear need
decision-making,
to design incentives and
resourcemobilization
measures for the private
and allocation,and
project implementation. sectorto undertakemore
of their functions.
in
Tunisia has resulted in few labor disputes,but at the cost of limiting
labor
relations
of
Overview.The institutionalization
the ability of private and public firms to restructure. As the economymoves closer to internationalintegration,government
will need to reshape its role in the labor market as a regulator, while at the same time consolidatingTunisia's positive
record in labor relations and workers' conditions.
Bank involvementin the labor markethas
Formalinstitutionsare
A major challengeto
15. -.
included financingof training and
policy-makersis the fact fairlywell developedin
employmentprojects, dialogue on labor
Tunisiafor all aspectsof
..
that unemployment
17.4
marketpolicies in the context of
remains high, especially relationshipsbetween
workersand employers. adjustmentoperations and trackinglabor
26.9 for first-jobseekers,
31.2
markettrends in the context of assessing
Labormarket
despite a decadeof
negotiationsare governed social conditions.
robust growth and job
creation and fairly stable by an extensiveset of
It has been suggested that further
rulescontainedin the
participationrates.
involvementin this area needs to focus on
Labor Codeand in
closer monitoringof labor market
various Conventions
Recentdynamics of the
developments,includingduration, skill
labor marketreveal also Collectives,which are
compositionand location of
negotiatedby tripartite
that: a) job creation has
unemployment;appropriatelabor market
committees,everythree
been faster in urban
interventions,includingpolicies to deal
years, withthe aim of
areas, b) employment
opportunitieshave been promotingsocial stability with redundanciesin public and private
sectors, encouragefirms to invest in onand avoidingindustrial.
shifting towardhigher

ANNEX B9a
Page 7 of 19
Areas

Development
Indicators2
lTunisia Benchmark'

CountryPerformance
Policies
Institutions
skills, c) value added per conflicts.They determine
worker is rising, and d)
amongotherthingsthe
non-salariedjobs are
levelof the wagesand
increasingfor men.
salaries,and their growth
for the next threeyears.
Prospectsfor a reduction This policyhas succeeded
of unemploymentare
inrecent yearsin making
hard because of rapid
labordisputesveryrare,
growth of working age
and has beenan asset in
populationand likely
attractinginvestments.
increases in female
However,the
participationrates in the institutionalization
of
near future. Concerted
labor relationsand the
action is needed to free
highpremiumplacedon
up and stimulatethe
socialstabilityhave
private SME sector,
hamperedflexibilityin
which has high potential the labormarket.
for job growth.
A new employmentfund,
2121, is to be formally
Revision of current
createdin the new budget
regulation of the labor
law to addresslabor
market(recruitmentand marketissues,economic
firing, severance
liberalizationand speed
payment,) is needed to
up ofjob creation
increaseflexibility.

World Bank Group (WBG)
3
Performance
the-job training for workers, and promote
entrepreneurship;and educationreform,
to improvethe responsivenessof the
educationsystemto emerginglabor
marketdemands. In-servicetraining for
small and medium enterprises,moreover,
needsto focus on the demand-sideof the
training needs of such enterprises.

ANNEX B9a
Page 8 of 19
Areas

Health and Population

Child (1-5) mortality rate (per
1,000 live births 1997)
Total fertility rate (birthsper
woman 1997)
Maternalmortality ratio (per
100,000live births 1994)
Life expectancyat birth (years
1997)
Births attendedby skilled health
staff (% 1993)
Adult HIV prevalence (% 1997)

Public expenditureon health (%
of GDP 1997)
Populationin 2020/Populationin
1998ratio
Child malnutrition:weight for
age (% under 5 yrs 1995)
Contraceptiveprevalence(% of
eligiblewomen 1995)

Development
World Bank Group (WBG)
CountryPerformance
Indicators2
4
Performance'
Institutions
Policies
Tunisia Benchmark
Basic health services are availableto almost all the population.The govemtment'sfinancialresponsibilitiesin the provision
of health care services have been reduced through new financialburdensharing arrangementsover the past years. In
addition, a health insurancereform, underpreparation,will permit privatepractitionersto be reimbursed.However,
Tunisia's health care, particularlythe public sector, faces the challengesof providingmore and better qualitybasic health
care services more equitably.This means improvingthe equity and efficiencyof operations, and concentratingpublic
resourceson the poorest segmentsof the population.
33.0
2.8
69.0
69.5
85
..

2.6
132.0
9.0
60.0

47.4 The health care system
covers almost all of the
3.7 populationand compares
favorablywith that of
..
other middle income
developingcountries.
66.9 The public sector is the
main provider, supplying
..
about 90% of all hospital
beds and over 60% of
..

medical staff. In 1997,

public sector health care
expendituresrepresented
148.7 52% of total health
spending(compulsory
14.5 health insurance funds
accounted for about one
..
third of that) and the
private sectorthe other
48%. New cost recovery
measureshave recently
been introduced.
The private sectoris
expandingrapidly: its
bed capacityhas doubled
in the last five years and
the outpatientvisits are
almost equal in number
to those in the public
sector. Government
ongoinghealth insurance
reform,which will allow
privatepractitionersto
..

Accessto basic health
care is availableto the
populationregardlessof
income. The state
provides free or
subsidizedhealth care to
the lowestincome
groups through two
public schemes. The
AssistanceMedicale

The Bank has supported health and
populationprogramswith investment
operations involving expansionand
improvementsof health infrastructureas
well as institution-building.A project
rated highly satisfactoryincreasedthe
national contraceptiveprevalencerate
and improvedthe health status of the
population,with particular emphasison
women and children in rural areas. Bank

Gratuite, Type I covers

involvement has also been aimed at

about 117,000families
classifiedas needy; and
the AssistanceMedicale
Gratuite, Type II (AMG
11)which provides health
care on the basis of a
passbook issuedfor a
small annual fee and
payment of reduced fees
averaging about 20% of
the regular fees for
outpatientvisits.

supportingGovernmenteffortsto reform
the sector and improve its efficiencyby
readjustingfinancingmechanismsand
improvinghospital management. At the
suggestionof Government,Bank
interventionnow focuseson i) facilitating
sector reforms, ii) strengtheningof
regionalhospitals and medical emergency
services,and iii) institutional
strengtheningin health policy and
planning. To that end, a flexible lending
instrument,the sector investmentand
maintenanceloan is currentlyunder
implementation.

ANNEX B9a
Page 9 of 19
Areas

Public Sector,
Governance, and Justice
System

(ratings are from I =worstto

6=best)
ICRG corruption rating, 1998
ICRG bureaucratic quality
rating, 1998
ICRG Law and order rating,
1998
Government expenditure (% of
GDP 1996)

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia Benchmark'4

Country Performance
Policies
Institutions
be reimbursed, will also.
have a strong impact.
Government efforts to
readjust financial burden
sharing mechanisms
have enabled a reduction
of the Government
subsidy to the recurrent
budget of its tertiary
hospitals (i.e., 50% of
expenditures) from 69%
in 1991 to 35% in 1998

1

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3

Overview: The share of public administration relative to GDP has remained around 15% in the last decade but that of
public enterprises has shrunk, from 29% in 1990 to 22% in 1996. Public sector reforms have aimed to improve service
delivery, but the country has an overly controlling and close-knit style of governance. By and large, the rule of law
prevails, a consultation mechanism on economic issues exists, albeit centrally-orchestrated, and the population values the
all-round stability and prosperity engendered by successive governments. Government is now considering devolution of
administrative responsibilities and the CAS proposes to support this in its operational program.
Bank involvementhas included dialogue
Past reforms have
Much has been done to
and support of public enterprise reforms
increased the efficiency
modernize the public
3.5 sector and strengthen its of the existing system of and the privatization program through
3.5
adjustment operations.
2.7 contribution to economic governance, but this
2.7
system relies on
performance. Important
Most recently, public sector management
4.3 achievements include the centralized controls on
5.2
issues related to provision of services,
inputs ill-suited to
clarification of the role
enterprise governance and private sector
24.7 of the state, reduced role rapidly evolving and
32.6
development have been reviewed in the
increasingly complex
of public enterprises in
productive sectors, and a circumstances. Tunisia's SSR and the PSA (both slated for
completion in FY2000).
exemplary policies and
start at separating public
programs on economic
mandates and business
The Bank also provided grant funding to
and social development
activities within their
strengthen the Tunisian Centre d'Etudes
have not been matched
operations; improved
Juridiques el Judiciaires, which carries
access to public services, by progress in opening
out essential research and comparative
through the Ombudsman up the civil society
legal analysis as a prelude to the
because of concerns
and related initiatives; a
number of adminiistrative about extremism and its 'preparation of important draft legislation.
The grant funding has resulted in gaining
attendant instability, as
reforms, ranging from
in neighboring countries. Tunisia membership in the Global Legal
the Cour des Comptes to
civil service pay; and the Hence Tunisia remains a Information Network (GLIN) and a

ANNEX B9a
Page 10 of 19
Areas

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia [Benchmark4

Country Performance
Policies
Institutions
very centrally managed
introduction of elements
economy and society.
of multi-year budgeting,
and the integration of
Still, its achievements in
social development and
capital and recurrent
the emergence of a
budgets.
strong middle class
should allow the country
to "open up"
progressively, especially
as the situation in
neighboring countries
stabilizes.

Financial System

M2 (% of GDP 1998)
Credit to the private sector (% of
GDP 1998)
Real lending interest rate (%
1998)
External short-term debt (% of
forex reserves 1997)
Non performing loans of the
banking sector (% in 1997)

.__

.

World Bank Group (WBG)
Perfornance
successful launch of "GLIN Tunisia".
The funding also supported preparation of
a "Strategic Action Program for
Legislative Reform" aimed at
strengthening the legal framework for
private sector development. The official
review and approval of the action
program, however, has been slow to
proceed.

_

Overview: Reforms from the late 1980s have reduced financial repression and also encouraged the development of private
venture capital funds. Still, the financial system remains dominated by the banking system and by a strong government
presence within it. In addition, some interest rate restrictions on deposits remain, and the central bank's priority
refinancing facilities for certain sectors of the economy (e.g. agriculture) influence bank credit allocation. Further reforms
are under way to deepen and develop the sector.
44.3
50.8

71.7
42.7

3.2

..

75.4

51.0

31

..

Methodical reforms over
the past decade have
involved the
modernization of the
legal and institutional
structure of the financial
system, phase-out of
direct credit controls,
privatization of the
management of the stock
exchange and setting up
of the legal framework
for new operators such
as merchant banks,
leasing companies and
mutual ftnds.

The financial system is
dominated by the
banking system which,
at present, is made up of:
the central bank, 13
deposit banks (6
government-owned), 8
development banks (2
government-owned and
6 joint ventures between
Tunisia and various Arab
states), 8 private leasing
companies and I savings
institution.

The impact of past Bank lending in the
financial sector was circumscribed by the
policy and institutional distortions.
Subsequently, following close dialogue
and a comprehensive report by a Tunisian
Banking Commission, the World Bank,
with the EU and the AfDB, is now
supporting implementation of the
Government's reform and modernization
program aimed at: (i) addressing the large
arrears of public enterprises to the
banking system; (ii) modernizing capital
markets regulations and payments
system; (iii) revamping the banking law
and strengthening prudential and
supervision regulations; and (iv)
consolidating the banking sector.

ANNEX B9a
Page 11 of 19
Areas

Private Sector
Environment

Private investment(% of GDP
1997);excluding public
enterprises
Stock marketcapitalization(%
of GDP 1998)
Euromoneycredit rating 1998

Development
Indicators2
4
Tunisia | Benchmark

CountryPerformance
World Bank Group (WBG)
3
Policies
Institutions
Performance
Efforts are ongoingto
Other financial
In addition,the authoritiesare responding
restructurethe banking
institutionsinclude: 2
to the problem of non-performingloans
sector (see lastcolumn). merchantbanks, 8
of the privatesector by establishingthe
When implemented,
offshorebanks, 2
frameworkfor the creation of private loan
these measures could
factoringcompanies,20 recovery agencies. A few such agencies
improve significantlythe mutualfunds, 19 capital have been created, but it is still unclear
servicesprovided to
risk companies, 16
whether this mechanismwill prove
private businesses;
insurancecompanies,
effective
however, upgrading
and the stock exchange,
servicesavailableto
brokeragehouses,and
private enterprisesin
the central depository for
Tunisia to the level
securities.
availableto competitors
will require more radical Prudentialregulation and
liberalizationof the
Central Bank
financialsector,
supervisionof the
includingentry of
banking sector need to
foreign banks.
be strengthened.

Overview: Much has been done to encourageprivateinvestmentbut the responsehas been below expectations.
Meanwhile,the external environmentis becomingmore competitive. The key constraintsappear to be Tunisia's complex
and discretionarymix of businessincentives,financingmechanismsand promotionalschemesthat effectivelyfavor
established large firms and enclave (offshore)locations,whereasthe major means for further developmentshould involve
a simplifiedand more neutral businessenvironmentto unleashthe potential of private small and medium enterprisesfor
rapid growth of output and employment.
ff.-F
12.1--16.8 The privatesector has
Importantinstitutional
An assessmentof the privatesector
been accordedgenerous improvementsin recent environment was preparedin 1994
tax breaks and grant
years have included the
focusingon measuresto make the private
10.3
30.6 assistancefor investment drafting of a modern
sector more competitiveon world
and export. Regulatory CompanyLaw, passage markets. Key policy and institutional
45.7
37.2

ANNEX B9a
Page 12 of 19
Development

Areas
-FTunisia

Indicators2
lBenchmark'

Strengtheningthe private
sector environmentwill
require: simple,neutral
incentivesframework;
easy access to finance;
further regulatory
reform; effectivepublic
sector support;and
efficient and sustainable
infrastructure.

Trade and Openness

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3
recommendationswere made for
improvementsin the financialmarkets,
the institutionalinvestorsand social
security, specialincentivesand the offshore sector, foreigndirect investment,
educationand training, trade facilitation,
privatization,the legal frameworkand
infrastructureand public utilities. This
assessmenthas been updated during
FY2000to gaugeprogress and remaining

CountryPerformance
Institutions
Policies
of a leasing law and
frameworkhas been
rationalizedand there are establishmentof a
regine for companiesin
low administrative
financial difficulties,and
barriers to entry. The
incentivesand financing ongoingmodernization
of Customsand the
mechanisms,however,
are complex and beyond financial sector. Several
institutions,such as
reach of the small and
mediumenterprisesthat Agence de Promotion de
dominatemanufacturing. I'Investissementand
Commission Superieure
de l 'Investissement are

issues.

involved in investment
promotion.

Bank support has also been provided in
the form of loan operations (Private
Investment,IndustrialSupport Institution,
and Export Developmentprojects) and
grant financingfor a review of trade
policy and strategy.

To improve the
competitivenessof the
private sector, further
reforms need to focus
on: facilitatingcompany
operationand exit;
improving enforcement
capacity and judicial
system; establishingand
securingproperty rights;
strengthening
competitionpolicy and
consumerprotection;
and improving contract
law.

Overview: Implementationof the 1995partnershipagreementwith the EU--withprovisions for establishinga free trade
zone--is on track. Tunisiais also a memberof the WTO. Institutionsto promote foreign investmentare in place; results
have been steady thoughslow, except in 1998when privatizationof two cement factories helped double FDI inflows. In
the short term, maintainingthe privatizationmomentumbuilt in 1998will be criticalto attractingFDI. In the medium to
long term, trade openness and enterpriserestructuringare likelyto generatemore efficient firms and more appropriaterules
for domestic competition. These in turn will attract FDI and help job creation.
-- -- - -- - --- ----- - --

--

- --

- --

- -- - --

- --

- --

- -

-

- - - --

- --

- --

- --

- --

- --

- --

- -- - --

- --

- --

- --

-

- - -- - --

- --

- --

- --

- --

- --

- - - - --

- -- - --

-

ANNEX B9a
Page 13 of 19
Areas

Trade (% of PPP GDP 1997)
Gross FDI (% of PPP GDP
1997)
WTO member
Import duties (% of imports
1996)

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia Benchmark4
25.7
0.7

26.1
0.9

Yes
10.2

14.7

Country Performance
Policies
Institutions
The importance of trade
in Tunisia's economy has
historically been high
and stable. A trade
liberalization plan
launched in 1987 under
the country's Structural
Adjustment Program
was followed up with the
partnership agreement
with the EU in 1995,
including provisions for
a phased establishment
of a free trade zone.
Since the mid-1980s,
Tunisia has successfully
managed its transition
from a resource-based to
a manufactures-based
export strategy.
Generous tax incentives
have been granted to offshore firms, which
export at least 80% of
production. E-lence,a
salient features of this
transition has been the
shift from an export base
dominated by oil and
related products to one
dominated by textiles,
clothing and accessories.
The heavy dependence
of Tunisia's exports on
oil and the attendant
exposure to oil price
fluctuations have thus

receded.

While the administrative
machinery of trade
operations and of trade
promotion institutions
have been gradually
streamlined, much
remains to be done in
this regard, especially in
Customs procedures and
facilities.
Internationally, Tunisia
acceded to the GATT in
1990, participated in the
Uruguay Round
agreement in 1993, and
became a member of the
WTO in 1994. The
country is also a member
of the Maghreb Customs
Union.
Tunisia's agreement with
the EU, the first in the
MENA region, has set
the stage for the
country's trade and
development agenda
well into the first decade
of the twenty first
century.

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance3
Bank support in this area has included a
series of studies analyzing the impact of
trade policy reforms and the EU
partnership agreement. Also, Bank
financing has been provided for
adjustment operations (notably SAL and
ECAL I) involving trade policy reforms,
and for investment operations supporting
industry and trade (Private Industry
Support Upgrading Project) and cargo
handling, among other components
(Transport Sector Loan). The
development objectives as well as the
implementation progress of the abovementioned completed and ongoing
operations have been assessed
satisfactory.
Most recently, the Export Development
Project was approved, providing financial
and technical assistance to: a) improve
access to export outlets and buyers; b)
improve access to pre-shipment export
finance, especially for small and medium
enterprises and emerging exporters; and
c) facilitate trade by simplifying import
and export-related procedures.

ANNEX B9a
Page 14 of 19
Areas

Social Protcction

Public expenditureon social
security and welfare (% of GDP
1996)

Development
Indicators2
Trunisia Benchmark

Country Perfornance
Institutions
Policies
Policies are now
requiredto address the
issuesof marketand
product concentrations,
and the deteriorating
balance in energytrade.

J

World Bank Group (WBG)
3
Performance

Overview: Due to the government'slong-standingcommitinett to social development,a comprehensivesocial protection
systemhas been developed in Tunisia. But the institutionsresponsible for social achievementneed to adapt to a chanlging
economicenvironment. The social security systemsuffers from weak contribution-benefitlinks and high evasion, and
returns on pension reservesare low. There is cross-subsidizationamong various insurance/assistanceprograms. The
urgency of reforms is mitigatedby available reserves(due to detnographicstructure),which gives a window of oppoortunlity
for phasing-infuture work in the mediumrun. Targetingof safety net programsneed to be improvedand their
administrationmade more efficient.
.
The systemof social
The social security
Bank involvementin the social protection
protection in Tunisiais
system is managedin the area in Tunisia has included analytical
main by the social
work examiningthe various elements of
made up of active labor
market policies,
insurance funds:Caisse the social protection systemand proposals
contiibutive(social
iiationale de Securite
for pension reform.
Sociale for the private
security) and noncontributive(sociai
sector, and Caisse
Based on the analyticalwork undertaken
assistance)schemes,
Nationale de Retraite et thus far our dialogue has suggested the
de PrevoyanceSociale
't'unisian social protection system needs
The mandatory
contributivesocial
for the public sector.
to address importantpolicy issues that
security system covers
concern:a) the system's ability to provide
agricultureworkers and
Informalsafety nets have adequate but affordablebenefits; b) its
the self-employedas
developedto provide
effectivenessin reaching the most needy
well as urban wagesocial protection to
groups; c) its impact onithe efficient
eamers. Cash benefits
informalworkers
functionintgof labor markets; and d) its
contributionto the developtnent of the
are provided against
insurablesocial risks
To preparedeeper
financial sector.
(retirement,disability
reformsof the social
and survivors'pensions, securitysystem,a social
and health care) and
securityresearchcenter
there is protection
was createdin 1998under
against non-insurable
the Ministryof Social
Affairs. Its main
risks (family benefit
responsibilityis to create
payments). System
coveragehas increased
a socialsecuritydata base
substantiallyin the past
and preparea more

ANNEX B9a
Page 15 of 19
Areas

Water and Sewerage

Access to safe water, urban (%
of population 1994)
Access to safe water, rural (% of
population 1994)
Access to sanitation, urban (% of
population 1994)
Access to sanitation, rural (% of
population 1993)

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia j Benchmark 4

Country Performance
Policies
_
Institutions
decade, from one million fundamental reform of
people (55% of the
the system (pension and
eligible labor force) in
health insurance).
1987 to about 2 million
people (81% of eligible
labor force) in 1997.

World Bank Group (WBG)
Performance 3

Overview. Tunisia is only moderately endowed with water resources. Moreover, these resources are distributed unevenly
by natural conditions within the country. Still, the population's access to safe water and sanitation has been remarkably
well-developed. With almost all water sources now fully developed, the consolidation of past progress will necessitate
careful demand management and a sound institutional framework for integrated management of ground and surface water
resources.
100.0
98.2 Tunisia has devoted
Two institutions--Societe The Bank has had a long-standing
substantial resources to
Nationale d'Exploitation
involvement in the water and sewerage
80.0
63.2 the expansion and sound et de Distribution des
area in Tunisia, making loans for urban
management of water
Eaux (SONEDE) under
and rural water supply and sewerage
100.0
92.0 supply and sewerage
Ministry of Agriculture
sectors (13 operations) and for irrigation
facilities in the country.
and Office National de
development and rehabilitation (8
36.4
..
The country has coped
I'Assainissernent
operations).
well with the major
(ONAS) under Ministry
constraints in the sector-- of Environment--are
Past operations were completed
remote location of fresh
responsible, respectively, satisfactorily and there are at present
water sources from the
for water supply and
three water supply/sewerage projects
consumption centers and sewerage in the urban
under implementation.
high salinity of many
areas. There are no
water sources--by
municipally-owned
Bank-financed projects in the area have
prioritizing its goals. At water utilities. About
included a number of technical and
first, priority was given
80% of agriculture relies
financial studies, including preparation, in
to urban areas to quickly on groundwater pumped
1975, of a water master plan parts of
provide service to a large from wells operated by
which were subsequently selected for
number of consumers.
farmers or user groups.
financing by the Bank.
The next priority went to The remaining water
agglomerated rural
used by agriculture is
A most recent Water Sector Study,
population, and then to
supplied to the farmers
completed in 1999, was financed through
the scattered rural
by the regional
a PHRD grant and Strategic Compact
population.
directorates of the
Funds. The study underscores the
Ministry of Agriculture.
strategic importance of the water sector in
Policy attention now
Both the SONEDE and
Tunisia now and for the future, especially
needs to focus more on
ONAS have started
in agriculture, which uses around 80% of

ANNEX B9a
Page 16 of 19
Areas

Environment and
Culture

Annual deforestationrate (% of
forest area 1995)
Nationally protected areas (% of
land area 1996)
Threatenedmammal species (%
of species 1996)
C02 emissions(metric tons per
capita 1996)

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia |Benchmark4

CountryPerformance
Institutions
Policies
involvingthe private
demand management
and sufficientcost
sector in building and in
recovery, especiallyin
operatingwater and
sewerageworks.
agriculture to ensure
greater efficiencyin the
use of water resources.

World Bank Group (WBG)
3
Performance

[

water.

Overview.Tunisia leads the MENA region with regard to environmentalprotection. It has a strong policy and institutional
base for sustainabledevelopmentin place. Importantenvironmentalissuesat present include those with strongestlinks to
economicoutcomes (EU partnershipand environmentalstandards,tourism and coastal zonemanagement) and those of
cross-sectornature(industrial pollutionand urban waste, fuel pricing,the adoptionof less pollutingfuels, and the
promotion of renewableenergy,and water pricing). Tunisian culturalheritage is valued both for its intrinsicworth and its
potential in promotion of tourism and employmentin the country.
The TunisianMinistry of The Bank has been involvedin the
0.9 Reconcilingeconomic
0.5
and social development Environment heads four environmentsector through its lending
specializedagencies:the program, analyticaland advisory work,
2.2 with the protection of
0.3
National Environmental and the MediterraneanTechnical
naturalresources is an
AssistanceProgram (METAP).
ProtectionAgency, the
10.8 importantpolicy goal.
11.0
METAP's technical assistancehas
Agencyfor Protection
The Government's
and Planning of Coastal focused on EnvironmentalImpact
3.9 commitmentfor
1.8
Assessmentproceduresand solid waste
environmentalprotection Areas, the National
management.
SanitationBoard, and
is reflectedthroughthe
the National Agency for
67% increasein the
RenewableEnergy. The In the cultural heritage field,Bank
budget allocated in the
participationhas includedgrant assistance
same Ministry also
most recent five year
administersprogramsto that has cataloguedlocal monumentsand
developmentplan for
sites and, in the process, building local
help meet a range of
activitiesrelated to
capability for cataloguing. A PHRD
environmental
ecology and protection
grant managedby the TunisianInstitui
challeniges:the urban
of the environmeni.
EnvironmentalImpact
Assessment(EIA) is
well developed,with the
legal frameworkclearly
specifying classification
of projects and key steps
in the EIA cycle..
Governmentpolicy
supportsdevelopment of
cultural physicalassets

and rural sanitation

National du Patrimoine has helped

program,the "Blue
I-and" programfor
protectionof the sea and
coastalresources,the
National Program for the
Managementof Solid
Wastes, an industrial
pollutionprogram, the
"Yellow Hand" program
for desertification

prepare a planned CulturalHeritage
Project included in the current lending
program.

ANNEX B9a
Page 17 of 19
Areas

Development
Indicators2
4
Tunisia Benchmark

CountryPerformance
Policies
Institutions
control,the "Green
with links to economic
activities, while
Hand"program for the
expectingthe private
preservationof
sector to foster folklore, biodiversity,and an
music, dance, drama, etc environmentalawareness
program.

World Bank Group (WBG)
3
Performance

Overview. The ongoingl 9Development Plan (I 997-200I)envisagesthe largest share of investmentstaking place in the
transport and communicationsarea. At the same time, transport policycontinues in the direction of progressive
liberalization. Official approachto privateparticipationhas thus far favored pilot projects in transport.
Telecommunicationscoverageis relatively low, costs are high and the provisionof service remains the pervasive
monopoly of a public sectorcompany.
An importantlandmark in the Bankyears, Tunisia The major development
78.9
506.2 nrcn
Paved roads (% of total 1996)
Tunisia collaborationin the sector was
64.0
58.6 has concentratedon
on the institutionalfront
Motorvehicles(per 1,000 people
in recent years has been a the preparation of the TransportStrategy
deregulatingthe
1996)
revampedrole for the
Studyjointly by Bank staff and Tunisian
53.3
..
transport sector,
Railways,goods trans. ton-km /
transport ministry,which officials. To implementthe strategy, a
privatizingpublic
PPP$ bill. of GDP 1995
70.1
107.8 transport companies,
has been orientedaway
long-term sector programwas designed
Telephonemainlines(per 1,000
from owningand
aiming to: a) increasethe efficiencyand
extendingtransport
people 1997)
operatingfacilitiesand
quality of transport services; b) reduce the
0.1
0.2 infrastructureand
Internethosts (per 10,000people
financialburden of the sectoron
improvingmanagement towards oversightand
1998)
policy formation. Thus its governmentbudget, notablyby increasing
of such facilities.A
private participationand improvingthe
liberalizationpolicy has principal functionsnow
performanceof the remaining public
been undertakenunder are seen to involvelongECAL I in the maritime term planningof
enterprises. This is being supported with
a Bank adaptableprogram loan, the first
transport sector. New
infrastructure,the legal
and regulatory
phase of which will advanceprivate
roads funds have been
established,financed
framework,and ensuring provisionof port services,facilitate
smooth and efficient
foreign investmentin trade-related
with privatization
proceeds. Most
functioningof the market. transport activities, commercializethe
railway parastataland increasethe use of
branches of transport
less polluting fuels.
Previouslya purviewof
are being liberalized;
the Ministry of
the pace has been
In telecommunications,Bank staffhave
Communications,
deliberatelyslow,
however, in urban and
telecoms is now
engaged officials in dialogue on the need
nominallythe
for and the likelybenefits of policy
inter-urbanpassenger
reforms. Bank dialogue,through
responsibilityof an
bus transport.
autonomouspublic
seminars and staff visits, has sought to
highlight the likelihoodthat reforms
company. Significant
Telecommunications
remains a weak link,
benefits would be realized could lowerbusiness costs for the private

Transport and
Telecommunications

ANNEX B9a
Page 18 of 19
Areas

Energy

Electricityconsumption (kwh
per capita 1996)
Electricitylosses (% of output
1996)
GDPper unit of energy use
(1995$/kgoil equiv. 1996)
Traditionalfuel use (% of total
energy use 1995)

Development
Indicators2
Tunisia Benchmark'

CountryPerformance
Institutions
P
with internationallines if this sector were more
relativelyexpensive,
liberalizedand
high-speeddata
competitive.
transmission limitedas
well as costly, and
controlson mobile
phones and the Internet.
Telecom revenues
show that, for the GDP
level of Tunisia,there
is room for sector
growth and new
serviceswould find a
receptive demand.

World Bank Group (WBG)
3
Performance
sector, help enhance the provisionof
services within the country and facilitate
adherenceto agreement with the WTO

Overview: Notable developmentsin the energy sectorhave been the gradualexhaustion of crude oil reserves in the main
fields, a recent pick up in gas production since the start of activity of the Miskar gas field in 1996 and a generallyrobust
annual growth of electricityproduction. Energy demand is expected to rise in the next decade, driven particularlyby
increasedeconomicactivityand populationgrowth. In order to reconcile an increasein energydemand with the
improvementof quality of life and protectionof the environment,reliance on energy efficiencyand renewable energies
will become increasinglyimportantin the years ahead.
674.4
1162.4 A marked featureof
Production,transmission Bank involvementin financingthe energy
energypolicy has been and distributionof
sector in Tunisia occurred largelyduring
10.6
9.0 the sale of gas above
electricityas well as most 1972-1991,with the last major project,
cost, and the surplus
of the transmissionand
Gas Infrastructure,closed in 1997.
2.9
2.0 used to cross-subsidize the distributionof gas in
electricitytariffs,
Tunisia are under a single, The climaticand economicconditionsin
12.9
1.2 including,but not
centralizedpublic utility, Tunisia are very favorable for the
limitedto, the provision the Societe Tunisiennede applicationof solar water heating
of a "social tariff' for
I'Electricite'et du Gaz
systems.The potential for use has been
householdsthat use
(STEG)under the
estimated at about one million square
limited quantitiesof
Ministryof Industry.
meters of solar collector area. Given the
electricity.Government STEGhas had a strong
resultingreductionin Carbon Dioxide
intendseventually to
financial performancefor (CO2) emissions associatedwith the
installationof solar heating systems, the
split gas and electricity the past few years.
Global EnvironmentalFacility (GEF) has,
supply and phase out
the cross-subsidy. Fuel S'l'EG's monopolyfor
since 1995, been financinga project on
prices are not

electricity generation for

"Solar Water Hleating Systems in

subsidized,but the
relativeprice of diesel

the grid was abolishedin
1996,openingthe way to

Tunisia".This project is managed by the
National Agency for RenewableEnergy

ANNEX B9a
Page 19 of 19
Areas

Development
Indicators2
4
Tunisia Benchmark

CountryPerformance
World Bank Group (WBG)
Policies
Institutions
Performance'
vs. gasolineis low
concessionsto
and aims at installingabout 50,000 m' of
compared with Europe. IndependentPower
solar collectorareas by the year 2003.
Producers(IPP). The first This will allow a saving in energy use of
Long-termplans are to planned IPP- the power
about 6,000 toe, and will reduce an
integrate electricity
plant in Rades -will allow estimated 18,000 tons of CO2 emissions
networkwith Europe
a substantialexpansionof per year.
through an undersea
capacity.
transmissionline to
Italy, thus making the
Tunisianelectricity
sector de facto a part of
the Europeanelectricity
market.

The diagnoses in matrix B9a and the development priorities identified by Tunisia and the World Bank in Matrix B9b are viewed within a long term perspective.
Against these, the DevelopmentCooperation Programs of Matrix B9b refer only to activitiesplanned for the 3-year CAS period, representing a time-slice of the long
term.
2 Latest availableyear, typically between 1994and 1999.
3Largely
self-evaluationand OED evaluationof completed operations.
4 Averages for lower middle-incomeor MENA countries,as appropriateand/or available.

ANNEX B9b
Page 1 of 16
Tunisia - CAS Program Matrix
Program

Development Priority

Development Cooperation Programs

Areas
Tunisia

Poverty and
Social
Development

*

*
*
*

World Bank Group

Consolidate
*
impressiveprogress
to-date
Closelytarget and
empower remaining *
population in poverty
As feasible, reduce
income inequalities *
Sustain efficient
provisionof basic
social services
*

Identify programs
suited to tackling
pockets of hard-core
poverty
Improve efficiency
and coverageof
assistanceprograms
Design,for
considerationby
country,appropriate
hard-core poverty
reductionstrategy
Increase partnership
with NGOs

World Bank Group Programs
Instruments
Progress Indicators
Ongoing
* Lower poverty
* Operationswith
incidence below
close impact on
7%
poorerregions or
* Lower child
population; e.g.
malnutritionbelow
NW Mountainous
23%
Dev. Project,Rural * Raise from 2.3%
Roads
share of income of
* Update of Social
lowest 10%
Conditions.
* Maintain at 0%
Proposed
children 10-14 in
* Integrated Rural
labor force
Development
(planned in
FY2003)
* Policy Note on
Employment
(AAA)
* Social Protection
Strategy Note

Other PartnerPrograms
*

*

A variety of
internationaldonor
programs
channeledthrough
officialbodies and
NGOs
UNDP

The diagnoses in matrix B9a and the developmentpriorities identified by Tunisia and the World Bank in Matrix B9b are viewed within a long term perspective.
Againstthese, the DevelopmentCooperation Programs of Matrix B9b refer only to activities planned for the 3-year CAS period, representinga time-slice of the long
term.

ANNEX B9b
Page 2 of16
DevelopmentPriority

DevelopmentCooperationPrograms

Areas

Macro economy

*

*

*
*

Sustainedgrowth of
real GDP
Attain average
investmentto
support GDP growth
objective
Maintainviable
financial balances
Keep inflationunder
control

World Bank Group Programs
Instruments
Progress Indicators
* GDP growth
Ongoing
Support country's
averaging5-6% per
priorities, which are * Supervisionof
year
macro components
well chosen
* Inflation rate
of ECAL11
Identify with countiy
around3% per year
* Economic and
key measuresto
* Fiscaldeficit
social policy
maintaindomestic
trending towards
dialogue within the
and external
2% of GDP
frameworkof SSR
financialbalances in
completed during
the mediumterm
FY2000
Proposed
* Macro component
in planned ECAL
III in FY2001
* External
Sustainability
Study
* Tenth Plan Policy
Notes
* Planned ECAL IV
in FY2003

World Bank Group

Tunisia
*

*

1

Other Partner Programs
*

*

*
*

The IMF: regular
Article IV
consultations
The EU (FAS I)
and the AflDB:cofinancingwith the
World Bank of
ongoingadjustment
operations
The EU: FAS 11
AfDB: cofinancing
of ECAL 11

ANNEX B9b
Page 3 of 16
Development Priority

Development Cooperation Programs

Areas
Tunisia

Education and
Knowledge

*

*

*

*

Consolidate
impressive
achievements to date
regarding access to
education
Adapt skills to the
future needs of the
economic sphere,
especially as regards
to new technologies
and scientific
knowledge
Increase capacities in
the sector, with an
emphasis on
vocational training
and higher education
Increase enrollment
rates and completion
rates in basic
education
Develop scientific
research

World Bank Group

*

*

*

*

World Bank Group Programs
Instruments
Progress Indicators

Support an increase

Ongoing

in completion rates in
basic education
Encourage improved
quality in basic,
secondary and
vocational education
for all students
Encourage reform in
higher education to
meet future increase
in the number of
students, address
current inefficiencies,
while reducing the
financial burden for
the State
Pursue discussions
w.ith the authorities
on WBG support to
development of new
technologies and
scientific research

*

Secondary
Education
*
Higher Education
*
Higher Education
11
*
SSR to be
completed in FY
2000
Proposed
*
Education Quality
Enhancement
*
Planned Higher
education project
in FY 2003
.
.
*
Dialogue on social
seto
a
o
upcdateo socal h
conditions

*
*

*

*

*

*
*

Dissemination
seminar for the
*

Other Partner Programs

Satisfactory,timely *

Agence Francaise

implementation of
ongoing projects
Raise completion
rates in basic
education
Improved
performance in job
placement
Greater cost
recovery in higher
education
Improvements in
national
assessments in
Arabic, French and
Mathematics
Introductionof
new teaching
methods
Improvements in
teacher training
and qualifications
Increased
autonomy for
regional- and
school-level
education leaders

de Developpement:
Formation
Professionnelle II
Belgium
GTZ: Promotion of
Dual Vocational
Training and
Vocational
Training for Rural
Girls
EU: budget-support
operation under
preparation;
MANFORM
project (vocational
training)
NICEF
AfDB: Secondary
Education Project

*
*

*

*

ANNEX B9b

Page 4 of 16
DevelopmentPriority

Development Cooperation Programs

Areas

Rural Strategy

.

*

*
*
*

*

Promote sustainable
growth by tackling
the issuesof water
managementand
climatic changes
Pursue on-going
strategieson
irrigation and water
and soil conservation
Reach food selfsufficiency
Improve external
competitivenessof
agricultural products
Support rural
developmentin the
West through
irrigation and road
infrastructure
Pursue improvement
of living standardsin
rural areas
(electricity,potable
water)

World Bank Group Programs
Progress Indicators
Instruments
* Satisfactory,timely
Ogoin
Pursue dialogueon
implementationof
* Study on
reforms in food
on-going projects
Agricultural
marketing
* Lower rural
Competitiveness
Identify with country
poverty incidence
* ASIL and ASIL 11
counterpartskey
below 14%
measuresto improve * Naturalresource
management
international
* Rural Roads
competitivenessof
* NW Mountainous
agriculture
Development.
Supportreforms in
Project
irrigationand water
and soil conservation * Rural Finance
* Second Forestry
Pursue dialogueon
Development
the complex issueof
Proposed
land titling and
* Water Sector
tenure
InvestmentLoan I
Providesupport to
* Agricultural
improvementof
Support Services
living standardsin
*
Comprehensive
remote rural areas
Development
Review
* Planned Integrated
Rural/urban
Developmentin
FY2003
* Policy Note on
Land Issues

World Bank Group

Tunisia
*

*

*

*

*

[

Other Partner Programs
*

*
*

*

*
*

GTZ: North West
rural development;
Promotionof rural
institutions
The KfW
Agence Fran,aise
de Developpement:
Integrated Rural
Developmentin
Kef region
The EU: Program
for Integrated
Rural Development
and Natural
Resource
Management
The OECF
FAO: Food
Securityprojects;
Participatory
Forestry
Development

ANNEX B9b
Page 5 of 16
Development Cooperation Programs

Development Priority
Areas
World Bank Group

Tunisia

Urban Strategy

.

Investments in social
housing construction
and support to
housing financing for
poor households

*

*

*

Labor Market

.

Stimulate the
creation of new
employment
opportunities by
supporting business
start-ups
Support vocational
training, improve
quality of education
to better adapt skills
to labor market
demand and improve

*

*

Support the
authorities in
designing incentives
for further private
sector involvement
in construction,
renovation of urban
areas, site
development and
housing finance
Identify with country
counterparts key
measures to address
the issues of housing
finance and urban
land market
Support the
authorities in
municipal
development through
a review of
municipal finances

Identify with country
counterparts actions
to promote the
private SME sector
Pursue dialogue on
labor market policies
to promote increased
flexibility in the
labor market,
employment,
entrepreneurship and
training

World Bank Group Programs
Progress Indicators
Instruments
*
Satisfactory, timely
Ongoin
implementation of
*
Municipal
on-going project
Development II
Lower urban
Proposed
*
poverty incidence
Cultural Heritage
*
below 3.6%
project
*
More involvement
*
Urban Water
of private firms in
Supply
the construction
* Municipal
sector
Development III
*
Decentralization
Study/ Municipal
Finances
*
Policy Note on
Land Issues
*
Planned Integrated
Urban/Rural
Development in
FY2003

Ongoing
* 2nd Employment
and Training
* Industry Support
Institutions
PSA and SSR to be
*

*

*

*

completed in
FY2000
Propose
Dissemination
*
seminars for the

*

Lower female
unemployment rate
below 17%
Increase female
participation rate
above 31%
Lower male
unemployment
below 15.5%
Amendment of
labor legislation to
increase flexibility

Other Partner Programs
*

*

*
*
*
*

Agence Francaise
de Ddveloppement:
CPSCL credit line;
Tunis South Lake
Area Rehabilitation
project;
Rehabilitation of
populous urban
areas
Italy
UNDP: Urban
U*
growth and
sustainable
development in
Tunis

France
Germany
United Nations
The EU: Project of
Support to Job
Creation under
preparation

ANNEX B9b
Page 6 of 16
Development Cooperation Programs

Development Priority
Areas
World Bank Group

Tunisia
support to on-the-job
training

*

*

Health and
Population

.

*

*

*
*

Public Sector,
Governance,
and Justice
System

.

Consolidate
impressive progress
to date regarding
universal access to
health care services
Further reform the
health sector to
improve costefficiency driven
provision of health
care services
Increase the
coverage of social
protection with a
particular focus on
improved health
cares for women and
children
Increase the use of
contraceptives
Assess health
financing schemes

*

Pursue privatization
of state-owned
enterprises and
involvement of the

*

*

*

World Bank Group Programs
Progress Indicators
Instruments
*
Raise ficiency of
PSA and the SSR
active labor market
Policy Note on
policies
Employment
(AAA)
Social Protection
Strategy Note

Support Government
priorities in
reforming the health
sector, implementing
the health insurance
reform and
strengthening health
policy design and
planning
Identify with the
authorities key
measures to provide
more and better
quality basic health
care services
Accompany ongoing
efforts to further
reduce the
government's
financial
responsibilities in the
provision of health
care

Ongoing
*
Health Sector loan
*
Hospital
management and
financing
*
Update of social
conditions
* SSR to be
completed in
FY2000
Proposed
Dialogue on social
*
sector based on
update of social
conditions and on
health finance
Planned Health
*
Sector project in
FY03

*

Identify with the
authorities key
measures to further
improve efficiency

On

*

*

PSA and SSR to be
completed in
FY2000

*

*

*

Lower child
mortality rate
below 33 per 1000
live births
Lower maternal
mortality ratio
from 69 per
100,000 live births
Lower subsidized
health care
availability from
about 50% to
around 25% of
population
Enhance efficiency
of public
expenditures on
health

Maintenance of
past IDF-funded
Global Legal
Information

Other Partner Programs

*
*

*

UNFPA
The EU: Structural
Adjustment
program covering
health insurance
and
decentralization
under negotiation
UNICEF

ANNEX B9b
Page 7 of 16
DevelopmentPriority

____

.

.

Areas

World Bank Group

Tunisia

*

*

*

Financial
System

.
*
*

DevelopmentCooperationPrograms

l

private sector in
services delivery
through concessions *
Pursue the reform of
taxation to increase
the relativeweight of
direct taxation of
domestic activity
Adapt the judiciary
*
frameworkto the
needs of an open
economy,especially
in the financialsector
Encourage
strengtheningof
*
associationsand
professional
organizationsfor
increased
participationof civil
society in economic
and social
development

of public
administration
Pursue dialogueon
privatizationand
concessionissues
and support of public
enterprisesreforms
and privatization
Encourage
accelerated
implementationof
improvedlegal
frameworkfor the
privatesector
Dialoguewith the
authoritieson how to
increasecivil
participationfor
sustainabilityof
Tunisia's
internationalopening

Pursue ongoing
modernizationof the
banking system
Support further
developmentof
venture capital funds
Adapt the judiciary
frameworkto the
needs of an open
economy in the
financial sector

Support further
liberalizationof the
financialsystemand
privatization of stateowned banks
Support ongoing
efforts on bank
restructuring,
institutionbuilding,
modernizationof the
payment system,

*

*

World Bank Group Programs
| Progress Indicators
Instruments
Proposed
Network
* Implementationby
* Institutional
Governmentof
Development
IDF-funded
Funds
"Strategic Action
* Dissemination
Program for
seminars for the
PSA and the SSR
Legislative
Reform"
* Improve I.C.R.G.
ratings on:
- Corruption
- Bureaucraticquality
- Law and Order

Ongoing
* Rural Finance
(extendeduntil
12/31/00)
* ECAL II
* TuninvestFinance
Group by IFC
* Maghreb
International
Merchant Bank by
IFC

*

*

*

*

Timelyand
satisfactory
implementationof
ECAL II
Reducedtime for
check clearing and
payments
Reducepercentage
of non-performing
bank loans
Reducedcost and

Other Partner Programs

*
*
*
*

France
KfW
The EU: Support
to Competitiveness
The AfDB: Sixth
Credit Line to the
National Bank for
Tourism
Development

ANNEX B9b
Page 8 of 16

.

Tunisia
*

*
*

Support progressive
implementationof
indirect instruments
of monetarypolicy
Support development
*
of the insurance
sector
Pursue external
financial
liberalizationin view
of future
convertibilityof the
dinar

World Bank Group Programs
| Progress Indicators
Instruments
increasedvolume
Proposed
strengtheningof
bank regulation and
* Financialsector
of creditto small
and medium
componentin
supervision and
enterprises
planned ECAL III
diversificationof
* Support to SME
financialservices
* Framlington
Providesupport to
Mediterranean
reforms in insurance,
Growth Fund by
housing finance and
IFC
capital markets
* MaghrebInvest
Fund by IFC
* FinancialSector
Assessment
Program(jointly

World Bank Group

____

Private Sector
Environment

Cooperation Programs

-_..Development

Development Priority

Areas

*

*
*

*

*
Improve the
organizationof
distributionnetwork
Rationalizefiscal
incentives
Open access of
service deliveryto
private firms through
concessions
*
Improve servicesto
private firms
(transport,
communication,
finance)

Encouragethe
Governmentto set up
a simplified and
neutral incentives
schemeto support
small and medium
enterprises
development
Support the
implementationof
key measuresto
improve access of
private firms to
efficientservices
Encourage
accelerated
implementationof
improvedlegal and
judiciary framework
for the privatesector

__

Other Partner Programs

withIMF)

Ongoing
* Export
Development
* Industry Support
Institutions
* PrivateInvestment
* PSA and SSR to be
completedin
FY2000
* Investmentin Ideal
Sanitaireby IFC
* Investmentin
SITEXby IFC
Proposed
* ECAL III
* SME support
* Dissemination
seminarsfor the
PSA and the SSR
* ProspectiveIFC

*

*

*

*

Increase in number *
of small and
medium enterprises
*
Trend rise in
foreign direct
investmentinflows
Trend increase in
share of private
investmentin GDP
from 12%
Raise stock market
capitalization
above 10%

*

GTZ: Support to
the Industrial
Adaptation Office
The EU: Support to
the Privatization
Program; Venturecapital for
privatization;
Venture-capitalin
Industry; Support
to
Competitiveness;
"Euro-Tunisie
Entreprise";
Support to
Promotion of
External
Investments;
EIB: Global
lending to Tunisian

ANNEX B9b
Page 9 of 16
Development Priority

Development Cooperation Programs

Areas.
Tunisia

World Bank Group

World Bank Group Programs
Instruments
| Progress Indicators
investmentin Arab
TunisianInsurance
Co.
Policy Note on
Information
Technology

Other Partner Programs

*

*

*

Trade and

.

Openness

*
*

*

Promotefurther
integrationof
Tunisia in the world
economy, especially
through the Free
Trade Agreement
with the European
Union
Pursue negotiations
on other trade
agreements
Pursue trade
liberalization,
harmonizationof
tariffs on imports and
export promotion
In particular,pursue
reform of tariff and
non-tariff barriers on
agriculturalproducts

*

*

*
*

*

Dialogue with the
Governmenton
issuesof marketand
product
concentrationand
balance in energy
trade
Encourage
facilitationof
customsprocedures
Support efforts in
export promotion
Maintaindialogue
with governmenton
further steps intrade
liberalization(e.g.
liberalizationwith
third parties;
services;agriculture)
Dialogue on
macroeconomic
aspectsof trade and

Ongoing
* Export
Development
* T'ransportSector
Investment
Proposed
* TransportSector
Investment11
* ECAL III
* Planned ECAL IV
in FY2003
* Agricultural
Competitiveness
Study (started
FY1999)
* External
Sustainability
Study

*

*

*

*

Increaseratio of
Trade/PPPGDP
above26%
Increaseratio of
Gross FDI/ PPP
GDP above 0.7%
Average import
duty rates lowered
along EU
agreement
Progress in
multilateral
extensionof trade
liberalization

*
*

enterprises
The AfDB:
Competitiveness
Support Program
UNDP:technical
assistance
UNIDO and Italy:
IntegratedProgram
for Promoting
Industrial
Competitiveness

The EU: Support
to Competitiveness
UNDP trainingand
TA underproject
titled "Mise a
niveau des
Capacites
nationalespour
gerer le nouveau
systeme
commercial
multilateral"

ANNEX B9b
Page 10 of 16
_______

Development Priority

l

Development Cooperation Programs

Areas_
World Bank Group

Tunisia

World Bank Group Programs
Progress Indicators
Instruments

Other PartnerPrograms

competitiveness
(exchangerate
management,capital
account
liberalization)

Social

.

Protection

*

Water and
Sewerage

Protect the poorest
against price
increases but with
improved
compensatory
schemes
Increase the
efficiency and
coverage of social
protection schemes
(active labor market
policies, social
insurance and
assistanceprograms)

a Shift to demand
*

*

*

*

*

managementin the
water sector
Pursue strategieson
irrigation and water
conservationthrough
completionof
ongoing dam
*
constructions
Focus on water

Improvetargeting of
assistanceprograms,
includingfood
subsidies
Pursue dialogueto
identifykey
measures with
country counterparts
to reform the social
protectionsystem
with view to increase
cost-efficiency,
target safety net
programs, and
contributeto labor
market and financial
development

Ongoing
* Updateof social
conditions
* SSR to be
completedin
FY2000
Proposed
* Dissemination
seminar for the
SSR
* Social Protection
StrategyNote
(AAA)

Identify with country
counterpartskey
measures to improve
demand-driven
managementand
cost recovery,
especiallyin
agriculture
Support reforms in
irrigationand water

Ongoing
* GreaterTunis
Sewerage
* Water Supply and
Sewerage
Proposed
* Water Sector
InvestmentLoan I
* Urban Water
Supply

*

*

Completereview
of social security
strategy
Agree on reforms
in social security
system

*

*

*
*

*
*

*

*

*
*

*

Formulation of
revised Water
Code
Implementationof
revised tariff policy
Increase average
tariff/averagecost
beyond 87%
New institutional
arrangementfor

*

*

*
*

GTZ: National
Social
Communicationifor
Families
Agence Francaise
de Developpement:
training
CIDA (Canada)
Caissede Dep6t et
Placementdu
Quebec:pensions
The EU
AfDB
USAID

AgenceFrancaise
de D6veloppement:
Sanitation in
populous urban
areas III
GTZ: Optimal
Managementof
Water Resources
KfW
EIB: ONAS III /

ANNEX B9b
Page 11 of 16
Development Priority

Development Cooperation Programs

_

Areas

World Bank Group

Tunisia

World Bank Group Programs
Instruments

*

Environment
and Culture

treatment and
reutilization in
agriculture
Increase access to
potable water in rural
areas

*

conservation
Encourage deepened
private involvement
in waste water
treatment

Progress Indicators
water
*
Improved surface
water management
Groundwater use
*
as a percentage of
recharge
* Increase access of
rural population to
safe water from
current 80% to
90%

"See detailed Environment Program Matrix at the End"

Other Partner Programs
Medium-sized
towns Sanitation;
Tunis South Lake
Sanitation;
SNCFTII; Hill
Dams
*
The EU: interest
rate subsidies on
EIB projects;
technical assistance
to Hill Dams
(under preparation)
* OECF: small hill
dams, rural water
supply and
wastewater
treatment projects
*Nordic Investment
Bank
* Arab Fund

l

ANNEX B9b
Page 12 of 16
Development Priority

Development Cooperation Programs

l

Areas
Tuniisia

World Bank Group

Transport a
Telecommunica
tions

World Bank Group Programs

Instruments

._________
_
_______

*

*

Develop and
modernize basic
transport
infrastructure, with a
focus on roads and
agricultural tracks
Increase coverage of
the telephone, radio
and television
networks

*

*

*

*

Continue to
accompany
government's efforts
in the transport
sector by supporting
the creation of an
appropriate
institutional
fiamework for public
transport
Encourage deepened
private sector
participation in the
transport sector
Pursue dialogue with
the authorities to
encourage further
liberalization in the
telecom sector
Pursue discussions
with the authorities
on WBG support to
development of new
technologies

Ongoing
*
Transport Sector
Investment
*
Extensive
treatment of
transport and
telecoms sector
issues and options
in PSA
Proped
*
Tranisport Sector
Investment 11
*
Policy Note on
Infonnation
Technologies

Other Partner Programs

ProgressIndicators

|
*
*

*

Agree on telecom
liberalization
Lower costs of
transport and
telecommunicationi
services
Increase private
provision of
infrastructure

*

AfDB: State

*
*
*

Classified Road
Development
Project; Railway
Infrastructure
Modernization
Project
OECF
EIB
Arab Fund

ANNEX B9b
Page 13 of 16
Development Priority

|

Development Cooperation Programs

l

Areas
Tunisia

.

Energy

*

World Bank Group

Increase the
coverage of the
electrification
network, especially
in rural areas
Pursue efforts to
develop solar-water
heating systems

*

*

World Bank Group Programs
Instruments
Progress Indicators

f

Support
Government's efforts
in the energy sector.
with a focus on
energy efficiency
and renewable
energies
Encourage deepened
private sector
participation in the
power sector

Ongoing
* GDF-Solar Water
lieating
*
ESMAP- TESCOP
Proposed
*
Assessments of
environment
impact of energy
supply and use
system

Lower electricity
losses below 10.6%
of output
Lower traditional
fuel use below 13%
of total energy use

*

*

Other Partner Programs
-

*
*
*
*
*
*

-

France
Germanly
UK
Italy
EIB
AfDB: Rural
Electrification
Project (Electricity
VI)

Environment Program Matrix
Strategy Actions

DevelopmentObjectives
Diagnosisof Problems
MIACROECONOMY

Bank Group Instruments
Lending! Financing
NLS

AND ENVIRONMIENTI

(1) Trade and Environment

_

-MEDPOLICIFS on-going

study on

the impact of environmental

Improveunderstandof the

regulationis on the export

linkages between trade and

competitiveness
of thecountry.

the environmentto assist
policymakers.

-ESW on trade and environment in
the context of the EU Free T'rade
Agreement.

COASTrAI

ZONE

MANAGEMENT

_.__

____
.

_____._._
_

_

_
.______

_

OthierDonor Instruments

Progress
Indicators

ANNEX B9b
Page i4 of 16
I)cvelopment Objectives /
Diagnosis of Problems
-Tourismis a vital economic
activity.90% of tourismactivities
arc locatedalong the coast.
-Enhancclocal capacity in
protectingand managingthe coastal
area.

Bank Group Instruments
L
_
___
_
Lending / Financing
ISLS
-GEPgrant project"Protection
-TechnicalAssistanceto Al'AI. to
identifybest practicesfor
of Marhie Resourcesin the Gulf
of Gabes.
and
rehabilitation,maniagemcnt
-GEFoni-goinig
project "Oil
protectionof fragileareas.
pollutionmanagemenitproject
-TechnicalAssistanceto assist
for the Southwest
APAL in adoptinganti-erosion
measuresappropriateto the Tunisian MediterraneanSea".
coast.
-Trainingto APAL's staff to
develop local expertisein assessing
damagescausedby econonsie
activitieson the coastalzone and
marineresources.
-METAPactivity: "Protectionof
coastallagoons"
-METAPon-goingfeasibilitystudy
for "Creationof a Surveillance
System of the CoastalZone"
-WB on-goingstudy "Managemenit
.
_._
andPromotionof Cultural Heritage"

Strategy / Actions

Other Donor Instruments

_.__

-ImproveAl'AL's technical
expertisein coastal zone
management.
-Diversifytourism activitiesto
reduce pressureon the coast.

Progress
Indicators

EIB,Franice
-Build up local
cxpertiseto deal with
accidentaloil spills.

___.

_

NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
(I) Energy
-Improved efficiency of utilization
of fuels
-Reduce CO, emission by increasing
energy efficiency.

-Encourageenergy conservationand
use of renewableenergy.
-Improveenergy use efficiency.
-Increasediesel price (see Pollution
Managementbelow).

______________
__ __

__ __

-RapidEnergy/Environment
Assessmentsfor prioritysetting of
the environmentimpactsof the
energysupply and use system

_ __________
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ ____
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _________

-iEF grant "Solar Water
Heating Systemsin Tunisia"

___

_____

__ ___ __ _

__

___ ___ __ ___ __

-Installationof
50,000m' of solar
collectorareas,
savings of 6,000 ton
of oil equivalentand
reductionof It8,000
tons of CO, emissions
by 2003.
- Assessmentreport
on the priority
and
investmnents
policyreformis
relatedto
environmiiental
clean
up for-the eniergy
supply sectorsand
environmental
regulatorypolicyfor
e_ ienerg y ssu pply/use

ANNEX B9b
Page 15 of16
Development Objectives /
Diagnosis of Problems
(2) WaterResources
-Improvewater resource
managementto ensure long term
watersupply availabilityand
quality.

Strategy / Actions

Bank Group Instruments
NLS

-Achieveintegratedwater resources
management.
-Achievebetter allocationof limited
water resourcesin agriculture and
improve the long term sustainability
of the agriculturalsector.
-Reducewater wastage.
-Increasewaterprices,especiallyfor
irrigation.

-"WaterSector Study" will sct the
basis for a long term strategyfor
water resourcesmanagement.At the
Round Table discussionin April 99,
it was agreed to includein the
proposedvision for the watersector:
Water ResourcesConservationand
EnvironmentalProtectionissues
especiallyfor waterquality,
pollutionreductionand coastal
zones management.
-NationalStrategyfor water and
wastewater sector.

Other Donor Instruments

Lending / Financing

-"Water SectorInvestment
Loan" will focus on demand
management(tariffreform,
irrigationefficiency,water
reuse). Expectedto be launched
between 2000-2002.The WSIL
will includean environmental
managementplanto address
potentialadverseimpactsas
wellas specificcross-sectoral
studies and trainingunder the
environmentalprotectionand
capacitybuilding component

Progress
Indicators

KfW, EIB,OECF

-% increasein water
prices.
-Betterallocationof
water.
-Provisionof safe
water for 100percent
of urbanpopulation
and 90 percent for
rural areas.

KfW -FODEP
EIB Pollution Abatementfor
Industrial States
EIB-projecton climinating
dischargesof phoshogypsumin
the Gulf of Gabes

-Pollutionload
assessmentreport.
-Industrialaudits
reports in selected
industries
-Increasemarket
shareof unleaded
gasoline from4% to
20% in 2002 and 33%
in 2005, decreaselead
content of gasoline
from 0.4g/Ito below
0.15g/l, and decrease
sulfur content of
diesel fromn0.4% to
below 0.05% in 2002.
-Relativepriceof
diesel vs. gasoline.

-WB on-going"Natural
Resourcesmanagement
Project".Enhance natural
resourcemanagementand
improve agricultural
productivitythrough a
participatoryapproachin 3
different climaticzones.
POLLUTIONMANAGEMENT
(1) Pollution
-Industrialpollutionfrom public
sector metallurgicaland chemical
industries
-Lack of treatmentand proper
disposalof industrialwaste.
-Air pollutionfrom transport and
industrialsectors.
-Under-pricingof diesel fuel relative
to gasoline.

-Controllingand reducingpollution
from industries
-Adoptionof lesspolluting fuels in
the transport sector.
-Raise diesel pricesrelativeto
gasoline.

METAPactivity: TunisiaPollution
Control Program

-WB on going "Transport
Reformand Investment
Program".

ANNEX B9b
Page 16 of 16
Development Objectives /
Diagnosis of Problems

Strategy/ Actions
_

(2) Solid Waste Management
-Collectionof SW is of satisfactory
standardswith good participationby
the private sector.
-Need to improvethe transfer,
treatmentand disposalof solid
waste.

-Improvethe disposaland
management of municipalsolid
waste

(3) Wastewater
-Remarkablewastewaterservices.
-Lack of storm water sewers.
-Need to pay attentionto the
treatmentand disposalof large
quantitiesof sludge.

-Improvewastewater qualityfor
irrigationand aquifer recharging

Bank Group Instruments
Lendingj/TFinncing

Other Donor Instruments

NLS

-WB on going:" Municipal
-METAPactivity"Plastic Packaging DevelopmentProject11:
WasteCollectionand Recycling
Project for GreaterTunis"

KfW,GTZ

Progress
Idicators
- Establishmentof 1-2
sanitary landfills
- Feasibilitystudy for
a public-private
partnership

-METAPactivity"RegionalSolid
Waste ManagementProject"
National Strategy for the waterand
waste-water sector

-WB on going "GreaterTunis
Sewerageand Reuse Project"
One componentof the projectis
to reuse treatedwaterfor
irrigationand for aquifer
recharging.

-EIB loan "Assainissement,
Dragageet Remblaiementdu
Lac Sud de ''unis"
KfWloan: "Rural water and
sanitation
OECF funded water and
sanitation

-Secondarytreatment
of 85 percent of
wastewater in urban
areas and re-use of
50 percent of treated
waste waterfor
irrigationand
industrialpurposes.

ANNEX B 10

Tunisia - CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Network area

Poverty Reduction&
Economic Management
Poverty reduction

Country
Performancea

Good

Economic policy
Public sector

Excellent
Fair

Gender

Good

Human Development
Education

Good

Health, nutrition & popula'n

Good

Social protection

Good

Environmentally& Socially
SustainableDevelopment
Rural Development
Environment
Social development
Finance, Private Sector and
Infrastructure
Financial sector

Fair
Excellent
Good
Poor

Private sector

Poor

Energy and mining
Infrastructure

Good
Fair

Major issue

Country
Prioritc

Bank
Priorityc

Reconciliation
of country and
Bank prioritiesd

Stronger growthemploymentsocial protection
nexus
Speed of reforms
Modernization&
decentralization
Maintain the very
strong advances
already made in
gender equity

High

High

Low

Low

Quality and
completion rates
Quality and
efficiency
Efficiency and
better targeting

High

High

High

Moderate EU support

Resource
management,
living standards
Industrial
pollution, coastal
zone management
Hard core poverty

Moderate Moderate

High

Moderate Bilateral and
GEF & METAP
support
High

Restructuring/insu
rance/mortgage/
SME finance
Incentives and
competition
Efficiency/ PPI
Cost/quality mix

High

High

High

High

Moderate Moderate
High
High

Moderate High

High

Dialogue
continues

Moderate Moderate
High
High

'Indicated as "excellenf', "good", "fair", or "poor".
bThis
refers to principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty"; for education, "female secondary
completion"; for environment, "urban air pollution").
'Priority is indicated as "low", "moderate", or "high".
dGives explanation if priorities do not agree; e.g., another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Annex B1 1
Page 1 of 5
Tunisia - CAS Review of Environmental Issues

Tunisia leads the Middle East North Africa (MENA) region with regard to environmental
protection. The strong institutional setup and legislative frameworkhave both contributed to this
success. The Ministry of Environment and Regional Planning (MEAT) heads four specialized
agencies:the National Environmental Protection Agency (ANPE), the Agency for the Protection
and the Planning of Coastal Areas (APAL), the National Sanitation Board (ONAS), and the
National Agency for Renewable Energy (ANER).
MEAT also administers several special programs to help the Governnent meet a range of
environmental challenges. These programs include the urban and rural sanitation program, the
"Blue Hand" program for the protection of the sea and coastal resources, the PRONAGDES
(National Program for the Management of Solid Wastes), an industrial pollution program, the
"Yellow Hand" program for desertification control, the "Green Hand" program for the
preservation of biodiversity, and a program for education and environmental awareness.
Tunisia also has a strong policy for sustainable development in place. In 1993, a National
Commission for Sustainable Development was created to coordinate among different actors and
reconcile economic and social development with the protection of natural resources. The
Government's commitment for environmental protection is also reflected through the budget
allocated in the most recent five year developmentplan. Planned investments in activities related
to ecology and environmentalprotection were increased by 67% in the Ninth Plan in comparison
with the Eight Plan to represent 1.6% of GDP. This is a clear indication of the importance
attached by the Government of Tunisia (GOT) to environmentalissues.
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is well developed in Tunisia. The legal framework
clearly specifies the classification of projects and the key steps in the EIA cycle. ANPE
adrninisters the EIA process, while the private consulting sector has the capacity to implement
EIA's. The government is firmly committed to the application and enforcement of EIA
proceduresto all projects which have adverse environmental impacts.
The issues with the strongest links to economicoutcomes are the following.
Key Issues in Environment and Development

The EU Free Trade Agreement. Mutual phased reductions in tariffs between Tunisia and the EU
will culminate in free trade by the end of 2008. This is expected to provide substantial economic
benefits to Tunisia, but it raises a number of concerns with regard to the environment. In order to
plan the transition to free trade, and to adapt policies as appropriate, the GOT would benefit from
technical studies on (i) EU product quality standards that have environmental dimensions (for
example, standards for pesticide residues on food, or for the recyclability of products or their
packaging), (ii) informal or voluntary requirements for cleaner production processes (such as
ISO 14000), and (iii) forecasts of sectoral growth rates in Tunisia, so that resource requirements
and pollution emissions can be foreseen.
Tourism and Coastal Zone Management. Tourism revenues represent 11% of GDP, and 90% of

these revenues are generated along the coast. Pressures on coastal resources from tourism

Annex Bll

Page 2 of 5
development, population (two thirds of Tunisians live on the coast) and industrial development
(80% of industrial zones are in coastal areas) are intense. Tourism revenues are therefore at risk
from the pressures on the coastal zone. Priority management issues in coastal areas include (i)
controlling beach erosion, (ii) monitoring and managing water quality, and (iii) protecting
sensitive environments that provide environmental services and may also be tourist attractions.
The World Bank Role in the Environment in Tunisia
In terms of Tunisian need for World Bank finance, Tunisia has access to concessionnal financing
for environmental projects from the European Union and bilateral donors. Therefore, the
comparative advantage of the World Bank lies in non-lending services, which take advantage of
the Bank's technical expertise and wide experience, or in providing soft finance in the form of
GEF funds.
Against this backdrop, and on the basis of a CAS environmentmission to Tunis in June of 1999,
the following environmental analysis matrix was constructed.

Annex Bi1
Page 3 of 5
Environmental Analysis Matrix
Natural Resource Management
Energy

Water Resources

Global Concerns

Pollution Management

CoastalZone
Management
Pollution

Solid Waste

Wastewater

Industrial pollution is an
important issue.Industrial
solid waste include about
7,000Vtyof heavy metals,
3,000t/y of infectious waste
(mainlyfrom hospitals),
and 8.7 million t/y of nonhazardouswaste (mainly
phospho-gypsun and
sludge).

Municipal solid waste
generated in Tunisia
is estimated at 2
million t/y, i.e. 1/2 kg
of waste per day per
inhabitant.

I00% of the
In urbanareas
population has access to
sanitation.

__________________

-

Current
issues
- local
regional
- global

Total energy use
estimated at 7.6
milliontons of oil
equivalent (13%
traditionalfuel and
87% commercial
energy).
emissions
estimated at 16 million
metric tons per year.
CO 2

An indicator of energy
efficiency is the dollar
amount of GDP
generated per kg of
energy used. This
indicator is equal to
$2.9/kg of oil
equivalent (compared
to an averageof
$6.3/kg in the EU).

"Despite frequent
droughts,Tunisians are no
longer thirsty" this
sentence by the MOA
reflects the great effort
made by GOT to provide
watersupply to the
population. 97% of the
urban population is
connected to the water
supply network (expected
to reach 99% by 2001). In

Tourism is an
important
economic
activity,with the
coast being the
major touristic
attraction.More
than 9/10 of
tourism activities
are locatedalong
the coast.

rural areas access to safe
water supply is projected
to reach78% by 2001.

The coast
suffered from
important
degradationand
beach erosion.
Beacherosion
problems are
especially acute
in the Jerba Island
and the Gulf of
Tunis.

Limited quantityof water
supply is an important
issue and is the focus of
major attentionin Tunisia.
The GOT is committedto
make all the necessary
progress to improve water
use efficiency.

Air pollutionproblems
could be acute in certain
region. The region of
GreaterTunis suffers from
high concentration of lead
from the transport sector.
Dust PMI0 emissions are
particularlyhigh in Gabes.
And Sulfur emissions are
very high in Sfax.

ONAS, the agency
responsible for wastewater
services, had connected
more than 80% of urban
The collection and
transport of municipal population and 50% of
well
rural population to the
waste are
sewage system in 1999.
developedwith a
substantial
55 wastewater treatment
participationby the
plants have already been
private sector (in
built and an additional20
1997more than 43
are planned for 2001.
communitieshad
About 90% of the
their waste collected
wastewatercollected by
by private
ONAS is treated and more
contractors).
than 20% of treated
Treatmentand proper wastewateris reused.
disposal of hazardous
Increasing service
waste is lacking.
coverage and striking a
balance between imposing
Waste transfer and
"socially acceptable"
disposal still require
tariffs and achieving costmajor improvement.
recovery will be a
There is a growing
challenge for ONAS.
need for sanitary
landfills.
Tunisia is poorly equipped

Trade &

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Envi
Tunisiawasthefirst
country of the
MENA region to
sign a free trade
agreementwith the
EU.
Understandingthe
various links
between trade and
environmenthas
raised a lot of
interest in Tunisia.

Fuel prices are low
relative to EU
averages,and the
relative price of diesel
fuel is particularlylow.

80% of waterresources are
used in agriculture
(wastagein water use
estimatedat 30%-40%).
Effort should be made to
focus on the most

To reconcile an
increasein energy use
and quality of life,
Tunisia needs to use its
energymore
efficientlyand to
encouragethe use of
renewableenergies.

in
uses of water
productive
an agriculture.
Toreconcille

sewers
withdrainage
stormwater
As a
systems.
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~and
result, rain often causes

Water quality is also at risk
because of industrial
pollution; and overexploitationof water
resources that leads to
saltwater intrusion.Free
access to private wells also
pauses risks of
contamination.

flooding, is slow to drain
in urban centers and can
generate pollution through
infiltrationinto the soil.
A large quantity of sludge
is generated in the 55
WWTP, and this quantity
is expected to increase
with the construction of 20
____________
____________
___________________________

_.____

additional

WWTP.

Annex Bl I
Page 4of5
Natural Resource Management
Energy
Driving
force, e.g.:
- population
growth
- poverty
- inequality

Energy demand
expected to rise driven
by population growth
and increased
economic activities

Coastal Zone
Management

Water Resources
Low endowmentof water
resources. 80% of water
used in agriculture.

PollutionManagement
Pollution

Rapid and intense
industrial,
residential and
tourism
development
alongthe coast.
Building
infrastructurestoo
close to the
seashore.

Impacts of
macro
policies

Lack of strict industrial
waste management
programs in the past.

Solid Waste

Global Concerns
Wastewater

Trade &
Environment

Population growth
and rapid
urbanization.

Importantindustrial
activity.Old vehicle fleet
and consumptionof
pollutingfuels.

A special unit has
been created at the
MEAT to deal with
trade and
environment issues.
The impactof the
FTA with EU on
Tunisia's
environment needs
to be analyzed

Impacts of
sectoral
policies

Increasing energy
prices has provided an
incentive for more
efficient energy use.

Free access to private wells
for irrigationpauses high
risk of contamination
(problemespecially acute
in coastal areas).
High water subsidy in the
past contributed to a lack
of efficient water use
(water subsidy estimatedat
$94 million in 1994). The
GOT is committedto
gradually decrease
subsidies and revise water
tariffs.

Policies to limit
and control
development used
to be lacking in
Tunisia. Sincethe
creationof APAL
in 1995
development
along the coast is
becoming very
strict and tightly
controlled.

Annex BIl
Page 5 of 5
Natural Resource Management
Energy
Impacts of
projects and
programs

GEF project on Solar
Water Heating System
2
will install 50,000 ti
of solar collector areas,
reduce energy use by
6,000 toe, and reduce
Co2 emissions by
18,000 tons by 2003.
ANER undertakes
awareness campaign
with regard to energy
efficiency. It has also
initiated multiple
studies and pilot
project to test
renewable energy
systems in Tunisia.

Pollution

Water Resources
"Program d'economie
d'eau" whereby the
govermnent subsidizes
60% of investment in
inrigation systems that
minimize water use.
The results of the "Water
Sector Study" were
presented in a Round Table
in April 99, and should be
finalized in May 99. This
will set the basis for a long
term strategy for water
management.

"Blue Hand"
Program for the
protection ofthe
sea atid coastal
resources.
APAL is putting
in place a Coastal
Observatoryto
collect and
analyze
information on
the status ofthe
coast. This will
facilitate the
surveillance,
control and
planning of
coastal areas.

A WB "Transport Reform
and Investment Program" is
being prepared. The targets
ofthe program are to
increase the market share of
unleaded gasoline, decrease
the sulfur content of diesel.
and decrease the lead
content of gasoline. Ihe
project also includes the
creation of air pollution
monitoring capacities in
large cities.

Solid Waste
PRONAGDES
program deals with
all issues related to
waste management.
18 landfills and a
composting plants are
under preparation.

WB project
"Management
and Promotion of
Cultural
Heritage".
GEF project
"Protection of
marine Resources
in the Gulf of
Gabes"
Environment
/ Resource
Institutional
issues_

Global Concerns

Pollution Management

Coastal Zone
Manlagement

Better regulation and
coordination of
lanidfills is required.

Wastewater
WB project "Greater Tunis
Sewerage and Reuse
Project". This project's
aim is to rehabilitate and
expand the sewage
network and wastewater
treatment capacities, and to
reuse treated water for
irrigation.

Trade &
Enviromnent
MEDPOLICIES has
been studying the
impact of
environmental
regulations (such as
an increase in water
and energy price)
on the export
competitiveness of
the country.

MAP SECTION

IBRD 24726R
o9

8

Bizerte

SEA
-Zi ,

Gull. 01
Tunis

t

MEDITERRANEAN

2

BIZERTE

_

X

3

4z~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~'A

X

37°

Bea ARIANA Q*J

ENOLJA
I
0BErN

r"',
f

<
_

Zaghouan
ZAGHOUAN

El Kef

°~~~E

s

/

,e

'Nbeul

Siliana

G u! f cf

EL KEF

36!

r

u
ENArous
AROUS

BEJA

Jendouba

Kairouan
rx '
KASSERINE
I-

\

r. <

>

Bou

MAHDiA
r.

.i

Zid
SIDI

Sfax

S

8OU
r v

9

. l

Gafsa

I

J

GAFSA

(

i

dahdia
0't~~~~~~-1

rifle~ ~~--

Sidi

36°

'

KAIRGUAN

~Kasserine
use

;;.

OMonastir
MON`ASTtR

V

, '~~KAIROUAN
(,
0

('

L,

0 \
C\ , Sousse

.

SFAX

ZI

Mishkor

°;

F,<

* a
Tozeuro•

P~~~~~~~~~~edo'

_
etl-Gbelli

Chott

Jerid

34-

a b es

-

GABES

<

i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~E
l

S
M.d--~~~~~~~~W/

-33'

,

GBELLI

!

Tatcouine

\.

TATAOUINE

TUNISIA
TUNISIE

/'

LACS SALES

i

j

GOVERNORATE
CAPITALS
CAPITALES DES

0

\

GOUVERNORATS
GOVERNORATE
BOUNDARIES
FRONTIERES DES
FRONTI~~~~~RES
NATIONALCAPITAL
N A TIO N AL C A PITA
L

i
DES

\

BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONALES

50

75

31

.
The boundaries,
~~~~denommnat,ors
andcolors,
any

)

,L

;

DU PAYS

INTERNATIONAL

25

KIL'OMETERS

GO UV ERNOR A Ts

FRONTIERES

320

A

SALT LAKES

CAPITALE

-'''

/

/

other informotionshown

~~~~~~on
this map do not
uply, on the port of

The Worid Bank Group,
a\y judgmenton the legal
status of any territory,
or any endorsement
or acceptance of such
0

t

0Rboundaries.

APRIL

1 995

