Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Documentof
The World Bank

Report No. 20072HO

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ONA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS

January 27, 2000

Central America Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region

CURRENCYEQUIVALENTS
CurrencyUnit = Lempira(L)
1 USDollar = L14.0 (November1999)
FISCALYEAR
JanuaryI to December31
MAIN ABBREVIATIONS
ANDACRONYMS
AIN

Integrated Child Assistance (Atenci6n Integral a la Ni iez)

APL
CABEI
CG
CSGs

AdaptableProgramLoan
CentralAmericanBank for EconomicIntegration
ConsultativeGroup
Civil SocietyGroups

CNBS

National Banking and Insurance Commission (Comisi6n Nacional de Bancosy Seguros)

DEI
ECLAC
ESAF

OED's DevelopmentEffectivenessIndex
EconomicCommissionfor Latin Americaandthe Caribbean
Enhanced StructuralAdjustmentFacility

FEHS

Honduran Social Investment Fund (Fondo Hondurehlode Inversi6n Social)

FIAS

Foreign InvestmentAdvisoryServices

FONAC

National Convergence Forum (Foro Nacional de Convergencia)

GEF
GINO
HIPC
1DB

GlobalEnvironmentalFacility
GenderInnovationProgram
HeavilyIndebtedPoor Countries
Inter-AmericanDevelopmentBank

INCAE

Central American Management Institute (Instituto Centroamericano deAdministraci6ny
Economia)

INTERFOROS
LIL
LSMS
MECOVI

NetworkOrganizationof CSGsand NGOs
Learningand InnovationLoan
Living StandardsMeasurementSurvey
Programto ImproveLiving StandardsMeasurementSurveys(Mejoramientode las Encuestas
de las Condiciones de Vida)

MOE
MOF
MOH
MOT
NAFTA
OED
PAHO
PFP

Ministryof Education
Ministryof Finance
Ministryof Health
Ministryof Transport;Communicationsand PublicWorks
North AmericanFree Trade Agreement
OperationsEvaluationDepartment
Pan AmericanHealthOrganization
PolicyFrameworkPaper

PRAF
PROHECO

Family Assistance Program (Programa de Asistencia a las Familias)
Community Education Program (Programa Hondureihode Educaci6n Comunitaria)

RLMP
SME
SMP
TA
UNDP
WBG
WBI
WHO

Rural Land ManagementProject
Smalland Medium-ScaleEnterprises
StaffMonitoredProgram
TechnicalAssistance
UnitedNationsDevelopmentProgramnue
WorldBank Group
WorldBank Institute
WorldHealthOrganization

IDA

VicePresident
ChiefEconomist
CountryDirector
Task Manager

David de Ferranti
GuillerrnoPerry
Donna Dowsett-Coirolo
Ian Bannon

IFC

VicePresident,InvestmentOperations
Director,LAC
Manager
Task Manager

Jamal-ud-dinKassun
Karl Voltaire
Bernard Sheahan
ToshiyaMasuoka

HONDURAS
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Table of Contents

Executive Summary........................................................

i-iii

Introduction.........................................................

1

I. Social and Economic Conditions Prior to the Hurricane.........................................................

2

II. Honduras' Development Challenge: Rebuilding with Social Equity ................................................... 3
A. Poverty Reduction and Social Development.........................................................
Toward a Poverty Reduction Strategy.........................................................
Human Capital and Social Safety Nets .....................
....................................
Rural Development and Rural Poverty .....................
....................................
Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples Development ..................................................

4
4
5
9
11

B. Reviving and Accelerating Growth .........................................................
Rebuilding Infrastructure........................................................
Strengtheningthe Financial Sector........................................................
Private Sector Development........................................................

11
12
13
14

C. Sustainability........................................................
Macroeconomic Stability and Debt Sustainability........................................................
State Modernization, Institution Building and Decentralization.....................................
Improving Governance........................................................
Environmental Sustainability........................................................
Risk Management and Disaster Preparedness........................................................

15
15
16
17
18
19

III. The Country Assistance Strategy........................................................
The Last CAS: Lessons and Impact........................................................
Overall CAS Approach ........................................................
Lending Levels and Composition........................................................
Portfolio Status, Lessons and Strategy........................................................
Advisory and Analytical Activities........................................................
Selectivity and Donor Coordination ..................
......................................

20
20
21
21
22
24
24

IV. Civil Society Dialogue, Monitoring and CAS Risks .........................

25

...............................

Text Tables
Table 1: Poverty Trends, 1991-98 (% of households below poverty line)................................................. 3
Table 2: CAS Lending Scenario Triggers ........................................................
22

Annexes
Annex A:
Annex Bi:
Annex B2:
Annex B3:
Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8:
Annex B9:
Annex C:
Annex D:
Annex E:
Annex F:
Annex G:

Honduras at a Glance
Honduras: Country Program Matrix, FYOO-02
Honduras: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Honduras: Bank Group Summary
Honduras: Summary of Nonlending Services
Honduras: Poverty and Social Indicators
Honduras: Key Economic Indicators
Honduras: Key Exposure Indicators
Status of Bank Group Operations in Honduras
Honduras: CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Poverty and Social Conditions in Honduras
The Effects of Hurricane Mitch on Honduras
OED: Emergency Assistance Recommendationsand Overall Evaluation
Honduras: Donor Support and Relations with IDB
CAS Dialogue with Civil Society

COUNTRY MAP

Executive Summary
i.
The last CountryAssistanceStrategy(CAS) for Honduraswas discussedby the Board in July
1993. A new CAS was under preparationwhen Mitch struck in October 1998, but the process was
interruptedas theWorldBankGroup(WBG)and the Governmentmobilizedto copewith the emergency.
The CAS preparationwas resumedin the Springof 1999,when it becameclear that the devastation
causedby Mitchrequireda majorreformulationof the assistancestrategy. At the sametime, and as part
of Honduras'likelyparticipationin the HIPC Initiative,the WBG beganto discusswith Governmentthe
need to preparean outcome-orientedand participatoryPovertyReductionStrategythat wouldunderpin
the HIPCprocessand guidethe povertyreductioneffortsof the Governmentandthe donorcommunity.
ii.
The September1999 DevelopmentCommitteediscussionof the EnhancedHIPC Initiativealso
endorsedthe proposalto underpinfuturedebt relief, and morebroadlythe strategyfor IDA and ESAF
lending,with a PovertyReductionStrategyPaper,to be preparedby the Governmentin a participatory
and transparentprocess. The WorldBank, the IMF and the IDB, as well as otherinternationalpartners
may contributediagnostic,analyticaland process supportto the preparationof the Poverty Reduction
Strategy,as requestedby the authorities.The HonduranAuthoritieshaveexpressedtheir commitmentto
preparingsuch a povertyreductionstrategyand have launchedthe process. A progressreport on the
preparationof the povertyreductionstrategy,includingthe participatoryprocessassociatedwith it, will
be preparedand circulatedto the Boardat the time of the HIPC DecisionPoint,expectedduringthe first
halfof calendar2000.
iii. However,giventhe urgentneedto providea revisedfraneworkfor WBGassistancein the light of
the aftermathof Mitch,the Governmentandthe Bankhaveagreedthat it wouldbe usefulto presentto the
Boardnow the CAS that has beenunderpreparationover the past few months. It was felt that the CAS,
the processfollowedin its preparationand the Board discussionof the document,woulddefineboth the
frameworkfor WBG support to the country and help to framneHonduras' participationin the HIPC
Initiativeand the workplannedto developits PovertyReductionStrategy.
iv. The CAShas beenpreparedas the countrystrugglesto rebuildfollowingthe devastationcausedby
HurricaneMitch. Hondurasfacesa formidablechallenge,not only to rebuilda shatteredeconomy,but
also to laythe basis for a moreprosperousand inclusivenation. Mitchhas madethe developmentagenda
more complex, but it is also inducing some positive changes-greater awareness of the need for
decentralization,a new dynamicin relationsbetweenthe Governmentand civil society,a sharperfocus
on the transparencyand govemanceagenda,and the needto reducethe country's vulnerabilityin all its
dimensions.
v.
The CAS was preparedin close consultationwith the Governmentand followinga productive
dialoguewith civil societyrepresentatives.In addition,the designof the CAS drawsfrom OED lessons
andthe resultsof our ownassessmenton implementationof the previousCAS.
vi. The devastatingeffectsof Mitchrequiredthe WBGto provideemergencysupportand refocusits
assistancestrategyto supportthe Government'sreconstructionand transformationprogram. While this
has necessarilyentaileda reassessmentof developmentpriorities,it is also providingan opportunityto
advancein many aspectsof the reformagenda. The overallthrust of the strategyis to help Honduras
rebuild,whilelayingthe basis for a strongereconomyand a more equitabledistributionof the benefits
from growth. The overridingpriorityis the developmentand implementationof a comprehensiveand
outcome-oriented
povertyreductionstrategy,with a strongemphasison improvingthe qualityof human

-

ii -

capital, strengthening the social safety net, supporting indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples
development, mainstreaming gender, and stimulating sustainable rural development. The strategy
supports faster growth, as an essential complement to poverty reduction, through infrastructure
rehabilitation, strengtheningthe financial system and private sector development. It also seeks to ensure
that progress can be sustained, through a stable macroeconomic framework and debt sustainability,
institution building, governance, improved environmental managementand disaster preparedness.
vii. The CAS proposes a base case lending scenario of $317 million over FYOO-02.A high case would
amount to $367 million by adding one adjustment operation to support financial sector reforms. Triggers
to move into the high or low case include progress on poverty reduction, governance, structural reforms
and portfolio quality. Progress on poverty reduction would be measured in line with indicators to be
agreed within the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy under preparation. The trigger on
governance will be based on IDA's assessment of the Government's handling of reconstruction assistance
and steps to strengthen internal and external control mechanisms. The high case trigger is in line with the
reform conditionality to be agreed under the respective adjustment operation. The lending level under the
low case will depend on the extent of the deterioration in performance and the sectors where we judge
that progress would still be possible. In principle, under a low case scenario IDA would reduce lending
by as much as one half of the proposed base case and seek to concentrate support on human development
and poverty reduction. IDA's proposed lending portfolio is designed to support the overarching priority
of poverty reduction and social development. About two-thirds of the proposed FYOO-02base case
lending directly supports human capital, social safety nets, development of indigenous and AfroHonduran peoples and the rural development/rural poverty agendas. This project portfolio composition is
a conscious choice, resulting from intensive discussions with the Government, a careful assessment of
IDA's comparative advantage and value added, and the expected role of other donors.
viii. IFC, like IDA, moved quickly to try to assist Honduras after Mitch, mainly trying to help existing
clients deal with the need to restructure their operations. IFC is presently re-assessing its approach in
Honduras, which to date has involved a small number of interventions to support early private power
generation and larger manufacturing and agribusiness firms. Priorities for IFC support include: (i)
assisting Honduras to extend private participation in infrastructure; (ii) strengthening the financial sector
and broadening access to capital; (iii) helping to improve the enabling environment for the private sector;
and (iv) selectively providing direct financing, particularly in industry, services and agribusiness.
ix. Experience in Honduras suggests the critical need to support reforms only after they have become
part of broad, longer-term reform programs which are also validated by some measure of consensus with
civil society. To address this issue, the CAS proposes to: (i) rely, where appropriate, on APLs and LILs
to support longer-term reformnefforts and test innovative approaches; (ii) draw lessons from pilot
activities in ongoing operations to demonstrate success and support broader reforms; and (iii) as agreed
during the CAS dialogue, enhance the consultations and consensus-buildingefforts with civil society and
key stakeholders, including prior agreement on clearly defined and time-bound consultation processes.
x.
The poverty agenda, public expenditure reform, a strategy for infrastructure rehabilitation and
private sector development will be the key analytical pieces to support CAS objectives. The major formal
output will be a Poverty Update (FYOI), but more important will be the process and technical support to
prepare the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy. Key aspects will include assistance to improve
the data base on poverty and living conditions, monitor poverty, and support a consultative process with
civil society to elaborate the poverty strategy and the outcome and progress indicators. Less formal
policy advice and dialogue will assist the Government in the design of a longer-term rural development

- iii -

agenda, which would be an essential component of the poverty reduction strategy. The second major
formal piece will be a Public Expenditure Review, focusing on the social sectors and the link between the
poverty agenda and improved public sector efficiency. A parallel Infrastructure Assessment will assist
the Government adopt a comprehensive strategy for infrastructure development, rationalize the state's
role in the sector and provide an overall framework to coordinate donor efforts. The fourth major piece
will be a Diagnosis of the Business Climate by FIAS, identifying major areas for reformnand including
consensus-buildingefforts to support the reforms.
xi.
The proposed CAS faces three major risks. First, the sheer magnitude of the reconstruction task
may divert somewhat the Government's attention from the longer-term reform and poverty reduction
agenda. While the reconstruction of Honduras is indeed a massive task, the Government has continued
efforts to advance the reform agenda and has initiated preparation of a poverty reduction strategy in
consultation with civil society. Second, an adverse external environment could severely impact
Honduras' fragile economy. Third, project implementation will become more difficult, as the public
sector's implementation capacity comes under increasing strain. The Government is aware of this risk
and, in coordination with donors, is working to strengthen institutional and implementation capacity. In
addition, the Government will increasingly seek the support of and delegation to other actors in order to
improve the country's implementation capacity. Although the proposed strategy includes support to
improve institutional capacity and strengthen project implementation, maintaining the satisfactory
implementation of IDA's portfolio will remain a challenge throughout the CAS period. On balance, we
believe these risks are reasonable and manageable, especially considering the impact of Mitch and the
enormous reconstructionand transformation challenge ahead of Honduras.
xii.

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:

*

Are the proposed CAS priorities an appropriate response to the development challenges facing
Honduras in the wake of Hurricane Mitch?

*

Is the proposed link between CAS priorities, CAS implementation and the Poverty Reduction
Strategy under preparation adequate?

*

Is the proposed mix of lending and nonlending instruments adequate and in line with the WBG's
capabilities and comparative advantage?

*

Is there sufficient flexibility in the CAS to respond to country circumstances and possible risks?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A COUNTRY ASISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR THE REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS

Introduction
1.
The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Honduras was discussed by the Board in July
1993. A new CAS was under preparation when Hurricane Mitch struck Honduras in October 1998. The
draft CAS did not propose a major change in strategy, which concentrated heavily on poverty reduction
and sustainability, but did have a greater focus on the quality of human capital, targeted poverty
interventions, rural development, enviromnent and institutional strengthening. These priorities remain
valid, but the physical, social and economic havoc wreaked by Hurricane Mitch required a more
substantial reformulation of the World Bank Group (WBG) assistance strategy. In addition, Honduras is
expected to qualify for the HIPC Initiative, and as part of this process, the Government has initiated
preparation of an outcome-based Poverty Reduction Strategy in consultation with civil society. By the
time of the HIPC Decision Point, expected during the first half of 2000, the Government plans to be well
advanced in the preparation of its Poverty Reduction Strategy, including the consultation process, and to
reflect this progress in an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper to be presented to the Board at the
time of the Decision Point. The WBG, the IMF and the IDB, as well as other international partners may
contribute diagnostic, analytical and process support to the preparation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy.
2.
The effects of Hurricane Mitch carry important implications for the country's development agenda
and WBG support. First, many of Honduras' developmentgains were set back decades-if nothing else,
the investments required to rebuild infrastructure will take years and will divert resources away from
activities that would have been undertaken otherwise. This raises issues of investment strategy and
sequencing that impact IDA's support-the volume of lending has increased, a large part of which has
been allocated for emergency assistance; there are likely to be secondary emergency problems over the
coming years, requiring flexibility in the WBG's response; our involvement in the infrastructure sector
will be larger than we had envisioned prior to Mitch; and there will be a need to intensify efforts to
strengthen the Government's absorptive and implementation capacity, as public sector institutions are
trying to carry out a more ambitious and time-sensitive set of activities.
3.
Second, Mitch has, and will continue to have, a profound impact on the way we and other donors
do business in Honduras. These changes, however, are positive:
* The disaster changed the dynamics between central and local authorities, as the latter were forced to
take on roles and responsibilities that they would otherwise have had little space to exercise. A fullfledged decentralizationagenda is yet to emerge, but the process has been energized after Mitch.
* In the same way, Mitch is changing relations between the Government and civil society-both
because the Government found it needed to work much more closely with civil society groups in the
emergency phase but also in response to donor expectations. The process is not always smooth, as
both sides search for common ground, but the dialogue between the Government and civil society has
progressed in a way that mightnot have happened in the absence of the crisis.
* The transparency and governance agenda has become more prominent. This was an important issue
for Honduras before Mitch, with the Government drawing attention to it in the early days of this
administration, but there has been a marked change in the attention it is receiving and a recognition
that there is no turning back from credibly addressing the need for improved governance.
* Systemic risk and the country's vulnerability to natural disasters were made painfully evident by
Mitch. The need to manage risk in all its dimensions has become an overarching theme in Honduras'
development agenda and the assistance priorities of the donor community.

2

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

In the end, poverty reduction remains the overwhelming challenge, but the specific issues the country
faces are now qualitatively different and as a result, the volume, to some extent the content, and certainly
the design and mix of instruments which the WBG and other donors use, will be different.

L Social and Economic Conditions Prior to the Hurricane
4.
Honduras is the third poorest country in LAC, with GNP per capita of $730 (1998), a high
incidence of poverty and low social indicators. Contributing to high poverty and weak social indicators,
have been the lack of economic dynamism, coupled with recurrent macroeconomic imbalances, a very
skewed distribution of income and assets, and the poor quality of investments in human capital. Although
Honduras avoided the civil conflicts that ravaged Central America during the 1980s and early 1990s, it
was pulled in indirectly as a stagingground for the conflict being fought along its border with Nicaragua.
Thus, as with other post-conflict societies in the region, successive administrations throughout the 1990s
have endeavoredto strengthen democratic institutions, increase transparency and establish civilian control
over the armed forces and national police.
5.
Economic Developments. The macroeconomic performance of Honduras has tended to be
vulnerable to electoral cycles. As with its predecessors, the Reina Administration (1994-98) inherited an
impending fiscal and external crisis brought on by expansionary policies in the run-up to the election.
Supported by an ESAF arrangement, the Government stabilized the economy and revived growth during
1994-95, but further progress proved difficult in 1996 and the Government was unable to agree with the
Fund on the third year of the ESAF. Largely reflecting political pressures related to the electoral cycle,
the Government considered that the fiscal effort that would have been required to bring performance back
on track during 1997 would not be feasible. In early 1997, the Fund and the Government agreed on a
Staff-Monitored Program (SMP) to re-establish a record of performance during 1997 that would lay the
basis for negotiating a new ESAF with the incoming Administration in 1998.
6.
Honduras' economy had been improving steadily during the two years before Mitch struck, having
met or exceeded the targets in the SMP. Growth rebounded to 5.1 percent in 1997 and was on pace for
5.5 percent in 1998. The current account deficit fell from 4.8 percent of GDP in 1996 to 3.9 percent in
1997. After stagnating in 1995-96, average real wages increased by about 10 percent in 1997 and a
further 3 percent in the first three quarters of 1998. Annualized inflation fell from 26 percent in 1997 to
13 percent in September 1998. In April 1998, the Government adopted a fiscal package to further reduce
the fiscal deficit, which had fallen to 2.9 percent of GDP in 1997. The measures increased social
spending, lowered income tax rates to bring them in line with the rest of Central America, and phased out
taxes on net assets and exports. To finance the increased spending and tax reductions, the sales tax rate
was increased from 7 to 12 percent. Preliminary data for the first nine months of 1998 indicated that
fiscal performance was in line with a fiscal deficit target of 2.5 percent of GDP.
7.
The Government was also making steady progress in its structural reform program. In April 1998,
a single regulatory agency was established for the electricity sector-a key requirement for establishing a
tariff structure based on long-run marginal costs and to support privatization; a strategy for privatization
of electricity distribution was approved in August and a decree authorizing privatization of the telecoms
company was approved in September. The decree complemented the previously-approved privatization
law, by strengthening transparency and accountability provisions in the bidding process. In November,
Congress approved legislation to permit private concessions for the construction and management of
infrastructure (mainly roads) and encourage private investment in mining and tourism. In the financial
sector, measures were adopted in 1998 to strengthenthe regulatory framework, including new regulations
on capital adequacy, loan classification, connected lending, and external borrowing.
8.
Poverty. Although the economy was improving, poverty levels remained high. Depending on the
source and definitions, between half and two thirds of Honduran households are poor. The Bank's 1994

Honduras: CountryAssistance

Strategy

3

Poverty Assessment' estimated that in 1993 more than one half of Honduran households lived in poverty,
of which almost one-third lived in extreme poverty. Other sources estimated that about two-thirds to
three-quarters of households were poor (see Annex C for a discussion of measurement, definitions and
trends). Income inequality is high, with a Gini of 0.54. Most of the poor live in rural areas-according to
official data, about 60 percent of poor households and 70 percent of extremely poor households live in
rural areas. In addition,there are wide rural-urban disparities in social indicators and service access.
Table 1: Poverty Trends, 1991-98 (% of households below poverty line)
Poverty Level
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
Rural
80 (60)
76 (54)
77 (56)
71 (53)
72 (53)
75 (66)
Urban
68 (47)
62 (39)
55 (31)
63 (40)
63 (41)
61 (39)
Total
75 (54)
70 (47)
67 (45)
67 (47)
68 (48)
69 (54)
Memo item:
GDP Growth
3.3
5.6
6.3
-1.3
4.2
3.7
Note: Figuresin bracketsareextremepovertyestimates.
a. Povertyestimatesarepre-Mitch.GDPgrowthin 1998is the projectedgrowthrate beforeMitchstruck.
Source:EHPM,andstaffestimates.

1997
72 (60)
59 (35)
66 (49)

1998a
69 (55)
57 (36)
63 (46)

5.1

5.0

9.
Official estimates indicate a reduction of overall poverty levels between 1991 and 1998, from 75
percent to 63 percent, and from 54 percent to 46 percent in extreme poverty (Table 1). While extreme
poverty in urban areas fell between 1991 and 1998 from 47 percent to 36 percent, extreme poverty in
rural areas decreased more modestly from 60 percent in 1991 to 55 percent in 1998. As analyzed in the
Poverty Assessment and in Annex C, there appears to be a strong link between economic growth and
poverty. During the early 1990s, the Government began implementing reforms to stabilize the economy
and remove structural constraints to growth. It also introduced compensatory programs to mitigate the
social impact of adjustment during the transition to a higher growth path. Success in structural reforms
was uneven and macro stabilization suffered some reverses during the 1990s, with the result that growth
was below potential. Official estimates indicate that there was a marked drop in poverty from 75 percent
to 67 percent between 1991 and 1993-especially in rural areas, probably in response to the first round of
reforms and price liberalization (para. 33)-but poverty stagnated in the mid-1990s as growth faltered.
As economic growth rebounded, poverty declined again during 1996-98, falling from 69 percent to 63
percent. Although Mitch clearly had a devastating effect on social conditions in Honduras, the exact
impact on overall poverty levels is uncertain. Our very rough estimates suggest that poverty could have
increased by up to 6 percentage points, to about 69 percent in 1999. These estimates, however, are highly
tentative and will need to be further refined before a post-Mitch poverty baseline can be established, and
will be reflected in the Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper to be prapered by Decision Point.

II. Honduras'

Development Challenge:

Rebuilding with Social Equity

10. Country Vision. Honduras' development challenge is to rebuild its shattered economy with
greater social equity. During the immediate aftermath of Mitch, donor and WBG efforts focussed on
helping the Government deal with the most urgent needs. As the country moves into the longer-term
reconstruction phase, the challenge will be not just to bring Honduras back to where it was before the
disaster struck, but to transform Honduras into a more inclusive and prosperous nation. Underlying this
transformation is a vision of Honduras as a more equitable and productive country, sharing more widely
the benefits of growth, with a dynamic private sector capable of competing in the global economy, while
reducing the vulnerability of its people and infrastructure to natural disasters, and sustainably managing
and protecting the country's valuable natural resources.

' World Bank (1994). Honduras: Country EconomicMemorandum and PovertyAssessment, Report No: 13317-HO

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

4

11. Mitch had a devastating impact on Honduras. As discussed in Annex D, an estimated 5,660 people
died, over 8,000 disappeared and 12,270 were injured. Infrastructure damage was extensive, including 60
percent of main and secondary roads (1,600 km) and about 100 bridges. Health and education facilities
suffered considerable damage, and about 661,760 people lost or suffered major damage to their houses.
Mitch has made Honduras' development challenge more difficult, but it is also providing opportunitiesto
advance on the country's longer-term development agenda. The Government's Plan for National
Reconstruction and Transformation sets out a comprehensive agenda and vision for rebuilding and
transforming the country. Key to the realization of this vision will be: (i) adoption and implementation
of a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy; (ii) ensuring a swift economic recovery and shifting the
economy into a higher growth path; and (iii) ensuring that these efforts are sustainable. Honduras'
development agenda and the proposed WBG support are organized around these three broad themes of
poverty reduction, revival of growth and sustainability.
A. Poverty Reduction and Social Development
Toward a Poverty Reduction Strategy
12. With the emergency phase over, Honduras must set in motion the policies and reforms that will
allow the economy to grow with greater social equity and with a greater contribution to the reduction in
poverty. The country has considerable economic potential, but a better integration between economic and
social policies is required to maintain high economic growth and sustainably reduce poverty. This makes
Honduras' poverty reduction challenge even more formidable, but at the same time presents a window of
opportunity to rebuild with social equity. The Government plans to seize this opportunity and, with
support from the WBG and other international partners, is in the process of developing a comprehensive
and outcome-based poverty reduction strategy to underpin the reconstruction effort.
13. The Government's approach to poverty reduction was under discussion with IDA when the disaster
struck. In addition to encouraging higher growth, it focused on: (i) improving the delivery and quality of
basic social services; (ii) improving the efficiency and targeting of safety net programs; (iii) indigenous
and Afro-Honduran peoples development; and (iv) stimulating rural development to raise incomes and
employment. The Government's approach built on the recommendations of IDA's 1994 Poverty
Assessment, which placed emphasis on growth, especially in rural areas, improved quality and access to
social services, and a strengthened social safety net. While these priorities were and continue to be
appropriate, the Government also had become aware that it needed to develop and adopt a more
comprehensive and longer-term poverty reduction strategy, including clear outcome indicators and
progress benchmarks. At the same time, it realized it needed to improve the measurement and monitoring
of poverty and social conditions.
14. Government institutions recognize the crippling effect of the lack of reliable poverty estimates on
policy work, and the need to establish an agreed methodology to monitor poverty trends and intermediate
indicators. The destruction wrought by Mitch has drawn further attention to the need for a sound data
base. Updated poverty maps and a national poverty profile reflecting the effects of Mitch will be
prepared as key inputs for the development of a the Poverty Reduction Strategy and its monitoring.
Moreover, Honduras' entry into HIPC will require the country to redirect resources to social and poverty
programs, and demonstratethat these programs effectively reach the poor.
15. WG Support Poverty reduction is the overriding objective of the Honduras country assistance
strategy. The WBG will support, with analytical work, advice and technical assistance, Government
efforts to develop and implement a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy. As a first step, it will
assist the Government to improve household survey data collection, dissemination and analysis through
the MECOVI project-a partnership between IDB, ECLAC and the WBG to improve survey capacities in
LAC. Over the medium term, we will also focus on addressing deficiencies in other data sources and
institutional weaknesses, working with USAID and UNDP who are assisting in the preparation of the

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

5

2000 National Census. The improved data base will be used to prepare a Poverty Assessment, which will
update IDA's 1994 report and support the Government in the elaboration of a poverty reduction strategy.
This work will be carried out in partnership with IDB, the IMF and the local UNDP office, which has
been supporting analytical and policy work on poverty and social development. The Poverty Update will
include a comprehensive analysis of urban poverty and, as discussed below, be complemented by a
parallel effort to assist the Governmentprepare and implement a rural development strategy. In addition
to this broad analytical and strategic support, the assistance strategy concentrates heavily on supporting
the other elements of the Government's poverty reduction and social development strategy.
Human Capital and Social Safety Nets
16. Social Policies. Prior to Mitch, public spending on the social sectors at almost 8 percent of GDP,
was high relative to income. A comparison of Honduras with 52 countries controlling for income levels
carried out by IDA2 showed strikingly different results regarding the performance of the health and
education sectors. The share of GDP allocated to health in Honduras was close to the international
average but its results in terms of life expectancy were better than average. In contrast, the share spent on
education was higher than the international average, but literacy was below average (illiteracy of 27
percent is more than double that for LAC). The evolution of other social indicators also suggests that
there is a need to focus on the quality and equity of service provision, and that the more urgent challenge
is in the education sector. Mitch, in turn, placed enormous strains on social sector and safety net
institutions, first to deliver emergency assistance and then to re-establish basic systems (e.g., schools,
clinics, rural roads, water systems). Mitch, and the way in which Government agencies responded to the
emergency, also helped to bring into sharper focus the need for reforms, especially in terms of increasing
community/parental participation (basic education) and effective decentralization (basic health, FHIS and
disaster preparedness). The challenge will be to move rapidly to support the momentum toward reform
while still helping the Government to deal with immediate needs such as the physical rehabilitation of
primary schools, the restocking of health posts and infrastructure repairs in small, isolated communities.
17. The Role of Women. As discussed throughout the CAS, Honduras has made substantial progress
in addressing gender issues. There have been significant increases in girls' school attendance rates,
women's access to pre-natal care has improved and some legislation that directly discriminated against
women has been revised. As pointed out in the civil society dialogue, however, much remains to be done.
Women's health status continues to be low because of their reproductive function and maternal mortality
remains unacceptably high. A significant proportion of births are high risk because institutional delivery
rates are low, pre- and post-natal care is limited and of poor quality, the use of family planning methods is
low, and a high proportion of births occur among very young women. Women's labor market
participation rates are still relatively low and substantial gender wage differentials exist. Women in rural
areas, and indigenous and Afro-Honduran women are especially disadvantaged, with more limited access
to education, health, and child-care services. Female-headed households, one in four nationally, have a
greater propensity to be poor. Although women and children benefit from a number of compensatory
programs, there is a need to expand their income and employment opportunities. Civil Society Groups
(CSGs) believe that greater efforts are required to change stereotypes and modify cultural behaviors that
negatively affect women, especially through the education system. They also believe there is a need to
strengthen the institutional framework supporting the role of women and gender issues in development.
In line with the CAS dialogue recommendations, an effort has been made not to present the role of
women as a separate developmentissue, but to mainstream it into the broader assistance strategy.
18. Education. Honduras has made considerable progress in primary education, especially in tripling
the number of students attending primary schools since 1970. Gross primary enrollment at 112 percent is
slightly higher than the LAC average. Pre-primary education has expanded substantially reaching one
third of children, but almost 75 percent of pre-primary schools are located in urban areas. Educational
2

World Bank (1995). Honduras: Reforming Public Investmnentand the Infrastructure Sectors, Report No. 14084-HO.

6

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

attainment is 4.2 years of formal schooling per person, up from 3.8 years in 1990. The main problem,
however, is low quality. Primary education suffers from low educational achievement, high repetition
and drop out rates, and low completion rates. The net result is that for every 100 students who enter 1I
grade, less than 8 finish 12t grade. Net enrollment drops markedly at the secondary level to 22 percent, is
heavily concentrated in urban areas (92 percent), and secondary education quality is widely regarded as
low. Education spending is also regressive given the high share allocated to public tertiary education and
the almost negligible cost recovery at this level. The education attaimnent of women has reached levels
similar to those of men. At present, there are almost no gender differences in overall literacy, and female
enrollment surpasses that of males at the preschool and secondary levels. In primary education, the net
enrollment of girls is slightly higher than boys. Illiteracy, however, is high among indigenous and AfroHonduran peoples, especially women. Over 7 percent of Honduras' school age population is from groups
whose mother tongue is not Spanish, of which over one-third are not enrolled in pre-or primary schools.
19. Poor educational outcomes have their roots in low teaching quality, shortages of books and
teaching materials, administrative deficiencies, insufficient classroom time due to teacher absenteeism,
weak supervision and low parental and community involvement. Even when resources have been made
available to improve educational inputs, the tendency has been for these inputs to reach schools
independently of each other. Thus, the challenge is implementing a national strategy which ensures the
provision of an integrated package: training teachers on pertinent curriculum content and modem
pedagogical practices, applying the training in the classroom, guaranteeing the suprly of instructional
materials, and evaluating the performance of students to adjust training, curriculum, pedagogy and
instructional materials. In general, finding strategies and incentives to make teachers more efficient in the
classroom-especially in rural, marginal and poor schools-is an ongoing priority in Honduras.
20. While Honduras has been able to increase primary education enrollments, two key challenges are,
first, to increase enrollments in pre-primary and in secondary education, and, second, ensuring that
students are retained and complete each education level. Rural areas have found it increasingly difficult
to open schools, attract qualified teachers and retain students in school. With IDA support, the
Government has adopted a community participation model in pre-primary and primary education,
drawing on the successful experience underway in the region (El Salvador and Guatemala). These
experiences suggest that community management of teachers, supported by a more flexible and
decentralized Ministry of Education, has a positive impact on enrollments, attendance (students and
teachers) and additional years of schooling, especially in rural areas. Following Mitch, the Government
believes it now has the opportunity to move more aggressively with these reforms and plans to accelerate
the introduction of its Community Participation in Education Program (PROHECO). The Government
has set ambitious targets by 2001, including the creation of 1,250 PROHECO schools, covering 50,000
children in poor rural communities lacking pre- and primary schools. So far, the initial target of 500
schools for 1999-2000 has been surpassed-624 community committees have been created, 585 new
schools are functioning, and 26,000 new students attend schools in 13 departments and 114
municipalities. By introducingthe PROHECO model in new schools, the Government expects that as the
reforms begin to show results, there will be demand from other communities and it will be able to build
consensus for an expansion to all pre- and primary schools in rural areas, and for some form of
community participation in urban schools, especially in marginal and high-poverty areas.
21. Secondary education enrollment and quality improvements have lagged prinary education. IDB
has been working to improve access and quality at the secondary level, while Germany is providing
substantial support across the sector. An increased collaboration is being developed between the two
Banks and key bilateral donors, to explore the curriculum and content articulation between basic and
secondary education, the benefits of the community participation model and other rural education access
strategies for the secondary level, and institutional improvements for the management, supervision and
support across the entire education system. There is also a need to improve the allocation of education
spending overall to increase efficiency and targeting on the poor.

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

7

22. The Government assigns top priority to education reform, viewing it both as a key component of its
longer-term poverty reduction strategy, but also as critical to attain the vision of a dynamic and
productive economy able to compete in an increasingly globalized market place. The Government is
aware that extremely low secondary enrolment rates and low quality in tertiary and vocational education
are a major impediment to increased productivity and competitiveness. FLAS,for example, points out that
although the maquila sector has been very successful, better education and training of the labor force is
needed to move into higher value added manufacturing.
23. Health. Honduras has made relatively good progress in health. Life expectancy has increased
from 54 years in 1970 to 67 (65 for men and 69 for women) currently. Infant mortality has fallen.from
110 per 1,000 live births in 1970 to 45 currently. Among children under one year, the immunization
coverage for smallpox, polio, DPT and BGG is 94 percent, which is remarkable for a country with much
of its population living in rural and often isolated areas. The number of pregnant women who received
pre-natal care increased from 65 percent in 1985to 84 percent currently. These improvements have been
the result of general socio-economic progress, especially increases in education, urbanization and access
to safe water and sanitation, and considerable external financing which has made possible a marked
expansion in coverage, especially in primary and preventive health. As a result, public health spending is
relatively equitable.
24. Despite these achievements there are a number of important weaknesses. Overall health coverage
is still only 75 percent, leaving one in four Hondurans without adequate access. The health status of
women, especially mothers has lagged. Maternal mortality at over 200 per 100,000 births remains high
(higher than Guatemala and Nicaragua). About 9 percent of these deaths are due to abortions and about
80 percent due to infections. Teenage pregnancy remains a serious problem and the total fertility rate at
4.3, although down from 7.5 in 1970, remains high. WHO estimates HIV prevalence of 1.47 percent and
Honduras accounts for over one half of AIDS cases in Central America. The contraceptive prevalence
rate, at 47 percent of women aged 15-49 remains low. Child malnutrition also remains a serious problem.
25. The Government is aware that Honduras' health problems are the result, not so much of the
quantity of the resources available, but of their efficient allocation. Many of the sector problems are
related to the centralization of the Ministry of Health, inefficiencies in the budget system, inappropriate
incentives to increased efficiency and weak linkages between hospitals and lower levels of the health
system. In addition there is a need to improve the procurement system for medicines and reform the
social security agency which is also involved in the provision of health services. Prior to Mitch, the
Government was preparing with IDA support a long-term reform program for the health sector aiming to
decentralize health financing, improve the budget system, and reform procurement. As in the education
sector, the Government believes that the need to rebuild health facilities provides a good opportunity to
push harder on system reforms in the sector. As a result of the need to cope with the Mitch emergency,
there is now a clearer understanding of the need to strengthen linkages between health system levels, but
also to consider increased decentralization and delegation of authority. For example, a relatively simple
system of radio communications established under the ongoing IDA project proved very effective in the
aftermath of Mitch in maintaining isolated communities linked with the health system and coping with
emergency health situations. These systems need to be reinforced not just for emergencies but as part of
wider reform efforts to improve the reach and quality of health service delivery.
26. WBG Support. To address immediate education and health sector needs, IDA moved quickly to
reallocate funds within the ongoing Education Project and prepare a supplementary credit for the Health
Project. While this is assisting the Government to cope with immediate needs, IDA is also working with
the Government to define and implement longer-term reform programs in education and health. In
education, we would seek to support PROHECO, expand quality and coverage in the pre- and primary
levels, improve teacher training, student assessments and the curriculum, as well as institutional reforms
to improve efficiency and capacity throughout the system. As part of the curriculum reform effort,
textbooks and teaching materials will be analyzed to remove gender biases and stereotypes, and an effort

8

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

will be made to track the retention and educational attainment of girls in primary education. In health,
IDA has been working to support improvements in the efficiency of resource allocation, greater emphasis
on primary health, increased coverage in under-served rural areas, more effective nutrition interventions,
increased decentralization, and separation of the health and pension systems. Within this approach, an
important priority has been to improve the health status of women, including reproductive health and
access to family planning services. While IDA will continue to support health sector reforms, over the
coming year we will be assessing the modality of such support, given that donor financing for the health
sector has expanded considerably after Mitch. Options under consideration include a traditional
investment project, an APL, a stand-alone Health TA project, or technical policy support to incorporate
reforms in the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy. The proposed reform strategies in education
and health have the potential to produce a marked improvement in coverage and the quality of service
delivery. At the same time, our experience in Honduras has clearly shown that IDA needs to undertake a
considerable investment in developing consensus, ensuring that reforms are country-owned and part of a
broader national vision. For this reason, we propose to proceed gradually with reforms in these two
sectors, working with our Governmuentcounterparts and civil society to build consensus around the
reform programs.
27. Safety Nets. The social safety net in Honduras is composed of two main programs: PRAF
(Family Assistance Program) and FHIS (Honduran Social Investment Fund). PRAF directly
compensates vulnerable groups through five core programs: the School Bond "or primary school
children; the Maternal Child Bond for pregnant and lactating mothers, and children under five; the Bond
for the Elderly; the School Pack Program, for primary students; and the Program for Development of
Women, to assist women in micro enterprise development and training, including the establishment of
230 community banks. These programs have increased steadily and appear to be reaching intended
beneficiaries, but two important concerns remain. First, despite substantial resources spent on food and
nutrition programs, malnutrition remains high and well above what could be expected at Honduras' GNP.
There is a growing realization that social safety net programs alone will not address the nutrition problem
or even most of it. A pilot program in Honduras (AIN or Atenci6n Integral a la Niiez) is showing
impressive results by focusing on preventing mild and moderate malnutrition rather than concentratingon
treating severe malnutrition (Annex C). Second, the Government and civil society are concerned that
while transfer programs constitute and important safety net, over the longer run they may create excessive
dependence on income and in-kind transfers. Thus, as part of its poverty reduction strategy, while
continuing to support well-targeted transfer programs, the Government aims to focus increasingly on
programs that can enhance the productivity of poor households, relying on income and employment
generation as a more sustainable way to reduce poverty.
28. FHIS was established in 1990 as a temporary agency to help mitigate the impact of adjustment on
the poor. As with other social funds, FHIS initially concentrated on the financing of small-scale social
and economic infrastructure works, but it also started playing a more active role in the Government's
social safety net by supporting a number of social development initiatives. This broadening of
responsibilities was formalized and gathered momentum when the FHIS mandate was changed in 1995,
from a focus on short-term to medium-term social investment. A key change was a new mandate to place
greater emphasis on community participation and strengthening of local governments, in line with the
Government's decentralization objective. While FLIS has become the principal, and in some cases, the
only Government instrument for financing small-scale, community civil works, it has also supported
important social programs. These include: health and hygiene training, nutrition, early childhood
education, attention to vulnerable or underserved groups (street children, women, the elderly, the
disabled, and indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples), and cultural identity (cultural preservation and
indigenous culture). In most instances FHIS does not itself manage these programs, but seeks to pilot or
act as a catalyst for new initiatives which subsequently become sustainable on their own (e.g., PRAF) or
can be transferred to other agencies, municipalities or NGOs (e.g., cultural heritage, street children). A
recent evaluation showed that FHIS is doing a good job of ensuring women's participation throughout the
project cycle, as well as in the hiring of women in construction projects.

Honduras:CountryAssistanceStrategy

9

29. Institution strengthening and increased local participation are key FHIS aims. Supported by an
ongoing IDA credit, FHIS is currently implementinga Pilot Program for Local Institutional Strengthening
to increase local participation in project planning, implementation and maintenance. Efforts to increase
community participation will also aim to ensure that communities and beneficiaries have a greater say on
the selection of FHIS projects, the quality of the construction and their sustainability-areas of concern
identified in the CAS dialogue. FHIS is also implementing a Pilot Program to Strengthen Community
and Rural Water Systems, working with municipalities, beneficiaries and Government agencies to
improve coverage and sustainability in rural water. The aim of the pilot is to help develop a better policy
and institutional framework for the sector, which can eventually be absorbed by the water authorities
30. FHIS has played a critical role in the national emergency relief and rehabilitation effort. A recent
IDA evaluation of the role of FHIS during the emergency phase found that it was responding positively
and efficiently to the enormous challenges presented by Mitch and its aftermath. FHIS rapidly put in
place a regionally decentralized operating structure, simplified project preparation and authorization
processes, and expedited contracting and disbursements. This flexibility allowed FHIS to respond
quickly and effectively to the pressing needs of affected municipalities and communities. The
Government believes that there is an opportunity to build on this valuable experience. FHIS plans to
restart the Town Hall Meetings for Municipal Development (Cabildos Abiertos) in order to define
appropriate reconstructionprograms at the municipal level. The first round of these Meetings, held prior
to Mitch, was an important first step in promoting more effective community and municipal participation.
31.
WBG Support IDA's FHS IV project had just been approved when Mitch struck, allowing FHIS
to play a vital role in the emergency and the rehabilitation phase. Its active role and ability to channel
resources quickly and effectively to affected communities means that a follow-on operation will be
needed soon. Many of FHIS' major programs, which had to be postponed due to the emergency, will be
restarted under the follow-on operation, including its pilot programs to strengthen local institutions and
the development of viable rural water systems. WBG support is being coordinated with Germany and
with IDB, which is supporting FHIS and PRAF through a Social Sector Project. IDA is also undertaking
an evaluation of nutrition programs, the results of which will be incorporated into the Government's
poverty reduction strategy and the health sector reform program, including support for the AIN pilot
nutrition program. IDA will also continue to support FHIS programs targeting women, including
increased focus on indigenous and Afro-Honduranwomen through the Nuestras Raices program.

Rural Development and Rural Poverty
32. Most of Honduras' poor live in rural areas. Land distribution is highly skewed. Farms of over 100
ha account for 1.6 percent of all farmland but almost 40 percent of land area, while close to 83 percent of
farms are below 10 ha. A recent Bank study estimated a Gini coefficient for land of 0.68. Agricultural
productivity is low, with 80 percent of basic grain cultivation taking place on slopes. Although Honduras
has been implementing a land titling program since 1982, having granted more than 77,000 titles (of
which over 20 percent were female farmers) on formerly public lands, over 45 percent of farmers still
lack titles. (While there is no legal constraint on the titling of women landholders, couples without legal
marriage papers-a large proportion of rural households-are not eligible to apply for joint title.) A
recent Bank study3 estimated a very respectable 17 percent rate of return on land titling in Honduras, but
in addition to titling, there is an urgent need to improve registries and cadastral systems, without which
the benefits of titling can quickly erode. Access to credit remains limited and Government efforts to
reform the state agricultural development bank have had little impact in expanding credit services to
small-scale farmers and rural entrepreneurs. Communal revolving credit groups have expanded
considerably in recent years but they are fragile institutions with little capacity to weather cyclical
downturns and no linkage with the formal financial system.
3World

Bank(1997).RuralPovernyinLatinAmerica:Analytics,NewEmpiricalEvidenceandPolicy,ReportNo. 16792-LAC.

10

Honduras: CountryAssistance

Stratey

33. During the 1960s and 1970s, the Government's approach to rural development focussed largely on
the agriculture sector, including heavy emphasis on farm-based area development projects in the late
1970s. Toward the end of the 1980s, faced with a serious macro crisis, the Government and donors
focussed on structural reforms to improve the functioning of markets and liberalize the economy,
especially during the first half of the 1990s. The reform program had an initial positive impact,
reactivating agricultural growth and raising the real incomes of the poor. An IDA study4 showed that the
real incomes of agricultural workers (three-fourths of whom are poor) grew at an average of almost 10
percent a year during 1990-93 As macro problems resurfaced in the mid-1990s and rural poverty began
to increase again, the Govermmentbegan to rethink its approach, realizing that removing the antiagriculture bias and focusing solely on agricultural policies, would not solve the rural poverty problem.
34. As Mitch hit, the Government had been putting the finishing touches on its rural development
strategy, which sought to adopt a more comprehensive approach to rural development, going beyond
agriculture policies and seeking a better integration with social policies. Mitch, however, destroyed up to
70 percent of Honduras' basic crops, robbing the people not only of daily foodstuffs, but also critical
exports. The immediate priority in rural areas has been to restore food-production capabilities to
subsistence farmers, and repair infrastructureto provide access to markets and services. As rural farming
communities are gradually stabilized, foodstuff production restored, and work initiated to address
immediate vulnerabilities, the Government is re-focusing on the longer-term reform agenda. Its postMitch strategy has three broad principles: targeting poor areas, strengthening decentralized institutions,
and sustainable watershed management. The Government's rural development program focuses on: (i)
land titling and registration to improve land security and the functioning of land markets; (ii) piloting a
market-assisted land reform program to reduce the skewedness of land distribution; (iii) establishment of
a Rural Investment Fund (PRONADERS) targeting marginal areas and poor producers; (iv) watershed
management and river course stabilization as part of natural resource risk management; and (v)
restructuring of forestry agencies, which are facing a governance crisis, to ensure sustainable exploitation
of forest resources. In addition, priority would be assigned to community infrastructure and social
services in poor rural areas, especially basic education.
35. WBG Support. In response to Mitch, the Rural Land Management Project (RLMP) was
restructured by reprogramming $5 million to finance emergency repairs to the flood control levees in the
Sula Valley, and $4 million to finance forestry and watershed activities through municipalities, in line
with the Government's decentralization objective, including $0.5 million for emergency seed and input
supplies. A proposed Municipal Watershed and Rural Development Project would support the
Government's decentralized program of watershed management and sustainable land use in the priority
areas affected by Mitch, aiming to reduce systemic risks and building on lessons from the emergency
response activities and the Upland Fund within the ongoing RLMP. Post-Mitch, civil society and donors
are concerned by the failure to adequately value forest resources, both for stability of land and water
catchments, and also because in terms of soil, land and forest coverage, Honduras has much more forestry
than agricultural potential, especially comparing forest management with extensive, low-return cattle
ranching in the agricultural frontier. The proposed Municipal Watershed Project, would promote
community and municipality-managed forestry activities for income generation and diversification as
well as for forest stabilization. Particularly in eastern Honduras, where the traditional indigenous
populations are concentrated, there is a good match between indigenous income generation and
sustainable forestry conservation. A proposed Land Administration and Land Fund Project would
support the soon-to-be-launched Pilot Land Fund and continuation of the land titling and registration
program included in the RLMP. The Pilot Land Fund will support market-assisted land reform, financing
land purchases for about 1,000 beneficiary families (IDA will not finance land purchases), providing
technical assistance and seeking to mobilize complementary commercial bank financing. Our previous
experience in the sector and the CAS dialogue clearly shows the need to build consensus on a longer-term
4

WorldBank (1995). Honduras: ImpactofPolicyReforms on theIncomes of theRural Poor, ReportNo. 14396-HO.

Honduras. CountryAssistance Strategy

11

rural development strategy. To this end, and as part of project preparation, IDA will support an intensive
and participatory policy dialogue, based on a series of workshops and sector policy notes, to develop
greater understanding and support for a longer-term rural poverty and development reform agenda.
Although the Government has not been prepared to consider a reassessment of rural credit policies and
institutions, IDA will seek to support pilot activities to test alternative rural credit delivery mechanisms
and continue a policy dialogue to build consensus on the need for comprehensive reforms to improve
rural credit access by low-income farmers.
36. As part of our gender efforts and at the request of the Government, the Ministry of Agriculture will
participate in the Bank's GINO program, designed to identify institutional constraints to gender
responsiveness and institutional change processes that make organizations more accountable to male and
female clients. A broader research effort examining the impact of land market liberalization and the land
access of the poor in Honduras, Mexico and Nicaragua, will include an analysis of gender impact.
Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples Development
37. Indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples constitute about 13 percent of the population and belong to
9 ethnic groups, four of which (Lenca, Garifuna, Tolupanes, and Miskitos), account for over 90 percent of
the total. Although household survey data does not disaggregate indigenous and Afro-Honduran
populations, a social assessment carried out by IDA shows that they are extremely disadvantaged relative
to the non-indigenous population: the worst poverty indicators in the country are found in municipalities
which have large indigenous and Afro-Honduran populations; illiteracy exceeds 70 percent in some
communities and is worse for indigenous and Afro-Honduran women; 38 percent of school-age
indigenous and Afro-Honduran children are not enrolled in schools; health coverage is low, with 8,500
indigenous and Afro-Honduran people per rural health post and 30,000 per health clinic; and potable
water coverage is only 40 percent (Annex C).
38. WBG Support. CSGs strongly argued that indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples are
disadvantaged, but should not be treated as a separate vulnerable group in need of compensatory
assistance. Indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples need to be fully integrated into a national poverty
reduction strategy. Emphasis was placed on education, the role of indigenous and Afro-Honduran
women, access to markets and employment, and the need to channel support in a manner consistent with
their own organizations and cultural systems. While communities value the efforts to design targeted
programs, they desire more direct involvement in decisions and programs that affect them, greater
capacity building of their own organizations, and increased support for productive activities. WBG
support for indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples development has been channeled though an IDF
Grant for capacity building and institutional strengthening in indigenous and Afro-Honduran
communities, focusing on project planning and execution, and the FH[S program Nuestras Raices. A
recent IDA evaluation of Nuestras Raices was positive but suggested a number of improvements,
including more effective support for community banking (Annex C). The ongoing Education Project is
implementing a pilot program to provide bilingual education, including translating teaching materials into
Garifuna and Miskito. At the request of the Government and in consultation with indigenous and AfroHonduran communities, IDA is considering a more integrated approach to be supported by a possible
Indigenous Development LIL and the second phase of the ongoing IDF Grant. This program will be
prepared in a participatory manner with indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples organizations.
B. Reviving and Accelerating Growth
39. Sources of Growth, External Environment and Medium-Term Prospects. Mitch brought to a
halt Honduras' economic recovery and its infrastructure base was set back decades. Economic growth
will turn negative in 1999, with considerable social consequences, especially in terms of unemployment.
Reviving economic growth is essential to the reconstruction effort and to ensure social and political
stability. While poverty reduction and social development are at the center of the Government's strategy

12

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

and the CAS, it is clear that without high growth it will not be possible to sustainably reduce poverty and
increase investment in human capital. The Government believes that Honduras has the economic and
human potential to make the vision of a more competitive and egalitarian society a reality. This potential
is best exemplified by the rapid development around the San Pedro Sula Valley, where a dynamic private
sector has expanded employment and the country' productive and export base, centered around textiles,
maquila (export processing) and agro-export industries. Honduran capital and management account for
about one-third of investment in the maquila sector, while the agro-export sector has successfully
penetrated foreign markets and contributedto an importantdiversification of the country's export base.
40. As a small open economy, a favorable external environment will be key to Honduras' sustained
economic recovery, especially the absence of major adverse shocks that would severely impact its flagile
economy. In recent years, Honduras has made considerable progress in establishing an open trade
regime, contributing to a gradual diversification of its export base. The Government hopes that together
with its Central American and Caribbean neighbors, Honduras will be granted NAFTA parity, thus
improving access to North American markets for its exports. Honduras has bilateral free-trade
agreements with Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Venezuela and, with other Central
American countries, is negotiating a free-trade agreement with Chile.
41. Honduras has considerable economic potential, and with a favorable external environment and
sound policies, it can sustain economic growth rates of 5-6 percent. Initially, reconstruction activities will
provide a strong economic stimulus, but over the longer term, growth will depend on a favorable external
environment and Honduras' ability to develop its considerable potential for sustainable tourism,
expansion of the agro-export sector, sustainable exploitation of forestry resources, development of
mining, increased foreign investment, private participation in infrastructure, and moving the maquila
sector into higher value-added production. Development of this potential is important not only to ensure
high and sustained growth, but also because most of these sources of growth tend to be labor intensive
and have strong linkages with rural areas, especially the tourism and agro-industrial sectors. The
Government is aware that over the long term, higher productivityand growth are the result of many interrelated factors, including a healthier and better educated population, macroeconomic stability, a dynamic
rural economy, a more efficient public sector, as well as increased transparency, governance and the rule
of law. While these elements are part of the country's longer-term development agenda, the
Government's medium-term growth strategy and WBG support focus on: (i) rebuilding the country's
shattered infrastructure; (ii) strengthening the financial sector; and (iii) providing an enabling
environment to stimulate private sector recovery, investment and longer-termgrowth.
Rebuilding Infrastructure
42. Mitch washed away much of the progress that Honduras had made in improving its physical
infrastructure. Damage was particularly severe on roads and bridges, water systems and major urban
centers, especially the capital Tegucigalpa. The speed and effectiveness with which the physical
infrastructure can be rehabilitated will determine, to a considerable extent, the pace of economic and
social recovery. While the physical needs are considerable, the Government also plans to use this
opportunity to push ahead with reforms in the infrastructure sectors. Over the coming year, the
Government expects to complete privatization of the telecoms company, the concessioning of the four
international airports, privatization of power distribution, and promote the concessioning of new
highways and main roads. In addition to privatization, the Government will aim to improve road
maintenance through the establishment of a road fund, attract private sector participation in the provision
of water and sanitation services in large cities, and develop a viable rural water and sanitation system.
Although the Government has prepared an infrastructure reconstruction plan, it needs to have in place a
comprehensive policy framework and strategy for infrastructure development.
43. WBG Support. As a result of Mitch, the CAS proposes a larger involvement in infrastructure than
would have been the case before the disaster. The Roads Project was winding down when Mitch struck

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

13

and a follow-on operation was under preparation. In response to Mitch, IDA approved a supplementary
credit to assist with immediate road and bridge rehabilitation. The Government has requested WBG
support to prepare a long-term policy framework and strategy to guide infrastructure development and
improve coordination of donor efforts. In response, the WBG has initiated preparation of a
comprehensive Infrastructure Assessment, which will not only review infrastructure needs, but also
examine inter-sectoral issues, linkages with private sector development, benchmarking of infrastructure
indicators, and a broader set of issues that constrain efficient infrastructure development. IDB has
indicated its willingness to join in this effort. Also at the request of the Government, IDA is considering
an Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project which would provide a vehicle and a framework to mobilize
cofinancing and donor coordination. While it is expected that the project would have a major roads
rehabilitation component, it would also consider financing priority infrastructure needs not covered by
other donors. Under the roads component, IDA would continue to support strengthening and
restructuring of the Ministry of Transport (MOT), operation of the road maintenance fund and, through a
pilot program, the creation of road maintenance microenterprises,drawing on the successful experience in
Nicaragua. The microenterprise pilot would support creation of two types of enterprises: (i) enterprises
drawn from communities along the roads being maintained; and (ii) enterprises formed by staff made
redundant due to MOT restructuring. It would also support a program to reduce vulnerabilities to natural
disasters in the roads sector-a strong concern expressed in the CAS dialogue-based on detailed road
and bridge damage assessments currently underway as part of the Supplemental Transport Project.
44. IFC has so far invested in an independent power producer in Honduras (Elcosa), and a regional
power company (EGI) which invests in power projects in Central American countries, that could include
Honduras as the privatization process advances. IFC expects to support the Government's privatization
process through advice (e.g., power distribution) and investments (e.g., telecommunications, ports). IFC
is also supporting a study, with a Spanish Trust Fund, on the commercial feasibility and an inter-oceanic
transport link connecting ports in Honduras and El Salvador with a highway. The initial assessment
supports the possibility of a private port concession in Puerto Cortes.
Strengthening the Financial Sector
45. Although Mitch placed additional stresses on the financial system, there were already indications
of weaknesses in the system. Financial liberalization over the past decade encouraged a rapid expansion
of the financial system and a proliferation of intermediaries. Total assets in the system were equivalent to
about 75 percent of GDP at end-1998, of which the 23 private banks represented more than 90 percent.
Non-bank financial services, such as leasing, housing finance, pension funds, and long-term capital
markets remain underdeveloped and shallow. Rapid growth has produced a large number of small and
weak institutions, which coupled with inadequate regulatory capacity raises concerns about the strength of
Honduras' financial system and its ability to contribute to growth. CNBS (the Supervisory Agency) is a
relatively new institution and presently lacks the technical capacity and legal basis to fully supervise the
system. Important parts of the system have remained unsupervised, including credit cooperatives, credit
NGOs, community banks (cajas rurales), and private pension funds. In addition, a legal loophole has
prevented CNBS from supervising the stock exchange, where some banks are able to mobilize funds from
the public without being subject to provisioning norms. Commercial banks tend to be organized around
industrial/financial groups, leading to problems of connected lending and excessive exposure to single
creditors. Although the Authorities have issued new regulations on connected lending, capital adequacy
(raised to 10 percent), and foreign exchange exposure, banks have considerable time to comply and
sanctions need to be more forcefully applied. In addition, some prudential norms do not comply with
Basle criteria and there is no formal deposit insurance system.
46. WBG Support. Prior to Mitch, IDA had proposed to the Government the elaboration of a Financial
Sector Review to assess the state of the financial system and design a reform program. The Govermnent
welcomed IDA support but requested instead that it work with the IMF on a rapid program of assisted
supervisions for commercial banks and move in parallel with technical assistance to support Government

14

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

reforms. The program of assisted supervisionsand technical assistance had just begun when Mitch struck
and will continue over the coming year. In the immediate aftermath of Mitch, the Central Bank instructed
financial intermediaries not to opt for across-the-board debt cancellations or automatic loan
reschedulings, instead addressing the problems on a case-by-case basis. It nonetheless requested IDA to
consider an operation that would inject liquidity to reactivate production and prevent a major deterioration
in bank portfolios. In the end, the Authorities found that the operation would not be needed as the system
was coping well with the damage and financial institutions were restructuring financing packages on a
case-by-case basis. The insurance sector was also able to cope with the disaster, largely because it had
extensively reinsured overseas.
47. The WBG will maintain its active involvement in the financial sector in partnership with the IMF.
A PHRD Grant and a Spanish Consultant Trust Fund are supporting a program of assisted supervision in
the banking sector, and preparation of a longer-term program of technical assistance to strengthen CNBS
and the legal framework. In addition, the Government has requested IDA support to strengthen the
financial sector through a Financial Sector Adjustment Credit and a TA operation. With IDA support, the
Authorities are preparing a financial sector reform program including: draft laws on capital markets,
insurance regulation, secured transactions and creation of a deposit insurance system, establishment of a
crisis resolution mechanism, further improvements in prudential norms and regulations to bring them in
line with international standards, including a schedule for bringing capital and provisioning requirements
in line with new norms. Honduras will also be part of a regional effort, currently underway in the
Caribbean, to determine ways in which the financial system, especially the insurance sector, can play a
more effective role in managing systemic risks from natural disasters. IFC's approach in the sector has so
far focused on the development of financial markets at a sub-regional level. It is supporting small and
medium-scale enterprise (SME) financing through Banco Cuscatlan (El Salvador-based) and invested in a
regional credit rating agency. As the regulatory and supervisory framework is improved in Honduras,
IFC will consider, on a case-by-case basis, direct investment opportunities in the sector.
Private Sector Development
48. Mitch inflicted large damage on the production and infrastructure base of the private sector.
Agriculture, the country's backbone, suffered enormous losses as did the agro-export sector-responsible
for much of Honduras' recent export dynamism. SMEs have been particularly affected, having less
access to credit markets and limited internal resources to cover rehabilitation needs. Over the longerterm, the Government is making efforts to improve the business climate, with support from the
Harvard/INCAE/CABEI Competitiveness Project, direct support to small and medium enterprises, and
opening up the infrastructure sector to private capital and management. Also, much remains to be done to
streamline regulatory and administrative barriers to private investment, both to improve the investment
climate and to enhance transparency. A better investment climate also requires improvements in the
speed and predictability of the judiciary system.
49. WBG Support Support for private sector developmentand improving the investment climate will
be provided through a number of complementary activities. IDA's assistance will focus primarily on
support for privatization and strengthening the financial system. As the reconstruction phase advances
and the role of the private sector expands, adherence to core labor standards will also be reviewed. IFC is
providing support under an Italian/IFC Technical Assistance Trust Fund to support SMEs in Central
American countries including Honduras, in project and skill development, and identification of financing
sources. FIAS is preparing a Diagnosis of the Business Environment as a first step in a longer-term
program to assist the Government improve the investment climate. Its preliminary assessment suggests a
moderately positive business climate, confirmed by inflows of foreign direct investment, which have been
rising steadily in recent years and have averaged over 2 percent of GDP during the past two years. FIAS
has tentatively identified five sectors as good candidates for promotion: infrastructure, finance, tourism,
forestry and maquila. An important outcome of the FIAS Diagnosis would be the identification of
administrative barriers on private sector development, which in a later phase could form the basis for an

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

15

action plan to streamline regulations and make them more automatic and transparent. This would also
make an important contribution to broader efforts to improve governance and transparency in Honduras.
IDB will channel lines of credit to SMEs through the commercial banking system and support microenterprise development through its Social Enterprise Program (including women and indigenous groups).
50. MIGA has actively promoted its products and services in Honduras, through its guarantee program
designed to encourage foreign investment by mitigating political risks, and its Investment Marketing
Services, which helps countries improve investment promotion. MIGA has supplied guarantees in the
power sector facilitating foreign investment amounting to $71 million. IPAnet and Privatization Link,
two specialized online forums developed and managed by MIGA, have and will continue to provide
information on the business climate to investors considering operations in Honduras. Currently there are
over 350 documents that can be referenced through these online forums. MIGA will support investment
promotion efforts in Honduras targeting foreign investment in higher value added export sectors
(especially maquila), infrastructure,and tourism.
C. Sustainability
51. The Government's development strategy must not only seek to meet the challenges described
above, but it must also ensure that achievements can be sustained. This is particularly important for
Honduras, given its uneven record in terms of sustaining economic policies and maintaining social
progress. Five aspects of sustainability will be critical for the country's prospects, both during the
reconstruction phase and in terms of meeting its longer-term development challenges: (i) ensuring a
stable macroeconomic framework and a sustainable external debt situation, without which high growth
and increased investment in human capital to reduce poverty will not be possible; (ii) modernizing the
state, strengthening its institutions, and advancing on decentralization, to lead the reconstruction effort
and improve implementation of development policies, projects and service delivery; (iii) improving
governance and transparency, to ensure effective use of reconstruction assistance, and improve
development effectiveness; (iv) environmental sustainability to protect Honduras' valuable natural
resources and reduce the effects of natural disasters; and (v) disaster preparedness through capacity
building and protection measures.
Macroeconomic Stability and Debt Sustainability
52. A quick return to macroeconomic stability will be essential to underpin the reconstruction effort
and re-establish conditions for accelerating growth. On March 26, 1999, the IMF Board approved a
three-year ESAF arrangement aimed at a quick and sustained economic recovery. The main targets of the
program are: (i) a recovery in growth to about 5-6 percent a year in 2000-01 following expected negative
growth of 2-3 percent in 1999; (ii) a reduction in the 12-monthinflation rate to 13-14 percent by end-1999
and 8 percent by end-2001; and (iii) an international reserve position of 3.5-4 months of imports. The
Government recognizes that fiscal policy will be key to stabilizing the economy and promoting faster
growth. The 1999 budget aims to shift priorities toward emergency relief and the reconstruction of
infrastructure, containing the growth in non-emergency spending (especially wages and non-emergency
transfers) and strengthening revenues through improved tax administration and the phased adjustment of
utility tariffs. Although the fiscal deficit will widen markedly-from 1.4 percent of GDP in 1998 to 8.7
percent in 1999-it is expected to be financed almost entirely through concessional loans and debt relief
The fiscal deficit is projected to decline to about 5-6 percent in 2000 and 3 percent in 2001. Economic
performance has been broadly satisfactory during 1999, and all ESAF quantitative benchmarks for June
and September were observed.
53. WBG Support. IDA moved quickly to provide macroeconomic support following Mitch. The fasttrack Hurricane Emergency Project is assisting the Government to maintain macroeconomic stability
through the financing of imports associated with rebuilding social and economic infrastructure, and reestablishing production levels in response to the economic damage caused by Mitch. In addition, at the

16

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

request of several donors, the Bank established the Central America Emergency Trust Fund which is
funded by donor grants to cover multilateral debt payments for Honduras and other hurricane affected
countries. Over the medium-term the Bank will continue to maintain an active policy dialogue and close
collaboration with the IMF in support of the Government's medium-term stabilization program, as
reflected in the ESAF, PFP and HlPC Initiative.
54. The Board of Executive Directors of the Bank and IFC discussed Honduras' Preliminary HIPC
Document, which presents the debt sustainability analysis and the proposed Decision Point, on December
14, 1999, and agreed that Honduras was eligible for assistance under HlPC and that a decision point in
2000 was appropriate if established conditions were met. By the Decision Point, the Government expects
to be well advanced in preparation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and the consultation process.
State Modernization, Institution Building and Decentralization
55. In response to a weak and overextended public sector, the Government has been implementing a
longer-term public sector modernization program, with the support of IDA and IDB. Mitch dealt a severe
blow to public sector institutions, including physical destruction of a number of ministries, and the
reconstruction effort will severely tax the public sector's administrative and managerial capabilities. No
significant changes have been made to the existing public administration structure in response to the
increased reconstruction demands-other than establishment of the Reconstruction Cabinet-and the core
Ministries, such as the Ministry of Finance, are now greatly overburdened as they try to prioritize,
coordinate and monitor an increased flow of assistance. The strengthening of public administration is a
key element of the Government's reconstruction program, framed within the broader public sector
modernization agenda. As discussed below, improving governance and transparency will be key, but
beyond this there is also a need to strengthen institutions throughout the public sector, which has become
even more urgent after Mitch. To a major extent, the fiscal discipline that will be needed to underpin the
macro framework, economic and social reconstruction, and implementation of the structural and social
reform agenda, will depend on the institutional capacity of the public sector.
56. The emergency caused by Mitch has brought to the fore the need to advance on the decentralization
agenda. Municipalities and local groups played a key and generally effective role in channeling
assistance to affected communities. CSGs pointed out that where communities were organized, the
response to Mitch was more effective. In a number of instances, Government agencies such as FHIS
adopted temporary decentralization approaches that allowed them to be more responsive to community
needs and speed up the delivery of assistance. While the Government agrees that the experience with the
emergency provides a good basis to build a longer-term decentralization strategy, it believes it must move
gradually and is concerned over the fiscal implications of broad based decentralization to the municipal
level. In recent years, as the Government has struggled to maintain fiscal stability, it has found it difficult
to transfer to municipalities the mandated 5 percent of net tax revenues. The Government believes that a
more comprehensive decentralization strategy, which would need to include a sustainable municipal
revenue base, could only be considered once it is able to deal with immediate rehabilitation needs and
provide a sounder fiscal basis for its own finances.
57. WBG Support. Institutional strengthening is a major CAS priority. Efforts through ongoing and
proposed projects will be intensified to build up institutional capacity in key public sector agencies,
especially those damaged by Mitch and where institutional capacity will be critical to implement reforms
(e.g., education, health, banking supervision, local governments). IDA will continue to support the
Government's public sector modernization and reform program through its ongoing adjustment and TA
operations. Beyond these ongoing efforts, however, the Government has identified an urgent need to
strengthen its capacity to manage the increased international aid flows in support of the reconstruction
effort. The WBG is supporting immediate institutional strengthening needs to deal with reconstruction
and aid management through a PHRD Implementation Grant. The Grant is assisting the Ministry of
Finance to set up a small unit to link aid coordination with the budgetary system and provide a continuous

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

17

information flow to guide the reconstruction process. Over the medium term, a proposed Economic and
Financial Management TA operation will seek to rebuild capacity in core ministries and provide support
to continue to deepen public sector reforms, especially in personnel policies and systems, governance and
accountability, regulatory systems for privatized sectors, and expansion of the integrated financial
management system The institutional capacity of the banking supervisory agency will be strengthened in
partnership with the IMF and IDB.
58. As discussed in the CAS dialogue, there is also a need to improve the efficiency of public spending
and to consider institutional support for gender equality. A Public Expenditure Review (PER), in
coordination with the Infrastructure Assessment and the Poverty Update, will analyze the efficiency of
public spending, especially the need for institutional reforms and to improve the targeting of public
expenditures on the poor. A proposed PHRD grant for Gender Institutional Strengthening will channel
support at the regional level. In addition, the Government has requested support through the Economic
and Financial Management TA Project to build capacity within the Ministry of Finance to adopt a gender
perspective in the evaluation and monitoring of public investments.
59. In terms of decentralization,IDA will continue to support effective decentralization of Government
agencies and strengthening the role of municipalities. It will coordinate efforts with other donors (IDB,
USAID, Spain, UNDP) who are supporting local participation and municipal strengthening programs.
This includes community participation in education, effective decentralization in health and FHIS
operations, strengthening of local governments and community participation through FHIS, and the
decentralization to municipalities of watershed management activities and sustainable land use. Over the
longer-term there is a need to improve and ensure a sustainable fiscal base for municipalities, structure
fiscal transfers to benefit poorer municipalities, and a clearer definition of their roles and responsibilities.
To this end, IDA will continue a policy dialogue with Government on the need for a longer-term
decentralization strategy, building on the experience and results of sectoral decentralization efforts.
Improving Governance
60. As Honduras advanced in its democratization process there were increasing concems, among civil
society and the Government itself, on the need to improve governance and transparency. Mitch
underscored the urgency of addressing this issue, not only to assure donors that their reconstruction
support would be handled transparently, but also as a key longer-term development issue. Improved
governance and transparency are key priorities in the Government's development agenda. There were
various attempts during the 1990s to address issues of governance but they were not sustained or were
perceived as political. All indications are that the immediate emergency relief phase was handled well
and transparently, especially through special audit teams under the direction of the Office of the
Comptroller General which inventoried, tracked and monitored the distribution of assistance. The
Government believes, however, that the transparent and efficient use of resources for reconstruction will
require a more concerted effort to strengthen internal and external audit mechanisms. At the same time, it
believes that if it succeeds in ensuring an efficient and transparent handling of the increased aid for
reconstruction, this can have a powerful demonstration effect allowing it and future administrations to
tackle more systemic and deep-seated issues of governance, transparency and impunity. This will be a
difficult process and the Government is aware that if it is to succeed against powerful and entrenched
interest groups, it must count on the support of civil society.
61. The Government's governance strategy focuses on ensuring a transparent and efficient handling of
reconstruction aid, and includes six key elements. First, with donor support, the Government is
strengthening the Comptroller's Office. Three international companies have been hired to assist in
auditing reconstruction projects. Second, the Government has prioritized reconstruction projects, which
will need to be betted and approved by the Reconstruction Cabinet before beginning implementation.
Third, with assistance from IDB, the Government has set up a Technical Commission, supported by an
international company, to oversee the procurement process, including the elaboration of standard bidding

18

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

documents and strengthening of the Office of Administrative Probity. Fourth, the Government also plans
to set up a General Project Inspection Unit to review the quality, financing and transparency of projects
under execution. Fifth, the Government is moving on two fronts to involve civil society. Through a
Presidential Decree it established the Commission for Civil Society Participation to monitor
implementation of the reconstruction plan. The Commission includes representativesof the Association
of Mayors, the Honduran Private Sector Council, the National Convergence Forum (FONAC), the
Citizen's Forum, and INTERFOROS. With the support of Denmark, the Human Rights Ombudsman's
Office is following up on the results of a preliminary Social Audit and the Government has undertaken to
take further corrective actions once the final report of the Social Audit is available. Sixth, with IDA
support, the Government is expanding the integrated financial management system throughout the public
sector, to increase the transparency of the budget process and financial management.
62. WBG Support. The CAS seeks to support improved governance and transparency, while
recognizing that this will be a difficult and longer-term process. The WBG's strategy in this area has a
number of inter-linked elements. First, we will intensify support for aspects of the public sector
modernization effort that can strengthen transparency and accountability in public administration. This
includes adoption of the integrated financial management system throughout the public sector, technical
support for a transparent privatization and concessioning process, as well as an improved and transparent
regulatory framework for privatized services and the financial system. Second, we are joining IDB and
other donors in strengthening existing control structures, especially to improve the audit capacity of the
Comptroller General's Office and the capabilities of the Office of Administrative Probity. As part of this
effort and at the request of the Government, IDA is participating with other donors in an effort to set up
special arrangements that can assure donors that funds are being used appropriately. Special care is being
taken to ensure that these arrangements work within existing institutional structures and that, when the
reconstruction phase is over, they leave behind greater capacity within the public sector. In addition,
FIAS expects to support a major effort to increase the automaticity and transparency of regulations that
affect the private sector, thus improvingtransparency. A parallel donor effort is underway in a number of
pilot municipalities to strengthen transparency and good governance. More broadly and focusing on the
longer term, we will support Government efforts to mobilize civil society and establish participatory
processes that can lead to a national integrity plan. As a first step, and with the support of WBI and IDB,
we organized a Regional Integrity Workshop in early February, which brought together representatives
from Central America, including Honduras, to share experiences and lay the foundation for the
development of national integrity plans.
Environmental Sustainability
63. The effects of Hurricane Mitch were exacerbated by Honduras' environmental problems. The
country is predominantly mountainous, with narrow coastal plains and numerous inland valleys. High
population growth, skewed land ownership, inappropriate land management and forestry policies, have
been responsible for the conversion of large areas of high forestry potential into less suitable activities.
This is causing a number of serious environmental problems, including deforestation, soil degradation,
water pollution, depletion of coastal and marine resources, and the loss of biodiversity. Over the past
three decades, Honduras has lost about 40 percent of its forests, principally as a result of an advancing
agricultural frontier, extensive livestock ranching, unsustainable logging and firewood extraction. More
than half of the cleared land was only suitable for forestry, so that deforestation has not led to sustainable
agricultural development and imposed high environmental costs. Increased rates of deforestation and loss
of vegetation cover have impacted adversely watersheds. Soil degradation is largely the result of illegal
logging, hillside farming by poor farmers who have no viable alternatives-at least one-quarter of land is
used in hillside farming and 3040 percent of the population is engaged in subsistence hillside farmingand the use of chemicals in commercial flatland production. Water pollution is also severe, as a result of
uncontrolled use of chemicals in agriculture and the lack of adequate sewage treatment facilities. The
depletion of marine and coastal resources is a matter of increasing concern. The estuaries and mangroves
of both coasts are deteriorating due to over-exploitationand contamination. Coral reefs in the Atlantic are

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

19

being destroyed at an alarming rate due to tourism, sedimentation and contamination. Honduras has
diverse ecosystems, with rich flora and fauna, particularly in its humid tropical and subtropical forests,
but the expansion of the agricultural frontier and deforestation pose a tremendous threat to its
biodiversity. Compared to other countries in the Meso-American Biological Corridor, Honduras has the
greatest block of continuous, intact tropical forest habitat, with considerable potential to tap global
environmental resources and develop sustainable tourism.
64. As awareness of Honduras' serious environmental problems has grown, Governments have been
taking steps since the early 1990s to address the most pressing issues, but results have been mixed.
Honduras' environmental agenda has been hampered by weak ownership and commitment at the central
level, in turn resulting in weak institutional capacity and enforcement capabilities. Progress has been
made in reorienting the public sector away from production and marketing of forest products, toward
management, regulation and protection of forest resources. The Government is also improving the
demarcation and management of biodiversity areas, carrying out outreach and education activities to raise
environmental awareness, and encouraging greater involvement at the local level-especially among
municipalities in fragile river basins. These efforts, however, have been inadequate to address the
country's serious environmental problems.
65. WBG Support. IDA's efforts to strengthen environmental institutions and policies were proving
largely ineffective as Mitch struck. Although there were important achievements in biodiversity
protection and work with municipalities, IDA's Environmental Institutions Project was floundering.
Mitch, however, cruelly demonstrated how easily progress could be washed away and the urgent need to
refocus the development agenda on environmental sustainability. Although IDA had been discussing
with Govermmentways to get the Environmental Project back on track, progress was hampered by lack of
leadership and commitment at the ministerial level. Recent changes in the Ministry and a stronger
mandate from the Government have improved prospects for refocusing on the environmental agenda.
The damage caused by Mitch, however, added an additional and urgent priority-protection of the
Choluteca River in the capital. To this end, and given the urgency of the works, IDA reprogrammed
about $6 million to finance cleaning, dredging and stabilization of the banks to prevent the devastating
landslides that caused widespread destruction in the capital. The remainder of the project will continue to
support programs that were proving effective, such as the work with municipalities and some urgent flood
prevention measures in poor communities, aiming to build capacity and ownership within the Ministry,
and strengthen environmental planing and management capacity in local governments.
66. In addition, WBG support for environmental sustainability will focus on: (i) Honduras' rich
biodiversity; and (ii) watershed management. The Bank will continue to support the ongoing GEF MesoAmerican Biological Corridor, and is also considering a GEF project to protect the Mesoamerican Barrier
Reef System. The GEF project would be complementedby a Sustainable Coastal Tourism LIL, aimed to
assist Governmentand stakeholders ensure the environmentally sustainable development of the country's
rich tourism potential in coastal areas. As clearly demonstrated by Mitch, protection against future
disasters will require a more integrated approach to the management of large river basins. A proposed
Municipal Watershed Management and Rural Development Project would join forces with other donors
to improve management and protection of large river basin systems.
Risk Management and Disaster Preparedness
67. While the destruction caused by Mitch is without precedent in Honduras' modem history, the
Government is conscious that it must reduce the country's vulnerability to natural disasters and improve
its ability to handle future emergencies. In fact, just prior to Mitch, we had begun discussing with the
Government a program to strengthen the country's institutional capacity for disaster preparedness and
management. In the event, WBG's disaster preparedness team was able to offer on-the-ground advice
and assistance to the Government during the immediate emergency relief phase. The Government has
requested IDA support to put in place a strategy and institutional strengthening to reduce the vulnerability

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

20

of critical infrastructure and settlements. Support either through a self-standing Disaster Preparedness
and Mitigation Project, or through components under other projects would include: (i) capacity building
to manage natural disasters; (ii) comprehensive damage and vulnerability assessments based on
watersheds, basins, and sub-basin-approaches; (iii) identification of flood-prone areas and protection
measures that should be adopted in parallel with infrastructure rehabilitation investments to prevent
catastrophic losses from future natural disasters; and (iv) other measures to reduce and manage systemic
risk. The project will build on a regional effort in partnership with IDB to support the Center for
Prevention of Disasters in Central America, through an IDF grant of $300,000 matched by an equivalent
grant from IDB and $1.1 million from the Japanese Trust Fund. The grants will support vulnerability and
risk assessments, training for public and private officials, carrying out small emergency response tests,
and raising awareness about ways to reduce risks at the local level. In addition, we are completing a
study on Gender and Post-Disaster Reconstruction in Honduras and Nicaragua. The findings and
recommendations will feed into the preparation of disaster management strategies and interventions.

m. The Country Assistance Strategy
The Last CAS: Lessons and Impact
68. OED Lessons. OED evaluations of country and IDA performance over the past five years, as well
as our own assessment, suggest a number of important lessons which guided preparation of this CAS. As
pointed out by OED (Annex E), Honduras has steadily improved its economic performance and had the
fastest improvement in outcomes among regional and worldwide portfolios, as reflected in OED's
development effectiveness index. Our internal assessment suggests somewhat disappointing progress in a
number of important areas, including: (i) the implementation pace of structural reforms; (ii) inadequate
social sector reforms and low social indicators in key areas; (iii) lack of a comprehensive poverty
reduction strategy; (iv) failure to reform rural credit systems and, more generally, to adopt a rural
development strategy fully integrated with poverty reduction efforts; (v) continued weaknesses in
environmental institutions and enforcement of policies and regulations; and (vi) streamlining gender in
WBG activities. In terms of IDA's portfolio, OED points out that while the development effectiveness
index has improved rapidly, it remains low and most IDA projects have had limited institutional impact.
69. Impact. Poverty alleviation was the overarching priority of the 1993 CAS. Official data suggests
that poverty decreased only slightly in the second half of the 1990s (from 67 percent in 1994 to 63 percent
in pre-Mitch 1998). As discussed in Annex C, economicgrowth explains an important part of the change
in poverty rates. Thus, WBG support for a revival of growth in the second half of the decade likely
contributed to the modest reduction in poverty. It can be argued, however, that the adoption and
implementationof a more comprehensive poverty reduction strategy would have had a stronger impact on
reducing poverty. The Government and the WBG probably placed too much emphasis on the FHIS as an
anti-povertytool, and not enough on other elements of a poverty strategy, especially social sector reforms,
sustainable rural development, gender, and the developmentof indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples.
70. In our view, a key weakness has been the difficulty in generating a national consensus to underpin
and to make sustainable reform efforts. We have learned that reform programs or strategies developed
and imposed from above have little chance of succeeding or of surviving electoral cycles, no matter how
strong the commitment at the top policy-making level. This has clearly been the case in agriculture
(especially rural credit and forestry), education and health, where progress has been modest and reforms
haltingly implemented. In agriculture, succeeding Governments carried out important reforms but little
progress has been made in developing a viable rural credit system or strengtheningthe forestry sector. In
education and health, while IDA projects and policy dialogue have supported reforms at the margin, until
recently there was little progress in shifting the central paradigm from service expansion to quality
improvements. In Honduras' four-year electoral cycle, it becomes critical to support reforms only after
they have become part of broad, longer-term reform programs which are also validated by some measure

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

21

of consensus with civil society and within the bureaucracy that will be required to carry them out. To
address this issue, the CAS proposes to: (i) rely, where appropriate, on APLs and LILs to support longerterm reform efforts and innovative approaches; (ii) draw lessons from pilot activities under ongoing
projects-land administration, environment, education and FHIS-to demonstrate success and support
broader reforms; and (iii) as agreed during the CAS dialogue, enhance the consultations and consensusbuilding efforts with civil society and key stakeholders, including prior agreement on clearly defined and
time-bound consultation processes. In addition, an ongoing Gender Review of the Honduras Portfolio is
analyzing the portfolio and will recommend moving away from focusing only on the role of women to a
gender approach that considers instead the relative roles of women and men.
Overall CAS Approach.
71. The devastating effects of Mitch required the WBG to refocus its strategy to support the
Government's medium-term reconstruction program. While this will necessarily entail postponing or
delaying some of the less urgent longer-term development issues, we will also seize opportunities to
advance the reform agenda. The overall thrust of the strategy is to help Honduras rebuild, while laying
the basis for a stronger economy and a more equitable distribution of the benefits from growth. The
overriding priority is adoption and implementation of an outcome-based poverty reduction strategy, with
a strong emphasis on improving the quality of social services, strengthening the social safety net,
indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples' development, mainstreaming gender, and supporting sustainable
rural development. The strategy supports faster growth, as an essential complement to poverty reduction,
through infrastructure rehabilitation, strengthening the financial system, and private sector development.
It also seeks to ensure that progress can be sustained, through a focus on macroeconomic stability,
institution building, governance, improved environmental managementand disaster preparedness.
72. As discussed earlier, Honduras has a very unequal distribution of income and assets. International
experience, especially in LAC, suggests that inequality tends to improve very slowly. The longer term
country vision underlying the proposed strategy involves a more equal and inclusive society, but we must
be realistic in terms of the progress that can be achieved during this CAS period. While a number of
proposed activities are designed to improve equity-especially better access and quality of pre- and
primary education, support for land security and the pilot Land Fund, improved targeting, and
development of indigenous communities-these efforts can only be expected to have a modest impact on
overall inequality, especially over the medium term. Rather, they represent first steps that, if sustained,
can show what can be achieved through a more inclusive development strategy. The planned Poverty
Update will provide a deeper analysis of inequality and its causes which, coupled with measurable
progress in the areas mentioned above, can begin to lay the foundations for a more equitable society.
Lending Levels and Composition
73. Lending Scenarios. IDA lending to Honduras over the period FY94-98 amounted to $169 million
(excluding 5t Dimension) for six operations. Lending in FY99, before Mitch struck, amounted to $53
million (FHIS IV and PROFUTURO). IDA increased lending in FY99 by an additional $230 million on
an extraordinary basis to assist Honduras with the immediate consequences of the disaster. This included
a Hurricane Emergency Project ($200 million) and supplementary credits for the Health ($10.4 million)
and Roads ($20 million) Projects, bringing total FY99 lending to $283.7 million. In order to support the
reconstruction effort and based on Honduras' continuing satisfactory performance, the CAS proposes a
base case lending scenario of $317 million over FYOO-02.A high case lending scenario would amount to
$367 million (excluding 5h Dimension) by adding one adjustment operation, to support broad reforms in
the financial sector. Triggers to move into the high or low case are presented in Table 2. Progress on
poverty reduction would be measured with respect to the quantitative outcome and intermediate indicators
that will be included in the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper to be prepared in early 2000.
The trigger on governance and transparency would be based on IDA's assessment of the Government's
handling of reconstruction assistance and implementation of the agreed steps to strengthen internal and

22

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

external control mechanisms (paras. 61-62). This assessment will be qualitative and carried out in
consultation with the group of donors supportingthe Government's transparency program. The trigger to
move to the high case would be a strong macroeconomic performance, especially sound fiscal policies,
and agreement on a comprehensive reform program in the financial sector (priority reform areas are
discussed in para. 47), which would form the basis for the proposed Financial Sector Adjustment Credit.
The level of lending under the low case would depend on the extent of the deterioration in performance
and the sectors where we judged that progress would still be possible. In principle, we expect that under a
low case scenario IDA could reduce lending by as much as one half of the proposed base case, and seek
where possible to concentrate support on human development and poverty reduction. Satisfactory
portfolio performance would include: (i) number of problem projects not to exceed 25 percent during a
year; (ii) agreement and satisfactory progress in implementationof action plans for problem projects; and
(iii) a disbursement ratio not lower than 20 percent in a year.
Table 2: CAS Lending Scenario Tnggers
Low Case
The lowcasewouldbetriggeredby one
of:
* Macrodeteriorationdueto
inappropnate
policiesor backtracking
on structuralreforms
. Lackof Government
commitmentand
progressin implementing
Poverty
ReductionStrategy
. Substantial
lackof commitment
to
improvinggovernance
* Substantial
deterioration
in the portfolio

Base Case

High Case

To remaininthe basecasewouldrequire: Movingto the highcasewouldrequire
the basecaseplus:
* Macroeconomic
frameworkacceptable . Strongmacroeconomic
performance
to IDA
. Strongcommitmentandgoodprogress . Agreementon and implementation
of
in implementing
PovertyReduction
keystructuralreformsto besupported
Strategy
by adjustmentlending
* Satisfactory
commitmentand
performance
in improvinggovemance
* Satisfactory
performance
in portfolio
implementation

74. IFC has a fairly large portfolio in Honduras relative to the size of the economy. Since 1995, IFC
has approved investments totaling $132 million, including syndications, in private power generation,
large manufacturing,tourism and agribusiness. IFC, like IDA, moved quickly to try to assist Honduras
after Mitch, mainly trying to help existing clients deal with the needs to restructure their operations. IFC
is presently re-assessing its approach in Honduras, which to date has involved a small number of
interventions to support early private power generation and larger manufacturing and agribusiness firms.
Priorities for IFC support include: (i) assisting Honduras to extend private participation in infrastructure;
(ii) strengthening the financial sector and broadening access to capital; (iii) helping to improve the
enabling environment for the private sector; and (iv) selectively providing direct financing, particularly in
industry, services and agribusiness.
75. Portfolio Composition. In line with the overall assistance strategy, the composition of IDA's
proposed lending portfolio is designed to support the overarching priority of poverty reduction and social
development. About two-thirds of the proposed FYOO-02base case lending directly supports human
capital, social safety nets, development of indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples and the rural
development/rural poverty agendas. This project portfolio composition is a conscious choice, resulting
from intensive discussions with the Government, a careful assessment of IDA's comparative advantage
and value added, and the expected role of other donors. This was especially relevant after Mitch, when,
given the widespread destruction caused by the hurricane, there could have been an understandable
temptation to pour resources into the infrastructure sectors.
Portfolio Status, Lessons and Strategy
76. Status. IDA has a portfolio of 11 projects, representing a total commitment of $603.8, of which
$231.7 is undisbursed. Poverty reduction and human development accounts for about 30 percent of
commitments, infrastructure for about 14 percent, public sector modernization, including adjustment for
about 20 percent, and import support provided under a fast-disbursing hurricane emergency project for 33
percent. The portfolio is relatively young-its average age is 3.5 years-and performance has improved

Honduras: CountryAssistance Stratey

23

as the Government has sought to maximize the effective use of resources in the aftermath of Hurricane
Mitch. The FY99 disbursement ratio, or the ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed
balance of IDA's portfolio at the beginning of the year (for investment projects only) has increased from
28 percent in FY98 to 198 percent in FY99. Four projects were restructured to meet urgent rehabilitation
and reconstruction needs (Transport Sector, RLMP, Environmental Development and Social Fund IV),
providing $79 million in incremental resources for hurricane reconstruction. An additional $30.4 million
was made available under supplemental credits for the Health and Transport Projects.
77. Lessons. At the beginning of FY99, two projects were rated unsatisfactory (Environmental
Development and Basic Education). Both projects have been restructured to respond to new prioritiesto pilot the community-based education pilot (PROHECO) under the Education Project, and to finance
urgent clean-up works in the Choluteca River in Tegucigalpa under the Environmental Project-and
performance has improved. Prior to the hurricane, both projects suffered from weak implementation
capacity but also weak commitment to the reforms they supported.
78. OED notes that between 1993 and 1998, Honduras had the fastest improvement in outcomes
among regional and worldwide portfolios (Annex D). The share of satisfactory projects increased from
60 to 75 percent from 1993-95 to 1996-98. OED's Development Effectiveness Index (DEI)-a summary
of a project's outcome, sustainability, and institutional impact-reflects this improvement. The DEI
increased at a faster rate, but the level of effectiveness in Honduras (a DEI of 6.2 between 1996 and 1998)
remained lower than the same index for Bank projects in Central America, LAC, or the rest of the world.
Only one quarter of projects evaluated by OED were considered likely to be sustainable or to have
substantial institutional impact, which is far below regional and world averages. In its recent review of
the Implementation Completion Report for the Agricultural Sector Adjustment Credit, OED rated it as
marginally satisfactory with a modest institutional development impact. OED, however, notes that
adjustment operations can lay the policy framework for follow-up investment operations, as demonstrated
by the Adjustment Credit and the RLMP. QAG rated the link between the two operations as best practice.
79. Notwithstanding the improving trends noted above, development effectiveness and overall
implementation capacity remain a concern in Honduras, especially in view of the greatly increased
external assistance being provided by the donor community in response to the hurricane. By and large,
IDA projects have not experienced systemic problems with: (i) counterpart funds; (ii) procurement
difficulties; or (iii) audit delays. Problems tend to occur in three major areas. First, effectiveness delays
are common-albeit improving-since IDA credits (as with all foreign borrowing) require Congressional
approval both before and after the credit is signed. These delays may occur even when credits are not
controversial or when they are urgently needed, especially at times when Congress has a busy agenda.
Second, as discussed in the CAS section on lessons learned, some operations have suffered from lack of
broad consensus. This lack of consensus becomes critical given Honduras' vulnerability to the electoral
cycle. Third, the public sector has weak implementation capacity, which often results in bureaucratic
delays. Although public sector capacity has improved in the 1990s, and is partly responsible for the
improvement in the portfolio, it remains a concern.
80. Portfolio Strategy. The CAS includes a number of measures to maintain the recent progress in
portfolio implementation,including:
Institution Strengthening. Improving the efficiency and institutional capacity of the public sector is
a key CAS objective. This will include: (i) continuation of the public sector modernization program;
(ii) institution strengthening prograns under ongoing and proposed operations (education, health,
transport and economic management); and (iii) a recently-approved PHRD Implementation Grant is
providing support to strengthen the Ministry of Finance's capacity to prioritize, coordinate and
manage the increased flow of international aid that is financing the reconstruction.

24

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

*

Supervision. IDA's supervision effort will be intensified during the CAS period. We will continue
with annual (or semi-annual, as needed) Country Portfolio Performance Reviews, which have proven
effective in resolving implementation issues and addressing systemic problems.
 Resident Mission. The previous Facilitation Office has been converted into a full-fledged Resident
Mission and we are contracting staff with strong World Bank operational experience to support
project supervision and strengthen donor coordination.
* Lending Strategy. As discussed in the CAS, three approaches have the potential to help address most
of the implementation constraints we have faced, including: (i) rely on APLs and LILs to support
longer-term reform efforts and innovations; (ii) draw lessons from pilot activities to demonstrate
success and support broader reforms; and (iii) enhance the dialogue and consultation with civil
society and key stakeholders.
Advisory and Analytical Activities
81. The poverty agenda, public expenditure reform, a strategy for infrastructure rehabilitation and
private sector development will be the key analyticalpieces to support CAS objectives. The major formal
output will be a Poverty Update, but more important will be the process and technical support offered by
the WBG in the preparation of the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy. Key aspects will include
assistance to improve the capacity to carry out and analyze living standard surveys, monitor poverty, and
support a participatory process with civil society in elaboration of the strategy and the outcome and
progress monitoring indicators. Less formal policy advice and dialogue will assist the Government in the
design of a longer-term rural development agenda, which would be an essential component of the poverty
reduction strategy. The second major formal piece will be a Public Expenditure Review (PER), focusing
on the social sectors, linking the poverty agenda with improved public sector efficiency. A parallel
Infrastructure Assessment will assist the Government adopt a comprehensive strategy for infrastructure
development, rationalize the state's role in the sector and provide an overall framework to coordinate
donor efforts. The PER and the Infrastructure Assessment will build on the 1995 joint WBG/IDB report
on Reforming Public Investment and the Infrastructure Sectors. The Government was making steady
progress in implementing the report's recommendations, especially in terms of increasing private
participation in infrastructure, rationalizing the public investment program, and improving the targeting
and quality of social spending. This progress, however, was interrupted by Mitch, and there is now a
need to refocus the reform agenda within a broader and longer-term strategy that fully integrates the
poverty reduction and public sector modernization objectives. The fourth major piece will be a Diagnosis
of the Business Climate by FIAS, identifying major reform areas and including consensus-building efforts
to support the reforms.
Selectivity and Donor Coordination.
82. The WBG's assistance strategy is framed within the Government's Plan for National
Reconstruction and Transformation, presented at the Stockholm CG Meeting. The international
community is responding generously to support the country's reconstruction, with indications of support
at the Stockholm Meeting totaling $2.8 billion over 1998-03 (Annex F). With increased donor efforts and
limited IDA resources, it is imperativethat the proposed CAS be highly selective. The assistance strategy
will be driven by the following selectivity criteria: (i) contributionto the CAS goals of poverty reduction,
growth and sustainability; (ii) the client's expressed needs, consistent with WBG capacities and CAS
priorities; (iii) the WBG's own comparative advantage; and (iv) burden sharing and improved
coordination with donor agencies. This criteria will guide the overall choice of WBG assistance tools, but
our support will also be driven by the need to ensure consensus and commitment to proposed activities.
In areas where these have yet to emerge-e.g., decentralization, reform in rural credit institutions-we
will rely on our policy dialogue to encourage consensus and commitment, while working on the building
blocks that can improve prospects for reforms. Based on these criteria and the expected role of other
donors, we do not, under normal circumstances, foresee direct IDA lending for: secondary, vocational or

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

25

tertiary education; food security; rural roads; urban development, water and sanitation, and housing; the
energy sector; the judicial sector; and lending to municipal governments.
83. CAS implementation will require strong coordination with other donors. A CG Meeting for
Honduras, chaired by IDB, is planned for February 2000 in Tegucigalpa. The Regional Stockholm CG
Meeting will be followed up with a regional meeting in Madrid in the second half of 2000. The Resident
Mission will play an active role in local donor coordination, especially through participation and support
for the technical donor coordination groups established in Tegucigalpa to support implementation of the
Government's National Plan for Reconstruction and Transformation. The StockholmCG Meeting agreed
to a partnership of donors and the Governmentunder six major objectives (vulnerability, transparency and
governance, decentralization, human rights, donor coordination, and debt sustainability). The CG
Meeting also established a group of 5 donors (US, Germany, Canada, Spain and Sweden) to provide
continuous follow-up and support for the reconstruction effort. Fifteen technical coordination groups
have been establishedto extend donor coordinationto the operational level. These groups are coordinated
by one or more donors and include: education, health, transparency and governance, decentralization,
housing, municipal strengthening, disaster mitigation, rural water, roads, justice, macroeconomic
developments, agriculture, forestry and environment, food security, and microenterprises. We will
maintain our very good working relations with the IMF and IDB, as we support Honduras' stabilization
and adjustment program, HIPC and the Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy. There is close
coordination with IDB, a strong partnership in a number of areas (e.g., governance, disaster preparedness,
MECOVI, infrastructure) and a clear division of labor in cases where the two institutions are involved in
the same sectors (Annex F).

IV. Civil Society Dialogue, Monitoring and CAS Risks
84. Civil Society Dialogue. Mitch began to introduce a new dynamic in the Govermment's dialogue
and relations with civil society. The Govermmenthad already begun working with civil society groups in
its efforts to mobilize support for the HIPC Initiative, but the disaster provided more opportunities for
dialogue as the Government sought to respond to calls by the donor community to involve civil society in
the design of reconstruction programs. The process has not always been smooth, but there is a concerted
and constructive effort to open up spaces for dialogue and consensus building. With the full support of
the Government, the WBG carried out a CAS dialogue with civil society representatives, and has sought
to reflect civil society views and recommendationsin the proposed CAS (Annex G summarizes the main
conclusions and recommendations of the CAS dialogue).
85. Monitoring CAS Implementation. Setting quantitative outcome and progress indicators to
monitor CAS implementation has proven difficult due to the devastation caused by Mitch. In most
instances, there is little reliable information on post-Mitch baseline indicators-including overall poverty
levels and social conditions-that would be needed to set quantitative CAS benchmarks. The
Govemment has initiated preparation of its Poverty Reduction Strategy in consultation with civil society,
including the development of outcome and progress indicators. A key step in this process will be the
development of baseline poverty and social indicators to reflect the impact of Mitch. Once completed, the
Government's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper will be the base to set benchmarks and output indicators
in the CAS Country Program Matrix (Annex B1).
86. CAS Risks. The proposed CAS faces three major risks. First, despite good intentions, the sheer
magnitude of the reconstruction task may divert somewhat the Government's attention from the longerterm reform and poverty reduction agenda. While the reconstruction of Honduras is indeed a massive
task, the Government has continued efforts to advance the reform agenda and has initiated the process to
elaborate an outcome-based poverty reduction strategy in consultation with civil society. Second, an
unfavorable external environment could severely impact Honduras' economy, especially adverse terms of
trade shocks which could derail an incipient economic recovery and place a considerable burden on the

26

Honduras: CountryAssistance Strategy

balance of payments. Third, project implementation will become more difficult, as the same institutions
with limited managerial capacity will be attempting to do more, while responding to more complex
problems, a larger number of donors and high public expectations. The Government is aware of this risk
and, in coordination with donors, is working to strengthen institutional and implementation capacity. In
addition, the Government will increasingly seek the support of and delegation to other actors, such as
NGOs and specialized UN agencies, in order to improve the country's implementation capacity.
Although we are taking steps to improve institutional capacity across implementing agencies and
strengthen project implementation, some weakening in the quality of IDA's portfolio, compared with the
exemplary performance over the past twelve months, may be inevitable. To guard against this risk, IDA
will pay particular attention to the quality of the portfolio and Honduras' absorptive capacity during CAS
implementation. On balance, we believe these risks are reasonable and manageable, especially
considering the impact of Mitch and the enormous reconstruction and transformation challenge ahead of
Honduras.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Sven Sandstrom
Washington DC

Peter L. Woicke

Annex Al
Page 1 of 2

Honduras at a glance
atin
Americs
LowHonduras & Carib. Income

POVERTY
and SOCIAL
1998
Population,
mid-year(nillions)
GNPper capita(Atlasmelhod4USS)
GNP(Atas nethod, USSbillions)

6.2
730
4.5

502
3P940
1,978

Population(%)
Laborforce(X)

2.9
3.8

1.6
2.3

1.7
1.9

Most recent estimate(latestyearavailable,199298)
Poverty(%of populationbelownatonalpovertyline)
Urbanpopulation(%of totalpopulaton)
Lifeexpectancy
at birth(yars)
Infantmortality(per1,000lIvebIrhs)
Childmalnutrition
(%of chkirenunder5)
Accessto safewater(X of populaon)
Illiteracy(% ofpopulatonage 15+)
Grossprimaryenrollment
(%otschool-agepopulation)
Male
Female

50
46
69
36
18
77
29
111
110
112

75
70
32
8
75
13
113

31
63
69

Development
diamond'
L'fe expectancy

3,51S
520
1,844

Averageannualgrowth, 1992-98
G
GNP
Per
capita

Gross
primary
enrollment

Accessto safewater
74
32
lDondUras
108
113
103

Low-Income
group

KEYECONOMIC
RATIOSand LONG-TERMTRENDS
1977

1987

1997

1998

GDP(US$ biltons)
GrossdomesticinvestmentUGDP
Exportsof goodsandserviceslGDP
GrossdomesticsavingstGOP
GrossnationalsavingsGOP

1.7
23.1
34.8
18.6
14.5

4.2
17.4
22.0
13.5
9.7

4.6
31.5
47.0
25.5
24.6

5.3
29.6
45.3
22A
23.0

Currentaccountbalance/GDP
InterestpaymentslGDP
TotaldebtGDP
Totaldebtservice/exports
Presentvalueof debt/GDP
Presentvalueof debtlexports

-8.6
1.8
45.1
17.9

-7.7
2.3
79.5
34.1

-6.9
3.7
101.4
21.2

-6.6
3.4
85.9
17.9

1997

1998 1999"03

Economicratios
Trd
rade

Invsten
Investment

Domestic
Savings
ngs

Indebtedness
197787 1988498
(averageannualgrowth)
GDP
GNPper capita
Exportsof goodsandservices

2.2
-1.0
1.5

3.4
0.8
2.1

5.1
3.4
1.0

3.0
1.1
1.8

3.9
1.6
7.0

-Honduras
Low-income
group

STRUCTURE
of the ECONOMY
1977

1987

1997

1998

Growthratesof outputandlnvestment(%)

(%of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

30.6
23.2
15.1
46.2

20.9
23.0
14.5
56.1

20.2
25.6
15.5
54.2

17.6
26.8
15.9
55.6

30

Privateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Importsof goodsandservices

68.9
12.5
39.3

72.3
14.2
25.9

60.2
142
52.9

63.1
14.5
52.4

-10

1997

1998

Growthratesof exportsand ImportsI%)

(average annual growth)

197787 1988498

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

2.2
2.4
2.2
2.6

3.2
3.7
3.7
3.4

5.6
4.7
6.1
52

-7.0
9.0
5.8
5.9

Privateconsumption
Generalgovemment
consumption
Grossdomesticinvestment
Importsof goodsandservices
Grossnationalproduct

2.5
3.1
-4.1
-1.4
2.2

3.1
-2.0
8.3
3.4
3.8

6.0
-0.4
1.1
-1.9
6.4

3.0
9.2
6.0
6.0
4.0
0

20
10
o
=t=9
93

94

A8

95

GDI

97
O

GOp

Is
10
5
0

97

se

9

8

-10
-15
Exports

e

Imports

Note:1998dataare preliminary
estimates,
^ Thediamondsshowfourkeyindicatorm
In thecountry(in bold)compared
with itsincome-group
average.If dataare missing,thediamondwill
be incomplete.

Annex Al
Page 2 of 2

Honduras
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
1977

1987

1997

1998

(%chag)

Inflation (%)
40 -

Consumerprkes
Implicit GDP deflator

..

12.2

2.5
2.8

20.2
22.7

13.7
13.7

Current budget balance
OveraHsurplus/defcit

.1

10C
0l

Govenmernt flnance
(%o GDP, ncludes cunent grants)

Curmntrevenue

30 20

I

..
..
..

22.6

31.3

29.9

03

1.0
-3.8

6.9
-1.3

5.5
-1.8

-G

9e

9s
98
07
DP deflator +-CPI
04

TRADE
1977

1987

1997

1998

Export and Import levels (USSmillions)

Toal exports (fob)
Bananas
Coffee
Manufactures

(US$ rigillaw)

..
..
..
..

822
311
200

1,538
212
327

1,605
176
430

3.00o
2,00
,00.

Totalimports(cld

.

953

2,149

2,589

l

139

269

346

1.00

234
529

221
510

500

..

119
193

..
..
..

87
81
108

98
95
103

87
103

1977

1987

1997

1998

CurrentaccountbalancetoGDPratlo(%)
0
-2. 02

Food

er

Fuelandeonerg
Capitalgoods
Export price index (19954100)
Import price index (1995.100)
Teramsof trade (1995u100)

.

niJ

I

II_

0
93

84

94

092
9

97

08
st

EltmportB

OExports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(USS mrillions)
Exportsof goodsandserAices

581

950

2,176

2,396

Imports of goods and servicks
Resource balance

655
-74

1,072
-122

2,452
-276

2,775
-379

Net income
Netcurrenttransfers

-69
0

-235
36

-218
174

-206
235

4
-8-

Current account balance

-143

-320

-321

-350

-12

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

209
-87

398
-78

601
-280

518
-168

-14

Memo:
Reserves including gold (USS milions)
Conversion rate (DEC, locaVUSS)

..

2.0

114
2.0

591
13.0

824
13.4

1977

1987

1997

1998

754

3,300

4,698

4,548

87

575
80

275

235G:43A25

33

496

579

106
9
0

342
59
1

505
73
5

479
68
6

Composition of net resource flows
OlriCal grant
OftTcialcreditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfdio equity

9
71
69
9
0

133
124
*41
39
0

138
348
3
128
0

193
123
-40
99
0

World Bank program
Commitmets
Disbursements
Principal reparymens
Net flows
Interest pamens
Nettransfers

17
25
3
22
6
16

4
25
26
-1
34
-35

48
95
52
43
26
17

245
68
5s

-

93

94

90

96

07

00

-4

_

-1e

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(USS n.vilDns)
Total deit outstanding and disbursed

IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

Development Economics

ComposItion of total debt, 1998(USS millions)

G:429 A235
F: 423
c: 113

E 1,287
0m,488

A -IBRD
B - IDA
C -IMF

D - Othermultlateral

E - Biater
F - Priwt
G - Shorternm

18
23
-5
9/7/99

AnnexB1
Page1 of 5

HONDURAS:Country Program Matrix, FYOO-02
Development
Objectives

Government
Strategy/Actions

Diagnosis

WBG
Actions/Indicators

WBG Instruments

A. Poverty Alleviation and Social Developmente
Povertv
Redsuction
Strategy,Dataand
Monitoring
Human Capital
Educaton

Health

* Betweenhalfandtwo-thirdsof
Honduran
householdsare poor.
* Comprehensive,
outcome-oriented
povertyreductionstrategyislacking.
* Weakstatisticalbaseonpoverty
conditionsandlivingstandards,
exacerbated
bv Mitch.

* Prepareand beginimplementation
of
* Assistwithpreparation
of PovertyReduction
Strategy,
comprehensive
povertyreduction.
civilsocietyconsultation,
andprogress/outcome
strategy,in consultationwithcivilsociety.
indicators.
* Improvesurveycapacityanddatabase
* Supportto strengthen
statisticalandsurveycapacity,
to monitorpovertyandlivingconditions
rebuildsocial/poverty
database.
* Improvetargetingof socialinvestments
* UpdatePovertyMapto reflectpost-Mitch
conditions.
andsocialsafetynets.

* Overallprimarycoverageandpublic
*
spendingare high,butqualityIs low
*
andruralareaunder-served.
* Parentsnotinvolvedin education
*
decisions.
* Largenumberof schoolsneedto be
rehabilitated
andre-equipped
after
*
Mitch.
* Indigenous
andAfro-Honduran
peoples
lackphysicaland languageaccess.
* Long-term
strategyfor the integrated
*
development
of theeducationsectorIs
lacking.
*

* Therehasbeenconsiderable
progress

includingnotableimprovements
in life
expectancy,Infantmortality,pre-natal
careandImmunization
coverage.
* Healthcoverage,however,remainslow
(only75%),matemalmortalityremains
high,contraceptive
prevalence
is low
andchildmalnutrition
is high.
* MoHistoo centralized,inadequate
Incentives
to increaseefficiency,
weak
Integration
of differentlevelsof health
system,procurement
systemfor
medicines
needsto beimproved,
the
socialsecurtysystemrequiresreform
anddelinkingfromthehealthsystem.

Long-Term
EducationStrategy.
* AgreedLong-TermEducation
Strategy
LaunchCommunityParticipation
in
* Supportfor PROHECO
program,includingopeningof
Education(PROHECO)
Program.
1.250PROHECO
primaryschools,covering50,000
Physicalrehabilitation
of damaged
childrenin underserved
areas.
schools,openingnewschoolsin under- * Supportadministrative
reformsin MOEto support
servedareasunderPROHECO
model.
PROHECOmodel,improvedteacherselectionand
Creationof 1,250PROHECO
schools,
training,revisedcurriculaandstudentachievement
covering50,000childrenIn poorrural
testing.
communitieslackidng
pre-andprimary
* Providebilingualeducation,
includingtextbooks,in tvo
schoolsby2001
languages:
Garifunaand Miskito,by 2000.
Strengthen
MOEinstitutional
capacityto
supportEducationStrategy.
Improvequalityby applicationof
technicalcriteriafor hiringandpromotion
of teachers,and expandtestingof
studentachievements.

* Long-TermHealthStrategy.
* Rehabilitate
healthInfrastructure
*
*
*
*
*
*

Non-Lendina
* PovertyReductionStrategyPaper
(FYO-001)
* PovertyAssessment
Update(FY01)
* MECOVI
Program(FY01-02)
* SocialCapitaland Poverty(informal,
strategicconpact.FY00)
OncoinaProlects
* Education
ReformProject
* FHISIV
ProposedProlects
* Education
ReformAPL(FYO0)
* FHISV (FY00)
Non-Lendina
* Consensus-building
activitiesto
supportEducationStrategy
(workshops,
seminars,dissemination,
clvi societydialogue)

* AssistGovemment
in theelaborationof Long-Term

OnnoinaProlects
HealthStrategy.
* HealthandNutrition,and
damagedby Mitch.
* Supportrehabilitation
andreplenishment
of essential
Supplemental
Credit
AdoptDepartmental
decentralization
suppliesIn thehealthsector.
* FHES
IV
programfor thehealthsector.
* SupportDepartmental
decentralization
programthrough
Updatehumanresourcescensusin the
technicalassistanceto rationalizemanagement
ProposedProlects
healthsector
structureIn MOH.
* Health(FY01)
Adoptandimplementcost management * Supportassessment
of AIN nutritionprogramand
* FHiSV (FY00)
and needs-based
cost recovery,
expansionto 5 additionalDepartments.
MaintainDPTcoverageandexpand
Non-Lendina
measlesImmunization
coverage.
* Consensus-building
activitesto
Evaluateresultsandnationalreplicability
supportHealthStrategy(workshops,
of AIN nutritionprogram.
seminars,dissemination,
civil society
Financiallyseparatehealthandpensions
dialogue)
systems.

1. TheGovernment
hasIntttetedpreparation
oa PovertyReduction
StrategyPaper,
withtheassistanceo iDA,theIMFandlDB. In line w/mtheWorldBankiIMF
recorrnedatbonsona ptoposedenhancedrframework
for
povertytducVon,theGovernment
Is focusingon anoutcome-orIented
povertyreduction
strategy,takingas abasistheIntemattonallyagreed
tarfets fortheyear2015(tnternatlonal
DevelprmentGoals),Pn7paraton
of the
strategyandffIemon/torngo itsInip/et776taton
w/l/lnvh a &badbasedpartipatory and consultatIve
poss wlvhol asodety
representatives.
/n elaborating
thestrategyand/nconsuttatVon
withcril sodely the
Government
wilagreeon acome
set o outcomeandIntemnedate
indicators.In thecaseof Honduras,theprocessofestablishinga baseineforsucha setoflndlcatorais compltcated
by thedevastat7ncausedby
HuakcneMitch. Thus,as partof thiseffortandwiththesupportof IDAand otherdonors,the Govemment Isalsotakingstepsto strengthen
Its databaseandupdatepost-Mitchinformation
onpovertyandIM4ng
conditions.
KeyIn thiseffortw/ii be the2000 Census,whih wadprovidea rkh sourceof InfomratIon
on ivng condtionsafterMitch. Thesetd outcotnesand /ntemiedateIndlcatorsagreedas part the Governmenrs
poverty
strategy,to bereflectedIn thePovertyReductionStrategyPaper,will befullyIntegrated
Into theCASCountryProgramMatrixandusedby theCountryTeamto monitor,ona prbodicbasis,progressIn meetingGovemment
andCASperformance
IndLcators.

AnnexB1
Page2 of 5

(continued)
HONDURAS:Country Program Matrix, FYOO-02
Development
Objectives
Social Safety Nets

Diagnosis
* FHIS has become an effective

*

*
*
*

instrument to finance communRy
infrastructureand, as evidencedafter
Mitch, it can respond quickly In
emergencies.
FHIS worked well In a decentralized
manner during the emergency and
some ofthese lessons can be
incorporatedIn is normal activies.
Need to Improve community
participation and strengthen capacity
and inolvement of local govemment.
Strengthentargeting on the poorest.
PRAF, the other component of the
safety net, can be strengthenedthrough
better targeting and expansion of
successful

Development of
Indigenous and
Afro-Honduran
Peoples

Gender

WBG
Actions/lndicators

Government
Strategy/Actions
* Seek Congressional approval to extend

*
*

*

*

life of FHIS,which under current
legIsation, lapses in 2002.
Improvetargeting of FHIS through an
updated Poverty Map.
Improvecommunity participation and
involvementof local govemments in
FHIS community projects.
Restructureinternal organization to
improveresponsiveness to community
needs,support decentralization and
Improveefficiency of FHIS operations.
Reviewwith tDB support the
effectivenessand poverty impact of
existing programs under PRAF.

* Support preparation of an updated Poverty Map, taking

account of effects of Mitch and further update based on
improved statistical base.
* Support the resumption of town hall meetings (cabldos
abbftos) to strengthen communIty participation and
involvementin setting priorties for FHISsupport. Adopt
participatorylocal planning approach to set priorities
and approve new projeds.
* Support FHIS program to strengthen local govemment
capabilities, community participation and coordinatlon of
FHIS projeds.
* Agree on FHIS measures and poridties to Improveits
poverty impact, based on the FHIS tmpact Evaluation
Study,currently underway.

* Nuestrs Rakes Program, implemented

* Continueto support Nuestras Rakcesprogram through

are extremelydisadvantaged, with high
poverty and low access to basic
services.
* Institutional and organizational capacity
is weak.
* Expansion of sustainable tourism
potential in the Atlantic Coast would
benefit indigenous/Afro-Honduran
communities but steps are also needed
to avoid negative effects, especially by
ensuring that communities havea voice
and participate in planned
developments.

through FHIS, targeting benefits on
indigenous/Afro-Honduran communities.
* Education program to expand access
and materials on bilingual education,
focusing initally on the two largest
languagegroups.
a Sustainable tourism development in the
Atlantic Coast to benefit indigenous/AfroHonduran communities.
* Strengthening organizational and
instiutional capacity of indigenous/AfroHonduran communities.

the FHIS.
* Complete pilot program to provide bilingual education
and translate education materials into Garifuna and
Miskito.
* Complete Social Assessment in preparationfor
Sustainable Tourism project, focusing on the needs of
indigenouscommunities that wi1 be affectedand beneflt
by expansion of tourism faclities in Atlantic Coast.
* Preparea program to strengthen indigenous InstHutional
capacity and participatory processes under proposed
LIL for Indigenous Development.

* National Policy on Women, approvedin

* Target improved educational attainment of gids,

*
*
*
*
*

Hondurashas made substantial
progress in addressing gender issues.
Women's health status continues to be
low; matemal mortality remains high.
Use and access to family planning Is
relatively low.
Women are especially vulnerable to the
effects of natural disasters such as
Mich.
Gender stereotypes and cultural gender
biases remain prevalent.
The institutionalbase to address
gender issues needs to be supported
and strengthened.

Proposed Prolect
* FHIS V (FYO)
Non-Lending
* FHIS Impact Evaluation (informal,
FYOO)

_

interventions.

* Indigenous and Afro-Hondurangroups

*

WBG Instruments
Ongoina Prolect
* FHIS IV

*

*

*

*

1989. The Govemmental Office on
Women created in 1994.
Reforms to the Penal Code in 1996
strengthenedpenalties for rape. Family
Councils were created under MoH to
address Inter-faninlyviolence. Creation
of Special Prosecutor's Offtce for Women
to address crimes against women.
The current Administration has made a
special effort to increase women
participation in highest levels of
govemment.
Strengthen social safety net programs
(FHIS and PRAF) targeting women.
Develop capacity in MOF to adopt a
gender approach to the evaluation and
E.
.mP.nhun.hI;U, u"s,,n--

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

removing gender biases in education system, as part of
Long-Term Education Strategy.
Reduce by 25% over 5 years current high level of
matemal mortality.
Improve quality and coverage of family planning
services offered by MOH.
Adopt a gender focus on disaster preparedness and
mMigation,strengthen FHIS programs for women.
Improve gender responsiveness of IDA portfolio.
GINO program to improve gender responsiveness In key
public sector agencies.
Reviewimpact of land liberalization on vwomen.
Channelsupport to Gender Instiutions, InitiaNyat
regional level.
Support capacity building in MOF on gender approach
to evaluate and monHorpublic investmentprogram.

__

Onoolno Prolect5
* Basic Education:Bilingual Education
Program
* FHIS IV: Nuestas RabeasProgram
Proposed Prolects
* Education APL: Indigenous education
component
* FHIS V: Nuestas Rages Program
* Indigenous Development LIL (FY01)
Non4Lendina
* Indigenous Development IDF
(ongoing)
Onaolna Protects
* Heaith and Nutrition Project
* FHIS IV
Prooosed Prolects
Health (FY01)
* FHIS V (FYOO)
* Education Reform APL (FY01)
Non-Lendina
* Gender Portfolio Review (ongoing)
* Study of Gender Impad of Mtch
(ongoing)
* Land Market Liberalization (research)
* GINO Program (proposed)
* IDF Grant to support regional gender
instiutlonality (proposed)
........
!. _,,
,T,
,''

Annex B1
Page 3 of 5

HONDURAS:Country Program Matrix, FYOO-02
(continued)
Development

Government

WBG

Objectives

Diagnosis

Strategy/Actions

Actionslindicators

Ruial Development
end Rurd Povertly

* Rural poverty is higher and deeper.
* Land distribution is highly skewed and

* Adopt longer-term Rural Development

* Support Govemment to prepare Rural Development

*
*
*
*
*

land security needs to be improved.
Credit access remains limited.
Natural resource management needs to
Improve, especially to mitigate natural
disaster risks.
Infrastructure and social services are
weak and hamper income and job
creation in rural areas.
The managementof forestry resources
needs to become more efficient and
transparent.
Emergency river course stabilization in
key areas is required after Mitch.

Strategy.
* Improve land security and functioning of

land markets.

*

* Launch market-assisted land reform

program to improve access to land.
Target investments in poor and marginal
rural areas through a Rural Investment
Fund (PRODERS).
* Adopt watershed protection approach to
the managementof natural resources.
* Restructure forestry agency and resolve
govemance problems.

*

*

*

Strategy, Includingconsultation process with civil
society.
Prepare program of watershed managementand
sustainable land use In 5 key areas affected by Mitch.
Promote community and municipality-managedforestry
activitiesfor income-generation and sustainable forestry
conservation.
Launchthe Pilot Land Fund to support market-assisted
land reform, financing land purchases for 1,000
beneficiaryfamilies.
Continue and extend the IDA-supported land titling and
registration program.

WBG Instruments
Onaolng Prolect
* Rural Land Management
Proposed Prolects
* Municipal Watershed and Rural
Development (FY01)
* Land Administration and Land Fund
(FY01)
Non-Lendina
Consensus-building activities on rural
development strategy (vorkshops,
seminars, civil society dialogue)
* Study on Land Market Liberalization
and Land Access (regional research
including Honduras)

B. Reviving and AcceleratingGrowth
Rebuilding
Infrastructure

Strengthening the
Financial Sector

-Mitch caused widespread damage to
Honduras physical infrastructure.
* The rebuilding effort vwillinitiallyboost
grovwh, but unless infrastructurecan be
rapidly and efficiently rebuilt it vwil
constrain future growth prospects.
* Privatizationand private management
of infrastructureand public utilities
needs to be speeded up.
* Road maintenance needs to be
improved.
* Access and service quality need to be
Improved in the water sector, rural and
urban.

* With donor support Govemment carrying

* Financial system expanded rapidly,

* Govemment is implementing program to

ahead of the country's regulatoryand
supervisory capacity.
* Capacity to regulate and supervise the
financial system is weak and leaves
parts of the system unsupervised.
* Mitch weakened some bank portfolios,
but system appears to have coped well.
* Credit access in rural areas is low and
existing rural lending not integrated In
formal financial system.

strengthen technical capacity to
supervise and regulate financial system.
* Adopted measures to tighten regulations
and prudential norms, and increase
capital requirements.
* Setting up deposit insurance scheme.

*

*

*
*

out most urgent repairs to infrastructure
network.
Adoption of Infrastructure Reconstruction
Program, as part of the overall 5-year
Reconstruction and Transformation Plan.
Proceedingover coming year with
privatizationand concessioning in
telecoms, airports and electricity
distribution.
Road Fund will be made operational to
improveroad maintenance.
Preparation of strategy for the
municipalization and concessioning of
urban water services.

* Support critical infrastructure repairs focused on the
*

*
*
*

roads sector.
Assist the Govemment prepare a longer-term framework
and strategy for the development of the Infrastructure
sector.
Support initial capitalization and technical opermion of
Road Fund to improve road maintenance.
Microenterprise pilot to create road maintenance
enterprises.
Provide technical assistance for the Govemment's
privatization program, Including bringing to the point of
saletconcessionaward by end-2000 the telecoms
company, the four intemational airports, and the power
distribution companies.

* Complete program of assisted supervisions Inall
*

*
*
*

commercial banks.
Develop and implement longer-term technical
assistance program to improve regulatory frameyworkfor
the financial sector.
Support implementation of structural reforms to
strengthen and deepen financial sector.
Strengthen capacity of domestic insurance sector to
cover natural disaster risks.
Review prospects for reform of rural credit system under
proposed financial sector reform program.

Onaoina Prolects
* Transport Rehabiltation and
SupplementalCredit
* Public Sector Modemization TA
* Public Sector Modemization
Adjustment Credit
Prooosed Prolects
* Infrastructure Rehabilitation (FY00)
* Economic ManagementTA (FYOO)
Non-Lendina
* InfrastructureAssessment (FYOO)
* IFC support for energy privatization
* IFC study of Inter-oceanic transport
link
Proposed Profect
* Financial Sector Adjustment Credit

(FY01)
* Financial Sector TA Credit (FYO0)
* Possible IFC regionaUdirect

investments
Non-Lendina
* PHRD Grant and Spanish Consultant

Trust Fund for assisted supervisions

Annex B'i
Page 4 of 5

HONDURAS:Country Program Matrix, FYOO-02
(continued)
Development
Objectives
Private Sector
Development

Government
Diagnosis

WBG

Strategy/Actions

X The business climate has improved

* Govemment improving incentivesto

substantially In recent years.
* Private sector needs to be the engine of
growth and increase export
diversification.
* Improvements in the business climate
need to focus on removing barriers to
domestic and foreign Investment,and
improving the speed and predictability
of judicial system.
* Support for small and medium
enterprises needs to be strengthened.

develop potential in tourism, mining and
agro-exports.
* In partnership with privatesector, the
country's investment promotioneffort will
be strengthened.
* As discussed above,
privatization/concessioning program
targets telecoms, airports, power
distribution and public works
concessions.

Macroeconomkc
Stability and Debt
Sustainability

* Maintain macroeconomicstability to

* Implement macroeconomic program

support reconstructioneffort and
longer-term economic growth.
*Reduce extemal debt to sustainable
levels and contribute to poverty
reduction efforts.

agreedwith IMF under ESAF
arrangement.
* Target economic growth of at least 5%
annually from 2000 onward.
* Seek Inclusion of Honduras in HIPC
Initiative.

State
Modernizadon,
Institution Building
and
Decentralization

* Although progress has been made, the

*Implementation of the Govemment's
Public Sector Modemization Program,
which in addition to the privatization
program, includes: 17% reduction in
public sector posts, gradual
decompression of public sector salaries
to attract beiter qualified staff,
implementation of Integrated Financial
ManagementSystem, linking it with the
human resource managementand
payroll systems.
* Strengthening of the public sector's
institutional and policy-making capacity
to manage the reconstruction program
and coordinate increased aid inflows.
* Strengthening municipalities,
decentralization and deconcentration
programs in education, heaih and FHIS.

Actions/Indicators
* Technical assistance to support small and medium

enterprises.
* Diagnosis and Action Plan to Improve the Business

Environment.
* Reform program to streamline and make more

transparent regulations that discourage domestic and
foreign investment.
* Improve information on the business climate for
investors consideringoperations in Honduras.

WBG Instruments
Non-Lending
* IFC/ltalian Trust Fund for TA to small
and medium enterprises in Central
America
* Possible IFC investments In industry,
services and agr-business.
* FIAS Diagnosis of the Business
Environment
Action Plan to Remove Administrative
Barriers on privatesector development
(FIAS)
* MIGA guarantees and information
support through IPAnet and
Privatization Link

C. Sustainability

public sector needs to be modemized
and its institutionalcapacity
strengthened.
* Mitch caused considerable physical
damage to public sector institutions,
and the reconstructioneffort will strain
the public sector's limited
implementation and coordination
capacity.
* Public expenditures need to be
rationalizedas the emergency phase
comes to an end, and in order to better
support the Government's poverty
reduction and social development
objectives.
* There has been progress in
decentralization, but a longer-term
agenda remains to be developed.

*Through policydialogue and advice support
Govemment to maintain stable macroeconomic
environment and sustain growth rate of at least 5%
annually.
* Support Honduras' participation in the HIPC Initiative,
including Board review of Preliminary HIPC Document
and completion of conditions to reach Decision and
Completion Points.

Non-Lendin
* Policy dialogue, IMF coordination on
ESAF program
* IDA Commercial Debt Buyback
Operation
* HIPC Preliminary Document,Decson
and Completion Point Documents

* Complete satisfactory implementation of the

Ongolna Prolects
* Public Sector Modemization TA
* Public Sector Modemization
Adjustment Credit

administrativereform component of the Govemment's
Public Sector Modemization Program.
* Strengthenthe capacity of the MOF to manage and
coordinate increased aid supporting reconstruction
program. Set up small coordination unit, strengthen
integration of aid flows into the budget planning and
execution process, and develop management
information system to track and coordinate aid flows.
Implement medium-term program to strengthen
economic and financial management capabilities in
MOF and key govemment agencies.
* Carry out Public Expenditure Review in partnership with
Government to rationalizeand improve efficiency of
public spending,especially in social sectors.
* Support specific decentralization efforts (education,
heaith, FHIS, watershed management at municipal
level), while maintaining policy dialogue on need for
longer-term decentralization agenda.

Proposed Protect
Economic ManagementTA (FY00)
Non-Lending
* PHRD Implementation Grant
* Public ExpenditureReview (ESW,
FY01)
* Policy dialogue and support for
elaboration of longer-term
decentralization agenda

Annex BI
Page 5 of 5

HONDURAS:Country Program Matrix, FYOO-02
(continued)
Development
Objectives
Imptoving
Governance

Environmental
Sustainability

ManagingRlsks
and Disaster
Preparedness

Govemment

WBG

Diagnosis

Strategy/Actions

* Improved
govemanceand increased

* Govemment
hasprepared
and initiated

transparency
needto bekey priorRies
in Honduras'
developmentagenda.
*Increasedvolumeof aid to support
reconstruction
needsto behandled
efficientlyand transparently.
*National controlagenciesneedto be
strengthened
bothto support
transparency
In the reconstruction,
but
alsoto improvegovemanceoverthe
longterm.

implementation
(withIDBassistance)of
strengthening
auditandprocurementcapacity.
programto strengthenintemal/external * Strengthenthroughtechnicalassistancethe Officeof
auditcontrolmechanisms
in the
theComptroller
Generalandthe Ofliceof Administrative
reconstruction
effort,andbuilddomestic
Probity.
capacRty
in procurement
andacquisiions. * Completeimplementation
of IntegratedFinancial
* Controlagencieswill bestrengthened,
Management
Systemto increasetransparency
of the
especiallythe Comptroller
Generaland
budgetprocessandoutcomes.
the Ofriceof Administrative
Probity.
* Govemment
commitment
to act on
recommendations
of SocialAudi.
* Strengthen
judicialsystemby improving
physicalfacilites andtrainingof judges.

* Honduras
facesseriousenvironmental * Strengthen
awarenessandeducationon

problems.
Deforestation, hashad a severeimpact
onwatersheds,
as painfully
demonstrated
by Mitch.
* Honduras'
rich biodiversiyis
threatened
by expansionof the
agricuturalfrontierand inadequate
management
of protectedandbuffer
zones.
* Coastalandmarineresources,
especialyin the Atlantic,are under
threat.
* Honduras
remainsvulnerableto natural

theseriousnessof Honduras'
environmental
problems.
* Developa programfor watershed
management,
focusinginiialy on the
mostvulnerableareas.
* Improvethe management
and
demarcation
of protededareasand
supporteffortsto enhanceincomesof
communhies
livingIn bufferzones.
* Protectthe Mesoamerban
BarrierReef
System.in partnership
vwith
other
countriesthatsharethiseco-system.

Actions/lndicators
* Joinotherdonorsto supportnationalprogram

* Promoteenvironmental
awarenessandinnovative

educationtechniquesthatcanhelpbuildrespectfor the
environment.
* Protectthe biodiversity
in Honduras'porionof the
Mesoamerican
Biological
Corridor.
* Implementwatershed
management
programsin the
mostvulnerable
areas,vmorking
in a decentralized
mannervih, municipalites
and vulnerablecommunity
groups.
* Developprogramto protecttheMesoamerican
Barer
ReefSystem,includingsupportingtheGovemmentin
thepreparation
of a strategyand programto encourage
sustainable
tourismin theAtlanticCoast.

* AlthoughRsinitialfocushasbeenon
* Preparea longer-termprogramto strengthenthe
disasters
suchas Mitch.
meetingthe mostimmediateemergency
country'sabilityto preparefor naturaldisastersand
* Thecountry'sinstitutionalcapacityto
needsandmost urgentrepairs,the
miigateis effects.
managedisastersand adoptmeasures
Govemmentbetievesi muststrengthen * Strengthen
regionaleffortthroughtheCenterfor
thatcouldmitigaterisksneedsto be
is capacityto preparefor natural
Prevention
of Disastersin CentralAmerica.
strengthened.
disastersand managerisks.
* Developprogramto reducevulnerability
to natural
* Beter disasterpreparedness
needsto
* Adoptgenderperspective
In disaster
disastersInthe roadssector.
be integrated
with regionalefforts.
management
and preparedness.
* incorporate
a genderdimensionin disaster
* Genderneedsto beconsidered
in
preparedness
andmanagement
of emergencies,
based
preparingfor disastersandin the
onongoingWBGstudy.
management
of reliefand
reconstruction
efforts.

WBG Instruments
OnaolngProlect
* PublicSedorModemization
TA
ProposedProlect
* Economicand FinancialManagement
TA (FY00)
Non-Lending
* WBIsupport,as part of regionaleffort,
to developNationalIntegrityPlan.

OnaolnaProlects
* Environmental
Development
* PROFUTURO
ProoosedProlects
* Municipal
Watershedand Rural
Development
(FY01)
* Sustain.CoastalTourismUL (FY02)
Non-Lendina
* GEFMesoamerican
Biologil Corridor
(ongoing)
a GEFMesoamerican
BarrierReef
System(proposed)
OnuolnaProlect
* TransportSectorRehabiliation
Supplemental
ProoosedProlect
* DisaserPreparednesslMRigation
Projedcor components
in other
projects
Non-Lendina
* Grantsupportfor theCenterfor
Prevention
of Disastersin Central
America
* Regionaleffortto strengtheninmurance
sectorandcorrectmarketfailures
13

Annex B2
Page 1 of 1

HONDURAS:Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performanceand
Management
Indicator

FY96

FY97

FY98

FY99

12
3.00

9
2.50

8
3.32

11
3.28

25.00
30.53

11.11

12.50

7.14

3.37

0.00
0.00

37.50
42.35
25.34

12.50
9.81
31.67

37.50
48.89
27.72

0.00
0.00
197.66

Yes
817.69
68.14

No
799.04
88.78

Yes
499.20
62.40

Yes
1,159.28
105.39

Portfolio Assessment
Numberof projectsunderimplementation
*
Averageimplementation
period(years)b
Percentof problemprojects2,c
by number
by amount
Percentof projectsat risk d
by number
by amount
Disbursementratio(%)
Portfolio Management
CPPRduringthe year(yes/no)
Supervisionresources(total$)
Averagesupervision($/project)

MemorandumItem
Projectsevaluatedby OED
By number
By amount($ million)
PercentratedU or HU
By number
By amount
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Since FY80

Last Five FYs

32
900.88

12
410.68

21.88
15.35

41.67
28.81

AsshownintheAnnualReport
onPortfolio
Performance
(except
for FY99).
Average
ageof projects
intheBank'scountryportfolio.
Percent
ofprojects
ratedUor HUondevelopment
objectives
(DO)and/orimplementation
progress
(IP).
AsdefinedunderthePortfolio
Improvement
Program.
Ratioofdisbursements
duringtheyearto theundisbursed
balance
of theBank'sportfolio
at thebeginning
oftheyear,
investment
projects
only.
Generated
11/01/99.

Annex B3
Page 1 of 1

HONDURAS:Bank Group Program Summary
Proposed IDA Base CaseLending Program, FYOO-02
FY

Strategic

Implementaton

$ Million Rewards(HIMIL)b Risks (HIM/L)b

Project

00

Economicand FinancialManagement
TechnicalAssistance
HealthSector
InfrastructureRehabilitation
FinancialSectorTechnicalAssistance
HonduranSocialInvestmentFundV
DisasterPreparedness
and Mitigationc
Subtotal FY2000

15.0
30.0
60.0
10.0
60.0
10.0
185.0

M
H
M
H
H
M

L
H
L
L
L
M

01

EducationAPL
Indigenousand Afro-Honduran
PeoplesDevelopment
LIL
LandFundand LandAdministration
MunicipalWatershedManagement
and RuralDevelopment
Subtotal FY2001

35.0
7.0
40.0
45.0
127.0

H
M
H
H

M
M
M
M

02

CoastalResourcesand SustainableTourismDevelopmentLIL
Subtotal FY2002

5.0
5.0

M

L

Total FYOO-02

317.0

a. Proposed
CASbasecaselendlng
program,
excluding
Resources.
5m Dimension
b. Foreachproject,
thetableindicates
whether
thestrategic
rewards
andImplementaton
risksareexpected
to behigh(H),moderate
(M),
orlow(L).
c. Eithera self-standing
projectorcomponents
aspartof otherprojects.

IFC and MIGAProgram, FY96-99
1996

Fiscal Year
1997

1998

1999

0.00

25.00

10.50

16.00

Sector(%)
FoodandAgro-business
HotelsandTourism
Infrastructure
Manufacturing
TOTAL

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
100.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
100.00
100.00

0.00
95.24
4.76
0.00
100.00

37.50
0.00
62.50
0.00
100.00

InvestmentInstrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equitya
Other
TOTAL

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
100.00

60.00
0.00
40.00
0.00
100.00

95.00
0.00
0.00
5.00
100.00

68.8
0.00
31.20
0.00
100.00

29.96
0.00

29.47
0.00

25.92
0.00

20.24
0.00

Category
IFCApprovals($m)

MIGAGuarantees($m)
MIGAPendingApplications($m)

a. Includes
quasi-equity
typesof bothloanandequityInstruments.
Generated
11101/99.

Annex B4
Page 1 of I

HONDURAS:Summaryof Nonlending Services
Fya

Costb

Audience

Objective

Economicand Sector Work
Recent Completions
CountryEconomicMemorandum
and Poverty
Assessment
Impactof PolicyReformonthe Incomesof the
RuralPoor
Reforming
PublicInvestmentandthe Infrastructure
Sector A JointWorldBankand IDBStudy
LandTenureSecurityand Productivity
in LAC:The
Caseof Hondurasand Paraguay
Improving
Access,Efficiency,and Qualityof Care
inthe HealthSector

95

247

95

19

Bank,Government,
Knowledge
generation,problemsolving,
Donors,Public
publicdebate
Bank,Government,
Donors Knowledge
generation

96

169

Bank,Government,
Donors Knowledge
generation,problemsolving

97

NA

Bank,Government,
Donors Knowledge
generation

98

160

Bank,Govemment,
Donors,Public

Knowledge
generation,problemsolving,
publicdebate

PublicExpenditure
Review

01

150

Infrastructure
Assessment
PovertyAssessmentUpdate(andsupportfor
preparation
of the Govemment's
PovertyReduction
Strategyand the PovertyReductionStrategy
Paper)
Diagnosisof the BusinessClimate

01
01

100
150

Bank,Government,
Donors,Public
Bank,Government,
Donors
Bank,Govemment,
Donors,Public

Knowledge
generation,problemsolving,
publicdebate
Knowledge
generation,problemsolving
Knowledg generation,problemsolving,
publicdebate

00

80

Bank,Government,
Public

Knowledge
generation,problemsolving,
publicdebate

01/02
00/02
00/01

100
100
50

Govemment,
Public
Bank,Govemment
Bank,Govemment,
Donors,Public
50
Bank,Govemment,
Public,
Donors
IDF Grants

Knowledge
generation,problemsolving
problemsolving
Knowledge
generation,problemsolving,
publicdebate
Knowledge
generation,problemsolving,
publicdebate

-

Knowledge
generation,problemsolving
Problemsolving
Problemsolving,knowledgegeneration
Problemsolving,publicdebate
Problemsolving

TBD

Knowledgegeneration
Knowledge
generation,problemsolving,
publicdebate
Knowledge
generation,publicdebate
Knowledge
generation,problemsolving
publicdebate
generation,publicdebate
Knowledge

Planned

Foml

Inform

PovertyMonitoringCapacityBuilding
Analysis
HIPCInitiative,DebtSustainability
RuralDevelopment
PolicyNotes,Workshops,
DialogueandConsuHation
GenderandPost-Disaster
Reconstruction:
The
Caseof Mitchin HondurasandNicaragua

EnvironmentDevelopment
TA ExtemalDebtManagement
1
SocialSectorManagement
IndigenousInstitutional
Strengthening
TA ExtemalDebtManagement
11
WorldBankInstRute
Courses
MECOVIProgramto StrengthenDataGeneration
Capabilities
SocialCapitalandPoverty(CompactFunding)
Supportfor Centerfor Preventionof Disastersin
CentralAmerica
Impactof LandMarketLiberal.& LandAccessof
the Poorin Honduras,Mexico& Nicaragua
GINOProgramin Honduras

00

95
97
98
98
99
00/02
00/02
01
00102
01

Govemment,
Donors,Bank
Govemment,
Bank
Govemment,
Bank,Donors
Govemment,
Bank,Public
Govemment,
Bank
Other
NA
Govemment,
Public
NA
Govemment,
Public,
Donors,Bank
NA
Govemment,
Bank,Public
NA
Govemments,
Bank,Public

01103 TBD

Bank,Government,
Donors,Public
Govemment,
Public

generation,problemsolving
Knowledge

NA = Notavailable;TBD = To be determined.
a. FYof completion.
b. Costin$000.
c. Includesstafftimeto assistthe Government
prepareits PovertyReductionStrategy,the consultationprocess,andthe PovertyReduction
StrategyPaperto be preparedwiththe supportof IDA, IMFandIDB.

ANNEX B5
Page 1 of I

Honduras Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same reglon/lncomegroup
LatinAmerica&

Low-

1970-76

1980-85

1992-97

Caribbean

income

3.0
3.0
32.1
7.1

4.2
3.2
37.7
6.0

6.0
2.4
45.0
4.3

493.9
1.4
74.2
2.7

2,035.6
1.7
28.4
4.0

..

..

..

..

50.0
56.0

..

..

46.0
3,940
123

350
122

POPULATION
Totalpopulabon,mid-year(millions)
Growthrate(% annualaverage)
Urbanpopulation(%of populabon)
Totalfertlity rate(birthsper woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNP percapita(USS)
Consumerpriceindex(1995=100)
Foodpriceindex(1995=100)

400
12
..

790
26
22

740
149
149

INCOMEICONSUMPTION
DISTRIBUTION
53.7

Gini index

..

..

Lowestquintile(%of incomeorconsumpton)

..

..

3.4

Highest quintile (% of income or consumpton)

..

..

58.0

SOCIALINDICATORS
Publicexpenditure
Health (% of GDP)

..

..

2.8

2.8

Educaton(%of GNP)

3.7

4.2

3.6

3.7

1.0

Social security and welfare (% of GDP)

1.2

..

..

7.4

..

91
90
93

90
89
91

91

..

50
51

77
91

75
83

69
80

..

49

66

36

66

Measles

..

OPT

..

53
59

89
94

93
82

74
76

..

..

18

8

54
52
56

62
59
64

69
67
72

70
66
73

59
58
60

104
170

62
103

36
48

32
41

82
118

361
283

306
237
300

193
115

189
116

274
255

Net primary school enrollmentrate
(%of age group)
Total
Male
Female

Accessto safe water
(%of populabon)
Total
Urban
Rural

..
..

41

Immunizationrate
(%under12months)

Child malnutriton (% under 5 years)

Ufe expectancyat birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant(perthousandlivebirths)
Under5 (perthousandlive births)
Adult (1549)
Male(per 1,000population)
Female(per 1,000population)
Matemal(per100,000livebirths)
1999WorldDevelopment
IndicatorsCD-ROM,WorldBank

..

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

HONDURAS:Key Economic Indicators
Projected

Prelim

Actuals
1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

200;!

100.0
20.9
24.7
54.4

100.0
18.7
26.7
54.6

100.0
19.2
26.5
54.3

100.0
20.6
24.4
55.0

100.0
17.8
26.1
56.1

100.0
17.4
25.3
57.3

100.0
16.5
24.7
58.8

100.0
15.6
24.0
60.4

100.1)
14.9
23.6
61.5

TotalConsumption

73.0

72.9

74.7

74.5

77.6

86.6

81.3

78.9

78.0

GrossDomesticFixedInvestment
Government
Investment
PrivateInvestment

28.1
10.7
17.4

23.0
9.5
13.5

23.3
7.5
15.8

25.5
6.5
19.0

23.0
6.1
16.9

25.5
10.1
15.4

25.7
8.2
17.5

26.5
7.7
18.8

27.1
7.!5
19.6

Exports(GNFS)*
Imports(GNFS)'

35.7
46.4

43.8
48.3

47.1
52.1

47.0
52.9

45.3
52.4

41.2
59.2

42.6
55.9

45.0
56.2

45.9
56.1

GrossDomesticSavings
GrossNationalSavingsb

27.0
23.8

27.1
23.0

25.3
22.1

25.5
24.6

22.4
23.0

13.4
15.1

18.7
20.7

21.1
23.2

22.0
24.0

Memorandum
Items:
GrossDomesticProduct(Sm,currentprices)
GrossNationalProduct(S p.c.,Atlasmethod)

3,428
580

3,960
600

4,081
650

4,632
700

5,292
730

5,474
790

5,930
880

6,410
940

6,92j
99)

RealAnnualGrowthRates:(%, 1978prices)
GrossDomesticProduct
GrossDomesticIncome

-1.3
3.5

4.2
6.1

3.7
1.9

5.1
3.8

3.0
3.4

-3.0
-2.7

6.0
5.6

5.8
5.2

5.3
5.2

RealPer CapitaGrowthRates:(%, 1978prices)
GrossDomesticProduct,marketprices
TotalConsumption
PrivateConsumption

-4.2
-3.1
-2.5

1.1
-1.7
-1.2

0.8
2.5
2.5

2.1
2.3
3.8

0.3
0.9
-1.7

-5.4
-2.3
-2.8

3.5
-1.6
-1.8

3.3
0.3
0.2

3.1
1.2
0.3

1,226
1,017
1,591
1,399
-365
83

1,735
1,298
1,913
1,571
-178
104

1,920
1,423
2,128
1,759
-207
130

2,176
1,536
1,452
2,039
-276
174

2,396
1,605
2,775
2,338
-379
235

2,255
1,244
3,239
2,740
-984
256

2,528
1,475
3,315
2,759
-788
274

2,885
1,687
3,604
3,007
-719
290

3,173
1,853
3,883
3,241
-711
304

-477

-337

-336

-321

-350

-890

-672

-584

-573

42

69

90

128

99

137

139

173

13B

Long-termLoans(net)
Official

112
118

78
29

-8.8
33

39
348

83
123

259
306

136
178

121
160

104
139

OtherCapital(net,includingerrors& omissions)

348

305

352

435

336

538

453

390

432

Changein Reservesc

-25

-116

-98

-280

-168

-45

-55

-100

-100

-13.9
-10.2

-8.5
-4.5

-8.2
-4.9

-6.9
-3.9

-6.6
-3.0

-16.3
-12.5

-11.3
-8.0

-9.1
-6.0

-8.3
-5.3

18.8
6.1
13.5
4.4

27.7
36.7
12.3
16.2

9.6
2.4
12.0
1.8

7.9
-5.6
15.8
3.4

4.5
10.8
14.7
-5.5

-22.5
-37.5
17.2
16.6

18.6
14.1
0.7
-10.6

14.4
13.7
9.0
10.6

10.2
12.0
9.3
9.7

currentmp)
National Accounts (%GDP,
GrossDomesticProduct
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Balance of Payrnents (Smillion)
Exports(GNFS)o
Merchandise
(fob)
Imports(GNFS)'
Merchandise
(fob)
ResourceBalance
NetCurrentTransfers
CurrentAccountBalance(beforeofficialgrants)
NetForeignDirectInvestment

Memorandum
Items:
CurrentAccountBalance(% of GDP)
CurrentAccountBalance(afterofficialgrants)
AnnualGrowthRates:
Merchandise
Exports(fob)
Primary
Merchandise
Imports(cif)
POLandOtherEnergy

(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

HONDURAS:KeyEconomicIndicators(continued)
Prelim

Actuals
1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Projected
1999

2000

2001

2002

Nonfinancial Public Sector Finances (%GDP)

TotalRevenues,
of which
TaxRevenues
Current
Expenditures
Capital
Expenditure

28.1
18.5
23.9
11.0

30.8
18.1
23.2
10.3

31.3
16.8
25.2
9.7

31.5
16.6
24.4
8.4

30.0
18.4
24.4
7.4

27.0
15.2
24.7
11.7

28.6
16.8
24.6
9.6

29.6
17.6
24.1
9.0

30.6
18.1
23.9
8.6

Overall
Balance
ForeignFinancing

-6.9
5.6

-2.7
4.6

-3.6
3.7

-1.3
2.9

-1.8
2.3

-9.5
6.2

-5.5
4.1

-3.5
3.4

-1.9
2.8

Monetary Indicators
M21GDP
(at current
marketprices)
Growth
ofM2
Private
SectorCredit/Total
Credit(%)

28.5
30.3
76.0

28.3
31.4 37.5 37.0
29.2 41.1
42.2 36.3
177.3 141.0 147.9 113.5

37.0
12.8
50.6

Price Indices (1978= 100)
Merchandise
ExportPriceIndex
Merchandise
ImportPriceIndex
Merchandise
Termsof TradeIndex
RealExchange
Rate($/Lempiras)d

37.0 37.0
37.0
18.0 23.9
25.0
121.1 108.6 105.8

104.2 124.9 115.7 122.4 108.2 101.8 105.4 106.8 107.6
101.6 104.5 105.0 111.8 98.8 95.2
98.5 101.9 105.5
102.6 119.6 110.1 109.5 109.4 107.0 107.1 104.8 101.9
59.0

62.4

62.6

72.0

62.4

21.7
28.9
28.9

29.5
26.8
24.9

23.8
25.5
22.4

20.2
12.8
22.7

13.7
15.7
14.1

RealAnnualGrowthRates:(1978prices)

Consumer
PriceIndex(period
average)
Consumer
PriceIndex(endofperiod)
GDPDeflator

13.6
13.0
16.2

10.4
10.0
7.5

9.8
8.0
7.6

9.1
6.0
7.1

a. GNFSdenotes
goodsandnon-factor
services

grants.
b. Includes
netunrequited
transfers,
excluding
official
capital
c. Includes
useofIMFresources.
d. Anincrease
denotes
appreciation.

BASE CASEECONOMICPROJECTIONS:Key Assumptions
Economicgrowthis projectedto be negativein 1999as a resultof the damageinflictedby HunicaneMitch. Growthwould
recoverstronglyto 5-6 percentfrom 2000onwardas a resultof reconstruction
work,recoveryin agricultureproductionand
non-traditional
exports,and a pickup in privateactivityas the scopefor privatesectordevelopmentis broadenedand
privatizationgathersmomentum.Growthwouldbe fueledby a higherinvestmentrate,whichis projectedto increaseto 27
percentof GDP by 2002. Domesticsavings-negativelyaffectedby the hurricane-related
lossof realincome-are expected
to recovermoregradually,reaching22 percentof GDP by 2002.
Fiscalpolicywill playa key role in helpingmeetthe Government'smacroeconomic
objectives.The fiscaldeficitwill shootup
to over9 percentof GDP in 1999as a resultof Mitch,butwill improvegraduallyto reachunder2 percentby 2002. The
currentaccountbalance(aftergrants),whichwill riseto about12 percentof GDP in 1999,is also expectedto improve
graduallyas exportcapacityis restoredand reconstruction
importneedsdecrease,fallingto about5 percentof GDP by
2002. The Government'smacroeconomic
programtargetsa gradualfall in inflation(end-period),
from 16 percentin 1999to
6 percentby 2002.

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

HONDURAS: Key Exposure Indicators
Actuals

Prelim

Projected

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

200:1

4436

4570

4533

4710

5002

4770

4842

4872

4875

98

43

65

348

191

285

138

112

137

433

553

564

505

505

543

530

481

467

362.0
129.4
35.3
42.1

263.4
115.4
31.9
44.1

236.0
111.1
29.4
48.3

216.4
101.7
23.2
48.3

208.8
94.5
21.1
49.1

211.5
87.1
24.1
51.3

191.6
81.6
21.0
53.6

168.9
76.0
16.7
55.4

153.5
70.4
14.7
56.3

22.4
70.7
7.3
469
0.2
307

19.5
63.0
5.5
443
0.2
386

18.5
77.7
4.6
350
0.3
424

18.2
57.2
3.4
275
0.2
496

17.8
55.7
2.8
235
0.3
579

16.4
64.3
2.9
189
0.3
630

14.5
63.1
2.1
149
0.3
730

12.6
58.7
1.3
124
0.3
840

11.4
60.7
1.3
103
0.3
943

10.5
2.6

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

15.0
10.0

10.0
0.5

11.0'
5.0'

..

..

30.0

29.5

25.9

20.2

Total External DebtOutstanding
TotalDebtOutstanding
and Disbursed(TDO)(Sm)*
Net Disbursements($m) '
Total Debt Service (TDS) ($m)
Debt and Debt Service Indicators (%)
TDOIXGS b
TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
ConcessionaVTDO

IBRDExposureIndicators
IBRO DS/Public DS
Preferred Creditor DS/Public DS C
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO ($m) d
IDA DS/XGS
IDA TDO ($m) d

IFC Approvals (by FY,in $m)
Loans
Equity and Quasi-Equity

MIGA(by FY, in $m)
MIGA Guarantees
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

Includespublicand publiclyguaranteeddebt,privatenonguaranteed,use of IMFcredits and net short-termcapital.
XGSdenotesexportsof goodsand services,includingworkers' remittances.
Preferredcreditorsare definedas IBRD,IDA, the regionalmultilateraldevelopmentbanks,the IMF,and the Bankfor IntemationalSettlements.
Includespresentvalueof guarantees.
Includesequity and quasi-equitytypes of both loan and equity instruments.
Actuals.

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

HONDURAS: Status of Bank Group Operations
Operations Portfolio

Prc4ect ID

FY

Borrower

Purpose

Original Arnount in S Million
IBRD
IDA
Cancel.

Undisb.

Difference Between Expected and
Actual Disbursements
Forn. Revised
Original

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Dev. Obj.
Imp. Prog.

Numberof ClosedProjects: 44
Active ProJects:
HN-PE-57350 1999
HN-PE-48651 1999
HN-PE-64083 1999
HN-PE-7398 1997
HN-PE-34607 1996
HN-PE-37709 1996
HN-PE-7387 1996
HN-PE-7396 1995
HN-PE-7399 1995
HN-PE-7388 1993
HN-PE-7392 1993
Total

Republicof Honduras
Gov. of Honduras
Republicof Honduras
Gov. of Honduras
Republicof Honduras
Gov. of Honduras
Republic of Honduras
Gov. of Honduras
Gov. of Honduras
Gov. of Honduras
Gov. of Honduras

Total Disbursed(IBRD and IDA):
Of which has been repaid:
Total now held by IBRD and IDA:
Amount Sold:
Of whichrepaid:
Total Undisbursed:

PROFUTURO
FHIS IV
HurricaneEmergency
Rural LandManagement
Pub. Sect. Mod. TAC
FHIS III
Pub. Sect. Mod. SAC
Environm.Development
Basic Education
TransportSector Rehab.
Nutritionand Health

Active Prolects
349.82
0.00
603.80
0.00
0.00
231.73

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

8.30
45.00
200.00
34.00
9.60
30.00
115.7
10.80
30.00
85.00
35.40
603.80

Closeroiects
1,078.41
521.30
546.03
4.46
4.46
0.00

a. intendeddisbursementsto date minus actual disbursementsto date as projectedat appraisal.
Note: Disbursementdata is updated at the end of the first week of the month.
Generatedon 09/01/99

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

8.30
16.13
96.41
21.90
2.12
1.42
27.49
5.60
19.24
23.05
10.07
231.73
Total
1,428.23
521.30
1,149.83
4.46
4.46
231.73

0.00
-26.78
-55.44
6.21
1.58
0.93
1.71
5.54
16.10
2.54
-0.78
-48.39

0.00
0.00
0.00
1.26
0.00
0.00
7.41
5.51
0.00
6.04
-0.77
19.45

HS
HS
S
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

HS
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

Annex B8
Page 2 of 2

HONDURAS:Statement of IFC's Committed and Disbursed Portfolio
As of October 31, 1999
(In US Dollar Millions)
Committed
IFC

FY

Disbursed
IFC

Approval Company

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic.

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic.

1998
1997/98
1997
1995/98
1988/99

CaminoRealPlaz
Cressida
CressidaIntl.
Elcosa
GranjasMarinas

10.00
15.00
0.00
7.90
6.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
2.64
0.00

0.00
0.00
10.00
3.50
0.00

0.00
33.92
0.00
19.46
0.00

5.00
15.00
0.00
7.90
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
2.63
0.00

0.00
0.00
10.00
3.50
0.00

0.00
33.92
0.00
19.46
0.00

Total Portfolio:

38.90

2.64

13.50

53.38

27.90

2.63

13.50

53.38

Approvals Pending Commitment
CeltelHonduras
Total Pending:
Generated
on11101199

Loan
5.00

Equitv
0.00

Quasi
5.00

Partic
15.00

5.00

0.00

5.00

15.00

Annex89
Page1 of 1
HONDURAS:CAS Summaryof DevelopmentPriorities
Reconcillation of
Network Area

Country
performance

Major issues

* Poverty reduction

Good

. Economic policy

Good

Need comprehensive poverty
reduction strategy, improve data
base
Maintain stable macroeconomy,
especially fiscal discipline
Improveefficiency of public
sector, maintain progress on
govemance, advance on
decentralizationstrategy
Needto mainstreamacross
public sector institutionsand
programs

Country
priority

Bank
priority

country and Bank
iorf

Poverty Reduction &
Economic Management

* Public sector

Fair

* Gender

Fair

High

High

High

Moderate

IMF has the lead

High

High

Policy dialogue on
decentralization

Moderate

Moderate

Improvequality and coverage,
especially primary in rural areas,
encourage community
participation, improve efficiency
across the system
Emphasize basic health,
improve sector efficiency and
articulation at different levels,
deconcentration
Continueto improve targeting
and strengthen capacity and
participation of local
governments and communities

High

High

High

High

High

High

Integrate with poverty reduction
strategy, improve service
coverage, rural credit, and adopt
watershed management
approach
Strengtheninstitutions, policies
and their enforcement
Improveparticipation of local
communities

High

High

Policy dialogue on
rural credit

Moderate

High

Policy dialogue

High

High

High

High

High

Moderate

Moderate

Low

High

Moderate

Human Development
. Education

Fair

. Health, nutrition &
population

Good

. Social protection

Good

Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development
, Rural development

Fair

. Environment

Poor

. Social development

Fair

Finance, Private Sector &
Infrastructure
* Financial sector
* Private sector
. Energy & mining
. Infrastructure

Fair
Good
Fair
Good

Strengthenprudential
supervision and regulation
capacity
Streamline regulations, improve
incentives
Private sector participation
Privatesector participation and
longer term strategy

Other partners
have the lead
Other donors have
the lead
Other donors active

Annex C
Page 1 of 6

POVERTY AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN HONDURAS

1.
Honduras ranks among the poorest countries in Latin America with a GNP per capita of $730 in
1998. Estimates of the number of poor households vary due to the use of different methodologiesand
sources of data for estimatingthe poverty line. The two main methods to measure poverty are the income
and the unsatisfied basic needs methodologies. The former estimates poverty in relation to the minimum
income needed to buy a predetermined food basket, whereas the latter considers indicators that measure
household access to selected basic services. However, all sources agree that more than half of all
Honduran households are poor.
How many are the poor?
2.
Following the income methodology, the National Household Survey (Encuesta de Hogares de
Prop6sitos Mzultiples, EHPM) estimated that in 1993 the extremely poor comprised 45 percent of total
households, and the poor (includingthe extremelypoor) comprised 67 percent. The methodologyused by
the Bank suggested that these poverty rates were overestimateddue to income reporting deficiencies, and
the abnormally high level of calories used to determine the basic food basket. Thus, the World Bank's
Poverty Assessment for Honduras' estimated a 1993 national poverty rate of 53 percent, of which 32
percent was extreme poverty (Table 1).
3.
Followingthe unsatisfied basic needs methodology,in 1996 the EHPM estimatedthat 78 percent of
the Honduran households were below the poverty line, and 46 percent below the extreme poverty line. This
method classifies a household below the poverty line if it has no access to one or more of the selectedbasic
needs, whereas it classifies a household below the extreme poverty line if it is below the income-defined
poverty line, and fails to satisfy all basic needs. Similar results were reported for 1996 by USAID using
the same methodology,with estimatedpoverty rates and extreme poverty rates of 75 percent and 54 percent
respectively.
4.
Overall, and dependingon the source and definition under consideration, between half and three
quarters of Honduran households were poor in the mid-1990s.
Table 1: Poverty Comparisonsby Source(% of total householdsbelowpoverty line)
EHpMa
WBa
EHPMD
USAIDb
Income
Income
BasicNeeds BasicNeeds
ExtremelyPoor
45
32
46
54
Poor
22
.21
32
21
Total
67
53
78
75
a. Fori993;b. For1996.
Sources:WorldBank1994;EHPM,andCommon
Country
Assessment,
SistemadeNacdones
Unidas.

Whoarethepoor?
5.
Honduras is mainly a rural economy. Official statistics use a broad definitionof rural areas (towns
with less than 2,000 inhabitants or without some basic services such as drinkingwater or a health center or
primary school). By this definition, 58 percent of the population (56 percent of the households) is rural.
According to the Bank's Poverty Assessment,in 1993 about 51 percent of the rural households were poor
' World Bank (1994). Honduras: Country Economic Memorandum/PovertyAssessment, Report No: 13317-HO

AnnexC
Page 2 of6
and 36 percent extremely poor. In 1992, about 78 percent of the households in the poorest 30 percent of
income distribution were rural. Rural poor householdsrepresented45 percent of all Honduran households,
while urban poor representedabout 15 percent of total households. Accordingto the 1996 EHPM, about
60 percent of the poor households and about 70 percent of the extremely poor households were also rural.
Using the unsatisfied basic needs definition,the 1996 EHPM estimatedthat 83 percent of rural households
were poor and 54 percent extremely poor. Finally, USAID reports indicate that in some rural areas 96
percent of the populationwere poor and 88 percent were extremelypoor (Table 2).
6.
Thus, while urban poverty is high, the incidenceof poverty is more severe in rural areas. The issue
is further aggravated by the fact that the average extremelypoor rural householdhas 6.2 members whereas
the average non-poor urban household has 4.2 members. Hence, the proportion of the population living
below the poverty line is larger than the proportion of householdsin that situation.
Table 2: Rural Poverty by Source (% of rural households below poverty line)
EHPMa
WBa
EHPM0

Income

Income

BasicNeeds

USAIDbc

BasicNeeds

Extremely Poor
56
36
54
88
Poor
21
15
29
8
Total
77
51
83
96
a. For 1993;b. For1996;c. Figuresreferto Westernruralareas.
Sources:WorldBank1994;EHPM;andCommonCountry
Assessment,
SistemadeNacionesUnidas.

7.
The differences between urban and rural areas are also reflected in some social indicators. Infant
mortality in rural areas is about 42 per thousand live births, whereas the same index in the two biggest
cities (Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula) is 26 per thousand (Table 3). Female illiteracy in rural areas is
close to 30 percent, whereas in the two largest cities, female illiteracy is less than 12 percent. Also, 37
percent of households in rural areas do not have access to safe water (4 percent in urban areas) and 43
percent do not have access to basic sanitation (4.4 in the urban areas).
8.
There are several related reasons contributing to rural poverty in Honduras: the skewed
distribution of land, the lack of access to credit, and low productivity. According to the latest Census
(1993), the largest 2 percent of farms hold 40 percent of the land, and the smallest 37 percent hold only 2
percent of the land. The quality of the land is also significantlylower in the smaller farms, which tend to be
located on hilly lands. Conversely, the largest farms are usually located on the plains and more fertile
areas. This implies that the rural poor are not only poor in terms of income but also in terms of wealth,
with low-qualityland, limited access to credit due to lack of collateral, and hence low productivity.
Table 3: Selected Rural/Urban Social Indicators.

Infant

Female

Mortalitya
42

Illiteracyb
28

Accessto Safe Accessto Basic

Sanitation'
57
26d
12d
95.6
21
77.5
74
Total
35
a. Per1000livebirths. b. % of femaies.c. %of households.
d. Urbandatareferto Tegucigalpa
andSanPedroSula.
Sources: EHPM,andCommon
CountryAssessment,
Sistemade NacionesUnidas.
Rural
Urban

Water'
63
96

Recent Trends
9.
Notwithstanding data problems mentionedabove with the EHPM poverty measurements based on
the income methodology, it is the only index covering the period 1991-98, against the most recent Bank
estimates that refer to 1993. Hence, even though poverty rates cannot be reliably calculated for recent
years, the trends are likelyto be a good reflectionof what has been happeningwith overall poverty rates.

Annex C
Page 3 of 6
10.
The period 1991-98 is especially important in the assessment of poverty trends in Honduras
because macroeconomic stabilization and sectoral adjustment policies were implemented to foster economic
growth and increase long-run economic efficiency. On the basis of the EHPM estimates, there was a
steady decline in poverty rates between 1991 and 1993, from 75 percent to 67 percent, and remaining
unchanged in 1994 (Table 4). This poverty decline is more clear in rural areas (80 percent in 1991 versus
71 percent in 1994) than in urban areas (68 percent in 1991 versus 63 percent in 1994). The overall
situation was reverted between 1994 and 1996 when the proportion of poor households increased by 2
percent to reach 69 percent. However, there was also a divergence between urban and rural poverty
levels-whereas urban poverty declined further to 61 percent in 1996, rural poverty increased 4 percent to
75 percent in 1996. Finally, over the period 1996-98 overall poverty levels decreased by about 6 percent to
63 percent in 1998 (before Mitch). During this period, both urban and rural poverty rates decreased 4
percent, though rural poverty remained substantially higher.
11.
After a significant reduction in extreme poverty levels during the 1991-94 period, when extreme
poverty fell from 60 percent to 53 percent in rural areas and from 47 percent to 40 percent in urban areas,
extreme poverty levels evolved in drastically different ways in urban and rural areas during the period
1995-98. The extremely poor households living in rural areas suffered most during this period, with the
extreme poverty rate increasing from 53 percent in 1995 to 55 percent in 1998 (in 1996, however, the
extreme poverty rate reached 66 percent). The extremely poor population in urban areas suffered less in
this period and in 1998 the proportion of urban households below the extreme poverty line (36 percent) was
lower than in 1995 (41 percent).
12.
Overall, EHPM trends indicate a reduction of poverty levels between 1991 and 1998-about 11
percent in both rural and urban areas. However, while extreme poverty in urban areas fell between 1991
and 1998 from 47 percent to 36 percent, extreme poverty in rural areas decreased more modestly from 60
percent in 1991 to 55 percent in 1998.
Table 4: Poverty trends (% of households below poverty line)

PovertyLevel
Rural
Urban
Total

1991
80 (60)
68 (47)
75 (54)

1992
76 (54)
62 (39)
70 (47)

1993
77 (56)
55 (31)
67 (45)

1994
71 (53)
63 (40)
67 (47)

1995
72 (53)
63 (41)
68 (48)

1996
75 (66)
61 (39)
69 (54)

Memo item:
GDP Growth
3.3
5.6
6.3
-1.3
4.2
3.7
Note:Figuresin bracketsareextremepoverty
estimates.
a. Povertyestimates
arepre-Mitch.GDPgrowthin 1998is the projected
growthratebeforeMitchstruck.
Source:EHPM,andstaffestimates.

Poverty among Indigenous and Afro-Honduran

1997
72 (60)
59 (35)
66 (49)

1998a
69 (55)
57 (36)
63 (46)

5.1

5.0

Peoples

13.
Honduras' indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples comprise about 13 percent of the total
population. Indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples belong to 9 groups: Lenca, Garifuna, Tolupanes,
Miskitos, Pech, English-speaking Afro-Honduran, Chorti, Nahuas and Tawahkas. Notwithstanding the
lack of official data (the indicators contained in the EHPM are not disaggregated at a level to make possible
treating the indigenous and Afro-Honduran population as a separate group), there are some social
indicators (Honduras: FHIS III Project, Indigenous Peoples Development Plan, March 1998) suggesting a
very high incidence of poverty among indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples.
14.
About 70 percent of the households classified as extremely poor are rural. According to
Honduras, Libro de. Pobreza, Potencialidad y Focalizaci6n Municipal, SECPLAN, most of these
households below the extreme poverty line are indigenous and Afro-Honduran. Infant mortality among

Annex C
Page 4 of 6

indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples reaches alarming proportions. Infant mortality per 100 live births
is about 30 percent among the Garifuna, 40 percent among the Tolupanes, and 60 percent among the
Tawahkas. According to the FHIS, about 60 percent of the indigenousand Afro-Honduran population has
no access to safe water and about 91 percent lacks basic sanitation.
Box 1: The FMISNuestrasRaices Program
A recentIDAevaluationconcludedthat FFIS' NuestrasRaicesProgram,nowin its third phase,is havinga positive
impactand generatingvaluablelessons. The Program,startedin 1995,allocatesprojectsbasedon consultationswith
indigenousand Afro-Honduran
peoplesorganizations.Its mainfocusis the financingof publicworksto improverural
infrastructureusing locallabor force. The mainactivityis improvingruralaccessroads,whichaccountsfor about80
percentof the programbudget. A numberof importantmodificationswere introduceddue to shortcomingsidentifiedin
the first twophases. Theseincludedstrengtheningthe communalbankingcomponent(cajasrurales),improving
technicalstandardsof the works(withKfWsupport)in responseto criticismsthatthe qualityof workswas inadequate,
and specificallytargetingstrengtheningof the indigenousand Afro-Honduran
peoplesumbrellaorganizationand
individualethnicfederations.
HDA'sevaluation,while notingimprovements
in the Program,suggestsa numberof areas to increaseeffectiveness:(i)
strengthencapacitybuilding,especiallyby longersupervisionof the worksand greatercoordinationwithother rural
developmentprograms;(ii) continueeffortsto improvethe qualityof works;(iii) strengthenthe communalbanking
component,whichhas had verylimitedimpact,throughtechnicalsupport,trainingand supportfor the elaborationof
financiallyviablesubprojects;and (iv) betteruse and increasedrelianceon NGOsand privatedevelopmentorganizations
nenles develonment.
activein indirenousand Afro-Tonduran
15.

Illiteracy rates reach 90 percent for Miskito males and 100 percent for females, about 92 percent

for Tolupanes, and 72 percent for Lenca. Child malnutrition is substantially higher among indigenousand
Afro-Honduran peoples than at the national level. While the national child malnutrition rate is about 18
percent, the same indicator reaches 68 percent among the Chortis, 62 percent among the Pech and 39
percent among the Tolupanes.
Social Indicators
16.
Honduras' social indicators are among the weakest in the region,partly reflecting its low per capita
income, but they have been improvingsteadily over the past couple of decades. Key indicators, including
life expectancy, infant mortality, and the share of the population with access to safe water and sanitation,
are considerably worse than regional (LAC) averages (Table 5). In terms of poverty, the 1999 World
DevelopmentIndicators estimate that prior to Mitch, 47 percent of the population lived on less than $1 a
day, and about 75 percent livedon less than $2 a day.
Honduras

Indicator

LAC

730
GNP per capitain 1998(M)1
3,960
47
Infant Mortality(per 1,000 live births)
31
66
Life expectancy (years)
70
65
Population with access to safe water (percent)
73
63
Population with access to sanitation (percent)
63
27
Overallilliteracy rate
15
28
Female illiteracyrate
16
1. Preliminary
except
GNPpercapitaareaverages
over1990-96.
Source:WorldDevelopment
Indicators.
Allvariables,

17.
Over the past two decades, Honduras has made considerableefforts in the social sectors, especially
education and health. Prior to Mitch, public spending in the social sectors was equivalent to about 8
percent of GDP, which was high relative to other countries with similar income levels. Public social
expenditureshave been channeledto programs designedto expand health care and education facilities. The
share of social expenditures in noninterest public expenditures rose from about 37 percent in 1990 to 41

Annex C
Page 5 of 6

percent in 1997, reflecting mainly the activities of FHIS and PRAF. Also, controlling for income levels,
Honduras' health and education indicators are above average. According to the 1998 UNDP Human
Development Report, while Honduras' income per capita ranked 126 among 174 countries, its health and
educationindicators ranked 91 and 118, respectively.
Table6: Honduras,SelectedHealthIndicators,1980-96
1980-89

Indicator

49
Safewater,rural (percentof ruralpopulationwith access)
51
Safewater,urban(percentof urbanpopulationwith access)
50
Safewater (percentof total populationwith access)
57
Immunization,DPT(percentof childrenunder12 months)
57
Immunization,measles(percentof childrenunder12 months)
22
Sanitation,urban(percentof urbanpopulationwith access)
32
Sanitation(percentof populationwith access)
101
Mortalityrate,underfive (per 1,000live births)
300
Mortalityrate,maternal(per 100,000live births)
63
Mortalityrate,infant (per1,000live births)
61
Life expectancyat birth,total (years)
Source:
WorldDevelopment
Indicators
Database.

18.

1990-96
53
81
65
93
91
86
63
61
200
47
66

As shown in Tables 6 and 7, educationand health indicators have improved considerably over the

past two decades. In addition, Honduras has been piloting a promising approach to nutrition (Box 2).
Table7: Honduras,
SelectedEducationalIndicators,1980-96
198049
34
29

32
78
78
78
16

Indicator
Illiteracyrate, adultfemale(percentof females15+)
Illiteracyrate, adult male(percentof males 15+)
Illiteracyrate, adulttotal (percentof people15+)
Schoolenrollment,primary(percentnet)
Schoolenrollment,primaryfemale(percentnet)
Schoolenrollment,primary,male(percentnet)
Repetitionrate,primary(percent)

1990-96
28
26
27
90
91
89
12

Source: WorldDevelopment
Indicators Database.

Poverty and Growth
19.

The Growth-Poverty Link. As indicatedabove, the only longitudinalstudy available, the EPHM,

indicates that poverty rates declined between 1991 and 1994, increased between 1994 and 1996, and again

declinedbetween 1996 and 1998. Average annual growth was about 3.3 percent higher (5.0 percent) in the
1991-93 period than in the 1994-96 period (1.7 percent), and 1.25 percent higher than in the 1997-98
period (3.75), suggesting an a priori

strong link between poverty and economic growth.

Analysis

undertaken for this CAS suggests that: (i) total poverty rates would likely stabilize with annual growth
rates of about 2.1 percent; (ii) a zero growth rate would lead to an increase in the total poverty rate by 1.3
percentage points (about 80,000 people); (iii) every additional percentage point of growth reduces total
poverty by about 0.6 percentage points (about 40,000 people); and (iv) growth rates would explain about
40 percent of the variation in poverty trends. This last elementunderscores the importance of accelerating
growth to reduce poverty but also that growth is certainly not enough-about 60 percent of the change in
poverty rates is explained by factors other than economicgrowth.

AnnexC
Page6 of 6

Box 2: A Community-based Nutrition Program in Honduras-A

Promising Approach

A new approach. A revisednationalgrowthpromotionprogram,whichtooklessonsfrominternationalexperienceand
addedsomeof its own,is showingpromisingresults.The AINprogram(AtencidnIntegrala la Niflez)adoptsa new
strategy,basedon the premisethat it canhavemuchmoreimpacton childsurvivalbypreventingmildand moderate
malnutritionthan by concentratingon treatingseveremalnutrition.Accordingly,it changedhealth servicesfrom focusing
on nutritionstatusand the severelymalnourishedto givinghighestpriorityto childrengrowingwell,or whosegrowth
wasjust beginningto falter, regardlessof theirnutritionstatus. The revampedprogramnow operatesin the community
as well as the health center,and concentratesonlyon childrenless than twoyearsold, so it can givemoreattentionto the
moremanageablenumberwhoneed it most. Researchdeterminedthatall but about5-8percentof the familiescoulddo
somethingto improvethe nutrientintakeof their childrenwithfoodand otherresourcesalreadyavailabletothem.
AIN. It functionsas a community-based
complementto the clinic-basedhealthsystem. The heart of the programis a
small cadreof well-trainedcommunityworkerswhohavemonthlycontactwithfamilieswithchildrenunder2. Emphasis
is placedon triggeringspecificactions,includingnutritionadvice,homevisits,reinforcementsand referralsif needed. A
new twist is that, in additionto watchingthe growthtrend on the chart,the motheris told the weightthe childshouldbe
in 30 days-the motivatedmotheris eagerto knowif she madeit. The actionprescribedto achieveit is basedon what is
neededand what is possible-negotiatedwiththe mother. The communityis systematically
engagedalso, carryingout
its ownanalysisof whychildrenare havingproblemsand the actionsit needsto take as a communityto improvethem.
Preliminaryresults. In communitieswherethe programhas functionedthe longest(9 months)thereas beena dramatic
reductionin malnutrition-from39 to 8 percentin communitieswith the highestmalnutrition,from25 to 10percentin
communitieswithmediumlevels,and from 9 percentto virtuallyzero in communitieswith lowlevels. Morecomplete
data and analysisare still required,but experiencednutritionprogranmmers
whohave seenAIN,believeit is promising.
The wider debate. Thisexperiencealso goesto the coreof a debateamongnutritionpractitioners,especiallyin LAC:
whetherit is a goodthingto providefoodroutinelyin conununity-based
nutritionprogramsfor veryyoungchildren.
Traditionally,the programmaticreflexto seeingmalnourishedchildrenis to providea supplementaryfeedingprogram.
Manynowbelievethis shouldbe a last, not first,resort. Theyobjectto the considerabletime that fooddistributiontakes
fromworkersand the resourcesand logisticsthat swampand detractfromeffortsto changethe behaviorof mothers.The
latter,whenwell done,canhavegreaterand more lastingimpact. In manycountries,as in Honduras,fewerthan 10
percentof the familiesinvolvedin suchprogramscannotadd to their children'sintakewithintheir existingresources.
4.me

Rer

A 1 ((()

NT~ a.,4nt

,reh in XTWWinun

No

4

20.
The Impact of Mitch. On the basis of the above estimates and projected growth rates for 199901, we can infer a reduction in poverty to about 64 percent in 1999, 66 percent in 2000, and a decrease to
64 percent in 2001. Also, with pre-Mitch growth projections we would have estirnated a steady decline in
poverty reaching about 58 percent by 2001. Mitch, of course changed all of this. If our tentative estimates
were to hold, Mitch would account for an increase of about 6 percentage points in total poverty-i.e.,
about as many as 375,000 additional people would have fallen temporarily below the poverty line as a
result of Mitch.
0

Annex D
Page 1 of 3

THE EFFECTS OF HURRICANE MITCH ON HONDURAS
A.

Background

1.
Except for two coastal strips, one extending about 640 km along the Caribbean Sea and the other
64 km on the Pacific Ocean, Honduras is a plateau, consisting of broad, fertile plains broken by deep
valleys, and traversed by mountain ranges in a northwestern to southwestern direction. The mountains,
which are volcanic in origin, rise to maximum elevations of more than 2,800 m. Most of the country's
rivers drain toward the north into the Caribbean Sea. Average annual rainfall ranges from 1,016 mm in
some mountain valleys to 2,540 mm along the northern coast. Like its neighbors in Central America,
Honduras is prone to national disasters, especially hurricanes and earthquakes. Normally, these
hurricanes affect Honduras' Caribbean coast to the north, as was the case with Hurricane Fifi, in
September 1974, which caused extensive damage and loss of life in that part of the country.
2.
On October 24, Tropical Storm Mitch was upgraded to a hurricane that quickly developed into
one of the strongest and most damaging storms ever to hit Central America. At its height on October 26
and 27, Hurricane Mitch sustained winds of 290 kph and dumped heavy rains over the region. Although
the winds diminished as the hurricane traveled inland over Honduras on October 30, the storm continued
to produce torrential rains, causing catastrophic floods and landslides. After its slow, destructive march
north and west across Honduras and Guatemala, Mitch dissipated over southeastem Mexico but again
gained strength causing flooding in Florida. Hurricane Mitch is considered the worst natural disaster to
have affected Honduras in modem times. Coming after copious winter rains in the previous weeks, which
had swollen rivers and saturated soils, the hurricane's strong winds and relentless rain caused rivers to
overflow and severe landslides. The sheer length of time that it remained centered over Honduras,
combined with its trajectory, resulted in incredibly heavy damage to all parts of the country.
B.

Hurricane Damage

3.
Within Central America, Honduras bore the brunt of Hurricane Mitch. As the storm traveled
inland, it dumped one year's worth of rain in a few days. The worst damage was in the Atlantic Coast,
Sula Valley, the Central Region and the South, but no part of Honduras escaped some impact. It is
estimated that about 4.8 million people (three of every four Hondurans) were affected. Unlike previous
natural disasters, Hurricane Mitch wreaked havoc in Honduras' two largest cities, the capital Tegucigalpa,
and San Pedro Sula. About 40 percent of the capital was damaged, half of its 1 million inhabitants were
affected, and the city was cut off from the rest of the country for almost a week. Much of the
Government's own institutional infrastructure was damaged, including destruction of the Ministry of
Education and extensive damage to the Ministry of Finance. San Pedro Sula, the country's industrial and
agricultural heartland, suffered damage to its intemational airport, road and bridge infrastructure, and its
water and sewerage systems. Estimates of the damage and reconstruction costs were prepared by working
teams of donor representatives and the authorities, coordinated by the Technical Support Unit of the
Ministry of the Presidency. IDA staff in Tegucigalpa assisted the effort to produce the first damage
assessment.
*

The Human Cost. An estimated 5,660 people died, 12,270 were wounded and over 8,000 persons
were classified as missing, suggesting that the total number of deaths could be substantially higher.
As a direct result of the hurricane, an estimated 441,150 people had to be placed in 1,375 temporary
shelters set up in schools, stadiums, churches and other places.

*

Transport. Damage to the road network isolated a number of regions in the country, including the
capital. The hurricane damaged or destroyed an estimated 60 percent of main and secondary paved

Annex D
Page 2 of 3

roads (1,600 km), and 20 percent of unpaved secondary and tertiary roads (2,390). About 100 bridges
(8 in Tegucigalpa) were completely destroyed or suffered extensive damage.
*

Water. Water systems in all major urban areas were damaged. In Tegucigalpa, about 23 km of the
water distribution system were damaged. The Government estimates that 47 major water systems and
1,500 of the 4,000 rural systems were damaged. In all, about 4.2 million people (or about 70 percent
of the country's population) lost water supply.

*

Energy and Telecommunications. None of the large hydroelectric stations suffered major damage,
but there was considerable damage to substations, and transmission and distribution lines. The
hurricane damaged about 45,000 phone lines.

*

Education. The Ministry of Education estimates that 17 percent of the country's 9,548 primary
schools were damaged. In addition, most educational establishments not affected by the hurricane
had to be used as temporary shelters. The Ministry of Education building in Tegucigalpa was
completely destroyed, including all its administrativeand academic records.

*

Health. The majority of hospitals and health centers suffered some damage. Of Honduras' 27
hospitals, 14 were left with no water. At least 4 of these reported extensive infrastructure damage.
Also, 12 hospitals reported damage to their electricity systems. Damage to rural health posts and
clinics was extensive. Unsanitary conditions and contaminated water placed large parts of the
population at risk of transmnitteddiseases such as dengue, cholera and leptospirosis.

*

Housing. The Government estimates that the hurricane affected the housing conditions of about
661,760 people (82,720 families). The authorities estimate that about 33,220 new houses will be
needed and about 49,500 will need to be rehabilitated. These estimates are likely to be on the
conservative, since there is little reliable information on conditions in isolated rural areas.

* Agriculture. Most of the basic grains production was lost. This severely impacted the poor, smallscale farmers who are the main producers of basic grains. Export products also suffered extensive
damage, including bananas, shrimp, pineapples, African palm, melons and other fruits.
e

Environment. Some ecologists believe that hurricanes are a natural cycle and are necessary to thin
forests, lower the salinity of coastal waters and scrub underwater reefs, and remove collected debris
and pollution. However, the magnitude of Hurricane Mitch and its impact on some of the same
places damaged by extensive forest fires the previous summer, will likely have a severe impact on
coastal areas and fragile offshore ecosystems. The fires deforested large mountain areas, and thenabsent the trees and undergrowth-torrential rains caused massive erosion. Small streams became
raging torrents that spilled from their banks, carrying with them trees and debris. Thousands of
mature trees spilled from the mouths of rivers into coastal areas on the Caribbean Sea.

4.
Estimates of Damage and Replacement Costs. The estimates prepared by UNDP and ECLAC
(Table 1) suggest total direct and indirect damage of $3.6 billion and replacement costs of $5 billion
(equivalent to 100 percent of Honduras' 1998 GDP).
C.

Response to the Hurricane

5.
After the initial shock over the intensity of Hurricane Mitch, the Government activated the
National Emergency Commission (CONE), and an Information and Damage Assessment Center to
coordinate immediate relief efforts and assess damages. CONE and Government teams worked with the
UN system and emergency response teams from IDA and other donors to determine priorities, channel

Annex D
Page 3 of 3

immediate support and coordinate international assistance. The Government also put in place
mechanisms to provide food and emergency health care, much of this with active help from relief
agencies, other governments and Honduras' own private sector. In terns of transport infrastructure, both
the Northern Corridor between San Pedro Sula and Tegucigalpa, and the Southern Corridor between
Choluteca and Tegucigalpa were reopened (in some cases using temporary solutions such as Bailey
bridges, or temporary routes around bridges and across the dryer sectors of river beds) within about a
week, reestablishing some road communications between the capital and parts of the country, and
enabling the shipment of food, fuel and emergency materials to get to the capital. Water service was reestablished gradually in the capital and major cities using temporary solutions, such as local wells, as the
Government continued efforts to repair the primary and secondary distribution networks. The
Government also worked with the Panamerican Health Organization to implement a massive vaccination
campaign, rehabilitate basic health services and implementa vector control program.
Table 1: Summary of Damages and Reconstruction Costs ($ million)
Direct
Indirect
Damage
Damage
TOTAL
2.177.4
1461.1
SocialSectors
305.4
719.4
Housing
259.1
675.3
Health
25.6
36.7
Education
20.7
7.4
Infrastructure
347.6
164.2
Roads,brdges,telecommunications
314.1
140.0
Water and sanitation
24.2
7.2
Energy
9.3
17.0
Productive Sectors
1,477.6
577.1
Agriculture,livestock,fisheriesandforestry
1,387.3
274.2
Manufacturing
15.8
196.3
Trade,restaurants,hotels
74.5
106.7
Environment
46.8
0.4

Total
Damage
3,638.5
1,024.8
934.4
62.3
28.1
511.7
454.1
31.3
26.3
2,054.8
1,661.5
212.1
181.2
47.2

Replacement
Costs
4.987.7
580.5
484.0
64.5
31.2
713.2
571.4
118.6
23.2
3,694.0
2,990.7
381.8
326.2
n.a.

Source: UNDP/ECLAC,
A PreliminaryAssessmentof DamagesCausedby HuricaneMitch,December10, 1998.

6.
The international community responded swiftly to the disaster, benefiting from the emergency
response capability of the UN and a number of countries. The primary focus was on rescuing
communities, establishing communications, distributing emergency food and medicines to affected
communities, and organizing shelters for displaced populations. There was also a major task of disposing
of the dead, both human and animals, to prevent the spread of disease. IDA staff on the ground in
Honduras moved quickly to help the Government coordinate with other donors and conduct a preliminary
damage assessment. IDA also reallocated and restructured existing operations, prepared supplemental
credits, and prepared a fast-track Hurricane Emergency Project to support financing of critical imports
and maintain macroeconomic stability. In addition, at the suggestion of a number of donors, the WBG set
up the Central America Emergency Trust Fund (CAETF), which through grant financing has helped
affected countries service their debt to multilateral agencies. CAETF contributions total $115.9 million,
of which $71.8 million have been allocated to Honduras.

AnnexE
Page 1 of 2

OED: Emergency Assistance Recommendations and Overall Evaluation
1. OED: Key Recommendationson EmergencyAssistance to Honduras
Key OED Recommendations'

CAS Response

Rewardthe recordof pre-hurricane
economicprogresswith strong
Banksupport.

*

BankGroupmovedquicklyto supportHondurasduringthe immediatepost-hurricane
period,including:fast-trackpreparationof HurricaneEmergencyProject($200 million);
approvalof supplementary
creditsfor the healthandtransportsectors;jointly withIFC
supportand adviceto the privatesector,and implementation
grant(PHRD)to enhance
capacityof Government
to coordinateand manageexternalreconstruction
assistance.
* The CAS proposesan increasein the lendingprogramto supportreconstruction
needsas well as to supportthe Government'sreformprogram,withspecialemphasis
sectors
Ste
up
.et
.ee. _._ _
. __ . .
_ ...
_. on the
.__social
_. _._B
an and disadvantaged _rou_s
Stepup debt relief.
* JointlywithIMF and IDBundertookDebtSustainability
Analysisto determineeligibility
for HIPC.
* At the requestof a numberof donors,set upthe CentralAmericaEmergencyTrust
Fundto financemultilateraldebtservicefor affectedcountries;contributionsbenefiting
Hondurascurrentlytotal$71.8million.
o
Commercial debt buyback operation underpreparation.
Supplyadditionalreconstructioninvestment
throughthe successful o FHISprojectfor $45 million(equivalent)approvedin FY99,whichhas allowedFFIISto
SocialFund(FHIS);FHISis the desirablechannelfor reconstruction
takethe leadin channelingreliefand reconstructionsupportto pool and isolated
investment.
communities.A follow-onFHISoperationis proposedfor FY00to support
reconstruction.

InCudepreventionand mitigationpoliciesin ongoinginvestmenits
to
alleviatelossescausedby recurrentnaturaldisasters.
0
*
*

*
*
*

- Oingoinng
transportprojectsare supportinga prograr to reducevulnerabilities
to
naturaldisastersin the roadssector,basedon detailedroadand bridgedamage
assessments.
Twoongoingprojects,RuralLandManagementandthe Environmental
Institutions,
were quicklyrestructured
to supportemergencyrepairsin theSulaValleyand flood
protectionwith ruralmunicipalities,
and protectionof the CholutecaRiverin the capital.
A proposedDisasterPreparedness
and MKtigation
Project-or componentsin other
projects-is underpreparation.
Togetherwith IDB,WBGis supportingthe Centerfor Preventionof Disastersin
CentralAmerica;grantfundingwillbe usedto supportvulnerabilityand risk
assessments,
trainingfor publicand privateofficials,conductingsmallemergency
responsetests,and raisingawarenessaboutwaysto reducerisksat the local level.
FHISis developingpreventionand mitigationguidelinesin its reconstruction
assistance.
Studyon the GenderImpactof Mich in HondurasandNicaraguais ongoing.
Comprehensive
InfrastructureAssessmentwill provide
overall
frameworkfor
infrastructurerehabilitation.

Source:OEDFast Track:EmergencyAssistance to Honduras.Volume2, Number6,December
8, 1998.

Annex E
Page 2 of 2

2. OED: OverallCountryand Bank Evaluation
CountryPerformance
Overthe pastfouryears Hondurassteadilyimprovedits economicperformance
and the performance
of Bankprojects. Between1988and 1994,
Hondurashadan averagegrowthrate of 3 percent.Between1995 and 1997,the economyexpandedat an averagerateof 4.2 percenta year-that is, more
than 1 percentage
fasterthan all LatinAmericaneconomiesoverthe same period,and reacheda GDP of US$660per capita. By 1997Hondurashad
exceededthe IMFStaff-Monitored
Program:it had reducedits fiscaldeficit,inflationhad fallen,andthe balanceof paymentsdeficitwas manageable.In 1998
thenew governmentapproveda comprehensive
economicreformand stabilizationprogram,includinga much-needed
tax reform.
However,evenbeforethe hurricane,socialindicatorsin Honduraswereamongtheworstin LatinAmerica. Halfof the populationlived in poverty,and
27 percentof adultswere illiterate,almostdoublethe LatinAmericanaverage. In Tegucigalpaalone,the hurricanedestroyedone-thirdof the housingstock,
leaving1 millionpeoplehomeless.
BankPerformance
In 1993,the Bankpreparedthe first CountryAssistanceStrategy(CAS),whichfocusedon: (i) povertyreductionand humanresourcesdevelopment;
(ii) publicsectorefficiency;and (iii) environmental
protection.The Bank'sassistancestrategywas relevantin Hondurasgiventheextentof poverty,the
underdeveloped
laborforce,the oversizedpublicsector,and the fragilenaturalenvironment.Between1993and 1998,commitmentsincludedten lending
operationstotalingUS$321million,includingtwojoint adjustmentoperationswith IDB.
Between1993and 1998,Hondurashadthefastestimprovementin outcomesamongregionaland worldwideportfolios.Theshareof satisfactory
projectsjumpedfrom60 to 75 percentbetween1993-95and 1996-98.OED'sdevelopment
effectiveness
index(DEI)-a summaryof a project'soutcome,
sustainability,
and institutionalimpact-reflectsthis improvement.TheDEI grew at a fasterrate,butthe levelof effectivenessin Honduras(a DEI of 6.2
between1996and 1998)remainedlowerthan thesameindexfor Bankprojectsin CentralAmerica,LatinAmerica,orthe rest of the world. Only one-quarter
of the projectsevaluatedby OED were consideredlikelyto be sustainableorto have hadsubstantialinstitutionalimpact,whichis far belowthe regionaland
worldaverages.
Source:OEDFast Track:EmergencyAssistanceto Honduras.Volume2, Number6, December8, 1998.

LI

AnnexF
Page 1 of 3

IDB RELATIONS AND DONOR SUPPORT FOR HONDURAS
Table 1: HONDURAS:Linkages between IDB and WBGPrograms
IDB PrioritiesandLendingProgram,1999.01
IDB'sassistanceprogramfor 1999-01will focuson supportfor publicspendingon socialneeds,reconstruction
of the waterand seweragesystem,housing,
and thetransportationnetwork.Subjectto the availabilityof concessional(FSO)resources,the programwouldalsoincludesupportfor social sectorreforms,
ruraldevelopment,
strengthening
thejustice systemand overhaulingtheelectricitysystem. The baselinescenario,basedon availableFSOresourcesand
agreedwiththe Government
wouldinclude12 projectsfor a totallendingof $305millionover 1999-01.Thisprogramwill becomplementedby technical
especiallyon the part of smalland medium-sized
businesses,throughthe
cooperation
and programsaimedat promotingprivatesectorparticipation,
MultilateralInvestmentFund,the Inter-American
InvestmentCorporationand IDB's PrivateSectorDepartmentand Microenterprise
Unit. The highscenario
wouldbe predicatedonthe availabilityof additionalFSOresourcesandwouldamountto $404millionover 1999-01

Area/Sector
Education

IDB
VocationalTraining(ongoing)
SecondaryEducation(proposed)

Health

Reorganization/Expansion
Healthcare(ongoing)
HealthcareSystemReform(proposed)
FHISIlI (ongoing)
SafetyNet
PRAFII (ongoing)
SocialSpendingProtection(proposed)
EmergencyInfrastructure(ongoing)
EmergencyHousing(proposed)
Waterand SanitationInvestment(proposed)
Infrastructure
HousingProgram(proposed)
SulaArea(proposed)
Development
Municipalities:
Tegucigalpa,SanPedroSula(ongoing)
Rehabilitation
ElectricalSystem(proposed)
RuralInfrastructure
(proposed)
RuralDevelopment Modernization
of Agric.& LivestockServices(ongoing)
Environment
PublicSector

WBG

Environmental
ManagementBay Islands(ongoing)
PublicSectorReformProgram(ongoin)
Modernization
of JudicialSystem(ongoing)
TechnicalCooperation
to JudicialBranch(proposed)

Relationship
Divisionof labor

Basic EducationII (ongoing)
Basic EducationAPL(proposed)
HealthReformProject(ongoing)
HealthAPL(proposed)
FHISIV (ongoing)

Complementary
Complementary
Parallelfinancing

FHISV (proposed)
RoadsProect and Supplementary
Credit(ongoing)

Complementary
Complementary

) InfrastructureRehabilitation(proposed)

) Complementary

)

)

DisasterPreparedness
(proposed)
) MunicipalDev. &WatershedManag.(proposed)
) LandAdministration& LandFund(proposed)
CoastalManagement
(proposed)
PublicSectorModernization
Adjust.& TA (ongoing)

'

)

) Complementary
)
Complementary
Cofinancing

Page 2 of 3
Area/Sector
Transparency
Poverty
______

Disaster
Preparedness
Infrastructure
HIPC/DSA

IDB Non-Lending Collaboration/Partnerships
Design of strategy and institutionalstrengtheningto improve transparency,accountabilityand efficient
lmplementation
of reconstruction
program(in collaborationwithotherdonors).
Improvesurveycapacityto analyzeand monitorpovertytrends(alsowithECLAC).
_ySupport Governr -pr pare PovertyReductionS ytr _
_
Supportfor Centerfor the Preventionof Disastersin CentralAmerica(alsowithJapanthroughTrustFund).
ParticpationinBankGroup-ledcorlprehensiveInfrastructureAssessment.
Carry outand reviewDebtSustainabilityAssessment,reviewof HIPCPreliminaryDocument.

Table 2: HONDURAS:
Donor
___1078.4

France
Germany

Priorities2
__

33.0

7.

___

__y_aly

Japan
_
Netherlands
Spain
Sweden
UnitedStates
___
_
OtherBilateral
__

Multilateral
EC_
__

NDF

WFP
IDB
IDA
OtherMultilateral

66.5
62.0
28.9
268.5
99.0
373.6
_ _ _____
74.5
__

Coordination,integration
of variousactivities.
MECOVIProject.
JointwithIMF.
Grantfinancingfromthe
Bankand IDB.
To be confirmed.
OngoingHIPCprocess.

Donor Indications of Support at the Stockholm CG Meeting, 1998-2003
$ml

Bilateral

Relationship

1685.0
___142.9
20.4
81.0
730.0

702.4
8.3

Education,culture,infrastructureSocialand_yi
infrstructure, education,technical
tcal
and vocationaltraining,forestry, HIS
Communitydevelopment,water/sanitation,
importfinance
Basicinfrastructure,heafth(iric.watersuppy/sanitation,agricuture,hou
N/A
Infrastructure,
education,judicial,legislature,security,culture,technicaltraining
Infrastructure,
ruralwaterand municipaldevelopment
Health,education,pnvatesectordevelopment,
shelter,environment,forestry,disasterpreparedness,
ijudicial,accountability(municipalities),
AIDSprevention,titling andfeederroads
Housing,forestry,municipalwater,transparency
-_

__

Health,education,economicintegraion,democraticsrengthening_
N/A
______
____
_______.
Foodaid
Seebelow =
__
___
=
_____=__
As perCAS
Immunization,
reproductivehealth,housing,disastermanagement,
municipaldevelopment,
childrenrghts

TotalIndications
2763.4
MemoItems:
o/w: humanitarian
85.7
o/w: reprogrammed
285.9
1. Donoramounts
asreported
by IDBfromInformation
submitted
at theCGMeeting
(May28,1999).Excludes
$346.8millionindicated
forregionalprograms,
andUS$1,006.2
million
wheredonors
didnotindicatea country
allocation
withinCentral
America.
2. To beconfirmed
withindividual
donors.Excludes
debtreliefandwrite-offs.
Source:IDBReport
onStockholm
CG,June30,1999;anddonorinputs.

_-

Annex F
Page 3 of 3

Table 3: HONDURAS:Major Linkages between WBG and Other Donors
CAS
Priorities

0

0o

c

-

oE
'y,
d)

o>
(L

X

0

.c_.Rural
a:

8

SectorslAreas

Major or Lead Role

Complementary/Partnerships

PovertyMonitoring/LSMS
PovertyAssessment

IDA/IDB/ECLAC
IDA

UNDP

Poverty Reduction Strategy

IDA/IMF/IDB

UNDP

PrimaryEducation
SecondaryEducation
VocationalandTechnicalEducation

IDA
IDB
IDB/Germany

Holland,EC,Germany
Germany

Health Sector Reform
Health Services Provision
Social Safety Net: FHIS

IDA
IDB
IDA

_
IDB
USAID, Holland, EC, PAHO, Spain
IDB, Germany, Holland

SocialSafetynet: PRAF
Indigenous
andAfro-Honduran
PeoplesDevelopment
RuralRoads
FoodSecurity

IDB
IDA
USAID
FAO

.
Germany,IDB,EC
Germany
CARE

Rural Development and Rural Poverty

Germany/IDB/IDA

FAO, Germany, USAID, Holland, Canada, Japan

OverallInfrastructure
Development
Strategy
Roads
Housing
UrbanWater
Water

IDA
USAID
Sweden
IDB
USAID

IDB
IDB,IDA,Japan,Sweden
IDB,Germany,USAID,Canada,Japan
Spain,Sweden,USAID,Japan
IDA,Spain,Italy,Canada,UNDP

No role
No role
Indirectrole(FHIS)

_

IDB

Spain

No role

__Electrkicty

FinancialSectorReform&Technical
Assistance
7 Smallandmicroenterprise
lending/support

U)

IDB, Spain
IDB,CABEI,Holland,IFC

FIAS/IFC

INCAE, CABEI, IDB

Macroeconomic Stability
Debt Sustainability
State Modemization

IMF
IDA/IMF/IDB
IDA/IDB

IDA
HIPC Participants
USAID, UNDP

<__________Private Sector Development Strategy

Z'

IDA/IMF
I USAID

Decentralization
and MunicipalDevelopment

IDB/USAID/Spain

Govemance and Transparency

IDB

JudicialSystem

Spain/USAID

UNDP,Sweden,IDA
IDA, USAID, UNDP,Nordics, Holland, Spain
IDB,UNDP

Environment
Forestry
Disaster Preparednessand Mitigation

Canada
Canada/Germany/USAID
USAID

Germany, USAID, IDA, UNDP, IDB
IDA, Canada, IDB
IDA, IDB, Japan, USAID, UNDP

WBG Role

Norole
Norole

Norole
Nodirectrole
No role

Indirectrole

Indirectrole(FHIS)
No role

Annex G
Page 1 of 7

CAS Dialogue with Civil Society
Background

1.

In early 1998, when the HondurasCountryTeam begun discussingpreparationof the Country
AssistanceStrategy(CAS),the Governmentagreedthat a dialoguewith civil societywouldbe desirable
and allowthe BankTeam to incorporatea morecompleteand inclusivevisionof Honduras'development
challenges. The Bank had begun to open a dialoguewith civil societygroups(CSGs),especiallythose
advocatingdebtrelieffor Hondurasand its inclusionin the HIPCInitiative. A CPPRMeetingheldearlyin
1998, which markedthe first step in the preparationof the CAS included,at the suggestionof the
Government,representativesof the private sector and NGOs who were workingon debt relief and the
HIPC process. AlthoughHurricaneMitch interruptedthe CAS preparationprocess,the Bank Team
maintainedan activedialoguewithCSGsthroughout1999.
2.
As discussedin the CAS document,Mitch introduceda new dynamicin relationsbetweenthe
Governmentand groups representingcivil society. The Governmenthad already developeda closer
workingrelationshipwith somegroups in its effortsto mobilizesupportfor Honduras'participationin
HIPC, but the disasterbroadenedthe dialogueas the Governmentsoughtto respondto calls by the donor
communityto involvecivil societyin the designof the Reconstructionand TransfornationProgram. The
process intensifiedas the Governmentand civil societypreparedfor the StockholmConsultativeGroup
Meetingin May 1999,and has continuedafter Stockholm.The processhas not alwaysbeensmooth,but
therehas beena concertedand constructiveeffortto openup spacesfor dialogueand consensusbuilding.
3.
As soon as we were able to restart the CAS preparationprocess,followingthe StockholmCG
Meeting,we discussedagain with the Governmentand civil society,representedby INTERFOROS(a
network of civil society and NGO groups),the modalitiesand timing for a dialogueon the WBG's
assistancestrategyfor Honduras. Civilsocietyrepresentativeswelcomedthe Bank'ssuggestionto carry
out a CAS dialogue,but remainedconcernedthat they wouldhavelittle scopein practiceto influencethe
strategyand policiesof the WBG in Honduras,especiallyif they did not have accessto early drafts on
whichthe WBGwouldbase thefinalCAS. Theywereconcernedthat if theywouldonlyhaveaccessto the
finalCAS document,theycouldnot determinethe extentto whichtheir inputshad beentakenintoaccount.
The Government,in turn, was stronglysupportiveof theWBG'seffortto carryout a constructiveand open
dialogue with civil societyto prepare the CAS, but wanted to ensure that there would be a wide
representationin the groupsparticipatingin the dialogue.It didnot seekto excludeany groups,but wanted
to ensurethat the Bankhearda diversityof voices.
4.
At the requestof INTERFOROS,the Governmentagreedthat the WBG could releasethe CAS
BrainstormingDocumentto civil societyparticipants,eventhoughthe Documenthad not beendiscussedin
detailwith the Governmentitself It wasmadeclearthat the Documentwas not the CAS itself,and that it
presentedpreliminaryideason the elementsthat wouldform part of the WBG'sassistancestrategy. The
Governmentalso worked with the civil societyorganizersof the dialoguethrough FONAC (National
ConvergenceForum)to expandthe list of participants. Agreementwas eventuallyreachedbetweenthe
Governmentand civilsocietyonthe timing,participationand formatof the CASWorkshop.
The Process
5. The CAS Workshopwas heldin Tegucigalpaon October21-22, 1999. The CAS Brainstorming
Documentwas sent electronicallyto the organizersof the CAS Workshopone week prior to the event.
Giventhat over 100peoplehad beeninvited,it was agreedthat therewouldbe two separatesessions. The

Annex G
Page 2 of 7
two sessions received the same documentation and the same presentations from the Bank Team and the
Minister of Finance, but the dialoguewas organized differentlyin each session.
6.
The first session (October 21) was attended by 60-70 people representing a variety of stakeholders,
including: labor, rural associations, women groups, private sector, NGO umbrella organizations, locallybased international NGOs, political groups, academia, government representatives, and the media. The
organizers decided that, following a brief introduction by the Minister of Finance and a detailed
presentationby the Bank Team on the background, context and main elements of the proposed strategy, the
workshop would break out into six Working Groups organized by CAS themes: poverty alleviation and
social protection; rural poverty and vulnerable groups; reactivation and acceleration of economic growth;
economicpolicies and external debt; state modernizationand decentralization;environmentalsustainability,
risks and natural disasters. The Working Groups were asked to comment and make recommendationson
their assignedtopics, as well as general aspects of the proposed assistance strategy. Each Working Group
prepared a detailed written matrix with comments and recommendations, which were presented and
discussed in the plenary session.
7.
The second session (October 22) was attended by about 20-30 people also representing a variety of
stakeholders, including: FONAC plus other groups representing NGOs implementing development
projects, the private sector, labor, universities, rural organizations,faith-based NGOs, women groups, and
government representatives. Following presentations by the Minister of Finance and the Bank Team, the
workshop was organized as an open dialogue between participants and the Bank Team.
What We Heard in the CAS Dialogue
8.
The Bank heard a wide variety of voices and received a rich set of suggestions and
recommendations. In addition to the discussion in the plenaries, we received almost 40 pages in matrix
form of commentsand recommendationsbased on the CAS Brainstorming Documentand the Bank Team's
presentation. CSGs welcomed the WBG's efforts to make the CAS process more transparent and
participatory and the Government'swillingness to participate and make the consultation process possible.
These were recognized as important steps for the WBG and the Government in developing stronger and
more constructive relations with civil society. While there was support for the Bank's efforts to consult,
and even surprise at the willingnessto open our CAS process to civil society, there remained an attitude of
healthy skepticism about the ability of civil society to effectively influence the Bank's strategy for
Honduras.
9.
Comments and recommendations varied greatly in depth and scope. They included drafting
suggestions, corrections of facts, general and specific recommendations,as well as areas of agreementand
disagreement with the Bank's proposed approaches. Some of the messages we heard were clearly directed
at non-Bank audiences, includingthe donor communityin general, the Government,the other powers of the
state, as well as other stakeholdersin Honduran society.
10. Government-civilsociety relations. CSGs recognizedthat there was an opening in the dialoguebut
felt that the Governmentneededto do more to empowercivil society, arguing that the basic relationshiphad
not changed fundamentally. It was felt that Government-civilsociety relations needed to be deepened,and
that the process neededto be widenedto includethe Legislature and the Judiciary Branches.
11. The economy before Mitch. Some in civil society felt that the Bank overstated the economic
progress prior to Mitch, in two major respects: (i) some questioned official data, arguing especially that
they did not believe inflation data; and (ii) while macro indicators may have been doing well, poverty

Annex G
Page 3 of 7
remained pervasive and stabilization/adjustment policies implemented to improve macroeconomic
conditionshad large social costs.
12. Country vision. There was agreementthat Honduras needed to forge a consensus on a long-term
country vision. Although there were no concrete suggestionson how to move this process forward, there
was agreementthat external actors such as the World Bank can help the process, but the consensus cannot
be forced from the outside or be a top-down approach.
13. Poverty. There was full consensus that poverty is the overwhelmingchallenge and that it must be a
CAS priority. There was also full agreement on the need for a comprehensiveand longer term poverty
reduction strategy arrived at with civil society consultation. It was emphasizedthat the strategy needed to
be seen not as a document but as a process. It was agreed the strategy needed to define outcome and
progress indicators, how these would be monitoredand the way in which civil society would be expectedto
participate. It was also agreed that an outcome-orientedpoverty reduction strategy with civil society
consultation should be an integral part of the HIPC process, since the aim of debt relief should be to
produce a meaningfulreduction in poverty.
14. The measurement of poverty and whether official figures can be trusted was much discussed. There
was agreement that the overall level was not that important and that, instead, there should be agreement
with civil society on the methodologyto measure poverty, so as to arrive at a common starting point from
which trends over time will be measured to evaluate progress. There is a need to strengthenthe country's
survey and analytical capacity to improve the quality and reliabilityof poverty and social indicators.
15. Most CSGs stated the Bank's diagnosis of the poverty problem was correct and fairly complete.
While there was general agreement on the componentsthat the Bank suggested should be part of a poverty
reduction strategy, there was less agreementon the specifics and the sectoral approaches proposed.
16. Education. CSGs could understand and support the Bank's proposed focus on the primary level, but
emphasized that there was a need to maintain a comprehensiveview of the education system as a whole.
Problems in each education level are carried over into the next. Improving education results has to be
viewed not just as access to education but also in terms of the ability of the system to retain students.
There were strong concerns over the quality of education, the efficiency of the Ministry of Education,
politicization of the system, and problems in the public university system. There was a cautious response
to the Bank's proposed support for the PROHECO (communityparticipation model), which appeared to
reflect the fact that other "special" education models had been tried before and few CSGs were very
knowledgeable on PROHECO. Some CSGs suggested that it was too early to tell whether this was the
right approach and that its results should be carefully evaluated.
17. Health. There was comparably less discussion and depth on the recommendationson the health
sector. Some CSGs were concerned that whatever progress had been achieved was the result of the
availability of considerable external financing for the sector. It was suggested that external financiers
should ensure there was sufficient attention within the health sector to reproductive health, prevention of
STDs/HIV/AIDS,teen pregnancies and violence.
18. Social protection. A number of CSGs expressed the strong view that transfer programs can
perpetuate poverty. There was agreement that the targeting and efficacy of transfer programs such as
PRAF needed to be monitored constantly, and there was a proposal to redirect some of its programs.
Regarding FHIS, views were somewhat mixed. Some CSGs acknowledgedthat it is an efficient institution
at what it does and that it played a useful role during the emergency. The concerns related more to what
CSGs thought FHIS should be. Most CSGs indicatedthat the Bank should continueto support FHIS but it

Annex G
Page 4 of 7
should also intensify efforts to prioritize projects at the local level, promote greater involvementof local
communitiesand strengthenlocal governments. It was also suggestedthat there should be grater vigilance
over the quality and sustainability of the works financed by FHIS, includingthrough social audits, and that
the institution should not be politicized.
19. Rural development. This theme generated the strongest and most determined questioning of the
Bank's proposed approach. This clearly reflects the fact that a rural developmentstrategy touches on a
very complexand sensitive set of issues, an area where there is a long history of reform efforts, and where
some groups feel that reforms, even when well-intentioned,failed to meet expectations or floundered in
their implementation due to lack of political will or the opposition of powerful vested interests. The
concerns or criticisms of the Bank's proposed approach can be grouped into two broad areas, bearing in
mind that the various concerns and suggestions from civil society were not always consistent among
themselves:(i) concern and/or oppositionto market-assisted land reform, either in principle or specifically
in terms of the proposed Land Fund; and (ii) the need for a more comprehensive approach, with other
elements added to the rural developmentstrategy.
20. In terms of land reform and access to land, some CSGs felt that agrarian reform laws should be
applied, especially redistributing land that is not productively employed instead of relying on mechanisms
such as the Land Fund. Other groups supported the Land Fund concept, noting however, that the number
of beneficiaries would be small and that it would be critical to provide complementary support, not just
land. Access to rural credit must be improved, building on the experiencesof community credit schemes.
There is a need to review the whole legal framework for the sector, especially the Agrarian Reform Law
and the Law for the Modernization and Development of the Agriculture Sector. There was broader
agreement on the importance of providing poor farmers with access to markets, although there was less
clarity on how to do this or how to prioritize interventions.
2 1. Development of indigenous and Afro-Honduran people. It was explained that the concept had
changed from ethnic groups to indigenousand Afro-Honduran peoples (pueblos indigenos y negros). The
developmentof indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples needed to adopt a comprehensiveand intercultural
approach, which recognizes these groups' own cultural processes. It was also suggested that indigenous
and Afro-Honduran peoples developmentneeded to be fully integrated in the poverty reduction strategy,
and not just treated as a separate vulnerable group. Emphasis should be placed on education and the role
of women. Household surveys should identify and collect disaggregated data on indigenous and AfroHonduran peoples.
22. Gender. A number of CSGs felt the Bank's effort to address gender issues did not go far enough.
While some of the priorities identifiedin the CAS were important, such as maternal mortality and access to
land, they fell short of a more comprehensiveand cross-cutting approach. In the discussion that followed,
the Bank indicated it found that many of the concerns were difficult for the Bank to operationalize (e.g.,
changing cultural attitudes, increasing self-worth) but that it welcomed concrete proposals for policy
action. There was agreement that CSGs were not proposing isolated women's programs or projects.
Suggestions included revising textbooks and curricula in the education system to remove gender biases,
focus on indigenousand Afro-Honduran women who are especially disadvantaged,greater emphasis in the
health sector on women's reproductive health, and Bank support for the institutional framework that can
support work on gender issues. In addition, one CSG promised to elaborate a more detailed set of
actionableproposals for Bank consideration.
23. Economic growth. CSGs by and large agreed that economicgrowth was important, and could see
the link with the poverty reduction objectives. They emphasized,however, that growth needs to be more
inclusive, small and micro enterprises need to be seen as a powerfuldriving force, and that increased equity

Annex G
Page 5 of 7

would strengthen the irnpact of growth on poverty reduction. Economic growth, therefore, must be
accompaniedby redistributive policies.
24. Infrastructure. CSGs agree that infrastructure rehabilitation and development is essential for
growth, but felt that a long-term infrastructure developmentstrategy should be linked to the need to develop
human capital, support the objective of rural developmentand also be consulted with local communities
and local governments. There were also concerns that the infrastructure rehabilitation investments needed
to be sustainable and not temporary solutions that will be washed away in the next natural disaster.
Developmentof the energy sector needed to emphasize hydro power and renewable resources. There were
doubts about the proposed privatization of power distribution, especially since it was not clear to civil
society what the benefits would be.
25. Financial sector. There was agreementon the need to strengthenthe financial sector and improve
prudential supervision. CSGs noted that supervisory and regulatory bodies cannot perform their roles
effectivelyif they are politicized. They also argued that financial sector reforms should be discussed with
civil society.
26. Private sector development. Private sector representatives emphasized the importance of
strengtheningand depoliticizingthe judicial system, improvingproperty registries, and improving citizen
security, all of which act to discourage foreign and domestic investment. It was also felt that resolvingthe
problems at the state university level was critical, because without an efficient tertiary system Honduras
could not hope to compete in a globalized environment. The lack of access to term financing and high
domestic interest rates were seen as major obstacles to private sector development. There was also
agreement that programs to benefit small and micro enterprises are urgently needed. Some CSGs stated
that while they supported reforms to improve the business climate and attract foreign investment,they were
concerned that sometimes these reform and legal changes were adopted too quickly, without giving civil
society sufficienttime to understand the longer-termimplications.
27. State modernization. There was agreementthat improvingthe efficiency of the public sector was
crucial. Efforts to modernize the state, in fact, neededto be speeded up, focusing not just on the Central
Government and needed to include implementationof performance evaluation mechanisms of the public
sector. Improving the efficiencyof public sector agencies is important, but there is also a need to improve
the efficiencyof public expenditures. The absorptive capacity of the Governmentcan be improvedthrough
greater reliance on CSGs and local governments. In a broader context, CSGs felt that state modernization
efforts needed to include the Legislature and the Judiciary. There was also a need to develop and
implementa system to evaluate public sector performance.
28. Decentralization. This topic generated considerable discussion and proposals. There was
agreement that there is a need to prepare a decentralizationstrategy, that it must be long term but that it
must also include short-term and time-boundmeasures. It was agreed that decentralization is not the same
as municipalization,though the terms are often used interchangeably. There was agreementthat a strategy
or vision to underpin decentralizationwas lacking. It was suggested that the Law on Municipalities needed
to be reformed and the current proposal should be amply consulted. It was recognizedthat the mandated 5
percent of revenues was not being transferred to municipalities,but that whatever resources are transferred
should favor the poorer municipalities. There was a sense that not enough was being done to strengthen
municipalities,and that Municipal DevelopmentCouncils (Consejos de Desarrollo Municipal, CODEMs)
needed to be strengthenedand empowered. A broader view of decentralizationwould consider community
organization processes, since Mitch clearly showed that where these existed the response to Mitch was
more effective. (This commenton the importance of communityorganizations also applied to Government-

Annex G
Page 6 of 7
civil society relations.) Also, FLITShad a positive experience when it decentralized to handle the Mitch
emergency,but these lessons should also be applied to other centralized agencies.
29. Governance andtransparency. CSGs agreed that discussions of governanceand transparency were
more prominent following Mitch. They felt, however, that this concern needed to go beyond the
reconstructioneffort and the transparent use of external resources. There was a lack of political clarity on
how to foster processes to improve governance and transparency. Governance can be improved with
greater involvementand participation of civil society. Impunity and the politicization of the Judiciary need
to be addressed.
30. Environmental sustainability. This theme also prompted a rich and diverse set of views. It was
pointed out that the Bank's diagnosis of the problem needed to be more complete. CSGs felt that the Bank
should point out that, at times, donor-supportedprojects had contributed to inappropriate natural resource
use (a donor-backed Livestock Fund was mentioned as an example) and that poor farmers have no option
but to encroach on protected lands or cultivate in slopes since they do not have access to better agricultural
land. Illegal logging is a far more serious problem than firewood collection by poor farmers. There was
agreementthat a watershed managementapproach is appropriate, and it was noted that the vast majority of
the rural poor live in and around watersheds. It was suggested that the approach should not neglect microwatershedssince these were also importantfor many communities. One set of commentssuggested that the
approach should be wider than watershed management and instead refer to territorial ordering
(ordenamiento territorial) which would involve a national approach to natural resource management and
settlements.
31. It was recognized that there had been progress in demarcation of protected areas, but very little in
terms of improving the management of protected areas. The efforts of the Government and NGOs to
protect valuable ecosystems was recognizedbut it was felt these had to be intensified. There was support
for the developmentof sustainable tourism in coastal and protected areas, provided a participatory and
consensus-buildingprocess is followed.
32. Donors. A number of groups emphasizedthat donors needed to coordinate better among themselves.
There was also a sense that there were too many individual projects, too fragmented and too small each to
make a lasting difference.
33. The role of the WBG. A number of CSGs wondered why the Bank did not place greater emphasis
on programs instead of projects. The Bank Team explainedthat this was indeed an objective, and that the
CAS placed emphasis on developinglonger-term sectoral programs that the Bank could support through
the recently approved Adaptable Program Loan (APL) instrument. This, however, requires consensus on
longer-term sector developmentstrategies that would justify adopting a program approach. In response a
number of CSGs urged the Bank to support sectoral dialogue and consensus processes, while recognizing
that the effort had to be country-led. There were also suggestionsthat dialogue and consensus processes
neededto have clear and agreed formats, and specifiedtimings.
How Did the CAS Dialogue Influencethe CAS?
34. The dialogue with civil society provided the Bank team with a deeper understanding of Honduras'
developmentchallenges,the complexitiesinvolved in forging a national consensus on key priorities and the
evolving role of civil society. In addition,there were a number of important areas where the dialogue led to
adjustment and reformnulation
of the initial approach proposed in the CAS brainstorming document. Major
adjustments in the CAS included: (i) reformulatingthe approach to gender in order to mainstream gender
concerns throughout the CAS and seek ways to strengthen support for gender institutionality; (ii) moving

Annex G
Page 7 of 7

away from an initial approach that tended to treat indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples as a separate
vulnerable group in need of special assistance, seeking instead a fuller integration of their development
needs within the overall poverty reduction strategy and a strengthening of their own institutions and
organizations; (iii) while maintaining a priority on basic education, the CAS now includes a better
articulation between the primary and secondary levels, as well as enhanced donor coordination to support
institutional strengtheningacross the entire education sector; (iv) adopting a more flexible approach to the
proposed support for health sector reforms, leaving open the choice of lending vehicle to be used but
placing increased emphasis on the dialogue with stakeholders,stronger donor coordination,and consensus
building; and (v) recognizingthe complexityof the rural developmentagenda, the importance of supporting
consensus-building while being aware of the sensitivities involved, and strengthening the CAS links
between poverty reduction, environmentalsustainabilityand sustainablewatershed management.
ConclusionsandLessons
* The CAS dialogue was very constructive, carried out with mutual respect and openness. The CSGs
valued the Bank's willingness to open the CAS process, and they worked very hard to provide
thoughtful and helpful recommendations. The majority of the civil society inputs have been
incorporated in the text of the CAS, while others provide a good base for a continuing process of
dialogueand consultation.
-

We perceived a deep desire on the part of civil society to participate and be taken into account in the
national decision-makingprocess, both by the state and the donor community. They perceivethe latter
as having enormous influenceon Honduras' developmentprocess.

-

While the dialogue brought to light important areas of disagreementor concerns on the part of civil
society, there was also general agreement on the broad developmentagenda articulated by the Bank.
The challengeis in the details. Much work lies ahead to define and seek consensus on the specifics that
will operationalizethe proposed Country Assistance Strategy.

*

Related to the point above, civil society welcomedthe Bank's willingnessto continue a dialogueon key
aspects of the assistance strategy, especially where Bank interventions need to be underpinned by
agreed longer-termsectoral strategies. However, civil society would like more precision from the Bank
on how and when these dialogues are to be carried out. The commnitment
to carry out consultative and
consensus-building processes is important, but the way the processes are structured and the
expectationsthey generate are equally important.
El

MAP SECTION

880

I

860

840

BELIZE

HONDURAS

!

ROATAN

I

-16

16Puerto
Cortms

GUATEMALA

(

. SAN PEDROg

J

Tel.a

LACEIBA

TRU

,,

S

J\

/1

.,

>BARBARA<

ROSA
__
r
zo
COPAN
\,RE
4
Gu.t..ala}

~.

J

-I.w>:>

/SANTA
>

\

8;

~-C

_/~

)

JUTICALP,

'

J

PUERTO
/-LEMPIRA

ffi

YORO

/7

P^J

WRACIAS

t@8

aedros

\/

'

XT

e.eqr

l

PuertoC.b-zns

)

\CMYGAW
~~~EXPER-ANLPA(

jPEOUE
9

p.TE

v

MAIN BITUMINOUSSURFACEDROADS

RALOD

/

ELSALVADOR.
-%_

Sr

~

J-

YUSCARAN
\
J_

{/

1A'-

SECONDARY
ROADS
-~RAILROADS

MAIN
AIRPORTS

ToSonSalvado4
,

MAIN PORTS
9no

L^O

78V

81-

MEX!

_

X

<

tRIVERS

CHOLEBELIZE

i8:

To Matagalpo

GUATEMi~AXHONDURAS

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
NC

to,

O
_

R

G

COSTA
RICA

lo

.ma

0I

~~~~~~

25
I

10

PANAMA

50

75

a
'0
90
$6,

90 tyt6
82_

COlOMBIA
_

_

_ _

_

_ _

_

_ _

_

_ _

_

_ _

)N

DEPARTMENT
CAPITALS

*

NATIONALCAPITAL

de-omioni

DEPARTMENT
BOUNDARIES

otherin-rnntion shoen
i0p th
e
do not
imply, 0th
on the poetof~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Th.WorldBnokGroop,

he-dories, colors

100 Kilometers

I

25

0

\

0
I

(5,000 AND GREATERPOPULATION)

AThe

To Chinadega

EL
SALVADOR

fq

ICARAGUA

0

100
Miles

~~~~~~~~
_

_ _

_

_ _

ThporldqSankooulpoly

te5n
iosM

505
acx
of
84
84'

_

_ _

_

_ __LOMBIA_

_

_

any

~,

NTERNATIONAL
BOUNDARIES

--

nd

86
_ _

_

82cceLOM
_ _

_

o0
boundarie
suh.
of

Gi
0

O-

~~~~~~~~~~
hntn,e
~ ~~~~~~
)
00

_ _

_

_ __

