Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of

The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No. 20426-TA

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZNIA
May 22, 2000
Country Department for Tanzania
MacroeconomicesII, AFTM2
Africa Region
|This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
|official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.l

l

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR:

July 1 - June 30

Currency Equivalents

CurrencyUnit= TanzaniaShilling(T Sh)
US$1= T Sh 797 (April2000)
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

APL
BEMP
CAE
CAS
CDF
CG
COMESA
EAC
ESAF
DAWASA
FIAS
HIPC
ICRG
IDA
IFC
IMF
LGRP
MIGA
MTEF
NBC
NMB
NGO
NPES
OCAG
OED
OEG
PFP
PRGF
PRSP
PSAC
PER
PERC
SADEC
SEMP
SMEs
TAS
TASAF
TANESCO
TIC
TTLC
UNAIDS
WBI

Adjustable Project Loan
Basic Education Master Plan
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Comprehensive Development Framework
Consultative Group
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
East Africa Community
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Authority
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
International Country Risk Guide Index
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Local Government Reform Program
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium Term Expenditure Framework
National Bank of Commerce
National Microfinance Bank
Non-Governmental Organization
National Poverty Eradication Strategy
Office of the Controller and Auditor General
Operations Evaluations Department
Operations Evaluation Groups
Policy Framework Paper
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Programmatic Structural Adjustment Credit
Public Expenditure Review
Public Expenditure Reform Credit
Southern African Development Community
Secondary Education Master Plan
Small and Medium Enterprises
Tanzania Assistance Strategy
Tanzania Social Assistance Fund
Tanzania Electric Supply Company Ltd.
Tanzania Investment Center
Tanzania Telecommunications Company Ltd.
United Nations AIDS Program
World Bank Institute

VicePresident:
CountryDirector:
Task TeamLeader:

IDA
CallistoE. Madavo
JamesW. Adams
MiriaPigato

IFC
AssaadJabre
CesareCalari
James Emery

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENTOF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGYOF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

CONTENTS

Executive Summary...................................................

i

I. Political, Social and Economic Context ....................................................

1

A. Political, economic and private sector development issues............................................... I
2
B. Poverty, social and governance issues....................................................
II. Macroeconomic Performance and Prospects ................

....................................

6

6
A. Recent economic performance ....................................................
B. Macroeconornic prospects, external environment and risks .............................................. 7
III. The Government's Strategy ....................................................
A. Overview ...................................................
B. Creating higher growth and economic opportunities for the poor ...................................
C. Building capabilities ....................................................
D. Empowerment and accountability ...................................................
IV. The Bank Group Assistance Strategy ...................................................
A. Consultations ..................................................
.
B. Lessons from past experience ..................................
C. The strategy ...................................
....................
D. Description of the lending program ..............
E. Non lending services..................................
.
F. WBI and MIGA...................................
G. Portfolio issues ...................................
H. Benchmark indicators for Government/Bank
..................................
I. Risks..................................
J. Concluding remarks ..................................

9
9
10
11
12
13
13
14
17
20
22
24
24
25
25
26

and may be used by recipientsonly in the
This documenthas a restricteddistribution
of theirofficialduties. Its contentsmaynot otherwisebe disclosedwithout
perfoumance
WorldBankauthorization.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENTOF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGYOF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
CONTENTS (cont'd)
CHARTS
Chart I
Chart 2

Tanzania: Social and Governance Indicators
Tanzania: Selected Economic Indicators

TEXT BOXES
Box I
Box II
Box III
Box IV
Box V

The Development Vision 2025 (1998) and the National Poverty
Eradication Strategy (1997)
CAS Consultations With Civil Society: Key Findings
OED's and OEG's Findings and Recommendations
Triggers for High Case Scenario
The Need to Scale Up the Fight Against HIV/AIDS

TEXT TABLES
Table I
Table 2
Table 3

Tanzania: Past Results and Macroeconomic Projections for 2000-03
A Framework for Development Partnership
Tanzania CAS- Lending Program FYO1-03(US$ millions)

ANNEXES
Annex I
Annex II
Annex III
Annex IV
Annex V

The Low Case Scenario
Tanzania: The Road to Ownership and Effective Partnership
Portfolio Overview & Performance Improvement Strategy
Client Feedback Survey 1997
Standard Annexes

Map

Tanzania - IBRD 27941

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENTOF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGYOF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

Executive Summary
1.
Economic reforms in Tanzania began in 1986 and by the early 1990s household surveys
indicated that higher economic growth was reducing poverty. However, in the mid 1990s
Tanzania's reform program fell off track, resulting in high budget deficits, increased inflation and
low economic growth. In parallel, corruption increased significantly. Reflecting this situation,
long-standing donor support for Tanzania came under threat. As summarized in the "Report of
the Group of Independent Advisors on Development Cooperation Issues Between Tanzania and
its Aid Donors" (ThieHelleiner Report) in June 1995: "With the current macroeconomic situation
lagging behind expectations and the continuing malaise in aid relationships, the major progress of
the past nine years is now at significant risk".
2.
Approximately six months after the report was published, elections were held and a new
Government, led by President Benjamin Mkapa, came to power. In its early pronouncements on
the economic situa4tion,the Government committed itself to a renewed effort at economic reform
and expressed its determination to re-establish more positive relations with its donors and
partners in development. The last Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), presented in 1997 during
the initial period of the Mkapa Government, focussed on supporting this effort at renewal. Three
related themes were central to that CAS: (i) the critical link between economic growth and
poverty reduction; (ii) the priority of supporting and reinforcing the growth oriented
macroeconomic reforms introduced by the new Government; and (iii) the need to respect and
foster Government ownership of both its macroeconomic reforms and investment programs.
3.
In parallel to the work on this CAS the Government is preparing the Tanzania Assistance
Strategy (TAS) and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). The TAS provides a
development framework to organize donors assistance around strategic priorities and to increase
the share of aid, currently as low as 40 percent, accounted for by the budget. The PRSP work is
focussing on specific policies and institutional changes for reducing poverty and improving living
standards in the short and medium term. The focus of this CAS is on higher growth, poverty
reduction and institutional reforms to improve governance and service delivery. The CAS shares
the main strategic directions of the TAS - adherence to macro stability, a renewed emphasis on
rural development:, improved governance and increased private sector participation in the
economy. It also supports the Government's desire to enter into new relationships with partners,
based on the phased switching from projects to programs for a more effective and efficient use of
aid resources. The preparation of the CAS has been participatory, involving wide consultations
with civil society and a large number of stakeholders. It also reflects the lessons learned by OEG
and OED in their recent reviews.
4.
The CAS presents three scenarios. In the base-case scenario (within which the Bank is
currently operating), lending would rise from US$200 million a year (in the last CAS) to US$260
million. This assumes that objectives for the PRSP and the Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility (PRGF) would be met, consistent with anticipated schedules. In this scenario,
macroeconomic stability and structural measures in the areas of governance, financial
i-

management, tax reforms and improvement of the business environment would be implemented
and social sector programs would be strengthened. The adoption of the low-case scenario
(lending program of US$100 million a year) would result from significant delays in the
implementation of PRSP and PRGF, as well as from slippage in the expected timing for the HIPC
completion point.
5.
The CAS envisions a move to the high-case scenario by the third year if specific triggers
(mostly on governance and public sector management) are met. This scenario would add US$200
million to the base-case lending scenario, and more importantly, move away from traditional
project financing towards budgetary support through the instrument of a Public Expenditure
Reform Credit (PERC). The PERC would focus on poverty and environmentally sustainable rural
development issues and would be utilized by the Bank to systematically address cross-sectoral
issues of poverty reduction identified in the PRSP.
6.
Tanzania is vulnerable to external shocks, commodity price changes and droughts. But
the sources of foreign exchange earnings are becoming increasingly diversified, and the current
level of international reserves offer sufficient cushion against external shocks. Domestically,
revenue shortfalls or increased government spending could endanger the adjustment efforts.
Domestic support for the reforms could be undercut if higher growth and poverty reduction are
not achieved. Finally, worsening governance and increased corruption may alienate the support of
key aid partners and reduce investment.
7.
These risks, however, are manageable. Tanzania is politically stable and ethnic friction is
minimal. The newly created East African Community and similar regional arrangements provide
the basis for greater policy and economic coordination in the area. The HIPC debt relief will
enable the country to free up substantial resources to enable an increase in spending for poverty
focussed programs. For the Bank, the greatest risk is that of overestimating the Government's
implementation capacity. Thus, we will have to pay great attention to project design, to undertake
effective capacity-building initiatives, to be vigilant and disciplined in supervision, and to have a
strong monitoring and evaluation feedback system. This will be vital to track programs, draw
lessons and adjust learning in real time.
8.

The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:
*

*
*

Does the Board agree with the strategic priorities for Bank Group support? Given the
success and strength of our dialogue on macroeconomic issues should we now pursue the
broader range of initiatives suggested in this CAS?
Is the proposed level of lending, and large share of program aid, consistent with the
expected progress in budget management and governance? Are the conditions for shifting
towards program support specific enough?
Are CAS implementation, risks realistic and acceptable?

ii

MEMORANDUM
OF THE PRESIDENTOF
THE
INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
ASSOCIATION
AND, THE INTERNATIONAL
FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGYOF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

I. POLITICAL, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT
A. Political, econontic and private sector development issues

1.
Democracy is evolving peacefully. Tanzania is one of the few countries in Africa with a
long record of political and civic stability, in which citizens share a strong sense of national
identity. Nearly 15 years into its transition from a socialist to a free market economy, and five
years since the adoption of multiparty elections, the United Republic of Tanzania' is steadily
moving towards a fully democratic society. Besides the party which has ruled since
Independence (the Cliama Cha Mapinduzi, CCM), there are five political parties which have been
active in Parliament and will be contending the next elections, to be held in October 2000. The
process of transformation has been slow - partly because of CCM's control of the political
institutions inherited from the socialist one-party state - but peaceful and extensive. Civic
organizations are developing, the media are becoming stronger and increasingly give voice to
different opinions. However the political situation in Zanzibar has been tense, with accusations of
electoral irregularities in 1995 not having been satisfactory resolved.
2.
Macroeconomic stability and growth have re-emerged. Since the last CAS the
Government of Tanzania has continued its stabilization program and has introduced deep
institutional and structural reforms. Growth has averaged about four percent during the last four
years. This is a strong result considering the severe weather conditions and reflects strengthened
macroeconomic and structural fundamentals as well as a greater flexibility of the economy in
responding to shocks. A large number of the distortions that existed in the 90s have been dealt
with - markets are fieer and the public sector is smaller. The foreign exchange market and the
trade regime have been liberalized. Though slowly, privatization has proceeded and mnre than
half of the 400 public enterprises have been privatized.
3.
Since the 1994-95 crisis, the fiscal situation has improved dramatically. But this has
implied large cuts in government expenditure, under-funding of social sectors and deteriorating
public services. Howvever, in the past two years the Government has identified a number of
sectors with a large impact on poverty - education, health, water, rural roads and more recently
agriculture and the judiciary. Funding for these sectors has been protected and monitored under
participatory Public Expenditure Reviews (PERs). The process has been supported by donors
through the creation of a Multilateral Debt Funcf (MDF) which has assisted in servicing debt to
multilateral agencies. The related budgetary savings have been used to protect expenditures
earmarked for these priority sectors.
4.
Private sector development remains limited. Tanzania has largely shifted from a socialist
to a market econorny but significant obstacles to private sector development remain. The
I Since April 26, 1964, the United Republicof Tanzaniaconsists of former Tanganyka(mainland)and the People's
Republicof Zanzibaf.
2 The MDF, supportedby bilateral donors, is aimed at assistingthe Governmentin meetingmultilateraldebt service
obligations. The relief, tied to the budget, is conditionalto the Government's commitmentto sustain budgetary
allocationsto the prioritysectors- education,health,water,ruralroads, agricultureand thejudicialsystem.
1

restructuring and privatization of public utilities and large parastatal monopolies is just starting
and the poor quality of public services represent a high cost to the private sector. In 1999, only
13 percent of the road network was in good condition. Electricity is available to only 7 percent of
households and tariffs are high. Frequent power cuts makes it necessary for enterprises to invest
in backup generators. Telephone service remains inadequate, with long waiting times for new
telephone connections, though new private cellular services in urban areas are developing fast.
Transport costs are high, and delays are common in ports and railways.
5.
The financial sector is now virtually under private sector management, while in 1995
more than 70 percent of the banking system's assets were state owned. In 1997, the National
Bank of Commerce (NBC), the largest bank, was split into the National Microfinance Bank
(NMB) and the NBC. The NMB was put under private management in August 1999, with IFC
assistance and the NBC was privatized in December 1999. A framework for micro-finance has
been established with the aim of increasing access to financial services by the poor. Banking
supervision has improved significantly in recent years and prudential regulations have been based
on internationally accepted guidelines. In spite of recent transformations, the ratio of credit to
GDP is low, 4.7 percent of GDP relative to an average of 14 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Financial penetration (the ratio of deposits to GDP) is also low, 15 percent. The large banks
maintain relatively high lending and low deposit rates to enhance their profitability and are
conservative in their expansion strategies. Non-bank financial institutions are insufficient to
provide significant alternatives and competition to the banking sector. The rural population has
limited access to financial services. Other problems remain, including the inaccuracy of financial
data reporting, and weaknesses in accounting standards. Despite the creation of a regulatory
framework for the securities market and the establishment of the Dar es Salaam Stock.Exchange,
capital markets remain largely under-developed, and constrained by limitation on foreign
participation.
6.
Improving the environment. Tanzania is recognized globally for its highly bio-diverse
natural heritage. Nearly 40 percent of the land area is covered by wood and forests and. 23 percent
has been established as protected areas. The main issues concerning the environment include: (i)
threats to bio-diversity and loss of wildlife habitats stemming from overgrazing, illegal hunting,
poaching, and overfishing; (ii) deforestation of high forests, the result of unregulated expansion
of the timber industry and the agriculture sector; (iii) environmental pollution, particularly in
urban areas, the result of inadequate waste collection and the lack of an effective regulatory
framework to limit industrial pollution. The government adopted a National Environmental
Policy in November 1997, widely recognized as inadequate for environmental protection and
management. Since then studies and efforts have been carried out to improve the institutional and
legal framework for environmental management. The process has relied on extensive
consultations and involvement of communities. A new and encouraging Forest Policy was
adopted in 1999. The Government is currently formulating a bio-diversity conservation policy
and a national plan to combat desertification.
B. Poverty, social and governance issues
7.
Poverty is widespread. Despite its potential and rich resource endowment, Tanzania is
one of the poorest countries in the world with a per capita GNP of about US$240 in 1999.
Official estimates suggest that over half of its 31 million population is poor and 36 percent is very
poor. Poverty is essentially a rural phenomenon: almost 61 percent of the rural population is poor

2

Chart I3
Tanzania: Social and Governance Indicators

1

GCu Prifary ThrollmentRatio
(percent)

HIVinfection rates amongblood
donors (percent)
30

20 j1.

100
50

,

-

19S5

1980

5.9

I10 -

j

|

1990 1995 1997

Life expectancyat birth
(years)

1992

199

(rGovernance

Indicatorsa

~~~~~~~~~~~~~(-gez
= 0 6,6 = Ies corrpt bema:mlc of la.v)
ruleoflaw

55
50

45

female

,male

1
L

_

12
_

_

_

_

_

_

__

_

_

_

_

_

2

_

1997
1980

-oruto
1

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

compared to 39 percent of the urban population. Income distribution is uneven. In the 1998 rural
survey the lowest quintile accounted for only 7 percent of mean expenditures. Paucity of
consistent and reliable data make it difficult to assess recent trends in both poverty and inequality.
8.
Lack of economic growth and of income opportunities for the poor,4 particularly in the
rural areas, are at the root of the poverty problem. In turn, the ability of the poor to benefit from
growth has been impaired by their low human development and lack of access to productive
assets, inputs and credit. The rural poor are concentrated in subsistence agriculture and employed
in crop production and livestock. In urban areas the poor are underemployed in the informal
sector or are unemployed. This analysis reinforces the point that sustaining macroeconomic
reforms and generating higher levels of economic growth remains critical to the policy agenda in
Tanzania. While the solid performance of the past four years is an improvement on the mid-

Data on gross enrollment ratio and life expectancy at birth are from 2000 World Development Indicators, World
Bank. Enrollment data fi-om national sources differ and are generally higher. Govemance indicators are from the
International Country RiskcGuide Index.
4 See: Narayan D. (1997), "Voices of the Poor - Poverty and Social Capital in Tanzania", World Bank Working Paper;
REPOA (1998), "Perspectives on rural poverty profiles: results from the rural survey of three regions of mainland
Tanzania"; World Bank(11996),Tanzania: The Challenges of Reforms: Growth, Incomes and Welfare, World Bank,
Washington D.C.
3

3

1990s, even higher rates of growth will be required to have a significant impact on reducing
poverty levels.
9.
Social indicators have deteriorated Many indicators of human development, which in
the past were higher than in many low-income countries, have deteriorated. This trend is longstanding and can be traced back to the early 1980s, when the economic crisis showed that the
sizable investments made by the Nyerere regime in education and health were not sustainable.
Falling real expenditures on social programs throughout the late 1980s led to significant declines
in service delivery which are only now beginning to be effectively addressed. Ensuring real
expenditure increases on social sector services on a sustained basis is a key objective of the
present Government. However, it will take time to achieve improvements in social indicators.
10.
Tanzania's ranking in the Human Development Index declined from 126 in 1992 to 156
in 1997. The infant and under-five mortality rates, 85 and 136 per thousand respectively, are high
and reportedly are much higher for the poor. Communicable diseases (malaria, diarrhea and
AIDS) account for most of the deaths in Tanzania. Among the factors contributing to ill health of
the poor, is the limited access to safe water (48.5 percent and 68 percent in rural and urban areas
respectively). Forty percent of the rural water supply system is malfunctioning or completely
inoperative. As regards sanitation, more than 90 percent of households in urban and. rural areas
use traditional pit latrines. The sewerage infrastructure in Dar es Salaam has not been maintained
over the last decade and is subject to frequent failures.
11.
The tragedy of HIVIAIDS. Life expectancy in Tanzania has declined to 48 years as a
result of the AIDS epidemic. As of 1997, HIV prevalence among the population aged115-49 was
estimated at 9.4 percent. About 50 percent of hospital beds are already occupied by patients with
HIV/AIDS related illnesses. Chart 1 shows HIV infection rates among blood donors5 . They have
increased significantly between 1992 and 1998 and are higher for women. Infection rates are four
times higher among young girls compared to young boys. The Country Economic M:emorandum
indicates that without policy actions, GDP in Tanzania could be 15-20 percent lower by 2015
(with respect to a non AIDS scenario). The number of orphans as a consequence of AIDS could
reach one million by 2015. On the positive side, data from a 1999 survey6 suggest that almost all
Tanzanians have heard of AIDS. Moreover, 56 percent of women and 71 percent of mren(up from
39 percent and 55 percent respectively in 1996) mention condom use as a means of preventing the
spread of HIV.
12.
The crisis in education. Children's educational attainments are dismal, suggesting a
crisis situation in the education sector. Primary school net enrollment rates are currently less than
50 percent, down from more than 80 percent in the 1980s7 . Admission rates to grade 1 are
reasonably high but survival rates to the end of the cycle (grade 7) are low (54 percent). Children
enroll late, at around 9 years of age. The primary school examination pass rate is 26 percent for
boys and 14 percent for girls. Entry rates to secondary education are only 15 percent. Parental
confidence in the education system is low.
13.
Progress in the health sector. In health the Government has been more effective in
establishing overall priorities, in working cooperatively with a broad range of health providers (in
the religious and NGO communities in particular) and in beginning to produce some
improvement in service delivery. The sector wide program developed by the Government has
5 Datareferto patients'relatives(94 percent)andto institutional
donors.Since1990all hospitalswhichprovideblood
transfusion services in the country are screening blood for HIV antibodies prior to transfusion.
6 Tanzania (1999): "Reproductive and Child Health Survey", Preliminary Report.
7 These numbers are taken from World Bank databases. National sources indicate higher gross and net enrollment rates.

4

been firmly supported by the donor community. While many problems remain, there is an
emerging and consistent view that the additional resources being provided to the health sector are
being more productively managed and that this should lead, over time, to real improvements in
the health status of the population.
14.
Gender issues. Women are often poorer than men, own less land and livestock and have
fewer years of schooling. There is roughly gender equality in access to primary schools, though
imbalances exist in c:ompletion rates and access to secondary schools. Gender imbalances are
rooted and sustained by traditional and cultural values. In 1990 the Govemment established the
Ministry of Women Affairs and Children with a view to promote gender equality. A Gender
Budget committee has been created to ensure that sectoral investments respond to the priority
needs of both men and women. The new land legislation has represented an encouraging step
towards securing the r ight of women to own, dispose of and inherit land.
15.
Labor standards. Tanzania's labor laws and regulations have changed little in the past
two decades. Forced labor is punished, and workers have the right to freely organize themselves
and strike. In 1994 the Government and the ILO signed a Memorandum of Understanding to
prohibit, restrict and regulate child labor progressively, under the International Program on the
Elimination of Child Labor. Provisions in the labor laws include measures on minimum wages,
maximum working arid overtime hours, housing, leave, medical and pension allowances. In the
downsizing that has resulted from civil service reform and privatization, adequate separation
packages have been given to redundant staff. Nevertheless, there is no efficient system to handle
industrial relations and labor disputes can endure for months. While labor laws are often
inadequate to support a modern private sector, the majority of workers in the informal and in the
rural sector enjoy little protection. Children work in agriculture from a young age. In the urban
informal sector children below 15 may represent up to 50 percent of the workforce.8
16.
Good governance remains an important goal. The fight for good governance is still to be
won in Tanzania. The graph in Chart 1 shows the behavior of two components of the
International Country Risk Guide (ICRG).9 The first measures the strength of the 'rule of law',
the second measures the degree of corruption in business transactions.10 The rule of law index has
improved in the late ].990s. By contrast, the corruption index has worsened during the late 1990s.
1 Serious cases of corruption
Other indices seem to confirm that corruption has been on the rise&
were documented in the 1995 Report of the Presidential Commission of Inquiry Against
Corruption-the Warioba Report. As in other developing and transition economies, corruption has
increased where liberalization has occurred in a weak institutional context, offering opportunities
to public officials to exploit their privileged access to information for private gain. But it is also
possible that the process of liberalization has increased the perception of corruption, which is now
reported more frequently.

s See ILO (1999), "Findings Ways to Fight Child Labor in Tanzania", World of Work, February.
9 The ICRG reflects the opinions of banks, multinational companies and other institutional investors.
' Both range from I to 6 with higher scores indicating sounder institutions and less corruption respectively. The "rule
of law" is defined as the degree to which the citizens of a country are willing 'to grant to the established institutions the
authority to make and implement laws and adjudicate disputes'. The corruption index indicates that "high-ranking
govemment officials are likely to demand special payments" and "illegal payments are generally expected throughout
lower levels of government in the form of bribes connected with import and export licenses, exchange controls, tax
assessment, policy protection or loans" (see S. Knack and P. Keefer (1995), "Institutions and Economic Performance:
Cross Country tests using altemative institutional measures", Economics and Politics, 7).
" Transparency International's 1998 and 1999 surveys give Tanzania a score of 1.9, within a range of 0 (highly
corrupt) and 10 (highly clean).

5

17.
There is, however, progress. President Mkapa has personally been leading efforts to
improve governance and fight corruption. Earlier political inertia and apparent unwilllingness to
prosecute corrupt high level civil servants is receding. Cases of corruption are increasingly being
brought to the courts and institutional reforms are now being accelerated. In May 1999 the
Government presented a new Plan to combat corruption with measures to improve the legal
framework and restore transparency and accountability in public procurement of works, service
and supplies.
II. MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCEAND PROSPECTS
A. Recent Economic Performance
18.
Growth has increased. Over the last four years Tanzania has established a record of
successful stabilization and structural adjustment. Real GDP growth has reached 4 percent in
1996-99, driven by improved resource allocation and capacity utilization, and inflation has fallen
from 28 percent in 1995 to 6.3 percent in early 2000, the lowest in 25 years. External reserves
have strengthened to 18 weeks of merchandise imports. Performance under the arrangement
supported by the IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) has been satisfactory. The
success in stabilization reflects a policy of monetary restraint, which has kept real interest rates
positive, and a tight fiscal policy. The adoption of a cash budget system and of sector budget
ceilings has allowed the Government to address the large fiscal imbalances of the mid 90s and to
repay domestic debt.
19.
Private investment and agriculture have responded slowly to reforms. The share of
private investment has remained at around 10-12 percent of GDP during the 1990s. Reasons
include a poorly functioning legal framework, administrative and regulatory complexities and
poor infrastructure. Average growth in the agricultural sector has barely reached 3 percent since
the early 1990s, just above the population growth rate. Much of the poor performance during
1995-98 can be attributed to adverse climatic conditions and to the overvaluation of the exchange
rate, which has affected exports. But the implementation of reforms has also been partial. Input
prices have increased substantially with price liberalization, due to the removal of sutbsidies and
lack of competition. At the same time output liberalization has been incomplete and many
distortions remain, thus limiting the benefits of the reforms.
20.
Tanzania is cautiously moving towards regional and global integration. The maximum
tariff rate is 25 percent and the trade weighted average tariff is 14 percent. Tanzania is a member
of the East Africa Community (EAC), The Southern African Development Community (SADEC)
and the Cross-Border Initiative, but it has withdrawn from the Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa (COMESA), in part due to opposition to its aggressive program of tariff
reductions on intra-regional trade. Foreign direct investments have increased substantially, from
$20 million four years ago to the current $183 million per annum. The Government is taking
advantage of the 'Integrated Framework Initiative',' 2 to prepare for the next WTO round.
Exchange rate stability has been achieved but during 1993-98 currency devaluation has failed to
keep pace with the excess of domestic over world inflation. In 1999 however, the real exchange
rate depreciated steeply, offsetting much of the increase it made in the past three years.
12 The Integrated Framework for the provision of trade-related technical assistance for LDCs was crealed in 1996 by
six multilateral agencies - IMF, ITC, UNCTAD, UNDP, World Bank and WTO. Tanzania prepared its own assessment
of trade-related technical assistance needs in 1997 and was committed financial assistance equaling US$1.4 million. As
provided in the Integrated Framework, the Government held a Consultation on Trade-Related Assistance in Dar es
Salaam on October 1999. The support from donors will facilitate the development of export financing and guarantee
schemes, measures to enhance competitiveness and institution building.

6

Chart 2: Tanzania:

Selected Economic Indicators

Inflationand Interest Rates
(percent)

Growth in Real GDP and RealGDP
per Capita (percent)
7
6
5-

Real GDP

30
Inflation Rate

2021

/

/

0-0
-1
1995

1997

Real GDP Per Capita

1999

.2001

10

2003

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Rea1
Disb wit Rate
1995 1996

Cunent Account andFiscal Balances
(after grants, in percent of GDP)
2

1997 1998 1999 2000

2001 2002

Real
Exchange Rate Index
(1992 = 100)

-2

140
1995 1996 1997 1998 19992000 2001 2002 2003

I~~~ncrease
= Appreciation

90

*OCrrentAccount *FiscalBalance

1995 1996

1997 1998 1999 2000

2001

2000-2003: Projections

B. Macroeconomic prospects, external environment and risks
21.
With macroeconomic stabilization substantially complete, the Government of Tanzania
can now focus its attention on creating the conditions for accelerated growth and poverty
reduction. The projections for 2000-2003 presented in Table 1 (our base case scenario) reflect the
ongoing dialogue between the Government, the Bank and the IMF and are consistent with the
scenario prepared in the context of the HIPC (Heavily Indebted Poor Countries) Initiative and the
PRGF. A low case scenario is presented in Annex I.
22.
Annual GDP growth is projected to increase to 6 percent by 2002-03. Monetary policy
will be geared to a decline of the inflation rate to about 4 percent, a rate compatible with that of
Tanzania's main trading partners. Gross official reserves would cover at least 4 months of
imports of goods and non-factor services. The Government will refocus public spending on
poverty reduction priorities. Revenues will increase through a containment of tax evasion,

7

reduction of exemptions, and tax simplification. The cash budget system is expected to be phased
out within the CAS period.
The HIPC Initiative
23.
In April 2000 the IMF and World Bank agreed to support a comprehensive de'btreduction
package for Tanzania under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. Total relief will translate into debt
service relief over time of US$3 billion (or US$2.1 billion in NPV terms). This implies a 54.7
percent reduction in the debt of multilateral and bilateral creditors outstanding at end-June 1999.13
Paris Club creditors will provide their share of assistance with a reduction of about 90percent of
eligible debt. The Government intends to target additional resources coming from debt relief to
the sectors that have the largest impact on poverty and human development and to specific
poverty initiatives. The Medium Term Expenditure Framework for 2000/2003 (currently being
finalized), has added to the traditional priority sectors (health, education, water, agriculture and
lands, roads and the judicial) energy and the Office of the Controller and Auditor General. The
additional resources coming from debt relief would allow to meet about 60 percent of
requirements in these sectors. Within each sector, poverty priorities are being specified in the
context of the PRSP.
External environment and risks
24.
Tanzania is vulnerable to external shocks, commodity price changes and droughts. For
instance tourism revenues may be affected by the spillover effects from conflicts in neighboring
countries. But the sources of foreign exchange earnings are becoming increasingly diversified,
and the current level of international reserves offer sufficient cushion against external shocks.'4 In
addition agricultural output is becoming more diversified. Domestically, revenue shortfalls or
increased expenditures could endanger the adjustment efforts. Moreover, domestic support for the
reforms including a backlash against privatization and foreign investment could be undercut if
higher growth and poverty reduction are not achieved. Finally, worsening governance and
increased corruption may alienate the support of key aid partners and lower investment.
25.
A number of positive circumstances facilitate the realization of the Government's
economic objectives. Tanzania is politically stable and ethnic friction is minimal. Ihe EAC and
similar regional arrangements provide the basis for greater policy and economic coordination in
the area. The HIPC debt relief will enable the country to free up substantial resources from
servicing multilateral debt and increase spending for poverty focussed programs. The economy's
ability to cushion against exogenous shocks has improved, as shown by the resilience in growth
performance despite the adverse weather over the past three years. Finally, the strcng record in
stabilization has created the conditions for a revamping of private sector growth.

At end-June1999,Tanzania'sexternalpublicdebtamountedto US$6.9billionin nominalterms(including
US$1.6
in arrears)andUS$5.1billionin presentvalueterms(as muchof it is on concessional
terms),or 43Spercentof the
three-year
averageofexports.IMFassistance(US$152million)willbe deliveredovera 10-yearperiod.andwillcover
on average58 percentof debt-service
obligations
to theFund.ThedebtreliefprovidedbyIDA(ofUS$1.2billion)will
be spreadovera periodof20 years,covering69.1percentof Tanzania's
debt-service
obligations
to IDA
14 Twoscenarios
havebeensimulatedfor2001.First,an 18percentdeclinein exportprices(equivale;at
to the largest
pricefall thathappenedduringthe last10years).Otherthingsbeingequal, the valueof the shortfallwouldbe around
US$148million.Assumingthat no additionalgrantwouldbe available,the levelof foreignreserveswouldgo down
from4.3to a stillsafelevelof 3.5monthsof imports.Second,tourismrevenuewouldgo downfrom8 percentof GDP
13

(the 1997 value) to zero. This would represent a shortfall of US$338 million, which, again, could be e2sily paid out of
reserves (reserves would go down from 4.3 to 2.6 months of imports).

8

Table 1. Tanzania: Past Results and Macroeconomic Projections for 2000-03
FY95

FY96

Actual
FY97

FY98

FY99

FY00

2.6
-0.4
28.0

4.3
1.4
21.0

4.0
1.2
16.1

3.8
0.9
12.8

4.3
1.5
7.8

5.0
2.2
5.2

5.4
2.6
4.1

6.0
3.2
4.0

6.1
3.3
4.0

Gross domestic saving
Gross domestic fixed investment

2.0
21.9

3.6
18.0

5.4
15.7

3.1
14.9

2.6
14.3

3.1
17.1

4.6
19.2

5.8
20.8

5.8
20.0

Current Account balance
Before grants
After grants

-21.1
-10.5

-15.9
-6.1

-12.0
-2.2

-14.4
-6.1

-15.3
-7.0

-16.0
-6.9

-15.4
-7.2

-14.3
-6.6

-14.0
-6.5

12.5
18.3
-5.8
-2.7

13.2
17.6
-4.4
-0.8

13.5
15.1
-1.6
1.0

12.0
15.2
-2.8
1.0

12.4
16.9
-4.5
-0.3

12.6
18.0
-5.4
-0.7

12.8
18.1
-5.3
-0.5

13.0
18.0
-5.0
-0.2

13.1
18.1
-5.0
-0.2

Foreign Reserves (months of imports)

1.4

1.4

2.8

2.9

4.0

4.2

4.3

4.3

4.3

HIPC relief IDA and IMF 1% of GDP)

-

-

-

-

-

0.2

0.6

0.5

0.6

HIPC relief IDA and IMF (US$ Mil)

-

-

-

-

-

14.0

57.7

65.8

67.5

Real growth of GDP (%)
Per capita real GDP growth (%)
CPI (annual av.%)

Projections
FY01
FY02

FY03

(% of GDP)

Government Finance:
Domestic Revenue
Expenditure
Fiscal balance (before grants)
Fiscal balance (after grants)
Memo Items:

III. THEGOVERNMENT'S
STRATEGY
A. Overview
26.
The Government of Tanzania is currently working on the Tanzania Assistance Strategy
(TAS) and the PRSP. The TAS breaks new grounds in the relationship between Tanzania and its
donors. First, it provides a clear framework to organize donors assistance around the priorities
decided by the Government. Second, it provides directions for increasing the percentage of aid
going through the budget (currently estimated to be only around 40 percent). The PRSP, which is
being prepared with the active involvement of civil society (recent consultations were held across
Tanzania) will introcluce short and medium term targets on poverty reduction and human
development, as well as the required budgetary allocations. Both the TAS and the PRSP work are
firmly rooted in the "Development Vision 2025" which specifies the country's long term
development goals and in the National Poverty Eradication Strategy (NPES), which discusses
how far the Vision can be advanced in the period through 2010 (see Box I).

9

Box I: The Dee
National oer

m

Vision 2025(199)andthe
EradiationfSitraeg (i1997

DevelopmentVision2025
The paper envisagesthat Tanzaniain 2025will beaaiwt
andeconomic
, rle
of law, peace,stbility and unity. Tihtieo
w ha Yc seog,selfrlncpti
and
sustainableeconomywith an educatedpopulaton and a cutrlrenaissance. Speic targets for
2025 are: universalprimary education n the eicatioo
l iteac;access to primary healt
care and qualiy reproductivices
for all; unive accessto safewater; gender eui
nd
rates Sby0
thelureso
empowermenttoftwomen;reution o nat adl matinalmortt
and fodscrt;
and elmnto
of co'rruptio.
currentlevels; oo selfsufiec
Specificgoalsfor 2010 in the PovertyErdication Strategy
it by the ear
e
eicat
reduce ot p
ve
Povery:
*
2025. Educai6n~ civ
nvra
rmr
dcto,adices
ucinlltrc
o9
percent;expand secondaryeducation(one secondaryschoolper ward. Water:increas ae
to
ncrease accesstoitary
waterto 90 percent of the populationwitin adistace 400 me
ition.
sevIere
servicesbiyat least 50 percent
among childrenunder-5 fom tr ratetof 6 percentto 2tpecnt orless and moderate malnition
from 44 percentto 22 percent;reduce ternal mortltrate byhalf 400 to 200'per100,000
lessthan 10percent.
reducethe rate ofunemploymentto 'mlent:
live births.
27.
The strategic directions of the TAS and the PRSP are in line with commitments to key
international development goals. They encompass three priorities: i) creating higher groswth and
economic opportunities for the poor; ii) building capabilities; iii) increased empowerment and
improved accountability. While not formally a pilot country for the Comprehensive Development
Framework (CDF), Tanzania's development strategy is firmly in line with CDF objectives.
B. Creating Higher Growth and Economic Opportunities for the Poor
28.
The Government's over-riding priority for reducing poverty is to attain a higher long
term sustainable growth rate. Beside maintaining macroeconomic stability, the Government's
strategy rests on three pillars: 1) developing and implementing a new environmentally sustainable
rural strategy; 2) promoting private sector investments and participation; and 3) investing in
infrastructure.
29.
Developing an environmentally sustainable rural strategy. This has highest priority as
most of the poor are located in rural areas and are engaged in agriculture. The strategy will have
three objectives: i) conserving the depletable natural resources on which the poor depend for their
livelihood; ii) commercializing agriculture and making it more dynamic and productive; and iii)
increasing linkages with urban areas to create income opportunities for youth and uneimployed
migrants.'5 The Government will continue implementing policies aimed at the conservation and
management of the environment and at raising awareness on sustainable use of natural resources.

15These objectives will be pursued through: reducing trade barriers across regions; rationalizing taxes; privatizing the
remaining parastatal farms; strengthening input and output markets; implementing the new Land Laws; improving
agricultural service provision with a view of getting them closer to small farmers; and developing a framework for
micro-finance and rural financial institutions to address lack of credit.
10

30.
Increasing private investment and private sector participation. The Government intends
to enhance the role of the private sector in order to accelerate growth, decrease unemployment,
particularly in urban areas, and provide income opportunities for the poor through: (i)
privatization. About 80 percent of the remaining public enterprise sector (in terms of
employment and turnover) will be privatized by 2004, including all major utility and
infrastructure public enterprises (ports, railways, electricity, telecommunications and mining); (ii)
strengthening the regulatory framework in key markets to increase competition and enhance
transparency. Privatization will be accompanied by the development of competitive regulatory
frameworks and new institutional arrangements;'6 (iii) improving the business environment, to
expand private and foreign investments; and (iv) increasing the efficiency of the financial sector
andfinancial services for small businesses. Detailed measures in these areas are in Annex B9.
31.
Improving crucial infrastructure - energy and roads. In the energy sector, the
Government's objectives are to improve the security of power supply and to increase access to
electricity. The Tanzania Electric Supply Company (TANESCO) would be unbundled and
privatized. A new regulatory framework for the petroleum sector will be approved in 2000
making provisions frora liberalized market. In the gas sector, the Government will encourage the
development of dornestic gas markets under private ownership. The Government is developing a
long-term transport sector strategy. In the short and medium term the focus will be in improving
maintenance and rehabilitation of existing trunk roads and rural feeder roads. Funding for
recurrent road maintenance costs is to be ensured via a Roads Fund through targeting revenue
from user charges.
C. Building Capabilities
32.
A central objective of the Government's strategy is building up the assets of the poor
through better health, education, and improved access to public services. In health, the
Government will implement the ongoing Health Sector Reform Program, which started in 1994.
A three year Program of Work and a one year Plan of Action have been prepared to implement
the reform under a sector wide approach (SWAP).17 To address major causes of mortality, the
Government will implement individual action plans for malaria, increase immunization coverage
and contraceptive prevalence. An AIDS plan includes measures to change behavior and raise
public awareness. To this end, the Government will establish a strong national body responsible
for implementing the third Medium Term Plan for Prevention and Control of HIV/AIDS which
has been supportedlby the UNAIDS and other donors.
33.
Education. Higher growth requires the accumulation of high level technical and
entrepreneurial skills. Over the years, Tanzania's ability to mobilize the skills required by new
businesses and reap the benefits from technological progress worldwide has been weakening. In
the primary education sector, the Government will update the 1997 Basic Education Master
Plan"8 , and develop district based plans for improving school and teaching conditions at the
Two multi-sectoral regulatory institutions are being created - the Tanzania Public Utility Regulatory Authorijty
(dealing with electricity, telecom, water, post and natural gas) and the Tanzania Transportation Regulatory Authority
(dealing with maritime and ports, roads, railways and aviation). Each of the sectors will then re-examine and amend the
relevant sectoral legislation to ensure a coherent and competitive legislative framework.
17 Priority areas include: (i) strengthening the delivery of cost-effective primary health services, particularly at the
district level, through decentralization and capacity building; (ii) development of national capacity and systems through
program support and streamlined implementation arrangements; and (iii) improvement in health care financing through
better targeting of government resources and diversifying financing mechanisms.
is The Plan aims to secure an 85 percent gross enrollment rate for primary schooling and 80 percent completion rate; to
reduce the salary/non salary ratio in the primary education sector from 93:7 to 80:20 and the completion of institutional
reforms by 2002.
16

11

primary level. The Government will articulate and implement theSecondary Education Master
Plan (SEMP), with the objective of improving quality and raising enrolment rates in secondary
education schools. A plan to rationalize a number of underutilized and inefficient tertiary
education institutions will also be implemented.
34.
Water and sanitation. The Government's objective is to ensure accessible and adequate
water supply and sanitation services to the majority of the population in both rural and urban
areas. This will be achieved through: i) creation of decentralized financially autonomous water
boards; ii) subcontracting of the Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Authority (DAWASA)
management to a private operator and allowing community groups to assume ownership of water
supply schemes; iii) introducing sound pricing; and iv) developing local planning and operational
capacities. Removal of water subsidies in urban areas will free resources for the rehabilitation of
supplies in rural areas. Emphasis in rural areas will be on rehabilitation and upgrading of existing
schemes.
D. Empowerment and Accountability
35.
Poverty reduction is likely to be achieved faster and to be sustainable if the poor are
given a voice in the design and implementation of poverty alleviation measures. Good
governance is also a necessary condition for sustainable private sector development.
Empowerment, accountability and improved governance are key objectives of the Government, to
be realized through (i) improved management of public resources; (ii) decentralization; (iii)
implementation of anti-corruption and financial accountability measures.
36.
The Government is stepping up efforts to improve the management of public resources
and put the process of institutional reform on solid ground. Important building blocks of the
strategy are: i) the rationalization of the role and functions of the State; ii) the establishment of a
credible and transparent budget process through the extension of the Integrated Financial
Management System (now covering the central Government) to all ministries and regionasand the
implementation of the performance management system; 9iii) restoring ethical conduct and
standards of performance for all public servants; and iv) improving the structure and level of civil
service salaries.
37.
Tanzania has recently embarked on a prqcess of political decentralization through a
Local Government Reform Program (LGRP), with the aim of improving accountability and the
2 started in 1999 with around one third of
quality of public services. Implementation of the LGRP
the districts participating and will be phased in by 2004. With the reform, the city, municipal,
town and district councils will be democratically elected. They will be fully responsible for: (i)
service delivery in education, health, water, roads and agriculture; (ii) social development, and
(iii) maintenance of law and order. Financial support to local governments is provided through
block grants, based on the costs of delivering minimum standards of services that hiave to be
attained by each local authority in the sectors of health, education, water, roads and agriculture.2 '
Local authorities are accountable for their spending, and the central government plays t:he role of
auditor. Local governments are empowered to collect "own revenues" from local taxes and fees.
19 Implementation of the performance management system is carried out through two important tools piloted since

1998 - Performance budgeting and the Medium Term Expenditure Framework.
20 The LPRG is coordinated by the Ministry of Regional Administration and Local Government. The LGRP is
supported by seven international assistance agencies (EU, Netherlands, Denmark, U.K., Ireland, Finland, and Norway)
and by budgetary allocations from the government.
2iThe principles for setting of national minimum service delivery standards are: being financially quantifiable,
fundable, achievable, compatible with sector plans, and measurable.

12

38.
Anti-corruption strategy andfinancial accountability. Success with institutional reforms
holds out prospects for improved governance. However, it requires a fundamental change in the
values and attitudes on the part of those who, in many cases, are benefiting from the status quo.
Corruption in the public sector is still widespread and represents one of the main constraints for
effective utilizatijon of domestic resources. In 1999 the Government developed a National AntiCorruption Straj'egy and Action Plan, and sectoral plans are now being prepared. Diagnostic
surveys in a number of ministries and agencies will be undertaken to monitor the implementation
of the Plan. In addition, the Government will: review procurement law and regulations, publicize
all contracts and tender results, and amend the Public Leadership Code of Ethics Act. Second,
the government will strengthen financial accountability. The Office of the Controller and Auditor
General (OCAG), which monitors the proper use of public funds and investigates incidents of
corruption, will be reinforced and adequately funded. Finally, the Government will implement
the Legal Sector Reform Program to strengthen the judicial system, particularly the primary
magistrate courts.
39.
Combating corruption requires a long and sustained fight. The Government has put in
place a program of institutional reforms and specific measures that is adequate. But ultimately the
outcome will delpend on political commitment, particularly at the top level, and a willingness to
prosecute and convict alleged crimes. In addition, it is critical that citizens believe they can refuse
to pay bribes, denounce corrupt practice, and not be penalized for this.
IV. THE BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

40.
This CAS has been informed by the strategic priorities defined in the TAS and in the
PRSP, consultations with the Government, the donor community and civil society and the results
from the last Client Feedback Survey (see Annex IV). Lessons from OEG and OED's Reviews
have been largelly incorporated. There are no areas of disagreement between the Bank and the
Government in the development agenda and in the major priority areas.
A. Consultations
41.
This CAS mirrors and supports the Government's vision of a society free of poverty, and
its development agenda, as discussed in the previous sections.2 2 At a very early stage (June-July
1999) the Bank arranged consultations with a large cross section of Tanzania civil society. Key
priorities such as accelerating growth and improving delivery of public services were largely
shared. People also manifested a strong desire for 'law and order' in a society free of corruption
(see Box II). Three rounds of consultations were undertaken in October 1999, January and April
2000 to discuss with Government and various stakeholders the role of the CAS within the TAS
and the PRSP.

The Governmenl's ongoing reform program has been supported by the ESAF program of the IMF, the Structural
Adjustment Credit of IDA, the SAL of the African Development Bank, the fifth rescheduling with the Paris Club and
the Multilateral Debt Fund agreement.
22

13

Box 11: CAS Consultations With Civil Society: Key Findings
In June 1999,the World Bank helda seriesof consultativemeetingswith a largecross-sectionof Tanzania
civil society23in the Dar es Salaam, Arusha, Kilimanjaro,Mtwara,Morogoroand Mwanza Regions (at
regional,district,ward and villagelevels),and in Zanzibar.The objectiveof these discussionswas to learn
about Tanzanians'perceptionsof the current economicsituation,public services,developmentalpriorities
and constraintsto growth and povertyalleviation,relative to three to five years ago. The key findingsof
these consultations are reported below.

Economic situation - Most peoplebelieve that the economicsituationhas deterioratedand reforms have
exacerbatedinequalitiesfurthermarginalizingthe rural poor. Perceivedprivate sector constraints include
poor infrastructure,underdevelopedmarkets, lack of capital and creditand corruption.On the 'other hand,
peoplebelievethat the reforms will eventuallybenefitthe economy.Somesmall-scalefarmersfeel positive,
about the liberalizationmeasuresas they are free to sell their produceto'private buyers for cash.
Governance - The President is widelyrespectedand trusted and seen to have made a determined ttempt
to listen to people and promote greatertransparencyand economicaridadministrativereforms.People do
not feel that enoughhas been done to nurture democracyand corruptionis seen as a corrosiveforce whose6`
root causeshave not been adequatelyaddressed.Some feel thahe governmenthas failedto enorcmeclear
'rules of the game' or otherwise provide the necessary enabling environment.
Public service delivery - In the mainland, there is a general belief that educational standards have
deteriorated and that the introductionof cost-sharmg imposes undue hardships on poor families. In
Zanzibar, on the contrary, the sectors performance is viewed as generally satisfactory.
ICth
services are seen as satisfactory, although both the mainland and Zanzibar have numernus r-eprtso
shortagesof qualified doctors,drugs and facilitiesin rural areas. Pu tension services fr agrC
and livestock, on the other hand, are

almostuniversally viewed as iadequate andneglected.'O'1.`

Culture - One legacyof socialismis that most people cotinue to believe the Statehas a fnidme
lo
in promoting development and providing social services. To a certain extent this h ledito't-'e
discouragement of private initiative and personal responsibility.
The Outlook - The overwhelmingmajorityof people think that the country has the potilfor
a
e
future becauseof its naturalresourceendowment,locationr,and politicaland social stabityToeaiehs
potential,however,will take a long tie
from 15 years to a geniertion.Some peSopethktha
e prerequisitesfor this emerging bright future are: a changeof culture in which people tke responsibiliyfor
their own destiny; and strong leadershipfrom a Govemmentwith vision and integrty. At thc top of
everybody'swish list is a desire for "law and order" and for transparentand competentpolicymanagement.
In Zanzibar,private sector representativessuggested the followingprorities: strengtheningthe business
community and enhancing marketing capacity/potential.

B. Lessons from past experience
42.

*

What worked

Since the last CAS there have been significant successes on the economic front. Government
ownership of the program has increased significantly. Since 1998 the annual P'ublic
Expenditure Review (PER) and the closely linked Medium Term Expenditure Framework
(MTEF) have been carried out in a highly participatory manner - under government

Including: small farmers and entrepreneurs in formal and informal sectors, industry and trade representatives, NGO
representatives, journalists, academics, social service providers (teachers, health care workers, etc.), government
officials and elected representatives (from village chairmen to Members of Parliament).
23

14

leadership. The formulation of the TAS is the latest example of how seriously the
Government is taking charge of its own development strategy.
*

There are new productive relationships with donors based on active cooperation. Since 199524
the Government and donors have agreed on improved aid coordination and integration of aid
within Tanzania's development priorities and budget (see Annex II). There is now greater
transparency in aid delivery and accountability for its use. Donors participate in regular
macro and sector-wide meetings under government leadership.

*

Implementation of Bank projects has improved dramatically. About 90 percent of the Bank
portfolio is now rated satisfactory (see Annex III).

*

IFC has made important contributions to private sector development through financing. IFC
support for privatization has been critical for key transactions, such as NBC. Other
investments in the financial sector have helped introduce new products and services, and
increase competition. IFC has also supported small and medium enterprises (SMEs) across a
range of sectors, with financing and capacity building.

*

Our country dialogue has been strengthened, in the last couple of years, by the BankGovernment collaborative production of analytical reports. Joint Economic and Sector Work
(ESW) ensures that the analysis and the recommendations are shared and internalized

43.

What did not work

-

As discussed in previous sections, the benefits of growth have not reached the poor and social
indicators anc access to social services have deteriorated. Our macroeconomic dialogue has
not been fully extended to adequately engage the Government and other stakeholders on the
social consequences of adjustment and to provide sufficient support for measures to sustain
social indicators.

-

The Bank has not managed to address the lack of good, reliable infonnation, particularly in
the social sectors, and their importance for constructing a welfare monitoring system.

*

The Bank has over-estimated implementation capacity, particularly in sector ministries.
Equally, it has over-estimated the pace of institutional reforms and capacity building.

*

Collaboration between Bank and IFC staff has been effective at the project level but has not
extended strategically to address private sector development (PSD) constraints.

OED and OEG reviews
44.
In 1999 both the OEG and the OED prepared evaluations of the Bank group
operations in Tanzania (see Box III). This CAS fully shares the recommendations made
by OED. The formulation of the CAS program has benefited from the insights of these
analyses. Many of the recommendations of the OEG review have also shaped the
preparation of the CAS, which is a joint exercise with IFC. Collaboration between Bank
24 In

1995 a report prepared by an independent group of consultants (the 'Helleiner Report') found that in the absence
of a national framework donors had assumed, over-time, a greater role in defining and designing policies, thus creating
little institutional capacity within Tanzania. Since resources were directly managed and controlled by donors, this gave
rise to the creation of parallel financial systems.

15

and IFC staff will be facilitated by joint work in PSAC I and F'SAC II; and by the
creation of Joint Bank/IFC Global Practice Groups in Telecommunications, Mining, and
Oil and Gas, all important sectors for Bank Group activity in Tanzania.

Box III: OED's and OEG's Findings and Recommendations
OED
The Bank's Operations EvaluationDepartnent (OED) prepared a Country AssistanceEvaluation(CAE) in 1999.It indicatedthat four decadesof Bank assistanceto Tanzaniahave had only limited`l
impact on growth and poverty reduction. However, initial results from the new Bank str;ategy,
initiatedin 1996,were consideredencouraging.The reviewsuggeststhe need to intensify effortson a:
range of issues.Two are summarizedbelow:
* Promoting balanced, long-term growth requires the development and implementation of
strategies directed at a broad number of components- growth, social policy and the budget,`
structural reform and gender issues. For instance, supporting a strategy for private secto
developmentwill help to create a broad constituencyfor reform,and developinga rural strat
focussingon constraintsto agriculturalproduction,will provide significantpotential for poverty
reduction.Addressingdistortionsin socialpolicy and improvingthe poverty focus of projectsin
other sectors is also a key objective that can be helped along by leveraging World :Bankt
assistance. And by being aware of the linkages betweendifferentreforms - public enteprise, ;
financial,judicial,regulatory- Bank strategyshould guard againstthe possiblyperverse impact
of foreignassistanceon domesticcapacity building. Finally,with appropriatelydesignedcreditsthereare good opportunitiesfor improvingthe Bank's projects'gender impact.
*Improving aid coordination.In line with the TAS objective,the Bank can help in renioving
inefficienciesof fragmentedand parallel aid delivery systemsby encouraging other donors to"
assistthe Governmentin its effort to increaseselectivity,coherenceand harmonizationiof donor
resources.
OEG
In 1999 QEG prepared a Country Impact Review of its activitiesin Tanzania during I1986-9$.The
Review concludedthat althoughmuch progress has been made, the country is not yet an atactive
location for pnvate investment. The review describes the principal
to ivatetors ;tbarriers
developmentas, i) slow privatization- between 1993 and 1998 only about halfthe parsta
enterpriseshave been privatized;ii) incompletefinancial sector reform- begun in 1991, it has beeng
"disappointinglyslow'; iii) strong aid dependence;there is evidenceof projectsthat could have bee
financedprivatelybut that havebeen displacedby aid; iv) poor infrastructureand human resources-;
even comparedto other Sub-SaharanAfrican countries.This penalizesinvestorswith unreliableand
high-costelectricity,high transportationcosts,poor communicationsand a labor force lackingmodem
skills; v) social and governmentalambivalenceabout private sector development.The deep-seated
reluctanceto open the economyto private ownershipand marketforces manifests itself in complex
and unpredictableregulatoryregimesrelatedto investment,property,taxes and employment.Irntermsi
of developmentimpact, of the 20 investmentsevaluated by OEG (representingabout 70 percent of
total projects approved since 1986), 60 percent had a satisfactorydevelopmentoutcome. In eight
cases the developmentimpact could have been improvedthroughpolicy and administrativereforms.
In addition,only 45 percent of the investmentsevaluatedhad a satisfactoryinvestmentperformance.
The review recommendsimprovingthe enabling environment;establishingexpectationsat approval
and monitoringresults while identifyingconstraints;establishingstandardsfor service by providing
training for staff and managersand monitoringcompliance;and improvingcoordinationbetweenIFC
and Bankstaff.

16

C. The Strategy
45.
Our mission in Tanzania is to help the Government reduce poverty through the promotion
of higher growth, and interventions that build the assets of the poor, reduce their vulnerability and
promote better governance and accountability. The CAS fully recognizes the leadership of the
Government in defining the development agenda. It supports the Government's desire to enter
into more productive relationships with partners, based on the adoption of sector wide strategic
approaches, on the phased switching from projects to programs and on greater control of
budgetary and procurement functions. This new direction was explicit in recent speeches by
President Mkapa and is fully supported by donors.25
46.
Besides clialogue on macroeconomic and public expenditure management, the CAS
proposes to focus lending and non-lending interventions in four areas of strategic importance. The
choice has been informed by Government's preferences, a consideration of both the Bank and
IFC comparative advantages, relative to that of other donors, and by the potentially large impact
of these interventions in the economy. They include:
*
*
*
*

Private sector and infrastructure development, to support the Government's objective of
making privale sector the engine of growth;
Sustainable rural development, to improve the livelihood of the majority of the poor who live
in rural areas;
Improved social infrastructure, to improve social indicators and enhance access for the poor
to essential public services; and
Public sector reform and institution building to increase the effectiveness of public service
delivery and improve governance.

47.
This program does involve a broadening of our effort from the macroeconomic focus of
the last CAS. This reflects judgment that such a broader effort is now essential to ensure that the
benefits of the reforms are realized by the population, particularly the poor in the rural areas.
However, considerable selectivity will be exercised in the choice of Bank interventions across
these areas. The framework for this decision making will be based on Government preferences
(ensuring that their ownership role is being enhanced through the process), the comparative
advantage of the Bank, the relative areas of strength of the donor community, and, finally, on
those areas where we feel impact on poverty will be greatest. In exercising this selectivity there
are some areas of past activity where the Bank will not be involved. For example, the IDA
program will involve virtually no parastatal investment except where necessary to support the
entry of a private partner, such as in the Dar es Salaam Water Supply Project and in the Songo
Songo Project. This directly reflects the movement to the private sector as the engine of growth
and is a dramatic change from past programs where parastatal involvement was very broad.
Second, we propose no multisectoral investment in district level projects - where we feel other
members of the donor community have a comparative advantage. Third, there will be no IDA
investment in the provision of credit - again reflecting the fact that this should be left to the
private sector.
48.
In addition to excluding certain areas in the program, selectivity will be exercised in the
activities pursued within these four priorities. First, there is increased Government ownership in
many areas (for example in the preparation of the Public Sector Reform Project). Second, the
Bank should be prepared to relinquish leadership to other donors in areas which they have a
25 See President B.W. Mkapa (1999), "Tanzania's vision regarding partnership based co-operation", speech at the
Workshop on Making Partnerships Work on The Ground, Stockholm.

17

specific interest to support. For example, the Bank did the initial study on corruption but the
UNDP and the European Commission (EC) are now taking the lead in working with Government
on its Action Program in that area. Third, there is increasingly joint execultion of analytic work for example in the case of the CEM. The UK and the EC have being leading the analytical work
in the education sector, which is now an essential input into our proposed project work. Finally,
the sector groups that are emerging are typically being led by bilateral conors but the Bank is
playing an active role in supporting them. Overall we are confident that the proposed program
both insures Bank involvement in key issues involving the poverty program but will be executed
in a way that both ensures ownership and maximizes the efficient use of Bank and other partner
resources.
Table 2. A Framework for Development Partnership
Creatin hiher Growth

Buildi Capabilities

Empowerentandaccountability

Par-ty

Activity

N1_
cn

>

LittieFocus

>

mSome

E15

~

Z

0

>

-0

~

a)

=

Focus El

Significant
Focus

HighFocus

49.
The proposed lending program comprises (i) quick-disbursing, policy-based lending
operations in support of overall and sector reforms; (ii) high-priority specific investments,
particularly those focussed on critical infrastructure, social services and environmental protection
and (iii) institutional development operations in support of capacity-building and governance
efforts. In addition, assuming that sufficient progress is made on public expenditure management
and governance, the Bank suggests moving toward budget support by the third year of the GAS
cycle with an operation for poverty reduction and environmentally sustainable rural development
through the instrument of a Public Expenditure Reform Credit (PERC). This would be justified
on several grounds: first, the improvement in the macroeconomic environment and budget
management would eliminate the need for Bank support in the form of traditional adjustment
lending; second, the preparation and implementation of the PRSP would make possible to
address issues of poverty reduction across sectors in a systematic way. F-inally,the PERC' would
be a better instrument than other forms of lending to address implementation constraints that have
arisen in sector ministries.

18

50.
The last CAS presented to the Board in June 1997 presented a lending scenario of
US$200 million, predicated on meeting ESAF targets and progress in various areas of the reform
program. A low case scenario (US$90-100 million) as well as a high case scenario (US$300
million or more) vere also included. The current CAS increases the Bank's lending assistance.
Macroeconomic stabilization in Tanzania is largely completed and substantial progress has been
made in reforming the economy. Consistent with the recent 'aid effectiveness' literature, this is
the best time for stepping up financial assistance. In a good policy environment this would result
in faster growth, h2igherprivate investment and rapid gains in social indicators. We propose the
following scenarics.
51.
Base case scenario: US$260 million a year over the CAS period. Under this scenario
macroeconomic arid policy conditions for the PRGF would be met consistent with the anticipated
schedules. Equally, PSAC I conditions, which include measures in the areas of governance,
financial management, tax reforms and improvement of the business environment would be met.
In addition, the Government would achieve the commitments under the PRSP for social sector
improvement, implemented through the MTEF.

Table 3. TanzaniiaCAS- Lending Program FY01-03 (US$ millions)
FY01

FY02

Primary Education A.PL
TASAF
Dar Water Supply
Rural Water LIL
Regional Trade

Mill.
100
50
45
5
10

Total Base case

210

FY03
Mill.
170
20
40
50
20

Songo Songo
Soil Fertility
Account./Governance
Forest Conservat.
HIV/AIDS

Roads Rehabilitation
Lake Victoria ll
PSAC 11
Local Gov. capacity
Educat. Ration.

Mill.
80
30
100
40
30

PERC-Poverty-rural

280
200

300
developm.-environment

High case

210

300

480

52.
Low case scerario: US$100 million a year over the CAS period - the low case scenario,
would materialize if the Government is off-track with the PRGF and PRSP programs and if there
is slippage in the expected timing for the HIPC completion point beyond the CAS horizon. The
following high priority social sector projects would be retained under the low case scenario:
Primary Education APL and Rural Water LIL for FYOI; Soil Fertility and Forest Conservation
Projects for FY02; and Lake Victoria II, Local Government Capacity and Education
Rationalization for FY03.
53.

High case scenario:

Progress in all areas of the reform program (as specified in the

matrix of actions, Annex B9) would make it possible to move, by the end of the CAS period,
towards higher lending. Thus, for the last year of the CAS period, Bank lending would increase
to the high scenario, about US$480 million. The triggers in Box IV would guide the move to the
high case scenario. This would imply not just an addition of US$200 million to the base case
lending scenario; more importantly, it would involve a move from traditional projects to budget
support through a. PERC. The PERC would be the instrument through which the Bank would
address the issues of poverty reduction identified in the PRSP across sectors in a systematic way.

19

Box IV: Triggers for High Case Scenario
Triggers
Macro
*
Maintain a stable macroeconomic
environment and poverty focus of public
expenditure
Sector Performance
*
Preparation of sector wide programs in
health, education, water, agriculture and
environment; significant improvement in the
implementation capacity of these ministries
Governance
*
Carry out diagnostic surveys in the ministry
of Works, Education, Health, Home Affairs,
the Judiciary, Attorney General
*
Dissemination of the national and sector
specific anti-corruption plans; implement
sector specific action plans against
corruption in the six areas surveyed
*
Adoption of the Public Audit Bill
*
Adoption of new procurement law that
permits greater transparency and integrity
*
Timely issuing of the office of Controller
and Auditor General's (CAG) reports and
Treasury Minutes in response to audit
queries
*
Publish Central Tender Board results
* Full implementation of the IFMS, including
all budgetary votes and tax and non tax
revenues, and recording of all expenditure
commitments, payments, and arrears. Roll
out of IFMS to 28 local districts

Means of verification
*

Satisfactory implementation of PRGF and PRSP; MTEF
documents approved by Cabinet

*

Submission of programs and strategies for strengthening
implementation capacity

*

Submissions of survey results

*

Submissions of approved anti-corruption plans and
implementation progress reports for each sector

*
*

Publication in the official gazette of relevant legislation
Publication in the official gazette of relevant legislation

*

CAG reports and Treasury Minutes

*
*

Copies of published tender results
Public Expenditure Review Reports

D. Description of the lending program
54.
Overall, our program underlies the contribution of various sectors to sustainable
development. For example, the quality of social sector services is of vital concern to the rural
population and progress there will be essential to the well-being of the rural poor. Physical
infrastructure improvements both offer the prospect of opening up areas to the market economy
(through improved roads) and providing services that simply don't reach rural areas at present.
Finally, the quality and efficiency of the public service will be a key determinant of whether
Government services are implemented and provided to many rural areas. Our work across all the
areas below will be vital for reaching sustainable development and making progress towards
poverty reduction.
55.
Private sector development(PSD) and infrastructure development The OED Country
Assistance Review commented on the lack of an effective PSD strategy in Tanzania; OEG's
evaluation criticized IFC for a lack of focus on an enabling environment for private sector. The
current and planned operations will address PSD comprehensively.

20

*

Enabling Environment. The first Programmatic Structural Adjustment Credit (PSAC 1), to
address the persistent obstacles to private investment is being presented to the Bank's Board
with this CAS; the second PSAC (PSAC II) is expected to be presented to the Board during
FY03. In addi.tion, a proposed Regional Trade Facilitation Project will address issues of
regional integration.

*

Financial SecLor. The Rural and Micro-Financial Services Project and the Second Financial
Institutions Development Project (approved in FY00 will continue to address structural
weaknesses in the financial sector including the design of a legal, regulatory and supervisory
framework for micro-finance. IFC will focus on the establishment of new non-bank financial
institutions arid on strengthening capital markets. It will help NMB's restructuring and
privatization. Other activities include the potential development of a mortgage finance
company, and a discount house in addition to advisory work and technical assistance.

*

Infrastructure. Inadequate infrastructure remains the most severe constraint to PSD. The
Bank Group will address infrastructure shortcomings, with a focus on sector policy reform
and increased private participation. In the power sector, the Bank Group will assist the
Government in implementing the Power Sector Restructuring Program; and it will encourage
the development of domestic gas markets and generate low cost power through the Songo
Songo Gas Development and Power Generation Project.

*

In the roads sector, the Bank will contribute to the proposed Roads Rehabilitation Program,
to help eliminate the backlog of rehabilitation works, assuming that progress is made in
improving the institutional framework for financing and managing the road network. The
Dar es Salaam Water Supply and Sanitation Project is aimed at achieving reliable and
affordable water and sanitation services, initially through a private management agreement.
In rural areas, development of projects, through local governments, private sector and
community management will be tested through a Rural Water Supply and Sanitation LIL

*

Supporting SMEs, Mining and Tourism. IFC will expand its investments in SMEs, focussing
on pioneering projects. After supporting tourism development with investments in hotels and
tour operators, IFC is shifting its focus to supporting smaller eco-tourism facilities, and in
financing privatization. In mining, IFC is seeking to support the construction of new
production facilities as the sector moves from exploration to development and production and
to provide teclnical assistance on sectoral development.

*

Privatization. The Privatization & Private Sector Development Project (approved in FY00)
supports the Govemment's privatization and banking restructuring programs, and the
establishment of an institutional framework for regulation of infrastructure and utilities. IFC
will seek opportunities to facilitate privatization transactions across sectors, in addition to
infrastructure.

56.
Sustainable rural development. The improvement of the rural lives in Tanzania is the
most important challenge facing the Government. The sense that the benefits resulting from
economic reform have not reached the rural poor is acutely perceived in Tanzania and it will be
critical to develop a program addressing these concerns directly. In addition to the ongoing
dialogue on the policy, incentive and regulatory framework of the agricultural sector the Bank is
preparing the Soil Fertility and Agricultural Recapitalization Project, to help develop agricultural
input availability for small holders. Support for communities, particularly in rural areas, will be
provided through the Tanzania Social Assistance Fund. The project will provide self-targeting
and low wage public works to the poorest. Support for the environment would be rendered

21

through two projects. The Forestry Conservation and Management Project, will assist the
government in developing a framework for the sustainable management and conservation of
forest resources and for the involvement of communities and private sector. The Lake Victoria II
operation will assist in completing the rehabilitation of the lake ecosystem. In order to ensure
that the various policy constraints identified in the analytical work on rural development are
addressed through an integrated program, a Poverty/Rural Development Environmental/ PERC is
proposed in the last year of the CAS period under the high case scenario.
57.
Improved social infrastructure. The Bank supports Government efforts to improve social
indicators, particularly for the poor. A suggested Primary Education APL would address the
critical situation of the primary education system in Tanzania including the budgetary, personnel
and system management issues associated with achieving a more decentralized system of
education. Support for policies to rationalize public expenditures on higher education will be
given through the Education Rationalization Project. In health, the Bank and other donors are
supporting a Health Sector Development Project, which is being presented for Board
consideration with this CAS. Finally, a suggested project would support the Government's fight
against AIDS. This would be the first of a series of HIV/AIDS Projects aimed at combating the
epidemic and tackling the consequences of AIDS (see Box V). The size of the epidemic, as well
as the growing number of AIDS orphans will put, in the near future, an unprecedented burden of
care on families and the social welfare system, thus requiring special efforts from the
Government and the donor community.
58.
Public sector reform and institution building. The recently approved Public Sector
Reform Program is aimed at improving accountability, transparency and resource management
for service delivery. An Accountability/Governance project would strengthen government efforts
to fight corruption and improve governance. A Local Government Capacity Building/ Slums
upgrading project would help building capacity in local councils to provide basic infrastructures
and services. The project would include a component on urban community slums upgrading, i.e.
targeted to infrastructure and service improvements in low income areas.
E. Non Lending Services
59.
The Bank with Tanzanian collaboration and the International Food Policy Research
Institute is concluding and will be disseminating two major pieces of analytical work - the
Country Economic Memorandum entitled Tanzania at the Turn of the Century: From Reforms to
Sustained Growth and Poverty Reduction and - Agriculture in Tanzania since 1986: Follower or
Leader of Growth? Successful annual reviews of the Public Expenditure have been cornpleted
since 1997, in a fully participatory manner, and will be continued. In the area of macroeconomics
and trade, a proposed report for FYOI on "Tanzania's Integration in Global and Regional
Markets" would analyze potential benefits from regional and global integration. This work,
together with two additional ESWs, a Financial Sector Assessment and a Private Sector Profile
would provide the analytical framework for the PSAC II in FY03. Sector work will be aimed at
preparing sector wide strategies and improving the linkages between sectoral policies and the
overall development strategy, essential steps for moving, by the end of the CAS period, to budget
support.

22

Box V: The Need to Scale Up the Fight Against HIV/AIDS
To date, efforts in Tanzania to fight HIV/AIDS have been slow and inadequate. However, the
Govermmenthas prepared a strategic plan, the Third Medium-Term Plan on Aids and has put in
place the basic institutional framework to combat this epidemic(a National HIV/AIDS Council
charged with coordinating all the AIDS-related activities, a secretariat and a National HIV/AIDS
Advisory Board). Leadership to tackle the HIV/AIDS problem as a development issue has been
lacking and is now the key constraint. Moreover, there is limited capacity to manage and
coordinate multi-sectoral responses involving both the public and private sector, and to encourage
broader participation in the effort.
The Bank has included a sub-component (US$4.3 million ) in the Health Sector Development
Project to help strengthening the institutional framework and the capacity to coordinate responses
to the epidemic. A National HIV/AIDS Fund will be set up to finance AIDS-related programs.
Disbursement of this component is subject to submission of an implementation strategy and of the
necessary institutional arrangements. The TASAF operation will help communities to tackle
HIV/AIDS (through financing of supplies for non-prescription drugs, ointments ) and by funding
training to commrunitybased care givers. The Bank is committed to addressing AIDS issues in its
lending program, particularly in education, water supply, roads and rural development and in the
economic and sector work. Moreover, the Bank is ready to accelerate the preparation of an
HIV/AIDS project (US$20 million, presently envisaged for FY02) as soon as the Govemrnent
finalizes an implementation strategy (nationwide, regional, district) of the interventions planned in
the Mid-Termr Plan III. The strategy should include requirements for financial and technical
assistance, the identification of different agents and tasks; and modalities for choosing priorities in
districts and regions, scaling up successful interventions and contracting out services.
60.
The Bank recognizes the weakness of the information base and of analytical capacity in
Tanzania. Consist:ent with the Government's objectives, this CAS supports the Government's
intention to develop a National Information and Communications Strategy. The strategy would
establish a framework for the use of information and communication technologies in the country.
Within this context, the Government is preparing a Household Budget Survey, a Labor Force
Survey (both ongoing), and a Population Census (scheduled for FY02).
61.
Jointly with other donors, the Bank will increase efforts to build in-country capacity to
collect and analvze information, particularly in the poverty and social sectors domain; to
strengthen the iniFormation base and institutional capacity for poverty analysis and to create a
monitoring system:
*

The Bank will assist in the preparation and implementation of the PRSP providing assistance
for poverty analysis as requested by the Government. On the basis of the new information
from the Household Budget Survey, a Poverty Assessment Report for FY02 is proposed to
analyze the nature of poverty, incidence and trends and to make recommendations on how to
improve policies for poverty reduction.'

*

In 1996 the Elank developed a Gender Action Plan (GAP), which was updated in 1998.26 A
Gender Report is being finalized and will be made available to the Government before the
end of the fiscal year. In the future the Bank will continue to provide assistance to the

Effortsto mainstreamgender concerns in Bank lendingare reflectedin the Girls SecondaryEducation Support
(GSES)program,which offers scholarshipsto low-incomegirlsto attend day or boardingschools for up to four years.
There are also two agriculturalprojects (NTational
Extension Project II, FY97, and AgricultureResearch Project II,
FY98)that explicitlyreflect genderconsiderationsin their objectives.
26

23

Government during the preparation of the PRSP to ensure that it is fully inclusive of gender
issues. Gender issues will be mainstreamed in all analytical work and in lending activities.
*

Preparing a "rural development strategy' to underpin the Government's intention to pursue a
new strategy for higher rural growth and poverty reduction. Emphasis will be on creating the
necessary linkages among the various sectors that contribute to rural development
(agriculture, rural infrastructure, water, education etc.) and with the urban areas.

*

Support of activities for improving governance and accountability and fighting corruption. It
will also provide for a study on fiscal decentralization to assess the policies and mechanisms
of the fiscal transfer system.

F. WBI and MIGA
62.
WBI. Over the CAS period, the World Bank Institute (WBI) plans to assist in the
implementation of the Tanzanian anti-corruption action program. Planned activities iinclude:
conducting training workshops to strengthen the oversight roles of the Public Accounts and
Finance Committees of the Parliament of Tanzania; promotion of media accountability, e.g.,
through strengthening of Media Council; providing support to the Prevention of Corruption
Bureau (PCB) to develop a public outreach strategy and an ethics component in the school
curriculum as well as assisting in developing a booklet on anti-corruption for secondary schools;
supporting the PCB and the Media to start an anti-corruption column in daily newspapers as well
as producing a daily bulletin highlighting the evils of corruption.
63.
MIGA. Tanzania has been a member of MIGA since 1992. MIGA's outstanding portfolio
in the country consists of five contracts of guarantee in the infrastructure and telecommunications
sector with a US$4.1 million Gross and Net Exposure. The total amount of Foreign Direct
Investment facilitated to date is US$19.9 million. MIGA is finalizing the issuance of guarantees
for coverage of a mining project with a total investment potential of US$400 million'. With
coverage of this project, MIGA largest exposure in Africa will be in Tanzania. In addition,
investors have expressed interest in MIGA's coverage for investments in the infrastructure,
mining, power, and tourist sectors in Tanzania.
G. Portfolio Issues
64.
Quality and implementation performance of the Bank's portfolio have been imiproving
over the past couple of years as evidenced by the healthy disbursement ratio (at 29.4 - aniualized
at April-end- for FY00 as compared with 15 percent in FY98) and the decline in the percentage of
"at risk" projects (in terms of commitments - the "at risk" ratio has declined from 72 percent in
FY97 to some 11 percent). Only about 10 percent of the portfolio is rated as unsatisfactory.
These positive trends are indicative of the increased progress in addressing the constraints to the
program, and should translate into a greater impact of Bank projects. Sustaining these
improvements through comprehensive annual portfolio reviews is central to this CAS. The
upcoming Country Portfolio Performance Review will seek to identify and define a program of
action for addressing existing and emerging generic problems as well as project-specific issues.
The gains made to date in significantly improved audit compliance (only one project had
outstanding audit reports at the time of writing) are to be safeguarded through close follow-up.
Beyond decentralization of some procurement and disbursement functions and overall portfolio
management to its Tanzania office, the Bank will continue to facilitate client capacity building
and strengthening institutions related to overall good governance.

24

H. Benchmark indicators for Government/Bank
65.
Country performance. Benchmarks for country performance are included in the matrix
(Annex B9). Many of these benchmarks, which have been determined in a participatory way, are
qualitative (or represent process indicators). Tanzania is now implementing difficult reforms for
private sector development and for improving governance. This will require tackling complex
institutional and legislative constraints, which implies that outcomes need to be measured over a
longer time horizon. The small number of quantitative, measurable indicators is also a reflection
of the inadequate statistical base, particularly for human development, that is available in
Tanzania. Outcome indicators of country performance over the CAS period include:
* Education: Increase gross primary enrolment rates by 2.5 percentage points each year;
increase the transition rate to secondary schools from the current 15 percent to 20 percent by
2003;
* Health: Increase percent of children under 2 year receiving measles and DPT from 71 percent
to 75 percent by 2003; increase percent of pregnant women delivering in a health facility from 50 percent to 55 percent by 2003;
* HIVIAIDS: Reduce HIV/AIDS prevalence by 25 percent by 2002; enhance community
mobilization on AIDS prevention and support; ensure that all hospitals are equipped to ensure
a safe blood supply for transfusions;
* Decentralization: Implement local fiscal transfers to local councils; transfer control of staff to
local councils;
* Roads: 50 percent increase (over current level) by 2002/03 of km of rural roads maintained
per year;
* Water: Provision of safe and clean water from 48.5 percent population coverage in 2000 to
55 percent by the year 2003 in rural areas; and from 68 percent coverage in 2000 to 75
percent by the year 2003 in urban areas; and
* Justice: Harmonization of the legal and regulatory framework by 2002.
66.
Benchmarks for Bank performance. Our strategy is to support the Government in
achieving the outcome indicators listed above. In terms of portfolio implementation (see Annex
III), we will be aiming at i) decreasing risk projects from 14 percent to 10 percent of the
portfolio; ii) sustaining a disbursement ratio at around 22 percent and respecting audit compliance
(with 90 percent of on-time audits) and iii) shortening the time between board approval and
effectiveness from the current 6-7 months to 4 months. The achievement of CAS objectives will
be monitored according to two criteria: a) macroeconomic variables which affect growth,
including fiscal performance and inflation targets; monitoring will be conducted during joint
IMF/Bank missions and annual public expenditure reviews; b) progress benchmarks, as detailed
in the CAS matrix. Benchmarks will be monitored during project preparation and supervision
missions, annual consultations and jointly with IMF, IFC and donors. Decision making and
increasingly a larger share of project preparation and supervision is now with the Country
Director and the resident mission in the field, to ensure a can better response to emerging requests
and issues.
I. Risks
67.
External risks that might threaten Tanzania's ability to implement its development
agenda have been outlined in previous sections. As already discussed, the most important risks
are domestic. Tanzania has been politically stable and free from ethnic violence and the next
general elections. (October 2000) are expected to take place peacefully. However, the current
political situation in Zanzibar has some potential for instability. Political support and commitment

25

to reform remains fragile beyond Central Government and at the local level, the understanding of
the reform process is limited. The improvement in the governance framework may take longer
than anticipated. Implementation of the local government reforms may be delayed because
districts lack capacity to generate appropriate policies and collect revenues and account for
expenditures. The transfer of many responsibilities from central line Ministries to local
Authorities may interfere with prospects for success of sector wide development strategies,
particularly in education and agriculture.
68.
For the Bank Group, the greatest risk is that of overestimating the Governnent's
implementation capacity. The keys to successfully implementing our strategy and portfolio
include:
attention to project design and robust quality at entry including inter alia consistency with
CAS objectives, clarity and realism of objectives and appropriateness of project approach;
adapting interventions to realities on the ground in Tanzania;
a clear and realistic sequencing of actions and interventions;
conducting good institutional assessments to establish whether there is adequate capacity and
a sound incentive framework for facilitating implementation;
effective capacity building measures aimed at Tanzanian counterparts as well as Bankcstaff
and;
. managing the threats to implementation and sustainability through avoiding excessive
optimism about the capacity and readiness to implement; conducting more candid risk
assessments to establish risks of borrower ownership, financial/procurement management as
well as social and institutional risks, and by establishing a strong monitoring and evaluation
feedback system.
J. Concluding Remarks
69.
The overarching goal of the Tanzania Assistance Strategy, as well as the Bank Group
Country Assistance Strategy is to increase growth for faster poverty reduction and to improve
living conditions of the poor. We believe that the economic and sector work and lending
operations proposed in this CAS, as well as IFC investments and the cooperation with IMIF and
other stakeholders will make a long term difference to Tanzania's development prospects and its
million of poor.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By:
Shengman Zhang

Peter L. Woicke

Washington, D.C.
May 22, 2000

26

TANZANIA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
ANNEXES

Annexes:
Annex I
Annex II
Annex III
Annex IV
Annex V

The Low Case Scenario
T'anzania: the Road To Ownership and Effective Partnership
PFortfolioOverview & Performance Improvement Strategy
Client Feedback Survey 1997
Standard Annexes

ANNEX I
The Low Case Scenario
1.
Under the low case scenario,the Governmentwill maintainits current poliqrregime and
the liberalizedinstitutionsalready established. The scenarioassumesthat PRGF targets will not
be met, there will be no further progress in structural reforms and the conditions for the
implementationof the HIPC initiativewill not be reached. Climate conditionswill reflect those
during 1996-1999.Projections indicate that GDP growth will be around 4 percent and the
inflation rate in the range of 12-11 percent. Over 2000-03 the Governmentwill need additional
foreignfinancingiforBOP supportin order to maintainmacroeconomicstability.
Indicator

Real Growth of GDP (%)
Per capita real GDP growth (%)
Real Growth in Agriculture (%)
Real Growth in Manufacturing (%)
Gross domestic investment (% GDP)
Gross domestic savings (% GDP)
Consumer Price index (%/6)

Actual

Projections

.

FY96
4.3
1.4
4.6
3.1
18.0
3.6
21.0

FY97
4.0
1.2
3.0
4.6
15.7
5.4
16.1

FY98
3.8
0.9
2.2
6.5
14.9
3.1
12.8

FY99
4.3
1.5
4.2
5.3
14.3
2.6
7.8

FY00
5.0
2.2
5.7
4.4
17.1
3.1
5.8

FYOI
3.9
1.1
3.9
4.7
16.1
2.9
12.1

FY02
4.2
1.4
3.3
4.9
15.9
2.5
11.5

FY03
4.0
1.2
4.2
5.0
16.0
3.0
10.5

696
1370
-15.9

794
1388
-12.0

613
1445
-14.4

541
1631
-15.3

552
1748
-15.4

521
1811
-17.4

529
2015
-20.5

658
2186
-19.5

-6.1

-2.2

-6.1

-7.0

-7.2

-8.3

-9.8

-9.0

13.2
17.6
-4.4
-0.8

13.5
15.1
-1.6
1.0
0.1

12.0
14.8
-2.8
1.0
-0.3

12.4
16.9
-4.5
-0.3
-0.3

12.6
18.3
-5.7
-0.7
0.8

10.9
18.5
-7.6
-4.0
3.2

'12.1
19.0
-6.9
-3.5
3.0

12.2
19.5
-7.3
-3.0
2.5

Trade

Export (fob) (US $mil)
Import (cif) (US $mil)
Current Account Balance (before
grants % of GDP)
Current Account Balance (after
grants

% GDP)

Government Finance ilall% of GDP)

Domestic Revenue
Expenditure
Deficit (before grants)
Deficit (after grants)
Net Foreign Financing

27

ANNEX II
Tanzania: The Road to Ownership and Effective Partnership

1.
Since 1961 Tanzania has developed cooperation programs with over 50 Governments,
international financial/donor agencies and NGO's. In recent years, external assistance, averaging
US$900 million a year, has contributed to 25-30 percent of the recurrent budget and 80 percent of
the development budget.
2.
Tanzan[ia/donor relations were strained during the late 1980s and early 1990s due to
deteriorating policy and fiscal performance, failure to collect counterpart funds for donor
supported programs, and rising corruption. These relations were analyzed in 1994 by an
independent group of advisers (The Helleiner Report, 1995). "Agreed Notes" were adopted in
1997 and reviewed in 1999. The review found that issues still remain, including : i) weak
Government capacity, ii) different donors requirements with regard to rules and procedures on
procurement, disbursement, accounting and auditing; iii) parallel budgetary systems and over
dependence on consultants to execute projects. However, Government-donors cooperation has
improved significantly as a result of:
* Changing dronorattitudes towards a new partnership approach, through active participation
in regular sector-wide meetings under Government leadership; and contributions to "basket
funds" in the health, education, roads and local government reform sectors, in support of
mutually agreed common objectives.
* Improved aid coordination. Government-donor joint working groups meet regularly under
Governmerntchairmanship.
* Greater transparency in aid delivery on the part of donors and accountability for its use on
the part of the Government. The Ministry of Finance has significantly improved financial
data storage and retrieval system using the latest software and equipment. Treasury budget
management has been strengthened in the past two years.
- Moving the CG meeting to Dar es Salaam has improved ownership.
3.
The Government has established a confident leadership in the preparation of its
development sl:rategy and in enlarging the participation process. Starting with the Vision 2025
document (initiated in 1995), a significant effort was made to consult with a broad range of
stakeholders.. The Vision document was debated in Parliament and has been widely disseminated
throughout the country. In 1997 the preparation of the National Poverty Eradication Strategy has
involved a substantial consultation process with NGOS and civil society. The Government has led
the preparation of various Policy Framework Papers (PFP), the annual PER and more recently the
TAS. The TAS will promote partnership in designing and executing development programs. The
Local Governrnent Reform, by decentralizing most Government functions to the local/district
levels, is expected to facilitate the involvement of civil society in socio-economic issues with a
direct bearing on their lives.

28

ANNEX III
Portfolio Overview & Performance Improvement Strategy
1.
Portfolio Flows & Current Status. Improved implementation continues to be central
under the present CAS. As of March 31, 2000, a total of 112 IDA credits and 27 IBRD loans,
amounting to some US$3.5 billion (US$3.2 billion from IDA and US$356 million from IBRD)
had been approved for Tanzania (original principal less cancellations). Of the 27 loans, 8 loans
amounting to US$42.5 million were extended to Tanzania through the East African Community.
Total disbursements amounted to nearly US$3,096 million (some US$2,741 million from IDA
and US$356 million from IBRD). As of March 31, 2000, the active portfolio consisted of 22
projects with total commitments of US$1.2 billion. Four projects have been approved thus far in
FY00 for a total credit amount of about US$120 million. A Health Sector Development Program
in the amount of $22 million and a Programmatic Structural Adjustment Credit (PSACI) in the
amount of $190 million are being presented for Board approval in June 2000 along with this
CAS. Four Credits (Roads I, Health and Nutrition Financial Institutions Development and
Forestry Rehabilitation totaling some US$225 million in net credit terms) closed in FY99.
2.
Portfolio Performance Trends. The Tanzania portfolio performance trends are
summarized below. The number of projects under implementation has remained fairly steady
since FY93 -- at between 21 to 24, however, the average commitments have declined from $75
million per project in FY94 to some $51 million per project in FY00, reflecting a trend towards
smaller, more focused projects. The quality and performance of the portfolio has been improving
over the past couple of years (see Annexes B2 and B8), as evidenced by the healthier
disbursement rati'o and the decline in the percentage of "at risk" projects. These positive trends
are indicative of progress in the implementation of the program, which should translate into a
greater impact of Bank projects.
3.
The disbursement performance of IDA's investment projects has improved steadily since
FY92 from $47.7 million to $166.9 million in FY96, and has maintained the momentum since:
*
*

*

The undisbursed balance which was around $800 million in 1996 now stands at
about $480 million.
Solid gains registered in disbursement, which increased by 21 percent between
FY97 and FY99. In absolute terms FY99 disbursements were over $166 million
while FY97 disbursements totaled $ 137 million.
IDisbursements as a percent of the opening undisbursed balance increased from
over 15 percent to some 20 percent between FY98 and FY99.

4.
In the first three quarters of FY00, total disbursements have amounted to some US$117.5
million of which over US$95 million is accounted for by investment disbursements. The
(annualized) disbursement ratio at April 30, 2000 stood at 29.4 percent (this is a significant
increase from the 9.0 percent in FY92 and compares very favorably with both Africa Region and
the Bank-wide averages).
5.
While thie implementation performance of Bank projects in Tanzania has been mixed, and
portfolio quality as measured by "problem projects" has not been entirely satisfactory, this aspect
now appears to be stabilizing. Since FY94 the share of problem projects in the portfolio increased
steadily, largely due to an effort to improve the accuracy and realism in ratings. This
downgrading leclto an increase in the problem projects in the portfolio from 14.3 percent in FY95
to 22.7 percent in FY96, and balloon further to over 50 percent of the portfolio by FY97. The "at
29

risk" portfolio swelled to some 72 percent. However, as indicated above, conscious piortfolio
strengthening and refining efforts over the past three years have resulted in improvements being
registered in the overall number (and commitment level) of problem projects in the portfolio. As
of March 31, 2000 compared with the end of FY97, the number of problem/potential problem
projects in the portfolio has fallen dramatically with only 3 projects being rated unsatisfactory
either in terms of Development Objectives or Implementation Progress. This compares with 11
projects in this category some two and a half years back. Annex B2 indicates that Talizania's
portfolio performance indicators compare quite favorably with Bank-wide as well as Africa
Region averages:
*

Nearly 90 percent of the portfolio (in terms of commitments) is now rated satisfactory -up from 48 percent in FY97.
* Projects at risk declined from 52 percent to 14 percent of the portfolio between FY97 and
FY00. Commitments at risk declined from 72 percent to 11 percent during the same
period.
* FY00 pro-activity ratio is 100 percent -- specific actions were taken with respect to all
five projects that were rated "U" at the beginning of FY99.
* FY00 realism ratio indicating consistency in ratings between the problem and potential
problem projects is at 100 percent.
* Close attention and persistent focus on financial management is also paying off. The
number of overdue audit reports declined from 35 percent to 16 percent by FY99. At
present only one project has audit reports that are overdue by three months or more.

6.
Portfolio Improvement Efforts.
Bank staff have been working closely wi.th their
Government counterparts to iron out certain longstanding issues (e.g., resource constraints,
governance etc.,) that have continued to impinge on the overall performance and impact of the
Tanzania portfolio. The enhanced focus on macro issues, including the improved fiscal and
public expenditure management effort launched by the Government and donors, will leaclto solid
payoffs in this regard over the medium term. The Tanzania Country Team's concerted efforts to
improve the quality of the portfolio have led to significant improvements. To address the generic
portfolio management issues regular meetings of project coordinators have been held
approximately every two months in the period since FY96; important actions were taken at the
individual project level as well, especially for problem or potential problem operations. ranzania
was one of 20 countries selected Bank-wide, for which a comprehensive Portfolio Improvement
Plan (PIP) was prepared for FY97. The PIP which was selected as one of the two Bank-wide
"Best Practices" identified a number of cross-cutting/ generic problems as well as projecl-specific
ones. The main objectives of the PIP, which was shared with the Government, was to achieve
major improvements in the performance of both problem projects and projects at risk, as well as
to further strengthen Government ownership of projects. Good progress has been made since
towards meeting the targets of the PIP including greater portfolio ownership by the Government.
As a result of this significant improvement - reflected in aggregate performance indicators Tanzania has graduated from the Bank-wide portfolio "watch list". The continued emphasis on
enhanced portfolio management is expected to sustain these positive results.
7.
As part of the Bank wide decentralization efforts, the Country Director is now based in
the field. The Country Office has been focussing more on disbursement and procurement prescreening, financial management and task management responsibilities. Furthermore, efforts
have been made (quite successfully) to establish a specialized Country Office Tanzanian staff in
areas of financial management, disbursements, and procurement. This has made the regular
exchanges with project coordinators more meaningful.

30

8.
A CPPR to follow-up on remaining issues and to pre-empt potential pitfalls is planned for
near future. Activities to address the generic portfolio management issues are being steered by
recommendations f,rom the most recent CPPR held in 1998, which focused on areas such as:
availability of counterpart funds; project management, staffing and incentives; and accounting
and audit compliance. A detailed Action Plan was formulated and the Country Office held
regular follow-up rmeetingswith project coordinators In order to institutionalize and sustain these
measures, the next CPPR seeks to focus Government's attention on the actions agreed, such that
the findings and recommendations of this exercise are put to good use. The Country Office is
playing a key role in this exercise and will continue to take the lead on close follow-up of
implementation issues.
9.
IDA's Fuiure Lending Program & Portfolio Improvement Strategy. The principles
guiding the development of a sound lending pipeline for Tanzania continue to include: (a)
operations designed to be fully consistent with the objectives of the Tanzania CAS -- which in
turn mirrors the Government's goals of sustaining past progress in poverty reduction through
measures aimed at improved economic growth performance and improved access to basic socioeconomic services; (b) superior quality of projects at entry, ensured through: greater ownership
by the borrower and key stakeholders as well as rigorous preparatory work at the design stage,
including particular attention to project implementation arrangements that would ensure
medium/long-term institutional synergy/strengthening; and capacity building for improved
performance over the life of the operation and enhanced sustainability thereafter; and (c)
supervision on the Bank's part following project effectiveness, and particularly intensive
supervision in the case of emerging implementation issues. Project design is being sharpened
through upstream peer reviews and a focus on the development of clearly defined and
monitorable project impact (including outputs and outcomes) indicators.
10.
Other efforts at reshaping the portfolio to enhance the quality, sustainability and impact
of Bank operations are underway:
*

GOT is taking the lead in developing the Tanzania Assistance Strategy which would
provide the framework within which the development partners are expected to provide
support. The GOT has endorsed the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF)
and this has contributed to furthering Tanzania's adoption of the principles of ownership
and partnership. With increased ownership, it is expected that the portfolio's emphasis
will shift to areas with greater urgency of reform.

*

The Country Team is applying lessons of experience and utilizing new instruments. The
recently effective Tax Administration Project (TAP) focuses on providing an overall
framework for donor support, the Health Sector Development Program is an APL which
adopts a sector-wide approach in line with GOT desires. The recently approved Rural
and Micro-finance project is a LIL which used a participatory approach and is a "bestpractice" in the sub-sector. We envisage moving to the provision of broad based budget
support via a rural development and environment Public Expenditure Reform Credit
during the CAS period. All these actions point towards improved quality at entry and are
expected to contribute to improved portfolio implementation.

*

The up coming Country Performance Portfolio Review will focus on issues identified by
the project coordinators and Bank staff.

II.
Remaining challenges to be addressed. While the performance of the Tanzania Portfolio
is now quite robust, there are a few remaining areas which merit closer follow-up:
31

*

Pace of implementation: The average age of the portfolio at 4.6 years continues to be
high as compared with both the Bank-wide average age of 3.6 years and the Africa
Region average of 4 years. The number of projects with extended closing date increased
from 2 to 12 between FY97 and FY99. Presently, the portfolio includes nine projects,
which have had closing date extensions of one year or more. Ten projects, or some 45
percent of the portfolio is over 5 years old. As newer projects continue to join the
Tanzania cohort, it raises issues in terms of manageability of the overall portfolio size
and issues emanating from some of the older projects. In this context, it would therefore
be important to consider carefully any project extensions.

*

Five projects in infrastructure continue to dominate the portfolio accounting for nearly
60 percent of total commitments and 65 percent of the undisbursed balance at the
beginning of this fiscal year. The Roads program has been the weakest in terms of its
implementation performance - plagued by weak management capacity and procurement
problems. However, the Government of Tanzania recently embarked on a program to
address governance issues in this subsector. For its part, the Bank reviewed its transport
portfolio carefully; the non-performing Roads I has been closed and a balance of about $
30 million cancelled; both the Roads II and Railways projects have been restructured to
focus on ways to improve the quality of roads and rail services including by addressing
issues arising from the el Nino damage to the road and rail network. The privatization of
the Railways parastatal is central to the restructured project. The Roads II project will, in
close coordination with other donors, support the development of a long-term
comprehensive (ten year) Road Development Program.

*

Dwindling attention to social sectors in the lending portfolio over the past several years
has resulted in the Bank not being able to respond adequately to the emerging challenges
in Tanzania's human development performance, especially in the area of primary
education where enrollment rates have declined. The Government with Bank support is
now engaging other donors on the issue of a cohesive approach to primary education. A
Primary Education APL is envisaged. Work in secondary education rationali2ation is
also planned. The process of dialogue and donor coordination has led to what may be
deemed as good results in basic health care provision. A Health Sector Devel[opment
Program is being presented with this CAS. HIV/AIDS is a critical issue. A program to
assist Government efforts at containing the HIV/AIDS pandemic is envisaged during the
CAS lending cycle.

*

Decentralization from the center to the district councils is expected to be a major
challenge in the medium-term, but is affecting the implementation of some of the projects
(such as the ongoing National Agriculture Extension or the planned social sector
interventions). Strengthening of local capacity and sound procedures for funding; district
councils and accountability framework need to be established

32

ANNEX IV
Client Feedback Survey 1997
Summary of Qualitative Interview Results

World Bank Staff
*
Excellent relationships with the Bank; good interaction at project level.
*
Staff sheuld spend more time in Tanzania, particularly rural areas, to understand better
country end its needs.
*
Bank staff should have broader, more frequent contacts beyond government.
*
Need to be more receptive to local ideas. Bank needs to sell itself, provide more
information on what it does.
Resident Mission
*
Presence appreciated for facilitation, liaison, project monitoring, accessibility.
*
Mixed reactions on desirability of Tanzania-based Country Director.
*
Clients consider as more important increased decision-making authority of Resident
Mission.
*
More local professional staff would increase understanding between Bank and Tanzania.
Development Objectives
Mixed views as to whether there is agreement on development objectives.
-Many respondents not aware of or involved in CAS process.
Those involved saw CAS consultations as a positive change, but Government needs to be
better prepared.
Products and Services
*
Strong views that local capacity building has not been a feature of technical assistance.
*
Positive effects of adjustment lending, but have lives of poor improved?
*
Positive impact of investment lending in industry, infrastructure and power sectors.
Procedures
*
Lending conditionalities necessary, but some feel they are too harsh.
*
Mixed reactions as to Bank's flexibility with respect to lending conditionalities.
*
Bank procedures too slow: give more authority to Resident Mission and involve
stakeholders in streamlining.
*
Procurement guidelines generally helpful.

33

ANNEX V

TANZANIA
CIDUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Standard Annexes

Annexes:
AI
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8

Tanzania at a Glance
Tanzania: Selected indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Tanzania: Bank Group Program Summary
Tanzania: Summary of Nonlending Services
Tanzania Social Indicators
Tanzania: Key Economic Indicators
Tanzania: Key Exposure Indicators
Tanzania: Status of Bank Group Operations in Tanzania (Operations Portfolio)
Tanzania: Statement of IFC's Held and Disbursed Portfolio
B9 Tanzania: CAS Program Matrix
B 10 Tanzania: CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Annex B1

page 1 of 2

Tanzaniaat a glance
SubPOVERTY and SOCIAL
Tanzanla

Saharan
Africa

LowIncome

32
240
6.7

627
510
323

3,536
520
1,842

2.9
2.9

2.9
2.9

1.7
1.9

1999
Population, mid-year(millions)
GNP per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNP (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Development
dlamond*
Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1993-99
Population (Y.)
Labor force (X)

Mostrecentestimate
(latestyearavailable,1993-99)

GNP
per

Gross

capita

Poverty(%of populationbelownationalpovertyline)
Urbanpopulation
(%of totalpopulation)
Lifeexpectancy
at birth(years)
Infantmortality(per1,000Wivebirths)
Childmalnutriton(%o
of childrenunder5)
Accessto safewater(%of population)
Illiteracy(%ofpopulationage 15+)
Grossprimaryenrollment(%ofschool-agepopulation)
Mafe
Female

27
48
85
31
52
28
66
67
66

33
50
92
33
43
40
78
85
71

30
63
68
36
73
31
107
112
102

1989

1998

1999

4.8
17.4
10.6
-2.7
17.5

7.7
15
18.2
3.1
2.9

8.2
14
21.8
2.6
3.1

14.4

-4.7
1.0
122.6
32.5

-14.4
0.5
100.5
13.4

-15.1
0.4
88.3
11.8

i

primary
enrollment

.

Accessto safewater
-

Tanzania
Low-income
group

KEYECONOMIC
RATIOSandLONG-TERM
TRENDS
1979
GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmentIGDP
Exports of goods and servicea/GDP
Gross domeshc savingslGDP
Gross national savings/GDP

..

Current account balance/GDF
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debtVGDP
Total debt servicelexports

..
..
..

.
..
..
..

197949

1989-99

1998

1999

1999-03

(average annual growth)
GDP
GNP per capita

..
..

3.1
0.6

3.8
0.7

4.3
3.2

Exports of goods and services

..

9.5

5.4
3.0
5.9

-10.0

7.3

Economic ratos
Trade

i
Domesticn
SavigsA

Investment

Indebtedness
Tanzania
Low-income group

STRUCTUREof the ECONCOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General govemment consumption
Imports of goods and services

1989

1998

1999

..
..
..

52.4
14.4
8.1
33.1

45.7
14.9
7.2
39.4

44.4
15.3
7.2
40.3

..
..
..

86.4
16.3
30.7

82.4
8.2
24.7

81.9
10.6
30.9

-10

197949

1989-99

1998

1999

Growth of exports and Imports (%)

3.5
2.6
2.1
2.5

2.2
8.5
6.5
3.6

4.2
7.6
5.3
2.4

40
30
20

2.8
-6.5
-0.3
-1.2
3.6

0.9
-13.3
4.3
-16.6
3.4

2.5
0.2
4.5
2.4
5.8

-10

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
Generalgovernmentconsurption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and servio3s
Gross national product

Growth of Investmentand GOP (%i
is
10

1979

..

..
..

_

'

s

GDI

-

04

9s

* a

GDP

se

-20
.30
Exports

Imports

Note: 1999 data are preliminaryestimates.
'The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) comparedwith its Income-groupaverage.If data are missing, the diamondwill
be incomplete.

AnnexBI
page2 of 2

Tanzania
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE
1979
DomesticpHces
(% change)
Consumerprices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDP, includescurrent grants)
Current revenuLe
Overallsurplus/deficit

1998

1989

InflationI%)

1999

40

129

25.8
31.3

12.8
17.8

7.8
137

20
10

Q,
64

.

1
12CPI0

.

-19

'

1.0

4
-03

95

De

97

to

oil

GOP deflator
_____________PI

TRADE
Export andimport levels (US$mill.)

1979

1989

1998

.
..
.
.
..

613

.

415
103
70
89
1,211
81
150
443

91
68
1,445
84
138
551

541
98
90
84
1,631
89
134
629

.
.

93
200
46

110
56
197

113
46
247

1979

1989

1998

1999

686
118
-513

538
156
-1,027

1132
217
-1,045

1163
244
-1,291

-9

-179

-140
61

-39
66

Current account balance

-521

-223

-1,155

-1,296

-20

Financingitems (net)
Changesin net reserves

464
57

223
0

1,1B5
-30

1410
-114

-2s

..

119.4

503
842.5

776
683.1

1979

1989

1998

1999

4,269
168
208

5,854
252
1,016

8653
21
2,451

7220
18
2,453

100
16
2

177
42
12

158
24
32

144
11
39

139
71

97
26

189
-15

459
0

(USS millions)
Total exports(fob)
Commodity1
Commodity2
Manufactures
Total imports(ci)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goodjs
Exportpnceindoex(1995=100)
Importprce irldex (1995=-100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

111

1999

1s.o8

1900
1,400

--

12,03
(

t03
SW
eoo
400
200_
93

_

_|

94

95

LF

96

a Expots

t

97

99

*Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)
Exports of goodsand services
Importsof goodsand services
Resourcebalance
Net income
Netcurrent transfers

Meno:
Reservesincludinggold (US$ millions)
Conversionrate (DEC bhcalWSS)

..

CurrentaccountbalancetoGDP(%J

.

45

40

EXTERNALDEBT and RESOURCEFLOWS
(US$millions)
Total debt outstandng and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Compositionof net resourceflows
Official grants
Official crediors
Private creditors

1

I
Compositfon
of 1999debt(USSmill.)
836

2858

Foreigndirect investment
Portfolioequity
World Bank program
Commitments

-

279
633

143

Disbursements

72

Prncipal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

4
68
15
54

DevelopmentEconomics

18

73

150

115

183

..
459

28
87
26
61

36
147
20
127

30
430
20
410

A-IBRD
B-IDA
C - IMF

D-Othermutilateral

E-Bibterai
F-Prhate
G - ShoSt-terlm

Annex B2'

Tanzania: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Indicator
Porfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Imnplementation
a
Average Implementation
Period (years)b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number 4 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
4"
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number 4 d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount d
Disbursement Ratio (%)e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
SupervisionResources (total US$ million)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum
Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Evalby OED)by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HUby Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HUby Amt

1997

1998

1999

2000

21
4.24
23.81
52.22
52.38
71.99
17.85

21
4.46
23.81
49.07
28.57
54.81
15.02

18
4.73
2.92
11.11
9.9
19.82

22
4.57
13.64
11.1
13.64
11.1
29.4

no
3.78
180,000

yes
4.5
214,000

no
3.23
181,000

yes
3.7
170,000

SinceFY 80

Last Five FYs

71
1891.19
50.7
43.1

7
110.75
14.29
14.99

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Banks country potlfolio.
c. Percent of projects; rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation

progress (IP).

d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursemnents during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only. Annualized as of April 2000.

5.56

Tanzania:

Bank Group Program Summary

Annex B3
page 1 of 2

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program
Fiscal year
2001

2002

2003

a

USS(fM)

Strategic Rewards b
(HIMIL)

Implementation b
Risks (HIfML)

Primary Education APL

100.0

H

H

DAR WATER SUPPLY

45.0

M

H

Regional Trade Fac. Proj.

10.0

H

H

TASAF

50.0

H

H

Rural Water LIL

5.0

H

M

Project

Sub-Total

210.0

Songo Songo

170.0

H

H

Account./Governance

40.0

H

H

Soil Fert. Recap.

20.0

H

M

Forest Conservat.

50.0

M

M

HIV/AIDS

20.0

H

H

Total

300.0

Roads Rehabilitatien

80.0

H

H

Education Ration.

30.0

M

H

Lake Victoria 11

30.0

M

M

PSAC II

100.0

H

H

Local Govt. Capac.

40.0

H

H

Total

280.0

Total Base Case (2001-2003)

790.0

H

H

High-case Lending Program (in addition to the Base-case)

2003

PERC - Poverty/RuiralDevelop/Environ

Total High-case (2001-2003)

200.0

990

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementationrisks are expected to be high (H), moderate
(M), or low (L).

Annex B3
page 2 of 2
Tanzania: IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1997-2000
1997 1998 1999 2000
IFC approvals (US$m)

6.70

20.30

2.80

40.27

Sector (%/6)
FINANCIALSERVICES

I
16

FOOD& AGRO-BUSINESS

84

HOTELS & TOURISM
INFRASTRUCTURE
TEXTILES
Total

100

41

100

59
100

101

100

100

100

75

Investment instrument(%)
Loans

92

Equity

8

100

100

100

100

100

0.430

0.430

4.167

4.167

25

Quasi-Equity
Other
Total
MIGA guarantees (US5m)

Annex B4

Tanzania: Summary of Nonlending Services
Product

Underway

Conpletion FY

Cost (USS000)

Audience'

Objectiveb

2001

Activities for PRSP

50

PER

175

Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public

Knowledge generation, problem solving, public debate
Knowledge generation, problem solving

FinancialSector

30

Donors, Gov't, Bank

Private Sector Profile

75

Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public

Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving

Tanzania - Integration in Regional& Global Markets
Poverty Monitoring and Analysis

100
175

Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public

Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving, public debate

Consultative Group

115

Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public

CPPR

110

Govt, Bank

Knowledge generation, donor coordination
Knowledge generation, problem solving

Rural DevelopmentStrategy

175

Accountability/Transparency

175

Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public

Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, donor coordination

PER

175

ConsultativeGroup

115

Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public

Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, donor coordination

Fiscal Decentralization

175

PovertyAssessment

200

Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public

Knowledge generation, problem solving, public debate
Knowledge generation, problem solving, public debate

110

Gov't, Bank

PER

200

Knowledge generation, problem solving
Knowledge generation, problem solving

ConsultativeGroup

125

Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public
Donors, Gov't, Bank, Public

Planned

Planned
CPPR

a. Government,donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledgegeneration, public debate, problem-solving.

2002

2003

Knowledge generation, donor coordination

Annex B5

Tanzania Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same regionlincome group

1970-75

1980-85

1993-98

SubSaharan
Africa

15.9
3.0
10.1
6.8

21.8
3.2
17.6
6.7

32.1
2.9
30.5
5.4

627.3
2.2
33.3
5.4

3,536.4
1.4
30.5
3.1

510
128

520
136

1.5
4.1

1.3
3.2

..
..

86
89
82

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% ofpopulation)
National headcount index
INCOME
GNP per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)

Total
Male
Female
Access to safe water
(%ofpopulation)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(9l under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(vears)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per thousand live births)
Under 5 (per thousand live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Matemal (per 100,000 live births)
2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

..

..

..

..

1

8
10

240
158
162

..

..

38.2

5.0
53.0

..

6.8
45.5

..

1.3

Lowincome

..

.1

..

..

..

..

56
55
56

48
48
49

..
..

52
85
47

52
68
49

..
..

66
67

58
53

80
82

..

..

69
74
31

46
45
48

51
49
53

48
47
48

50
49
52

63
62
64

125
218

102
166

85
136

92
151

68
92

513
419

451
370

521
482
530

432
383

235
208

..
..

..

..

..

AnnexB6
pagel of 2

Tanzania - Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP) (Fiscal Year)
Gross domestic product'
Agriculture
Industry
Services

100
46
15
39

100
48
14
38

100
47
14
38

100
46
15
39

100
44
15
40

100
43
16
41

100
43
16
41

100
42
16
42

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Govemment investment
Private investment
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

98
22
3.2
19

96
18
3.6
14

95
16
2.6
13

91
15
3.6
11

93
14
3
12

94
17
4.1
13

95
19
4.3
14

95
21
4.4
15

23
42

22
36

18
28

18
25

22
31

25
36

27
39

28
42

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc

2.0
-0.3

3.6
2.0

5.4
4.3

3.1
2.9

2.6
3.1

3.1
3.3

4.6
5.0

5.8
6.1

4627

5852

6920

7775

8228

8816

9732

10642

160

160

190

210

240

270

280

300

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1992 prices)
Gross domestic product at marketprices
2.6
3.2
Gross Domestic Income

4.3
4.0

4.0
3.0

3.8
5.4

4.3
3.1

5
4.5

5.4
5.2

6
5.6

Real annual per capita growtb rates (%, calculated from 1992 prices)
1.4
Gross domestic product at market prices
-0.4
-0.1
-2.2
Total consumption *
-0.6
2.4
Private consumption

1.2
-2.1
0.5

0.9
-3.1
-1.6

1.5
-0.2
0.0

2.2
2.4
2.4

2.6
3.0
2.9

3.2
3.5
3.5

Balance of Payments (US$ Mdil) (Fiscal Year)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Current account balance (before grants)
Current account balance (after grants)

1163 1213
541
552
2454 2617
1631 1748
-1291 -1404
-1296 -1400
-559 -604

1377
652
2850
1907
-1474
-1463
-685

1602
814
3141
2121
-1539
-1523
-737

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Net private foreign direct investment
Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)

1089
593
2029
1510
-940
-1047
-522

1142
696
1986
1370
-844
-942
-361

1274
794
2040
1388
-767
-842
-152

1132
613
2177
1445
-1045
-1155
-486

104
-46

134
-81

150
-208

165
-30

183
-114

201
-49

221
-18

244
-73

-20%

-14%

-11%

-13%

-12%

-13%

- 13%

-12%

Annex B6
page2 of 2

Tanzania - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

(Fiscal Year)
Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Total revenues
12.5
Current expenditures
15.1
Capital expenditure (includesnet lending)
3.2
Balance (before grants)
-5.8
Balance (after grants)
-2.7

13.2
14.0
3.6
-4.4
-0.8

13.5
12.5
2.6
-1.6
1.0

12.0
11.0
3.8
-2.8
1.0

12.4
13.1
3.8
-4.5
-0.3

12.6
13.4
4.6
-5.4
-0.7

12.8
13.5
4.5
-5.3
-0.5

13.0
13.5
4.5
-5.0
-0.2

24.3
37.7
0.6

24.1
26.4
-205.3

21.9
13.3
224.9

19.9
10.8
244.8

19.9 18.7
18.5 8.4
155.4 271.1

16.0
9.2
40.4

16.4
14.0
180.1

Price indices( YR92 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index

110
56
197

113
46
247

116
38
310

120
31
388

124
25
486

108
107
101

110

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

97.7

118.3

125.6

135.5 135.5 120.6

121.8

121.8

Consumer price index (%change)
GDP deflator (% change)

28.0
28.9

21.0
22.3

16.1
20.0

12.8
17.8

4.1
6.6

4.0
5.1

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%/6)
Private sector credit growth/
total credit growth (%)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

7.8
13.7

108
106
101

5.2
9.0

[10
100

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequitedtransfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Consolidated central govermnent.
"LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

* Total Consumption(Govt+ Private) where the share of GovernmentConsumptionis about 10%-8%average.
from 1995-2002.

Annex B7

Tanzania: Key Exposure Indicators

7446

7412

7177

8653

7220

6800

6590

6500

Net disbursements(TJS$m)a

95

149

239

192

439

459

471

482

Total debt service (TDS)

232

269

158

158

144

94.2

91.1

8l.0

TDO/XGSb

674.4

634.6

546.5

663.9

598.7

599.0

522.8

446.2

TDO/GDP

160.9

127.3

104.3

100.5

88.3

85.9

76.9

69.6

TDS/XGS

21.0

23.0

12.0

13.4

11.9

18.6

10.7

8.5

IBRDDS/public DS

18.9

12.4

16.4

16.4

7.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

Preferred creditor DS/public

69.9

55.0

87.9

87.9

97.7

43.8

39.7

28.5

IBRD DS/XGS

3.8

2.8

1.8

2.0

0.9

0.0

0.0

0.0

IBRD TDO (TJS$m)d

87

56

34

21

18

11

7

5

2182

2242

2306

2451

2453

2864

2836

2813

Total debt outstanding and
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators
(M)

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

DS (%)

IDATDO(US$m)d

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equityinstruments.

AnnexB8
Tanzania:
Closed

Projects

Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations

page 1 of 2

Portfolio)

117
Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR

Board Date
Fiscal Year

IDA

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig.

0

37

0

6.87

2.41

0

0

44

0

7.78

4.33

4.02

0

76

11.26

17.88

24.24

3.54

0

20

0.71

2.56

1.3

0.49

11.53

Active Projects

1990

P002184

S

1991

P002786

PORTS MODERNIZATION
PETROLREHAB

S

S

RAILWAYSRESTRUCTURI

S

S

FIN.&LEGALMGTPROJ
POWER VI
PRIV. PUB. SECT. MGT

S

S

S
S

S

U

P002157

1993

P002817

1993
1993

P002756

1993

P002788
P002780

1994

P002801

TELECOM11
AgricultureSectorManagement Project

1994
1995

P002770
P002812
P002758

1996
1997
1997

P046837

1997

P002753
P038570

1997

P002821

1998
199S

P002804
P002789

S

200
34.9

0

S

0
0

25.89

0

2.14

0.47

0
0

S

0

74.45

0

8.93

7.26

7.18

4.22
148.91

5.85
138.06

0
155.2

ROADS n

S
s

S
s

0
0

24.5
170.2

2.35
0

S

12.5
105

3.39

S

0
0

0
0

54.11

1.73
5.76

URBANSECTORREHAB
LAKE VICTORIAENV.
National AgricultureExtensionProjectn,(NAEP H)

S
S

0

MINERALSECTORDEV.

S

S

0

10.1

0

6.63

1.79

0

U
S

U
S

0
0

31.1
26.3

0
0

16.46
18.66

8
5.72

0
0

S

S

0

134.1

0

18.95

13.59

16.07

StructuralAdjustmentCredit(SACI)
National AgricultureResearch Project II (NARP II)
Human Resources Development I

S
S

S

0

21.8

19.88

1.3

12.69

1.99

0
0

S

RIVER BASINMGM.SMAL

2000

P047761
P057187

2000

P049838

Tax AdministrationProject(TAP)
FIDPI
Privatization &Private SectorReform Project (PPSR)

2000

P060833

PublicSectorReform Program(PRSRP)

2000

P050441

RURAL&MICROFIN SERVICEPROJECT

1999

S

IBRD

U

0

20.9

S
S

0
0

40

0
0

39.01
28.7

2.82
5.5

0

27.5

0

0

IDA

TOTAL

361,030,400
5,477,943

3,302,156,395
141,463,032

3,663,186,795
146,940,975

Disbursed:
Undisbursed:

355,552,457
0

2,740,559,746
484,645,525

3,096,112,203
484,645,525

Repaid:

342,233,982

154,616,532

496,850,514

13,228,474

2,577,032,700

441,526

2,563,804,226
0

13,670,000

2,563,804,226

2,577,474,226

90,000
90,000

6,200,000
6,200,000

6,290,000
6,290,000

Sold 3rd Party:
Repaid 3rd Party:

* Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.

441,526

0

0

45.9

0

0

0

41.2

0

38.98

0

0

2

0

2

0.45

0

1199.45

14.32

484.64

244.1

186.5

0

Original Principal:
Cancellations:

Exchange Adjustment:
Borrowers Obligation:

0

0
0

S

S

Grand Total

Due:

Frm Rev'd'

IBRD
Develooment
Prnt,ress
~~ObietctivesR
~ Implementation
~~~~~~~~~~~

Active Projects

1991

Disbursements

Ori2inal Amount in USS Millions

Supervision Rating

AnnexB8
Tanzania: Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 04/30/00
(In US Dollars Millions)

page 2 of 2

Held
FY Approval
1996/99
1997
1998
1996
1998
1997
1995
1998
1996
1994
1999
1994
1997/99
1994
1995
1993/96
1996
1997
1994
1996
1991
1989
1993
1991/97
1994
1998
1994

Company
Loan
AEF A&KTanzania
AEF AquvaGinner
AEF Blue Bay
AEF Contiflora
AEF Drop Zanziba
AEF Hort. Farms
AEFMIC Tanzania
AEF Maji Masafi
AEF Milcafe
AEFMoshiLthr
AEF MusomaFish
AEF Nomad Safari
AEF Pallsons
AEF Raffia Bags
AEF Tanbreed
AEF Tanganyika
AEF Zainab Grain
DATEL
EurafricanBank
IHP
Mufindi Tea
TASCO
TPS (Tanzania)
TPS Zanzibar
TanzaniaBrewery
TanzaniaJubilee
ULC Leasing

Total Portfolio:

Disbursed

Equity
Quasi Partic Loan Equity Quasi Partic
0.3
0
0
0
0.3
0
0
0
0.68
0
0
0 0.68
0
0
0
1.5
0
0
0
1.5
0
0
0
0.35
0
0
0 0.35
0
0
0
0.32
0
0
0 0.32
0
0
0
0.5
0
0
0
0.5
0
0
a
0.2
0
0
0
0.2
0
0
C
I
0
0
0
1
0
0
a
0.18
0
0
0 0.18
0
0
C
0
0.19
0
0
0 0.19
0
C
1.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.03
0
0
0 0.03
0
0
C
0.73
0
0
0 0.45
0
0
0
0.29
0
0
0 0.29
0
0
0
0.7
0
0
0
0.7
0
0
0
0.13
0
0
0 0.13
0
0
0
0.77
0
0
0 0.77
0
0
0
2.25
0.51
0
0
1.35 0.48
0
0
0
0.73
0
0
0 0.73
0
0
1.3
0.6
0
0
1.3
0.6
0
()
0.43
0
0
0 0.43
0
0
0
0.88
0
0
0 0.88
0
0
0
7
0.87 1.04
0
7 0.87 1.04
0)
0.93
0.2 0.2
0 0.93
0.2
0.1
0
0
6
0
0
0
6
0
0)
0
0.29
0
0
0 0.29
0
0
1.13
0.95
0
0
1.5 0.76
0
0
23.1

10.34 1.24

0 20.79 10.12 1.14

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan
1999
2000
1999
1998
1998
2000
2000
2000

AEF Arusha
AEF Drop II
AEF Moun Village
AEF Neptune Flwr
NBC
AEFZan Safari
IOH
NBC
Total Pending Commitment:

Equity
1.5
0.2
0.9
0.4
0
0.7
2.5
30
36.2

Quasi Partic
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10.07
0
0
30.07
0
0

IT

AnnexB9
page 1 of 7

Tanzania CAS: Framework for Country Program
.

Development
Objectives/lssues
|
Focuson Poverty
Alleviation& tirowth
Makepoverty
eradicationacentral
focusof development
strategy,

Improve
informationon
povertyand
improve
statisticscapacity
forbetter
monitoringand
analysisof
developmentand
povertydata

Diagnosis
Over50%of populationor
i8 millionis poor;3' oot
populationlive in abject
poverty
a Povertyis mainlya rural
phenomenon(61%of rural
populationis poor)

Limitedand poorqualityof
dataon poverty
povertydata/
a Comparadve
trendsnot available
.

HouseholdBudgetSurvey&
a Implement
n

a

.

Ensurecontinued

* Progressin fiscalreform
needsfurtherbroadening,
especiallyin expenditure
management

a

.
a

laborsurvey
analysisofbasichousehold
Preliminary
data,includingpovertylines,povertyand
sociaiindicators(bygender,regionand
socioeconomiccharacteristics)
Agreementon amonitoringsystemfor
trackingchangesin: i) incomepoverty,ii)
needs
socialindicatorsandiii) community
Defineinstitutionalrolesin collection,
analysisandmonitoringofpoverty
informadon
of
establishmnent
MTEF2001/2-03104:
budgetary
inter-sectoralandintra-sectoral
allocationsin the recurrentand
budgetaccordingto poverty
development
priorides.
Adoptanual budget,incorporating
povertyprioritiesin the agriculture,
education,health,ruralroadsand water
supplysectors
stance& reduce
Maintainanti-inflation
inflationaround4%
Improveandstabilizefiscalperformance
Prioritizedevelopmentexpenditues
amongand withinsectorsandensue their
consistencywiththeMTEF

Allkeymuld-lateralsandbilateralsengagedin policydialogueand povertyeradicationinitiatives.
UpgradingProject(FILMUP),2000
PinancialInstitudonsandLegalManagement
NationalAgricultureExtensionProject(NAEP11),1997
NadonalAgricultureResearchProject(NARP11),1997
PovertyReducdonStrategyPaper(PRSP),2000
and PrvateSectorReformProgram(PPSR),2000
Pdivadzadon
StructuralAdjustmentCredit,I and 11(PSACI and 11),2000
Programmatic
PublicSectorReformProgram(PRSP),2000
ServicesProject,2000
Rual andMicrofinance
Project(TAP),1999
TaxAdministradon

for the

I
* Policydialogue
Allkeynulti-lateraland bilateral
PSAC!
I
d.n.rgn.dNC-Os9.e i.lemtntino
* Rural Development
generation,
income
programs(e.g.
Strategy
capacity building,community
* MediumTerm
initiatives,infrastructureandsocial
Expenditure
sectorinterventions)to support
Framework(MTEF)I
Tan;ania'spovertyeradication
PublicExpenditure
objectives.Thelargerdonorsare also
Review(PER)
activelyengagedin policydialogue
* PovertyMonitoring

Poor
Officialstatisticsand
:e
p.uci* PRSPcompleted
includingdatabaseon
povertyandbaseline
povertyline and
incidenceanalysis
a Povertymonitoring
indicators
*Rural Develop.Strategy

1*

* ResultsofHouseholdBudgetSurveyby2001
* Approvedoperationalpovertymonitoring
indicatorsandsurveymethods
. Pilot laborsurvey

* Completionof
HouseholdBudget
Surveyandlaborsurvey
of
a Presentation
preliminaryanalysison
povertyandof
monitoringsystem

.
.

.

AdoptionofMTEFFYOI-03 thatadheresto
in line wilh thePSRP
prioritization
. Adoptionof budget2001/02in linewith
MTEFprioridesandconductingannual
publicexpenditurereviewsto confirm
adherenceto set priorities

a Publicexpenditure

a Allkey donorsfullyengagedin

MeetPovertyReduction& GrowthFacility
(PRGF)/PRSPconditions,
Replacecashmanagementsystemwith
basedon
efficientexpendituremanagement
the budgetandspendingpriorities.
oftheIntegrated
a. Fullimplementation

a PER& MTEF

.

T

reviews& MTEF

. IFMSrecords
* PublicFinanceMgment
& PublicAuditBills
approved
* TreasuryMinutes(in

Bank Group
2
Instruments

Partner Programs'

MeasurementTools

Adjustment/Benchmark

1

a

SoundMacro
Framework&
ImprovedFiscal
Performance

|

Creating Higher Growth and Economic Opportunities
* Reductionin povertyincidence,especiallyin
ofa PovertyReduction
implementation
jcs
u-au sn- , 0,6S6twf. W h .it ob..,
argess
StrategyrPaper(fRSPj)iodessne
. Increasein GDPpercapitagrowthrate from
and measuresaimedat improving
2002-03.
1.3%(1997-99)to about3%in
for the poor,build
economicopportunities
stabilityand
of macroeconomic
* Maintenance
humancapitaland empowerthepoor.
of
of full complement
implementation
of a ruraldevelopment
a Preparation
structwralandsocialsectorreforms
strategyto articulatea cohesiveprogram
ofactionforaddressingpovertyin rural
areas

a

Shiftbudget
resourcestowards
acdividesbenefiting
thepoor

,Z|
Strategy/Actions

1

Activities for PRSP
PERC

/ EU
UiK/UNDP
Otherlargerbilaterals

PER/MTEFprocess

* IMFProgram
* AfDB/EU:StructuralAdjustmsent
a Key donorsengagedin regular
dialogue

* Policydialogue
* HIPC
* Activitiesfor PRSP
a PovertyAssessment

. Policydialogue
* FILMUP
* MTEF/PER
a HIPC
* Acdvidesfor PRSP
* PERC

. Policydialogue
* TAP
. MTEF/PER
a PSACI

//

Annex B9
page 2 of 7

Development
Objectives/ssues

Diagnosis

response to audits)

Financial Management System (IFMS)

macroeconomic
stability.

B ank Group
Instruments'

Partner Programs

Measurement Tools

Adjustment/Benchmark

Strategy/Actions

Improve expenditure
mwangement
* StrengthenRevenueAuthority andexpand
tax base

Improve tax regime:
Modemize tax
administration,
rationalizetax regime
andcontaintax evasion

*
*
*
*

*

Addressissuesof
heavyexternaldebt
burdenandhigh
interestpaymentson
domesdcdebt.
Environmentally
SustainableRural
Development
Promotesustainable
rural growth and
reducepoverty
incidencein rural areas

Improved smallholder
productvity

t

Radonalizeimport taxes
Simplify tariff structureandreduce
protection
* Harmonizetaxeswithin the EAC

*

Maintain multilateral debt fund
Maintain macroeconomicstability and
implementstructuraland social sector
refonmswith a view to reachingthe
completionpoint under the HIPC
Initiative
. Promoteprivatesectorinvestmentsin the
ntral sector;greaterenvironmental
protection;improved linkageswith urban
areas;md strengtheningrelevant
institutions.
* Strengthenfanmer-driven researchand
extension.
. Implementland policy to enhanceaccess.
* Strengthenagriculturalexports

*

.
*

Review tax policy to
reducetrade taxesand
removenuisancetaxes
at various levels of
government
.

Unsustainableexternaldebt
burden

Average3% agricultural
growth in 1989-99below
potential.
* Subsistence,rainfed
farming; low productivity;
weak(input-market)links.

.

*

80% (majority) of farmcrs
are subsistence farmers with
average holding size of less
than I ha.

*

*

Establisha Unified Taxappealsmechanism.
Implementguidelineson the rationalizationof
local taxesandfees
Review remainingstatutoryexemptions(inel.
NGOs & GOT) to reducethem.
Introduceuniquetaxpayeridentification
numbers(TIN) for administration/
registration.
Abolish withholdingtan on goodsand
services& limit other taxesand leviesto
import duty, product-specificexcises,the
Energy Fund andthe RoadToll; reduce
number of excisesto 6
Reducetariff barriers& establishcustoms
union in line with EastAfrican Cooperation
guidelines
Radonalizeother customs/export-import
duties& establisha duty drawbacksystem

*

Public Notice of a
Unified Tax Appeals
Mechanismbeing
operational
* Publishedguidelines on
rationalizing local taxes
andfees
* StrengthenRevenue
Authority andexpand tax
base.

* IMF Program
* EU/JNDP/USAID/Sweden/Finland/
Demnark:Institutional strengthening
of TanzaniaRevenueAuthority;
Ministry of Finance;fiscal reform

.

Policies setout in CBI
policy leter followed
* Public Notice of a Duty
drawbacksystembeing
operational

.
*

ReachCompletion Point underlIfPC
Initiative by endFY2001

* Bank of Tanzania(BOT)
reportson external&
domesticPublic debt
stockand debt servicing

* IMF Program
* AfDB/Bilaterals: MDF; HIPC
support

Firm & Farmsurveys;
supervisionreports
* CropBoard Acts
amended
* Governmentorderson
rationalizationof
taxation
* Point of salecashewnut
processingplants, &
remainingstateranches

.
*

Finm & Farm surveys;
supervision reports
Level of budgetary
expenditures for
provision of
decentralized agricultural

*

a

Prioritize smallholder agriculture in
development strategy
* Develop/strengthen national and local
institutions to facilitate farmer (support)
srgxnirstionr.
*

_ _ _ _[ _ _ _ _ _ I

_

_

_

_

_

_

IMF Program
EU/Other largerdonors

*
*
*
*

Policy dialogue
MTEF/PER
PSAC I
TAP

*

As above

*
.

Policy Dialogue
CommercialDebt
Buyback
Muldlateral Debt Fund
(MDF)
HIPC
Policy dialogue
Rural & Micro-Finance
ServicesProject
PSAC I; PSAC 11
NARP If
NAEP 11
HIV/AIDS Project

*
.

Rationalizelevies,feesamdtaxespaid by
farmers/traders;avoid muldpletaxation;
ensureuniform fiscal treatment.
* Removetrade barriersacrossregions;
eliminatetemporaryexport bans; Commodity
BoardsandStrategic Review Scopefor Grain
Reserve.
. Divest cashewprocessingfactories,state
farms
. Publish rules andregulations,basedon work
by Min. of Agric & Cooperatives
* Involve export crop industryin research;
apply uniformtaxeson crop expons across
districts
* Increase small-holders participatory farters
groups establishedand visited/assisted by
extension agents per cropping season * Improved smallholders' access to fertilizer,
improved seeds, small implements
.

[

I__
_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

.

*
.

_

_

_

IMF Program
EU/FRG/UK/ Netherlands/
Finland/Denmark/AfDB: sector
reforfmdialogue

s

.
*
*
*

.

.

EU/FRG/UK/ Netherlands/
Finland/Demnark/ AfDB: Research
and Extension
UNDP/Den-mark/Finland: agroprocessing; irrigation

X__

_

_

_I

* Policy dialogue
* NAEP If
. NARP 11
* Lake Victoria 11
. Soil Fertility Project

I__

Annex B9
page 3 of 7

Development
Objectives/Issues

Strategy/Actions

Adjustment/Benchmark

Improve rural
infrastructure
particularly tunk and
feedet coads network

* Inadequate irrigation; poorly
maintained rural roads
(trunk and feeder); limited
access to ruraUurban areas &
to power

* Build roads to access urbamand rural
markets.
. Expand use of water for small and
medium scale irrigation.
* Electrify rural areas with growth potential.

* 50% Increase by 2003/04 of kilometers of rural
roads ( trunk and feeder) maintained per year,
with a breakdown by level of Government
and district

*

Improved micro/rural
financial services

* Rural and non-rural poor
have limited access to credit

n

*

Issue preliminary regulations for micro/ruralfinance institutions
Recapitalize NMB and transforming it into a
micro-finance institution

a

Improve Natural
Resource Management

* Proliferation of
uncoordinated Donor
intervenfions
* Gaps in integrating sector
policies with envirommental
policies,
* Lack of transparent policies
on wild life and hunding.
* Deficient property rights and
disincentives for
conservation.
* Deficient urban water and
sanitation management.
a Inadequate public safety net
mechanism

Examine prudential banking regulations
and provisions for bank supervision to
ensure the integration of micro/rural
finance sector
* Revise Financial Institutions Act to
stimulate coordinated growth in
micro/rural finance
* Conserve natural resources for sustainable
growth

Prepare a biodiversity conservation strategy
and action plan
Adopt a national action plan to combat
desertification
Present enviromnental framneworklegislation
to Parliament
Finalize Environmental Impact Assessment
Guidelines
.
Adopt environmental standards
Prepare a National Priority Enviromental
Management Programme
Rationalize donor program from current S 400
million with 60% outside GOT budget
Increase capacities of communidies to
prioritize, implement and manage sustainable

*

Publish a biodiversity
conservation strategy;
Plan to Combat
Desertification;
Enviromnentl Impact
Assessment Guidelines;
National Priority
Environmental
Management Programme
fmalized

e

Environmental

a
a

Framework legislation
passed by Parliament
Supervision reports
Reports from MOLG and

Develop Social Safety
Nets to assistthe rural

poorandvuhlerable

Improve food security

.

Lack of coherent policy
frame work relatng to food
security

_ _ __ __

_

_ _

_ _

.
a
a

*
*
*
a

*
*

Empower local communities
Initiate preparation of District Action

a

*

Legislate national ban on local tayation of
food shipments across district boundaries
Develop a transparent nadonal policy on
food aid

* Eliminate Regions prerogative to impose
export/import bans on food trade

_ _

_ _

_ _

_

_ _

_ _

_

_ _

_ _

_

_ _

_ _

_ _

_

_ __I_

_ __I_

Roads 11
Roads Rehabilitation
Power VI; Songo
Songo

Level of Road Fund
resources directed to
districts
* Level of budgetary
for
s
expenditures
provision of

* EU/FRG/IJS/
* Finland/Norway/SwitzerlandlUNDP/
AfDB: Roads Rehab; mainten.
* Switzerland/
Demark: rural roads
a Switzerland./ UK/FRG: TA; Training

services
Copy of official gazette
showing approved
Microfinance Act
a NMB operational as
micro-finance institution

* Canada/
* Norway/Densarld Switzerland:
Support to micro-finance; rural
finance; pilot revolving funds;
capacity building

a

.
*
.
.

Policy Dialogue
Financial Sector
FIDP 11
PSAC 1; It
IFC support for
microfinance

FRG/Norway/
Finland/Denmark/EU/AfDB: Forest
resources mgmt; wildlife/park areas
mgmt
a Norway/Finland/
a Denmark/Sweden/UK/JNDP:
land/soil mgmt; env./ ecosystem
mgmt.
* FinlandU Denmark: fisheries; marine
env. protection

*
*
*
.

Lake Victoria 11
Forest Conservation
Soil Fertility Project
PERC

.

TASAF
PERC

*

Policy dialogue on food
security improvement
and enhancement(food
aid food import and
export)
intemal and
aLiberalized
extemualfood
m arketstrade

.
.

a
a

*

Minof Cominunity
development

developmentiniatives to improvesocioPlansfor PovertyReductionwith
economicservices opporettnities
stakeholderpatticipation
of
* Createsafetynets for themost vulnerable, * Conductzonalworkshopsfor Development
DistrictsActionPlansfor PovertyEradication
AIDSvictims,orpbsas,widows.
usingpardcipatorymethodologies
* Increasepercentageof developmentprojects
to combatAIDS

a

_

*

Bank Group2
Instruments

Partner Programs'

Measurement Tools

Diagnosis

.

Many key Bilaterals (EU/UNDP and
NGOs involved: Community

a

development;genderawareness;

.

LocalGovt. Capacity
Bldg.

Bilaterals and NGOs involved

a

Rural Development
Strategy
NAEP 11& NARP 11
PSAC I
Soil Fertility Project
Local Govt. Capacity
Bldg.

*
a

.
a
_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

Annex B9
page 4 of 7

Development .Bank
Objectives/Issues
Increase Private
Investment and Private
Sector Participants
Improve business
environment and
enhance contestability
of markets

Cwnbersome processes and
inadequate regulatory frame
work for pfivate sector
paridcipadon
* Weak institutions that fail to
support the private sector's
needs
. Low investment rates
* Lack of capacity in
Tanzanian fums
* Ambivalent attitudes
towards PSD

*

Approve proposed revision of company
ordinance and submit to parliament
a Revitalize Tanzania Investment Center
(TIC)
* Support development of a Credit
Information Bureau (CIB)
* Promote operation of the Comumercial
Court
* Issue regulations to make the new Land
Act effective;
* Arcane labor laws amended
* Fomulate Transportation Masterplan
*

*
*
c

.
*
*
*
*
*
*

Reduced delays in investment sanctioning and
simplified procedures for private sector entry
company ordinance revised
foreign participation in the stock market
allowed
Official gazeneC(amendinentsof Act
governing TIC); TIC restructured.
CIB established and operational
Disseminate the new land law and regulations
widely
Implementation plan for the Land Acts.
Revised labor laws
National policy on transport & Transportation
Masterplan
Nat'l Power sector Strategy approved

Regular implementation
review & Supervision
reports
* Issuance of regulations
for implementadon of
Land Law
* A 'New' TIC & CIB
operational
* Private sector surveys
*

Group2
Instruments

Partner Programs'

Measurement Tools

Adjustment/Benchmark

Strategy/Actions

Diagnosis

*
*
*
*

UNDP/US/UiU/
Denmark: Capacity Building; TA
UNDP: Trade/ export development
Germany: Power Sector

Policy dialogue
PPSR
Private Sector Profile
Study
* PSAC I; PSAC 11
* Roads Rehab I/
* Songo Songo
. Regional Trade Project
.
.

IFC Activities
* Financing and capacity
building for SMEs
.
.

Financing key sectors
of mining and tourism
Financing of key

privatizations
.

FIAS advisory services

on FDI
Complete privatization
of parastatals.
Encourage privte
sector participation in
infnmtricture

* Slow pace of privatization in
the past.
* Considerable fiscal drain
fiom ineffective parastatals
* Inefficient state owned

utilitiesandinfrastructure
* Highcostsandinadequate
serviceconstraingrowth

Establish an adequate
andtransparent
Nationalreguatoty
frameworkfor key
udlidesand
infrutrtwture

* Privatize
* 80Noof parastatals (by total employment
and tunover)
* -20 strategic / large enterprises
* IS0 smiall medium
policyonPE
* Adoptcomprehensive

legal system for
demonopolized industries

s

*

Private sector surveys
Supervision reports
Issuance of required
docutmentation, e.g.,
MOU; POS; Options

*
*

IMF Program
UNDP/UK: Capacity Building; TA;
private sector development

study;concessioning
Plans
IssuanceofIM to
investorsandCall for
Bids.
*Cabinet approvalof
strategyfor
reorganizilonof
TANESCOand
Electricitysector

.

compensadon
retrenchment
policyon PE debt
* Adoptcomprehensive
treatmentand resolveindebtednessof
panastatals

in
a Strengthen the regulatory framework
keysectorsto increasecompetitionand
utilitiesandinfrastructue
transparency
enhance
power,
ports,
(railway,
water,telecommunications) * StrategyforreorganizadonofTANESCO
and Electricitysector bymid-2001;
* Inadequatesystemof
commerciallaws;deficient
* Inadequate regulation of key

*

Bring to point of sale/concessioning Tanzania
Telecom Company Ltd; TRC, TANESCO
distribution system, DAWASA, Port Services
Review and decide on the future role of the
State Mining Corporation (STAMICO)

Creation of Regulatory Institution(s) covering

Telecom,Rail, Ports& Shipping,Energy,
Water
fullystaffed
* Regulatorylnstitudon(s)
* Passedlawsgoverningthe regulatory
frameworkforabove sectors
*
*

Copies of official gazene

participatingBanks.
* Fualystaffed
____
___ ___
___
________
.___ ___

___

___

____

___

_ _

*

*

IMF Program

* AfDB/EU:CapacityBuilding;TA
showingapproved
Act(s);laws
Copyof Commissioners
appointment
announcement
* Copies of Sectoral
Regulations
* Sale of Credit reference
company's Shares to

Formation of credit reference company
Establish Roads Agency TANROADS

TANROADS

a

IFC Activities
SongoSongo
. TTCLprivatization
* Financingforprivate
telecomoperators
. Financingfor other
utilityand transport
privatizations

s

.

Policy dialogue
PSAC l; PSAC 11
* PPSR
* FIDP 11
* Dar Water Supply
* SongoSongo
.

*

Policy dialogue

PSACl; PSAC11
PPSR
* FILMUP
* Rural& Micro-finance
ServicesProject
.

a

*

IFC Activities
Advisory and technical
assistance on regulation

Annex B9
page 5 of 7

Bank Group
Instruments'

_

Development
Objectives/Issues

Political interference in bank

Enihancedperformnance
by tne uinanciaisector

acuviues,non-commercialending and bad loans.
. Weak capacity to enforce
prudential regulations noid
supervise finnncial sector
institutions
iWeak financial institutions
* Insufficient development of
NBFIs
s developed capital
Poorly
N
markets

Adjustmen t/Benchmark

Measurement Tools

bank licensing requirements,
-nd
r
e
......
......
capacity for both off-site and on-site
supervision
the Banking and Financial Institutions
*Revise
Act to institute legal franework for regulation
and supervision of micro-finance institutons
a Complete revision of prudential bankitng
a
regulations
* Develop and evniuate options for
restcturing /divestituareof PBn
restructuring TPB and privatizing TIB
m Complete study to strengdten the regulatory
mechanism for insurance and pension sectors

Issued, evised
e
d
r
pt
-..
revised Banking and
Financial Institutions Act
on options for
nStudies
FZ, TPe, TIP
P

Strategy/Actions

Diagnosis

sod regulation of
_
Improve supervision
e-.
ssia,csaasrc
* Expanded financial intermediation
n Improve efficiency of financial
intermediation and stem losses
iApprove proposal to allow foreign
in the stock market with
ricipation
pa
appropriate safeguards.
a Grealer regional integration of capital
markets
Build capacity of banks
s Encourage new NBFIs
*

*Revise

Partner Programs
IMF Prograns
ITTSPI _91r.u-Id.
* Denmark/Sweden/
. Finland: Capacity Building; TA
*EU/AfDSB/

Policy Dialogue

FILMUP
*
*

Switzerland: Structural Adjustment
*

*
a
a

Financial Sector
Assessment
Rural & Micro-Finance
Services Project
PPSR
FIDPPS
I; PSAC
PSAC11
IFC Activities
of NMB
A
Privatotion
Supprtn for new
NBFIs
Advisory work on
capital markets
Term resources to
banks

Building Capabilities
Heilth

.

Improved Health and
Population outcomes;
reduced malnutrition
and lowered infant,
child and matemal
motality rates
Reduced HIV/AIDS
infection rates

.

.
.

Inequities in access to health
services
1997 infant and child
mortality rates are 85 and
136 per Thousand
respectively
Severe stunting in 20% of
children
In 1997, HIV prevalence in
15-49 age group was
estimated at 9.4%

* Improve health status through greater
allocation of resources for basic health
care
* Broad-based campaign on HIV/AIDS

.

*

*

*

*
*
*
*

Complete national health accounts & develop
public resource envelope for health within
MTEF
Review/improve efficiency of revenue
collection for hospitals
Extend cost-sharing to dispensaries and health
centers
Set targets for intra-sector allocations of
resources, with priority to basic health
services and non-salary items
Increase percentage of children under 2 years
immunized - measles and DPT from 71%
(1996) to 75% (2001)
Increase % of pregnant women delivering in
health facilities from 50% to 55% by 20003
Implement malaria control plan
Raise public awareness of HIV/AIDS
epidemic;
AIDS: reduce HIV/AIDS diseases by 25% by
2002. Ensure that all hospital are equipped to
ensure a safe blood supply for transfusions.

.
*

a

Reports from Ministry of
Health
Nationally spear-headed
campaign on HIV/AIDSNational Advisory
Committee: all regional
centers; Other National
Leadership.
Visits to 75% of districts
by 2001

IMF Program
AfDB/UNDP/
UK/US/Netherlands/Norway:
HIV/AIDS
a AfDB/FRG/US/
* Norway/Netherlands/Denmark/
. Canada/
Switzerland/Others: Preventive
Health; nutrition; capacity building;
TA
.
.

.
*
*
a

.
.
*

Policy Dialogue
Decentralization
PERIMTEF
PSRP
HIPC
Activities for PRSP
HIV/AIDS Project

Annex B9
page 6 of 7

Development
Objectives/Issues
Clean Water
Improve quality and
availability of drinking
water and sanitation
services

Strategy/Actions

Diagnosis
*

* Access to safe water is
around 50%/.and water bome
diseases are common

*

Improved management of water
distribution system and improved access
to clean water
Strengthen support to urban/mral
decentralization, private sector
participation, sound pricing, and
development of local appraisal, financing,
implementation and operation capacities.

.

*
.

.

Primary &
Secondary Education
Improve access to
quality and costeffective basic
education
Improve secondary
education, including
broadened publicprivate partnership

* Ensure adequate resources to sector
* Adopt action plan for education
management and monitoring system
* Implementation of BEMP and SEMP

Primary school examination
rates is 26% for boys and
14%for girls
* Entry ratesin secondary
schools are about 6%
* 1997 Illiteracy Rate was
28.4%
* 1997 School enrollment,
primary (% gross): 66%
*

.

*
.

a

*

In urban areas support to: decentralization for
provision of WSS service; creation of
finamcially autonomous Water Boards & their
consolidation; sub-contracting of operations
to professional (preferably private) operators;
promoting sound pricing policy; developing
local capacities.
DAWASA management transferred to private
sector
Provision of safe and clean water from 48.5%
population coverage in 2000 to 55% by the
year 2003 in rural areas; and from 68%
coverage in 2000 to 75% by the year 2003 in
urban areas
In nrral areas, develop demand driven
community identification, preparation and
implementation of WSS projects, through
local govemments & private sector.
Community management.
Implement action plan for decentralization of
education financing and management in 35
phase I local authorities.
Complete primary school mapping in 50
percent of the districts
Complete Secondary Education Master Plan
(SEMP) and adopt a framework for cost
sharing among govermment,private sector,
and local communities
Increase enrollment rate by 2.5% each year by
2003/04
Improve transition rate to secondary schools
from 15%to 20% by 2003.

* In urbanareas,MOW
annual reports;
* In Dar es Salaam, bi
annual reports by
independent regulator;
* In rural areas, MOW
annual reports.
. Signed DAWASA
concession agreement

*

*

*

*

Action plan for
management and
monitoring system
Mapping Report to
provide infotmation
covering: availability and
condition of schools,
quality and distribution
of teachers, quality of
school management,
enrolbment rate, drop out
rate and key problems in
delivery of education
Undertake annual joint
government/donor
review to monitor
progress in sector
development, including
basic education
SEMP Implementation

Empowerment & Accountability

qualityof
Improved
ratdarcc:stopub!:
atlocallevels
services

*

Major responsibilitiesand
accountabilities are being
devolved to local
govemments, but their

*

financial,governance,
M-Ifi.1 .. A
to
capacities
administrative
deliverinfrastructeanBuild
areweak
services

I

EU/FRG/lreland/Sweden/
Denmark/UNICEF: regional water/
sanitation projects; capacity building.

.
*
*
*
*
*

Policy Dialogue
PER/MTEF
Dar WSS
Rural WSS L
HIPC
Activities For PRSP
PERC

* IMF Program
e UNICEF/EU/ UK/Ireland: Sector
refom
* FRG/UK/JUS/Ireland/Netherlands/Belgiuan/ Norway/Swedern/
. Finland/Denmark/
* UNICEF: Support to basic education;
technical and vocational training;
capacity building

*
*
.
*
.

Policy Dialogue
PER/MTEF
HIPC
Educ. Ration.
Primary Educ APL

.

Supenision
*~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.
Implementatlon of
Deecentrlization
Program

Bank Group
Instruments 2

Partner Programs'

Measurement Tools

Adjustment/Benchmark

Local Govemment Refonm Program
(LGRP) to be implemented in three main
phases thsroughDecember 2003

I~~~~~~

n Adopt plan for strengthening capacity in the
local Govt authorities (LGAs) under the three
phases
n Clarifying the framework for delivery of

*

LO financial
performance; anainment
of national affordable
minimum standards

with district
through * Workshops
on behalfof theGovenmnent
services
authoritiesandcivil
sector
reformof thegrantsystemandparallel
societytoreview
reforms.
p ogress view__
Buildcapacity
progress
for effectiveresouce
reports
* Supervision
r
management.

T

UK/Finland/ Denmark/ Netherlands:
Local Govt. refom; capacity
building in inter alia financial
management

j

_

_

__

_ __

_ _

__HIP___

Policy Dialogue
Fiscal Decentralization
Study
* PER/MTEF

.
*

. TASAF
* PSRP
* lIPC
_ __ _ __ _
Capacity
Local_Govt
Bldg

Annex B9
page 7 of 7

Development
Objectives/Issues
Improving
Governance
Improve accountability
and teduce corruption

.Transparency intemational
Tanzania ranks 82 in a of 89
(89 being most corrupt)
* Lack of mechanism to
enforce accountability.
Lack of civic awareness

Improve budget
management to fumly
root prudent fiscal
operations, sectoral
prionii2zation and
improve public service
delivery,

*

Establish efficient and
motivated civil service
amd improve quality
and effcctiveness of
delivery of public
seriices

*

Imnproved
Governance

Strategy/Actions

Diagnosis

Weak local Govemrment
capacity for delivery of
public services

.Official adoptioni publication mild
dissemination of National Action Plan for
use controt ot corrupnon
IImplementation of Legal Sector Reform
Program

a

.
.

Consensus for institutional
reforming and next role of
the state is still week
* Civil servants are still poorly
paid and unmotivated.

.
.

Enhanced Financial Accountability &
Public Financial Management
Enforce hard budget constraint on
parastatals
Integrate Performance Budgeting and
Medium Term Expenditure Framework

Implenmentationof an effective Public
Service Reform Program
Reform civil service pay stnictsre
Introduce output accountability in service
delivery for the 5 priority sectors
Operational plans for perfommance
management implemented in key
ministries

Adjustment/Benchmark

Measurement Tools

.Dissemmiate to all districts the National AntiCorauption Strategy and Action Plan
a Adopt sector specific ami-corrpiio- pias- ILw
tax administration, nationai tender system,
judiciary and public works
. Cany out diagnostic surveys on Judiciary,
Ministry of Works, Education, Health,
RALG, and Home Affairs, A.G.'s, office,
TRA, and CAG and develop and approve
operational strategies for these areas
. Amended Public Leadership and Code of
Ethics Act
. Approve/Pass new Procurement Law and
Regulations
. Publicize all contracts of significant
implications
. Make public tender results.
e Strengthen the Office of the Controller and
Auditor General
. Full implementation of Integrated Finauicial
Management System (IFMS)
* Roll out IFMS to all Ministries, Regions and
Districts and to at least 50% of disticts by
2003
. Performance budget developed and
introduction of output accountability in
service delivery for the Ministries of
Agriculture, Education, Health, Water and the
Civil Service department by FY02-04
. At least 10% reduction in current public
serice employment nwmbers by 2004.
. Introduce performance management in
Ministries, Departments and Ageiscies
(MDA):75 percent of MDAs' to have
developed strategic plans by 2002. 50% of
MDAs' to show results by end-2004
* Establish systems to improve performance,
personnel management and compensation.
. Launch at least 37 Executive Agencies by
2003/04

with district
.Workshops
authorities and civil
-- ci-y
. Dissemination of Annual
Report of Pemaneit
Commission of Enquiry
. Sector-specific anticortuption plans
. Sector-specific surveys
completed
. Public Leadership and
Code of Ethics Act
. Regular issue of quality
CAG Reports

Dialogue
|.Policy
.EU-/UJi(/Netherlands/Dernmark/
Anti-Corruption Report
|
Sweden/Finland: anti-corruption
- non SiTEF
^
. FILMUP
strengthening;
. Accountability/
LTNDP/EUWSweden/Nether-lands:
Govemance
Strengthening human rights; refugees
TAP
assistance
Activities for PRSP
. Denmark/ Sweden/Finland: Support
elections;
processes;
to democratic

Record of all expenditure
comnitments and arrears
in the IFMS
Public Finance
Management Bill and
Public Audit Bill
approved
Survey Results

.

Public service payroll
and personnel data
. Quarterly and annual
M&E reports
. Predictable resource
flows to service delivery
in priority sectors
(PER/MTEF)
* 100J of Ministries
utilizing improved IFS
and Performance
Budgeting
* Implementation of public
service management &
employment policy;
public service pay
policy; code of ethics
and conduct
a Public Service
Commission operational

.

.

.

.

.

Bank Group
Instruments

Partner Programs'

a

.

IMF Program
AfDB/EU: structwraladjustment
facility
EU/Derunark/ US/Sweden/Finland:
public financial management refonn

.
.
.
.
*
.

Donor Programs noted above

.
*
*
.
.
.

__

Policy Dialogue
PER/MTEF
FILMUP
Accountability/
Governance
TAP
Activities for PRSP

Policy dialoguc
MTEF
Local Govt. Capacity
Bldg.;
PSAC I
PPRP
Accountability/
Govemance
PSRP

_

Annex BIO

Tanzania CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Networkarea

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Povertyreduction

Bank priority'

Countrypriority'

Major issueb

Country

of country and
Bank prioritiesd

performancea

Poor

Increasing Poverty

High

High

Economic policy
Public sector

Good

Success in Stabilization

High

High

Fair

Governance,Decentralization

High

High

Gender

Fair

Tradition

Moderate

Moderate

Poor

Low and decliningenrollment

Moderate

High

Fair

Malaria,AIDS

Moderate

High

Good

Safety nets

Moderate

Moderate

Poor
Fair

PoorPerformance
Natural resourcedegradation

High
Moderate

High
High

Fair

Slow

Moderate

Moderate

Good

Extensivefinancial reform

High

Moderate

Fair
Fair
Poor

Low Competitiveness
Low electrification,mining improved
Poor quality and maintenance

High
Moderate

High
Moderate

Moderate

High

Human Development
Education
Health,nutrition& population
Social protection

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development
Environment
Socialdevelopment
Finance,PrivateSector& Infrastructure
Financialsector
Private sector
Energy& mining
Infrastructure

Reconciliation

a. Use "excellent," "good," "fair," or "poor."
b. indicate principai couniry-specific probleriis (e.g., for pove;ty reduction,,"rural pove..y;" foreduca:ion, "fmalc

sccondry

complion;"

forenvironnnen:, "u.b&a airpo!!u: on",.

c. To indicatepriority,use "low," "moderate,"or "high."
d. Give explanation,if prioritiesdo not agree; for example,another MDB mayhave the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Dialogue

Dialogue

Dialogue

Lake Victoria

/ Jkobo
a
gi

K

RWANDA

,

M

Musom

KENYA

AN2WMARA

~~~AFRICA

Kake

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Arusha
oho

BURUNDI

v 3 \,

|

1

4

0M\

g

(; 0)

4 < V <9
4

)

AA4EYEA
4

t%~~~~~~~~R,ukwe7

<1

'\5

r

S

ff

,/XX

/

~~~~~~~OCEAN

}/

ROGORO a

296/

N~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TheWorhj~'
fiokGrop
=''\

:btus of ony hrrior,I_

=ef

'oudre

MAINROADS

(3REGION

RAILPOADS

iINATiONAL

RIVERS

i~~~~~~~~~~0

Li

CAPITALS

o

,

_-

WRS.r

ao10

s

r

BOUNDARIESr

200

sM

,

CAPITAL

sS

INTERNATIONAL
BOUNDAPIESRUMAj
o

30-

-REGION

LiIlD

8f

TANZANIA

uh

eO
'ar

OAanyiM

RIhE

-t0%iS
.notn

i
SINGIDAINDIN

(tRVWYA

Tang

on iis mPo'

~~~~~~~~ARUSHA\/

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

<

-

t

3w

_
i

/

e

OBIQUE

>

