Public Disclosure Authorized

Documentof

The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 20370 - EAP

PACIFIC
REGIONAL STRATEGY

May 2000

Papua New Guinea and Pacific Islands Country Unit
East Asia and Pacific Regional Office

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
perfornance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization

GLOSSARY OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ADB
AusAID
APL
CDF
CRP
DWFN
ESW
EU
FEMM
FDI
FFA
FIAS
FSM
FTMM
GDP
GSP
GEF
HPI
IBRD
IAMP
IDA
IFC
LIL
MHLC
ODA
OED
OECD
PFTAC

PIC
PMCs
PSRP
R&D
RER
SPC
SES
SOE
SOPAC
SPPF
SPREP
UNDP
WTO

Asian Development Bank
Australia Agency for International Development
Adaptable Program Loan
Comprehensive Development Framework
Comprehensive Reforn Program
Distant Water Fishing Nations
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Forum Economic Ministers Meeting
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Fisheries Agency
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Federated States of Micronesia
Foreign Trade Ministers Meeting
Gross Domestic Product
General System of Preferences
Global Environment Facility
Human Poverty Index
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Infrastructure Management Project
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
Learning and Innovation Loan
Multilateral High Level Commission
Official Development Assistance
Operations Evaluation Department
Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development
Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center
Pacific Island Country
Pacific Member Countries
Policy and Structural Reform Program
Research and Development
Regional Economic Report
Secretariat of the Pacific Community
Statement of Economic Strategy
State Owned Enterprise
South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission
South Pacific Project Facility
South Pacific Regional Environment Program
United Nations DevelopmentProgram
World Trade Organization

Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

Mr. Jemal-ud-din Kassum, EAPVP
Mr. Klaus Rohland, EACNI
Mr. Laurence Dunn, EACNI

FOR OFFICIAL
USE ONLY

CONTENTS
Executive Summary...............
1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE....................................................................

1

2. THE PACIFIC SETTING....................................................................

2

A. Characterizing Pacific Economies
.2
B. Geographic, Political & Social Diversity..................................................
C. Governance.............................................................
D. Basic Human Indicators.............................................................
E. Poverty in the Pacific.............................................................

...........10
12
12
14

3. REFORM AND DEVELOPMENTIN THE PACIFIC.......................................................17
A. National Reforn Programs...................................................................
B. The Regional Dimension to Reform...................................................................
C. The Role of Development Partners...................................................................
4. PARTNERSHIP & STRATEGICSELECTIVITY- IDENTIFYING THE BANK'S
ROLE...................................................................

17
19
20
24

A. The Banks' Experience in the Pacific...................................................................
24
B. Lessons Learned...................................................................
26
C. The Comprehensive DevelopmentFramework (CDF) in the Pacific...........................27
D. The World Bank Group's Pacific Strategy ...................................................................29
E. Risks To ImplementationOf The Strategy....................
37...........
7
5. CONCLUDING COMMENTS.....................................

38

Annex 1: The Bank's Pacific Experience.....................................
Annex 2: Pacific - Countries at a Glance.....................................

39
43

FIGURES IN TEXT

Figure 1: GNP per Capita (US$, 1998).....
2.........................
Figure 2: Population (Thousands, 1998)......................................
2
Figure 3: GDP Growth (%)-High, Low, and average (1990-98) .................................................3
Figure 4: Government Expenditure 1996-98(% GDP) ............................................................. 5
Figure 5: Current Account Balance Before and After Official Transfers.......................................6
Figure 6: Suicide Rates in Selected Pacific Island Countries, by Sex and for Youth................... 16

This docimenthas a restricted
distibutionandmaybe usedby recipientsonlyin the
performance
of theirofficialduties.Itscontentsmaynototherwise
be disclosedwithout
WorldBankamthorization.

TABLES IN TEXT
Table 1: Main MerchandiseExports and Tourism Receipts...........................................................7
Table 2: Overall Fiscal Balance, 1994-98................................................................
8
Table 3: Debt Stocks and Aid Flows (Average, 1996-98)..............................................................9
Table 4: Basic Human Resource Profile................................................................
13
Table 5: Human Poverty Index for the Pacific ................................................................
15
Table 6: The Pacific Reform Agenda................................................................
18
Table 7: Bilateral Official Development Assistance (ODA) to the Nine Pacific Member
Countries - 1994-1998 ................................................................

Table 8: Multilateral Official DevelopmentAssistance (ODA) to Pacific Member
Countries 1994 -1998................................................................
Table 9: Current Lending Activities................................................................

20

22
31

BOXES IN TEXT
Box A: The Case of Kiribati.................................................................
11
Box B: The Solomon Islands' Reform Program ..........................................
...................... 17
Box C: World Bank Approaches to Poverty, 1990 and 2000.......................................................28
Box D: The World Bank's Approach to Private Sector Developmentin the Pacific.................... 32
Box E: The Biennial Regional Economic Report................................................................
34
MAP: IBRD 29631

PACIFIC REGIONAL STRATEGY
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
CHARACTERIZINGTHE PACIFIC
i.
The Bank's Pacific Regional Strategy will provide the framework for the re-engagement
of the Bank with the Pacific region and the nine Pacific countries that are Bank members'. It
follows the recent work of the Joint Commonwealth Secretariat-World Bank Task Force on
Small States and places the issues raised through that process in a Pacific context. A regional
strategy was considered appropriate given the size of the Bank's operations in the Pacific and the
shared nature of many of the problems facing countries of the region. The Regional Strategy
does, however, lay the foundation for future individual Country Assistance Strategies for Pacific
Bank members if required.
ii.
The Bank's Pacific Member Countries (PMCs) share many characteristic with other
small states. They are all relatively small, open economies with limited diversification and
limited institutional capacity. They are vulnerable to external economic and environmental
shocks and have limited or nonexistent access to global capital markets. Size and remoteness are
strong defining characteristic of the nine Pacific Bank members with the total land area of only
some 64,000 square kilometers (equivalent to twice the size of Belgium), while the exclusive
economic zones they control exceeds the land area of the USA. The population of all members
totals some 2 million (of which Fiji accounts for over 40 percent).
iii.
Unlike the Caribbean and Indian Ocean countries to which they are sometimes compared,
indigenous cultures and traditions have remained strong in the Pacific Islands and continue to
play a large role in political, economic and cultural life. The existence of these strong cultural
and social systems continues to ameliorate the incidence of absolute or abject poverty, but there
are clear indications that the systems and the values that underpin them are under strain.
iv.
The challenges facing the PMCs are to overcome the constraints they share with other
small states, including economic and environmental vulnerability, changing global trade regimes,
lack of institutional and human capacity and identifying practical options in response to the
continuing process of globalization. A major challenge specifically confronting all PMCs is to
provide sustainable and meaningful economic and social opportunities and services for growing
populations and within a context fast paced social, cultural and economic change.
v.
Most PMCs have broad based economic reform programs under development or in place
which have at their core macroeconomicand fiscal policy stability and recognition of the private
sector as the engine of sustainable economic development. Many also focus on promoting
development in rural and regional areas and improving access to health, education and training

' The Pacific Member Countries (PMCs) comprise Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji, Samoa, Tonga, Kiribati, Palau,
Federated States of Micronesia and Republic of Marshal Islands. A separate CAS (19590-PNG)has been prepared
that covers Papua New Guinea; for East Timor a Transition Strategy will be submitted to the Board shortly.

-

ii

-

services. The degree and extent of broader civil society involvement in and ownership of reform
programs varies.
vi.
There is a strong history of dialogue in the region on how to respond to shared
vulnerabilities and opportunities and a number of regional institutions have been developed.
Prospects for continued regional and subregional cooperation loom strong in the areas of trade,
banking, transport, telecommunications, management of marine resources and bulk purchasing
of supplies and products; but the immense size of the region and the variety of cultures and
political systems limits regional cooperation.
THE ROLE FOR DEVELOPMENTPARTNERS
vii.
PMCs have all depended heavily on external assistance to help finance their development
expenditures. In line with both colonial history and national interests, some 20 developed
countries provide bilateral assistance to the PMCs, though the top four (Australia, Japan, New
Zealand and, in the case of compact countries, the USA) accounted for over 95 percent bilateral
Official Development Assistance (ODA) in 1998. Multilateral partners include the Asian
Development Bank (ADB), the European Union (EU) and specialized agencies of the United
Nations family. The ADB and EU accounted for 82 percent of multilateral ODA provided to
PMCs in 1998. The scale of involvement by development partners, and the lack of institutional
capacity of PMCs to manage and drive it renders importanceto the issue of aid coordination.
THE BANK'S PACIFIC EXPERIENCE
viii. The Bank has extended 38 loans and credits to PMC since 1971, comprising 13 IBRD
loans ($US152.8m) to Fiji and 25 IDA credits to Samoa, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu and Tonga.
The success of the Bank's lending to PMCs can only be described at best as mixed. The Bank
has maintained an expanded program of economic and sector work since the beginning of the
1990s, with the cornerstone of that program being the biennial Regional Economic Report
(RER). The main lessons drawn from assessing the Bank's Pacific program have been:
*

The Bank's role in the transfer of resources to the PMCs has been and is likely to remain
limited, with the bulk of resources to be provided by bilateral donors, the ADB and the EU.

* In view of its limited lending, the Bank needs to carefully define its strategic objectives and
tailor its lending and non-lending activities to achievethose objectives.
* The absence of a long term strategy for assistance to PMCs has circumscribed the
effectiveness of the assistance that the Bank has been able to provide.
*

A long-term strategy for development in the region has to include active collaboration with
other principal developmentpartners in the region.

- iii

-

THE BANK'S PACIFIC STRATEGY
ix.
The Comprehensive Development Framework, the Bank's evolving understanding of the
root causes of poverty and the shared work with the Commonwealth Secretariat on the
challenges facing small states all provide the basis of a long term strategy for assistance to the
Bank's Pacific members. This strategy has at its core the fight against poverty as manifested in
the Pacific, will be supportive of reform programs that are owned and driven by the PMCs
themselves, will acknowledge the central importance of the sustainable utilization of natural
resources in meeting the development aspirations of the Pacific peoples, will identify country-led
coordination with other development partners as a key element for success and will stress the
role that Pacific institutions, traditions and customs play in making sustained progress against
poverty.
x.
The Bank's mission in the Pacific is based on partnership with the nine members and
their development partners. The Bank will provide a targeted and focused mix of project
financing, and a program of economic and sector work that brings global experience to the
development problems faced by PMCs.
i) The Bank's Lending Program
xi.
The Bank's lending program will be largely IDA-based, focused in sectors that match the
Bank's overarching mission of poverty reduction and in which the Bank's has a proven track
record, will involve direct policy and strategic reform and will only involve financial assistance
where there are no other sources of financing available. This will entail a sectoral focus on
education and health, measures to address the remoteness and isolation faced by the Pacific
including in the transport infrastructure and telecommunications sectors and a focus on
strengthening the private sector's capacity to play a greater role in these areas. In the area of
environment and natural resources, the Bank will continue to address country priorities through
GEF medium-sized grants and by mainstreaming it into lending, policy and advisory activities.
Support for broad based economic reform and restructuring will be considered where PMCs can
articulate a coherent reform program and demonstrate commitmentto carrying it through.
In terms of overall scale, an indicative benchmark of 2-3 new lending activities per fiscal
xii.
year will see a portfolio under supervision of some 7-10 projects and will entail a call on IDA
resources of up to $US30-$40 million over the next three years.
xiii. In recognition of the circumstances that apply in the Pacific, including the capacity of
small states and the cost of doing business with International Financial Institutions, continued
efforts will be made to use existing instruments more flexibly and develop new instruments that
match the scale and capacity of Pacific countries. This will include fine tuning and more
extensive use of Adaptable Program Loans (APLs) and Leaming and Innovation Loans (LILs),
as well as development of sector and program lending and possibly regional based lending
operations.

- iv -

ii) Economic and Sector Work
xiv. The Bank's role as a global knowledge provider is the key strength that it can bring to the
Pacific. The Bank's biennial Regional Economic Report (RER) will continue to be the main
vehicle for bringing the Bank's global perspective to the Pacific. It will be supplemented and
supported by a more focused program of regional and sector based analysis developed and
undertaken in conjunction with PMCs and other regional and bilateral development partners. The
Bank will maintain its capacity to undertake country-specificeconomic and sector work.
xv.
In the medium term, the main focus of the Bank's economic and sector work will focus
on the agenda identified through the joint World Bank-CommonwealthSecretariat Task Force on
Small States and on developing specific strategies that are relevant to the Pacific. This will
include:
i)

helping identify scope for cooperation at the regional level to share infrastructure and
institutional resources to overcome the lack of economies of scale that some individual
PMC face;

ii)

working with PMCs, regional organizationsand bilateral development partners to see
what relevance the Bank's work on catastrophe risk management in Caribbean can have
for the Pacific;

iii)

analyzing and identifyingadaptation strategies open to PMCs to respond to global
climate change, environmental degradationassociated with the growth of towns and
population growth;

iv)

drawing on the Bank's involvementwith trade liberalization experiences in other
countries to identify roadblocks to liberalization in the Pacific that could increase the cost
of adjustment; and

v)

working with PMCs and other developmentpartners to identify how the forces of
globalization, particularly technologicaland communicationadvances, can provide new
opportunities for reducing physical isolation and remoteness from markets.
ISSUES PROPOSED FOR BOARD CONSIDERATION

xvi. Issues that the Board may wish to provide guidance on include:
* the balance between lending and non-lending services in the Banks Pacific operations;
* strategic selectivity in terms of sectors identified and activities proposed; and
* how the issue of partnership is best handled in the Pacific context.

PACIFIC REGIONAL STRATEGY
1. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE
1.
The Bank's Pacific Regional Strategy will provide a framework for the re-engagement of
the Bank with the Pacific region and nine Pacific Bank members2 . It follows the recent work of
the Joint Commonwealth Secretariat-World Bank Task Force on Small States and places the
issues raised through that process in a Pacific context. A regional strategy was considered
appropriate given the size of the Bank's operations in the Pacific and the shared nature of many
of the problems facing countries of the region. The Regional Strategy does, however, lay the
foundation for future individual Country Assistance Strategies for Pacific Bank members if
required.
2.

A broad Bank Strategy for the Pacific will:

* build on and refine the work of the Small States Task Force;
*

provide member countries with a clear statement of the World Bank's ongoing commitment
to the Pacific region;

*

articulate a set of principles on which World Bank activities in the region would be based and
on which their effectivenesscould be judged;

* identify those areas and sectors in which the World Bank would focus its involvement in the
region; and
* provide an indication of the likely scale and composition of the support that could be
mobilized by the World Bank in the region.

The Pacific Member Countries (PMCs) comprise Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji, Samoa, Tonga, Kiribati, Palau,
Federated States of Micronesia and Republic of Marshal Islands. A separate CAS (19590-PNG) has been prepared
that covers Papua New Guinea; for East Timor a Transition Strategy will be submitted to the Board shortly.

2

-2 -

2. THE PACIFIC SETTING
A. CHARACTERIZINGPACIFIC ECONOMIES
3.
The total land area of the PMCs, dispersed among hundreds of small islands and atolls, is
only 88 800 square kilometers - equivalent to about twice the size of Belgium. However, the sea
area controlled through exclusive economic zones (EEZs) exceeds the land area of the USA. The
total population of the PMCs is about 2 million, with Fiji accounting for about 42 percent and
Palau less than 1 percent (Figure 2). In terms of GNP per capita PMCs range from low income
countries (Solomon Islands, US$750) to upper middle income (Palau, over US$7,000). All other
PMCs belong to the lower-middle-incomegroup with GNPs per capita ranging from US$1,020
(Samoa) to US$2,110 (Fiji).

Figure 1: GNP per Capita (US$, 1998)

8000
70002
6000-

Figure 2: Population (Thousands, 1998)

900
800
'°700
6000~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0
5000~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0
4000

]

4000~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~500
0

3000

4~
00-

2000

200J

2NO '

W S

. N 0 zzEt
,,Et
t&

tO

-

Growth and Vulnerability
4.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in the PMCs has been modest ranging from -1.4
percent to 2.9 percent per annum between 1990 and 1998 (Figure 3). Growth however has not
been smooth and most countries' growth rate had a coefficient of variation of 2 or greater. The
volatility of incomes is to be expected given the nature of these economies-highly open,
commodity exporting with low levels of diversification, and prone to natural disasters. Despite
their relatively higher levels of income within the subset of developing countries PMCs are more
vulnerable than their larger counterparts. Here, vulnerability means exposure to exogenous
shocks over which they have no control, and have relatively low resilience to withstand and
recover from these shocks. According to a vulnerability index designed by the Commonwealth
Secretariat for 111 developing countries all PMCs rank amongst the 28 'most vulnerable'
countries.

-3 Figure 3: GDP Growth (%)-High, Low, and average (1990-98)
15%l
10%

1~~~~~~
5%LI

T

-T

-5%-

-1S%

i~-

-

*

Average

-20% l

Structure of PMC Economies
5.
The small size of the domestic market interacts with a narrow resource base to make
PMC economies relatively undiversified and highly open on the trade account, with openness
being expressed through a high share of exports to GDP or a high share of imports to GDP or
both. The remoteness and isolation of these countries from major centers of trade and commerce
makes it more difficult to compensate for the limited domestic markets by turning to world
markets. Transport costs are high because of small cargo volumes. The ratio of freight and
insurance debits to import costs (an indicator of transport costs) is 20 percent or higher for PMCs
compared with the median value of 14 percent for all developing countries.
6.
The constraints of a narrow resource base and small size are most apparent in 'advanced'
manufacturing activities such as capital goods, metal working, and intermediates. These
activities are characterized by economies of scale in production, product development and R&D.
The share of manufacturing in GDP in PMCs is generally under 10 percent. Manufacturing is
thus limited to basic small scale 'low technology' activities like food processing and breweries
which are not greatly impacted by market size. The exception is Fiji where the share is 15
percent because of the sugar and garment industries.
7.
In the absence of a large manufacturing sector PMCs are dependent on the primary and
tertiary sectors of the economy as a source of output, employment, and foreign exchange. In the
agricultural sector a large share of production is in the form of smallholder operated,
semisubsistence, household enterprises growing chiefly root crops and garden vegetables. In Fiji
agriculture is organized more along commercial lines, although the subsistence sector remains
important. Large scale agriculture comprises oil palm, coconut, cocoa, and coffee plantations,
and beef cattle in Vanuatu with the bigger and more capital intensive operations wholly or

-4 partially foreign owned. The sharp fall in prices of traditional PMC export crops has stimulated
producers to move into nontraditional crops to exploit niche markets in squash pumpkin, vanilla,
melons, and coconut cream.
8.
The contribution of the tertiary sector ranges from 55 to 60 percent in Fiji, Samoa, Tonga,
and Vanuatu, while in FSM, Marshall Islands, and Kiribati it is greater than 75 percent. In the
tertiary sector the two important activities are public services and tourism related services.
9.
The economic contribution of the fisheries sector comes from subsistence activities
employing traditional methods, commercial fishing, and downstream industrial processing.
National accounts statistics show a contribution ranging from about 2 percent in Fiji to about 9
percent in Marshall Islands, but these are greatly understated as they fail to take full account of
artisanal and subsistence production. For example, in Kiribati where commercial fishing
contributes about 3.5 percent to GDP, the share of subsistence fisheries is estimated at nearly 9
percent. Trade data show that fish exports figure prominently in most countries (Table 1), but
especially in Micronesian countries where they range from 50 percent to nearly 90 percent of
commodity exports. All PMCs also receive access fees from licensing of Distant Water Fishing
Nations (DWFNs) vessels. Total revenues from access fees varies significantly across countries
reflecting the great variation in the distribution of offshore fish resources. For the Micronesian
countries, fishing fees have in the recent past contributed amounts equivalent to 50 percent to
100 percent of revenues raised from taxes.
Public Sector
10.
The size of the public sector in most PMCs is larger than virtually all countries at similar
levels of per capita income (Figure 4). Small but widely dispersed island nations cannot exploit
economies of scale in the provision of public services. The role of the private sector has been
small. Lack of private initiative stemming from social, cultural, and land tenure reasons partially
account for this, but it has been further aggravated by policies that inhibited private sector
development. The generous inflows of foreign aid which have been used mainly for public sector
projects have also contributed to this. PMC governments are engaged in a wide range of
economic activities such as utilities, development finance, commercial credit, overseas trade,
marketing of agricultural goods, operating fishing fleets, mines, plantations, aviation services,
and hotels. As government has grown it has failed to create many new opportunities in the
private sector and has become the 'default' employer of skilled and educated workers.
Government employment accounts for nearly 30 percent of total formal employment in Fiji and
Solomon Islands and about 50 percent in Kiribati. The wage bill amounts to about 45 percent of
total recurrent expenditurein Fiji and Solomon Islands.
11.
The range of activities carried out by the governments is wide but is not matched by
requisite technical and managerial resources. As a result limited skills are spread thinly.
Governments have responded to this situation by over staffing agencies with partially qualified
personnel, spending heavily on overseas training, and relying on overseas technical assistance to
fill gaps. In some services technical assistance has become an almost permanent feature.

-5 -

Figure 4: GovernmentExpenditure 1996-98 (% GDP)
120

i

100

80

-

60
40
20

0~

Investment and Saving
12.
During the 1990s, investment rates in the PMCs have been of the order of 25-35percent
(save Fiji where it has been 10-15 percent), with the public sector playing an equal if not
dominant role in most. However, the growth rates achieved from this level of investment have
been relatively low. The low level of productivity of investment can partly be explained by
natural constraints imposed by size, spread and remoteness of PMCs which raise the unit cost of
economic activities. The volatility of output and incomes generated by external shocks to the
economy poses a tremendous challenge to the efficient utilization of capital stocks. However,
there is evidence that even after controlling for these factors there has been inefficient allocation
(poor choice of projects) and utilization of capital (weakness in implementation). A large part of
public investment in the PICs has been in low return areas such as public buildings. The
investments of public enterprises in loss-making commercial activities have also contributed to
this outcome. The policy environment,including distortions in trade, tax, and tariff regimes have
tended to support high-cost uncompetitiveinvestment.
13.
Public investment has had a crowding out effect on the private sector. Government
controlled enterprises operate in many sectors of the economy that could readily be undertaken
by the private sector and the involvement of the public sector in these commercial areas has
tended to discourage entry of the private sector. Crowding-out has also occurred through factor
market effects wherein public sector activities resulted in pushing up wages and interest rates and
the pre-empting of credit.
14.
Domestic savings rates are low, reflecting a high propensity to consume, shallow
financial systems and the narrowness of the monetized portion of the economy. High rates of
investment have been sustainedprimarily through aid and remittances.

-6 -

External Sector
15.
Because of their structural and resource characteristics PMCs produce a relatively narrow
range of goods and services but they consume a wide range. For some PMCs merchandise
imports are a multiple of exports, implying large merchandise deficits. Invisible earnings reduce
the gap in most countries except Solomon Islands, Marshall Islands, and FSM. Tourism earnings
are important for Fiji, Vanuatu, Tonga, and Samoa (Table 1); investment income for Kiribati,.
and remittances from nationals working abroad in the case of Kiribati, Tonga, Vanuatu and
Samoa. Despite these flows a large gap remains that is met through aid (Figure 5).
Figure 5: Current Account Balance Before and After Official Transfers
(% GDP, Average 1996-98)
40
30
0 BeforeTransfers
* After Transfers

20

10

-10

i

-20
-30
-40

A

-50J

cZo

16.
Exports have been mainly confined to primary commodities with a high degree of
concentration on a single commodity (Table 1). Over the last few years, however, changes have
occurred in the export structure as countries begin to diversify by moving towards higher value
added products by finding niche markets. Fiji moved in to the manufacturing sector by exporting
garments others diversified within primary commodities- squash in Tonga; logging in Solomon
Islands, seaweed in Kiribati, and sashimi in FSM. Imports consist mainly of machinery and
capital goods and petroleum products.
17.
The PMCs have benefited from preferential trade arrangements which convey duty free
or low duty access for their exports into the markets of major industrial countries. All of the
PMCs receive GSP treatment which accords them the lowest duties on offer for products
exported to OECD countries. FSM, Marshall Islands, and Palau have special trade access
agreements with the USA. The others are signatories to the Lome Convention that, in addition to
development assistance, extends them duty free access for most products to European Union

-7-

markets. Fiji, as a founding signatory to the Commonwealth Sugar agreement has an export
quota of 200,000 tons for its chief commodity export in the EU. In the last decade about 70
percent of Fiji's total sugar exports have been at preferential prices which were 2 to 4 times the
world market price. The tuna fish processing industries of Fiji and Solomon Islands have also
relied heavily on Lome preferences. Within the Southern Pacific, PMCs are provided duty-free
access to the markets of Australia and New Zealand. This preferential market arrangement has
been very important for the development of garments and footwear in Fiji and automotive wire
harnesses in Samoa. The preferential trading arrangements are, however, eroding under the new
World Trade Organization(WTO) rules, posing a stiff challenge to PMCs. It will not be possible
to sustain domestic industries built on preferential market access once it is eroded. The PMCs are
gearing up to face this challenge by forming a regional trading area and by proposing to become
a signatoryto the successor of the Lome Convention- the Suva Convention.
Table 1: Main Merchandise Exports and Tourism Receipts
Main MerchandiseExports
(% total merchandiseexports)

Tourism Receipts
(% exports of goods & services)
25.1

Sugar

26.4

Garments

22.3

FSM

Fish
Garments/buttons

87.7
5.7

7.6

Kiribati

Copra
Seaweed

51.6
7.2

15.7

Marshall Is

Chilledfish

67.4
13.4

8.3

Coconut oil
Solomon Is

Logs
Palm oil

51.1
11.0

Samoa

Coconut oil
Copra

27.6
15.9

51.3

Tonga

Squash
Fish

44.4
19.6

29.1

Vanuatu

Copra
Beef

40.2
12.1

41.7

Fiji

* Average for latest three years for which data are available. Figures not available for Palau.

Macroeconomic Policy
Five of the nine PMCs have their own central banks and currency while the other four do
18.
not have central monetary authorities-Kiribati
uses the Australian Dollar and FSM, Marshall
Islands, and Palau use the US Dollar. In the countries with independent monetary authorities the

-8 use of monetary policies is limited owing to their small size and the openness of capital accounts.
The use of monetary policy is also restricted by structural and institutional constraints. These
include the existence of a large nonmonetary sector, the rudimentary stage of capital markets
which hinders smooth financial intermediation,a shortage of monetary instruments to implement
policy, and high consumption propensities that limit the savings flowing into the financial
system.
Fiscal policy is the main instrument of macroeconomic management for all PMCs
19.
because of the limited role of monetary policy and the large share of public expenditures in GDP.
During the 1980s, even in the face of a large and growing government, PMCs record of fiscal
management was generally positive. In the face of budgetary imbalances most countries took
corrective action without undue delay so as to avoid major inflationary pressures or the build up
of debt. In recent years, however, several of the PMCs have faced fiscal stress (Table 2). In many
PMCs, weakness in public expenditure management has lead to a recurrence of unbudgeted
spending and arrears to government employees, to suppliers, or to holders of government paper.
More generally, budget management has been weak, with loose procedures for supplementary
appropriations, and an inadequate monitoring and review system.
Table 2: Overall Fiscal Balance, 1994-98
(in percent of GDP)

Fiji
FSM
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Palau
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Vanuatu

1995
-0.5
1.6
-10.1
-14.1
95.8
-7.4
-5.3
-3.5
-2.7

1996
-4.9
6.9
-35.6
20.3
-7.4
1.6
-4.4
0.8
-1.8

1997
-6.6
1.4
6.3
3.9
0.2
2.4
-4.8
-1.2
-0.7

1998
3.8
0.4
24.0
4.2
6.0
2.1
0.1
-4.4
-13.3

20.
On the revenue side, the tax base is narrow, relying largely on indirect taxes such as trade
and excise taxes. Trade taxes provide over 60 percent of tax revenues in Kiribati, Tonga and
Vanuatu and about 40 percent in Marshall and Solomon Islands. The tax base is made narrower
by numerous discretionary fiscal incentives in the forn of income tax holidays or import tax
exemptions, which often benefit multinational corporations. Fiji and Samoa have a broader based
tax system. Large external grants (ranging from 10 to 15 percent of GDP in Solomon Islands,
Samoa, and Tonga to over 40 percent in FSM, Kiribati, and Marshall Islands) have, in part,
permitted the fiscal profile to remain weak. These grants, while financing an enlarged
government sector did not compel the PMCs to prioritize its needs or generate more of their own
revenue.
21.
In recognition of the fundamentally weak fiscal positions several PMCs have undertaken
comprehensive adjustment programs. The governments have made efforts towards downsizing

- 9-

the public sector and reducing budgetary outlays, improving revenue streams with revised
taxation and tariff systems, and initiating privatizationof state owned enterprises (SOEs) that are
a drain on the budget and can be sold. Efforts also have focused on improving the enabling
environmentfor the private sector.
Access to External Capital
22.
PMCs depend heavily on external development assistance and official aid to help finance
their development expenditures (Table 3). Their access to external commercial borrowing is
either non existent or very limited. Information costs and country risk issues (especially for those
who suffer repeatedly from natural disasters) are perceived as making spreads very high or
prohibitive. Gathering information about the country's capacity to repay the loan has significant
fixed costs and the small absolute size of the loan amount makes it less attractive to the lender.
The cost of enforcing contracts are also perceived to be higher on account of differences in legal
and administrative systems. PMCs are also at a disadvantage in attracting foreign direct
investment (FDI) relative to larger developing countries. A recent study (Collier and Dollar,
1999) showed that small states are rated as being almost 30 percent more risky for FDI even
when they had good policies and human resource development indicators. To some extent this
may reflect the underlying riskiness of very small economies, but, importantly, it could also
reflect the weaker incentives that risk rating agencies and investors have to do their homework
and learn about opportunities in small states.
Table 3: Debt Stocks and Aid Flows (Average, 1996-98)

Fiji
FSM
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Vanuatu
Palau
Low & middle income
Low income
Lower middle income

External
Debt/GDP

Concessional
Debt/Total
Debt

Aid/GNP

Aid per capita
(US$)

11.7

9.7

..

..

..

..

..

..

92.7
43.3
36.0
23.0

89.7
61.3
80.3
84.0

2.2
44.5
17.6
60.5
17.7
12.5
15.7
14.4
45.9
0.7
1.4
0.9

53
868
182
1039
190
104
290
185
3492
9
7
17

..

..

38.0
37.7

16.3
34.0

Aid Effectiveness

23.
Like other small states, PMCs receive significantly larger inflows of aid than larger low
and middle income developing countries. However, aid has not always been effective in
generating a good growth performance in PMCs, in part because of inadequate policy settings.
This is generally consistent with a recent study by the Bank on the effectiveness of aid to

- 10-

developing countries which has shown that financial assistance leads to faster growth and
poverty reduction in countries with sound economic management. This finding applies to small
states and larger ones alike. The combination of good policies and significant financial aid
decreases perceived riskiness of countries and leads to larger private capital flows. In other
words, aid "crowds in" private investment in a good policy environment. The presence of aid
increases investor confidence that good policies will be maintained. Aid also helps governments
finance investments such as schools and roads that are complementaryto private investment. The
reform programs (discussed below) currently underway in the PMCs are likely to lead to more
effective utilization of aid, but the extent of success would depend on the strength of ownership
of reforms by the countries.
24.
Donors too need to play a critical role in improving aid effectiveness in the PMCs. Aid
should be targeted to modernize the economy and aid allocations should reflect the country's
overall policies and entire public spending program rather than flows to individual projects.
Donors should also make major efforts to coordinate their activities in a country-led framework
as is already happening in some PMCs (discussed below). In the longer tern the combination of
good policies and aid should lead to decline in the aid needs of the PMCs. The larger and more
resource rich PMCs should be able to achieve a faster decline in aid requirements and eventually
'graduate' to a situation where aid is needed only in emergencies arising out of external shocks.
B. GEOGRAPHIC,POLITICAL & SOCIAL DIVERSITY
25.
Geography continues to play a major role in shaping opportunity in the Pacific. The
region is remote from major world centers and the 2,700 islands that make up the region are
relatively small and dispersed, with the total land area being only 88,800 square kilometers.
Isolation, remoteness and internal dispersion have an impact on the economies and social fabric
of most Pacific Island countries (see Box A).
26.
Strong identification with village and kin networks often supercedes affinity to any
national or regional groupings and diversity and differences within countries can be pronounced
as those between countries. For example, the 417, 800 citizens of the Solomon Islands live on a
scattered archipelago of mountainous islands and coral atolls with a land area of 27,556 square
kilometers and speak over 85 different languages.
27.
The formal political systems that prevail in the region today reflect the interaction of
strong and vibrant traditional political systems, varied colonial histories and relatively recent
independence experiences. Colonial history in the Pacific, stretching back over 200 years, has
involved the USA, France, Spain, Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Germany and Japan. The
move to political independence in the Pacific is a relatively recent phenomenon, beginning in
1962, when Samoa gained independence.
28. This history has left behind a patchwork of different political systems and allegiances that
include strong US-styled republic models in Palau and the Marshall Islands; a federal system in
FSM; Westminster-based parliamentary democracies underpinned with varying degrees of
provincial and state structures in Samoa, Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands; and a strong
monarchy in Tonga where the King both reigns and rules. All political systems allow and support

-11 -

formal political oppositions and all involve, to varying degrees, the regular exercise of popular
elections.
Box A: The Case of Kiribati
Kiribatihas a populationsimilar in size to that of Andorra,but spreadover an area roughlyequal to that of
Europe.Mostof the area is ocean:its landmassamountsto 810 squarekin,comparedto an ExclusiveEconomic
Zone of 3.55millionsquarekm. Thevastgeographicspreadof the 33 islandsreachesfrom4,000km from eastto
west androughly2,000km fromnorthto south.TransportwithinKiribatiis extremelylimitedand is primarilyby
boat.Thenearestlargemarketsare 4,000km away,in HonoluluandBrisbane.Thereare only sixflightin and out
of the countryper week, all by smallplane. Hencedistancefrom and accessto marketsnot just externallybut
internallypresentschallengesof a magnitudefacedby few othercountries.
The resource base is very narrow. The arid climate and poor soil offer little potential for agricultural
development.Oceanresourcesare the mainstayof the economy- about80 percentof householdsmakea living
or survivethroughfishing.The publicsectordominatesall spheresof economicactivity.Fishinglicensingare the
major sourceof foreignexchangeand governmentrevenuewhile importduties and remittancesfrom I-Kiribati
employedin foreignshippingfleetsprovidesignificantadditionalgovernmentrevenue,respectively.
The populationof 88,500is concentratedin the GilbertIslandsGroup,whichincludesTarawa,the capital.Onethirdof the populationlive in the urbancenteron SouthTarawa,wheredensityreaches1,610personsper square
kin, while the Phoenixgroup is largely uninhabited.If presenttrends continue,populationwill doublein 20
years; such an outcomewill presenteven greaterchallengesto effortsto overcomeenvironmentaland health
problems,particularlyin Tarawawheresanitationand water problemsare alreadypressing.The demographic
profileof Kiribatiis skewedto the youngwhichis placingsignificantstrainon the Governmentto providebasic
healthand educationservices.
In additionto these constraints,Kiribati's potentialto benefit form globalizationis hampered by its limited
institutionaland human capacity. The society has strong 'traditional' practicesand values based on family
relationships,the sharingof resourcesand a co-operativeapproachto economicactivity.The private sector is
very small and fragmentedand the privatizationprogramhas not progressedvery far. These factors present
challengesto the governmentin determiningthe mostappropriatepaceand sequencingof policychangesin areas
such as privatization,downsizingand improvingthe performanceof the public sector, tax and duty reforms
(which would initiallyhave negativerevenueconsequences),and the installationof moderntechnologies.And
while embracingthe global tradingregimewill delivercertainbenefits,commodityexportswill continueto be
harnperedby Kiribati'sremotelocationand irregularsupplyroutes.

29.
Shared throughout much of the region is the importance placed on land. Although
demographic shifts and population growth are changing the rural and urban balance in the Pacific
Islands, land ownership and use still forms an integral part of everyday life. Though systems of
ownership and use vary greatly, shared ownership is often based on common descent, residence
and participation in social and economic activities. Land helps identify family, clan and lineage
and is valued for what it symbolizes as well as the subsistence and livelihood it provides.
30.
Unlike the Indian Islands and Caribbean countries, to which they are sometimes
compared, indigenous cultures have remained strong in the Pacific Islands. They continue to play
a large part in national life, and although continually modified and adapted, their influence
remains strong, retaining control over significant national resources and exerting influence on
national policies and decision making.

-

12 -

C. GOVERNANCE
31.
A number of stresses are influencing patterns of governance and organization throughout
the Pacific. Traditional fonns of authority and organization are being modified by a variety of
largely imported substitutes and by the globalization of trade, investment and economic
governance. The first is primarily a social phenomenon with local roots, and the second primarily
economic and driven internationally, but they are connected, and each has reached beyond its
origins to shape social and economic structures and performance.
32.
In some areas of the Pacific traditional governance systems that provided robust
accountability and participation are eroding and the introduced western structures erected
alongside or in place of them are seen to be costly and ineffective, not responsive to local needs
and priorities, and prone to capture by domestic and foreign interests. This is not to suggest that
'traditional' and introduced systems of governance are mutually exclusive, or that one is
necessarily better than the other, rather that changing patterns of governance are having a
significant impact on community access to decision making and levels of accountability. The
success of the PMCs in integrating the respective strengths of traditional and introduced
structures, institutions and practices will have a significantbearing on their ability to successfully
adapt to the internal and external challenges they face.
33.
In the PMCs that are well endowed with natural resources such as fisheries and forests,
governance arrangements relating to the rewarding of contracts for their use assume great
importance. In the past, however, nontransparent negotiations between government officials and
politicians and resource users have resulted in resources being undervalued and large economic
rents have been appropriated by, mainly foreign logging and fishing companies. In some
instances negotiations over the granting of fishing rights have been linked to bilateral aid
negotiations. This has tended to weaken the negotiating position of PMCs and has reduced the
transparency of the actual levels of access fees.
34.
The role of the kinship ties and 'wantok' type systems of support in providing for basic
human needs is one of the underlying strengths of many Pacific societies; however it can also
hamper transparent and clear governance and contribute to corruption. The small size of many
PMCs has some community leaders performing a number of different roles, ranging from a
church leader, to businessman or high level government minister. These competing roles can
lead to conflicts of interest and influence decision making processes.
D. BASIC HUMAN INDICATORS
35.
Despite the diversity of population dynamics in the Pacific there are some common
trends. Over the past few decades fertility has declined or remained stable, life expectancy has
increased and urban population growth has outpaced rural population growth. Growth rates are
highest in the Micronesian countries at an average of 2.7 percent and lowest in the Polynesian
countries where growth averages 1.3 percent. The Melanesian countries average 2.2 percent
(Table 4). One of the most pressing concerns for many Pacific Island countries is growing
frustration and alienation among youth. About 40 percent of the Region's population is under 15
years of age and about 20 percent is between 15 and 24 years of age.

- 13 -

Table 4: Basic Human Resource Profile
COUNTRY

Annual pop. Adult
Life
Growth
Literacy Expect
(1990-98)
at birth

Human
Dev Index
(HDI)*

Global
HDI
rank

Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Palau
Tonga
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Vanuatu

2.1
0.9
2.1
3.6
2.4
0.3
1.2
3.3
2.7

0.569
0.667
0.515
0.563
0.861
0.647
0.590
0.371
0.425

120
101
129
121
46
107
117
147
140

71.3
92.9
92.2
74.4
91.4
99.0
95.7
30.3
33.5

65.7
66.5
61.6
65
69
68
66.6
64.7
65.8

* The Human Development Index is derived from the combinationof average life expectancy at birth, adult literacy,
gross school enrollments, and adjusted GDP per capita.

Sources:

Secretariatof the PacificCommunity,UNDP,variousnationalcensuses.

36.
Although still far from satisfactory, with the exception of the Melanesian countries of the
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu, access to basic educational opportunities is no longer the
overriding priority in many of the PMCs. It has been replaced by a focus on the quality of
education services and continued financing of schools and teachers salaries. A recent regional
education survey identified a number of issues that were commonly shared throughout the
PMCs. These included concern about: teacher shortages; how to ensure that education assisted
national economic growth; increased efficiency in the public and private education sectors;
promotion of national identity and culture; and resolving the growing mismatch between skills
and livelihood opportunities.
37.
Life expectancy is generally high in the region but there has been an increase in midadult mortality, especially of males.3 This is associated with an upsurge in so called "life-style
diseases", accidental deaths, and the resurgence and emergence of infectious and vector-borne
diseases. There has been an increase in communicable diseases in the Pacific, and many
communicable diseases that health officials had thought were almost eradicated, such as leprosy,
TB, malaria and measles have reappeared, while new types of communicable diseases have
emerged, including HIV/AIDS, and hepatitis C.
38.
The shortage of financial resources in the social sectors is pervasive. The predicted
growth in future school enrollments, the demographic profile of the population (mainly the
vulnerable population-children and the elderly) and the growing burden of noncommunicable
diseases while communicable diseases continue to persist will continue to outstrip the ability of
governments to finance quality health and education services.

3IJNDP.

Pacific Human Development Report. 1999. Pg. xi

- 14 39.
The status of women in the Pacific varies considerably, often dependent on the systems
of land ownership and access to education. Matrilineal and patrilineal systems give women
different access to resources and power and are influenced by development changes including:
outer island and oversea migration; access to education and training, monetization of the
economy, reforms to the public sector that affect the terms of distribution of men's and women's
roles, and status in society. In general terms, women in Polynesian societies have traditionally
enjoyed high social status and more access to power in government and the commercial sector
than women in Melanesia, but this can also vary greatly within communities depending on
access to education and family position.
40.
In most countries of the region the colonial experience resulted in a deterioration of
women's public position as the representatives of the patriarchal colonial countries preferred to
deal with men in public or business transactions and tended to marginalize women. Today
women's economic role is becoming more diversified. In many cases, this is making women's
lives more difficult in the context of serving as the head of households, persistence of the sexual
division of labor, a growing informal sector, low or nonexistent legal recognition of their rights,
and gender based violence. Women still lag behind men in many countries in the region across a
range of social and economic indicators, including school enrollment ratios, literacy rates and
access to the formal labor market.
E. POVERTY IN THE PACIFIC
41.
Pacific Islanders are proud of the unique networks of support and sharing that sustain
many of their communities. Yet, while these networks of sharing food and resources still operate,
increasing economic strains and changing cultural patterns imply that Pacific Island societies are
not as egalitarian as they are sometimes portrayed. In many ways the gaps in income, access to
services, well-being and opportunities are widening.
42.
Poverty in the Pacific is rarely as visible or as extreme as it is in some of the harshest
parts of the world. Yet recent surveys have shown big differences in income and well-being in
several countries, even after traditional forms of redistribution have been accounted for. There
are people who are truly disadvantaged or deprived compared to other people in their country.
43.
The Human Poverty Index (HPI) rankings reflect quite marked differences between
Pacific countries, especially between Melanesian and Polynesian countries (Table 5). For
example, the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu rankings put them on a par with countries such as
Guinea, Burundi, Senegal and Bangladesh in sharp contrast with Tonga and Fiji with rankings
similar to Costa Rica and Singapore.

-

15

-

Table 5: Human Poverty Index for the Pacific
COUNTRY

FederatedStatesof

Percentage
of people
not
expected to
reach 40 yrs

Percentage
of adults
who are
illiterate

Percentage
of people
without
access to
safe water

Percentage
of children
>5 yrs who
are underweight

Human
Poverty
Index*

10.5

28.7

56

15

26.7

7.4
16.3
13.2

7.1
7.8
25.6

23
20
23.5

7.9
12.9
17

8.5
12.6
19.5

7.3
10.3
13.7
8.4
12.2

8.6
4.3
69.7
1
66.5

14
10
36
5
13

8
17
21
2
23

10.8
8.6
49.1
5.9
46.6

Micronesia

Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall

Islands
Palau
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Vanuatu

*TheHumanPovertyIndexreflectsdeprivationin threeessentialelementsof humanlife:longevity,knowledgeand
a decentstandardof living.Sources:Secretariatof thePacificCommunity,UNDP,variousnationalcensuses

44.
While instructive on a regional and national level, the HPI does not reflect growing
inequalities within Pacific Island communities. A series of surveys in Solomon Islands revealed
big differences in household incomes, even after subsistence production and traditional gifts
were accounted for. This was especially so in Honiara, the national capital and main urban
center, where 1 percent of households shared more than 50 percent of total earnings. Many urban
and rural households have very poor living conditions and lack safe water or sanitation, problems
in towns are compounded by contaminated groundwater and growing waste disposal problems.
Recent and continuing unrest between Guadalcanal landholders and settlers from Malaita has
disrupted schooling, access to facilities and the delivery of services and is likely to have
exacerbated existing poor living conditions.
45.
The United Nations DevelopmentProgram's (IJNDP) 1997 Fiji Poverty Report found that
poverty was an undercurrent in both urban and rural areas and in all ethnic communities. One in
four households could not afford a basic standard of living and these households often included
people who have little formal education or skills and had difficulty getting paid employment.4
The 1998 Samoa Household Income and Expenditure Survey found that one in three households
could not properly meet their basic needs and were poor relative to national standards of living.
46.
A 1996 survey of Tarawa, the capital of Kiribati, found many aspects of the urban
poverty that is common in the Pacific. Many households live in badly overcrowded conditions.

4

Fiji Government and UNDP, 1997

- 16Most households depend on cash incomes, yet only few adults have paid jobs. Most of this cash
is spent on food, mainly rice, fish, frozen meat and sugar5
47.
Approximately 20 percent of the labor force of the PMCs is employed in the formal
sector. Rapid population growth, shifts in the age structure towards the working age group, the
diminishing capacity of the semisubsistence sector to absorb labor, and a growing need for cash
incomes means that the number of people seeking employment in the formal sector is fast
increasing. This, however, is not being matched by growth in formal sector jobs. Youth
unemployment is in excess of 10 percent in most countries, and higher than 20 percent in FSM
and Marshall Islands. To date, the issues of labor standards, including child and forced labor,
have not been identified as major concerns in the PMCs. In the rural informal sector people
mainly depend on semisubsistence agriculture and fishing. The few small-scale enterprises that
exist employ mainly family labor. In the urban areas, small-scale informal enterprises employ the
urban poor who often seek multiple sources of income. Many children, particularly those who
leave school early are also employed here. The informal sector is the main source of employment
for women, often because they lack the educationand skills to join the formal sector.
48.
A broader concept of poverty of opportunity is to include 'lack of education and health,
lack of economic assets, social exclusion and political marginalization', is a better description of
poverty for many people in the Pacific6 . Poverty of opportunity in the Pacific is evident in many
ways including rapid emigration from some countries, high but disguised unemployment, and an
emerging subculture of youth crime and high youth suicide rates (Figure 6). Overcoming poverty
of opportunity is a major challenge facing many Pacific economies so that people's talents, skills
and aspirations are not frustrated but utilized to benefit the domestic economy and improve
human development. Economic growth in most of the PMCs has been far less than that needed to
open up such opportunities.
Figure 6: Suicide Rates in Selected Pacific Island Countries, by Sex and for Youth

Samoa

d

I _=1Sa m o a

~~~~~~~~~~~~~M
Fem ale

FSM

r-1 F~~~~~~~~~Eje
m ale Youth

F S M

M Male
F iji In dFians

i

iMale

F iji
0

20

40
rate per 100,000

60

80

100

people

Source: UNDP, Pacific Human Development Report 1999, pg. 64.
5Govemment of Kiribati, Bureau of Statistics, 1996
ul Huq, M. 1997. Human Development in South Asia, Oxford University Press, Karachi

6

Youth

- 17 -

3. REFORM AND DEVELOPMENTIN THE PACIFIC
49.
There are a number of public sector reforms underway throughout most of the Pacific
region and much is being done through national reform programs, supported by regionally
focussed institutions and action programs. The quality of the design and implementation of
programs has been mixed but the engagement of development partners in these reforms is
significant both in terms of sheer numbers and in terms of the resources they bring to the
development table.
A. NATIONAL REFORM PROGRAMS
50.
Most PMCs have reform programs in place or under development (Table 6). In
Melanesia, Vanuatu's Comprehensive Reform Program (CRP), first endorsed in 1997, has
provided one extreme in terms of the breadth, scope and timing of reform approaches in the
region. The Solomon Islands' Policy and Structural Reform Program (PSRP), initially focussed
on the macroeconomic environment, public finances and the public sector, has broadened to
include a medium term development strategy and private sector development (Box B). In
Polynesia, the Samoan Statement of Economic Strategy (SES) has provided perhaps the most
successful example of reform, with the SES providing the overall macroeconomic framework for
the development of separate strategies focusing on health, education and rural development. In
Micronesia, explicit reform programs have been developed in Kiribati and the Federated States
of Micronesia.
Box B: The SolomonIslands' Reform Program
The Solomon Islands Government developed the Policy and Structural Reform Program (PSRP) in 1997 in response to a nexus
of critical issues in the fiscal, financial and forestry sectors. The program, supported by the World Bank through a Structural
Adjustment Credit and other partners including Australia, ADB and New Zealand, focuses on a three-pronged approach:
restoring and maintaining a sound macroeconomic environment;reform of public finances, including wider public sector reform;
and review and reform of the public service.The process is designed to achieve a number of major objectives:
*

*

Restoration and maintenance of a sounds macroeconomic environment.
Improving governance, accountability and productivity across the public sector, especially in the quality and quantity of

service provision in core areas (primary education, preventative health, agricultural support services, and infrastructure
support to private sector led growth)
*
*
*
*

Establishing conditions for the private sector to become the engine of economic growth in a competitive environment.
Creating the basis for sustainable and equitable development of renewable resources, including through and effective and

sustainable forestry policy.
Liberalizing the financial sector, particularly with respect to nonbank financial institutions and especially those that are
government owned and influenced, but with an accompanying enhancement of regulation and supervision.
Achieving greater self-reliance in rural areas by emphasizing projects in core activities which will support development of
economic activity in these communities and ensure a more equitable allocation of public funds between the rural and urban
areas and across provinces.

Progress on the PSRP reforms has been significant but recent ethnic tensions will have an impact on implementation. The
rehabilitation of public finances, the core of the PSRP, is threatened by the loss of revenues because of the closure of enterprises,
reduction in employment and lower levels of taxable activities.At the same time expenditure is rising to cover increased security
operations. Public service reforms and collaboration with the private sector are less effected, but privatization of state owned
enterprises may be more difficult because of the shock to investor confidence.

Table 6: The Pacific Reform Agenda
Solomon Island Prerequisitesfor
Sustainable Growth Policy and
and Development Structural Reform
Program
Major focus
Good and Clean
Government
No explicit focus
Justice System

Non-Government & Multilateral and
Bilateral
Volunteer
Engagement (past
Organizations
& present)
ADB, Australia, New
Major Focus
Zealand, UN, UK
New Zealand,
Focus
Australia
ADB, Australia, WB
South Pacific Forum, Focus
FEMM
Australia, New
South Pacific Forum, Major Focus
Zealand, UN
SPC

Major focus

Major focus

Major focus

No explicit focus

No explicit focus

No explicit focus

Federated States of Regional
Micronesia- Public Organizations
Sector Reform
Program
South Pacific Forum,
Major focus
SPC, FEMM, PlDP
No explicit focus

Major Focus

Major Focus

Major Focus

Samoa - Statement VanuatuComprehensive
of Economic
Reform Program
Strategy

Kiribati Development
Strategy

FinancialSystem

Major focus

Major focus

Social Safety Net
and Social
Programs
Education

No explicit focus

Focus

No explicit focus

Focus

Focus (retraining of South Pacific Forum, Major Focus
SPC, USP
civil servants)

Health

Focus

Focus

No explicit focus

South Pacific Forum, Major Focus
SPC

Water and
Sewerage

No explicit focus

Focus

No explicit focus

Energy

No explicit focus

Central role played Focus
by village, churches
and NGOs.
Focus
Separate strategy
developed and linked
to SES
Focus
Separate strategy
developed and linked
to SES
Separate water and No explicit focus
waste management
national policies
No explicit focus
Identified as a
priority
Focus
Identified as a
priority

No explicit focus

No explicit focus

South Pacific Forum, Major Focus
SPC, SPREP,
SOPAC
South Pacific Forum Focus

No explicit focus

No explicit focus

South Pacific Forum, Focus
FEMM

ADB, Australia, New
Zealand, EC, WB

No explicit focus

Focus

No explicit focus

Focus

No explicit focus

South Pacific Forum, Major Focus
SPC, FFA, SPREP,
SOPAC, CROP
South Pacific Forum, Major Focus
SPC, CROP, SPREP

New Zealand,
Australia, ABD, WB,
UN, EC, Japan
Australia, New
Zealand, EC, UN

Focus

No explicit focus

ADB, WB, UN

Major focus

Major focus

South Pacific Forum, Major Focus
SPC, FEMM
South Pacific Forum, Major Focus
FEMM

Focus

No explicit focus
Roads,
Transportation &
Telecommunication

Australia, New
Zealand, WB, EC,
UN, UK, Japan
Australia, New
Zealand, Japan, WB,
UN, EC, Japan
ADB, Australia, EC,
UN, Japan
ADB

s

Environment and Major focus
Natural Resources (forestry)

Identified as a
priority

Rural Strategy

Major focus

Urban Strategy

No explicit focus

Major focus
Separate strategy
developed and linked
to SES
Not an explicit focus Major focus

Private Sector
Strategy

Major focus

Major focus

Major focus

ADB, Australia. NZ,
UN, EC, WB.

Secretariatof the Pacific Community (SPC), Forum Economic MinistersMeeting (FEMM), Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), South Pacific Regional
The University of the South Pacific (USP), Council of Regional
Environment Program (SPREP), South Pacific Applied Geoscience CommissionD(SOPAC),
Organizationsin the Pacific (CROP), Pacific Islands DevelopmentProgram (PIDP).

-1951.
In general, there are a number of similarities between many of these reform programs.
Most have at their core macroeconomic and fiscal policy stability and the importance of
stimulating the private sector as the engine of sustainable economic development. Many of the
reforms also focus on promoting development in rural and regional areas and improving access
to quality health, education and training services. While all reform programs have acknowledged
its importance, the degree and extent of broad civil society involvement in and ownership of the
reform programs has varied.
B. THE REGIONALDIMENSIONTO REFORM
52.
There is a considerable history of dialogue in the region about how to respond to shared
vulnerabilities and opportunities. Coordinated action has led to the creation of the University of
the South Pacific, the Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), the South Pacific Regional Environment
Program (SPREP), the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC), the Tourism
Council of the South Pacific and the Pacific Islands DevelopmentProgram.
53.
Pacific Island governments are developing a shared policy agenda for change in areas
including government accountability, environmental policy, trade and investment policy,
government involvement in business enterprises, and private sector development. The Pacific
Islands Forum focuses on economic and trade issues and has been a major force in regional
economic cooperation but moves cautiously and on the basis of consensus among its diverse
membership. The Forum Economic Ministers Meeting (FEMM) process has been one of the
main vehicles driving the reform agenda in the region and is particularly concerned with issues
such as government reform and private sector development. The Secretariat of the Pacific
Community (SPC), the oldest regional organization, has a wide range of programs including
demography, agriculture, fisheries research and development, education, health, gender and
community development.
54.
Prospects for regional and subregional cooperation loom strong in the areas of trade,
banking, transport, telecommunications, management of marine resources and bulk purchasing
of supplies and products. The Forum Secretariat, Forum Economic Ministers Meeting, the Forum
Trade Ministers Meeting (FTMM) and the Melanesian Spearhead Group are working on
cooperation on regional trade, telecommunicationsand bulk purchasing of pharmaceuticals. The
June 1999 meeting of the FTMM endorsed a free trade area among Forum members to be
implemented in stages. There are a number of other ongoing initiatives such as work on the
Environmental Vulnerability Index for the Pacific, and the work of SPREP and SOPAC on
climate change. The Multilateral High Level Commission (MHLC) is currently looking at the
management regime for highly regulatory fish stocks. Underpinning this is an acceptance that
regional and subregional collaboration holds the best prospect of overcoming some of the
constraints that that the countries of the region face, such as lack of capacity and scale of
operation, and of maximizing the returns that the region as a whole can obtain from the
exploitable resources available.
55.
There are limits to regional cooperation. The immense size of the region itself and the
variety of cultures and political systems it contains constrains efforts for regional cooperation.
Pacific Island countries are keen to maintain bilateral relationships with each other and with

-

20 -

donor countries and multilateral agencies. Importantly, some countries from outside the region
and which have direct interests in the region see value in maintaining the focus on bilateral
relationships. Increased regional cooperation is both possible and desirable, but must be seen in
the context of differences in domestic political agendas and constraints posed by existing
bilateral and other relationships.
C. THE ROLE OF DEVELOPMENTPARTNERS
56.
Upward of twenty bilateral and multilateral development partners maintain programs in
the Pacific. Most larger bilateral donors are present locally, with Australia having by far the
largest number or regional offices. The ADB has a regional office in Vanuatu and is in the
process of reviewing its regional representation to move to a subregional office structure. Fiji is
the main center for regional representation from the UN system and the EU.
57.
The largest aid flows to the Pacific come from bilateral donors with significant economic,
geographic or political interest in the region including Australia,New Zealand, the United States
and Japan (Table 7). The majority of multilateral assistance stems from the European
Community, the Asian DevelopmentBank and the United Nations system.
Table 7: Bilateral Official Development Assistance (ODA) to the Nine Pacific Member
Countries - 1994-1998
Amount of OfficialDevelopment Assistance ($US)
1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Bilateral
Donors
Australia
61.2
51.6
50.4
49
44.1
Belgium
0.1
0.1
Denmark
0.2
0.3
-0.2
France
13.7
11.7
11
9.2
9.9
Germany
4.3
1.5
1.8
0.5
0.9
Japan
101.1
110.4
95.7
97.6
89.4
Netherlands
0.4
0.9
0.6
0.6
0.4
New
18.4
27.1
29.1
29.7
25.5
Zealand
United
12.7
8.6
Kingdom
United
320
216
219
144
179
States
TOTAL
531.9
427.9
407.8
330.9
349
Source: Geographical Distribution of Financial Flows to Aid Recipients. OECD. 2000

- 21 -

Bilateral Partners
58.
Australia has significant economic and political interests in the region and is one of the
largest bilateral contributors to the PMCs. Australia's aid is largely directed to Fiji, Solomon
Islands, Vanuatu, Samoa, Tonga and Kiribati and is concentrated in education and training,
economic reform and governance, health, environmentand private sector development. Australia
maintains a large network of AusAID officesthroughout the region.
59.
The overall goal of the Australian aid program is to assist developing countries reduce
poverty. In the Pacific this goal is expressed through a long term objective of helping Pacific
Island countries achieve the maximum possible degree of self reliance. Self reliance is defined
differently for the larger Pacific economies where it is taken to mean eventual graduation from
aid, than for the smaller less economically viable atoll states where it is taken to mean the
maximum degree of self reliance within an ongoing need for external support.7
60.
As with Australia, New Zealand has a wide range of bilateral and regional economic and
political interests in the region. Its development cooperationwith the Pacific Islands countries is
based on the key areas of health, education, the environment, human resource development and
the encouragement of private sector growth. New Zealand maintains a significant network of
offices throughout the region and a large and increasingly influential Polynesian Diaspora living
in New Zealand has helped ensure an active interest by New Zealand in these countries.
61.
The guiding principals of the New Zealand program in the Pacific are a recognition that
development will be achieved primarily though the efforts of the countries themselves; capacity
building; sustainability; a primary focus on poverty reduction; greater participation of all people,
especially the disadvantaged in economic, political and social life and involvement of the New
Zealand community in development.8
62.
Japan's engagement in the region is very significant and has focused on the development
and promotion of agriculture, forestry and fisheries industries, and the upgrading of basic
infrastructure including hospitals, schools and water supply facilities. The United Kingdom's
links with the Pacific region rest mainly on historical and commonwealthties. In 1995 a decision
was made to move away from individual country programs and focus instead on a single regional
program. Key sectors are educationand rights and good governance.
63.
The United States remains the most significant bilateral development partner in the
compact of free association countries of Palau, the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of
Micronesia. The relationship and access to resources extended to these countries through the
compact of free association has a major impact on developmentprospects for them. The USA, as
it renegotiates the compact with individual countries, is seeking ways of moving from what has
essentially been united budget support to more focused program approaches that maximize
development outcomes.

7Australia

& Pacific Island Countries: Partners in Development Australia's Overseas Aid Program December 1998.
1998-99,Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

8 New Zealand Official development assistance;Program Profiles

- 22 Multilateral

64. Of the multilateral agencies, the Asian DevelopmentBank and European Community have
the largest programs, while the various UN agencies have established significant and high quality
programs, especially in the social sectors (Table 8).
Table 8: Multilateral Official Development Assistance (ODA) to Pacific Member Countries
1994 -1998
Amount of Official Development Assistance ($US)
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
Multilateral Donors
Asian Development Bank
European Community
International Development Association
United Nations Regular Program of Technical Assistance
Intemational Fund for Agricultural Development
United Nations Development Program
Other Multilateral
Total

18.8
13.8
4.6
3.8
2
3.7
2.5

24
12.9
4.2
10.7
0.6
3.6
2.9

5.8
12.2
4.2
3.5
1.4
2.1
1.9

22.7
8.9
3.4
6
0.2
1.7
1.6

47.1
7.4
4.5
4.2
0.5
1.7
0.3

49.2

58.9

31.3

44.5

65.7

Source: Geographical Distribution of Financial Flows to Aid Recipients. OECD. 2000.

65.
The Asian Development Bank has a major presence in the region. The ADB has
supported major public sector reforn programs in the Cook Islands, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Marshall Islands, Samoa, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. Regional activities
supported by the ADB have been in the areas of fisheries, aviation, air transportation, financial
and investment advisory services and the provision of venture capital.
66.

The ADB program has been guided by its 1996 Strategy for the Pacific: Policies and

Programs for Sustainable Growth. This strategy had as an overall objective the improvement of
living standards through sustainable economic development. The ADB is now in the process of
developing a new Pacific regional strategy that will specifically address poverty in line with the
ADB's overarching objective of poverty reduction.
67.
The pattern of commitments by the European Community has been influenced by
STABEX transfers which has accounted for over 30 percent of all aid. Project aid constitutes
approximately 62 percent of assistance to the Pacific Islands and the main sectors supported
included; transport and communications, industry, mining and construction and the energy
sectors.
68.
Various United Nations agencies work throughout the Pacific region and have well
established programs. The UNDP takes a coordinating role for most UN operations which are
particularly active in the social sectors. The UNDP's assistance focuses primarily on the creation
of employment and sustainable livelihoods, the advancement of women, empowerment of
disadvantaged groups, protection and regeneration of the environment, and improved
governance.

- 23 69.
The International Monetary Fund is engaged in the Pacific Islands countries on a number
of levels. As well as its regular Article IV consultation meetings and reports, it jointly
established with the United Nations Development Program the Pacific Financial Technical
Assistance Center in Suva, Fiji. The Center is also funded by ADB, AusAID, the New Zealand
ODA and the Forum Secretariat, and its primary aim is to build the skills and institutional
capacity in PMC for effective and sustainable economic and financial management.
Partnerships and coordination
70.
The sheer number of development partners operating in the Pacific, combined with the
limited absorptive capacity of most Pacific Island states and the characteristic limited
institutional capacity that they share with other small states, represents a major challenge for
PMCs as they seek to coordinate, direct and manage external support.
71.
All donors in the region accord coordination and cooperation a high priority and there are
a number of mechanisms in place that support these efforts. The ADB convenes consultative
group meetings, while the main region-wide vehicle for donor coordination is the donors'
consultation meeting that is held following the annual FEMM. This meeting, convened on a
rotating basis, provides a forum in which issues and respective donors' programs can be
discussed. There are a range of other bilateral and multilateral coordination measures in place,
including bilateral high level consultations between the major donors and regional organizations.
72.
The Bank takes an active role in coordination and was instrumental, for example, in
establishing annual trilateral consultations between AusAID, the ADB and the Bank. The Bank's
relations with the ADB in the Pacific are guided by the broader Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) between the Bank and the ADB in the East Asia and Pacific region. This MOU places a
premium on close cooperation between the two institutions, to ensure complementarity at the
regional, country and sectoral levels. The forthcoming relocation of the Pacific Country
Management Unit to Sydney will further enhance the close working relationship between the
World Bank, the ADB and other regional development partners. Dialogue with the ADB and
other donors will continue with a view toward establishing and maintaining clear understandings
of each agency's focus.
73.
While a solid basis of cooperation between development partners exists, there is a need to
move beyond general discussion of cooperation and into more substantial measures. These
include the articulation of donor programs within broader PMC driven sectoral and reform
programs, alignment of program cycles, rationalization of reporting requirements and the
development of more flexible work programming and targeting within projects. The Bank, in
line with the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF), has actively sought out such
approaches. Early experience has been positive. In Samoa the Government has developed an
MOU that sets out the respective roles of the Bank and AusAID and ways of operating within the
broader context of the Government's health sector reform program. A similar approach is being
developed in the Solomon Islands, again in the health sector but which builds on the positive
experience of targeting donor assistance under the Solomon Islands reform program.

- 24 -

4. PARTNERSHIP & STRATEGIC SELECTIVITY
IDENTIFYING THE BANK'S ROLE

-

A. THE BANKS' EXPERIENCEIN THE PACIFIC
74.
The Bank Group's involvement in the Pacific Region effectively started in the 1970s. Fiji
became the first Pacific member country when it joined the Bank in 1971, with Palau being the
most recent, achieving membership in 1998. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s Bank assistance
tended to focus on lending operations, with a more substantial program of economic and sector
work only beginning in the 1990s.
75.
Since 1971 the World Bank has extended 38 loans and credits, totally some $US284.2
million to Pacific Island members. Of these, 13 have been IBRD loans ($US152.9m) extended to
Fiji, while the remaining 25 IDA credits ($US131.3m) have been shared between Samoa (11)
Solomon Islands (8), Vanuatu (4) and Tonga (2). Half of the Bank's lending operations have
been cofinanced (5 with AusAID and 14 with the ADB). In terms of any qualitative assessment
of the effectiveness of the Bank's lending portfolio, three key phases can be distinguished.
A beginning in 1970s
76.
In the nine years up to and including 1980, the Bank extended eight IBRD loans to Fiji
(including one supplemental loan) totaling $US83.7 million and three IDA credits to Samoa
($US14.4 million). In Fiji, the bulk of the loans were focussed in the infrastructure sector, with
one in agriculture. Project completion reviews found that the bulk of the projects were successful
in meeting their objectives. In the case of Samoa, however, where three IDA credits were
provided (one in infrastructure and two in agriculture) the results were far less satisfactory with
the first agriculture project rated as a failure, in part because the project's development objective
reflected Bank rather than the Samoan Government's priorities, and the second as suffering from
poorly defined project objectives.
Expansion in the 1980s
77.
The period up to and including 1990 saw an expansion in the number, country coverage
and sectoral focus of the Bank's lending activities in the region. In addition to continued lending
in Samoa and Fiji, lending was also undertaken in Solomon Islands (1981), Vanuatu (1984) and
Tonga (1987). The expansion in country coverage was a reflection of a relatively rapid process
of independence in the region and growing Pacific membership of the Bank. It was based on a
formal cooperative arrangement with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) that saw the World
Bank participating as a cofinancier and the ADB playing the lead role in project processing and
implementation.
78.
This arrangement, agreed in October 1980, had two main objectives: to minimize the
burden on the limited staff and institutional capacities of Pacific Island members; and to achieve
efficiencies through saving costs and avoiding duplication of effort. Of the 18 loans approved in
the 1980s some 11 were cofinanced with the ADB($US69.2 million) and a further 4 cofinanced
with AusAID ($US25.6 million). The 1980s also saw an expansion in the sectoral focus of the

- 25 -

lending portfolio, with lending activities undertaken in the following sectors: agriculture,
finance, education,transport, power, telecommunicationsand urban development.
79.
An assessment of the Bank's operation undertaken by OED in 1991 and 1992 concluded
that "the Bank was generally unable to make an effective contribution to the development of the
Pacific member countries during most of the 1980s"9 Other conclusions reached by the OED
study were:
* the Bank's direct contribution to resource transfers to the Pacific Island member states had
been very limited;
* the Bank's lending had not been guided by any well conceived strategy to contribute to long
term sustainable development in the Pacific Island member countries;
* the Bank had not been able to make effective use of project lending as an instrument of
policy dialogue; and
*

the Bank's past experience did not clearly establish areas of comparative advantage for Bank
assistance to Pacific Island members.

80.
In terms of the arrangement with the ADB, the OED Report noted that "while the ADB
arrangement has provided administrative savings to the Bank, the benefits to the PMCs (Pacific
Island Member Countries) are less clear. The selection and design of projects has generally not
been underpinned by appropriate country strategies and ESW. It has been time consuming and,
in some cases, difficult to harmonize policies and procedures. The Bank, in practice, could not
give up fully its responsibility for cofinanced projects. Yet the limited contact with PMCs
appears to have weakened the country relations".
Refocusing in the 1990s
81.
In response to the experience with the cofinancing arrangement, and discussions with
member countries and key donors, the Bank reassessed its strategy and made two major
adjustments. First, the Bank moved to take a more direct role in project lending. Second, the
Bank reassessed its approach to economic and sector work. A number of donors also felt that the
Bank could contribute more effectively to the Pacific in a leadership role through the provision
of advice on development strategy and policies in the region. A special South Pacific Facility,
supported by Australia, became operational in 1989 to support an expanded program of
economic and sector work, the center piece of which was a series of regional economic and
sector reports. (See Section 4D)
IFC and FIAS
82.
IFC investment activities have concentrated on those industries in the PMCs that hold a
competitive advantage such as tourism and fishing. In the 1998/1999 financial year alone the
9 The WorldBankand PacificIslandCountries:
An OEDReview,May 5 1992

- 26 -

South Pacific Project Facility (SPPF), helped secured financing for fifteen small businesses,
seven of them in the service sector.
83.
Although the SPPF does not provide project financing, it finances part of the cost of
market, technical and feasibility studies and helps entrepreneurs secure financing from banks and
other sources of capital. It also assists companies during project implementation and startup,
reviews joint venture agreements and assists governments privatizing public sector enterprises.
The SPPF has agents in seven member countries and has carried out 43 assignments since it
began operations in 1990.
84.
The Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) supports PMC governments design
initiatives to attract foreign direct investment and has been active in a number of countries
including the FSM, Samoa, Fiji, Palau and the Solomon Islands as well as working on regional
projects such as oceanic fisheries with the FFA and the SPC. FIAS advises on laws, policies,
incentives, institutions, and strategies
B. LESSONS LEARNED
85.
The same OED report cited earlier also identified a number of lessons to be incorporated
in the Bank's future program. These lessons remain relevant today:
* Poor definition of strategic objectives made it difficult to tailor lending to achieve these
objectives and had an adverse impact on project quality and sustainability;
* The absence of long-term strategy contributedto inadequate sector and economic work;
* Long-term strategy development needs to include active collaboration from the other
development partners in the region; and
•

Future lending activities in member countries and with development partners need to be
based on shared strategy and policy goals.

86.
The continuing validity of these lessons has been reinforced through the recently
published Asian Development Bank's (ADB) Assessment of its Assistance for Reform Programs
in the Pacific, which found that:
*

Reform programs have to have broad political ownership and be open to and driven by wide
participation if they are to have any chance of success.

* In designing and supporting reform programs the issues of scope, phasing and pragmatism in
the design of interventionsneeds to be considered explicitly.
* Reform is a long term process and longer term perspectives, by both countries themselves
and development partners, are essential.

- 27 -

*

There is a need to clearly establish the link between inputs, processes, outputs and impacts.
To be able to do this timely and reliable information is required.

* Culture plays a crucial role and needs to be accepted as a legitimate consideration in
designing reform programs.
C. THE COMPREHENSIVEDEVELOPMENTFRAMEWORK (CDF) IN THE PACIFIC
87.
The Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF) establishes a balance in
policymaking by highlighting the interdependence of all elements of development-social,
structural, human, governance, environmental, economic, and financial. The CDF seeks to move
beyond discrete indicators of economic performance and human capacity to address, in concert,
the 'fundamental, long-term issues of the structure, scope, and substance of societal
development". It highlights four major areas of development-structural, human, physical, and
sectoral:
* Structural elements include honest, competent governments committed to the fight against
corruption; strong property and personal rights laws supported by efficient legal and judicial
processes; a well-supervised financial system promoting transparency; and a reliable social
safety net.
*

Human development requires universal primary educationalong with a sound secondary and
tertiary system; and a health system that focuses on family planning and child care.

-

Physical concerns center around the efficient provision of water and sewerage; expanded
access to reliable electric power; access to road, rail and air transport along with
telecommunications; and preservation of the physical environmentand cultural heritage.

-

Sectoral elements include an integrated rural development strategy; sensible urban
management; and an enabling environmentfor the private sector.

88.
Fighting poverty is the central mission of the Bank and is at the core of the CDF. Poverty
in the Pacific varies both in terms of its incidence and its defining characteristics. The existence
of strong cultural and social systems in the Pacific continues to ameliorate and mask the
incidence of absolute or abject poverty, but there are clear indications that these systems, and the
values that underpin them, are under strain. Rates of youth suicide throughout the region are
some of the highest recorded in the world. Towns and informal settlements continue to grow at a
rate that see young people and their families removed from traditional support structures and the
incidence of urban poverty growing at an increasing rate. The demographic profile of the Pacific,
with some 40 percent of the population under 15 years and a further 20 percent between 15 and
24 years, points to continuing and sustained pressure on Governments' capacity to establish and
maintain health and education systems capable of providing even a basic level service. The
impact of poverty also varies within the region with the larger Melanesian countries of the
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu sharing some features, such as adult illiteracy rates and levels of
access to safe water, that place them on a par with experience in Sub-Saharan Africa.

- 28 -

89.
Sustainable progress against poverty is conditioned on the development agenda pursued
by Pacific countries being broad based, owned and driven by the country itself and realistic in
terms of the timing and resources available. Only such an agenda can lead to broad based
economic growth and employment creation. While not uniform, there is an ongoing reform
process in the region. It is one owned and driven, to a greater or lesser extent, by the individual
countries concerned and which finds expression in both domestic reform programs and shared
regional action. The World Bank's engagement in the region supports such reform programs,
both at a country and regional level, and the scale and type of assistance to individual countries
in the region will reflect this (see also Box C).
Box C: World Bank Approachesto Poverty, 1990 and 2000
The definition of poverty has evolved over the past decade together with international knowledge about the nature of poverty
and its determinants. In 1990, the World DevelopmentReport expanded the traditional income-based definition of poverty to
further include capabilities - such as health, education and nutrition. This framework explicitly recognized the interaction
and causal relationship among these dimensions. It recommended a strategy for poverty reduction based on broad-based
growth in incomes and on investment in basic education and health care, together with safety nets for those unable to
participate in growth.
In light of the voices of the poor study and the evolution of events and ideas in the 1990s, the 2000 World Development
Report proposes to further extend the concept of poverty to include the dimension of vulnerability and that of voicelessness
and powerlessness. These added dimensions broaden the causal framework for analysis and expand the range of policies and
actions that can be consideredto tackle poverty.
The key elements of an effective poverty reduction strategy are:
* A comprehensive understanding of poverty and its determinants.It will be necessary to identify who and where the poor
are and what prevents them from moving out of poverty, and to consider the various dimensions of poverty, including
low income, capabilities, security and empowerment.
* Choosing public actions that have the highest poverty impact.
* Policies that lead to more rapid economic growth-including macroeconomic stability, freer and more open markets and
a stable and predictable environment for private sector activity-will need to be outlined. Prioritization of public actions
in the poverty reduction strategy should, in general, be based on the expected impact on poverty in the short- and longrun. It will also depend on specific national, regional and group priorities that are expressed during the participatory
processes. Social sector programswill generally be significant components of the effort, but actions with a more direct
effect on the incomes of the poor -based on actions in areas like rural development,local infrastructure,and to enable
private sector development - will usually be of equal importance. Strengtheningcapacity to implement is likely to be of
general importance. The availability of non-inflationary financingfor the program will need to be assessed.
*
Transparency. The process of setting budget and policy priorities, and monitoring progress toward achieving poverty
reduction goals, should, in general, rely upon transparent processes for public dialogue and disclosure of information.
Greater transparency and accountability in fiscal managementwill help to boost the efficiency of public spending.
*
Outcome indicators which are set and monitored using participatoryprocesses. The identification and measurement of
poverty outcome targets, and assessment of the impact of priority interventionson the poor, are crucial mechanisms for
regular assessment of policy and program design and implementation.Broad participation is needed to ensure that the
most relevant targets are selected and that the results of regular monitoring of outcome indicators feed back to refine
policy and programs to improve their effectiveness.

90.
The sustainable utilization of natural resources, especially forests and fisheries, is crucial
for meeting the development aspirations of Pacific Island populations. In some countries,
however, economic growth has been at the expense of an overexploitation of natural resources,
and is, therefore, unsustainable. Expanding economic activity has also been accompanied by
rapid growth of towns. However, inadequate management of this process has resulted in
considerable stress being placed on the urban environment, especially in the areas of sewerage

- 29 -

and waste disposal. The emerging scenario thus calls for a greater integration of environmental
policy with economic policy both at the macroeconomic and sector levels. This is an area the
Bank has begun work in other regions which it could draw upon in assisting Pacific member
countries in ensuring that economic growth occurs in harmony with the natural environment.
91.
A wide range of development partners are involved in the region, including both bilateral
and multilateral donors. Importantly, a significant element of the response of Pacific countries to
the development challenges they face has been to seek partnership with other Pacific countries,
both at regional and subregional levels and through development of a range of regional
organizations. Fundamental to the success or failure of development in the Pacific must be
notion of partnership that encompassesnot only governments,bilateral agencies, multilateral and
regional organizations, but which extends to broader civil society. Examples of donor
coordination in the Pacific, such as the annual meeting between Pacific countries and their
development partners, the annual meeting of all Pacific donors, the annual tripartite meeting
between the Bank, AusAID and the ADB, and a range of regular high level consultations
between the major bilateral donors, all point to a solid foundation. Development partners must
now seek practical ways to build on this foundation and demonstrate an increasing willingness to
work cooperatively within broad sectoral and policy parameters set by Governments.
92.
Part of the uniqueness of the region stems from the way in which Pacific traditions and
institutions have evolved and interacted with more recent modes of operation to form unique
contemporary systems. These Pacific institutions, traditions and customs need to be
acknowledged as important and legitimate elements of the broader governance process that
applies in the Pacific. They need to be explicitly taken into account in structuring the assistance
that the Bank and other development partners can provide. The consultation process followed
and role identified for villages in the management of coastal protection in the Samoan
Infrastructure Management Project (IAMP) is one practical example of how this is being done by
the Bank. At the same time it needs to be understood that such institutions, traditions and
customs continue to evolve and change and are subject to legitimate scrutiny and debate about
their inclusiveness, effectivenessand fairness.
D. THE WORLD BANK GROUP'S PACIFIC STRATEGY
93.
The Bank works in partnership with the nine Pacific members of the World Bank and
their development partners to achieve sustainable social and economic development. The Bank
brings its global knowledge to help address the developmentproblems faced by Pacific members
particularly at a regional level, and provides a targeted and focused mix of development
financing.

The Bank's Lending Program - toward a targeted and innovative portfolio
94.
In terms of overall resource transfers to the Pacific region the Bank's role has been
modest. In 1998, for example, the Bank accounted for less than 1 percent of the total net
disbursements of ODA to the broad Pacific region (excluding the French Territories). The major
sources of development financing in the region remain Australia, New Zealand, Japan, the
European Union and the ADB (see Section 2C).

- 30 -

95.
The ready availability of other sources of development financing, particularly grantsbased support from bilateral donors, has enabled the Bank to take a more targeted and strategic
approach to the provision of lending in the last 2-3 years. The Bank has only accepted a role in
lending where it has a proven track record in the sector concerned or where the program of
economic and sector work has provided a sound basis for Bank involvement, where the proposed
activity has a strong link to an explicit policy reform agenda, is in keeping with the Bank's
mission of poverty alleviation and where there are no other sources of finance readily available.
Clearly, as a lending institution the Bank's role in the Pacific is secondary to the ADB and is
designed to complement ADB's activities. This is reflected in the current portfolio where the
four projects currently under supervision, along with the four at advanced stages of preparation,
are all in high priority sectors in which the Bank has a proven track record and which all involve
large policy reform components (Table 9).
Lending in the Medium Term
96.
Lending operations would be open to all member countries. It is expected, however, that
lending will continue to concentrate on the larger Pacific economies in line with the economies
of scale associated with doing business with the Bank and given availability of grant based
financing opportunities for the smaller Pacific economies.
97.
As the majority of the Bank's Pacific members are eligible for IDA, in principle,
(Kiribati, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu) the lending portfolio will continue to be
largely IDA-based, though access to IBRD support remains an option, particularly for Fiji. The
Bank's lending portfolio will stay within the current level of up to two new lending operations
per fiscal year. This would see over time a portfolio under supervision of some 6-8 projects and
could involve a commitment of IDA resources to the region over the next three years of $US3040 million.
98.
The mission of IDA is to support efficient and effective programs to reduce poverty and
improve the quality of life in its poorest member countries. IDA helps build the human capital,
policies, institutions, and physical infrastructureneeded to bring about equitable and sustainable
growth and its goal is to reduce the disparities across and within countries, to bring more people
into the economic mainstream, and to promote equitable access to the benefits of development.
The lending program in PMCs will maintain a strong focus on the social sector, particularly
health and education, and will complement ongoing Bank and other donor programs. In the
Melanesian countries of the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu a key focus will be on girls education.
In the health sector maternal and reproductive health would continue to have a high priority.
Gender issues will continue to be mainstreamed in all Bank lending activities. The transport
infrastructure and telecommunications sectors have also been identified as priorities given the
challenges posed by remoteness and isolation to the countries of the Pacific.

- 31 -

Table 9: Current Lending Activities
Country

Project

Amount
$USm |

Solomon Islands Education III
(Approved FY 93)

16.9

Solomon Islands Structural Adjustment
Credit
(Approved FY 99)

12.0

Solomon Islands Health Sector
Development
(Approved FY 2000)
Samoa
Infrastructure Asset
Management
(Approved FY 99)

4.0

14.4

Samoa

Health

5.0 (est)

Vanuatu

Education It

10.0(est)

Solomon Islands Education IV

8.0 (est)

Tonga

2.0 (est)

Telecom Sector
reform

Description and main focus
Under Supervision
The project has supported improved access to secondary education,
especially senior secondary Forms 4 and 5 and expanded female
participation;establishment of pilot lower unit-cost day schools (Day
Junior Secondary Schools (DJSS); enhanced educational quality including
teacher upgrading and curriculum improvements;expanded supply and
improved training of nurses; and improved management of the education
sector, including strengtheningof budgeting and financial planning. Due to
close in December 2000. IDA financed.
The first Bank structural adjustment operation in the Pacific, the operation
supports the Govemment's broad Policy and Structural reform Program.
Other development partners supporting the reform program are the Asian
Development Bank, AusAID,the Government of New Zealand, and the
European Union. The IMF has provided advice on macroeconomic issues.
Due to close in December2000. IDA financed.
The project supports improvements in reproductive health, malaria
prevention and capacity building in the national department of health and
provincial health services. Due to close in June 2005. IDA financed.
In line with the Government's Statementof Economic Strategy, the project
is helping change the role of governmentin the delivery and management
of infrastructure services in the three priority subsectors of air transport,
road transport and coastal protection Phase I and will help alleviate the
constraints imposed by remoteness and isolation. Due to close in
December 2002. IDA financed and cofinanced with AusAID
Under Development
Within the framework of the Government's Health Sector Strategic Plan,
the project will provide support for the strengthening of policy
development and health care legislation and regulation; improvement of
health facilities planning; improving the quality of key infrastructure;
improvementof maintenance of health infrastructure and equipment; and
developing a health care waste management system. IDA financed.
Within the context of the Bank sponsored Vanuatu Education Master Plan
the project will support system wide reform, including the introduction of
mother-tongueinstruction in community school grades K-2 and English or
French language instruction in primary school grades 3-8. IDA financed.
The project will improvethe quality of basic education and strengthen
institutional capacity with a particular focus on community based schools.
In particular, it will support the implementation of policy reforms in the
areas of education financing, textbook provision and management, and
preservice teacher training. It will also support increased female
participation in basic education.
The project will support the implementation of the Government's sector
reform programn,focusing on: regulatoryreform, institutional reform, in
particular,corporatization of TTC; and pilot IT Applications (e.g. telemedicine, tele-education, etc.). IDA financed.

99.
Strengthening the private sector's capacity to play a greater role in the development of
these areas will be a key concern. The work of the IFC's South Pacific Project Facility (SPPF) on
accelerating the development of a productive private sector in the PMCs through supporting the
entry of private sector projects will continue (see also Box D). In the area of environment and
natural resources, the Bank would continue to address country priorities through GEF mediumsized grants, and by mainstreaming it into its lending, policy and advisory activities. Support for
broad based economic restructuring and reform will remain an option where counties can

- 32 -

articulate a coherent reform agenda and demonstrate strong commitment to carry through with
that agenda.
Box D: The World Bank's Approach to Private Sector Development in the Pacific
The role played by the private sector in Pacific economies varies greatly but there is a general trend toward private sector
development and privatization or corporatizationof State Owned Enterprises (SOEs). Given the dominance of the Pacific private
sector by small business, the Bank's approach to private sector development is strongly integrated with strategies in Small and
Medium Enterprise (SME) development and Microfinance.
SOE Reform and Privatization
Effort in this area is varied but in general there is a stated intention on the part of PMCs to privatize or corporatize state owned
enterprises. Some countries have embarked on programs but others are still grappling with what such programs can mean. There
is a general lack of communityunderstanding of the processes and benefits associated with privatization and corporatization and
legislators and officials are not clear on the process involved or, in many cases, the governance and regulatory framework
required to manage the sale process in a transparent manner and create the environment for the successful operation of the
privatized or corporatized businesses.The Bank has a role to play in offering advisory support and technical assistance for the
process of privatization and corporatization.This support needs to be at all levels of the community but particularly targeted to
legislators and officials. Care swill continue to be exercisedso that efforts are coordinated with other agencies, particularly the
ADB and the Pacific Forum.
Small and Medium Enterprise Development (SME) and Microfinance
Small and medium business is the dominant private sector activity in virtually all Pacific countries. Many development partners
are involved in the sector, particularly in training and education. There is a need for equity venture capital in the region and also
for stronger post-financing technical support for funded projects.There is also a developing focus in village based microfinance
largely through the NGO community which is in keeping with the Pacific environment.The Bank will continue to support
project development through IFC's South Pacific Project Facility (SPPF) with support from regional donors such as Japan,
Australia and New Zealand and will examine ways to offer stronger post-financingtechnical support. As the private sector grows
there will be a developing need for capital markets advisory and investment support, equity funds, leasing and other
mechanisms. Evaluation of capacity building in the region and identificationof training gaps will also be considered. The Bank's
expertise and experience in the area of microfinance can also add value to the work of other development partners in the region.
Private Participation in Social Service and InfrastructureDevelopment
The provision of social services and infrastructure in the Pacific is largely in public hands in all of the PMCs. There is a desire to
look at a role for the private provision of many of the these services, particularly as part of the SOE reform that is occurring in
the region. There are a number of development partners already working with the PMCs in this area. By drawing on its global
experience in this area, the Bank can add value to this work. This is likely to include advisory and credit/investment services but
in the context of careful targeting and coordinationwith other development partners.

Matching lending instruments with capacity and need
100. In recognition of the specific circumstances that apply in the Pacific, including issues
associated with vulnerability of small states and the cost of doing business with the Bank,
continued efforts will be made to both use existing instruments more flexibly and develop new
instruments so that they match the scale and capacity of member countries involved.
101. The development of Adaptable Program Loans (APLs), Learning and Innovation Loans
(LILs) has provided a greater range of lending instruments that more closely match the scale of
operation necessary in the Pacific. The lending program in the Pacific will seek to make more
extensive use of such instruments as well as fine tune their application in light of the experience
with the first Pacific APL in Samoa and broader Bank experience with APLs and LILs.

- 33 -

102. A number of Pacific member countries have expressed interest in the further development
of program and sector lending instruments, as opposed to project based lending. This will be
done by building on broader Bank experience and on experience with the bank's first structural
adjustment operation in the Pacific. Sector or program approaches will only be feasible,
however, in those countries where there are clearly articulated sector reform programs. Such
approaches will also be dependent on a willingness, flexibility and capacity of development
partners to work cooperatively within a broader country articulated sector program.
103. The countries of the Pacific have long recognized that shared action has a role to play in
addressing the development challenges they face. The Bank has started to develop lending
mechanisms that can provide resources to support such regional action and this early experience,
particularly in the Caribbean and Africa, may provide a model for the development of regionally
focused lending in the Pacific. This could involve rolling programs targeting a number of
countries or ones based on partnership arrangements with regional organizations. Discussions
with PMCs to further explore this option have only just begun.
The Bank's Nonlending Program-A Global Knowledge Bank for the Pacific Region
104. Unlike many other regions in which the Bank operates, its role as a knowledge bank is
perhaps the key strength that it brings to the Pacific. To date, the Bank's main means of
contributing knowledge at the overall regional level has been through the Regional Economic
Reports (RER) (see also Box E). The first of the Bank's RERs was produced in 1991 and the
fourth in 1998. The fifth is currently under preparation and due to be presented to Pacific
member countries in mid 2000. The role of the RER has been supported and extended by a
number of regionally based sector studies, including in the health, post-secondary education,
transport and energy sectors. In contrast, the Bank's country-focused economic and sector work
has provided a means of bringing the Bank's global experience to bear on development issues
specific to individual member countries. The Bank's economic and sector work has been
disseminated widely, including through the Pacific Islands Discussion Paper Series, as
standalone publication and through country and regional presentations.
105. The RER will continue to be the main vehicle for bringing the Bank's global knowledge
to the Pacific region but will be supplementedby a more focused program of regional and sector
based economic and sector work developed in conjunction with members countries and other
development partners, including sectoral studies undertaken on a partnership basis with regional
and other organizations. The country-specificeconomic and sector work undertaken by the Bank
has covered a broad range of sectors including health, fisheries, finance and forestry.
Importantly, it has been the means by which all member countries have been able to see tangible
returns for their membership. The Bank will maintain this capacity to respond flexibly to
individual members country requests for short term technical and analytical assistance.
106. Pacific members have indicated that they would like to see a significantly expanded level
of service provision by the Bank in terms of economic and sector work and in the provision of
short term technical assistance. There are resource constraints on the Bank's ability to increase
its capacity in this regard. One option that will be explored is whether it might be possible to
develop, in conjunction with other development partners, a grants based facility to support the

-

34 -

provision of technical assistance by the Bank ideally based on grant contributions by
development partners. The existing South Pacific Facility currently financed by AusAID and the
arrangements underpinning the very successful operations of PFTAC and FIAS provide some
possible models in this regard.
Box E: The Biennial Regional Economic Report
The Regional Economic Report (RER), prepared biennially, is a key piece of economic and sector work undertaken by the Bank
in the Pacific region. RER 2000, the fifth prepared by the Bank, is due to be presented to member governments in mid-2000 and
aims to help the people and governments of PMCs deal with some of the challenges and opportunitiesthat will confront them in
the first part of the new centuly. Three aspects of managing unavoidable change are examined in detail in RER 2000: they are
the growth of towns, the effects of global climate change, and the management of the ocean and its interaction with its island
peoples.
These three themes were identified after consultations in the region and because of their region-wide relevance. They were also
chosen because of the immediacy of the challenges and opportunities they raise, the ability of the Bank to contribute to the
ongoing work on the issues, and because within each of the themes lie substantial opportunities to effect lasting improvements
to social and economic conditions. The growth of towns is handicapped by lack of understanding of the social and economic
nature of the process, poor physical management of the towns themselves, and failure of govemments to grasp the strongly
positive development potential of urban settlement. The effects of climate change and the scope for human response to it is a
vast and rapidly evolving subject, very difficult for communities and governments to grasp but of immense and immediate
impact on the Pacific Islands.The Pacific Ocean is by far the most important physical influence on social and economic activity
in the PMCs.
Woven through those three areas of concern, and strongly conditioning the way PMCs react to them, RER 2000 also identifies
two widespread sources of stress and assesses their significance: these are the changingforms of institutions and organization,
and the globalization of trade, investment and economic governance.
RER 2000 draws on the advice and experience of Pacific Island countries, regional and international institutions and individuals
to suggest what needs to be done, where and how to equip communities and governments in PMCs, and their regional
organizations,to meet and manage these inescapable challenges and their accompanying opportunities.

Economic and Sector Work in the Short & Medium Term-the Small States Agenda in the
Pacific

107. The recent joint work of the Commonwealth Secretariat and World Bank on identifying
the characteristics of small states has brought a new focus and shared perspective on the specific
problems that small vulnerable states face. A general focus on small states will be maintained in
the Bank's operations on an ongoing basis through the establishment of a Small States Network
and the holding of an annual Small States Seminar. The next step is to identify specific strategies
that are relevant to the Pacific. The Bank's global coverage, combined with the fact that forty
one World Bank developing country members have populations of less than 1.5 million and three
out of four of these are island countries, means it well placed to help identify world best-practice
approaches and solutions to the development problems that its nine Pacific member countries
face.
108. Managing the vulnerabilitiesthat Pacific Island countries face requires innovative, sound
and focused thinking on the part of national governments. Sound macroeconomic policies must
be at the core of these efforts and scope of national reform programnscurrently being
implemented in the Pacific is testament to the commitment of many Pacific Island governments
to implement sound macroeconomic and fiscal policies. Diversification of the domestic

- 35 -

economic base will reduce the impact of specific trade or financial shocks and the small size of
many of the national economies and the associated lack of economies of scale could be offset by
giving more attention to cooperation at the regional level to share infrastructure and
institutional resources. The Bank will seek ways to support and foster such regional level
cooperation and will focus a significant part of its economic and sector at the regional and
subregional levels.
Managing natural disasters
109. Natural disasters, like cyclones, frequently exact a large toll on PMCs in the form of
human suffering, damage to infrastructure and loss of export earnings. The cost of such disasters
can be considerably reduced through comprehensivedisaster management programs. This would
include ex ante mitigation measures such as appropriate zoning and hazard mapping,
establishment and enforcement of building codes, and disaster information mechanisms. A
second component would be the strengthening the capacity of national emergency management
agencies. Local communities could be involved by organizing, training and equipping
community disaster committees in disaster preparedness and mitigation. Third, the program
could include investment in protection of key infrastructure facilities. Such work needs to be
informed by the approaches already developed that are uniquely integrated with the social and
cultural institutions and understandings in the region. The Bank is undertaking work on the
development of catastrophe risk management in the Caribbean. This includes both catastrophe
insurance and the incorporationof catastrophe exposure into macroeconomicpolicy making. The
Bank will work with PMCs and other development partners to see what relevance such work
could have for the Pacific.
Tackling commodityprice risks
110. The PMCs being largely dependent on export of primary commodities are vulnerable to
fluctuations in their prices. It would therefore be useful if the International Task Force ° on
commodity price risk management pay attention to issues and commodities of relevance to the
Pacific. The risks that the Pacific are faced with, however, including fluctuations in volumes and
tourism earnings and different land tenure systems are likely to require a combination of
different approaches.
Managing environmental vulnerability
111. Pacific Island countries are among the most vulnerable in the world to global climate
change. Most of the population, economic activities and infrastructure are located near the coast
and the combination of inherent small island vulnerability to environmental degradation and
population growth entails high costs during extreme climatic conditions such as cyclones or El
Nifo events. The region has been active on climate change issues, especially through regional
organizations such as SPREP and SOPAC. However, despite the progress that has been
achieved, knowledge gaps persist in regional impact assessment, economic valuation and
adaptation to climate change. Changing population dynamics and increasing numbers of people
10 This Task Force was convenedby the World Bank in 1998and includes participation from all stakeholders in
international commodity markets. See http://www.worldbank.org/commrisk.

- 36 -

moving to urban and peri-urban areas located near the coast or at sea level are also having an
impact on urban environmental services, including water supply, drainage, sanitation/sewerage
and solid water disposal and on urban infrastructuresuch as roads, power and telecommunication
services. The Bank's forthcoming Regional Economic Report will analyze ways for PMCs to
develop adaptation strategies and improve their access to international funding for adaptation.
Responding to worldwide trade liberalization
112. Recent years have seen the progressive liberalization of world trade following the
implementation of Uruguay Round agreements, the establishment of the WTO, and the
proliferation of regional trade agreements. As a result, the trade preferences once afforded to
PMCs are likely to be eroded. Both time and resources will be needed as PMCs adjust to this
new trading environment. Successful adjustment will require both policy change and external
support.
113. There is a recognition among the PMCs that they need to participate more fully in the
worldwide trend toward freer trade. The benefits of freer trade are not achieved without costs. It
takes time for efficient industries to respond to the new opportunities opened by freer trade. The
uncompetitive or less efficient industries may have to be scaled down or forced to exit, resulting
in reduced profitability and job losses. These 'adjustment costs' are inevitable and the movement
towards freer trade must be carefully managed so as to minimize them. The Bank's past and
continuing economic and sector work in the region places it on strong analytical base to help
PMCs manage this adjustment in their specific context. In addition, the Bank can draw upon its
involvement with liberalization experiences in other countries to identify roadblocks which could
increase the costs of adjustment. The Bank could examine whether policies that have been used
to successfullytackle the roadblocks in other regions could be adapted for the PMCs.
114. The Lome convention which had accorded preferential treatment to exports from
participating PMCs to the EU expired in February 2000. A successor convention is to be signed
later this year in Suva, Fiji. The new agreement would require the PMCs to conclude with the
EU a WTO-compatible arrangement by 2008. Current market access arrangements would,
however, be maintained over these eight years. The new WTO-compatible relationship will
likely involve a reciprocal trading arrangement of the PMCs with the EU. PMCs have already
begun negotiations for forming a regional free trade area amongst themselves which will greatly
facilitate a regional economic partnership arrangement (REPA) between the relevant PMCs and
the EU. The Bank could support the PMCs in accomplishingsuch agreements.It is likely that the
REPA with the EU would confer greater benefits to the PMCs than would a free trade area
among themselves.
Globalization

115. Economic policies and strategies need to be considered in terms of national priorities and
social circumstances, but national level decisions have to be informed by international events and
pressures. The fast pace of globalization accentuates the economic vulnerability of the region,
especially as most countries produce mainly primary commodities that have fluctuating and often
low value on world markets. National governments can find their policies superceded by larger
global forces over which they have limited or no control. Growing export markets for natural

-

37 -

resources can weaken traditional management systems, particularly when local leaders sacrifice
long-term sustainability to short-term gains. Conversely, the forces of globalization can also
stimulate an environment where innovative policies and incentives help remove some of the
traditional barriers of remoteness from markets. Technological and communications advances
can, if managed properly, provide new opportunities by reducing liabilities of physical isolation.
The Bank will work with PMC s and development partners to help identify how such advances
can be realized in the Pacific.
E. RISKS TO IMPLEMENTATIONOF THE STRATEGY
116. The major risks to the Bank's Pacific Regional Strategy stem from the nature and
characteristics of Pacific states themselves and the region in which they are located. Major risks
include:
* A lack of political and institutional capacity in PMCs to follow through with reform
programs, to manage the resources available to them and to respond effectively to the
changing global economic environment.This risk is significant, particularly for those PMCs
whose reform programs are not yet far advanced. The measures set out in this strategy will
help build the institutional capacity of PMCs and the risk will decrease over time as progress
is achieved. The Bank's continued involvement in the region, along with the decentralization
of the Bank's PNG and Pacific Country Management Unit, will enable more sustained
dialogue with PMCs to help maintain the commitmentto reform.
*

Susceptibility of the region and countries in it to external economic and natural shocks. The
measures outlined in paragraphs 107-115, including in disaster mitigation and management,
environmental vulnerability and trade liberalization, will increase the resilience of PMCs. It
has to be acknowledged, however, that this risk will remain on an on-going basis as a part of
the Pacific operating environment.

* A failure on the part of development partners that are active in the region to follow through
with their stated commitment and willingness to work cooperatively within country-driven
reform and sector programs. This risk is rated as low as all development partners have clearly
stated their desire and commitmentto work on the basis of partnership. The decentralization
of the Bank's Pacific operations will also enable enhanced dialogue with other development
partners to help ensure the realizationof this commitment.

- 38 -

5. CONCLUDING COMMENTS
117. The Bank has a role to play in the Pacific. It involves working in partnership with the
nine Pacific Bank members and their development partners to identify solutions to the
development challenges they face. That role must be targeted and focused, playing to the Bank's
strengths and avoiding generating expectations that the Bank has neither the resources or clear
comparative advantage to satisfy. The Pacific Regional Strategy outlined plays to the Bank's
strengths, highlighting its global access to knowledge and combining it with a strategic and
targeted lending portfolio. The strategy provides a yardstick by which the Bank's involvement
can be predicted, measured and assessed; but perhaps the real value of the regional strategy lies
in the commitment it makes to its Pacific members and to the other development partners who
share that commitment.

James D. Wolfensohn
President

By: Sven Sandstrom

Washington, D.C.
May 4, 2000

Annex 1

- 39 -

ANNEX 1: THE BANK'S PACIFIC EXPERIENCE
Table 1: The World Bank's Lending Program 1971 - 2000
Approval Date

Closing Date

29 June 1971
30 Jan 1973
15 Jun 1972
8Jul 1975
23 Mar 1976
15 Jun 1978
29 May 1980
25 Nov 1980
2Jul 1985
3 Sep 1987
25 May 1989
17 Apr 1990
18 Jun 1992

31 Dec 1977
31 Mar 1978
30 Nov 1978
31 Mar 1981
31 Dec 1983
30 Sep 1982
31 Dec 1983
30 Jun 1984
31 Dec 1989
31 Dec 1991
31 Dec 1996
30 Sep 1998
30 Jun 1999

4 Mar 1975
18 Sep 1979
9 Dec 1980
23 Apr 1985
4 Feb 1986
21 Apr 1987
22 Apr 1993
8 Jun 1989
17 May 1990
9 Mar 1993
15 Apr 1999

30 Jun 1980
30 Jun 1988
31 Dec 1987
30 Sep 1990
31 Dec 1993
31 Aug 1994
31 Aug 1994
31 Dec 1994
31 Dec 1994
31 Dec 1997
31 Dec 2002

17Mar 1981
2 Mar 1982
20 Dec 1983

31 Dec 1987
31 Dec 1989
31 Dec 1990

2.2

22Jan 1985

30 Jun 1989

6.1
16.0
7.0
0.1

29 Apr 1986
25 May 1993
17 Jun 1999
6 Jan 2000

31 Dec 1992
30 Jun 2000
31 Dec 2000
30 Jun 2005

2.1
2.3

12 Jun 1987
14Jan 1990

131 Dec 1990
131 Dec 1995

1.4
2.5
8.6
1.6

2 Aug 1983
20 Mar 1986
15 Nov 1988
|11 Jun 1991

Amount In Millions (USD)
Disbursed
Undisbursed
FIJI
11.8
0
11.8
4.2
0
4.2
0
2.2
2.2
5.0
0
5.0
12.0
0
11.7
15.0
0
15.0
15.5
15.5
0
0
18.0
18.0
0
1.2
6.5
23.4
0
23.4
0
7.6
8.1
12.9
16.2
0
15.0
0
14.9
SAMOA
4.4
0
4.4
6.5
8.0
0
1.0
2.0
0
2.4
2.0
0
2.5
0
3.1
3.0
0
3.4
0.4
0
1.0
4.6
0
5.0
15.3
14.0
0
5.1
5.1
0
0.4
14.4
0
SOLOMON ISLANDS
0
0.8
1.5
4.7
5.0
0
0
2.6
3.5

Project

Financier

Principal
IBRD
IBRD
IBRD
IBRD
IBRD
IBRD
IBRD
IBRD
IBRD
IBRD
IBRD
IBRD
IBRD

Highway - Suva - Nandi
Highway - Suva - Nandi
Telecommunication
Telecommll
Sugar Development
Power
Power II
Cyclone Reconstruction
Development Bank
Road Upgrading
Third Telecommunication
Housing Project
Roads Upgrading

IDA
IDA
IDA
IDA
IDA
IDA
IDA
IDA
IDA
IDA
IDA

Highways I
Agriculture Development
Second Agr. Development
Development Bank
Multi-Project Loan
Power
Power
Telecom
Emergency Road Rehab
Emergency Road Rehab
Infrastructure Management

IDA
IDA
IDA

IDA
IDA
IDA
IDA
IDA

DevelopmentBank

1Primary
Education
1Agriculture
Development

2.0

|Guadalcanal Road
Education 1;
Education III
SAC
Health Sector Development

0
0
1.3
5.0
3.9

5.0
16.9
12.0
4.0
TONGA

IDA
IDA

Development
Development

_______
____________________

IDA
IDA
IDA
IDA

2.0
3.0

Bank
Bank I

Agriculture Research & Extension
Multiproject
Education
Housing

_

1

1

2.0
2.0
8.0
3.4

1

0
0
VANUATU
0
0|
0
0

30 Jun 1989
30 Jun 1993
31 Dec 1998
30 Sep 1998

- 40 -

Annex 1

Table 2: SECTORALCOMPOSITIONOF BANK LENDING, 1971-2000
Fiji

Sector
USsm
Education
Health
Agriculture/Rural
Banking
Housing/Informal Settlements
Roads/Transport
Asset/Infrastructure Management
Cyclone Reconstruction
Telecoms
Structural AdjustmnentCredit
Sugar Industry
Multiprojects
Power
TOTAL

%

Samoa
US$m
%

4

10
2

10

_

6.5
16.2
54.4

36

18.0
15.3

12
10

12

8

30.5
152.9

20
100

Solomon Islands
USsm
%N
26.9
54

16
3

4

8

3.5
1.5

7
3

_

23.5
14.4

39
24

4.6

7.5

2

52

2

13

3.4

22

2

13

15.4

100

5

100

5

100

_

12
4
6.5
100

8

Tonga
US$m
%

4

12
2.5
4
61

Vanuatu
%
USm

24
24

1
1
49.9

100

_

Analytical and Advisory Work
The Bank's analytical and advisory work in the Pacific has been substantial and included
regionally based work such as the biennial Regional Economic Reports and individual country
work. Regionally based advisory work has covered a wide range of areas including governance,
fisheries, education, health, transport, energy, agriculture, coastal management, inforrnation
technology, telecommunications,private sector investment and energy.
B) Analytical and Advisory Work-Listing of Substantial Pieces
Working Apart or Together
Pacific Islands Discussion Paper Series, Number 10, 2000
Voices from the Village: A Comparative Study of Coastal Resource Management in the
Pacific Islands
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 9, 1999
Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: Vanuatu
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 8, 1998
Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: Fiji
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 7, 1998
Samoa: Meeting the Challenges of Development.
Health Sector Review, 19998
Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: SolomonIslands
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 6, 1998
Enhancing the Role of Governancein the Pacific Island Economies
Regional Economic Report, 1998

- 41 -

Annex 1

Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: Kiribati
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 5, 1998
Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: Tonga
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 4, 1998
Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: Samoa
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 3, 1998
Aspects of the Industry, Trade and Marketing of Pacific Islands Trochus
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 2, 1997
The Use of First and Second Languages in Education
Pacific Islands Discussion Series, Number 1, 1997
Pacific Islands, Building a Resilient Economic Base for the Twenty-First Century
Regional Economic Report, 1995
Pacific Island Economies: Sustainable Development of Fisheries
Regional Report, 1995
Pacific Island Economies: Sustainable Development of Forestry
Regional Report, 1995
Pacific Islands Education Study
Regional Report, 1995
Fiji: Restoring Growth in a Changing Global Environment
Country Report, 1995
Managing Urban Environmental Sanitation Services in Pacific Island Countries, Annotate
Bibliography
Regional Report, 1995
Health Priorities and Options in the World Bank's Pacific Member Countries
Regional Report, 1994
Managing Urban Environmental Sanitation Services in Selected pacific Island Countries
Regional report, 1994
Pacific Island Economies: The Role of the Private Sector
Regional Report, 1993
Post Secondary Education Study
Regional Report, 1993

- 42 Transport Sector Study
Regional Report, 1993
Pacific Island Economies: Towards Efficient and Sustainable Growth
Regional Economic Report, 1993
Pacific Regional Energy Assessment
Regional Report, 1992
Pacific Island Economies: Towards Higher Growth in the 1990s
Regional Economic Report, 1991
Fiji: Incentive Policies for Growth
Country report, 1991
Western Samoa: Agricultural Strategy Review
Country Report, 1991
Role of Remittances in Polynesian Economies
Regional, 1991
Tonga: Agricultural Sector Strategy Review
Country Report, 1990
Fiji: Performance and Prospects of Education Training and Health Services
Country Report, 1990
Fiji: Challenges for Development
Country Report, 1990

Annex 1

- 43 -

Annex 2

ANNEX 2: PACIFIC - COUNTRIES AT A GLANCE

- 44 -

Annex 2

Fiji at a glance
POVERTYand SOCIAL
riji
Population.mid-year(millions)
GNP percapita (Atlasmethocd,
US$)
GNP(At/asmethodf,US$ billins)

0.83
2,110
17

East
Asia &
Pacific

911
7199

Lowermiddle-.
Intcome

1,817
990
1.802

---

____

__

--

Development
diamond'

908
1,710
1,557

Lifeexpectancy

Averageannual growth,1992-95
Population(%5)
Laborforce (I/)

1~5
2.8

1.~2
1.6

1.
1.5

42
73

3511

58

69

18

37

688
38

8
90
8
128
128
128

20
77
is
117

Most recent estimatte(latest year available, ISS2-08~
Poverty(% ofpoPulationbelownationalpovertyline)
Urbanpopulation(l%of totalpopulation)
Life expectncy at birth (years)
Infant mortaliy (pe 1,000 live births)
Childmalnutritionl
(% of childrenunder5)
Accessto safewater (%/of population)
Illiteracy('Aof populationage 15.)
Gross primaryenrollment (l%of school-agepopuflaion)
Male
Female

1A9
116

~

GNP
per
aiaerlmn

Accesato safewater

.,

1 75
14
103
105
100

Gross
primary

"~~"F/ij
Lower-mtiddle-rncome
group

KEY ECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERMTRENDS
1977

0.7~I

GOP(U.S$billions)
Grossdomesticinvestment/GDP
Exportsot goodsandiservices/GOP
GrossdomesticsavIngs/GOP
Grossnationalsavings/GOP

23,2
43.9
20,4
19~0

Currentaccountbalanoe/GOP
Interestpayments/GOP
Total debt/GOP i16,5
Total debt service/exports
Presentvalue of debt/GOP
Presentvalue of debt/exports

-3.5
0,7
3.4

1.1
-1.1

1998

--

2,1
124
57.3
10.7
11,0

1.8
12.
66.0Trd
13.-3
9.7

Eonmcrais

-1.1
2.2
39.5
11,8

0.2
0$~
10,2
3.1
9.5
15.4

-2.
06
13,5
1.8

Doesi
DoetcInvestment
Svig

.

.

,

2.4
0.9

4997

1.2
15.9
45.0
19.2
15.2

..

1977-87 1988498
(averageannualgrowth)
GOP
GNPper capita
Exportsof goodsand services

1987

1997
-1.5
-3.2

Tad

1998~ 1999-03

Idbens

-7
-5

____

Fj
Lower-middle-income
group

2.2

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMVY
(56 of GDP)

~ ~~~~~1977
1987
1997

1998

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

23.3
20.7
11.5
58.0

22.9
21.1
11.7
56.1

17.8
28.2
13.6
56.1

19.5
31.0
15.1
49.5

Private consumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Importsof goodsand services

64.1
15.5
46.7

83.6
17.3
41.7

72.9
16.4
59.0

70.7
16.0
64.7

1977-87 1988-98

1997

1998

(averageannualgrowth)
Agricuiture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

2.0
-0.1
1.6
2.3

0.5
4.7
4.1
1.1

-12.5
-1.3
-3.4
1.9

-10.0
3.2
-5.0
-7.4

Privateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Grossdomesticinvestment
Importsof goodsand services
Grossnationalproduct

-0.2
4.3
-3.0
-0.7
0.8

2.3

-1.8

-4.2

Gr~owthratesof-otput

and
-Investmenit l%lA

20
151-

-15
-3D

-'_.GDI

-- *-GDP

Note: 1998data are preliminaryestimates.
The diamondsshowfour key indicatorsin the country(in bold)comparedwith its income-group
average.If data are missing,the diamondwill
be incomplete.

-45 -

Annex 2

Fiii
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1977

1987

1997

1998

7.0
0.0

5.7
8.2

3.4
3.8

5.7
7.3

Inflation
1

8
4
4

Govemment finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)

2
o

Current revenue

..

23.2

26.5

27.0

Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

..

..

-0.9
-5.0

2.1
-6.5

1.5
-2.4

93

1977

1987

1997

1998

329
150
41

511
148
51
155
829

505
60
40
152
768

94

95

96

97

' GDP deflator

98

CPI

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Sugar
Gold
Manufactures
Total imports (cii

Food
Fuel and energy
Capitalgoods

..
..
..

374

~~~
61

..
..

73

..

Exoort Dnce index (1995=100)
ImDortorice index (1995= 1001
Terms of trade (1995=100)

Export and import levels (US$ millions)
soo*

idiilud

3

~~~~
133
~~~~~
114
30 ~~70
114
76
225

152
.

..

..

92

93

92

93
94
Exports

..

94

90

6

97

9

9
*Imports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)

1977

1997

1998

Current account balance to GDP ratio (%)

318
334
-16

530
521
8

1,240
1,241
-2

1,139
1,117
22

6T

-9
-1

-11
-11

-68
74

-86
25

Current account balance

-26

-13

4

-39

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

43
-17

-50
63

-33
29

22
17

Memo:
Reserves includina cold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC. localVUS$)

147
0.9

132
1.2

360
1.4

385
2.0

1977

1987

1997

1998

121
23
°

468
80
°

213
30
°

218
32
a

11
2

67
13

39
6

21
7

0

0

0

0

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers

1987

°

T

-

-

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(USS millions)

Composition of total debt, 1998 (US$ millions)

Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD

IDA
Composition

A: 32

of net resource flows

Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development

G. 48

Economics

8

17

14

11
8
0
0

-1
-16
11
0

-8
-12
12
0

-6
0

0
5
0
4
2
3

0
1
7
-6
6
-13

0
4
4
0
2
-2

0
4
5
-1
2
-3

F 41
E:11

A- IBRD
B- IDA
C - IMF

D- Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

9/17199

- 46 -

Annex2

Micronesia,Fed. Sts. at a glance
POVERTYand SOCIAL

Micronesia.
Fed. Sts.

1998
Pooulatio6,
(minilions)
GNP cer caoita (Atlas4methC4,
US$)
GNP (Alas method,US$ biflions)~

~mid-vear

Avers

East ;Low.r
Asia & rmiddlePacific~ income

0.11

1.817

0.20

1 02

90
1710
1.557

1.2
1,6

1.1
1~

35
69
37
20
77
15
is).
117
i11
116

Ss6
66
38

~990
I.0
zo

9/23/99

---

Developmentdiamond'
Lifeexpectancy

annualarowth. 19912-98

Pooulation(96)
Laborforce (%l

20

Most rvoentesthnateflatestvesravaiwable.199281
Poverty(3 of ooolatiorrbelownationalcoverifvline)
Urbanco6tulatioft(9%of total ooouLet/on)
Life exoectancvat 1With(vears)
infant mortalitvADoe
1.000live births)
ChildmalnutritionPA6of childmen
un,der87.
Accessto safewater1%pfOoculalion)
illiteracy(% of oooulatidniao0
Gross orimarvenroliment( Oflsoolft
ooq aioq
Male
Female:

29
87
30
22
.

GNP
per
caiaerlmn

Grs
primary

Accessto safe water

..

75
1
10iroes,Fd.Ss
10.5
:100

Lower-middle4nrrome
group

KEY ECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERMTRENS
1977

1967

GDP(US$billions)
GrossdomesticJnvestrnnflarGP
Exowrtsaf coods and services/GOPTrd
Grossdomesticsavinos/GDP
Gross nationalsavi-nos/GOP

1997

1998-

021

0.21

Economic
ratioe
Trd

C,urrenteccount
balance/GOP
Interestoavments/GbP1.Saig
Total debtIGDP
Total debt service/exoorts
Presentvalueof debtlGDP;
Presentvalueof debt/exoorts

..

30.&

31.4

Domestic

/

nvsmn
SvnsIvsmn

Indebtedness
1977497 1966-98g
(everacaannualoroWthl
GOP
GNP oer caoita
Exoortaof ogodsend services

..

03
-3

1997

1998

199-03

-4 0
-6

-3.1
-4.

i~

1997

1998

"Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Lower-middle-/ncome
group

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY
(Y. of GOP)

~ ~~~~1977
1987

AoricultLure
lndustrv4
Manurfactufino

Growthratesof outputandinvestment
(%1)

OU3/

Services

.4

Private consumotion
Generalcovemmentconsumotion
lmoorts of ooodsand services

-e

93

'r
''GOl

1977-87 1988-98

1997

1998

-4.0

-3.1

93

93

--

GDP

(averaae
annualaomwthl
Acriculture
Industrv
Manufacturino
Services
Privatec-onsumoton
Generalaovemment consumnotion
Gross domesticinvestment
ImDortsof aoods and servies
Gross nationalDroduct

.

-0.2

Note:,1996 dataare preliminaryestimates.
The diamondsshowtour key indicatorain the country(in bold)comoaredwithits inicome-aroUD
averaae.If dataare missina,the diamondwill
be incomolete.

- 47 -

Annex 2
Micronesia,Fed. Sts.

PRICES and GOVERNMENTFINANCE
1977
Domesticprices
(6 change)
Consumerprices
Implicit GDP deflator
Governmentfinance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

1987

1997

1998

3.0
3.0

3.0
3.0

Inflation(/.)

8T
.

.

..

..

6
4
2

o
..

..

73.8

75.7

..
..

..
..

15.0

1.5

23.5
0.3

1977

1987

1997

1998

..

33

32

93

95

94

-

95

GDP
deflator

97

98

C

TRADE
(US$millions)
Totalexports(fob)

.

Exportand Importlevels(USSmillions)
300

n.a.

n.a.
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)

DD

109

Food
Fuel and energy

..

Capital goods

..

Exoortoriceindex(1995=100)
Imoort oice index (1995=100)
Termsof trade(1995=100)

J.L

..

107

.

.

.

.

o-

,
92

..
..

..

..

..

1997
64

1998
62

;_
93

94

95

flExports

_

_

99

97

99

*lmporls

BALANCEof PAYMENTS

(US$millions)

1977

1987

Exportsof goodsand services
Importsof goodsand services

..

..

..

..

118

Resource
balance

..

..

-54

115
-53

1

1

116
t

118
t

Netincome

.

Net current transfers

64

670. _,

Financing
items(net)

..

-56

-51

Changesin net reserves

..

-8

-16

Current account balance

Memo:
Reservesincludinaoold (US$ millions)
Conversionrate (DEC.local/IUSS)

..

..
1.0

46

62

..

1.0

1.0

1977

1987

1997

1998

Currentaccountbalanceto GDPratio(%)
40
130

Eh

20

lE

i

al

-1

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

EXTERNALDEBT and RESOURCEFLOWS
(US$millions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Compositionof net resourceflows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principalrepayments
Net flows
Interestpayments
Net transfers

Development
Economics

..
..

..
..

..
..
..
..
..

..
..

..

9123/99

-48 -

Annex 2

Kiribatiat a.glance
POVERTYandSOCIAL
Kiribati
1998
Pooulation.
mid-year(milhionsl
GNP oercaoita (Atlasmethod.USSI
GNP(Atlasmethod.US$ billions)

East Lower.
Asais& middle--Pacific income

0.09
1.180
0 10

1.817
990
1802

92J9

-.

Development
diarrond'
Lifeexpectancy

908
1.710
1.~557

AveracsannualorovAh.1992-98
PoDulation(%l)
Laborforce (VP).

71

1.2
1.8

/

11
1.5

GNP
per
capita

Most recent estimate (latestveeravailable.1992-981
Povervt!y.(ofDooouatonbelownatinal ooverty'line)
Urbanoooulationt% of totaloooulatlonl
Lifeexoethancvat birth (veers)
lrrfantroratlity (oarl,000 livebirths)
Childmalnutrition(%6of cVidrenunder51
AccessatoWe water(%/ofoowatdaionl
Illiteracy(% ofDoooulation ace 15+1
Grossorimaryenrollment (1,1ofschool-aeoenoou/atonl
Male
Femriale

37
60
Ei0
100
.

..

35
89
37
20
77
1
117
119
11e

75
14
103
105
100

-Gross

primary
enrollment

..

/

58
68
38
to safewater

.Access

-P'qKirbatf
Lower-middle-income
group

KEY ECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERMTREN4DS

GOP (USSbill/ansI
Grossdomesticinvestment/GOP
ExDortsofaoods and services/GOP
GrossdomesticsavinosGDP
Grossnationl savinos/GOP

1977

1987

1997

1998

0.04
84
55,8
24.0

0,02
70.2
!.3
-35.0

0.05

0.05
-Trade

Economic
ratios'

-

_

.

CurrentaccountbalancelGOP
IntwrestoavmertstaGDP
Totaldebt/GDP
Totaldebt service/exrcorts
Presentvalue ofdebt/GDP
Presentvailueofdebt/excorts

..

0.0
0.0
.

.

4.0
6881
57

7.4
00

25.9
00

Dometic
nvsrnn
Ivsmn

Savins

.

I

.

Indebtedness
1977-87 1988-98~
(avereceannualcr0wth)
GDP
GNP cer caoita
ExDortsof coodsand services

-8.3
0.5

24
-02Q

1997

1998

3.3

8.1

11999-03
Klrtibati
Lower-middle-rincomegru

.

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY
1%/of GDP)
Aariculture
Industrv
Manufacturina
Services
PrivateconsumDtion
Generalcovemment conSUMDtion
Imoortsof noods and services

1977

1987

-.

25.1
10.5
2.2
84.4

.
.

-.

49.0
27.0
38.2

86.4
48.6
114.5GD

1977-87 1988-98
(averaoeannualorowthl
Aoriculture
Industrv
Manufacturina
Services
Privateconsumotion
Generalaovemment consumotion
Grossdomesticinvestment
(moorts of 3ooods
and services
Gross nationalDroduct

-1.3
3.2
-0.4
-3.1

-0.8
-2.5
1.0
2.6

2.9

1.8

1997

1998

Growthratesof outputandinvestment(%

.
.

.

.
..

.

.

..

~Gl

93

94

95

94

~
-'

1997

97

98

D
GP

1998

Note: 1998dataare preliminaryestimates.
The diamondsshowtour keyindicatorsin the countrv(in bold/comoaredwith its income-orouD
averaeo.Ifdata are missino.the diamondwill
be incomolete.

- 49 -

Annex 2

Kiribati
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE
1977

1987

1997

1998

4.8

2.2
-1.5

4.7
3.5

Inflation(/)

Domestic prices

(%change)
Consumerpnces
lmplicitGDPdeflator

..

8.9

15
10
s
o

Governmentfinance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budgetbalance
Overallsurplusldefict

93

..

122.8
47.2
6.3

137.0
64.5
24.0

1977

1987

1997

1998

..

..

7

6

..

.

,.

..
..
..

..
..

.

.

..

..

..

94

95

98

97

.-5

[

_GDP

deflator

*CPI

TRADE
(US$millions)
Total exports (fob)

Exportandimportlevels(US$millions)
40

Copra
Fish
Manufactures
Total imports(cif)
Food

Fueland
energy
Capital
goods

3.
0

37
.

Exoort owceindex (1995=100)
Imoort onceindex (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=1001

.

..

.

..

29

0
o
92

93

a Exports

lnrlports

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$millionsl

1977

1987

1997

1998

Exportsof goodsand services
Importsof goodsand services
Resourcebalance

..
..

32
58
-26

44
60
-16

40

..
..

Net income

..

..

13

20

Netcurrenttransfers

.

..

13
17

Current accountbalance
Financingitems (net)
Changesin net reserves
Memo:
Reservesincdudinaoold (USs millions)
Conversionrate (DEC.locaLWUS$)

.,

..

.

-1

3

15

4
-7

12
-24

0.9

1.4

323
1.3

370
1.6

1977

1987

1997

1998

Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA

0
0
0

17
0
0

0
0

0
0

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

0
0
0

1
0
0

0
0

0
0

Compositon of net resourceflows
Official grants
Olfidal creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolioequity

4
0
0
0
0

10
0
0
0
0

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principalrepayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

..

T

12

54

17

Currentaccountbalanceto GDPratio(°)

.

92

93

94

97

98

-o

EXTERNALDEBT and RESOURCEFLOWS
(US$ millions)

DevelopmentEconomics

0
0
0
0
0
0

9/22/99

- 50 -

Annex2

MarshallIslandsat a glance9229
POVERTYand SOCIAL

Marshall;
Islands

¶998
Populalion,mid-year1'milllons)
GNPpercapta (Adeasmethod,US$)

GNP(Atiasmethod,
US

bm*

East
Asia &

Lowermtddle.
PacifIc Income

0.06
I1.540

1.817
990

908
1,710

1

1,802

57

---

Development
diamond'
Lifeexpectancy

Averageannual growfth 1992.98
Population(5)1.2
Laborforce (%6)

6

1.1
1.5

GN
GPGross
per

mostrecentestimate(latestyear available,1992.98)caiaerlmn

Poverty
(56OA
ouainblwntoa
oef line)
Urbanpopulation(56oflotalpopulation)
Life expectancyat birth (years)
Infantmortality per1,000o
livebulths)
ChIlIdmnalnutrition
('A of children)
under8)
Accessto safewater (56of populatioN)
Illiteracy(56of populafion.age15+)
Grossprimry enrollmient(% of schoo-aepultn)17
Male
Female

..

..

35
69
37
20;
71
15
119
1is

primary

58
68W
38
Accessto safewater
75
14
103
105
¶00-

~

"-~MarshallIslands
Lower-middle-income
group

KEY ECONOMICRATIOSand'LONG-TERM
TRENDS
1977

GOP(UJS$billions)
Grossdomesticinvestment/GOPTrd
Fxports of goodsand servicesIGOPTrd
Grossdomestiasavings/GDP
GrossnationalsavingelGDP

19871

00

1997'

0

Currentaccountbalance/GOP
Interestpayments/GOP
Totaldebt/GDPSaig
Total deotserviceexports
Presentvalue of debt/GOP
Preset value of debtlexports

16.9

1998

------

--

-

Economicratios'

01

22.2

Domestic
Investment

Indebtedness
1977417 188611-98111997

(average
annualgrowth)
GOP
GNP percapita
Exportsof goodsand services

.

09

-

1998
5,0
-9 5

1.999-03

~MrhlIsads

Lower-middle-income
group

..

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY
1977
(5/6of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Pr'ivateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Importsoyfgoodsand services

(average
annual
growth)

1987

1997

1998

Growthratesof outputandinvestment
(%)
10

.

..

.

.

.

.

.

..

.

.

14.8
11.9
2.3
73.3
.

T.
..

93

..
-.

-

..

-20

94

GDI

-.

95

5

-4OGDP

.

1977-87 1988-98

1997

1998

-5.3

-5.0

Agricufture
Industry
Manurfacturing
Services
Privateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption.
Grossdomesticinvestment
Importsof goodsand services
Grossnationalproduct

--

..

.

-3.1

Note: 1998data are preliminaryestimnates.
The diamondsshowfour keyindicatorsin the country(in bold)comparedwith its income-groupaverage.If data are missing,the diamondwill
be incomplete.

Annex 2

- 51 -

MarshallIslands
PRICES and GOVERNMENTFINANCE
1977

1987

1997

1998

4.8
4.8

4.0
4.0

Currentrevenue

66.8

66.5

Currentbudget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

18.4
3.9

16.2
5.2

1997
26
25
3

1998
22

Domestic prices
(%change)
Consumerprices
Implicit GDP deflator

I lnfladon
()

Governmentfinance
(%of GDP, includes currentgrants)o

..

..

94

93

95

97

99

deflator

-GDP

¢

99

CPJ

TRADE
(US$millions)
Total exports (fob)
Fish
Coconut oil
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

1977

1987

..

..

ExportandImportlevels(US$millIons)
IDO

75

..

62
15
14
6

56

..

..

s
2.

ol
92

ExmortDoceindex (1995=100)
ImDortoriceindex (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

93

94

95

9s

98

97

*Imports

aExprt

BALANCEof PAYMENTS

1997

1998

42
91
-50

36
82
-46

Net income
Net current transfers

20
47

20
47

Current account balance

16

21

v77
(USSmillions) a
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resourcebalance

1987
..

..

..

..

-18

-24

Changes in net reserves

.

..

1

3

Memo:
Reservesincludinocold (USS millions)
Conversionrate(DEC. localMUSS)

..
..

..

1.0

7
1.0

4
1.0

1977

1987

1997

1998

..
..
..
.
..

..

.

Financingitems (net)

Currentaccountbalanceto GDPratio(%)
25T
20

10

9

l5 92

93

94

95

9s

9

97

03

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(USS millions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Compositon of net resourceflows
Official grants
Official creditors
Privatecreditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

.

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principalrepayments
Net flows
lnterestpayments

Net transfers
DevelopmentEconomics

9122/99

- 52 -

Annex 2

Palau at a glance
POVERTYandSOCIAL

.Asia

Palsot
1998
Population.mid-year(millions)
GNP per capita(A1asmetfod, USS)i
GNP (Atlasmethod,U/S$billions)

.0

East
&
PacIfI
1.817
990
1,~802

9/22/99

Uppermiddle~--inicome

Development
dlamond'

588~

Life expectancy

4,860
2,862

Average anniualgrowth,119$2-98
Populatin ()2.5
Laborforce(

1.2
.

1.4:
GNP
per
capita

2,6

.

Most recantestimiate(latest year avaHlable,1992-98)
Poverty(% of populationbe/ow nationalpovery line)
Urbanpopulation(% of ltotarpopulat/on).
Life expectancyatbirth (years)
Wnantmortality(per 1,1.000fivye
births)
Childmalnutriton (%ofchildren
undfe,r)
Accessto safewater (56of population)
Illlitracy (% ofpopulationage; 15+)
Gross primaryenrollment (% of schoo/-age
population)
male

.

35
69
37
20
77
1
is
117
110

197

1907

1998

0 3

0,13'-

7
25
..

100
..

Gross
primary
erlmn

77
70
27
to safewater

.,Access

70
11
108

-Palau
Upper-middle-income
group

KEY ECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERM"TRENDS
1977
GOP (US$billions)
Grossdomesticinvestment/GOP
Exportsof goodsand services/GOP
Grossdomesticsavings/GOP
Grossnationalsavings/GDP
Currnt accountbatince/GQP
inerest payments/GOP
Total debt/GOP
Total debt service/exports]
Presentvalueof debt/GDP
Presentvalue.of debt/exports

,,

-__

Economic
ratios'
Trade

.
.

16.6

13.2

Dmsi

.SvnsInvestment

Indebtedness
197747 1963-98
(averageannua/grawth)
GOP
GNPper capita
Eixportsof goodsand services

1997

1998

1999-03

.

-Palau
Upper-middle-income
group

,

STRUCTUREot the ECONOMY
1977
(96of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Privateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Importsof goodsand services

1987

Privateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Grossdomesticinvestment
Importsot goodsand services
Gross nationalproduct

1998

1997

1998

.
.
.
.
.
.
-

1977-87 1988-98
(averageannualgrowth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

1997

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

0.8

Note: 1998data are preliminaryestimates.
The diamondsshowfour keyindicatorsin the country(in bold) comparedwith its income-groupaverage.If dataare missing,the diamondwill
be incomplete.

Annex 2

- 53 -

Palau
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE
1977
Domestic prices
(%change)
Consumerprices
Implicit GDP deflator
Governmentfinance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overallsurplus/deficit

1987

1997

1998

..
..
..

..
..
..

55.1
10.7
0.2

56.8
14.4
5.9

1977

1987

1997

1998

..

..

12

11

..

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports(fob)
n.a.

n.a.

jj

7

7|

.

Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Fuel and energy

..

Capital goods

..

Export price index (1995=100)
Importprice index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

Exportand importlevels(USSmillions)
1o

91

79

..

..

..

..

.,

,.

92

93

94

95

9S

97

98

..

..

RsImports

GExports

..

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(US$ millions)

1977

1987

1997

1998

Exports of goods and services

..

..

73

69

Imports of goods and services

..

..

93

81

Resourcebalance

..

.

-20

-12

Net income

..

.

7

Net current transfers

..

..

18
24

22

Current account balance

..

..

22

17

Financingitems (net)

.

.

-25

Changes in net reserves

..

..

3

-13
-4

Memo:
Reserves includinggold (US$millions)
Conversion rate (DEC,locatWUS$)

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.0

1977

1987

1997

1998

Currentaccountbalanceto GDPratio
30
20

10

o.i
92

93

94

96

97

9g

-10

-201

EXTERNALDEBT and RESOURCEFLOWS
(US$millions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
lBRD
IDA

..

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA
Compositionof net resourceflows
Offidial grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

..
..
..
..
..

World Bank program
Commitments

..

Disbursements
Principal repayments

..
..

Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

..

DevelopmentEconomics

..

..

..

..

9/22/99

- 54 -

Annex 2

Samoaata glance9129
Eat LowerAsia & middlepacit incom

POVERTYand SOCIAL
iSamoa
Pooutation.mid-year(millions)
GNPoer caalta(Atlasmethod.
USS)

al 18
1 020

GNP(Atlasmethod.US$tbilions)

0.18

1.1
990

988
1,710

1.2
1,6

~1.1

-

---

__

Dvlopment diamond*
Life expectancy

1~802 1.557

Averaceannu al orwftI 1992-98
PoDulationM%l
Labrfore(%o)

1.2

mostrecentestimat (latestyearwavalable.
1992981
Poverty1%of oDoUlation
belownational
oovettvline)
UrbanDocvlation(% oftotatbooOuation)
Life exoectanwv
at birth (vears)
Infantn-mortality
(oer 1,000lle,birth
ChOdrmalnutrtion
1Y.of childre-nunder
5)
Accesstosofa waterf% of Dooufaffon)l
llliterav (% of oDoulation
ace 15+)
Grossorminavenrollment PA ot'school-aoe
ooulatidn)
Male
Female

1.5

GNP
per

Gross
primary

capita

21
60
22

103
106
100

35
69
37
20
77
I15
117
119
118

198?

1997

199

0.1
35.2Trd
18,2
-15.3
33.3

0.19

0,18

32,6

36.3

7.2
1,3
78.8
¶1,7

4.7
0.
815
5.9
40.7
91.7

11.4
0A,8
171I
5.6

..

68
..

enrollment

58
68,
38
Accessto safewater
75
14
- Sa

a

Loawmeor-middle-income
group

11005
100

KEYECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERM
TRENDS
1977
GDPWS(WSt/lr)~
Gross domesticinvestment/GOP,
Exoortsof aoods and services/GOP
Grossdomesticsavinca/GDP
Gross nationasawirroaGDP

,

.
,.
..

current accountbalancelGDP
Interestoavmnwts/GDP
Totaldebt(GDP
Total debtserice/exoorts
Presentvalueof debtIGOP
Presentvalue orfcdebtlexoorts

..
.
..

13.0
.

..

.

.

-

.

-

Economicratios'

lomstic
SvnsIvsmn
ai

ivsmn

.

Inrdebtedness
1977-87 11988-98
(avew,e annual
aomwth)
GOP
GNP oe caoita
Exoortsof ocodsand services

401
1.6
1,7

1.1
0.0
..

1997

1998

999-03

1.6
0.4
-7.1

1.3
0.1

1987

1997

1998

17.3
2.8

16.6
2.

Samoa

group

.Lower-middle-income

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY
1977

1%of GDP)
Aariculture
Industrv
Manufacturino
Services
PrivateconsumDtion
Generalcovemmrent
consunmDtion
Imoortsof coods and services

..

.

..
.
..

..
..
..

.

95.5
19.9
68.8

1977-87 1988-98
(averaceannualorowthl
Aoriculture

..

.

Industrv

..

.

Manufactudna
Services
Privateconsumotion
Generalaovernment consumnotion
Grossdomesticinvestmient
Imoortsof aoodsand services
Grossnationaloroduct

Growthratesof outputandinvestment
(%/)
1

.
.

..

1.2
-5.8
-7.3
-2.6
1.7

1.2

.

6095.
.

se
..

-GD
54.3

52.8

19197

1998

97

98

-10

-'O'GDP

-8.2
-3.6
-5 5
7.5

-6.2
1.6

1.3

Note: 1998data are preliminaryestimates.
The diamondsshowfour key indicatorsin the countrv(in bold)comoaredwith its income-orouoaveraae.If data are tossina, the diamondwvill
be incomrnlete.

Annex 2

- 55 -

Samoa
PRICES and GOVERNMENTFINANCE
1977

1987

1997

1998

..

4.6
4.6

6.9
11.8

2.2
4.0

Domestic
prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

.

Inflation
Inltn(%
25
1 T
2o

1\
10

Governmentfinance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

5
0
..
..

48.2
20.1
0.3

44.9
17.4
2.0

1987

1997

1998

..
..
..

15

20

..

93

95
96
97
94
- GDP deflator
OCPI

98

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Copra
Coconut oil
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)

1977

..

Food

Fuel and energy.
Capital goods

.

3
3
.
100

.
.
104

o

U II

505

.
.

Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

Exportand importlevels(US$millions)
15C

..

92

..

93

92

94

95

rExports

.

96

_
+
97

98

omimports

BALANCEof PAYMENTS
1977

1987

1997

1998

Currentaccountbalanceto GDP ratio (%)

17
42
-25

28
71
-43

80
140
-60

83
126
-43

15

0
14

1
49

1
68

4

15

..

7

9

20

2

2

-15

0.8

37
2.1

64
2.6

61
2.9

1977

1987

1997

1998

31
0

81
0

156
0

188
0

3

13

42

45

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

3
0
0

8
0
0

5
0
1

5
0
1

Composiion of net resource flows
Official
grants
Official
creditors
Private
creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

0
6
2
0
0

18
4
0
1
0

0

3
2
0
2
0
1

(US$ millions)

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers
Current account balance
(net)
Financing items
Changesin net reserves
Memo:
Reserves including gold (USSmillions)
Conversionrate (DEC, local/US$)

T

i

w

94

Mss
95

96

w97
97

w

98

59

-1D
..

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(USs millions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
DevelopmentEconomics

Composition
of total debt,1998 (USSmillions)

1
0
1
0
1

G:3

E:10

0
4
0

0
3
0

0

0

1
0
1
0
0

2
0
2
0
2

D:100
j A - IBRD
B- IDA
C- MF

E - Bilateral
D- Othermultilateral F - Private
G- Short-te

9/22/99

-56 -

Annex2

Solomon Islands at a glance
POVERTY anidSOCIAL

Solomon
islands

East
Asia &
PacIfic

0.42
750
0.31

1.817
990
1.802

3.1
3.1

1.2
1.8

1.7
1.9

35
e9
37
20
77
15
117
119
¶18

31
63
69

Pooulation.mnid-vear(mnill
jons1
GNP Der caoita (Atlas methocd.US$)
GNP (Atlas
method.U13$billions)

Lowincome

9117/99

-

--

-

D-evelo-pme-nt
di_am~o
nd'

3.5115
520
1.844

Life expectancy

Ave ace annual orowth. 1992.98
Pooulation (%
Labor force (%)

Most recent estimate (latest vesr available. 19%2-98)catanrlmt
Poverty (% ofocoulation below national ooverfv linel
Urban oooulation (% of total Doculationi)
Life exoectancv at birth (vesrsl
Infantmortalitv(Loer 1.000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of chIldre? tinder 51
Access to safe water (% of aotaulation)
Illiteracv (%/of OODulatiOn
aCo 154~.
Gross orimarv enrollment f% of schodl-ace 000 letlarnl
Male
Female

19
70
23
.

64
97
103
89

~

GNP
per

Gross
primary

Access to safe water

..

74
32
108
113Loinmegop
-03

Islands

-Solomon

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRrENDS
1977

0.06

Current account balance/GOP
Interest osyvments/GOP
Total debt/GDP
Toltl debt servicetexiaorts
Presentvalue of debt/GOP
Present valve of debt/exoorts

9.0
0.0
13.3
0,0

(averaae
annualcrowithI
GOP
GNP Der caoita
Exoorts of ocoodsand services

1987f

1907

199$
8-

0,16
34.0
52.8
22.3
44.6

0. 7

0.30

-2.8
1.3
S9.4
5.1

-10.2
0.3
36.3:
2.4
23.5
374

--

_____

.

Economicratios*

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investment/GDP
Exoorts of coods arndservices/GOP
Gross domestic savinosIGOP
Gross national savinos)GDP

..
.
..
.

978
7.4
3.1
8.8

,

.,

.

..

989
3.9
0A4
.

.Trade

97IIdbens
-0 5
-70O
-3 5
-9.7

5.5
1.2
50.9
356

Doetc
Savingsvestmen
Saig

4,0

neamt

-~Solomon Islands
-Low-income group

1.0

.

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
11977
(% of GDP)
Aoriculture
Industrv
Manufacturina
Services
Private consumotion
General aovemment consumDtion
Imoorts of aoods and services

1987

1997

1998

Growthrates of outputend investmentI%)
5

.

..
9
..
..
.

47.9
29.8
64.5

1977-87 1988-98

10

..-

3

94

_GDI

1997

1998

-0.5

-7.0

5

9

-- *'-OP

(averaae annual arowthl
Acriculture
Industrv
Manufacturina
Services
Private consumDtion
Generalcovermment consumtotion
Gross domestic investment
Imoorts of aoods and services
Gross national Droduct

2.2
5.4
2.2
2.7
5.8

3.7

Note: 1998 data are preliminary estimates.
diamonds show four key indicators in the country(in bold comoared with its income-arouc)aversae. If data are missino. the diamondwill
be incomnDlete.

-The

- 57 -

Annex 2

Solomon Islands
PRICES and GOVERNMENTFINANCE
1977

1987

1997

1998

..

11.0

8.6

..

8.1
9.7

12.0
12.3

..

23.0
-3.3
-4.9

24.5
1.7
0.1

1997
174
80
17
20
209

1998
141
41

Inflation(%)

Domestic prices
(% change)

Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Governmentfinance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplus/deficit

15

1

|

.

93

95
96
97
deflator -O-CPI

94

-1GDP

98

TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports(fob)
Logs
Fish (frozen)
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)

1987
..

..

Foodmii
Fuel and energy

Exportand Importlevels(USSmillions)
25D_
200
150

147
l1

Capital goods0
Exportprice index (1995=100)
Importprice index (1995=100)
Termsof trade (1995=100)

..

..

11392
92
123

93
94
rExports

|.

96

97

98

u Imports

122

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(UJS$millions)

1977

1987

1997

1998

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resourcebalance

36
39
-3

84
119
-35

231
302
-71

191
206
-15

Net income
Net current transfers

-4
13

38

7
40

38

Current account balance

6

-5

-38

17

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

1
-7

11
-6

32
6

4
-21

..

0.9

37
2.0

32
3.7

49
4.8

1977

1987

1997

1998

9
0
0

98
0
10

135
0
30

0

5

6

7

0

0

0

0

10
0
0
4
0

34
14
0
11
°

16
2
-4
22
°

M-emo:
Reservesincluding gold (US$ millions)
Conversionrate (DEC,local/USS)

-

Currentaccountbalanceto GDPratio(%)
97

4

T8
4

95

96
l4

-8
-12

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
O
IDA
Compositionof net resourceflows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

Compositionof total debt, 1998(USS millions)
153
03
33

1

°

F:45

14
0
E
D: 9
i

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
1
0
1
0
1

0
3
0
2
0
2

0
2
0
2
0
1

A IROE
B - IDA
C - IMF

- Bilateral
D- Othermrltilateral

F - Private
G - Short-term

9/17/99

Annex 2

-9-

Tonga at a glance
POVElRTYandSOCIAL
Toncoa
PODUlaton.
mid-vear(rnIllioSl
GNPoer cacita (Allasmethod,
USSI
GNP(Atl.-S
methootUS$
billions)

0,10
1.690
0.17

.

Averace annual orowth, 1992-09
PoculationI(%)
Laborforce (%)

03

.

East
Asia &
Pacific
1,817
990
.1,802

1.2
1.8

Lowvermiddle-Income

44
70
22
100
.

.

-

Developmentdiamond*
Lifeexpectancy

90
1.710
-1,557

11
1.5~

most recentestimatetlatest vear available 199241caia.
Povertv(%/ofoooulaifon
belownational
Dovertv ie
Urbanocoulatiori(% oftotalcoouletion)
Life exoectancvat birth (vears)
Infantmortalitv(ber 1.000liveb/rt/rsl
Childnialnutrition(% of children
under51
Accessto safewater (% of Dooulat,on)
lltiterac (16.ofoooutaliein
acre15+1
Gross.onmarvenrollment i'6 ofschool-aoeooua"tion)
Male
Female

9/17/99

GNP
per

Gross
primary
nolmn

35
58
69
68
37
38
20
..
Accessto safe water
77
75
15
14
1
103~ [
-Tonga
119~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i
105
Lower-middle-income
group
118
100

KEY ECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERMTRENDS
19177

Currentaccountbalance/GOP
Interestoavmehts/GOP
Total debt/GOP
Total debt service/exoorts
Presentvalueof debt/GOP
Presentvalueof debtVexoorts75

1987

1997

1998

0.08
22.2Trd
31,0
-11.,5
26:0

0,1

.0.1f

7.51
0.4
46,8
24

-0.8
07
33.5,
12.3
20.2

-12.3.
0,7
41,6
11.8

1998

1999-03

---

--

-.

Economicratios/

GOP(USSb/ikons)
Grossdomesticinvestment/GOP
Exoortsof ooodsand services/GOP
Grossdomesticsavinos/GDP
Gross nationalsavinos/GOP

0.04
20.1
33,8
-32

.
.

,

.

,

Tad

Savings

Investment

Indebtedness
(averaoe
orowtl,l1977-87
annual
GOP
GNP oercaota
ExroortS
of coods and services.

1988-96
3,3
32

1997

14

-A

-1

0~5

.4,6

-23

L

Ti15

Lower-middle-incomegru

.

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY
(% of GDPI
Acriculture
Industrv
Manufacturina
Services

(9/6 of GDP)

Privateconsumotion
Generalaovemment consumoition
Imoortsof ocodsand services

~~~~~
~~~~1977
1987
1997
38.9
12.8
4.9

36.9
11.5
4.2

38.3
11.5
3.9

44.9

48.3

51.6

50.2

88.1)
15.3
57.1

94.9
16.6
64.7

.

.

1977-87 1988-98
(averaaeannual
aomwfhl
Aariculture
Industrv
Manufacturina
Services
Privateconsumoton
Generalcovemment consurnotion
Grossdomesticinvestment
Imoortsof aoods and services
Grossnationaloroduct

1998

43.8
11.2
6.7

0.5
4.8
11.0
3.8

Growthratesof outputandinvestment
(6
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~6
[3
1-3

4

959

-

I0

-0GE)P

G
1997

1998

2.4
-1.7
-0.4
1.8

-3.0
-28.1
0.6
-2.4

-3.8
1.8
-3.0
1.6

0.8

-4.4

-1.5

.
.
.
.

3.2

Note: 1998data are preliminaryestimates.
Thediamondsshowtour keyindicatorsin the countrv(in bold)comoaredwiithits income-arouoaveraae.If data are missina,the diamondwill
be incomolete.

- 59 -

Annex 2

Ton-ea
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE
Domest?kprices
(% change)
Consumerprices
Implicit GDP deflator
Governmentfinance
(%/6
of GDP, includes current grants)
Currentrevenue
Currentbudget balance
Overallsurplus/deficit

1977

1987

1997

1998

..
..

4.7
11.0

2.1
2.9

3.3
5.6

Inflation(%)
12

s
4
o
93

94

95

96

97

..
..
..

40.4
14.0
-1.2

38.4
10.7
-4.4

-4

1977

1987

1997

1998

Export and import levels (USSmillions)

..

..

13

12

150

..

..
..

2

oo

..

5
2
1

.

..

73
24

..

..

11

..

..

..
..
..

GDPdeflator

98

w CPI

TRADE
(US$ millions)

Total exports (fob)
Squash
Fish
Manufactures

Total imports(cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
ExDort Doceindex (1995=100)

..

ImoortDrice index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

.,

97

s

6
92

..
..

..

..

IJ

1.JJ

.

93

94

93

94

as

Exports

so

97

98

* Imports

..

BALANCE of PAYMENTS
(UJS$millions)

1987

1997

1998

Exports of goods and services

1977
1)0

25

44

40

Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

19
-9

52
-27

85
-40

100
-61

Netincome
Net current transfers

0
..

4
29

2
37

3
38

Currentaccount

balance

..

6

-2

-19

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

..

-2

-5
-1

4
-2

7
12

..
0.9

29
1.5

28
1.2

29
1.5

1977

1987

1997

1998

..

36
0

61
0

65

0

4

0
4

1

4

4

0

0

0

0

0

0

12

8

Memo:
Reserves includina aold (USS millions)
Conversion rate (DEC. localWUSS)

Current account balance to GDP ratio (°/.)

o

-wa
92

93

I5iwf
_

EXTERNALDEST and RESOURCEFLOWS
(USSmillions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD

IDA
Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

..

.

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants

Officialcreditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity
World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers
Development Economics

..

..
..
.

2

1

3

0
0
0

-3
3
0

-2

2

0
0
0

0

0
0
0

0
0
0

..

0

.

0

..

0
0

.,

0

Composition of total debt, 1998 (USS millions)
G:

B:4

F

E. 11

A - IBRD
| B - IDA
C - IMF

D - Other multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Prvate
G - Short-term

9/17/99

- 60 -

Annex 2

Vanuatuat a glance9229
POVERTYandSOCIAL

Asia&

PoDulation.mid-vear(millions)
GNPner caDlta(Atlasmethod.US$)
GNP (Atlasmefthd U.SSbillions)

middle-.

----

Pacific Ancomne

Vanuatu
018
1,270
0.2$

990
I .02

90
1 710,
1,557

12
1

.1/
15

___

Development
dlarnond'
Lifeexpectancy

Averaceannualorowth.1992-98
Pooutaton W%
Laborformef%)

26

GNP
per

Most recentestimatetiatest year available.1992481Iaiaennmn
Povetyv(16of oouldationbelow nationalcovertvfine)
UrbanDoculation(%oof total oooulationt
Life exoectancvat birth (gears)
Infantmortality Doar1.000live birthsl
Childmalnutritiont% of childrenunder5)
Acc-essto sale water(% of DoDulation)
Illiteac'y0
f% ofDnoDulation
aae 15+1
Gross onimarvenrollment1%of schtp~oilacDooulafionl
Male
Female

20
65
7

98
101
94

35
69;
37
20
77
is
.117
119
118

1987

1997

~

87

//Goss

-

`prmary

58
68
3
to safewater

.Accesa

.

75
1514
103
105o
100

Vanulatu
Lower-midce-income
group

KEY ECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERMTRENDS
'1977
GDP fUS$ billions)
Grossdomestic
investmerlVGD)P
Exooctsof ooodsand servicesIGOP
Gross domesticsavinas/GDP
Gross national savinos/GDP

.0,12
0.25
35.3..
384Trade
5,9
42

1998
I

i~0.24

Economiic
ratloe

~

CurrentaccountbasnoelG0P
Ineetovents/GDP
Inter" oavm
Total debtGDP
Tots debt service/exoorts
present valueof debtIGDP.
Presengt
valiueof debtlexoorts

.

..

-20.0
OA

-.8.1
0.2

39

i's
13
200

,

-15.7
02

Domestic
Sa19.ings

Ivsmn
Investment~~~~~~Svins

Indebtedness
1977.87 1988-98
(averaceannualaorwthl
GDP
GNP cer caoita
Exoortsof ooodsand services

3.2
.

16A
-2.5

1997
27;
1~

1998

11909-3

2,1
-04.4

Vanuiatu
Lower-middle-income
group

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY
1977
1%of GDP)
Aariculture
Industryv.
Manufacturinoa.
Services
Privateconsumotion
Generaloovemmentconsumotion
IMDortsof cioods
and services

..

..
..
.
..

1987

1997

21.5
11.2
4.6
67.3

24.7
12.2
4.9
63.2

60.2
33.9
67.8

1977-97 1988-98
(averaaeannualaoewhl
Aoriculture
Industrv
Manufacturino
Services
Privateconsumrotion
Generalaovemment consumotion
Grossdomesticinvestment
Imoortsof aoods and services
Gross nationaloroduct

4.0
-2.8

im

Growthratesof outputandInvestment(%
.

.

.

..

..

.

1997

4.7
2.5

6.2
1.0

0.0

1.6

0.2

3.7

A

.

93

54

GDI

95

96
97
-0GDP

98

1998

.

4.1
.
.
.
.
..

2.1

Note: 1998 data are preliminaryestimates.
The diamondsshow four kevindicatorsin the countrv(in bold)comoaredwithits income-orouoaverace.If data are mriasina,
the diamond
will
be incomoILete.

- 61-

Annex 2

Vanuatu
PRICESand GOVERNMENTFINANCE

Domestic
prices
(X change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1977

1987

1997

1998

Inflation(%)
6

..
..

16.1
9.6

2.8
1.0

5.0
3.1

4

Governmentfinance
(% of GDP,includes currentgrants)
Current revenue

..

..

Current budget balance

..

..

Overall surplus/deficit

..

..

23.3

27.8

1.5

93

4.0

94

95
deflator

-GDP

-0.7

-13.3

1997

1998
30
13

96
97
-- *-CPI

98

TRADE
1977
(us$

1987

Exportandimportlevels(USSmillions)

mnillions)

Total exports (fob)
Copra

..

..

35

..

..

.

..

..

Food

..
..

17
2
2l94

..

22

Fuel and energy

..

Capital goods

..

..

24

..

..
..

..

..

..

1997

1998

129
122

1il
131

-23

7

-20

-31
4

-31
13

Cocoa
Manufactures
Total imports (ct)

Export priceindex (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

~

150

109

J_iJIW

so

..

10
.

92 93

94

FExports

95

96

97

8

*imports

BALANCEof PAYMENTS
1977
(US$millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services

..

Resource
balance

..

Net income
Net current transfers

1987
50
273

..

-21
9

Current account balance

..

-24

-21

-38

Financing items (net)

..
..

14
7

37

Changesin net reserves

37
-13

Memo:
Reservesincluding gold (US$ millions)
Conversionrate (DEC,local/US$)

..

1

79.4

40
109.8

37
115.9

45
127.5

1977

1987

1997

1998

5
0

24
0

48
0

0

2

13

0
0

3
0

2
0

0

0

0

12
0
0
0
0

32
4
0
13
0

7
0
0
30
0

0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0

1

1

0
1
0
1

0
1
0
1

..

Currentaccountbalanceto GDP ratio(%)
0

3

El

i5

t,8

EXTERNALDEBT and RESOURCEFLOWS
(US$millions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

Compositionof net resourceflows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private crediors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

Composition
of totaldebt, 1997(USSmillions)

G:9

3

E:

0:17

..

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements

Principalrepayments
Netflows
Interestpayments
Nettransfers
DevelopmentEconomics

..

A - IBRD
B -IDA
C - IMF

D- Othermultilateral

E - Bilateral
F. Private
G - Short-term

9/22/99

IBRD29631
140r

f

17.

Orso

N-orira

1

170r
'a0s

Isiland (US)

Gouna
(US)

--

MARSHALL
----....
ISLANDS

-

NORTH PACIOfCOCEAN
Is','

1

-10'

,

PALAU.;'
Gll + ' '

~''

'

i

STATES
OF
FEDERATED
MICRONESIA

,>

4

Atoll (US)

g

...

.

>

xi

K
4'd

. <, . sc

,:,

p,NAURU

KIRIBATI

INDONESIA
PAPUAt
NEW
GUINEA

4t-

'.

TUVALU,

SOLOMON

t~~~..
~~~ISLANDS

t

Cs ) ;/

P..J"-'

'>~~~~~~~~~t

~ ~ --....--~ ~ ~- ~c.'"~'

m

^

7
t

-2n

20'

Cook
(NZ)
-;

S
o

..

X

cal~~ewfPi

50001c CiTC0'l'K!COIN

SAMOA
~~

';

t

,...
'-.4'

+

'

_

1

Cldja£

I

WoP r nd;
5A oencrisSnAMOA
v'
Samoa(US)
Wollo
FnIons
In.ood~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
(Er)

[

VANUATU
Vi<

TU-IEW

TUAUTIEAJ(H)Mlnorl

'4'~~~~"~~-~~ -.

-4'

H~~~~~'obe,rn
(US)Jas(S0

TONGA
>,,
Nine(NZ,7

;

FPrenchfi
Plynesia(f
-x

.FIJI

n,

..

__._._

...

_

.

_

.,=.,,

,,

.20r:J

,,.;

TROPICOFCAP'5fCOR

AUSTRALIA

/

'Lordblows

as'

Norfolk(As)

THEPACIFIC

Is-lands(HZ)

. C~~~Avs)

g

LINESOF DEMARCATION
-1
aSOUTH
, %

'

ITERNATIONALBOUNDARY

PACIFIC
OCEAN

r.-i'
J{>3NEW
is rinpoinpsosFre

40'
s4o

nd by lbn.Mop

Dtsign

sboonos sIllsnimapdo
notistnpl on ^7;^o
or nceptoocsafso boond77i5n.
nlb ss itsofsynrlos

00s \1

156'

Iso'

nitOr
of TheWUorldBook.

I7ZAIAND

tWirlSosSiQ Csoo0'2i
2
Q,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ayopsn
osny .od-,ossoo

\

170'

L
1

b

iOn'

150'
JUNE

1998

