Public Disclosure Authorized

The WorldBank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ReportNo.:

20158 BHU

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Documentof

EXECIUTIVEDIRECTORS
ONA
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
BHUTAN

FEBRUARY 22, 2000

Bhutan Country Unit
South Asia Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performanceof their official duties. Its contents may not otherwisebe disclosedwithout
World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit
US$1

=
=

BhutanNgultrum (Nu)
Nu 43.40 (February 22, 2000)

FISCAL YEAR (FY)
July I -June 30

ACRONYMSAND ABBREVIATIONS
AIDS
FDI
GDP
GEF
GNP
HIV
IFC

IMF
SDR
UNDP
UJNHCR
UNICEF

-

AcquiredImmune Deficiency Syndrome
Foreign Direct Investment
Gross DomesticProduct
Global EnvironmentFund
Gross National Product
Human Immune Virus
Intemational Finance Corporation
InternationalMonetaryFund
Special Drawing Rights
UnitedNations Development Program
United Nations High Commissionerfor Refugees
United Nations Children's Fund

Vice President
Country Director
Team Leader

Mieko Nishimizu
John W. Wall
Peter Nicholas

BHUTAN
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Table of Contents
Page No.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..........................................

A. POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL CONTEXT ..........................................

1

Dedicated, ProfessionalPoliticalLeadership.....................................................................
l
Rapid, Resource-led Growth....................................................................
2
Benign External Environment.....................................................................
2
Strong Social Development,but Rising Challenges.....................................................................3
B. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND KEY CHALLENGES............................5
Resource-based Growth.....................................................................
5
Heavy Reliance on Foreign Assistance.....................................................................
6
Sound Public ExpenditureManagement.....................................................................
6
Dutch Disease, the Private Sector, and Employment.....................................................................
6
N'eed for Trade Diversification....................................................................
7
Continuing Importanceof Agricultureand Rural Development....................................................8
C. BIIUTAN'S VISION FOR SOCIAL TRANSFORMATION.............................................8
Economic Reforms for Private Sector-ledGrowth................................................................. 10
StrengtheningInfrastructure.................................................................
11
Defining a Future for Agricultureand Forests..................................................................
11
Balancing Development: Human Development,the Environment,and Culture........... ...............
12
D. IDA's ROLE IN BHUTAN'S DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK...............................
Past IDA Support....................................................................
IDA's Assistance Strategy.....................................................................

13
13
14

E. BIHUTAN'S DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIPS ................................................................ 18

TABLES
Table 1: Bhutan: DevelopmentIndicators.....................................................................
4
Table 2: Proposed IDA Analytical and Advisory Assistance and Lending to Bhutan, FYOO-02
...... 14
Table 3: Bhutan's Selected DevelopmentPrioritiesto be Assisted by IDA......................................16
Table 4: Bhutan's ComprehensiveFrameworkfor Ongoing Development Assistance.................... 19

BOXES

Box 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:
Box 4:

3
Bhutan's Vision of Inclusion...................................................
S5
........................................
Bhutan: HydroelectricPower Projects...........
9
Bhutan 2020 Vision ...................................................
Bhutan 2020 and the ComprehensiveDevelopmentFramework.........................................15

FIGURES

Figure 1: Bhutan: Trends in Sectoral Shares of GDP....................................................
ANNEXES
Annex Al
Annex BI
Annex B2
Annex B3
Annex B4
Annex B5
Annex B6
Annex B7
Annex B8
Annex B9

Bhutan's DevelopmentPriorities
Bhutan at a Glance
Bhutan: Selected Indicatorsof Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Bhutan: Bank Group Program Summary,FY2000-2002
Bhutan: Summaryof Nonlending Services
Bhutan: Social Indicators
Bhutan: Key Economic Indicators
Bhutan: Key Exposure Indicators
Status of Bank Group Operationsin Bhutan
Bhutan: CAS Summaryof DevelopmentPriorities

MAP No. IBRD 30467

2

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION'S
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR BHUTAN
EXECUTIVE

SUMMARY

IDA'S MISSION
1.
ID)A's mission is to help Bhutan manage its considerable natural, institutional, cultural,
and envitonmental assets in ways that can translate economic growth into rapid and inclusive
social transformation and improvements in living standards. This is consistent with Bhutan's

distinctive vision of its long-term development as it enters the new millennium. This is also a
highly selective mission, in order to fit IDA's continuing role as one of Bhutan's smallest
foreign aid donors. IDA's comparative advantage-in transferring knowledge and ideas to
Bhutan rather than finance-is consistent with our small role in Bhutan, and complements
Bhutan's development framework for donor coordination. Emphasizing IDA's comparative
advantage in analytical and advisory work-as opposed to lending-also makes sense in terms
of gradually filling IDA's information and knowledge gaps resulting from our very limited past
involvemientin Bhutan. The government fully supports IDA's mission.
DEVELO]PMENT

CHALLENGES

2.
This mission is set against Bhutan's unique characteristics: a small Himalayan nation of
about 760,000 people with a 1998 GNP per capita of US $480; close political and trade
relationships with India going back 40 years; large, environmentally benign hydropower assets
that are fueling rapid GDP growth through electricity exports and energy-intensive industries
such as cement, calcium carbide, and forestry; a comprehensive, well-articulated national vision
for development that emphasizes the preservation of Bhutan's cultural and environmental
heritage and rising investments in its people; girls accounting for 45 percent of primary school
students and social indicators that are improving rapidly; fiscal prudence and a strong balance of
payments position; sound public institutions; a participatory style of governance; and a
committed administration.
3.
But it is also set against Bhutan's difficult terrain and still weak infrastructure, which puts
more than half its population at least half a day's walk from the nearest motor road; the heavy
reliance on foreign aid and a dominant, single-commodity export; a shallow financial sector that
does not yet fully support private sector development; the difficulty of creating private sector
employment opportunities, both in rural Bhutan, where much of the population lives, and in
rapidly growing cities, where increasingly educated Bhutanese are entering the labor force; the
highest population growth rate in South Asia; social tensions arising out of the presence of a
Nepali-speaking minority in the south; and economic data deficiencies that may be constraining
policy design even though the policymaking process remains highly participatory.
BHUTAN'S

DISTINCTIVE

VISION OF DEVELOPMENT

4.
Bhutan has adopted a balanced approach to development, seeking to calibrate
development goals to its ability and readiness to absorb change without creating social alienation
or excessive economic inequality. Human development, a living culture and heritage, balanced
and equitable development, good governance, and environmental conservation remain the

cornerstones of its recently articulated development vision.1 This vision reflects the notion of
development as social transformation and, in its conception, implementation, and management of
donor partnerships, precedes and is fully consistent with the Comprehensive Development
Framework. The government has articulated desirable long-term outcomes and detailed
milestones to measure progress in each development area (Annex Al). The government is
emphasizing its development and poverty reduction strategy of larger investments in the social
sectors, a better enabling environment for private sector development, diversification of exports
and of the productive base, and improvements in rural infrastructure. The regular and extensive
field visits by officials at all levels, combined with the small population size (fewer than 100,000
households), means that the government has a sophisticated and detailed knowledge of
conditions and needs across the whole country.
BHUTAN'S DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIPS

5.
Bhutan differs from most other aid-dependent countries in that the government has a very
strong sense of vision and development priorities-and of the comparative advantage of various
donors-and deternines on this basis where technical and financial assistance is most needed,
and which donor can best provide it. The admirably small size of the government means,
however, that donor missions can impose a high cost on scarce government officials' time.
Bhutan therefore prefers to limit the number of donors overall, and in any particular sector, in
order to keep coordination costs low. This approach is fully consistent with the approach
espoused by the Comprehensive Development Framework. India is the largest donor. Other
important donors include Austria, Denmark, Japan, Netherlands, Switzerland, ADB, European
Union, UNDP, and UNICEF. In forestry and education, IDA and Switzerland have been acting
effectively as a single donor. The Government, U7NDP,and IDA jointly chair the donor Round
Table Meetings, the last one in Geneva in 1997. UNDP holds sector-oriented coordination
meetings frequently among donors resident in Thimphu, with participation from the non-resident
multilateral institutions, as possible.

IDA's ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
6.
IDA's strategic goal is to assist Bhutan-in ways that are driven by Bhutan and in full
partnership with other donors-in realizing its development vision. Bhutan' s favorable mediumterm growth prospects and its comfortable macroeconomic balances, based on its natural
resource endowments and substantial grant and concessional aid inflows, create ideal conditions
for concerted action to meet its development challenges. Its development vision provides a wellarticulated agenda for action that is fully owned by Bhutan.
7.
The last country assistance strategy was discussed with the Board in July 1993 and
emphasized a limited and highly selective role for IDA focusing on economic policy advice,
natural resource management, and primary education. Bhutan has drawn relatively little on IDA
financing in the past, preferring to use grant aid from bilateral donors and the UN before using
multilateral assistance. This selective role will continue, but will build much more strategically
on IDA's comparative advantage in Bhutan in transferring knowledge and ideas rather than
finance. As a result of our limited past involvement, there are a number of gaps in our
knowledge base in areas such as poverty analysis and public expenditures-the new emphasis on
working with the government on analytical and advisory services will help fill these gaps over
the next few years and lead to shared learning valuable both to Bhutan and IDA.
' Bhutan 2020: A Visionfor Peace, Prosperity, and Happiness, Royal Government of Bhutan, Thimphu: 1999.

- iii

-

8.
In line with this comparative advantage in Bhutan, the locus of IDA's assistance will
therefore increasingly be to place its knowledge resources at the disposal of the government
without t-yingthem to IDA credits. The government has already requested such knowledgebased consultations on macroeconomic policy, a financial sector strategy, long-term health and
education strategies, and accounting and auditing standards. IDA expects to assist with the
generation and analysis of poverty data. Other areas in which IDA may assist with knowledge
transfers include private sector development, foreign direct investment, trade and investment
reform, public expenditures, employment analysis, school curriculums, rural road capacity
development, and policy frameworks for economic and sector development. The government is
interested in greater harmonization of donor support and in discussing the merits of more
program-oriented funding and has asked for IDA's help in thinking through the issues.
9.
IDA's limited role in providing financial support for Bhutan's development is likely to
continue, with IDA lending only modest amounts under special circumstances when other donors
cannot put together a timely package of knowledge, practical expertise, and financing as
requested by the government. In line with the previous CAS, past lending has focused on
primary education and forestry. As part of our ongoing dialogue, and following the two
infrastructure projects accompanying this country assistance strategy, IDA will explore with the
government options for financing high-priority projects in social and physical infrastructure and
forestry that have a high payoff for improving the living standards of the poor and for private
sector development. Such financing could take the form of standard project credits or sector
program credits. Given Bhutan' s strong record of governance and implementation, economywide program credits have also been discussed with the government, to be provided if economic
conditionismerit such support, and based on prior public expenditure and poverty analysis.
RISKS

10.
Bhutan faces two kinds of development risks. First, is the vulnerability arising out of its
external environment-the heavy reliance on power exports to India and financial support from
India, and, in general, on foreign aid. Relations with India continue to be principled and reflect
the long-standing partnership between the two countries, with no emerging problems that would
suggest increased vulnerability. The development effectiveness of foreign aid in Bhutan
suggests that it will continue to receive aid flows, but Bhutan's large and growing foreign
exchange reserves could lead some donors to reallocate aid flows at the margin to other
countries. The government's long-term goal is to reduce its reliance on foreign aid.
Macroeconomic stability is not itself likely to be much of an issue over the medium term because
of the past history of fiscal prudence, a strong balance of payments position with very little debt,
and the nominal anchor provided by the currency peg with the Indian rupee.
11.
Second, and more important, Bhutan faces the risk of rising social and political tensions
from rapid population and economic growth, particularly if economic growth does not yield
universal increases in levels of living. What happens to growth will remain a function of how
well Bhutan strikes the balance between growth and concerns about the environment and
maintaining the integrity of its historical heritage and cultural values. Much will depend on the
way Bhutan manages the conversion of economic growth into social transformation, including
meaningful employment opportunities for its people. In doing so it will have to manage
expectations associated with a 6-7 percent GDP growth rate. In particular, unrest in the south
related to Nepali-speaking minorities has attracted considerable attention. The government is

- iv

-

attempting to negotiate a just settlement to the refugee issue together with the Nepalese
government. In the east, the incursion into Bhutan of rebels opposing the Indian government in
Assam poses risks, but the government is working with the Government of India to contain such
incursions.
ISSUES FOR BOARD DISCUSSION

12.
In its discussions, the Board may wish to consider the following:
*
IDA' s recognition of Bhutan' s unique characteristics and its distinctive vision for its
development, which seeks to improve the lives and living standards of its citizens in holistic
ways without compromising its cultural identity and its environmental heritage.
*
IDA's willingness-within a Comprehensive Development Framework and recognizing
that IDA is among the smallest donors but also has unique comparative advantages-to support
Bhutan first and foremost through knowledge transfers, then through financial assistance as
needed. Such a knowledge-intensive strategy will also lead to learning that will fill IDA's
information gaps on Bhutan.
*
IDA's continuing support to Bhutan in building its social and physical infrastructure as
ways of converting its rapid economic growth into inclusive social transformation.

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION'S
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR BHUTAN
1.
Ehutan is a landlocked Himalayan country with a 1998 population of about 760,000,
wedged between the world's two most populous countries, India and China. With altitudes
varying ifrom100 to 7,000 meters (within a south-to-north distance of less than 100 kilometers),
Bhutan has almost every micro climate of the world and much rugged terrain. Its 1998 per capita
GNP was US$480. Bhutan has many factors in its favor. Rich in natural resources, including
large, environmentally benign hydropower assets, it has a ready market for electricity and
resource-based exports to India. Its public administration of dedicated professionals, headed on
a rotating basis by a member of the Cabinet, has a clear vision for Bhutan's future based on
extensive consultations with the people and elected representatives at all levels of society. Few
Bhutanese are hungry, landless, or homeless, although there have been no comprehensive living
standards surveys to provide accurate assessments of rural and urban poverty and changes over
time. There is relatively little gender discrimination-girls make up almost half of primary
school children, women constitute a substantial proportion of new civil servants, and inheritance
is matrilineal in many areas. Bhutan was one of the first countries to start protecting its
enviromnent and culture; over 70 percent of the country is under forest cover, and tourism is
limited t.o sustainable levels.
2.
13utdespite impressive development gains over the past 30 years, Bhutan faces the many
development problems of a low-income country. Its fundamental challenge is to translate rapid
economic growth into inclusive social transformation and improvements in the living standards
of its people, and to do so without compromising its cultural identity and environmental heritage,
to which it attaches great value. Perhaps as much as half the population lives in remote areas
without access roads, electricity, piped water, or telephones, and far from schools, health clinics,
markets, and public transportation. Eighty-five percent of the population is rural, and agriculture
accounts for 38 percent of GDP. It has a nascent modem private sector and a still-shallow
financial sector. It will take time for the private sector to lead growth and generate substantial
employment. Though the government relies on highly participatory modes of policymaking at
all levels of society, development and economic statistics are limited and not always reliable.
A. POLITICAL,ECONOMIC,AND SOCIALCONTEXT

Dedicated,ProfessionalPoliticalLeadership
3.
As part of a decade long process of political transformation, Bhutan introduced farreaching political changes in 1998, when the entire cabinet was asked to resign and a new sixmember cabinet was selected from among high-achieving civil servants. T he King is no longer
the head of government, a post now held on a rotating basis by a Cabinet member. Cabinet

-2members were approved by secret ballot by Bhutan's elected body, the National Assembly. New
Cabinet elections are to be held every five years, and the Assembly is elected every three years.
4.
Bhutan's government is dedicated, professional, and honest. Decision-making and
budget authority have been increasingly decentralized. Civil servants are well paid relative to
their counterparts in the private sector-recent pay increases have largely corrected the slippage
of past years. The increasing use of private sector bidders on government contracts has led to
some minor corruption, to which the government has responded rapidly by strengthening the
Audit Authority. The governnent has also rededicated itself to preventing misuse of public
funds, with officials held accountable for actions that might go unremarked in many other
countries.
Rapid, Resource-led Growth
5.
Bhutan's development has been rapid. Until the 1950s, Bhutan isolated itself from the
rest of the world, and its dispersed rural population depended on subsistence agriculture. Once it
opened to the outside world in the 1960s, Bhutan embarked on a far-reaching development
strategy that has been articulated in eight Five-Year Plans. Bhutan has developed a physical
infrastructure of roads,
power supply,

telecommunications,and

Figure
1:Bhutan:
Trends
inSectDral
Shares
ofGOP

water supply that now

100.0

serves a rapidlyincreasing
share of the population.
At the same time the
government has
developed a social
infrastructure of education
and health services that,
despite the difficult terrain
and scattered population,
has greatly improved
access.

-

Services

-

- ------

.

-

0I Oter lndusby

..

.
20.0 -,,,,,,

9 Agriculture

,,
0.0
,.

1980
1985
Source:
Naional
Accounts
Stfislics.

1987

1998

6.
Agriculture continues to account for the largest share of GDP (38 percent in 1998, Figure
1). Hydropower (11 percent of GDP) and foreign aid (23 percent of GDP) are important
elements in Bhutan's small economy (1998 GDP of US$428 million). Its average GDP growth
rate of almost 7 percent a year since 1985 has been propelled by the 370 MW Chukha
hydropower project, which has boosted GDP growth directly through power exports to India and
by facilitating energy-intensive industries such as cement, ferro-alloys, and calcium carbide.
Benign External Environment
7.
The Bhutanese economy is closely linked to India. The Indian rupee circulates in Bhutan
as legal tender. Bhutan's free access to the vast Indian market (India's GDP is almost a thousand
times larger than Bhutan's) and almost unlimited demand for hydropower have boosted Bhutan's

-3exports. Bhutan's large trade deficit with India has been financed by Indian grant aid. India has
also financed Bhutan's major hydropower projects and some of its large industrial investments.
Beside ][ndia,other donors have also been generous in giving aid to Bhutan. Between 1993 and
1998 Bhutan annually received an average of about US$80 million in disbursements of
concessional assistance. Of this 85 percent was grant aid, with extermalborrowings limited by the
government' s policy of first using grants. The highly favorable terms of its aid, combined with
efficient, cost-effective, and transparent use, has enabled Bhutan to limit its external debt. Its
1998 ratio of debt service to exports was under 7 percent.
Strong Social Development, but Rising Challenges
8.
Poverty and Social Indicators. While few Bhutanese are hungry or homeless, the
governnent is deeply concerned about the presence of seasonal hunger, food insecurity, and
exclusion of groups living in remote and marginal areas (see Box 1). Even though policymakers
themselves engage in an unusually high degree of consultation starting at the village level,
Bhutan does not have good poverty statistics that could better inform policy choices on poverty
programas. It needs to carry out a living standards survey to provide a firmnbasis for analyzing
living standards and income distribution in both urban and remote areas, with periodic and
selective poverty monitoring thereafter. While there are no direct measures of poverty incidence,
social iindicatorsthemselves reveal an impressive advance (even allowing for data deficiencies in
earlier years). Mortality and education indicators are relatively good, especially given Bhutan's
scattered and remote population, and life expectancy at birth is substantially above the South
Asian aLverage(Table 1). The provision of more rural access roads is part of the government's
poverty reduction strategy. The government is also working on targeted programs for eastern
Bhutan, where soils tend to be poorer and population densities higher.

Box 1: Bhutan's Vision of Inclusion

In May 1999,the Royal Governmentproduced a comprehensivestatementof Bhutan'sfuture as it enters the
next millennium,Bhutan2020: 4 Visionfor Peace,Prosperityand Happiness.On inclusion,Bhutan2020 notes:
Although the vast majority of our populationhave benefitedin very tangible ways from the process of social
and economic development, the benefits have not been shared equally. This is an inevitable consequenceof
modernizationin a country in which the populationis so scattered,the terrain so severe, and infrastructurestill
incomplete. Despitethe rapid expansionof the road network,more than half of our populationlivesmore than half
a day's walk from the nearest motorroad, while in more isolatedand remote areas communitiesare still dependent
on trails, muletracksand ropewaysfor communication....
.Inthese remote and isolatedareas livesare still characterizedby vulnerabilityand uncertaintyand by the sheer
drudgeryof toil from dawn to dusk in order to satisfydaily survivalneeds. Food shortage of some three months,
coinciding with planting seasons, are not uncommonin a few dzongkhags(districts),while in isolated pockets
within them food insecurityis more severe and malnutritionwidespread. Althoughfree basic educationand health
care are today reaching these pockets of disadvantagedand vulnerable groups, the need to contribute to the
constructionand maintenanceof buildings,the cost of travel, contributionsto school welfare funds, the cost of
school uniformsand so forth, while modest, are sufficientto place the services beyond the reach of the poorest
farmers and their families.... Ensuringthat disadvantagedand vulnerablegroups are able to benefit more fully
from the processof social and economicdevelopmentis a challengethat must be met in the years ahead.
Sotirce: Bhutan 2020: A Vision ofPeace, Prosperity, and Happiness, RoyalGovernmentof Bhutan,May 1999.

-49.
Within South Asia itself, Bhutan is still catching up with most other countries. In the
mid-1970s, Bhutan's social indicators were the lowest of any country in South Asia. Now, 25
years later, they are roughly comparable to the regional averages, with the exception of its higher
fertility and population growth rates. Globally, UNDP ranked Bhutan 145th among 174 countries
in 1997 on its Human Development Index.
10.
With the continuation of the right policies and expenditure priorities, and given the
country's resources and capacity, Bhutan should be able to raise social indicators substantially.
However, Bhutan's rapid population growth rate-estimated on average at 2.9 percent a year for
1995-2000 and higher than in India, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka-makes the improvement in
social indicators a challenge. Finding employment for its young and increasingly educated labor
force is also a challenge. The government is correctly determined not to become the employer of
first and last resort. The modem private sector is not developed enough to absorb the rapidly
growing labor force. This is a challenge for which there is no easy solution, given the difficulty
of finding labor-using private sector activities that can compete with Indian goods.
Table 1: Bhutan: DevelopmentIndicators
.i970s
19981/ SouthAsia Low-income
Total population(million)
0.44
0.76
1305
3515
Growthrate (% annualaverage)
1.4.
2.9.
1.8.
1.7
Urban_,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
population
(% of total)
3.5
15
27.0
31.0
...............
. .,_...
.......................
......... .. ...
....................
-----------------...........
...........................
... ... ...... .....................
...............
. ..............
...........
......................
.......
..
Total fertilityrate (birthsper woman)
5.8
3.53.2
_ _ . . _ ....................
__ ... ..._ ...........
_ , .... ........... ...............
.......
...................
...........
...........
.............. . 62 .....
..................
..........................63
..........
Life
46etnyatbrh
66s .................
~
Infantmortality(per 1,000 ive births)
142
712
77
69
Maternalmortality(per 1,000live births)
7.7i
3.8
dult (oO2
iteracy rate
2
54':
51
68
~~~~~~~~.............
Gross primaryschoolenrollment(%)
35
72:
100
108
Roads(kin)
1,755
3,440
Electricity
connections
9,75029,700:
. _._.
. . . . ___. _ .
_.
................................ .. ............................................
Ruralwatersupplyschemes
150
1760
Telephones
1, 8801 9,314
Source:RoyalGovernmentof Bhutan& World Bank.
1/ When not available,most recentdata shown.Pop. basedon 1990Censusof 600,110.Datafor
S. Asia and low-incomecountriesare most recentavailable.
_.

_

.

__

.

__

._

..........

...

..

.

..

_

...........

.....................

..... ..

........

......

..

............

............................................

..

...

. .....

.....................

....

11.
Ethnic Unrest and Threats to Social Stability. The government is working to create a
fair society in which all nationals can benefit equally from the fruits of Bhutan's development.
But Bhutan, like most multi-ethnic societies, has experienced social tension. In the 1980s
concern arose about the ambitions of some among the Nepali-speaking minority inside Bhutan
(mainly in southern Bhutan, where the majority of Nepali speakers live) and activists outside
Bhutan. The government began enforcing its citizenship laws and moved to solidify national
cultural convergence. Unrest emerged in the south in the late 1980s, and the ensuing violence
led to refugee camps springing up in Nepal. While some of the refugees are former inhabitants
of Bhutan (illegal immigrants or not), some are said to be Nepalese who had never resided in
Bhutan. The government has been actively seeking solutions through discussions with the
Government of Nepal and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and is working
with Amnesty International. A more recent threat is the incursions into eastern Bhutan of Bodos
and members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (insurgents opposing the Indian

-5governmnentin Assam). These insurgents are using the dense forests in the area as safe havens.
The government is working with the Government of India to contain this threat to Bhutan's
stability.
B. RECENTECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTSAND KEY CHALLENGES
Resource-based Growth
12.
Real GDP grew by about 6 percent in 1998-99, boosted by investments in hydropower
and by power exports. Three medium- to large-scale hydroelectric projects are under
construction, including the 1,020 MW Tala project (Box 2). These projects, all run-of-the-river,
are environmentally and socially benign, requiring no large storage reservoirs. Bhutan's mediumtern economic prospects are good, with a major economic boost expected in 2004 when Tala
comes on-stream, and with smaller jumps expected in 2001 and 2002 when the 45 MW Kurichu
and 60 MW Basochu projects come on-stream. These projects will raise the proportion of power
in GDP to about 30 percent from its current 11 percent. India is reforming its power sector and
moving to a more market-oriented approach. This is likely to lead to greater price differentials
depending on when and with what reliability electricity is supplied. Over the long run, Bhutan's
export power tariffs will need to be competitive with those of other Indian suppliers, while still
continuing to provide adequate royalties for the use of its water resources and for servicing debt.
Box 2: Bhutan: Hydroelectric Power Projects
*

Chu[kha. The largest power project commissioned so far, Chukha was completed in 1988 with an installed
capacity of 336 MW, subsequently increased in 1997to 370 MW. The project cost of US$255 million was
financed by the Indian government through concessionary loans (40 percent) and grants (60 percent). Eightyfour percent of Chukha's cumulative generation since commissioning had been exported to India as of
Febiruary 1999, with a corresponding revenue from sale of power of $170 million. According to the initial
agreement between Bhutan and India, electricity tariffs were to be revised every four years, but these have
been reviewed more frequently in view of escalating maintenance costs since the tariff was first set at 1.9 US
cents (Nu 0.27) per kWh in 1988. The last tariff was set in June 1999 at 3.5 US cents (Nu 1.5) per kWh.

.

Basochu. Construction of the Basochu project started in 1998 and is expected be completed by the end of
2001. The combined peak capacity of Basochu will be 60.8 MW. The generated capacity will meet domestic
demand of 11 districts in the west-central region of Bhutan. The project cost, estimated at US $37 million, is
being financed by concessionary loans and grants provided by the Austrian government.

*

Kuirichu. Construction of the 45 MW Kurichu project began in 1995 with an estimated cost of US$89
million. It is expected to be fully commissioned by September 2001. The project is financed by the Indian
government on a 60 percent grant and 40 percent concessional loan basis. Additional financing for a fourth
generating unit to increase the installed capacity to 60 MW is being considered by the Indian government.
The installed capacity of the project will meet the domestic demand of the eastern region of Bhutan. The
project is also expected to provide power to the Dungsum Cement Project in eastern Bhutan.

.

Tala. Construction of the 1020 MW Tala project began in 1998 and will be the largest power plant when it is
completed in 2004. Tala, estimated to cost about US$727 million, is being financed by the Indian
government on a 60 percent grant and 40 percent concessionary loan basis. The generated capacity will be
mainly exported to India under a power purchase agreement signed in 1996.

-6-

Heavy Reliance on Foreign Assistance
13.
Foreign assistance, mostly in the form of grant aid, is likely to continue at present rates at
least over the medium term. Rupee debt is expected to increase over the next few years from
borrowings for the Tala and Kurichu power projects. The 50 percent increase in the power
export tariff to India in 1999 should, however, more than compensate for the increased debt
service. There are many signs of the impact of these large inflows of resources: a high domestic
saving rate (38 percent of GDP), high foreign exchange reserves, budget surpluses, and a high
proportion of domestic financial assets in the form of foreign assets (80 percent foreign, of which
80 percent are in hard currency).
Sound Public Expenditure Management
14.
Bhutan has a strong record of public expenditure management. The overall budget (after
grants and concessional credits) has always been close to balance, with just a small surplus or
deficit. Bhutan's attention to quality and development effectiveness has meant year-on-year
slippages in capital expenditures, with actual capital expenditures tending to undershoot annual
budgets, but coming in close to plan over the entire five-year plan period. Recurrent expenditures
have tended in aggregate to be slightly above plan and budget, with health expenditures having
proportionately the largest overrun. But conservative forecasting of revenues has avoided
sustained budget deficits. It has also allowed the government to ensure that recurrent
expenditures are domestically financed, which is crucial for ensuring the sustainability of the
development program-the government has always closely considered the recurrent cost
implications of new capital expenditures to make sure that they can be financed without recourse
to excessive deficit financing. The government recently raised domestic power prices and
introduced user charges for domestic water and school materials. It is considering establishing a
personal income tax. Over the longer run, Bhutan needs to diversify its revenue base.
Dutch Disease, the Private Sector, and Employment
15.
Bhutan's economy is both blessed and burdened by the richness of its natural resources
and the large volume of donor aid it attracts. The large inflow of foreign aid and of foreign
resources produced not by the competitiveness of domestic production and diversified exports
but by hydroelectric power exports that are large relative to the total economy, has created a
peculiar strain of "Dutch disease." And because Bhutan's exchange rate is pegged at parity to
the Indian rupee, the exchange rate does not work as a mechanism for lowering the prices of
tradables relative to nontradables. Instead, the real exchange rate appreciates, making imports
more attractive and exports less attractive. This has undermined the domestic competitiveness of
non-power exports and discouraged them. The effect is also seen in the high wages of Bhutanese
farm and unskilled workers (several times the wages of similar workers in India) and low labor
absorption (and therefore employment).
16.
This Dutch disease syndrome is limiting the development of a diversified, employmentintensive economy and may become a more serious concern when the massive Tala hydropower
project comes on-stream in the next decade. These forces have been dampened somewhat by

-7Bhutan's high savings rate, rising investment in basic social and physical infrastructure, and a
lean but effective government. But the population growth rate is high, and the modem sector is
still small. Together with the rapid rise in education levels, this suggests that finding employment
opportunities for an expanding and increasingly educated labor force will be a serious problem.
17.
There is no easy cure for Bhutan's Dutch disease-like problem. One approach is to invest
the inflows in cost-reducing infrastructure (roads, communication networks), as some countries
did to albsorbthe sudden increase in oil income in the 1980s. Another is to invest surplus
resources abroad to create a sustainable income flow, as some countries in the Middle East did in
the 1980s. Besides investing in social and physical infrastructure, Bhutan's approach is to focus
on strengtheniingthe enabling environment for its still-nascent private sector. The government is
gradually reducing its own role in commercially viable areas of the economy, privatizing many
public sector corporations and encouraging the private sector to compete in areas that were
previously the reserve of the public sector.
18.
In this effort, Bhutan needs to avoid the common mistake of other resource-rich countries,
which was to subsidize the domestic production of manufactured items that are inherently
noncomripetitiveinternationally. Bhutan seems to be heeding this caution and has a long-term
goal of creating high knowledge-content service industries (advanced medical care, high quality
education, financial and banking services, medicinal drugs) that can serve nearby international
markets and sustain high salaries. This strategy will require very high and sustained investments
in health and education. Bhutan is already investing public resources in basic physical and social
infrastructure (roads, communications, basic health and education) and focusing on high
technology (digital telecommunications system, Internet and intranet services, computerization of
information flows, and higher education abroad for technical and engineering students).
Need for Trade Diversification
19.
India, with which Bhutan has a free trade agreement, accounts for 85 percent of Bhutan's
external trade. Bhutan also has transit agreements with India for trade with Bangladesh and the
rest of the world. Most of that trade goes through Calcutta port, 600 miles away. The potential
for export through Bangladesh is being explored. Major shifts in the pattern of trade are unlikely
in the next few years. Bhutan's trade regime continues to favor exports to India. In addition,
transport costs, domestic human and capital resource constraints, and a nascent private and
financial sector limit the scope of major third-country export industries.
20.
Recently, tariffs on third-country imports have been reduced from a maximum of 100
percent to 30 percent and in some cases to zero. Further reductions are constrained by concerns
over re-exports to India, which also led to the imposition in 1997 of the Bhutan sales tax on all
third-country imports. Quantitative restrictions and other forms of non-tariff barriers are being
significantly reduced. Import licensing procedures for third-country goods have been
streamlined to allow for greater diversity and competition in meeting the demand for consumer
and capital good imports. Imports from third countries are likely to rise faster than exports as a
consequence of this liberalization and of rising incomes. High levels of mostly hard-currency
foreign assistance more than cover the current account deficit with third countries, but if
assistance levels decline the need for export diversification will grow more urgent.

-8-

Continuing Importance of Agriculture and Rural Development
21.
Bhutan is a mountainous country with limited arable land (8 percent of area) and a large
number of terrains, micro climates, and soil types. With 85 percent of the population in rural
areas, 38 percent of GDP in agricultural production, and poor transport facilities, rural
development is a daunting but crucial goal for the government.
22.
Bhutan is well-positioned relative to the Indian plains and has the climates to produce
agricultural products in India's off seasons. Bhutan also has free and ready export access to the
huge Indian market, the only country in the world with this advantage. With its climate,
remoteness, and high wage labor, Bhutan's clear comparative advantage in the future lies in high
value crops and high technology agriculture to supply the Bhutanese and Indian markets, and
possibly beyond. For the present, however, there is little optior but to continue the low input-low
output agriculture currently practiced. Scattered rural communities, very difficult and high-cost
transport, and traditional farming practices force the production of cereals and dairy products for
home consumption and local sale. Both crop and livestock agriculture have low yields, with
little fertilizer use on fields and low efficiency animals. There are also some policy obstacles to
change, including the law banning conversion of paddy fields to other production.
23.
Despite the obstacles, there has already been some movement away from these low
productivity practices. Some farmers have already seen the profits from producing potatoes for
domestic and Indian markets. These could well be followed with off-season supplies of other
basics-tomatoes, ginger, onions, cabbage, and a wide range of other horticulture crops. Bhutan
could also increase farm incomes even further with the use of greenhouse technology that
maximizes returns to land and labor and access to niche markets.
24.
Meeting this challenge of rural development rests on the achievement of an
interconnected rural sector in which communities are well-served with roads, electricity, schools,
health facilities, trucks, banks and good government. Bhutan needs to increase basic investment
in public physical and social infrastructure to channel the benefits of its foreign inflows to its
poorer and more remote communities and households.
C. BHUTAN'S VISION FOR SOCIAL TRANSFORMATION
25.
In May 1999, the government produced a seminal and comprehensive vision statement of
Bhutan's future as it enters the next millennium, Bhutan 2020: A Visionfor Peace, Prosperity
and Happiness. This 20-year vision is remarkable both for its candor and for the clarity with
which it analyzes and makes choices on Bhutan's distinctive path of development. Annex Al
shows the concrete milestones under the five topics put forward by Bhutan 2020 as contributing
to increasing Bhutan's "Gross National Happiness" (Box 3). Bhutan's desire to lead
development with this strong vision sets the context for IDA's country assistance strategy and is
therefore discussed in some detail here.

-9Box 3: Bhutan 2020
Bhutan recently articulated a clear vision and set of values in Bhutan 2020: A Visionfor Peace, Prosperity and

Happiness.Vision2020 seeksa "cautiousinterpretationof modernisation."It puts humanhappiness,not
economicgrowth,at the centerof the nation's visionand valuesfor development:
"Our guidingprinciplesfor the futuredevelopmentof our nationand for the safeguardingof our
sovereigntyand securityas a nation-statemust be complementedby a singleunifyingconcept
of development,...the distinctivelyBhutaneseconceptof GrossNationalHappiness.... The
conceptplaces the individualat the centerof all developmenteffortsand it recognizesthat the
individualhas material,spiritualand emotionalneeds. It assertsthat developmentcannot and
shouldnot be definedexclusivelyin materialterms. ... The conceptof GrossNational
Happinessmustbe translatedinto objectivesthat are ableto givedirectionto the Kingdom's
long-termdevelopment."
Bhutan2020 articulatesfive developmentobjectives:
*
*
*
*
*

HumanDevelopment,to enableall Bhutaneseto achievetheir full potentialas humanbeings. It
stressesthe need to provideexpandedchoicesand opportunitiesconsistentwith the greaterselfrelianceof the nation and of individuals,families,and communities.
CulturalDevelopment,to promoteawarenessof Bhutan'srich culturalheritageand its role in
meetingspiritualand emotionalneeds,maintaininga distinctiveidentity,and cushioningsome of the
negativeeffectsof modernization.
BalancedandEquitableDevelopment,to ensurethat the benefitsof modernizationare shared
equitablyby differentincomegroupsand regionsand in ways that promotesocialharnony,
stability,and unity and contributeto the developmentof a just and compassionatesociety.
InstitutionalDevelopment,to developinstitutions,humanresources,andgovernancesystemsthat
allowBhutanto reduceits dependenceon aid, to managean increasinglycomplexsystemof
development,andto enlargeopportunitiesfor all peopleto participatein decisionmaking.
EnvironmentallySustainableDevelopment,to see that developmentembodiesthe principleof
environmentalsustainabilityandprotectsBhutan'sgloballysignificantbiodiversityandnatural
environment.
The Visionis explicitthat, in achievingthese objectives,Bhutanwill haveto:
'... take the good with the bad. We have openedthe doorsto [a globalizingworld]and we are
no longerable to close them,evenif we wantedto. ... The challengeis to find andstrike the
right balance ... to maximize gains while minimizing ... disruptive impacts. This will be an

immenselydifficulttask, but we are not withouttangibleassets. Ourbeliefs and values,so
deeplyrooted in the perceptionsand behaviorof our people,provideus with the prismsthrough
whichwe will continueto interpretthe world andto distinguishbetweenpositiveandnegative
forcesof change."

26.

The essential development challenge for Bhutan is to convert its rapid economic growth

into effective social transformation, while maintaining its cultural identity and traditions of
equality and dealing with an inadequate supply of jobs for the growing, high-wage labor force.
Bhutan 2020 sees the private sector-including knowledge-intensive industries-as the driving
force behind employment growth. Bhutan is working to improve the business environment by
reforming the financial sector, reducing trade and investment barriers, and keeping the
govenunent compact and efficient. This is a vision for the long term, however. For the shorter
term, given the conditions of human and physical development, and the large portion of the

-10-

population still dependent on agriculture, this sector will have to absorb the bulk of the rapidly
growing labor force.
Economic Reforms for Private Sector-led Growth
27.
Private Sector Development. A strong private sector is crucial to the balanced growth
of the economy. The government is committed to reducing, as rapidly as feasible, its role in the
productive economy and focusing on the provision of basic infrastructure and social services.
Majority ownership and management in seven public sector enterprises (constituting 25 percent
of manufacturing/non-government services) have been transferred to the private sector, and other
public enterprises have been corporatized. The government has privatized bus services and
corporatized postal services. The only non-performing public enterprise has been liquidated
after the failure of an initial attempt to revitalize it through privatization. There are plans to
privatize some agricultural services, to contract out much power construction and road
maintenance, and to encourage private sector participation in education and health. However,
the limited absorptive capacity of the local market for equity constrains progress on these
initiatives.
28.
The government is also taking a number of steps to improve the enabling environment for
private sector investment, including:
* Introduction of a transparent framework for direct foreign investment to replace the current
restrictive case-by-case approach;
* Issuance of more work permits to expatriate labor;
* Establishment of a transparent set of rules and regulations governing trade and payments
with countries other than India;
 Provision of foreign exchange for all bona fide external current account transactions;
* A more active role for the Royal Monetary Authority in using market-based instruments to
improve liquidity management;
 Improvements in the legal framework for loan recovery and settlement of financial disputes.
29.
The Financial Sector. There is considerable excess liquidity in the banking system, most
of it sitting in non-interest bearing accounts with the Royal Monetary Authority. This has
undermined the profitability of Bhutan's four main financial institutions, which are prohibited
from investing abroad (except in short-term instruments of the Reserve Bank of India). Part of
the problem has been a boom and bust cycle, with overly enthusiastic lending for enterprises,
especially in the tourism sector, that proved not to be viable. The response was a significantly
more conservative lending strategy and a sharp reduction in new lending. The imbalance
between liquidity and productive lending opportunities will likely continue until Bhutan can
break through into much higher value-added economic activities involving the private sector.
30.
The government has started to liberalize the financial sector. The competitiveness of the
banking system was improved significantly with the conversion of the Unit Trust of Bhutan into
a fully fledged commercial bank (in which Citibank has an equity stake) and with the
liberalization of interest rates on loans and large deposits. (This has not changed the interest rate
structure in practice, however. Deposit rates range from 5 to 11 percent and lending rates from
13 to 16 percent.) The government is also tightening regulation of the financial sector, in

-11-

response to the threat of a rapid increase in the number of nonperforming loans. All financial
institutions are required to maintain a capital-adequacy ratio above 6 percent, to provision for
nonperforming loans, and to maintain a minimum liquidity ratio. The Royal Monetary Authority
conducts on-site inspections of financial institutions at least every six months. Clear bankruptcy
procedures have been established, and banks now have the right to seize personal property when
loans are in default. A Loan Recovery Committee has reduced the nonperforming loans of
financial institutions. A computerized stock exchange has been established to encourage equity
investments. The Royal Monetary Authority plans to conduct a detailed study of the financial
sector and to draft a comprehensive strategy.
Strengthening Infrastructure
31.
Aside from the massive investment in the Tala hydopower project and the two other
smaller hydropower projects, the government's infrastructure priorities are urban planning and
dev.elopment-Bhutan's major towns are growing rapidly-and road maintenance and
improvement. Urban development programs are being prepared for Bhutan's rapidly growing
cities, including new urban housing sites. The emphasis for roads is on increasing private
participation in maintenance and construction, shortening road connections, making road design
and construction more environmentally safe, and expanding the country's still incomplete
infrastructure, especially to remote areas.
Deifininga Future for Agriculture and Forests
32.
Agriculture has traditionally been the principal source of income for most Bhutanese
famniliesand is still the largest area of private sector production. Approximately 85 percent of
the population is engaged in farming or forestry, which account for 38 percent of GDP.
33.
Under the Eighth Plan (1997-2002) the government is moving away from its unsuccessful
emphasis on large capital investments toward a program framework approach. Agricultural
activities will be managed under six discrete programs: development of farm systems, crop and
livestock production, forest management, horticulture exports, planning and management, and
training. Bhutan is diversifying into new export crops and emphasizing domestic production of
nontraditional crops such as potatoes. Community involvement and cost-sharing are increasing,
especially for irrigation. Irrigation schemes for cash crops will be fully financed by the farming
communities, with the government providing only technical advice.
34.
The government's role in forestry is fundamentally different from its role in much of the
rest of the rural economy, where production is in private hands. Almost all forests are stateowned. The government sees itself as the custodian of an asset of national significance for
maintaining sustainable rural livelihoods and of global significance for biodiversity protection.
Forest cover has increased from 60 to 70 percent over the last 20 years-despite heavy subsidies
on forest products-because of strict enforcement of controls on encroachment on forest lands
and other damaging practices.
35.
Fearing a reversal of this trend, and in the interests of economic efficiency, the
government is reducing its heavy subsidies on wood for urban and industrial users. Rural users,
however, will retain free access to restricted quantities of wood, in line with the government's
policy of containing rural to urban migration, and to prevent an upsurge in uncontrolled and

-12environmentally damaging illegal felling. The government has recently banned exports of round
wood and timber in an attempt to increase domestic supply.
Balancing Development: Human Development, the Environment, and Culture
36.
Education. Bhutan introduced modern secular education in 1961. Since then, it has
made enormous progress in building a public primary and secondary education system and, to a
more limited extent, in providing selective tertiary schooling. Primary enrollment, which has
been increasing at an annual rate of 8 percent in recent years, is now over 70 percent. Bhutan
has also emphasized the quality of learning outcomes while raising enrollments. English is the
medium of instruction in schools and serves to unify Bhutan' s multiple linguistic groups.
37.
The government will devote its efforts to achieving universal primary education by early
next century and to expanding secondary education to meet rapidly growing demand. The
majority of students will continue to receive tertiary education abroad, principally in India.
Bhutan has also been gradually increasing the capacity of its own degree granting institutions,
where it is cost effective to do so, and is actively developing its strategy for higher education in
line with its longer term objectives for growth and development.
38.
Health. The introduction of modem health services in the 1960s has probably done more
than any other program to enhance the quality of life in Bhutan. The country has made
remarkable progress in establishing a four-tier health delivery system that is able to deliver
health services effectively to its people. There is very little private provision of health services
outside of urban areas, since the public provision of health services is effective and health clinics
are well stocked and managed (average annual public health expenditures were $18 per capita in
1997, slightly above the South Asian average of US$16).
39.
Bhutan's high population growth rate, estimated to be about 2.9 percent a year, remains a
matter of concern. Reducing the population growth rate is a top priority, and the Eighth Plan has
a strong focus on reproductive health and family planning. The government also plans to
consolidate and strengthen health infrastructure; improve staffing and service quality, including
greater attention to traditional medicine and mental health; and increase access to health care in
remote areas. The government has also been conducting a wide-ranging public information
campaign on HIV/AIDS prevention. HIV/AIDS prevention will remain high on the government's
agenda, including attention to capacity building for an effective national public health program
and intensified health promotion interventions targeting vulnerable groups and border areas in
the south. For the sector as a whole, capital investments will focus on upgrading basic health
units and improving the health delivery system. The Eighth Plan calls for a 50 percent increase
in the number of doctors, a 47 percent increase in the number of basic health workers, and a 40
percent increase in the number of technicians. Some degree of cost-recovery is under active
consideration, both to raise revenues and to control the excess demand that a free good generates.
40.
Environment and Culture. Bhutan has been well ahead of much of the world in
recognizing the importance of environmental protection. It also places a high value on
maintaining its cultural identity, emphasizing its living culture rather than a culture preserved
only in museums. The strength of its commnitment-and its willingness to sacrifice short-term
gains in growth to achieve it-is shown by the 10-percentage point increase in forest cover in the
last 20 years and by the control of tourism using a substantial tourist fee. Bhutan's commitment

-13to the environment is embodied in its Trust Fund for Environmental Conservation, established
with support from the Global Environment Facility and other donors. Income from the Trust
Fund is used to support the commitment to preserving 23 percent of the land area as wildlife
parks and sanctuaries and 60 percent of the land under forest cover. A similar Trust Fund is
being established for maintaining its cultural heritage, and the government is soliciting donor
support.
D. IDA's ROLE IN BHUTAN's DEVELOPMENT
41.
Bhutan has drawn relatively little on the World Bank Group. IDA is almost the smallest
donor in Bhutan in terms of resource transfers. IDA commitments over the past 10 years through
fiscal 1999 have been only $19 million, with disbursements of $12 million. In the past five years
IDA has provided only 1 to 2 percent of total aid disbursements. This follows from Bhutan's
external aid policy of limiting the number of donors overall and in any sector and of drawing on
bilateral grant aid first, followed by UN agencies for technical assistance, and only then turning
to international financial institutions. The policy is part of an effort to reduce the transaction
costs of dealing with donors. Bhutan is not a member of IFC or MIGA.
Past IDA Support
42.
IDA has been assisting Bhutan very selectively since the early 1980s, initially with
support for institution building and calcium carbide production. The last CAS was discussed
with the Board in July 1993 and emphasized economic policy advice, education, and forestry.
During the early 1990s, Bhutan made good use of IDA's expertise in primary education and
forestry and in preparing an economic report and a Power Development Master Plan. IDA has
also managed a Global Environment Fund grant and supervised a GEF trust fund for national
forest protection. For the most part IDA has provided such support only when other donors could
not put together a timely combination of knowledge, expertise, and financing as requested by the
government. Bhutan's management of these projects overall has been superior, with good impact
and relatively few implementation problems.
43.
OED has reviewed Bhutan five projects since 1991. All five were rated satisfactory.
Three were rated as having a substantial impact, and the other two a modest impact. None of
the projects was judged unlikely to be sustainable, but for three sustainability was judged to be
uncertain. Borrower performance was judged satisfactory in all five, and IDA performance
likewise, with the exception of the supervision of the second forestry project. IDA's past
involvement has led to a few lessons. What appears to have worked well is project impact. An
important lesson in project design and implementation is the need to work closely with the
government in assessing the availability of technical and managerial staff for project work and
supervision. Finally, the experience suggests a larger role for knowledge transfer independently
of project lending.
44.
In 1997, Bhutan requested IDA to support the adoption of new approaches to rural access
roads and small town infrastructure. This has led to the projects that accompany this CAS. This
request also led to a deeper dialogue between IDA and the government on Bhutan's development
strategy and framework. This country assistance strategy is an outcome of this dialogue.

-14IDA's Assistance Strategy
45.
IDA's strategic goal is to assist Bhutan-in ways that are driven by Bhutan and in
partnership with other donors-in realizing its development vision of translating rapid economic
growth into social transformation and poverty reduction. IDA's strategy is set against Bhutan's
favorable medium-term growth prospects, its comfortable macroeconomic balances, and
considerable exports and aid inflows. The strategy is also set against a development vision that
reflects a well-articulated, nationally owned development framework. Bhutan is unusual in
South Asia in that its public administration is strong, corruption is low, and basic institutions
(schools, health posts, district offices, road maintenance) work well to produce quality outcomes.
These conditions give shape to IDA's comparative advantage in Bhutan in providing highquality global knowledge and practical expertise. The Bank has fixed costs in preparing and
processing IDA projects, and given the availability of substantial alternative assistance to
Bhutan, using scarce IDA resources for knowledge assistance over lending preparation will be
more cost-effective. Accordingly, IDA 's country assistance strategy will emphasize knowledge
transfersfirst, then lending.
46.
Knowledge Transfer. IDA will increasingly place its global knowledge resources at the
disposal of the government without tying them to IDA credits. The government has asked for
regular consultations, without lending, on aspects of its long-term health and education
strategies. It has also asked for help on macroeconomic aspects of development policy, which
would build on IDA's routine participation in IMF Article IV consultations. Discussions have
begun with the Royal Monetary Authority on a detailed study of the financial sector to help
develop a financial sector strategy. Bhutan lacks a solid analytical basis for measuring rural and
urban poverty, which would be useful to inform and accelerate its development strategy of
inclusive social transformation. IDA will urge the govemrnent to carry out a baseline living
standards survey, and will be prepared to provide technical staff or other assistance for this
important purpose. Possible program lending would need to be preceded by a public expenditure
review, and IDA will offer assistance in this area. Bhutan has requested assistance for the
development of accounting and auditing standards and skills. These tasks will involve openended assistance, either through the ongoing dialogue or through special tasks that may or may
not involve specific studies (Table 2). IDA is working with the government to broaden the
training of government officials, including greater access to World Bank Institute courses and
inviting promising Bhutanese civil servants to Washington for intermshipsof up to nine months.
Table2: ProposedIDA Analyticaland AdvisoryAssistanceand Lendingto Bhutan,FY00-02
. AAA Starts'
. Lending
Ongoing
HealthOperational
Planning
EducationII
Forestry
- Forestry IlIl
~~~''
~F~'~~~----~~-'~-'~-~-~~~~---~~
------.-.
r . ----..-. _........................
_.___......
.__._
__
FY00
. Post-Secondary
Education
Strategy
UrbanDevelopment
FY01
FY02

Rural Access Roads

Country Assistance Strategy
Financial Sector Strategy
S Poverty Analysis
_ Public Expenditure Analysis ___
,--

.

~

_

1/ FY00includesongoingactivitiesbegunin FY00. AAA assistanceis seen as open-endedin that it
will respondto the needsof the govemmentas and whenneeded,and will thereforecontinuewhile it
is justifiedin termsof the knowledgetransferneedsof the government.

-15Other areas for a knowledge-intensive role for IDA include issues relating to school
47.
curriculums, long-term health finance, rural road capacity development, options for employment
generation, policy frameworks for economic and sector development, and Bhutan's deficiencies
in economic data (Table 3; Annex Al). Such a knowledge-based partnership would involve
prcividing Bhutan with access to the Bank's global knowledge and expertise with the help of
visiting IDA missions, World Bank Institute courses (including distance learning), and technical
assistance through IDA-supported projects.
48.. Donor Coordination. The government is interested in greater harmonization of donor
support and in discussing the merits of a more program-oriented approach. The Comprehensive
Development Framework, which Bhutan' s development vision and implementation have
anticipated, provides a natural foundation for this (Box 4). As part of its effort to help the
government enhance the efficiency and development impact of donor assistance, IDA will seek
to build stronger partnerships with Bhutan and other donors on this foundation.
Box 4: Bhutan2020 and the Comprehensive Development Framework
Bhutan's development practices have anticipated the Comprehensive Development Framework. The
emphasis on development as social transformation, the need for ownership of the development strategy,
and the emphasis on participation, inclusiveness, and a well-defned framework for donor partnerships are
all themes that resonate with Bhutan 2020.
Each pillar of the Comprehensive Development Framework is reflected in current practice in Bhutan or in
Bhutan 2020:
* Good governance. The government has a long-standing reputation for honesty and professionalism.
Training is a key focus. Large numbers of civil servants at all levels are studying abroad in highly
regarded programs. Decentralization is increasing transparency, voice, and information flow, with
development decisions increasingly made at the geog (community) and dzongkhag (district) levels. A
greater role for the elected National Assembly and Cabinet is enhancing these crucial values at the
central level.
* Market fundamentals. The government is modemizing the legal system to meet the needs of a market
economy and finalizing a digital GPS-based land survey and titling system. A stringent new
bankruptcy law and a high-level committee have boosted enforcement of foreclosures. Competition
has been introduced in the banking system, and a new private commercial bank, with Citibank equity
involvement, will compete with the government-owned commercial bank.
* Inclusion. Bhutan is making a concerted effort to increase access to education and health care. Girls
now constitute over 45 percent of primary school students. Infant and maternal mortality rates have
dropped sharply. Health clinics are well equipped, with dedicated and well-trained staff committed to
both preventive and curative medicine. Bhutan has a long-established school for the blind, and
accommodation for the deaf is now also being made in the school system. After an initial overreaction
in the 1980s to ethnic tensions, the government is working to create a society in which all nationals
benefit equally from development.
* Communications and transport. The government continues to improve its road, trail, and ropeway
network, with an emphasis on maintenance-increasingly through the private sector-and improved
access to remote areas. A communications network now covers all 20 dzongkhags. In rural
development Bhutan is diversifying into new export crops.
* Environmental and human sustainabiity. Bhutan is making substantial contributions to the global
environment through reforestation and biodiversity protection and the export of hydropower to India.
Forests cover over 70 percent of the land area-over a quarter of the land area is dedicated in
perpetuity as national parks and nature reserves-and there is a growing movement toward community
forestry. The government is also focusing on solar power and mini- and micro-hydels. In addition, the
government is at the forefront of cultural preservation worldwide. Tourism is limited to sustainable
levels, and school textbooks are geared to local values.
Source: Bhutan 2020: A Vision of Peace, Prosperity, and Happiness, Royal Government of Bhutan, May 1999.

BYIDA
TOBEASSISTED
PRIORITIES
DEVELOPMENT
SELECTED
Table3: BHUTAN'S
Visionand
Development
Bhutan's
Outcomes
Long-term

_

NRELPENT777

7 77777

Happiness .
National
Gross
Maximizing

A.

IDAInputs
Visionand
Development
Bhutan's
Outcomes
Long-term
f::
B Blanced& uitabie eeent
andregions
groups
allincome
among
equitably
areshared
ofdevelopment
thatthebenefits
Ensure
.iya
..................
soastopro...... t,n
1. Urbanization

IDAInputs
_

e_

infuture
available
support
Broader
and
consultations
regular
through
program,
or
sector
project,
limited
ledin.
program
ecnomy-wide
7a

-

.

potental.
their
full&innate
themtoachieve
toenable
ofallBhutanese
happiness
Maximize
... .............
. . ... . ... .... . .. . , .......................................................................................
I. Education
Education
Second
through
. Support
assoonas
enrolment
universal
.
Achieve
education
forbasic
Credit
possible.
consultations
forregular
request
RGoB
*
&
thequality
improve
Continually
.
onpost-secondary
lending)
(without
ofeducation.
relevance
strategy.
education
toeducaton.
access
Improve
.
curriculum,
onschool
Dialogue
*
schools.
private
Develop
.
andpostsecondary
secondary
education
planning*.
for
careservices
health
primary
Provide

*

.

all.

self-reliance
topromote
ofgovemance
& asystem
resources
human
institutions,
develop
Further
& par cipar p c.s..L
Mobilization
1. Resource

4.

Private Sector

3.
.
.

.
.

5.

*
*

Focus
onruraldevelopment.
agriculture.
commercialize
Further
growth
atmostfourregional
Establish
forsocial
(asfocalpoints
centers
aswellasfor
&services
infrastructure
their
afterassessing
govtservices)
impact
environmental
Bhutan.
Eastem
Area:
Priority
existing
centers
Expand
urban
desin&planning.
Improve

health
onlong-term
lending)
(without

.

.

.

Towns
RuralAccessandSecondary
Credits(FY00)

*

consultations
request
forregular
RGoB

strategies.
care.
ofhealth
quality
Improve
financing.
health
onlong-term
offinancing . Dialogue
methods
innovatve
Introduce
on
care(e.g.userfeesforservices
health
bai)
an'abififto
.......................
.............
........................................
,...,, ... .....................................
.....................
,......................
,,,,,,,
. ... ,.,
... )a,,
.s
i ...tepa .a.g
anoi
EconomicGrowthandDevelopnent
on
forconsultations
request
ofdevelopment * RGoB
themomentum
Maintain
issues.
&financial
macroeconomic
soastopromote
theeconomy
Diversify
dataandanalysis.
*
Poverty
selfreliance.
review.
Public
expenditure
*
employment
productive
generate

.

*

so
to rapidurbanization
Timelyresponses
effects.
negative
asto minimize

*
*

.
*
*

;
sector.
tofinancial
support
Non-lending
Continueto create an enabling *
.Ensure
.........................................................................................................
tr
pr vat sector.
.menvironment
.o
n.h ' .e n forthepnvate
Transport, Communications and
Information

ofphysical
development
. Further
bydetailed
guided
infrastructure
&social
ofenvironmental
assessment
maintaining
while
assessment
impact
with
relations
&constructive
friendly
countries.
neighboring
a) Surtacetransport. Improvepublic
system.
transport
* Developdry ports at strategic
withIndia.
ontheborder
locations
b) Civilaviation.
airservices.
intemational
* Improve
c) Telecommunications.
toruralpopulation.
services
* Expand
an Information
&activate
Prepare
Prioritv:
.
(IT)strateg
Technology

.........
.ses

DevelopnentFinancing
in .
assistance
onextemal
reliance
Reduce
thelong-term.*
&levy
ofrevenues
newsources
Explore
onan'ability
services
userfeesforsocial
topay'basis.
*
Revenues
Schools
Private
Health
taxbase.'s_tax_base.
thenation's
Improve
So

Table
meetng.
Round
inthecontext
advice
Economic/Budget
byRGoB
requested
oftheconsultations
education
financial,
onmacroeconomic,
issues.
&health
&auditstandards
onaccounting
Advice

t

environmental
embody
theprinciplesof
ahead
tochallenges
response
thenation's
environment.
thenatural
sustainability&presere
1.

Forest Regeneration & Biodiversity

.

remains .
& regeneration
protedion
Forest
butwithmore
inthefuture
apriontv
biodiversity..
tomaintaining
sensitivity
resource
of biodiversity
fullinventory
Make
base

a

onnational
(focus
TrustFund
Bhutan
parks
&biodiversity)
of
insupport
Credit
Forestry
Third
forest
sustainable
environmentally
anduse
development

Note: Shows only those priorities for which IDA anticipatesproviding
either
knowledgeor financial assistance.
Source: Excerpted from Annex Al.

-16-

.........

&

-1749.
Lending. Based on the governmentand IDA's joint assessment of Bhutan's needs for
developmentassistance, lending is likely to be at very modest levels and under very special
circumstances. This is a continuationof our past approach, under which lending to Bhutan has
been a small fraction of its nominal performance-basedannual IDA allocation of SDR 10
million. The current programdoes not propose additional credits during FYOO-02(see Table 2):
such credits would be triggered by specific government requests for IDA assistance, usually
when an appropriateblend of funding and expert advice is not available from other donors.
When provided, IDA credits will remain focused on the priority poverty-reducingareas of
human development and infrastructure. In addition to standardproject lending and sector
program lending, several factors make Bhutan a potentially good candidate for alternative
economy-wideprogram lending, including its comprehensivedevelopmentvision, well-specified
performance benchmarks, strong public institutions, and careful public expenditure stance.
50.
Project lending would follow IDA's long-standingproject partnerships in education and
forestry. IDA has been supportingBhutan's secondaryeducationvision through two credits cofinanced with the Swiss DevelopmentCorporation,and is well positioned to assist in developing
a tertiary educationmodel. Sector-basedprogram lending would build on the blend of project
and sector program lending embedded in the two projects that accompanythis CAS, including
the future possibility of time-slice financingbased on comprehensivedonor coordination.
Economy-wide program lending-against the general effectiveness of development assistance in
Bhutan-is also a possibility under discussionwith the government,provided that economic
conditions (including a drop in foreign aid or export earnings)require such support. A review of
public expenditures,a baseline poverty assessment,macroeconomicmonitoring in collaboration
with the IMF, and a Poverty Reduction StrategyPaper would need to precede such lending. The
government is consideringthe pros and cons of such support.
51.
To ensure that lending remains demand-driven,IDA has been in dialogue with the
government on these options, discussingthe merits and costs of each approach and its fit with
Bhutan's developmentvision. This dialogue is very mindful of Bhutan's constraints in
absorbing the external resources already available and its desire to modernize with "deliberate
speed" to avoid the social, cultural, and environmentalcosts of overly rapid growth. But it is
also mindful of the high payoff in social transformationfrom additional investments in basic
social and physical infrastructure. While focusing strategicallyon knowledgetransfers, IDA will
continue to explore knowledge-intensiveand innovativeopportunities for financing such highvalue added investments in social and physical infrastructure. The projects accompanyingthis
CAS are two examples of such opportunities.
52.
Development Outcomes. IDA's strategy of knowledgetransfers and limited lending
must be and is an integralpart of the comprehensivedevelopmentfrarmeworkderived from the
government's vision, as enunciatedin its Bhutan 2020. The performance indicators for IDA's
strategy are therefore also derived from the milestones the government has set for itself, as
described in Annex Al. These milestones are of course not specific to IDA's limited assistance,
but in each case represent the interaction of donor assistance derived from the development
fiamework and Bhutan's implementationof such assistance. The government has set these
milestones after extensive consultations.Regular and extensive field visits by officials at all
levels, combined with the small population (fewerthan 100,000 households),mean that the
government has a sophisticatedand detailed knowledgeof conditions and needs across the whole
of Bhutan. As such, the government's milestones represent a blend of realistic targets over the
nmediumterm-by which IDA would measure its performance-and stretch goals in the short

-18run that indicate the clear directionthe governmentwishes to pursue (and which may sometimes
be quite attainable given Bhutan's small population.)
53.
Consultations.IDA has engaged in numerous consultationswith all levels of Bhutanese
society throughout the preparation of this assistance strategy. Discussions with government and
civil society in Thimphu and in rural areas were held by teams covering education,forestry,
urban development, infrastructure,and social development,with two extensive field visits by
Bank anthropologists,including to the South, to learn about and discuss the social and ethnic
aspects of Bhutan's development.Bhutan 2020 and the Eighth Five-Year Plan are founded on
exhaustive, open, and highly participatory consultations at all levels of society, including the
chimis (elected members of the National Assembly)and gups (electedvillage leaders, who are an
integral part of each dzongkhag's local government).

E. BHUTAN'S DEVELOPMENT
PARTNERSHIPS
54.
Bhutan differs from most other aid-dependentcountries in that the government has a
strong vision and a strong sense of developmentpriorities-and of the comparative advantages
of various donors-and deternines on this basis where technical and financial assistance is most
needed and which donor can best provide it. The admirably small government means that donor
missions can impose a high cost in scarce government officials' time. The government has been
exceptionallyproactive in managing donor assistance, fitting aid into a well-defined framework,
rather than allowing donorsto drive its developmentprograms (Table 4). The government has
actively encouraged very close liaison between donors and facilitated this objective by limiting
the number of donors, both overall and within each sector. In forestry and education, for
example,IDA and Switzerlandhave effectively been operating as a single donor. This well
thought-out framework has also emphasizedpartnerships with relatively small donors, with the
exception of India, which has remainedBhutan's major development partner over the past 40
years. Other important partners include Austria, Denmark, Germany,Japan, the Netherlands,
Switzerland,the Asian DevelopmentBank, the European Commission,UNDP, and UNICEF.
Among other important initiatives, UNDP has organized the donor Round Table Meetings,
chaired jointly by the government, UNDP, and IDA.
55.
The congruence between Bhutan's vision and the approach suggested by the
ComprehensiveDevelopmentFramework provides unique opportunities for strengthening the
partnershipsbetween the government and the donor community,including IDA. There is
already a strong foundationon which to build. Bhutan 2020 includes detailed and quantified
milestones or benchmarks for all the government's priority areas, from population, health, and
education to decentralizationand participation(Annex Al). The government is working to
establish harmonized procedures,including for procurementand disbursement.
56.
UNDP has pioneered the concept of a sustainable developmentpartnership with the
governmentand has assisted it in bringing coherence to donor activities, partly through its
substantial assistance for strengthening governmentplanning and program management
capacities. The Netherlands is supporting an innovativeenvironmentpartnership with Bhutan,
Costa Rica, and Benin. Sector-by-sectoraid coordinationmeetings are held among the donors
resident in Thimphu, with participationfrom the nonresident donors (Japan, the Asian
DevelopmentBank, the International MonetaryFund, and IDA), when possible.

-19Table 4: Bhutan's Comprehensive Framework of Ongoing Development Assistance
Dev. Partner

Education

Governance

Health

Forestry

Rural Dev't

Tech.& Vocational UpgradingHealth
Posts
Education

Germany

Landuse& Environ.
Planning
BhutanTrustFund

Primary
Integrated
Health
Care,Essental
Drugs& SafeWater

Decentralization,
Royal
Strengthen
AuditAuthority,Tax
Administration
Assistance

Thimphu&
Phuntsholing

Agro-industries

Promotionof cash
crops

Conserv.&
Sust.

___

TeacherSalaries, MalatiaEradication
SchoolConstruction
ParoRuralDev.

Japan
Netherlands

Norway

Switzerland

RoyalAudit Primary/secondary
Strengthen
Teachertraining
Authority
(withIDA)

ADB

Min.of
Strengthen

EU______________Finance

Bhutan
Biodiversity,
TrustFund

Ruralroads
CashCrops,
Develop.,management
Horticulture
Zhemghang
RuralDev.

BhutanTrust Fund

Rural_Dev

of Cash
Promotion
Crops,Livestock
Dev.,Natural
ResourceTraining
Center
IrrigationSupport

Sustainable
Use,
&
Protection
mgt.Offorest

Tech.& Vocational

Forest

Education

development

Tala,Kunchu, Radio
transmission
Bunakha
Micro-hydels Microwave
__

______

Tel. Network

SolarPower

Bridges& Trails

Highwaymaintenance Town
Development
planning

Rural
Electrification

Ext.
Livestock/Agri.
Service

EU
BhutanTrust Fund

GEF

IDA

RoundTable,Econ.& Prim.& LowerSec.
TeacherTraining
BudgetAdvice

UNDP

RoundTable,Planning
Aid
& Budgeting,
Coord.,Priv.Sector
of
Dev.,Modemization

Consultatonson
long-termhealth
financeand
infectiousdisease

SupportRGoBProg.of Secondary
improvingruralaccess, Towns
initiallyinZhemghang,
Trashigang,
&
Trashiyangtse
Lhuentse

of
Sustainable GEFsupervision
BhutanTrustFund
Use,
&
Protection
Mgt.Of
Forests
NationalParks&
Biodiversity

of Cash
Promotion
Crops

Legal System

MCH,
Prim.& LowerSec. Immunization,
TeacherTrng.,Prim. FamilyPlanning

UNICEF

__Educ,Adult Literacy

Food-For-Work

SchoolMeals

WFP
WHO
WWF

____

&
Construction
maintenance
Paroroadsandbndges |
___
_______

Decentralization

Telecomm

Basochu

management___________

India

Power

Urban Dev

Roads

BhutanTrustFund

Austria
Denmark

Environment

DiseasePrevention,
Human Res. Dev.__Bhutan

Trust Fund

Telecomm
corporatization

-20F. RISKS

57.
Bhutan faces two kinds of developmentrisk. First, it is subject to vulnerability arising
from its external environment-the heavy reliance of the economy on power exports to India and
on financial support from India and foreign aid in general. The relationship with India continues
to be one of principledpartnership, with no emerging political problems that would suggest
increased vulnerability. The developmenteffectiveness of aid in Bhutan suggeststhat the
country will continue to receive substantial aid flows, but Bhutan's growing foreign exchange
reserves could lead some donors to reallocateaid flows to other countries and create some
uncertainty about the size of future aid flows. The government's long-term goal is to reduce its
reliance on foreign aid. Macroeconomicstability and creditworthiness are not themselves likely
to be of concern over the medium term because of Bhutan's history of fiscal prudence, its strong
balance of payments position with very little debt (all concessional),and the nominal anchor
provided by the currency peg to the Indian rupee.
58.
Second, and perhaps much more important, Bhutan faces the risk of rising social and
political tensions from rapid population and economicgrowth, particularly if growth does not
yield universal improvementsin living standards. GDP and employmentgrowth will remain a
function of how well Bhutan strikes a balance between economicgrowth and strong national
concerns about preserving its environmentand maintaining its culture. These issues of long-term
social and political vulnerability-of how to match the gains from 6-7 percent GDP growth to
rising expectations of welfare improvementsand expanding employmentopportunities-are thus
of greater concern. More immediately,unrest in the south related to Nepali-speakingminorities
has attracted considerableattention. The governmentis attempting to negotiate a just settlement
of the refugee issue together with the Nepalese government. In the east, the incursion into
Bhutan of rebels opposing the Indian government in Assam poses risks, but the government is
working with the Indian governmentto contain such incursions.
James D. Wolfensohn
President
February 22, 2000

By ShengmanZhang

AnnexAl
Page1 of 9

Priorities
Development
BHUTAN's
'R
RGoB

;Gs
:40610.20

i

RGGQD

00A1InusLeOnr

LogTriPerform
~DesIredL
inthefuture,
supportavailable
Broader
andlimited
throughregularconsultations
oreconomy-wide
project,sectorprogram,
programlending.

Gross
Maximizing
CentralDevelHappiness.
opmentConcept National

thevisionand
PastIniuts:IDAhassupported
traditional
assistance,
valuesviatechnical
and
education
in forestry,
projectlending
calciumcarbideproduction.
A. Human
Development

1. Population

2. Education

of all
happiness
Maximize
to enablethem
Bhutanese
theirfull&
to achieve
innatepotential.

._____._____
.___
population
Reduce
growth.

policyinstruments
Existing
1995
of Population,
RoyalDecree
HealthTrustFundlaunched.
HealthSectorMasterPlanlaunched.
TrustFundlaunched.
YouthWelfare
Dev.MasterPlan(1990-2010).
Hydropower
MasterPlan.
Horticulture
Industries.
SmallandMedium
MasterPlanforCottage,
MasterPlan
Telecommunications
MasterPlan
PostalServices
pop.growthrateto
Reduce
(a)2.08%perannumby 2002
(b)1.63%perannumby2007
perannumby2012
(c) 1.31%
from5 to 2 by2012.
perwoman
av.# of children
Reduce
Policy.
Population
National
proposed
Implement

family
smaller
Promote
sizenationally.
pop.educ.&
Introduce
for
programs
awareness
& adults.
alladolescents
enrol- Achieve
universal
Achieve
by2002.
Schoolenrolment
Primary
mentassoonaspossible. (a)universal
atJr. HighSchool(Class8)by2007.
(b)fullenrolment
atHighSchool(Class10)by 2012.
(c)fullenrolment
of
FullBhutanization
islargelycompleted.
schoolcurriculum
(a)primary
by2007.
schoolcurricula
(b)secondary
the
improve
Continually
by
program
education
distance
operational
Introduce
of
&
relevance
quality

UNICEF
UNFPA

for regularconsultations
RGoBrequest
education
onpostsecondary
lending)
(without
strategy.
&
secondary
onschoolcurriculum,
Dialogue
planning.
education
postsecondary
II ($13.2mill.)March1998
Education
(ongoing)

andlower
Primary
&
education
secondary
training
teacher
IDA
Switzerland
(alsoadult
UNICEF
literacy)

AnnexAl
Page2 of 9

Priorities
Development
BHUTAN's

2007.
thefulladultliteracyratefor alldeveloping
Achieve
by 2017.
countries
by 2007.
University
a National
to educa- Establish
access
Improve
by2002.
College
Engineering
Doethang
Establish
tion.
SectorMasterPlan.
Education
proposed
Implement

education.

&
India(teachersalaries
($4.2mill.)
PastInputs:PrimaryEducation
schoolconstruction)
April1988
training).
& teacher
lowersecondary
(Primary,
WFP(SchoolMeals)
ADB/Germany
& vocational
(technical
education)

schools.
private
Develop

3. Health

4.Economic
and
Growth
Development

to currentav.for alldeveloped
lifeexpectancy
Increase
77
years).
(i.e.
2012.
by
countries
foralldeveloping
currentav.ofdoctor/pop.
Achieve
by2007.(1.2per1000persons).
countries
by 2002.
telemedicine
operational
qualityof health Introduce
Improve
countries
developing
for
all
av.
curr.
to
reduce
2007,
By
care.
Rate(from71to 60).
(a)InfantMortality
Rate(from3.8to 1.8per100,000
Mortality
(b)Maternal
livebirths).
Rate(from96.9to 84).
(c) Under-5Mortality
innovative
Introduce
systemof privatehealthcareby
operational
Introduce
of financing
methods
healthcare(e.g.userfees 2007.
below1%of adultpopulation.
onan'ability (d)HIVprevalence
for services
to pay basis).
by2012.
of Install2,000MWof hydropower
themomentum
Maintain
by2017
Install3,000MWof hydropower
development
exports200%by2007&
valueofhorticultural
Increase
300%by2012.
shareinGDPof
so Increase
theeconomy
Diversify
to 30%by 2012.
(a)manufacturing
asto
to 25%by2017
(i)reducevulnerabilities. (b)tourism
by
of farmers
in realincome
increase
a three-fold
selfreliance. Achieve
(ii)promote
2012.
fromtourism100%by2012& 150%by
revenues
Increase
health
Provideprimary
for all.
careservices

RGoBrequestforregularconsultations
health
on long-term
lending)
(without
strategies.

UNICEF/WHO/
(primary
Denmark
healthcare)

healthfinancing.
onlong-term
Dialogue

eradicaIndia(malaria
tion)
(upgrading
Germany
healthservices)

on
RGoBrequestforconsultations
& financialissues.
macroeconomic
Povertydataandanalysis.
review.
Publicexpenditure

India/Austria
(hydropower)

PastInputs:
($9mill.)May1985.
Carbide
Calcium

advice)
ADB(economic

Japan(micro-hydals)

AnnexAl
Page3 of 9

DevelopmentPrioritles
BHUTAN's

2017
Dev.MasterPlans
TourismandIndustrial
(iii)generateproductive Implement
inpreparation.
presently
employment.
5. PrivateSector

arrangements.
licensing
Simplify
to createan
Continue
law.
commercial
unambiguous
for Introduce
environment
enabling
strategyforthe
proposedlong-term
Implement
theprivatesector.
oftheprivatesector.
thissector'srole development
Increase
inthenation'sfuturedev.
Createjobsto attract
youngpeople.
for
opportunities
Expand
smallbusinesses,
outsideserviceespecially
orientedactivities.
accessofprivate
Improve
firmsto capitaltechnology

& know-how.
MasterPlanandMaster
CivilAviation
proposed
Implement
of
development
Further
6. Transport,
presently
Transport
infrastructure PlansforRoadSectorandSurface
Communications physical
underpreparation.
andInformation guidedbydetailed
ofenvironassessment
mental& socialimpact
whilemainassessment
& containingfriendly
with
relations
structive
countries.
neighboring
walk
that75%ofruralpop.livewithinhalf-day's
Ensure
transport.
(i)Surface
2012.
by
road
nearest
from
publictransport
Improve
trunkroadsto take30-tontrucks
currentnational
Upgrade
system.
by2007.
by2017.
highway
transnational
second
Complete
dryportsat
Construct
by 2002
(a)Phuentsholing
by2007
(b)Gaylegphu
dryportsat
Develop
by 2007.
Jongkhar
onthe (c)Samdrup
locations
strategic
to
by2002(service
airservices
domestic
Introduce
borderwithIndia.

sector
supportto financial
Non-lending

UNDP(instituframework)
tional/Legal
sector
ADB(financial
privatization)

RuralAccessProjectinsupportfor RGoB's IDA(ruralaccess)
ruralaccessin districts
of improving
program
(e.g.
infrastructure
withpoorlydeveloped
&
Trashiyangtse
Trashigang,
Zhemghang,
Lhuentse).
onruralroadcapacitydevelopment.
Dialogue

India(roadconstruction
& maintenance)
Japan(Paroroads)
&
(bridges
Switzerland
trails)
WFP(Foodfor Work)

AnnexAl
Page4 of9

Priorities
Development
BHUTAN's

Bhutanishighpriority).
eastern
extemalairlinkswithfullinstrument
improved
Establish
by 2017.
systemcapacity
landing
by2000.
television
national
Introduce
havea postoffice
& settlements
allmajorvillages
Ensure
& strengthen
Improve
airservices. by2002.
international
IDA(telecomm.)
by2002.
ITstrategy
a comprehensive
& establish
Develop
Japan(microwave,
of telecommunications.
IDFfor Corporatization
(iii)Telecommunications.
network)
telephone
by2000,fullyoperational
to the Introduce
Expandall services
transmis(radio
India
systems.
email
&
services
Intranet
(a)
ruralpopulation.
sion)
(b)accesstoInternet.
&
Prepare
Prioritv:
an Information
activate
(IT)strategy.
Technology
(ii)Civilaviation.

policyinstruments
therichcultural Existing
& Heri- Interpret
B. Culture
Fundlaunched.
Heritage
&
ina dynamic
heritage
tage
development-oriented
mannertoensurethatit
for
itsrelevance
maintains
in transformaa society
tion.
by2007.
inventory
Complete
of the
Makeinventory
culture& heritage.
nation's
Actby 2002.
& Heritage
Culture
Prepare
&
conserve
Preserve,
&
theculture
promote
heritage.
Codeby 2002.
Construction
thetraditional Prepare
Promote
style.
architectural
and
C. Balanced
Equitable
Development

of
thatthebenefits
Ensure
equitably
dev.areshared
groups
amongallincome
& regionssoasto
unity&
justice,
promote
harmony.

policyinstruments
Existing
1992193.
Sanitation,
and
Water
on
Decree
Royal
MasterPlan
Development
HumanSettlement
Long-term
launched.
(1999-2020)

(Dzong
India/Austria
renovation)
Netherlands/Denmark
support)
(Cultural

AnnexAl
Page5 of 9

Priorities
Development
BHUTAN's
I~~~Go0~~~~s
Bkuta2020 DsIe4LhgTen
to rapid
Timelyresponses
soasto
urbanization
negative
effects
minimize
ofthisproblem.
Focusonrural
development.
commercialize
Further
agriculture.
atmostfour
Establish
centers
growth
regional
(asfocalpointsfor social
& services
infrastructure
aswellasforgov't
afterassessing
services)
theirenvironmental
impact.
Area:Eastern
Priority
Bhutan.
existingcenters
Expand
urbandesign&
Improve
planning.
access
equitable
to basic Ensure
2. Access
andinfra- to Electricity
services
structure.
1.Urbanization

water
Potable
Safesanitation
&
3. Vulnerable
disadvantaged
rou s.
4. Equitable
Development

to the
Rapidresponses
&
needsof vulnerable
groups.
disadvantaged
thegrowthof
Prevent
inequalities.
income
a progressive
Develop
taxes.
of income
sYstem

~RGOW8-

Ptoifria~Mlsoe
by 2002.
growthcenterstrategy
Formulate

lA~Inxt
TownsCredits
RuralAccessandSecondary
(FY00).

odDnv
(town
IDA/ADB
development)
Japan(Paroruraldev.)
UNDP/Switzerland/
Germany/Netherlands
(cashcrops).

& Phuentsholing
urbandev.plansforThimphu
Complete
by 2002.
dev.plansfor othermajortownsby2002.
Complete

(urbandev.)
Denmark

Plan.
Master
RuralElectrification
proposed
Implement
to
of electricity
Provision
(a)50%of ruralpop.by 2012.
(b)75%of urbanpop.by 2020.
to
of potablewatersupplies
Provision
(a)80%ofruralpop.by 2002& 90%by 2007.
(b)90%ofurbanpop.by 2002.
to 75%of ruralpop.by2002&
ofsafesanitation
Provision
90%b 2 07.
fragileareas.
inecologically
to limitpopulation
Program

ADB(ruralelectrification)
(solar
Netherlands
power)

IncomeTax(PIT)by2000.
a Personal
Introduce
Seeabove.

(Tax
Denmark
assistance)

(safewater)
Denmark

AnnexAl
Page6 of 9

Priorities
Development
BHUTAN's

develop
D. Governance Further
human
institutions,
& a systemof
resources
to promote
govemance
&
self-reliance
processes.
participatory
to
respond
of Progressively
1.Management
newneedsandrequireDevelopment
ments.
civilservicewith
Compact
highlyqualified
adequate
professionals.
to
continues
System
2.Law&
tothe
Jurisprudence evolveinresponse
needsofa societyin
change,eventhoughit
in
anchored
remains
principles.
Buddhist
of newpowers
3.DecentralizationDevolution
to the
& Participation & responsibilities
andgeog
dzongkhag
levels,

4.Human
Resources
Development
(HRD)

-.
policyinstruments
Existing
1981
DYTChatrims,
1992.
GYTChatrims,
1993.
Guidelines,
Decentralization
MasterPlan(1997-2020).
Development
Resources
Human
by2002.
Guidelines
ReviseDecentralization
Systemby
andEvaluation
Monitoring
national
Establish
2002.
intermsof
to makethesystemof lawproactive
Measures
legal
change& theappropriate
to anticipate
thecapacity
needed.
instruments

their
thecapacityof DYTs& GYTsto prepare
Enhance
ownplansby 2005.
for Geogfunds
andguidelines
financialpractice
Establish
by2007.
Gupofficesinall Geogsby 2007.
well-equipped
Establish
Fundsin
LocalDevelopment
Implement
(a)100Geogsby2007,and
(b)all Geogsby2012.
by
fundsin all Dzongkhags
Geogdevelopment
Introduce
2017.
Plan.
Development
Manpower
Long-Term
HRDstrategyisguidedby Implement
theHRDMasterPlan
whichis
(1997-2002)
underreviewto
presently
period.
covera 20-year
by
planning
unitfor manpower
anindependent
Establish
thenation's
Reduce
onexpatriates, 2002.
reliance
trainingtobefully
of RIMformanagement
intheprivate Capacity
especially

Denmark/
Switzerland/
ADB(strengthen
institutions)
legal
UNDP(modernize
systems)

Denmark
Netherlands/
(decentralization)

Thailand/
Netherlands/
Plan
India/Colombo
&
technical
(specialized

AnnexAl
Page7 of 9

Priorities
Development
BHUTAN's
L

tb.-t7
O.:0_

5.Resource
&
Mobilization
Development
Financing

sector.

by2007.
developed

Providetertiarytraining
locallyalso.
on
reliance
Reduce
inthe
assistance
external
long-term.
of
Explorenewsources
& levyuserfees
revenues
onan
for socialservices
'abilityto pay'basis.
Revenues

Collegeby 2002.
Engineering
Doethang
Establish
by 2007.
University
a National
Establish
comeonstreamin 2006.
schemes
Newhydropower

Private
Schools

salestaxongoods&
of introducing
feasibility
Examining
tax.
& property
services
of royalties
thestructure
of revising
possibility
Examining
onforestryproducts.
SectorMasterPlan.
Education
proposed
Implement
systemof privatehealthcareby
operational
Introduce
2007.
of taxreform.
ona majorprogram
Alreadyembarked

t

1A
training)
vocational

UNDP/IDA
RoundTablemeeting.
of the
advicein thecontext
Economic/Budget
by RGoBon
requested
consultations
& health
education
financial,
macroeconomic,
issues.
andauditstandards.
Adviceonaccounting

Health
tax
thenation's
Improve
base.
E. Environmen- Ensurethenation's
to challenges
tallySustainable response
the
aheadembody
Development
of
principles
environmental
& preserve
sustainability
thenaturalenvironment.
&
Forestprotection
1.Forest
a
remains
regeneration
&
Regeneration
inthefuturebut
Driority
Biodiversity
to
withmoresensitivity
biodiversity.
maintaining

&
2. Conservation
Development

of the
Makefullinventory
nation'sbiodiversity
resource
base.

policyinstruments
Existing
Actof 1995.
Conservation
Forest& Nature
MasterPlan(1996-2010).
Forestry
National
Strategy.
Environment
National
ActionPlan.
Biodiversity
National
ActionPlanunderpreparation.
Environmental
National
at least60%forestcover.
maintain
Continually

basecontinues
resource
ofbiodiversity
Inventorying
through2002andbeyond.

Conser- Majordonorsof Bhutan
BhutanTrustFundfor Environmental
parks& biodiversity).TrustFund:GEF/WWF/
vation(focusonnational
Netherlands,/
Dev.III ($5.4mill.)July1993
Forestry
Denmark/Austria/
(ongoing).
Norway (biodiversity)
PastInputs:
GTZ
IDA/Switzerland/
Dev.l ($5.5mill.) April1984.
Forestry
(forestry)
Dev.ll ($1.1mill.) April1988.
Forestry
UNDP/Denmark
BhutanTrustFundfor Environmental
(biodiversity)
Conservation
Switzerland/

AnnexAl

Page8of9

BHUTAN's
Development
Priorities

Germany/

Accounts
toincludethecompiof National
AdaptSystem
Include
the
of the Priorith:
3, Greening
accounts
by 2002.
satellite
lationofenvironmental
to the
Accounts. contribution
National
economy
by the
environment
& by
ecological
services
inthe
of GDP.
calculation
Environment
in National
established
4. Institutionalize HighPriority:Institutional- EIAunitalready
(NEC).
Commission
izecapacities
for confor
Capacities
EIALegislation.
proposed
ElAsatalllevels Implement
Environmental ducting
by
(EAP)approved
Process
Assessment
Environment
ofgovernment.
Impact
NECinFeb.1999.
Assessments
projects
by
ElAsfor alllarge-scale
Introduce
(a)mandatory
(ElAs).
2002,and(b)EIAs
for allphysical
infrastructure
projects
by
2007.
Extend
capacity
toconduct
ElAsto Dzongkhag
levelby
2007.
Prepare
fullyelaborate
(a)standards
forwaterquality&
environmental
healthby2002and
(b)airqualitystandards
by2007.
5.Watershed
Preparation
of ManagementPlansforwatershed
Management
areasasfollows:
HighPriority:WangChu
PunaTsangChu,Mangde Complete
by2002.
Chu,KuriChuand
Complete
by2007.
Dangme
Chu
legis6. Environmental Newenvironmental
to ethical,
lationsensitive
Legislation
religious
& culturalvalues
aswellastraditional
byParliaActapproved
Protection
Environment
National
of resource
systems
management.
mentin July1999,
Needlegislation
that

IDA(conservation
&
sustainable
management)
(assistance
to
Denmark
National
Environment
Commission)

(InstiDenmark/UNDP
tutional
assistance)

(landuse&
Denmark
environment
planning)

(InstituDenmark
tional/technical
assistance)

AnnexAl
Page9 of 9

Priorities
Development
BHUTAN's
RGoBWs

A9_s

RGo''_

f

& buildson
consolidates
existinglegislation.
to review
Needinitiatives
witha
relatedlegislation
them,if
viewto updating
(e.g.Inherinecessary
tanceAct,LandAct,LivestockAct).

Notes:
DYY:
GEF:
GYT:
Geog
RGoB

YargyeTshogchung
Dzongkhag
Facility
GlobalEnvironment
YorgyeTshogchung
Gewog
unitundera Dzongkhag.
Administrative
of Bhutan
RoyalGovernment

Dzongkhag
Chu
Chatrim
Gup
RIM

District
River/Water.
Rulesandregulations.
leaderof thegeog
Elected
of Management
RoyalInstitute

forBhutanarefromRGoBandmaydifferfromthatintheWorldBankCentralDatabases.
Socialindicators
is usedfor
countries
whiledatafor lower& middleincome
countries
isusedfor developed
dataforhighincomecountries
indicators,
Withregardto performance
countries.
developing

Bhutan at a Glance
POVERTY
andSOCIAL
Bhutan

AnnexB1

South
Low.
Asia Income

1998
Pooulation,
mid-vear(millions)
GNPPercapita(Atlasmethod,US$i

0.76
480

1.305
430

3.515
520

GNP (Atlasmethod, US$ billions;

0.36

555

1,844

1.8
2.3

1.7
1.9

Development
diamond'
Lifeexpectancy

Averageannualarowth.199248
2.9
2.3

Population(%)
Laborforce(%)

GNP
GNP
per
capita

Mostrecentestimate(latestyearavallable,1992-981

Gross
primary
enrollment

e

Poverty t% of pooulation below national poverty line,

Urbanpopulation
(%of totalpopulationJ
LifeexDectancv
at birth(vears)
Infantmortality(per 1.000livebirths)
Childmalnutrib'on
(%of childrenunder5)
Accessto safewater(%of population)
Illiteracy(%of Population
aae 15+1
Grossprimaryenrollment(%ofschool-apeDopulation.
Male

15
66
71
38
64
46
72

Female

RATIOSandLONG-TERM
TRENDS
KEYECONOMIC
1977
GDP(US$billions)
investment/GDP
Grossdomestic
Exportsof qoodsandservices/GDP
Grossdomestic
savings/GDP
GrossnationalsavinqslGDP

..
..
..
..

..

Currentaccountbalance/GDP
Interestpavments/GOP
Totaldebt/GDP
Totaldebtservice/exports
Presentvalueof debt/GDP
Presentvalueof debt/exDorts

..
..
..
..

1977-87 1988-98
(averageannualgrowth,
GDP
GNPpercapita
Exportsof qoodsand services

7.9
7.2

..

27
62
77
53
81
49
100
109

31
63
69
74
32
108
113

*

90

103

1987

1997

1998

0.28

0.40

0.43

30.5
21A4
17.2
10.1

48.1
33.0
38.8
35.8

47.3
33.2
37.9
36.5

-34.0
0.2
14.4
1.0

-14.1
0.6
30.3
6.0

-10.8
0.5
27.8
6.3

1997

1998 1999403

Accessto safewater

..

6.1
2.0

7.8
2.6

7.1
2.4

7.1
3.1

1977

1987

1997

1998

46.0
27.4
5.8
26.6

37.8
36.5
11.4
25.8

38.2
36.5
11.6
25.4

65.2
17.6

35.8
25.5

36.2
25.8

34.6

42.3

42.6

1997

1998

3.1
3.8
3.6
16.1

3.4
7.3
13.0
7.2

Bhutan
Low-income
group
_

Economic
ratios,
Trade

Domestic
Investment
Savings

Indebtedness
Bhutan
--- --- Low-income
group

..

STRUCTURE
of the ECONOMY
(I)
Growthratesof outputandinvestment

(% of GDP at factor cost)

Aqriculture
Industry
Manufacturinq
Services
Privateconsumption
Generalaovemment
consumption
Importsof aoods and services
(averageannualgrowth,
Agriculture
Industrv
Manufacturina
Services
Private consumotion

Generalaovernment
consumption
Grossdomesticinvestment
Imports of roods and services
Gross national product

8C
.

.
.

'197747 1988-98
6.2
14,8
11.6
6.7

3.1
9.0
12.2
7.0

..

.

,

4.7

.
9.9

0.3

..

.

9.4

5.0

4
4

20
-20

93

94

95

GDI

97

98

0-GDP

I

Growthratesof exports
andImports
(%)
2-

1
i

7.5

9

9S

xpons
5.7

93

96

9

-- Imports

5.5

Note:1998dataare preliminary
estimates.
Thediamondsshowfourkevindicatorsin thecountrv(inbold)comparedwithitsincome-group
averaqe.Ifdataare missina,thediamondwill
beincomplete

BRhlutani Ann,lexB] (coit 'd)
PRICES and GOVERNMENTFINANCE
Domestic prices

1977

(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1987

1997

1998

f
20

4.8
86

..
..

7.4
14 7

9.0
59

15r^
15
0

*

1

Governmenffinance
(% of GOP, includescurrent grants)
CulTentrevenue

0

Current budget balance

.

Ovierallsurplusideficit

.

.

18.5
06

19.9
3.3

-2 3

3.2

1997

1998

93

94

95

96

GDPdefator

97

98

-CPI

-

TRADE

1977

(U.S$millions)
Total exports (fob)

1987
29

Electrcity

.
..

Agric. Prods
Manufactures
Tctal imporns (cif)

.

101

Export and import levels (US$millions)

99
21
12

111
37

162

131

136

oI1

Fuel and energy
Capital goods

ID
92

93

94

95

I|
97

96

98

Exportprice index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms oftrade (1995=100)

E Imports

.Exports

BALANCEof PAYMENTS
1977
(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imnportsof goods and services

1987

1997

1998

}

Current account balance to GDP ratio I%)
.

50
144

121
183

146
203

Resource balance

..

-95

-62

--57

Net income
Ilet current transfers

-

0

0

0

-15

0

6

11

-20

-95

-56

-47

79

78

92

16

-22

-45

176

8.7

13.0

36 3

218
41 3

.

Current account balance
Financing items (net)

.

Changesin net reserves
Memo:
Reserves includinqooJd(US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, locaW/US$)
EXTERNAL DEBT

and

RESOURCE

.

-25
-

-35

FLOWS

1977

1987

1997

1998

j'US$ millions)
Total debt outstandingand disbursed
IBRD
IDA

0
0
0

40
0
9

121
0
23

120
0
24

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

0
0
0

1
0
0

7
0
0

9
0
0

I Compositon of total debt, 1998(USSmillions)

2

Compositionof net resource flows
Official grants

.

.

74

85

Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign directinvestment

0
o

16
O
0

14
-2
0

2
-2
0

0

0

0

0
5

0
1

14
1

0
5
0
5

0
1
0
1

0
1
0
0

.

Portfolio equity

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

0
0
0
0
0
0

Data on NationalAccounts and Debt is in calendaryear, all other data is in fiscal year
Development Economics

0 58

A - IBRD
B - IDA

5 - o0 er multilateral

E - Bilateral
F - Private

11117199

Annex B2

Bhutan - Selected Indicators of

Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects under implementationa
Average implementation period (years)b
Percent of problem projectsa, c
by number
by amount
Percent of projects at riska, d
by number
by amount
Disbursement ratio (%)e

1996

1997

1998

1999 1/

2
5.60

2
6.60

2
2.70

2
3.65

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
17.16

0.00
0.00
15.75

0.00
0.00
9.18

0.00
0.00
3.76

No
110.10
55.05

No
127.47
63.73

No
64.53
32.26

No
150.26
75.13

PortfolioManagement
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision resources (total US$)
Average Supervision ('000 US$/project)
Memorandum item
Projects evaluated by OED
by number
by amount (US$ millions)
Percent rated U or HU
by number
by amount
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Since FY80

Last five FYs

5
22.76

3
10.76

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY)
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementationprogress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio ImprovementProgram.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursedbalance of the Bank's portfolio at the beginning of the
year: investment projects only.
1/ As of November 1999.

Generated by the Operations Information System (OIS)

Annex B3
Page I of I

Bhutan - Bank Group Program Summary, FY 2000-2002
Proposed IDA Base-CaseLending Program,FY 2000-2002a

F:Y

Project

US$(AM)

2000 RURAL ACCESSROADS
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
Subtotal
Total, FY 2000-2002

10.0
12.0

Strategic rewardsb
(HIMIL)
M
M

Implementationb
risks (H/M/L)
L
L

22.0
22.0

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years. Based on the CAS, which emphasizes
knowledge transfers over resource transfers,no furithercredits are currently planned but will be considered if
requested by the Royal Governmentof Bhutan and if prepared, will come to the Board for approval under
nonnal procedures.
b. For each project, indicate whether the strategic rewards and implementationrisks are expected to be high (H),
moderate (M), or low (L).

Annex B4
Page I of I

Bhutan-Summary
Product

of Nonlending Services
FY

Cost (US$000)

Audiencea

Objectiveb

Recent completions
Country Economic Memorandum

FY97

89

Govt, Bank,
donor, public
dissemination

Knowledge
generation,
public debate,
problem
solving

Underwayin FY00
Country AssistanceStrategy

FY00

125

Govt, Bank,
donor, public
dissemination

Global EnvironmentFund

FY00-02

43

Health OperationalPlanning

FYOO-02

225

Govt, Bank,
donor
Govt, Bank,
donor

ForestryAAA

FYOO-02

180

Govt, Bank,
donor

Knowledge
generation,
public debate,
problem
solving
Problem
solving
Knowledge
generation,
public debate
Knowledge
generation,
problem
solving

Planned for FY00 and beyond1l
Post-SecondaryEducationStrategy

FYOO-02

210

Govt, Bank,
donor

PovertyAnalysis

FYO1-02

130

Govt, Bank,
donor, public
dissemination

Financial SectorStrategy

FYOO-02

180

Govt, Bank,
donor

PublicExpenditureAnalysis

FYOI-02

130

Govt, Bank,
donor

a.
b.
1/

Knowledge
generation,
problem
solving
Knowledge
generation,
public debate,
problem
solving
Knowledge
generation,
problem
solving
Knowledge
generation,
problem
solving

Government,donor, Bank, public dissemination.
Knowledge generation,public debate,problem-solving.
AAA assistanceis seen as open-endedin that it will respondto the needs of the governmentas and when needed, and will
therefore continuewhile it isjustified in terms of the knowledgetransfer needs of the government.

Annex B5
Page 1 of 1

Bhutan: Social Indicators
group
Sameregionlincome

Latest singleyear

1970-75
POPULATION
Totalpopulation,mid-year(millions)
Growthrate(% annualaverage)
Urbanpopulation(%of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1980485

1992-98

South
Asia

Lowincome

1,305
1.8
27.3

3,515
1.7
30.7

..

0.76
2.9
15.0

..

..

5.8

3.5

3.2

..

..

..

..

480
109

430
117

520
122

100
109

108
113

90

103

64
75
54

81
84
80

74

81

80
82

62
62
63

63
62
64

0.44
1.4
3.5

0.54
2.0

POVERTY
(%of population)
National headcount index

Urbanheadcountindex
Rural headcount index

INCOME
GNPper capita(US$)
Consumerpriceindex(1995=100)

..

Food price index (1995=100)

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

3.6

..

..

3.5

..

..

35

..

72

..

..

..

DISTRIBUTION
INCOIMEICONSUMPTION
Giniindex
Lowestquintile(%of incomeor consumption)
Highestquintile(% of incomeor consumption)
SOCIALINDICATORS
Publicexpenditure
Health(% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)

..

290
38

Grossprimaryschoolenrollmentrate
M%
of'agegroup)
Total
Male

Female
Accessto safewater
(%of population)
..

..

..

..

Rural
rate
Immunization
(%under12months)

..

..

Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)

..
..

43
52

..

..

84
87
38

46

..

66.0

..

..

..

..

65.9
66.1

Total
Urban

Lifeexpectancyat birth
(yearsJ
Total
Male
Female

Mortality
Infant(per thousandlivebirths)
S (perthousandlive births)
UJnder
Adult(15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000population)

Maternal(per1,000livebirths)

87
53

..

..

71
97

77
100

69
97

..

..

..

..

..

..

413
423

557
513

7.7

..

3.8

142

..

of Bhutan.
IndicatorsCD-ROM,WorldBankand RoyalGovernment
Sources:1999WorldDevelopment

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Bhutan - Key Economic Indicators
Actual

Indicator

1994

1995

Estimate

1996

1997

1998

Projected

1999

2000

2001

2002

National accounts (% of GDP)
Gross domestic product
Net indirect taxes

100
4

100
4

I00
3

100
3

100
5

100
5

100
5

100
5

100
5

Agriculture

40

39

39

36

36

36

36

36

35

Industry

28

33

32

35

35

35

35

35

38

Services

27

24

26

25

24

24

24

24

22

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment
Change in stocks

55
52
14
38
3

51
51
14
37
2

62
47
15
32
1

61
46
15
31
2

62
45
15
30
3

61
45
15
30
4

60
45
15
30
4

59
46
15
31
4

56
46
16
31
3

Exports of goods & services
Imports of goods & services

30
39

37
42

34
44

33
42

33
43

33
42

33
42

33
41

35
40

Gross domestic savings

45

49

38

39

38

40

40

41

44

Gross national savingsa

42

41

31

36

36

38

38

40

43

271
360

317
390

342
420

404
460

428
480

446
540

492
570

538
600

594
640

8.1
6.4

6.8
7.4

5.5
6.1

7.8
7.3

7.1
5.8

7.0
6.0

7.0
6.0

7.1
6.1

7.2
6.2

..

.

3.9

3.9

4.0

.

..

Memorandum items
GDP (US$ million at current prices)
GNP per capita (US$, Atlas method)
Real annual growth rates (%)
GDP at market prices
GDP at factor cost
Gross Domestic

Income

Real annual per capita growth rates (%)
GDP at market prices

.

.

..

.

.

4.7

4.0

5.0

3.7

2.4

Total consumption

.

.

.

..

Private consumption

..

..

.

..

.

4.1

Balance of Payments (millions of US$)
Exports ofgoods & services
Merchandise FOB
Imports ofgoods & services
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers

84
63
130
93
-47
7

90
70
132
97
-42
8

121
98
164
111
-43
6

121
99
183
131
-62
6

146
III
203
136
-57
11

146
109
243
165
-97
10

154
114
269
185
-115
11

163
121
299
209
-135
11

180
134
328
231
-148
11

17

18

43

18

39

38

19

7

3

Net foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissi

0
6
8
-2
-10

0
3
5
-2
-6

0
11
13
-2
-29

0
12
14
-2
-8

0
-1
2
-2
7

1
6
6
0
-4

2
6
5
0
0

2
3
3
0
9

3
0
0
0
14

Change in reservesb

-13

-14

-25

-22

-45

-4t

-26

Current accountbalance (incl. grants)

-21
-20
(Continued)

Annex B6
Page 2 of 2

Bhutan - Key Economic Indicators

(Continued)
Estimate

Actual

Indicator

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Projected

1999

2000

2001

2002

Memorandumitems
Resource balance (% of GDP)

-13.7

-22.2

-24.6

-26.2

-26.1

18.5
17.9
0.6
20.0
18.0

19.9
16.7
3.3
14.0
13.9

19.3
16.8
2.5
18.2
15.7

19.8
17.8
2.0
19.3
17.4

19.9
18.2
1.8
19.7
17.8

20.6
18.4
2.2
19.9
17.6

30.1
30.4

32.7
30.9

39.2
41.7

44.6
30.0

49.8
29.0

55.2
28.0

61.0
28.0

..

..

..

..

9.0
5.9

9.2
7.8

7.0
8.0

7.0
8.0

7.0
8.0

-17.6

-14.3

-13.0

21.2
19.8
1.5
20.6
..

20.3
20.6
-0.3
18.8
19.1

19.6
18.2
1.5
21.1
21.6

24.6
21.5

27.2
29.9

..

..

5.9
9.3

8.2
9.8

-166

Real annualgrowth rates (%)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)
Public finance (% of GDP)'
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current surplus (+) or deficit(-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing
Monetary indicators
M21GDP
Growth of M2 (%/)
Private sector credit growth / total credit g
Price indices (1980 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)d
Real Interest Rates
Consumer price index (% FY change)
GDP deflator (% CY change)

9.3
11.4

7.4
14.7

a. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
b. Includes use of IMF resources. Note that a minus sign (-) indicates an increase in assets.
c. Refers to Consolidated Central Government accounts
d. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.
Data on National Accounts and Debt is in calendar year; all other data is in fiscal year.
Due to large exchange rate devaluations in 1997 and 1998, there is a big jump in the 1999 GNP per capita projection.

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

Bhutan - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

1994

Totaldebtoutstandingand

Actual
1995
1996

Estimate
1998

1997

Projected
2000
2001

1999

2002

105

106

114

121

120

126

131

134

134

Net disbursements (US$mn)'

6

3

11

12

(1)

6

5

3

0

Total debt service (TDS)

8

10

7

7

9

7

7

7

7

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)'

(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators

(%)

TDO/XGS'

124.9

117.3

94.4

99.5

82.0

85.9

85.3

81.8

74.3

TDO/GDP

38.6

33.3

33.4

29.8

28.0

28.2

26.6

24.8

22.5

TDS/XGS

9.0

10.9

5.8

5.9

6.4

5.0

4.6

4.3

3.8

90.7

93.0

95.7

96.2

100.0

..

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

14.7

12.2

21.4

21.1

18.3

28.8

29.6

31.0

31.9

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0.0
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public
DS (%)C
IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)d
Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRDportfolio

(%)

..

..

..

..

..

..

21

23

23

23

24

25

29

33

36

Loans

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Equity and quasi-equity Ic

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

IDA TDO (US$m)d
IFC (US$m)

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (USSm)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c, Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

Annex B8
Page I of I

Status of Bank Group Operations in Bhutan
Operations Portfolio

Original
Project

Number

ID

Fiscal
Year

of Closed

GOB
ROYAL

in US$ Millions

Purpose

Borrower

Projects:

Active Projects
1994
BT-PE-9582
1998
BT-PE-9574

Amount

Between
Difference
expected
and actual
disbursemnents a/

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig

Frm

Rev'd

IBRD

IDA

0.00
0.00

5.40
13.69

0.00
0.00

3.41
12.81

3.03
2.43

.89
0.00

0.00

19.09

0.00

16.22

5.46

.89

GOV'T

FORESTRY Ill
EDUCATION II

OF BHUTAN

Active
(IBRD and IDA):
Disbursed
of which has been repaid:
Total, now held by IBRD and IDA:
:
Amount sold
:
Of which repaid
:
Total Undisbursed
Total

Projects
2.64
0.00
19.09
0.00
0.00
16.22

Closed

Projects
21 .00
.91
16.37
0.00
0.00
0.00

Dev Obj

Imp Prog

S
S

S
S

Total
23.64
.91
35 .46
0.00
0.00
16.22

to date minus actual disbursemenits to date as projected at appraisal.
a. Intended disbursements
S = satisfactory,
(HS = highly Satisfactory,
b. Following the FY94 Annual Review of Portfolio perfor=miice (ARPP), a letter based system was introduced
August 23, 1994.
(SecM94-901),
see proposed Improvements in Project and Portfolio Performance Rating Methodology
RU = highly unsatisfactory):

data

PSR
Rating

5

Total

Note
Disbursement

Last
Supervision

is updated

at the end

Generatedby the Operations Information System (OIS)

of the first week of the month.

U

unsatisfactory,

b/

AnnexB9
Page I of I

Bhutan-CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area

Country
performancea

Major issueb

Country
priorioyc

Bank priorityj

Reconciliation
of country and
Bank
priorttiesd

Poverty Reduction& Economic
Management
* Poverty reduction
* Economic policy

Good
Excellent

* Public sector
* Gender

Good
Good

HumanDevelopmentDepartment
* Education
* Health,nutrition& population

Excellent
Good



Good

Social protection

Environmentally& Socially
SustainableDevelopment
i
Ruraldevelopment

Fair

*

Environment

Excellent

*

Social development

Good

Ruralpoverty
Diversify
econ.
Cap.building
Women's
participation
in the formal
sector

High
High

High
High

High
Moderate

High
Moderate

Basic educ.
Improving
qualityof
healthcare &
pop. growth
Social
inclusionof
all groups

High
High

High
High

Moderate

High

More rural
access roads;
agric. services
Forest manag.
& conserv.
Decentral.&
participation

High

High

High

High

High

Moderate

Other donors

Ongoing
dialogue

Finance,Private Sector&
Infrastructure
* Financial sector

Fair

Liberalization

Moderate

High


*

Private sector
Energy & mining

Fair
Good

Moderate
High

Moderate
Moderate

*

Infrastructure

Good

Privatization
Hydropower
development
Road
maintenance,
rural mobility
& urban
planning

High

High

a.
b.
c.
d.

Ongoing
dialogue

Other donors

Use "excellent,""good," "fair," or "poor."
Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for poverty reduction, "rural poverty;" for education, "female secondary
completion;"for enviromment,"urban air pollution").
To indicate priority,use "low," "moderate,"or "high."
Give explanation,if priorities do not agree;for example,anotherMDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing
dialogue.

Template created by the Operations InformationSystem (OIS)

MAP SECTION

~~~~~~~~~~~

,
_

t

'29,"">e

-

z

.

.

@ H:(

M

t

_,p3.

00

~

~

~~~~

91 009,30

92-'00

BHUTAN

,,2

 E

M0

_.

.

'

'

.,

'

u

_,

4,

NATIONAL PROTECTED
AREAS

\.

L'~~~~~~A

Y
1

89 001

89 10

MM30

<*>

..............

> \ r' \

.1

.7-

+

tP

NATIONALNAL
CATECTEDPAREA
$;._....
AIA

NTOA
4

2

,4

;l

.,<

-

,{

._aF <_,-.

,RIVERS

HERTOWNS~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0
O
S
tAIRPORT
OTHR
TWN

~~~~~~~~~~~~~2

NTERNATIONALBOUNDARES~~~~~~~~~~~~EDROADS
UNPA
- - N P V E R AD

I T RN

TI

NA

B

UN

AR E

r

A fftt

.t

t >E

30467

~~~90

90'30

~~~~~~~~~~~28,30-

5000

,(

z

~~~~

FLEVATION IN MLTERs.

.c"4;

,,.

;

* tSAtnwns
E

|

F

<;;

<-

*

is~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~bo

900090ms910091
J*

y 0 vf

ai0

0 lingma:1hu

tPe~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0?o
0
3
4

stb

r9<L
-e->W~~~~~~~~~~~
(
<

JE
/

~

89900'~~~~~~~~~~~~

KJ

g

I

S

SANOCUP

(.N

|UTiqAN

HIfN

~ ~ ~
~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~SANCTUARY
~ K,U3e'
~ WILDLIFE
~~~~
Lh.t

6'Yongtn
T,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

