Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
For Official Use Only
Report No. 20327 MOZ

Public Disclosure Authorized

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT

OF THE

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

AND THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

TO THE

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS

ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP

FOR THE

REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE

May 8, 2000
Africa Region
This documenthas a restricteddistributionandmay be used by recipientsonlyin the performanceof
their official duties. Its contentsmay not otherwise be disclosedwithoutWorldBank authorization

The last Country Assistance Strategy was dated November 21, 1997
Currency Equivalents
Currency Unit= Metical (Mt)
US $1 = 15,717Mt (as of April 2000)

AAA
AMSCO
APDF
APL
CAR
CAS
CDF
DPT
EMPSO
ESAF
ESSP
ESW
FDI
FIAS
FRELIMO
GDP
GEF
HIPC
IDA
TFC
IMF
JSA
M&E
MIGA
NGO
NPV
PARPA
OED
PER
PODE
PRGF
PROAGRI
PRSP
RENAMO
SADC
SME
SWAP
TA
UN
UNAIDS
UNDP
WBI

Abbreviations and Acronyms
Analytic and Advisory Activities
Africa Management Services Company
Africa Project Development Facility
Adjustable Project Loan
Country Assistance Review
Country Assistance Strategy
Comprehensive Development Framework
Diphtheria, Pertussis, Tetanus
Economic Management and Private Sector Operation
Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility
Education Sector Strategic Program
Economic and Sector Work
Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Frente de Libertacao de Mocambique
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Highly Indebted Poor Countries
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Joint Staff Assessment
Monitoring and Evaluation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Non-Governmental Organization
Net Present Value
Action Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty
Operations Evaluation Department
Public Expenditure Review
Enterprise Development Program
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Programa Nacional Para o Desenvolvimento Agricola
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Resistencia Nacional de Mocambique
Southem African Development Comnunity
Small- and Medium-sized Enterprise
Sector Wide Approach
Technical Assistance
United Nations
United Nations AIDS Program
United Nations Development Programme
World Bank Institute

Vice Presidents:
Director:
Task Manager:

IDA
Callisto Madavo
Michael Sarris
Jehan Arulpragasam

IFC
Assaad Jabre
Cesare Calari
James Emery

FOR OMCUL USE ONLY
MOZAMBIQUE
COUNTRYASSISTANCESTRATEGY
TABLEOF CONTENTS

ExecutiveSummary

i

Introduction
I. Social,Political, and EconomicContext
and PoliticalContext
A. Historical

1
1

B. Poverty,SocialContextandIssues
C. EconomicContextand Issues
D. Governance

I
2
4
6

E. Medium-Term Economic Outlook and External Environment

7

II.

Developingthe Bank Group's Country AssistanceStrategy
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

The Contextfor Developingthis CAS
PerformanceUnderthe PreviousCAS
PortfolioManagement
LessonsLearned
StrategicOrientation

8
8
9
10
12
13

III. Mozambique's DevelopmentAgenda and the Bank Group's CAS

15

A. IncreasingEconomicOpportunitiesthroughPrivateSectorLed Growth
1. Strengtheningthe Private Sector Environment and the Financial Sector
2. DevelopingInfrastructure

16

3. Promoting Rural Development and Agriculture

4. EnsuringSoundEnvironmentalManagement_
and Employment
5. PromotingInnovation,Competitiveness
B. ImprovingGovernanceandEmpowerment_
1. Reformingthe PublicSector
2. Improvingthe Ruleof Law
C. IncreasingHumanCapabilities

16

17
18

19
20
21
21
22
22

1. Preventing and Reducing the Impactof HIV/AIDS

23

2. ImprovingHealth
3. ImprovingEducation
4. SocialProtection

23
24
24

IV. The Bank Group's Country Assistance Strategy: Implementation
A. AlternativeScenariosfor the LendingProgramand Non-LendingServices
B. DevelopmentPartnerships_
C. ProgramMonitoringandEvaluation
D. Risksand Risk Management

25
25
27
28
28

Conclusion

29

This documenthas a restricteddistriution and may be used by recipients only in the
pfIormance of thei official duties. Its contentsmay not othewise be disclosed without
WorldBank authoriation.

MOZAMBIQUE
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
Table of Contents

TEXT TABLES
Table 1
Table 2

Mozambique: Social Indicators
Outcomes Under the Last CAS

TEXT BOXES

Box 1
Box 2
Box 3
Box 4
Box 5
Box 6

HIV/AIDS in Mozambique
Sources of Mozambique's Recent Growth
Mozambique's Program of Liberalization and Economic Reform
Sector Wide Approaches (SWAPs) and Development Partnerships in
Mozambique
Mozambique: Country Assistance Review (CAR) 1998
CAS Non-lending Activities

ANNEXES

Annex A2:
Annex B 1:
Annex B2:

Annex D:
Annex E:

Mozambique at a Glance
Mozambique: Summaryof Proposed IDA Program, FY2001-2003, by Case
Mozambique: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and
Management
Mozambique: Bank Group Program Summary
Mozambique: IFC and MIGA Program, FY97-00
Mozambique: Summary of Non-lending Services
Mozambique: Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Mozambique: Key Economic Indicators
Mozambique: Key Exposure Indicators
Mozambique: Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
Mozambique: Statement of IFC Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Mozambique: Country Assistance Strategy Matrix FYO1-03
Mozambique: CAS Summary of Development Priorities
Mozambique: The Government's Program, its Poverty Reduction Strategy and
the CAS
Mozambique: CAS Consultations
Mozambique: A Framework for Development Partnership

Map:

Mozambique

Annex B3:
Annex B4:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:
Annex B7:
Annex B8:
Annex B9:
Annex B1O:
Annex C:

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE
EXECUTIVESUMMARY
The last World Bank Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Mozambique, covering fiscal years
1998 through 2000, was discussed by the World Bank Board in December 1997. The World
Bank Group CAS presented herewith covers the fiscal years 2001 to 2003. It supports the
Government of Mozambique's Five-Year Program and its interim Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP). In April 2000, the interim PRSP, which included the Government's Action Plan
for the Reduction ofAbsolute Poverty ( PARPA), was considered by the World Bank Board to be
an adequate framework for the enhanced HIPC Initiative decision point and a sound basis for the
future development of a full PRSP, scheduled for completion in March 2001. Mozambique
reached the completion point under the original HIPC framework in June 1999.
Mozambique has made enormous strides since the end of the war in 1992, when it was still
heavily reliant on food aid and its economy was centrally planned. Today the country is at peace,
a market economy is in place, and substantial progress has been made on a challenging reform
agenda, all leading to a growth rate among the highest in the world. Even so, the lives of most
Mozambicans continue to be characterized by poverty, illiteracy, and disease, in a country which
continues to be one of the poorest in the world.
The challenge for Mozambique today - and the focus of the Government's program and emerging
poverty reduction strategy - is to sustain broad-based, private sector led growth and ensure that
its benefits are broadly distributed and reach the poor. For the implementation of an effective
anti-poverty strategy, institutions, norms and attitudes need to change so that governance is
improved and people are empowered to initiate and control the actions that affect their lives.
Public sector capacity to deliver basic services and enforce a consistent legal and regulatory
framework supportive of private sector development remains limited; physical infrastructure is
inadequate; and the financial sector is still developing. The domestic private sector also faces
significant challenges in acquiring the skills, experience, and innovation needed to exploit new
sources of growth and to compete successfully in the world economy. Despite progress on many
fronts, more needs to be done to increase private sector skills, productivity, and competitiveness;
to strengthen and diversify foreign direct investment; to integrate under-served areas with high
growth potential into the national economy; to continue to improve economic management; and
to create economic opportunities for all, including the poor. Action is also needed to control
HTV/AIDS,which now constitutes the greatest single threat to development.
Preparations of this CAS involved extensive consultations with a wide variety of groups,
including government officials, donors, NGOs, trade unions, religious leaders, academics,
joumalists, the private sector, and the rural poor. These groups largely agreed that the highest
priorities on Mozambique's development agenda over the next few years should be to improve
the quality of human resources (especially linked to labor needs), expand capacity in public
administration, increase support to rural development, better assist the private sector, expand
infrastructure (including roads, electricity and telecommunications), and improve health care.

-

11-

These are long-term goals with short-term implications for Mozambique's policies and public
spending choices and for this CAS.

Povertyreductionis the overallgoal ofthe Governmentand of the BankGroupin Mozambique.
In supportingthe Government'sprogram,the CASis designedto help(i) increaseeconomic
opportunifies, (ii) improve governance and empowerment, and (iii) improve human capabilities.
These are the pillars of the Government's new Five Year Program (2000-2004) and of this CAS.

A key objectiveof this CAS is to improvethe focus,effectiveness,and monitoringof poverty
reductionefforts,especiallyby helpingthe Governmentto operationalizeits povertyreduction
strategy. Mostnew IDA lending,as wellas IFC investmentsand advisoryservices,will focus on
increasingeconomicopportunitieswhich,throughgrowthpromotionand participation,is likely
to have the greatest impact on reducing poverty, even in the short-term. IDA lending will

contributeto developinginfrastructure(particularlyin the ruralareas),improvingthe
environmentfor privatesectoractivities,and promotinginvestment,innovation,competitiveness
and employment.In supportof this agendaIFCwillprovideadvisoryassistance,capacity
building,and financingto developprivateinfrastructure,buildthe financialsector,and support
smalland medium-scaleenterprises(SMEs),as wellas foreigninvestors,in developingkey
sectorswhereMozambiqueis competitive.New IDAlendingunderthis CAS willalso be
directedto improvinggovernanceand empowerment,as limitedadministrativecapacityand
effectivenessis currentlya primaryconstraintto reform,growth,and development.Operationsin
this area will focuson improvingpublicsectormanagementand capacityas wellas strengthening
the Government'sdecentralizationefforts;this will promoteempowermentas wellas the
effectivenessof programsaddressingpovertyreduction. Supportwill alsobe givento improving
the legal andjudicial system,with a viewto facilitatingprivatesectorledgrowth. NewIDA
lendingin supportof improvinghumancapabilitieswillbe limited,becausetherealreadyis
substantialIDAsupportfrom ongoingprograms(particularlyin deliveringbasichealthand
education)as wellas from plannedBankanalyticalservices. IFC willsupportprivateproviders
of healthand educationservices. TheBankwill also providesupportto the Government'snew
programto fightHIV/AIDS.
Lendingunderthe base caseover FYO1-03will rangeup to the indicativeIDA allocationof
US$540millionbut is likelyto be belowthis allocationas a consequenceof IDA's strategic
decisionto matchlendingwith the country'sabsorptivecapacityand the availabilityof grant
fundsfrom otherdonors. Lendingunderthe highcasewill rangeup to US$655millionand is
contingentprimarilyon increasedabsorptivecapacity,implementationof relatedpublicsector
reforms,and progressin implementingthe povertyreductionstrategy. Thelow case,which
would resultfrom significantdeteriorationin governance,economicmanagement,or
implementationof the povertyreductionstrategy,wouldinvolvelendingat aboutone-thirdof the
indicativeIDA allocation. The BankGroup's businessstrategypresentedin this CAS is
complementedby an extensivecomplementof advisoryand analyticalactivitiesto Mozambique.
Triggersincludeperformancewith respectto the portfolio,the povertyreductionstrategy,the
publicsectorreformprogram,the HIV/AIDSprogram,and variouseconomicreforms(including
demonopolizationof the energy,transport,and telecommunicationsectorsfor the high case,and
policyreversalsin the areasof privatization,the financialsector,and trade policyfor the low
case). IFC's investments,with a currentportfolioof aboutUS$150million,are expectedto
increasesubstantiallyoverthe CAS period,so that Mozambiquewill remainone of the
Corporation'slargestportfoliosin Africa.
Mozambiqueis a high-rewardcountry,but the strategyalso carriesseveralmedium-termrisks.
Thereis a politicalriskthat the opposition'sdissatisfactionwith the 1999electionresults,
drawingon a feelingamongsomegroupsof civil societythat popularparticipationin decision-

- iii

-

making is unduly limited, could lead to political paralysis and possibly civil strife. The
perception that growth is not sufficiently benefiting most people, or not sufficiently benefiting
Mozambican businesses and workers, could result in protectionist and distortive regulations and a
more general backsliding on reform. The growth of HIV/AIDS could substantially increase
poverty. Efforts to improve public sector capacity may not yield results quickly enough to
improve absorptive capacity and program implementation. Adverse developments in neighboring
countries, which are increasingly linked to Mozambique, can dampen growth prospects. In
addition, climatic variations and natural disasters can adversely affect agricultural productivity
and growth and limit poverty reduction. The Bank recognizes these risks and is working to
mitigate them. To this end, it is supporting decentralization and good governance, supporting the
participatory development of a poverty reduction strategy, improving awareness of Government
work on poverty reduction and its achievements, and better disseminating analytical work on the
Bank's own poverty-reduction activities, the impact of policy choices, and the benefits of
strategic thinking on competitiveness. The Bank is also supporting implementation of the
Government's HIV/AIDS Plan to help limit the spread of the disease. Trade diversification and
active participation in regional organizations will help mitigate the risk that regional crises will
impede Mozambique's growth; and efforts to identify, reduce and transfer risks associated with
hydro-meteorological hazards should provide better protection against natural disasters.
The following issues are suggested for Board discussion:

-

Is the World Bank Group's proposed support to the Government's evolving poverty reduction
strategy appropriate and adequate?

-

Is the evolving division of labor appropriate among the Government, the Bank and
Mozambique's other external partners?

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE
INTRODUCrION
1.
Mozambique has made tremendous strides in the past few years. A sound economic
reform program has been implemented, with substantial support from external partners. The
transition from war to peace and from a central planning system to a market economy is reaping
results. Mozambique's growth rate has accelerated and last year was among the highest in the
world. Heavily reliant on food aid just a decade ago, the country now produces almost enough
food to feed itself. Mozambique ranks first among 20 countries on the "optimism index" in a
survey of business people active in Africa.
2.
But alongside this good news are daunting challenges which face the nation, its people,
and its partners. Mozambique is still one of the poorest countries in the world. Poverty,
isolation, illiteracy, and disease characterize the everyday life of most Mozambicans, who often
feel that the benefits of growth are not reaching them. The country is also vulnerable to floods
and droughts. Most recently, in February and March 2000, devastating floods killed 700 people,
displaced 250,000 and put about two million people into severe economic difficulties.
Mozambique's growth and poverty reduction strategy is based on environmentally sustainable
and inclusive private sector growth. But the public administration remains weak, despite
significant reform and improvement, and it continues to face challenges of capacity and resources
to deliver basic infrastructure and services and to properly enforce a consistent legal and
regulatory framework essential for private sector development. The emerging domestic private
sector needs access to infrastructure and financing, and must also acquire the skills, experience,
and innovation required to exploit new sources of growth and to compete successfully in the new
world economy. Finally, Mozambique's young democracy remains fragile, and underlying
political tensions continue to task nation building and threaten national stability.
3.
The challenge facing Mozambique today is how to sustain growth and reduce poverty.
Many important economic reforms have been completed, but others are needed to increase private
sector skills, productivity, and competitiveness and create economic opportunities for all,
including the poor. Infrastructure has been built to support service delivery and the growth of
markets, but more needs to be done to integrate under-served areas with high growth potential.
Institutions as well as norms and attitudes need to change so that governance is improved and
people are empowered to initiate and control the actions that affect their lives. These are longterm goals with short-term implications for Mozambique and for this CAS. Increasing economic
opportunities, enhancing governance and improving human capabilities are key actions for
reducing poverty in Mozambique, and this CAS outlines the Bank Group's contribution to this
enormous endeavor.

I. SoCIAL,POLITICAL,
ANDECONOMICCONTEXT
A. Historical and Political Context
4.
Since the end of the civil war, Mozambicans have made tremendous progress in
reforming their country. The transition from a socialist command economy to a democratic
market economy is largely complete. The Frente de LibertaVao de Mogambique (Frelimo),

- 2which governed Mozambique during the war, retained control of government through national
elections in 1994 and 1999, transforming itself in the process from a socialist to a market-oriented
democratic party. The main opposition party, Resistencia Nacional de Mo9ambique (Renamo),
which came close to winning the December 1999 elections, has generally supported
Mozambique's political and economictransition, though there continues to be political tension.
Government policies are under intense scrutiny and often the subject of contentious public debate.
B. Poverty, Social Context and Issues
5.
Per capita income in Mozambique, at $230 in 1999, is below the average for sub-Saharan
Africa ($480) and the low income group ($520). The Human Development Index, an index of
income, education and life expectancy, ranks Mozambique 169th out of 174 countries. Key social
indicators for Mozambique continue to be below the averages of Sub-Saharan Africa and those of
low-income countries as a whole (see Table 1).
Table1.: Mozambique:SocialIndicators
Mozambique Sub SaharanAfrica
GNP per capita(atlasmethod,US$)
230
480
Poverty: nationalheadcountindex
69
Life expectancy(at birth,years)
47
51
Infantmortality(per 1,000live births)
134
91
Childmalnutrition(% of childrenunder 5)
41
Accessto safewater (%of population)
24
47
Illiteracy(% of populationage 15+)
60
42
Gross primaryenrollment
71
77
Male
79
84
Female
60
69
HIV/AIDSprevalencerate
14.5
7

Low Income
520
63
69
74
32
108
113
103

6.
A 1996-97 Household Survey on Living Conditions, the first integrated survey
undertaken nationally, shows that poverty is pervasive. About seven in ten Mozambicans
reported consumption below the national poverty line (US$0.40 per day). One-third of the
population is considered to be 'ultra poor', with consumption expenditure 60 percent or less of
the poverty line.
7.
About 80 percent of Mozambique's poor live in rural areas; about 70 percent of the rural
population is poor; and over 90 percent of rural adults work in agriculture. There is significant
regional variation in poverty. Sofala, Tete, and Inhambane have the highest poverty incidences,
but 40 percent of the poor live in densely populated Nampula and Zambezia. Rural households,
poor or non-poor, typically have low access to services. In 1996-97, the mean distance of rural
households to a market was 16 km and to a health center 29 km. Poor households are also larger
and have higher dependency ratios than the non-poor. Nearly all rural households have land, but
land per capita is higher for the non-poor, chiefly because household size is lower. In urban
areas, the non-poor tend to be wage-laborers employed in commerce, services, and the public
sector, whereas the poor declare themselves to be self-employed or unemployed.
8.
Widespread poverty is reflected in Mozambique's social indicators (see Table 1). The
poor and ultra-poor tend to miss more days of work from illness than the non-poor, and are less
likely to seek treatment. Lack of health care, hygiene, and access to safe water and sanitation
allows preventable disease to flourish. Malaria, measles, diarrhea, and acute respiratory
infections remain leading killers of children. HIV/AIDS, having already infected about 14.5
percent of the adult population, has serious implications for Mozambique's development

- 3prospects (see Box 1). Though poverty explains some of the differences in health and education
outcomes, these differences correlate more closely with gender and rural-urban divisions.
Box I.: HIVIAIDS in Mozambique
The civil war ended in 1992, but the war againstAIDS continues, and now constitutes the greatest
single threat to Mozambique 's development. In Africa most carriers oftheAIDS virus will die of
AIDS-related illness within ten years. In Mozambique, as elsewhere, the HIVprevalence rate is
rising exponentially, and has already reached about 14.5 percent in the adult population. The virus
is no longer localized in high-riskgroups but affects the whole population. The overallpicture is
bleak. Health services are beginning to be overloaded with AIDS-related cases, diverting resources
away from other serious illnesses. As a result, hard-wongains in life expectancy and infant and child
mortality are being reversed AIDS-related deaths are now projected to make as many as 800,000
Mozambican children orphans by 2002. Moreover, adults die ofAIDS-related illnesses such as
tuberculosis during what should be their most productiveyears. Multi-country evidence suggests that
at HlVprevalence rates of 15percent, GDP growth per capita is reduced by about 0.8 percent per
annum, and at 25 percent, as in Zimbabwe, growth per capita is reduced by 1.5 percent. In
Botswana,for example, despite rapid growth, HIVIAIDS has brought poverty back to levels last seen
ten years ago. Mozambique is vulnerable to similar reversals. Action is needed now, at all levels of
society, to prevent and control the spread of HIV.

9.
Food insecurity, prevalent during the war, continues to contribute to malnutrition.
Though Mozambique has nearly achieved food self-sufficiency, the average rural household still
suffers through a pre-harvest hungry period of several months per year, and malnutrition remains
widespread. In 1996-97, with 64 percent of Mozambicans living in food-insecure households, 43
percent of children were stunted and 6 percent wasted. Even though the degree of market
participation has increased since 1993, in 1996 only half of all agricultural households sold any
part of their output.
10.
Mozambican girls and women continue to do less well than boys and men. The maternal
mortality rate, at 1,100, is high. There is poor access to health services in general and poor
quality of services directed specificallyto women. Literacy rates among women (particularly in
rural areas) are much lower than among men, with negative implications for agricultural
productivity and child health and nutrition. While access to education is increasing, the gross
primary enrollment rate among females (60 percent) is still much lower than among males (79
percent). One in five households is headed by a female; these households have less adult labor
and consequently cultivate less land, and they participate less frequently in paid employment.
Although remittances from absent family members make these households on average no worseoff than male headed households, households without remittances are typically worse-off.
Households with male adults working elsewhere are also more at risk of HIV/AIDS. Family law
in Mozambique also discriminates against women. A married woman has limited rights to make
independent economic decisions or enjoy full ownership of assets, and a widow's rights to
inheritance are secondary to males in the family. Finally, domestic violence against women is a
hidden issue, which requires a legal response. To address these issues, the Government, in
coordination with civil society, is implementing the National Post-Beijing Plan of Action
(NBPA), and key sector ministries have included gender in their sector plans.
11.
The national poverty assessment, recent analytical work, and the interim Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) highlight important policy implications for a poverty reduction
strategy based on an analysis of the determinants of poverty:

-4*
*
*
*
*

Accelerate economic growth, particularly in agriculture and rural areas.
Improve educational levels, particularly among girls and women.
Improve the productivity of small-holder agriculture, through simple technology and input
improvements.
Generate off-farm employment opportunities.
Increase the market integration of small-holder households, mainly through increasing
infrastructure.

C. Economic Context and Issues
12.
Economic Performance and Policies. Mozambique's recent economic performance,
buoyed by good agricultural seasons, has been impressive, though it represents a recovery from
very low base levels. GDP growth averaged 5.5 percent annually between 1987 and 1996 and 11
percent annually between 1997 and 1999. Inflation dropped sharply from almost 50 percent in
1996 to low single digits today. At the same time, investor confidence has grown. Between 1996
and 1998, consumption grew by an average of 9 percent annually, and investment by 13 percent
annually. Merchandise exports increased by 42 percent from 1996 to 1998 as a result of increased
export volumes and higher commodity prices for prawns, cashews and cotton. Foreign direct
investment (FDI) has also increased, and, as a result of large investment associated with the
Mozal aluminum smelter, it reached US$213 million in 1998. At about 3.3 percent of GDP over
1996-98, FDI is high relative both to the size of the economy and to other African countries.
These are indications that foreign investor confidence is growing rapidly and FDI sources are
becoming more diverse.
Box 2.: Sourcesof Mozambique'sRecentGrowth
Mozambique's economicgrowthhas beenled by smallholderagriculture.Valueaddedin the agriculture
and livestocksectorgrewat more than 9 percentperyear after 1996,fueled by expansionin land under
cultivation.Agriculturalgrowthhas beenparticularlystrongin the northand center. Theservicessector
has alsogrown well, at 6 percentper annumon average,buoyedby revivalin transport,tourism,and the
financial sector. Slowerto recoverhavebeenlarge-scalecommercialagricultureand industry.Many
companieshavegone throughprotractedprivatizationand restructuringprocessesand havesuffered
marketlosses. However,afirm surveyundertakenin 1997showedthatmanufacturing,concentratedin a
few sectors(food,drinks,and tobacco;chemicals;and minerals),experiencedrobustgrowthof almost 40
percentannuallybetween1995and 1997. In termsof salesgrowth,firms outsideMaputoappearto be
growingas rapidlyasfirms in the capital,despitelowerqualityinfrastructure.Thisgrowthis mostlydue
to increasedcapacityutilization,whichaveragedabout50percent (comparedto 10 to 30percentin 1989),
ratherthan expansion.Employmentlevelsin aggregatehaveremainedstable. All three types offirms
surveyed(privatefirms founded before1991,newentrants,and privatizedfirms)had strongaverage
growthrates in sales,but employmentgrowthin privatizedfirmshad stagnatedor declined It is the new
entrantsthat havebeencreatingmostof the newjobs in manufacturing;newfirms recordeda 6 percent
averagerate of employmentgrowthfrom 1992through1997.
13.
Mozambique's strong performance has been, and continues to be, supported by
substantial foreign assistance. Since 1986,the Government has received US$8 billion in external
aid, or almost US$600 million per annum (currently about 17 percent of GDP). In recent years,
50 percent of government spending and 75 percent of public investments were financed by
external aid. These aid flows allowed Mozambique to maintain consumption levels while
increasing public investments needed to expand the economy in a post-war period where financial
demands for reconstruction exceeded potential revenues from a debilitated economy. High levels
of aid have allowed Mozambique to focus its fiscal policy on stimulating growth while reducing
domestic financial imbalances only gradually. From 1987 to 1998, expenditures increased by
four percent annually, with revenues growing slightly more.

14.
A sound program of economic reform and management - based on privatization,
financial sector reform, investment promotion, trade and price liberalization, sound
macroeconomic management and substantial public investment - has underpinned Mozambique's
ongoing economic transformation and growth record (see Box 3). While Mozambique's recent
accomplishments have been impressive, this success is fragile: the local private sector has
limited market experience and has yet to find avenues for sustained growth; the financial sector
remains inefficient with limited ability to finance investment; employment creation needs to be
accelerated; public sector institutions are weak, including in their capacity to enforce and regulate
the new market economy; the country remains dependent on aid and vulnerable to external and
weather-related shocks; and the reform program is subject to protectionist sentiment within
segments of civil society, particularly in urban areas.
Box 3.: Mozambique'sProgramof LiberalzationandEcononicReform
Privatization:Governmenthas restructuredorprivatizedover 1,200companies.
Financialsectorreform: The Governmentcreateda centralbank;adoptedregulationson licensing,
capitaladequacy,and exposurelimits;and sold the twostate-ownedbanks. Theprivatefinancialsector
now includeselevenbanks,a leasingcompany,and seven otherfinancialinstitutions.
Investmentpromotion. The Governmentestablisheda progressiveinvestmentregime,promotedfreetrade
zones to encouragemanufacturedexports,transformedthe InvestmentPromotionCenterfrom a regulatory
to a promotionagency,and reducedadministrativered tapefor investors.
Sound macroeconomicmanagement:Monetarycontrol,and the saleof the twostatebanks,brought
macroeconomicstability.In 1996,the Governmenttransferredcustomsmanagementto a private
company;in 1999it introduceda valueaddedtax (VAT);and it is now implementinga new budget
frameworklawand a rollingmedium-termexpenditureframework(fMTEF).
Exchange, trade,andprice reforms: Mozambiquetodayhas oneof the most opentraderegimesin
southernAfrica. Theexchangerate regimehas beenliberalizedand importlicensesabolished Prices
have beenliberalizedexceptfor afew consumergoods.
Public expenditure: Gradualfiscaladjustmentin a contextof improvedrevenuesand sustainedaidhas
enabledMozambiqueto increasespendingon roads,healthand education.Today55percentof the 27,000
km roadnetworkis in good orfair condition,and only 10percentsometimesimpassable,comparedto 10
and 30 percentrespectivelyin 1992. From 1994to 1998,the Governmentnearlydoubledits share of
currentexpenditureon health (from10to 18percent) andeducation(from5 to I 0 percent). Healthcare
has improvedas over 300first-levelfacilitieshavebeenrehabilitatedor constructed,oftenin remoterural
areas,and aboutnine in ten reliablycarryessentialdrugsand medicalsupplies, In addition,over 3,000
lowerprimaryschoolshavebeenrehabilitatedor constructedover the 1990s,doublingthe numberthat
existedat the end of the war.
15.
Economic Prospects: Mozambique benefits from a variety of agroecological and other
natural resources which, if sustainably managed, provide a good basis for growth. Agricultural
growth is key to ensuring that growth translates directly into poverty reduction. Short and
medium term prospects for agricultural growth are good: only 15 percent of arable land is
currently cultivated. Other sources can also be exploited. The 2,700 km coastal zone has many
unique habitats, offering opportunities for wildlife and tourism developments. Large perennial
rivers offer significant prospects for irrigating agriculture and developing hydroelectric power.
Substantial gas and coal reserves have been found, and prospecting continues for petroleum and
mining. Tourism, mining, agroprocessing, and light manufacturing can generate significant
employment. Attracting foreign investment will be important to this effort. Large investments
exploiting the transportation corridors or exporting energy (gas, coal or electricity) or energyintensive manufactured products (iron, steel and aluminum) are under active consideration by
large international companies. Here the challenge will be to develop linkages, especially to the
growing service sector, to maximize the benefits for the poor; this is likely to occur primarily
through spin-off effects, such as employeetraining, connected infrastructure developments, and
improved Government tax revenues that can subsequently be channeled into poverty-reducing

-6activities. Substantial and permanent poverty reduction will also require sustained growth in
value added and in jobs created within the Mozambican economy. To grow, over the medium- to
long-term Mozambican firms will need to become increasingly competitive in evolving world
markets, capitalizing on knowledge and innovation.
D. Governance
16.
Mozambique has consolidated some gains in governance in recent years. An active
multiparty parliament debates national policy; freedom of the press is respected; and core labor
standards, which include the rights to free association and collective bargaining and prohibit
discrimination, are protected in the labor law. National elections were held in December 1999 as
planned, and though the opposition initially denounced the results as fraudulent, the elections
were declared free and fair by international observers.
17.
Red tape and associated corruption continue to impede business. A 1996 study by IFC
and the Foreign Investment Advisory Service of the Bank Group (FIAS) detailed the
administrative red tape facing investors. An inter-ministerial working group established to
address those problems has since achieved significant improvements; however, obstacles remain.
A recent firm-level survey found that governance problems - primarily related to onerous
regulations, weak enforcement, and bureaucratic burden - were the most important problems
faced by businesses. Excessive bureaucracy and poor enforcement related to a weak judiciary
branch create incentive and opportunity for corruption. This is exacerbated by low levels of pay
among public sector staff, who may therefore seek additional sources of income, as well as low
levels of training, which hinder their ability to efficiently administer government systems. Firms
acknowledge that, at least in customs, progress has been made in this regard through introducing
private management. With regard to public sector accountability, the Administrative Tribunal
(the supreme audit body) is constitutionally independent but, like the Inspector General (the
Government's internal auditor), lacks the resources to be an effective monitor. Reform and
capacity building efforts in the areas of budget management, accounting, and auditing are aiming
to address the areas of economic governance, and implementation of a recent budget law has
resulted in some improvements in the transparency and management of the budgetary process.
18.
Taking a broader view of the governance area, the Government is refocusing its activities
on the core areas of public sector responsibility and moving from being a direct provider of
services to a facilitator in areas where private initiative is likely to improve efficiency. The
Government has started to decentralize public functions, most notably in 1998 by establishing 33
municipal governments, to improve public services by bringing political accountability down to
the local level. It is also deconcentrating decision-making responsibility to make government
bodies more responsive to local needs. It has undertaken civil service reform, decompressing
salaries in 1998, implementing a revised career stream and remuneration system in 1999, and
initiating various capacity-building programs. The emphasis now is on broadening and
deepening the reforms required to manage a market economy. This is necessarily a medium and
long term agenda.
19.
Much remains to be done. Changes in institutions continue to lag legislative changes,
and changes in the norms and attitudes of civil servants lag further. Although the civil service is
learning that its role in a market economy is to assist the private sector in every way that it can
without impeding competition, its capacity to fulfil this role is constrained by low education,
limited private sector experience, and low morale resulting from poor wages and the uncertainty
that reform inevitably engenders. The size of Mozambique's civil service relative to population
is low by African standards; hence the state is thinly spread and has difficulty in delivering
services and enforcing legislation in every district. Ancillary functions remain weak (e.g. there

- 7are only 500 legal practitioners and no internationally certified accountants in the country).
Continued weakness in the public sector and an expansion in corruption could compromise
economic growth and constrain service delivery by creating bureaucratic bottlenecks, deterring
private investment, and undermining public confidence in the reform process. Thus, improving
governance is an important part of Mozambique's poverty reduction strategy.
E. Medium-Term Economic Outlook and External Environment
20.
Medium-Term Economic Outlook: Sustaining the current level of broad-based
economic growth while, simultaneously, keeping inflation low and improving the delivery of
social services, are central elements of the Government's strategy to reduce poverty in the
medium term. Although the growth target for 2000 has been revised down as a result of the recent
floods, prospects remain sound that Government can achieve its objectives of annual GDP growth
rates in excess of 7 percent and inflation rates below 5 to 7 percent over the medium-term (200 12003), assuming no further adverse exogenous shocks and continued satisfactory implementation
of the reform program (Annex B6). Achieving these growth objectives is expected to reduce the
national poverty headcount index from 69 percent in 1997 to about 60 percent in 2004, as
targeted in the Government's interim PRSP. Success will require Government to continue to
maintain a prudent monetary and fiscal stance, improve the environment for the expansion of
private sector activities and investment, and foster the development of a strong export base
through liberal investment and trade policies. Domestic fiscal balances will gradually be reduced,
but improvements in revenues in the context of a growing economy, together with sustained
external aid, will permit continued expenditures in support of poverty reduction efforts. While
external aid will remain necessary, Mozambique should be able to reduce its aid dependency in
the coming years. Under this base case economic scenario, it is expected that small-holder
agriculture will expand, large-scale commercial agriculture will begin to revive, and
manufacturing will grow across all sectors and in non-traditional areas, increasing employment.
At the same time, deeper regulatory reform should encourage further investment in energy,
transportation, and telecommunications; and megaprojects such as Mozal should remain on track
to begin productive activities, further increasing and diversifying the export base. Mozambique's
medium-term prospects, while favorable, are subject to risks; these are discussed in paragraph 79.
21.
External Debt, Debt Sustainability, and the HIPC Initiative: In December 1998
Mozambique's external public debt totaled about US$6 billion (US$2.7 billion in net present
value (NPV) terms). Of this, 49 percent was owed to Paris Club bilateral creditors, 37 percent to
multilateral creditors (of which 55 percent was owed to IDA), and 14 percent to non-Paris Club
and commercial creditors. Debt service payments amounted to about 20 percent of export
earnings on average. The NPV of debt-to-export ratio was 538 at end-1998. In June 1999,
Mozambique reached the HIPC completion point and received debt relief amounting to about
US$3.7 billion (US$1.716 billion in NPV terms), with IDA granting relief amounting to US$975
million (US$381 million in NPV terms). Enhanced HIPC debt relief, which Mozambique is
expected to obtain at the completion point in 2001 (the decision point was reached in April 2000),
will amount to about US$254 million more in NPV terms, bringing the cumulative assistance
under the HIPC Initiative to US$1.97 billion in NPV terms and lowering the NPV of debt-toexport ratio to 150 and the debt service-to-export ratio to below 5 percent from 2002 onward. In
NPV terms, the debt remaining after relief is about one-fourth of the US$2.7 billion that would
have been owed without HIPC Initiative assistance. This will substantially improve
Mozambique's external viability and sustainabilityand, as debt service savings are directed to
poverty reduction, it will also bring benefits to the poor.
22.
External Financing: Continued and stable support in the form of bilateral and
multilateral grants and credits, with debt relief, will be important in enabling Mozambique to

-8meet its medium-term development objectives. At an international donors' conference in Rome
in May 2000, Mozambique's external partners pledged US$453 million to finance the costs of
emergency reconstruction following the severe floods in February and March. Financing needs
for the Government's new five-year program will be discussed at a Consultative Group meeting
planned for June 2000. Reliance on aid flows is projected to decline gradually over the next
decade, as strong economic growth and increased levels of private sector financing diminish aid's
share of GDP and of the budget.
23.
Regional Context: Though its economy is more inwardly oriented than its neighbors',
Mozambique's dependence on regional trade and investment flows is high, and developments in
the region can significantly influence the pace and sustainability of its development. Trade flows
with South Africa are the most important, representing 15 percent of total exports and 53 percent
of imports in 1997. Mozambique in December 1999 ratified the SADC trade protocol, which
aims to gradually establish a regional free trade area. Mozambique is also likely to join a regional
trade guarantee facility covering Eastern and Southern Africa. With political stability and greater
investor confidence, Mozambique has also become an attractive destination for South African and
more recently other regional investors, such as Mauritius.
Regional cooperation is slowly emerging in energy, transportation, and water resource
24.
management. FDI concentrated around the Maputo corridor, and rail and port rehabilitation in
the Beira and Nampula corridors, will increase economic interdependence between Mozambique
and its westerly neighbors. Energy reserves near Cahora Bassa and planned megaprojects based
on coal and hydroelectricity can result in further integration as the energy is sold directly to
foreign markets (particularly South Africa and Zimbabwe). Mozambique is a central member of
the South African Power Pool, as a key supplier of electricity and owner of the main trunk
transmission line, and interconnection with Malawi and Tanzania is currently under
consideration. Regional approaches to water resource management are also needed. Since the
1970s, upstream riparians have diverted much of the yield of several cross-border rivers for
irrigation and other uses, creating a need for Mozambique to negotiate a more equitable water
distribution to satisfy its own requirements. Regional cooperation on watershed management and
hydrologic and climatic monitoring is also essential for natural disaster mitigation.

II.

STRATEGY
DEVELOPING
THEBANKGROUP'SCOUNTRYASSISTANCE

A. The Context for Developing this CAS
25.
Mozambique stands at an importantjuncture in its development. Its first elected post-war
Govemment has completed its term and much of the economic reform agenda, set out in its fiveyear plan, has been completed. Over the period in which this CAS was developed, the new
formulated and presented to the National Assembly a new five-year Government
Govemrnment
Program (2000-2004), focused on the reduction of poverty, and published its accompanying
Action Plan for the Reduction of Absolute Poverty (PARPA) as part of its interim PRSP. The
PARPA is expected to evolve, through extensive consultation, into a full PRSP. (See Annex C).
This CAS is designed to support the Government program and the emerging national
26.
dialogue on Mozambique's priorities for poverty reduction. It was developed through an
extensive consultative process, fully described in Annex D. The CAS process was designed to
initiate a wider Government-led dialogue to forge a common long-term vision and development
framework for Mozambique. There is an emerging consensus regarding the importance of
defining the country's development agenda, increasing government ownership, and fostering
strong partnerships among government, donors, civil society, and the private sector. These are
some of the principles of the Comprehensive Development Framework (CDF), and they are

-9critical to achieving Mozambique's poverty reduction goals. They have been discussed with
Mozambique's key development partners with a view to jointly articulating Government
priorities and mapping out the current development activities of the Government, donors, NGOs
and the private sector (see Annex E) so as to improve coordination and coverage of the country's
development agenda in the future. Further steps in this process will build on Mozambique's
accumulated experience with four ongoing sector wide approaches (SWAPs) to strengthen
existing partnerships (Box 4).
Box 4.: Sector Wide Approaches (SWAPs) and Development Partnerships in Mozanbique
A SWAP is an agreement between the Government and its development partners concerning sector
policies and strategies, resourceprojections to support strategy implementation, and common
management arrangements using national administrative systems to thefullest extent possible.
Implementation of IDA-supportedprojects in health, education, agriculture and roads has been, or
soon will be, integrated into SWAPs. Withfourteen or more donors represented in each SWAP, most
large donors have moved away from supporting discrete free-standing projects in these sectors. This
has resulted in greater organization and complementarity in each sector, lesser demands on
Government capacity, and improvedfiscal management (as the approach enables the Government to
incorporate allfundingfor each sector into the national budget). Moreover, by consolidating
accounting, auditing and monitoring procedures, SWAPs allow donors to distance themselvesfrom
day-to-day operational issues and enhance Government leadership, transparency and accountability.
IDA has been heavily involved in developing SWAPs, including in identifying sector strategies and
appropriate procurement, disbursement, management and monitoring systems. Joining forces behind a
common strategy has been relatively easy. The main difficulties have resultedfrom the SWAP s heavy
reliance on relatively weak national administrative systems andfrom the centralizing effect of a single
nati onalfunding system. To improveperformance, current efforts arefocused on strengthening
financial management capabilitiesfor sectoral ministries in Maputo and the provinces. Decentralized
planning mechanisms, combined with greater, predictable and consistentfundingfor sectoral
programs, are being used to drive the provincial agenda and increase regional responsiveness.
Although Mozambique is not a CDFpilot country, SWAPs give effective operational implementation, at
the sectoral level, to the CDF principles of shared vision, Government ownership, and partnership.
This approach has worked particularly well in expanding infrastructure. With about US$475 million
or 55 percent of the IDA portfolio programmed in SWAPs sectors, the Bank has made a large
investment in this approach, which is already providing returns.

B. Performance Under the Previous CAS
27.
The previous CAS defined three strategic priorities: promoting rapid broad-based
private-sector-led growth; building capacity and developing human resources; and strengthening
development partnerships. Throughout the CAS period the Bank operated broadly in the base
case, with new lending concentrated on infrastructure and on sector programs in water,
agriculture and education. Lending, at US$521 million, was slightly above the projected base
case total of US$480 million. Although two projects were postponed due to implementation
delays in predecessor projects, the resulting decline in lending was more than offset by increased
lending in other operations including an adjustment operation, which was delivered as an IDA
grant in the form of HIPC interim assistance, and an unprogrammed flood emergency recovery
project. IFC's portfolio increased substantially to about US$150 million; it is now among the
largest IFC portfolios in Africa. IFC invested US$120 million in the Mozal aluminum smelter,
the Corporation's largest single committed investment anywhere in the world, and played a key
role in mobilizing other commercial finance for this US$1.3 billion project. MIGA also supported
Mozal with a US$40 million guarantee, and is working on a possible US$75 million guarantee to
support investments on power transmission lines to Mozal. IFC supported the establishment of a

- 10-

foreign bank that has established a wide branch network, created an investment banking affiliate,
and brought new levels of service and competition to the sector. Other IFC investments, including
SMEs, were concentrated in agribusiness, which helped re-establish cormmercialagriculture in
rural areas, and in tourism. Overall, under the previous CAS, progress was made against stated
development objectives and most country performance indicators and benchmarks were met,
though sometimes with delay (see Table 2), generally resulting from capacity problems.
28.
The Government's program, coupled with continued stability, good weather for several
years, and support from external partners, is contributingto welfare gains in Mozambique. There
is no definitive data on income/expendituretrends at the household level and many service
delivery indicators are monitored with a lag. Yet all available data point to continued
improvements. Since 1994, per capita consumption has grown by about 6.4 percent per annum,
and per capita agricultural GDP by about 8.4 percent per annum, while cereals production by
smallholders has doubled. Survey data suggest that poverty in the provincial capitals fell from 73
percent in 1992/93to 65 percent in 1996197. Access and coverage of education and health
services has improved. Between 1996 and 1998, an index measuring health service delivery per
person increased by 38 percent; DPT immunization rose from 63 percent to 77 percent;
geographical disparities in service delivery fell; and quality indicators (such as the proportion of
health units with basic drugs and trained personnel) improved. Over this period, the gross
primary enrolment rate increased from 62 percent to 71 percent, and the number of students in
primary schools from 1.6 million to 2.1 million.
C. Portfolio Management
29.
As of May 1, 2000, there were 15 projects in the portfolio totaling US$813 million,
compared to 18 projects totaling about US$840 million at the start of the last CAS (November
1997). About 38 percent of this portfolio has been disbursed, and the disbursement ratio is now
about 20 percent, at about the same level as at the beginning of the last CAS. Disbursement lags
have fallen, with earlier delays partly resulting from increased Bank involvement in relatively
slow disbursing SWAPs. Portfolio performance has improved dramatically and is still improving.
At present, there are no problem projects and no projects at risk, compared to one problem project
and six projects at risk in early 1998. Improvement in risk indicators has resulted in large part
through proactive portfolio management and the removal, through continued progress on
economic policies, of the economic management risk, which applied to all IDA-assisted projects
in Mozambique at the beginning of the last CAS.
30.
Efforts continue to be made to improve portfolio management. There is closer
coordination with the principal donors through the SWAPs. IDA lending is being limited to fit
the Government's absorptive capacity. Portfolio management has been devolved to the Country
Office to ensure that emerging issues are promptly and satisfactorily resolved. Monitoring now
includes both a formal annual review to check portfolio status and review progress (next
scheduled for June 2000) and weekly meetings between the Resident Representative and the
Governor of the Central Bank. The Country Office has recruited a financial management
specialist and local project officers now cover most sectors, permitting more realistic project
preparation that is sensitive to local conditions as well as closer monitoring of project
implementation and quicker resolution of emerging problems. Local staff are also being trained
in procurement and disbursement procedures with a view to accelerating implementation. Within
Govemnment,progress in public sector reform is addressing capacity constraints. In addition,
technical assistance in accounting and budget execution, to be strengthened under the new CAS,
is improving financial management, and public procurement issues are to be addressed through
diagnostic work on the public sector. A financial assessment and procurement review will also be
an integral part of the work to be done under a public expenditure review in FY01.

Tablel.:
A.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*

*
*
*

R.B
U
*

OWome6sUnder:theELAstCAS':

: .-....-..Performiance
e rm n Indiators
o.
Pttote broadbas'e4 7rivate-sectoFk.ro;edh
Maintain real growth of non-energy GDP at an annual
rate of at least 5%.
Maintain single digit inflation.
Value added tax in place by mid-1998.
HIPC completion point reached by mid-1999.
Agricultural SWAP (PROAGRI) implemented by 1999.
Satisfactory progress on ROCS program, including
maintenance of 15,000 km of road by 2000.
Comprehensive restructuring plan for CFM, the national
railway, including private concessioning of all three
ports and railway lines by end-I 998.

:
*
*
*
*
*
*

*

Liberalization of telecommunications sector
commencing in 1998.
Private management contracts in place for five major
urban water companies by 1999.
Sale by 1999 of all companies currently on the
privatization rolls under the privatization program.

*

Role of the Center for Investment Promotion (CPI)
modified to enhance its investment promotion functions.
Commercial Code revised by mid-2000.
New land law passed in 1997. Regulatory framework to
be implemented.

*
*

dcapad-yaaddeve.op.hwnwSre

-:.-:.

::.-Outcorme-:
O7tTom

-

:

__:--.____.___:____

*
*

*

:::.
:__--_

Non-energy GDP grew 11.3% in 1997, 9.2% in
1998 and 9.3% in 1999.
Achieved: inflation 1.5% in 1999.
Value added tax was introduced in June 1999.
HIPC completion point reached in June 1999.
PROAGRI implemented in August 1999.
ROCS progress satisfactory, 3,800 km roads
rehabilitated and 15,000 km being maintained.
In progress: CFM will concession main ports and
railway systems; five main port terminal
concessions already operational and several small
concessions/leases have been awarded.
Cellphone market to be liberalized in north and
center, TDM seeking 30% strategic equity partner.
Water companies serving the five major cities were
leased to the private sector in September 1999.
90 large enterprises and over 1,100 small and
medium enterprises privatized or restructured;
majority public share retained in 33 companies.
Achieved.
In progress.
Regulations for the Land Law of 1997 were
approved in December 1998.

ceS

Budgetary Framework Law implemented; budgetary
scenarios for the medium-term developed; rules and
procedures for budgetary execution simplified.
*
Local elections held in 1998 in 23 cities and 10 towns.
*
Increase health coverage under the Health Sector
Recovery Program from 40% of the population currently
to 60% in the year 2000; increase DPT vaccination
coverage from 55% to 80%.
* Improved health outcomes; significant reductions in
maternal and infant mortality rates.
*
Increased education coverage; primary school
admissions rate up to 80-86% by 2000 (from 75% in
1996). Special programs implemented for girls and
provinces with lowest coverage.
* Improvement education quality indicators: repetition and
drop-out rates in primary education to fall to 14-17%
and 10-12% (down from 24% and 14% respectively).
* National poverty assessment and poverty action plan
completed by end-l 998.
C. &renegh1enparfnesheps._
* IDA portfolio management responsibility to be
delegated to Resident Representative by end FY98.
* Increased Government commitment to and ownership of
reform program.
*
SWAPs in roads, education, health, and agriculture by
1999.
*
Strengthen partnerships.

*

*
*

*

Law adopted in September 1998. Medium-term
expenditure framework elaborated for 1998-99
budget.
Elections held in June 1998.
In progress: health coverage rose from 40% in 1995
to 50% in early 1999; vaccination coverage rose
from 63% in 1997 to 77% in 1998.
Infant mortality rate fell from 162 to 134 over the
1990s.

*

Primary admission rate increased to 79% in 1999.
Special programs for improving female access to
education implemented.

*

Repetition rate still at 24% but dropout rate
decreased to 8.4% in 1998.

*

Poverty assessment published in December 1998;
action plan published in April 1999.
:
_'':
Achieved.

*
*
*
*

Government ministers acknowledged increased
ownership during CAS consultations.
Achieved.
Done through Consultative Group, Development
Partners Group meetings, as well as meetings on
SWAPs and topical issues (HIPC, PRSP process,
UNDAF, and HIV/AIDS).

- 12 D. Lessons Learned
31.
As the CAS consultations confirmed (see Annex D), the key challenge for Mozambique
and for this CAS is sustaining rapid poverty-reducinggrowth and accelerating the delivery of
tangible economic and social benefits to the poor, particularly in rural areas. Participants in the
CAS consultations acknowledged that much has been accomplished recently, including
maintaining peace and stability; increasing food security; constructing roads, schools, and clinics;
consolidating democratic freedoms; reducing inflation; and developing a more vibrant market
economy. At the same time, they also expressed concern about the sustainability of growth and
the participation of the poor in the benefits of growth, reinforcing many of the issues raised by the
Bank's ongoing analytical work on Mozambique's growth prospects:
* The ability of the Government to absorb aid, to implement policies, and to do so
accountably and transparently, is weak, particularly in understaffed remote regions.
* Investment in primary health care and education needs to increase, especially in rural areas.
* The single most important investment area for growth and poverty reduction remains
infrastructure. Investment in roads, energy, water, and telecommunications will need to be
directed to the rural areas to reduce poverty, integrate the nation, and bring densely
populated areas with high agricultural potential into the market network.
* Mozambicans agree that reform is necessary for growth, but disagree about the scope and
substance of reform. Some favor further liberalization, particularly in key cross-cutting
sectors (energy and telecommunications) and regulatory areas (visas, customs, licensing,
land law, and labor law). Others, feeling that domestic firms cannot adjust so quickly to
international competition, are calling for subsidies or increased protection.
* The rule of law is critical to Mozambique's development. A weak legal and judicial
administration needs to be strengthened, to serve an expanding and increasingly complex
business environment, stimulate investment, and secure individual rights.
* Many Mozambicans feel that they lack the skills required to benefit from or contribute to
growth. Many Mozambican businesses seem to be trapped in low-growth traditional
industries. The few that are innovative, competitive, and high-growth frequently hire
foreign labor into technical and managerial posts. Hence, many Mozambicans sense an
urgent need to improve skills through higher education, vocational training, and other
strategies to enhance knowledge transfer.
* Many Mozambicans feel that they are not sufficiently empowered to participate in the
development process or consulted in the decisions that affect them.
* Most Mozambicans do not speak openly of HIV/AIDS, but many recognize that it has
emerged as a major threat to their security and well-being and that it can easily reverse
hard-won social and economic gains.
32.
The CAS consultations, the 1999 Client Survey, the 1998 OED Country Assistance
Review (see Box 5), and IFC experience indicate what worked well and what worked less well in
Bank Group operations during the previous CAS periods. What worked well: The Bank has done
well in working with the Government, which is constrained by limited capacity, to effectively
sequence reform efforts in response to evolving development priorities over the past years. The
Bank continues to demonstrate comparative advantage in delivering analytical inputs to guide
policy dialogue. In particular, client and partners value the Bank's work on economic
management, both for its technical competence and its sharing of international experience. The
Bank is also able to leverage financial assistance by capitalizing on partnerships with bilateral and
multilateral donors, and it has taken important first steps in widening partnership and
consultations to include civil society and the private sector.

- 13 Box 5: Mozambique: Country Assistance Review (CAR) 1998
The 1998 CountryAssistanceReview was completed asthe 1997CASwas beingfinalized. The CAR
concluded that the Bank played a critical role in Mozambique 's recoveryprocess by helping to assess
problems and opportunities, design the evolving policy agenda, and mobilize IDA and other resources,
thereby providing financial, administrative and analytical contributions to Mozambique 's transition
process. The CAR noted that partners continue to look to the Bank to deliver advisory and analytical
servicesfor sectoral and thematic programs and to provide leadership in the dialogue on economic
management and sector strategies, particularly in the area of economic governance (e.g.fiscal
management, public sector reform, trade policy andfinancial sector development). The CAR also found
that the availability of grant financing in some sectors, and the Government 's preference not to incur debt,
may limit the scope for IDA financing. Development effectiveness has also been limited by weaknesses in
aid coordination and excessivefocus on traditional investment and technical assistance projects rather
than results-based sectorwide programs.
On the basis of these findings, the CAR recommended that the Bank be more selective and cede leadership
to other donors where they have a comparative advantage or substantialfinancial presence; use country
dialogue and aid coordination mechanisms to nurture policy reform and capacity building; enhance
partnerships among donors and civil society to improve resultsfor sector programs; support Mozambican
authorities' increased leadership in development and aid coordination; and increase the responsiveness
and effectiveness of Bank assistance by further decentralizing authority to the field. These
recommendations have begun to be observed in the Bank 'spractices over the last CAS period and are also
reflected in the current CAS.
33.
Whatworked less well: While many recognize Bank efforts to share information, develop
common understandings, and improve coordination, the Bank needs to be more systematic and
inclusive in reaching out to civil society and the private sector and in disseminating its analytical
work. The link between the Bank's policy and lending program and poverty reduction, as well as
the Bank's important role in many of the social sectors, is poorly understood. Although the
Bank's analytical products are valued, the Bank needs to do more in this area, and it needs to
better follow-through in applying upstream ESW to inform project identification and improve
quality of entry. At times, the scale and complexity of Bank projects have not been appropriately
tailored to match government's implementation capacity. Simpler project design, involving more
local expertise, could result in higher levels of client ownership and participation and in more
flexible project structures that would better allow for effective mid-course corrections. Given the
escalating HIV/AIDS crisis and its likely repercussions on the entire development effort, the
Bank should have acted sooner and been more systematic in joining the battle against this
pandemic. The fact that IFC's objective of financing SME investments with local sponsors has
only been partially met also indicates a need for the Bank Group to do more to develop the local
private sector. Finally, with respect to infrastructure, the recent flood emergency has indicated a
need to improve Bank evaluation of hazard exposure, to reassess or develop standards, and to
help the Government incorporate appropriate measures for reducing or transferring the risks of
future loss or damage.
E. Strategic Orientation
34.
Bank support will aim to improve the effectiveness of Mozambique's overall poverty
reduction effort, taking into account the special needs for partnership in a country with weak
capacity and substantial access to grant financing. The orientation of this support recognizes a
dual role for the Bank: one as a catalyzing, strategic, and analytical partner to the Government's
development efforts, and the other as a financing partner. In the first role, the Bank will continue
to draw on its comparative advantage - as recognized in the CAR, ICRs, and the Client Survey in aid coordination and in analytical services, especially in sector analysis and policy and
program design. In particular, the Bank will continue to assist the Government in the critically

- 14important tasks of selecting the areas where reform is strategically needed, formulating and
sequencing appropriate programs, and coordinating development assistance. This is particularly
needed in the Mozambican context where public sector capacity to undertake these tasks is
limited. In its financing role, the Bank will be more selective, recognizing that other partners
have a comparative advantage in project implementation and are able to provide grant financing.
For example, IDA will provide no financing in telecommunications; limited financing in the
environment sector; and secondary financing behind other lead donors in the education and
agriculture sectors. Moreover, even in sectors where the Bank leads, IDA financing will continue
to constitute only a share of total sectoral financing (e.g., up to or about a fifth of total financing
in the health and roads sectors).
35.
The focus of the ongoing program and the previous CAS are in accordance with the
strategic principles presented above. The lessons learned during the previous CAS and the CAS
consultations imply that the focus of the ongoing program has been appropriate and effective.
These efforts should be continued, but they will now need to be deepened in certain areas.
Specifically the Bank will need to:
*

Redouble efforts to accelerate growth, diversify its sources, and increase economic
opportunities for the poor, particularly in rural areas. To this end, investments in
transportation will continue, together with deeper regulatory reform and private participation
with IFC support in the key cross-cutting sectors of energy and telecommunications. Efforts
to promote pro-poor rural development and agricultural growth will need to be strengthened.
Further improvements are needed in the basic enabling environment, in the performance of
the financial sector, and in the development of SMEs.
X Continue to support service delivery to improve human capabilities, with emphasis on
improving quality while continuing service expansion in basic health and education. The
Bank will also need to continue to provide advice in the area of social protection, including
to reduce vulnerability through improving the Government's capacity for disaster prevention
and mitigation.
* Continue to improve our development effectiveness through enhanced partnerships,
particularly among the donors and civil society. To this end, working with Government and
donors in supporting the PRSP and possibly a CDF provides a means to defining joint
priorities, assessing comparative advantages, and making strategic selections within
strengthened development partnerships.
36.
With this CAS, the Bank Group will also strategically address newly binding constraints
in Mozambique and new imperatives among Mozambicans. These are areas that require action,
particularly in the development and design of new programs. As such, the Bank can apply its
comparative advantage in a timely manner, especially to provide analytical inputs, support
program design, and act as an aid coordinator. Specifically, the Bank Group will need to:
*

*
*

Improve the focus, effectiveness, and monitoring of poverty reduction efforts. The
Government's commitment to design and implement a Poverty Reduction Strategy, as noted
in the Joint Staff Assessment (JSA) of the interim PRSP, provides a basis for the Bank, with
other partners, to support its work in poverty analysis, policy formulation, and monitoring
progress against objectives.
Increase emphasis on improving governance. Good governance and the rule of law are
critical for private sector led growth, and advantageous for the poor. Capacity constraints
urgently need to be addressed so that they do not stall Mozambique's ability to grow.
Increase emphasis on preventing HIV/AIDS. Having learned from global experience that
HIV/AIDS negates growth and poverty reduction, and seeing that the epidemic is reaching

- 15 crisis proportions in Mozambique,the Bank will make the fight against HIV/AIDS a critical
component of its work in the country.
Increase emphasis on promoting innovation, competitiveness, and employment. Skills
shortages are constraining growth and employment and undermining support for reform by
constraining the participation of Mozambicans in growth opportunities. There is a need for
Mozambican workers to improve their skills through technical, vocational, and higher
education and for Mozambican firms to address the challenges of competing in a global
economy that rewards high-quality innovation.
III. MOZAMBIQuE'SDEVELOPMENT
AGENDAANDTBE BANK GRouP's CAS

37.
The Government aims to promote growth to reduce poverty and improve the well-being
of the Mozambican people. Its medium-term development strategy (as stated in its Five-Year
Government Program (2000-2004)) and its emerging Poverty Reduction Strategy (as stated in its
interim PRSP) include efforts to increase economic opportunitiesby generating povertyreducing and employment-creating growth through the private sector; improve governance and
empowerment, through a more effective public sector, improved rule of law, and greater
transparency and accountability; and improve human capabilities. Annex C outlines these
documents and their link to the CAS.
38.
Poverty reduction is the overall goal of the Bank Group in Mozambique and there are no
major disagreements between the Bank and the Govemrnent on Mozambique's development
objectives and strategies. Differences do exist sometimes on the specific instruments or scope
and timing of reform. The Government favors protection in certain industries and restrictions in
the labor market. The Bank Group would like the Government to lower trade taxes and
surcharges and to proceed more quickly in demonopolizing sectors such as air transport and
telecommunications. The Bank also thinks that tax exemptions or other types of fiscal incentives
for internationally financed megaprojects or regional development schemes generally prove to be
more costly (in relation to benefits) and should be avoided where possible. These issues have
been the subject of continuing dialogue, and their debate has contributed to the increasingly
candid and open relationship between the Government and the Bank. The Bank is providing
technical and analytical inputs to inform the debate. In addition, the Bank is also supporting the
Government's efforts in developing the full PRSP, an integral part of which would be the broader
participation of civil society in discussing such issues and evaluatingtrade-offs.
39.
The three pillars of this CAS are supported by new lending as well as a strong existing
lending program. (See Annex B9). Most new IDA and IFC activities will focus on increasing
economic opportunity which, through growth promotion, is likely to have the maximum impact in
reducing poverty in Mozambique even in the short-term. Ongoing work in this area will be
consolidated with a view to ensuring that the benefits of growth are distributed as broadly as
possible. This CAS will also direct increased IDA support to improving governance and
empowerment, as limited administrative capacity and effectiveness is currently a primary and
binding constraint to reform, growth, and development. Finally, this CAS will continue to
support improving human capabilities, with limited new lending but substantial ongoing
programs and continued strong analytical products. To the extent that other partners have a
strong presence and comparative advantage and are willing to finance activities on a grant basis,
the Bank will scale back IDA's financing contribution. The Bank will structure new lending to
maximize synergies and complementarities and maintain an overall focus on promoting povertyreducing private-sector-led growth; IFC will provide direct support to the private sector to help
generate that growth.

- 16 A. Increasing Economic Opportunities through Private Sector Led Growth
40.
To promote growth and poverty reduction in Mozambique, the Government aims to
create an environment which will enable the private sector to expand its activities and generate
employment, especially among the rural poor. In the interim PRSP, the Government aims to
achieve real GDP growth of 7 to 10 percent per annum and limit inflation to 5 to 7 percent per
annum, thereby reducing the poverty headcount index to 60 percent in 2004 from 69 percent in
1997. Whereas growth and inflation targets may be compromised in 2000 because of the flood
emergency, they could be achieved in general by strengthening the private sector environment
and financial sector, investing in infrastructure, promoting agriculture and rural development,
ensuring sound environmental management, and improving innovation and competitiveness to
promote employment.
1.

Strengthening the Private Sector Environment and the Financial Sector

41.
Issues and Government strategy: Macroeconomic stability has been achieved and needs
to be maintained: low inflation provides a stable environment for private sector growth and
benefits the poor. This will require continued financial discipline. A key outstanding issue is
reducing fiscal imbalances, which the Government hopes to achieve gradually through
expenditure efficiency, HIPC debt relief, and increased revenues (accrued by broadening the tax
base, simplifying tax structures, and limiting exemptions). Continued external aid will permit
fiscal adjustment to be gradual and allow for expansion in spending on key poverty-reducing
programs. Another issue is expenditure control, which the Government will address with reforms
in accounting and budget execution. To help develop a more diversified export base, liberal
trade and investment policies will need to be strengthened, while addressing other constraints in
infrastructure, access to finance, and business capacity. To remove red tape, simplify the business
environment, and ensure the fair and efficient operation of newly privatized companies, the
Government will also undertake legal and regulatory reform. To this end, a new Commercial
Code and new urban land use regulations are being prepared, while regulations in the energy,
transportation, and telecommunications sectors are being revised to encourage entry, private
participation and competition. The Govermmentwill continue to strengthen its capacities of
poverty analysis, policy-formulation, and monitoring to improve the impact of policy on poverty
reduction.
42.
In thefinancial sector, further work is required to effectively mobilize savings so as to
finance growth and to improve supervision of the expanding private financial sector. Despite
improvements in regulation, privatization, and the entry of new banks, access to financial services
remains limited in rural areas and among the poor, real interest rates and lending margins remain
high, and medium and long term finance is limited. Government policies are aimed at
encouraging lowering financial intermediation costs by enhancing competition, including
encouraging the development of non-bank financial intermediaries, as well as by addressing
systemic problems that constrain the financial sector, such as the poor enforceability of contracts,
lack of accounting standards, and legal obstacles to effective use of collateral. The Central Bank
aims to enhance pro-active supervision of the banking system to ensure financial stability.
43.
Bank Group support: The Bank will continue actively to support areas of economic
management, as this answers to its comparative advantage. The Bank will provide policy advice
to the Government for improving fiscal management and strengthening the poverty focus of its
programs, most notably through assisting in preparing and implementing the PRSP, and will help
Mozambique to attain debt relief under the enhanced HIPC framework. A public expenditure
review (PER) will be undertaken to identify spending strategies for reducing poverty, and there
will be studies of the linkages between economic growth and poverty reduction as well as of

- 17targets for effective public service delivery. In addition to analytical contributions, in support of
the PRSP, Bank projects and studies will contribute to strengthening poverty analysis as well as
systems of poverty and program monitoring and statistical strengthening. An IDA proposed
Economic Management and Private Sector adjustment operation (EMPSO), as well as TA to
be included under a new public sector operation, will focus on private sector development and on
improving fiscal management (accounting, executing expenditures, developing consolidated
accounts, and reforming the pension system). The Bank, possibly with participation from FIAS,
will also support further work on improving and simplifying the regulatory framework, including
in the labor market, through a new study on constraints to private sector development. In addition
to ongoing work in the water and transportation sectors, the Bank Group will support improving
the regulatory and legal frameworks in the energy and mining sectors. Bank and IFC support to
the annual private sector conferences will continue. IFC is expanding its financing and advisory
support for SMEs, and will continue its focus on agribusiness to raise rural incomes. As the
investment environment improves, MIGA will support the Investment Promotion Center and
make guarantees available to attract increased foreign investment.
44.
In the financial sector, the Bank will complete a diagnostic study and continue to provide
advice to improve banking supervision and financial intermediation, particularly by analyzing the
causes of high interest rates, by advising on financial sector efficiency and implementation of
contract law, and by strengthening bank supervision in accord with the Basle Core Principles. The
Bank Group will continue to work with the IMF to assist the Government in monitoring the
stability of the financial sector, particularly in the wake of the recent floods. To promote
competition in the banking sector, IFC will seek to expand its involvement with additional equity
investments, term resources, and institution building. IFC will work to spur increased
competition and intermediation through the establishment of new non-bank financial institutions,
particularly in leasing, insurance, housing finance, and microfinance, which will help increase
access to financial services for the poor. IFC will also provide advisory and technical assistance
on regulatory and institutional issues.
2.

Developing Infrastructure

45.
Issues and Government strategy: To promote growth, generate off-farm jobs, and
increase rural access to markets, the Government is upgrading infrastructure, particularly in areas
of high growth potential and population density. In the short-term, the Government is prioritizing
the rehabilitation of critical infrastructure damaged by the February 2000 floods with a view to
improving siting and construction standards so as to reduce damage from such events in the
future. Over the medium- to long-term, the key issues addressed by the Government's roads
program include incomplete road systems, limited funding for maintenance, and limited
involvement of national contractors in road construction. Work on the three major port-andrailway systems aims to reduce transport costs, expand traffic, and increase earnings to ensure
sustainability. Government actions include concessioning operations to the private sector,
restructuring Caminhos de Ferro de Mofambique (CFM), and establishing an appropriate
regulatory framework. In energy, the principal issues are expanding household access and
sustainably exploiting resources for maximum macroeconomic and development impacts while
ensuring sound environmental management. To these ends, the Government is undertaking
structural and pricing reforms to encourage expanded private sector provision of electricity as
well as defining strategies for exporting energy and energy-intensive products. In
telecommunications, monopolization remains the key issue, but the Government is now opening
the cellular market to free entry and seeking a private sector equity partner for the state
telecommunications company as first steps towards liberalization. It is also trying to expand
entry into the international telecommunications market and improve access to services such as

-

18-

satellite connectivity and the internet. To improve the quality, reliability and sustainability of
urban water services, in September 1999 the Government placed water services in five major
cities under private management supervised by a new regulatory agency. It is also taking
measures to increase access to safe water in rural areas and small towns, aiming to raise rural
access from 12 percent in 1998 to 40 percent by 2004. Improving household access to markets,
energy, and safe water are key aims of the Government's strategy to reduce poverty, lower
household costs, improve the productivity and welfare of women and girls (who are responsible
for collecting water and fuel wood), and also improve the welfare of children (who benefit from
greater time allocated to child care).
46.
Bank Group support: The Bank Group has considerable experience and comparative
advantage in infrastructure and will remain active, in partnership with the major bilateral donors
and alongside private investors. A proposed Roads and Bridges (APL) project (FY01) will help
rehabilitate trunk roads and bridges, support rural road rehabilitation and maintenance, develop
institutional capacity for managing the network, reduce vulnerability of transport infrastructure to
flood and storm hazards, and increase the participation of local contractors in implementing
works. The recently approved Railways and Ports Restructuringproject will help to restructure
CFM, develop a policy and regulatory framework, and place port and railway management in
private hands. IDA will also continue to provide policy advice on the development of the
transport corridors. An Energy Reform project will provide TA for structural and pricing
reforms; test financing and delivery options for electrification in small towns; and promote the
sustainable urban use of traditional fuels. IDA will also assist in developing strategies for
exporting energy and energy-intensive products and establishing a market-based regulatory
framework for the gas and power subsectors. IFC, together with IDA and MIGA, will selectively
review megaprojects for their viability and potential support from the Bank Group; IFC will
examine further financing of Mozal for its expansion. In telecommunications, IDA will help to
assess the new law and support a national policy workshop; IFC has been in discussions with the
national telecommunications company to support its privatization. The national water program
will be supported in three ways: National Water Development (NWD) I will continue to focus on
reforming rural water supply and sanitation and managing regional and national water resources;
NWD II will continue to support concessioning of urban water services; and a new Municipal
Development project will help to strengthen the ability of Mozambique's 33 new municipalities
to provide basic urban services, including sanitation and drainage. IFC is also seeking
opportunities to finance private infrastructure projects across sectors, with other potential projects
in industrial park development and investments arising from the development of the transport
corridors. IFC will also sponsor a workshop on best practice in private participation in
infrastructure at the request of the government.
3.

Promoting Rural Development and Agriculture

47.
Issues and Government strategy: As most of the poor are subsistence farmers,
promoting agricultural growth and rural development is critical to reducing poverty over the short
to medium term. Key issues include improving access to land, increasing productivity, expanding
off-farm employment, facilitating rural trade, arresting land degradation, and improving
management of climate variability and extremes. To address these issues, the Government's rural
development strategy includes adopting and enforcing land tenure regulations, developing rural
roads, and creating rural market incentives. The agriculture SWAP, PROAGRI, supports
agricultural extension services, with a special focus on reaching female farmers to disseminate
information on farming practices and gender-specific legislation, and is establishing a regulatory
framework (for land markets, land tenure, and forest and wildlife management) that will promote
an efficient and environmentally sustainable use of resources.

-1948.
Bank Group support: The Bank will remain active in this area. The IDA-supported
Agricultural Sector Public Expenditure Program, a 15-year APL in its first phase, supports
PROAGRI to strengthen the institutions needed to provide a core set of services in agriculture
and natural resource management. A Rural Action project will bring resources down to the
community level and strengthen the capacity of local authorities through supporting small-scale
community-driven investments in rural infrastructure and services. The Roads and Bridges
project will support efforts to rehabilitate and maintain rural feeder roads. New lending,
combined with large existing programs in health, education, and water, contribute to IDA's
significant support to improving infrastructure and service delivery in rural areas. IFC's SME
program is concentrating in agribusiness and tourism to expand opportunities for rural
development and off-farm employment. Finally, a rural development study underway, which
focuses on key elements in the state's role in facilitating rural development, will inform the PRSP
and enhance the design of Bank operations.
4.

Ensuring Sound Environmental Management

49.
Issues and Government strategy: Agriculture, fisheries, mining and tourism-activities
based on exploiting the environment-contribute about 45 percent of GDP and 70 percent of total
exports. Ensuring that resource exploitation is sustainable is critical to long-term prospects for
growth and poverty reduction. Although Govemment policy in this area is fluid and capacity
limited, there is general movement towards integrating environmental aspects into all major
policies and strategies, implementingprograms for environmental management, and subjecting
major economic activities to environmental impact studies. The Government will also participate
in regional efforts to manage the environment, particularly in tourism, transportation, and water
and wildlife conservation. Over the past five years, the Government has adopted an Environment
Framework Law, a new Land Law, and a new Forestry and Wildlife Law. At present, key
Government objectives include increasing capacity to ensure that regulations are properly
implemented, formulating cross-sectoral approaches, and encouraging environmentally and
socially sustainable private sector investment.
50.
Bank Group support: IDA will support a study aiming to identify critical environmental
pressures, including climatic hazards, and appropriate responses, in a context of rapid growth and
weak institutions. With GEF support, and in partnership with the private sector, IDA is helping
to develop a framework for forestry and wildlife management through the Transfrontier
Conservation Areas project and will test and refine mechanisms to promote environmentally and
socially sustainable development through the proposed Coastal and Marine Biodiversity
Management Project accompanyingthis CAS. The Transfrontier project will also address issues
of watershed management that will mitigate flood risk. Through its presence on the Maputo
Corridor working groups for environment, tourism, and biodiversity, the Bank will continue to
provide advice on environmental management as well as support to the development of a
Strategic Environmental Management Framework for the corridor. IDA's sectoral programs
(particularly health, PROAGRI, National Water I, and Municipal Development) will also provide
support. In addition, a Natural Resources Management project will develop an environmental
information system as well as build capacity within Government to enforce environmental
regulations and address mining-relatedenvironmental challenges. Through the projects it
finances, IFC will bring Bank Group environmental standards to the private sector, including
financial intermediaries' assessment of environmental risk.

- 20 5.

Promoting Innovation, Competitiveness and Employment

51.
Issues and Government strategy: Creating on- and off-farm employment is a key
objective of the Government's poverty reduction strategy. This requires a response both to build
the capacity and competitiveness of Mozambican firms so they expand and create jobs, as well as
to enhance skills in the workforce and professions to fill the technical positions in an expanding
local economy. To sustain growth and employment at levels high enough to reduce poverty
permanently, Mozambican firms will need to adopt new technologies and individuals to develop
new skills, so that Mozambican businesses will become increasingly able to compete in extemal
markets. To do so requires exposure to competition and competitive practices, access to
information, increased capacity, and financing. In addition, the shortage of skilled personnel is
constraining growth and limiting the distribution of its benefits among Mozambicans. To address
this problem, the Government in January 2000 created a new Ministry of Higher Education,
Science and Technology to focus on higher education, technical and vocational training as part of
its growth and employment strategy. The Government is also developing a strategy aimed at
improving opportunities for Mozambicansto participate in the labor market by strengthening the
quality and improving the relevance to market demand of vocational and higher education, while
strengthening the sustainability of these institutions and programs through fostering appropriate
private-public partnerships in financing and service provision. Special efforts are aimed at
promoting employment among women by targeting them for delivery of small and medium
enterprise credits, tool kits, and training for informal sector employment. With NGOs, the
Government is also supporting women's associations that assist women household,heads with
weak economic capacity.
52.
Bank Group support: The Bank will study labor costs, market policies and regulations
to complement Government efforts to develop a strategy for higher education and vocational
training. While the Bank is already supporting a large and fully-subscribed basic education
program (see paragraph 63), under this CAS IDA will also support a Skills Development project
focusing on tertiary, technical and vocational education and aiming to infuse, in Mozambique's
labor market, the skills, practices, and attitudes required to create value-adding knowledge and
innovation in production. The project, like the strategy upon which it will be based, is to be
developed through a strategic partnership among Government, academic institutions, and the
private sector. It will support comprehensive reform in the sector to enable the most effective
delivery of the training and skills being demanded in the context of Mozambique's evolving labor
market. IFC will support private education, focusing on the tertiary level, and has an initial
project under development for a technical college. IDA's recently approved Enterprise
Development project (PODE), as well as technical assistance and policy advice in the areas of
private sector development and competitiveness, will expose local entrepreneurs to best-practice
business techniques, management systems, and technological innovations and support knowledge
transfer by promoting inter-company linkages. IDA is also prepared to provide small credits to
support Mozambique's participation in the Regional Trade Facility (a facility permitting
entrepreneurs to insure productive activities against political risk) as well as consultancy-led
assistance to improve the competitiveness of one or more major Mozambican industries. IFC
support facilities, including the Africa Project Development Facility (APDF) and the Africa
Management Services Company (AMSCO) will be expanded to provide assistance to the local
private sector, complementing the PODE. Through these facilities and outreach efforts, IFC will
seek to involve more Mozambican businesspeople as sponsors in the SME projects it finances,
and expand the number of those investments. AMSCO will provide training and capacity building
for local firms, as well as management assistance. In addition, WBI's World Links program is
introducing information technology and communication infrastructure into secondary schools
outside of Maputo to improve student and teacher familiarity with this new technology: over the
next few years, the program will be expanded to cover up to 100 schools.

- 21 B. Improving Governance and Empowerment
53.
This CAS will support efforts to develop a public administration that is responsive to its
constituents and that effectively supports the country's poverty-reduction efforts. Limited
administrative capacity and effectiveness is currently one of the primary constraints to growth,
development, implementation of reform, and service delivery to the poor. Government efforts
have been aimed at bolstering the civil service, reforming the institutional framework, including
decentralization and deconcentration, and simplifying and increasing the transparency of
administrative procedures and improving accountability. Under the governance pillar, the Bank
will not be involved in providing support in the areas of peace, public safety, and personal and
human rights, given the Bank's lack of comparative advantage and the support of other
development partners in these areas.
1.

Reforming the Public Sector

54.
Issues and Government strategy: Public administration until very recently was highly
centralized in Mozambique. Quality is also a concern: 80 percent of staff have no more than a 6t
grade education and only 3 percent have higher degrees. To attract and retain qualified staff, the
Government has decompressed salaries and instituted a new career stream system; it will also
implement a medium-term pay policy and merit-based reward system, as well as a training
program to reorient existing staff. In 1998, the Government's decentralization program created
33 elected autonomous municipalities and devolved to them the responsibility for urban
management within their jurisdictions. The Government intends to increase the number of
municipalities with each election cycle, and gradually transfer responsibility for other services. It
is also exploring ways to deconcentrate responsibility for local development to provincial
authorities and to encourage development planning at the district level. Further reforms, being
developed by an interministerial group supported by a technical group, will develop a more
results- and service-oriented public sector by redefining the sector's role and restructuring it
accordingly. The Government will continue its efforts to improve budget and expenditure
management and control to ensure that resource allocations are in accordance with national
poverty-reducing priorities. Upon reelection, Mozambique's President has reiterated
Government's commitment to fight corruption; Mozambique is one of the eleven countries which
drafted and approved the 25 Principles to Combat Corruption under the auspices of the Global
Coalition for Africa.
55.
Bank Group support Support to the public sector reform program is threefold, with an
emphasis on capacity building, including at the local level. First, the Bank will provide support
to the technical group and initiate a Public Sector and Legal Reform project to assist the
Government in implementing reforms in system-wide areas such as wages, decentralization,
financial and personnel management. A public sector study, including an assessment of
governance and of public procurement, will provide the diagnostic underpinnings for design of a
program of reform. Second, given decentralization's role in improving service delivery while
also empowering citizens, including the rural poor, this will be a principal focus of new Bank
lending. IDA's Municipal Developmentproject will assist in developing a framework for fiscal,
financial and human resource management for the new municipalities and include a capacitybuilding component linked to the new National Institute for Public Administration, which will
play a key role in wider public sector reform. IDA's Rural Action project will use small-scale
community-driven rural infrastructure investments to strengthen the capacity of communities and
local governments to plan and manage local infrastructure and services. Through WBI's panAfrican Municipal Development Program and AFRICITIES conference series, the Bank is also
strengthening capacity in the areas of inter-governmental fiscal relations and financial
management as well as community participation in local government. Third, to help the

- 22 Government improve economic management as well as transparency and accountability in its
budget system, the Economic Management and Private Sector operation will help to strengthen
budgetary execution, accounting, and auditing. The Bank will also continue to provide policy
advice in support of reforms in customs administration. In the area of corporate governance, the
Public Sector and Legal Reform project will help to strengthen capacity in accounting and
establish a professional accountants group. IFC (through AMSCO) is providing training to
selected firms in the area of corporate governance, and strengthening capacity in accounting in
the private sector.
2.

Improving the Rule of Law

56.
Issues and Government strategy: In Mozambique, the legal and judicial system is
outdated, inefficient and poorly equipped to ensure the rule of law. Dissemination and
enforcement of current laws is poor, particularlyoutside the main cities, and weakness in the
legal sector is impeding progress in other sectors as well as the development of the private sector.
Commercial law, family law, and the criminal code are critically in need of reform. These are all
on the Government's agenda. A strategic plan for the justice system should be completed in
2000, and a legal reform commission has been established. The plan is expected to address key
legislative reforms, capacity-building needs, and institutional reform in the Ministry of Justice,
Supreme Court, Attomey General's Office and Administrative Tribunal. To increase capacity, a
Center for Judicial Studies and Training is being opened and efforts are being made to
disseminate legal texts throughout the country to legal professionals. The Government has
prioritized the adoption of legislation that will foster private sector activity, and work is
continuing on revising the Commercial Code. To help secure women's rights, the Government is
expected to revise the Penal Code to include provisions for prosecuting domestic and sexual
violence and Family and Succession Laws to guarantee women's rights to succession and to
independent economic activity. The Government is also working with NGOs to combat violence
against women, and female officers are being recruited into the police force.
57.
Bank Group support The Bank's Legal Sector Capacity Building project has supported
the training of legal professionals, strengtheningof the Faculty of Law, developing legal code
reform, and disseminating knowledge of the law. The Bank is also supporting revision of the
Commercial Code. After the Government finalizes its strategic plan, the Bank expects to renew
its support in this area. An assessment of the legal and judicial sector will be undertaken. It will
direct the development of a legal component in the Public Sector and Legal Reform project,
which will aim at improving the legal environment and judicial system witlha view to promoting
private sector growth. IDA's work in the judicial sector will be undertaken in coordination with
other external partners, some of whom have extensive previous involvement in this sector, and
IDA's financial support to the sector will be scaled accordingly.
C. Increasing Human Capabilities
58.
The short-term urgency of improving low living standards and the longer term objectives
of improving human capabilities, increasing growth, and reducing poverty motivate the Bank's
continued support of efforts to improve human capabilities. Most of the Bank's financial support
under this pillar, chiefly in the area of primary health and primary education, will continue to be
delivered through ongoing operations.

- 23 1.

Preventing and Reducing the Impact of HIVWAIDS

59.
Issues and Government strategy: About one in seven adult Mozambicans carries the
AIDS virus, which is now the largest single threat to Mozambique's prospects (see Box 1). To
date, resources directed to the fight against HIV/AIDS has not reflected the magnitude of the risk
that it poses to the nation's development effort (as is evident in Annex E). In September 1999 the
Government adopted a National Strategic Plan (2000-2002) for Fighting STDs/HIV/AIDS at a
national workshop presided by the President. The Plan aims to provide essential services to
prevent infection and reduce the impact of AIDS, targeting some 1.6 million people with highrisk sex partners as well as 15,000 people and their families living with HI-V/AIDSalong the
main transport corridors. Given the cross-cutting developmental implications of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic, the Government has recognized that effective H1V/AIDSprevention, care, and control
strategies require a multisectoral response. To this end an Interministerial Committee for AIDS,
involving eight ministries, is being created to have general oversight responsibilities for
implementing the National Plan, and a National AIDS Commission is being established with
more direct national management responsibilities.
60.
Bank Group support: The existing IDA portfolio and pipeline are being reviewed and
revised to include appropriate HIV/AIDS prevention and care activities wherever possible. The
ongoing Enterprise Development project and the roads program already include components with
this objective. Through an IDF grant, IDA is supporting the establishment of the National AIDS
Commission, which will define objectives and strategies in priority areas for HIV/AIDS
prevention and control; integrate these strategies into government sectoral plans; and establish
workplans, budgets, management, and monitoring mechanisms for their implementation. The
Bank also supports UNAIDS and, in its capacity as an aid coordinator, will play an active role in
increasing HIV/AIDS awareness in Mozambique. Because Mozambique and some of its external
partners are expected to finance the US$40 million National Strategic Plan through grants, no
IDA operation in support of this Plan is currently anticipated. However, IDA is prepared to
expedite new lending should any financing gap emerge.
2.

Improving Health

61.
Issues and Government strategy: Despite increased Govemment spending, health
outcomes continue to be poor and health resources inequitably distributed, with per capita
spending on health being four to five times greater in Maputo city than in Zambezia and
Nampula. The Government's health program aims to improve access and quality, particularly in
rural areas, with a view to reducing morbidity and mortality and increasing economic
productivity. The program is oriented toward primary care, which will benefit the poor, and
targets reductions in infant, child, and maternal mortality and increases in DPT coverage. It also
focuses on improving health service coverage in rural areas. The program includes capacity
building and training of traditional birth attendants in rural areas with a view to reducing levels of
maternal mortality, consolidating preventative programs for women's health, and reviewing staff
recruitment methods and training to incorporate gender concems. The Government is now
formulating a new sector strategy in consultation with its partners, who will be reorganizing their
support to the sector in the form of an expanded SWAP.
62.
Bank Group support: The Government has asked the Bank to help facilitate the
transition from a sector program to a full SWAP and coordinate donor support of the new
strategy. The Bank will continue to support the sector through its existing Health Sector
Recovery program (HSRP), which aims to increase access to health services through improved
service delivery and institutional development. IDA will also develop a new Health (SWAP)
credit to support the new program, but because many external partners are channeling grant

- 24 money into this sector, new lending is likely to be limited. The Bank is also prepared to support
the Government's Roll Back Malaria campaignwith advisory services and financial support. IFC
will support the expansion of private medical services.
3.

Improving Education

63.
Issues and Government strategy: Improving access and quality, particularly for primary
education, remain key objectives. In launching its Education Sector Strategic Program (ESSP) in
1998,the Government placed education at the center of its efforts to boost economic and social
development. The fully subscribed program of over US$700 million aims to improve quality
(through increasing teacher training, improving learning materials, and revising the curriculum)
and access (through constructing classrooms and improving internal efficiency); it also aims to
strengthen institutional capacity for management, policy development, monitoring and evaluation.
To mitigate regional and rural-urban disparities, the Government is further decentralizing
education management and shifting budget allocations. In the effort to reduce the gender gap in
schools, provinces with highest gender disparities have been targeted, and a program is in place to
sensitize communities and reform curricula and texts to demonstrate the issues and benefits of
girls' education. To improve adult education, literacy programs, which target women and include
courses on domestic violence, women's rights, and land access, are being provided outside
schools.
64.
Bank Group support: The Bank assisted, with 18 other partners, in developing the
education sector program and will continue to support its implementation with the ongoing ESSP
project, focused on strengthening quality, access, and institutional capacity. The Bank is also
assisting the Government in an ongoing study to explore alternative models for financing the
education sector and it will initiate a Skills Development project under this CAS (see paragraph
52). IFC support for private education will be expanded.
4.

Social Protection

65.
Issues and Government strategy: The Government's Integrated Program of Social
Action, Employment and Youth includes safety net programs to protect the vulnerable and the
chronically poor, and training and job-creating programs to assist the able-bodied poor; social
assistance and psycho-social rehabilitation are also covered. Currently targeted groups include
female heads of households, malnourished pregnant women, the elderly disabled, and the
chronically ill. The PARPA calls for improving the quality of social protection programs which
will require assessing appropriate targeting, eligibility criteria, and coverage levels as a step to
developing programs for marginalized groups currently not covered. Pension schemes are also a
matter of Government interest; to ensure the sustainability and efficacy of these schemes, the
Government is developing regulations for private schemes and undertaking a study on the main
national schemes. In restructuring and resizing public institutions, such as customs and the
railways, the Government is putting into place programs that will support the transition of
workers to other productive activities, including through retraining. Disaster mitigation and
management form part of the Government's social protection programs. Three govermnent
agencies, the National Water Directorate, the National Meteorological Institute, and the National
Institute for Disaster Management share direct responsibility for anticipating hazard events to
prevent and prepare for disasters; existing capacity to perform these functions is to be
strengthened, including with respect to local, regional and sectoral linkages. The advancement of
women is also a stated objective of the new Government, and responsibility for gender issues was
recently given to the Ministry of Social Action and Women.

- 25 66.
Bank Group support Given the substantial scope for grant financing in the area of
social protection, the Bank's support here will be principally in the form of analytical work and
policy advice. In particular, the Bank will provide informal policy advice on social protection
and safety net issues as part of its overall assistance to the Govermnent in developing its Poverty
Reduction Strategy. WBI will also play a role in providing training and capacity building in this
area. Through the Railways and Ports Restructuring project, support is to be provided for the
retraining and redeployment of workers resulting from the restructuring of CFM. In addition, the
Bank will assist the Government in undertaking diagnostic work on its pension system through
this project and will provide further support in this area, if required, through the next programmed
adjustment operation. The Bank will also provide informal policy advice and technical assistance
in the area of institutional capacity building for disaster prevention and preparedness. In addition
to related measures being implemented through the Bank's National Water Development Project
(NWDI), should the need arise, a small, free-standing technical assistance operation will be
considered to support efforts in disaster prevention, preparedness, and management.
IV.

THEBANKGROUP'SCOUNTRYASSISTANCE
STRATEGY:IMPLEMENTATION

A. Alternative Scenarios for the Lending Program and Non-Lending Services
67.
The Base Case: Base case lending over the three-year CAS period (FY0 I-FY03) would
range from US$455 million up to the IDA authorized lending envelope of US$540 million. (See
Annex Bl). Lending levels in the base case are likely to be below the authorized envelope to take
into account the country's absorptive capacity, the availability of grant funds from other donors,
the Government's debt management strategy, and a recognition that in Mozambique's current
political environment some time is needed to ensure adequate public information and debate
about new reforms. Adjustment lending (the US$100 million Economic Management and Private
Sector operation programmed for FY02) would decline relative to the previous CAS and
represent about one-fifth of total lending. The base case lending program (described in Section
III above) aims to help Mozambique sustain high, broad-based and inclusive growth, and to
ensure that the benefits of growth are equitably distributed, particularly to the poor. Capitalizing
on the Bank's comparative advantage, a substantial non-lending work-program is designed to
contribute to developing the PRSP and to provide analytical foundations for the design of
Government programs as well as the Bank's lending program (see Box 6). The number and
volume of IFC investments, which will depend on demand from private investors, is expected to
expand significantly during the CAS period given the expansion of infrastructure, and the
potential for further large projects.
68.
The triggers for the proposed base case lending program will be monitored on an ongoing
basis by the Bank's Country Team and will include:
*

*

*
*

Formulation by end 2001 and implementation thereafter of a comprehensive public sector
reform and governance program, that includes specific government actions to improve
public sector capacity and fiscal management and to contain and reduce corruption.
Substantial adherence to the agreed timetable for developing a poverty reduction strategy
paper (PRSP) with monitorable indicators through a consultative process; and subsequent
satisfactory implementation of the PRSP, including satisfactory progress in achieving
targets under programs in health, education, water, and roads.
Substantial progress in implementing the National Strategic Plan to Fight
STDs/HIV/AIDS.
Continued satisfactory portfolio performance, including continued high disbursement
ratio (around 20 percent) and low percentage of problem projects (around 10 percent or
less).

- 26 -

The High Case. The high case will materialize principally on the basis of an increase in
69.
absorptive capacity. Absorptive capacity would be improved through progress in reforming
public administration, strengthening public and private sector governance and capacity, and
expanding skills and knowledge, thereby also improving portfolio performance. Under the high
case scenario, economic growth would be close to or in excess of seven percent per annum for
2001 and beyond, based on successful and timely implementation of Government programs as
well as increased investor confidence and private investment. This would result in continued
expansion of the agricultural, manufacturing, and tourism sectors, as well as faster growth in
exports, including from megaprojects.
With strong growth, improving social indicators, and improved participation through
70.
decentralization, political support for the reform program would
Box 6: CASNon-LendihgAdivities
broaden and reforms in the energy, transport, and
telecommunications sectors would be accelerated. The Energy
PublicSectorReformStudy
Reform project would be advanced into FY01, and, if
deregulationof the energysectoris substantiallycompletedin the a PublicExpenditureReview

next two years,an EnergyDevelopmentproject(notin the base
case lendingprogram)wouldbe broughtintoFY03. If public

e

*

LegalandJudicialStudy
Povertyand GrowthLinkages

Constrapnts
D
to PrivateSector

sector reform accelerates, and there is substantial adherence to

agreedpay reform,trainingsystems,and careerstreamsystems,

*

work on the Public Sector Reform Strategy and on the Legal and
Judicial study would be expedited, permitting the Public Sector
and Legal Reform project to be advanced into FY02. With

PolicyAdvce and TA

relevantsectoralprogressand adequateupstreamAAA,the
secondphase of supportto the HealthSWAPcouldbe advanced

*
*

PRSP Support
Enhanced HIPC Initiative
HIV
E
VA IDS

*

PrivateSector/Competitiveness

into FY02 and a second adjustment operation, to be focused on
private sector development, could be brought into the current

*

CAS period. Lendingvolumesunderthe RuralActionand

a

Energy Reform projects would be increased. Depending on a
number of factors, including overall economic performance, the
degree of political consensus, the pace of reforms in the various

*

sectors,the extentof Bankpreparednessas demonstratedin
relevantand high-qualityupstreamESW,and Government
capacity-and willingness-to absorbhigherlevelsof
indebtedness,lendingcouldincreaseup to US$655millionin the
high case.
Triggers for the high case would include all indicators

71.

for the base caseplus:
*

*

*

Formulationby end 2000,as wellas satisfactoryand
acceleratedimplementation
thereafter,of a

Environment:CriticalPressures

Advice

*
*

MaputoCorridorAdvice
DisasterPreventionand
andManagement
Mitigation
RegionalEnergyand
MegaprojectsAdwce
FinancialSectorAdvice
Learning
Global
Distance
Network,
Schoolnet
WorldLinks
for Development;Municipal
Development/AFRICITIES
(WBI)

IFC
* Technicalassistancetofinancial
institutions

*
*

*
*

FIAS workon investmentred tape
AdvisoryassistancetoSMEs
Infrastructure
advisorywork
Megaprojectsadvice

comprehensive public sector reform and governance
program, including progress specifically in actions to improve public sector capacity and
fiscal management.
A full PRSP endorsed by the Bank's Executive Directors, together with a record of
timely and substantial implementation,achieving or exceeding key targets on or ahead of
schedule.
Significant progress toward demonopolization of the energy, transport, and
telecommunications sectors.

- 27 Strong portfolio performance (with the share of problem projects remaining below 10
percent and disbursement ratios exceeding 20 percent).
72.
The Low Case. The low case scenario for Mozambique would result if political
instability led to government paralysis or to civil strife, or if Mozambique were to become
entangled in regional conflicts, or if governanceproblems severely impede the delivery of
services and the continuation of economic reform efforts. Other possible triggers of the low case
include a major crisis in the financial sector; substantial shifts in economic policy towards
reasserting state control over productive activities; or major distortions in price, trade, or
exchange policies that impede the development of markets. Whatever the cause, the low case
would likely be characterized by recession, increasing and ultimately high inflation, decreased
investor confidence, and an extended and pronounced decline in balance of payments support.
This in time would result in real declines in social sector spending and a reversal of gains in
social indicators.
73.

Triggers for the low case include:
*

*

*
*

Significant deviation from poverty-reducing policies outlined in the agreed PRSP
(including reductions in the share of spending allocated to priority poverty-alleviating
activities such as primaiy education and primary health care).
Significant reversals in economic reform policies, especially related to overall
macroeconomic management, the financial sector, privatization and trade policy, leading
to a more closed and centrally-controlled economic environment.
Civil strife, war, or governancepractices which cause the external development partners
to significantly reduce their level of support for an extended period.
Significant deterioration in portfolio performance (with problem projects significantly
greater than 10 percent and disbursement ratio significantly less than 20 percent for an
extended period of time).

74.
In the low case, new IDA lending will be constrainedto US$170 million over the CAS
period. Beyond a self-standing emergency operations in health, IDA will proceed only with the
Roads and Bridges project, the Municipal Development project, and a scaled-down Rural Action
project aimed at improving governance and basic service delivery in urban and rural areas. The
Roads and Bridges project would experience delays in achieving effectiveness due to slower than
expected completion of the existing roads project. In the low case, non-lending work would also
be scaled back and reoriented to assess the Government's commitment to its poverty reduction
strategy and to advise the Government on managing the economy. Completion of the proposed
Public Expenditure Review and the PRSP would remain important in this context.
B. Development Partnerships
75.
Mozambique receives almost US$600 million in aid each year, making aid coordination a
key concern. The bilateral donors are most active in infrastructure, rural development and
agriculture, health, and education (see Annex B9 and Annex E). Political governance, peace,
social protection and human rights-areas where the Bank is not active-also receive strong
bilateral support. Multilateral activity covers many areas, including political governance. Under
the Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), the UN system is concentrating on
governance, health and education, empowerment and the environment. The European Union has
been active in infrastructure, civil service reform, agriculture, health and education; and the
African Development Bank, besides providing balance of payments support, has been active in
infrastructure, education and the environment. There is also significant NGO involvement in the

-

28 -

social sectors and private sector involvement in infrastructure (e.g. upgrading the N4 road link
between the port of Maputo and South Africa).
76.
A large part of the Bank's work in Mozambique consists in developing and participating
in development partnerships. Short-term aid coordination is one area of priority. In addition to
the Consultative Group Meetings, which the Bank chairs, there are also monthly meetings of
Heads of Mission and Heads of Development in Maputo, chaired by the UNDP. Mozambique's
external partners look to the Bank for briefings, coordination, economic policy guidance, and
sectoral leadership. Regular consultative meetings are held by the Country Office with the NGO
Working Group, which is being expanded to include academic institutions. Over the longer term,
the Bank will continue to play an important role in coordinating aid in the delivery of support to
Mozamibique'soverall and sectoral reform programs. Continued coordination through the
SWAPs and further work on the PRSP will help to consolidate the partnership and enhance
Government leadership and accountability.
77.
A second area of priority concerns partnership within the Bank Group and with the IMF.
Joint Bank and Fund work on the HIPC Initiative and PFPs has already brought the two
institutions closer together. Ongoing work on the PRSP and the Enhanced HIPC Initiative will
further consolidate this close relationship. Within the Bank Group, the Country Team structure
has encouraged sharing information and improving coordination. IDA and the IFC work together
closely. This CAS is an IDA-IFC product and IDA and IFC are housed jointly in the World Bank
Group's office in Maputo. Improvements in the economy are likely to increase demand for MIGA
guarantees. With the Bank Group's new emphases on governance, innovation, competitiveness,
and knowledge management, there will be an increased role for WBI in delivering the Bank's
strategy. WBI is also expected to play a role in the Bank Group's delivery of policy advice and
training to assist Mozambique in formulating and implementing its Poverty Reduction Strategy.
C. Program Monitoring and Evaluation
78.
The Bank will monitor its program utilizing the indicators outlined in the program matrix
(see Annex B9). These indicators and targets will be revised and updated to link more directly
with the indicators in the full PRSP once it is completed, including a revision of sectoral targets,
as necessary, to fully account for the impact of the floods. Critical systems for overall program
monitoring and evaluation will be the M&E systems associated with SWAPs as well as several
household surveys to be undertaken regularly by the Government. The Bank, in joint missions
with the Fund, will monitor program implementation and performance under the PRSP and HIPC.
In addition, another OED Country Assistance Review is expected to be undertaken prior to the
next CAS to evaluate the overall program, and Client Surveys will continue to be undertaken to
gauge responsiveness to client needs. The portfolio will be managed closely by the Country
Office with annual portfolio reviews held with Government (see paragraph 30) and the Country
Team will continue to use the ICR process, and OED reviews, as important inputs in improving
the portfolio and its management.
D. Risks and Risk Management
79.
Mozambique continues to be a medium-risk high-reward country. The program faces six
major risks over the next few years. First, there is the political risk that the opposition's
dissatisfaction with the 1999 election results and limited participation in government may lead to
political paralysis and possibly civil strife, drawing on dissatisfaction among some groups of civil
society that believe that popular participation in decision-making is unduly limited. Second, the
widespread perception that growth is not sufficiently benefiting most people, or not sufficiently

- 29 benefiting Mozambican businesses and workers, could result in protectionist and distortive
regulations on trade, labor, and capital as well as more general backsliding on reform. This
would slow growth and employment creation, increase poverty, and concurrently reduce
Mozambique's external financing prospects, particularly from foreign investment. Third,
HIV/AIDS, if unchecked, could substantially increase poverty and compromise or reverse
Mozambique's development, even in the short term. Fourth, despite efforts to strengthenpublic
administration, capacity, and governance, gains in these areas may not materialize quickly
enough to improve absorptive capacity and program implementation, particularly where this
concerns assisting private sector initiative. Fifth, Mozambique's economic prospects are
increasingly linked to those of the sub-region, such that adverse economic developments in
neighboring countries, particularly South Africa and Zimbabwe, will dampen prospects for
Mozambique. Sixth, Mozambique is extremely vulnerable to climatic variations, including
drought and floods, that can adversely affect agricultural productivity and growth, water
supplies, health, economic development, and progress towards alleviating poverty.
80.
The Bank Group recognizes these risks and, where possible, will work to mitigate them.
This CAS aims chiefly to increase the impact of growth throughout the country, and especially
among the poor. With added emphasis on decentralization, IDA will work to ensure that
development processes and institutions are more inclusive, increasing popular participation in the
program. The Bank will support the PRSP process, which will include Government-led
consultations to inform the design of policy while also improving awareness of Government work
on poverty reduction and its achievements. The Bank Group will also improve dissemination of
its analytical work, such as its ongoing growth prospects paper, to raise awareness of its povertyreduction activities, the impact of policy choices, and the benefits of strategic thinking on
competitiveness. The Government's National HIV/AIDS Plan is a critical step toward limiting
the spread of the disease, and the Bank will be playing an important role in supporting that
program, including galvanizing increased resources and offering new lending, if necessary, to
step-up the program. The Bank will also help to improve public sector administration and
governance. Where capacity and institutional constraints in strategic areas compromise growth
and poverty reduction, alternative institutional arrangements will be explored (e.g. as occurred in
temporarily contracting customs to the private sector). With regard to the potential for regional
crises, the Country Team is working closely with Country Teams for the rest of Southern Africa
to understand and to support efforts to mitigate regional crises and their spill-over effects.
Mozambique's gradual diversification of trade with other countries in the region and the world,
along with its active participation in regional organizations, will also mitigate this risk. Finally,
the Bank will support Mozambique's efforts at the local, national and regional levels to identify,
reduce and transfer risks associated with hydro-meteorological hazards.
CONCLUSION

81.
Mozambique is an extremely poor country which, unlike many other impoverished
countries, has significant and real potential for growth and poverty reduction in the relative near
term. Just as important, its Government has to date shown serious commitment to the objectives
of poverty reduction, manifested by a sound reform program and, most recently, by its interim
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. The country's potential, coupled with its commitment and
programs, are yielding results. Yet there are daunting challenges and risks to be confronted if
Mozambique's potential is to be realized. The Bank has played an important role in supporting
Mozambique's impressive progress over the past decade. Selecting the right development
constraints to address at the right time - in an enviromnent of significant commitment but limited
capacity - has, in large part, been key to the success of the Government and of the Bank in
Mozambique. This CAS proposes that the Bank Group, with some shifts in focus, continue its
strong support to Mozambique over the next three years. Increasing economic opportunities,

- 30 -

enhancinggovemance,and improvinghumancapabilitiesare all part of the long-termagendafor
povertyreductionin Mozambique.Withits programunderthis CAS,the BankGroupproposes
to continueits partnershipwiththe Governmentand all of its developmentpartnersin this
endeavor.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Shengman Zhang

Washington, D.C.
May 8, 2000

Peter L. Woicke

- 31 Annex A2
Page 1 of 2

Mozambique at a glance
Mozambique

SubSaharan
Africa

Lowincome

17.3
230
4.0

628
480
304

3.515
520
1.844

2.2
2.4

2.6
2.6

1.7
1.9

POVERTYand SOCIAL
1999
Population,mid-year(milNlons)
GNP per capita (Aliasmethod,US$)
GNP(Atlasmethod US$bilblons)
Avera

5/9'00

Developmentdiamond
Lifeexpectancy

annual growth, 1993-99

Population %)Laborforce (%)

Gr-.
Gpnmary

G
GNP

enrollment

capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1993.99)
69
38
47
134
41
24
60
71
79
60

Poverty(% ofpopulationbelownatonal povertyline)
Urbanpopultion (% of totalpopulation)
Life expectancyat birth (years)
Infantmortality(per 1,000lIvebirths)
Child malnutriton(% of childrenunder5)
Access to safewater (% of Popu/ation)
literacy (% of populahionage 15+)
Grossptimaryenrollment (% ofschool-agepoWatIon)
Male
Female

33
51
91

31
63
69

47
42
77
84
69

74
32
108
113
103

Accessto safe water

Mozambique
Low-incomegrup
_

_

KEY ECONOMICRATIOSand LONG-TERMTRENDS
GDP (US$billions)
Gross domesticinvestment/GDP
Expoftsof goodsand serviceslGDP
Gross domestksavings/GDP
Grossrational savings/GDP1/

197t

1988

199S

1999I_

..

2.1
15.1
a1.
8
-14.1
-5.8

3.9
20.4
11.7
1.7
0.8

4.2
35.5
13.4
11.0
12,8

-31.4
1.2
200.7:
21.6

-20.5
1.5
204.1
29.0

-31.7
1.5
1022
28.0

538.0

202.0

Current accountbalance/GDP11
Interestpaymentspaidafter reschedulin/GDP21
Total debt afterrescheduling/GDP
2.
Total debt serviceafterrescheduling/exports
Presentvalueof debtafter
3/ 41
reschedulinglexports

Economicratios
Trade

Domestic
Savings
Si

i

Investment

Indebtedness
(averageannualgrowth)
GDP
GNP per capita
Exports ofgoodsand services

197848

1989-99

1998

1999

2000-04

-2.2
-5.0

5.7
3.6
14.2

12.0
9.3
6,5

9.0
6.4
8.3

75
5.S
26.0

1978

1988

1998

1999

42.9
25.4

31.7

34.3
20.8
10.5
44.9

31.6
24.1
12.6
44.3

103.6
10.5
37.3

89.0
9.3
30,5

78.8
10.2
37.9

.20

1989-99

1998

1999

Growthrates of exportsand imports(%)

4.2

7.0
22.9
7.5

5.4
12.6
16.0

'0
40
20

5.7

9.9

7.9

3.2
-5.1
11.5
2.2
5.9

11.8
32.2
29.4
24.2
11.8

8.7
9.3
83.9
55.3
8.6

-11.5

-

Mozambique
Low-incomegroup

____

STRUCTUREof the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Imnports
of goodsand services
197848
(averageannualgnwth)
AgricuRure
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Privateconsumption
Generalgovemmentconsumption
Grossdomesticinvestment
Importsof goodsand services
Gross nationalproduct

8.0
16.4
-3.6
-4.1
2.2
-5.7
-3.1

Growthrates of output and investment(%)
100
so0
so.4020
0*

94

9s

96
GDI

97

99 99
GDP
O

0
se

97

9s

-40

-Exports

-Imports

Note: 1999data are preliminaryestimates. GNP percapitaAtlas methodfor 1999is not official.
1/ Exdudingcapitalofficialgrants.
21Includingprivatedebt.
3/ Excludingprivatedebt.
4/ As percentof threeyear moving averageof exportsof goodsand non-factorservices.
average.If data are missing,the diamond
The diamondsshow four keyindicatorsin the country(in bold) comparedwith Rs income-group
vwllbe incomplete.

99

-32 -

Annex A2
Page 2 of 2

Mozambique
PRICES and GOVERNMENTFINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1978

1988

1998

1999

..

58.5

0.6
3.8

2.0
5.2

.3248.3

Current budget balance
Overall surplusldeficat

s0
s0
40

201

Governmentfinance

(%6
of GDP,includescurrentgrants)
Currentrevenue

Inflation(%)

o
..
..
..

15.9

15.7

17.6

94

2.3
-11.0

4.3
-6.5

5.4
-6.2

-

95

97

98

99

98

GDPdeflator -

cPI
1

TRADE

(US$miions)

1988

1998

1999

..

103

248

260

49
16

27
44

41
73

35
75

..

0

14

20

1,000

868

1,346

sW

32

39

40

84

86

200 _____||

211

307

99

95

97

82
120

88
108

89
108

..
.,
.

1988
188
730
-542

1998
534
1,075
-540

1999
559
1,579
-1,020

-10.

Netincome
Netcurrenttransfers

..
.,

-115
0

-256
0

-303
0

2
2s-2

Currentaccountbalance

..

-657

-796

-1,322

Financingitems(net)
Changes
in netreserves

..
..

682
-25

858
-62

1,375
-53

Total exports (fob)

Cashew
Prawn
Manufactures

'1978

(cif
Totalimports
Food

658
.

..

Fuel and energy

Capitalgoods
Exportpriceindex(1995=100)
Import price index (1995=f100)
Termsof trade (1995=100)

..

.

.
.
.

ExportandImportlevels(US$millions)
1soo
1,400
1.200

|||

_

||__

__

0
9s

93 94

97

06

D Exports

599

9

D Imports

I_

BALANCEof PAYMENTS
(USSmillions)
Exportsofgoodsandservices
Importsof goodsandservices
Resourcebalance

1978

Currentaccountbalanceto GDPratio(%)
0-_
.- 93

94

I

|9

97

06

r

98

99

I

*30 _
.35.
40
s -

Memo:

Reservesincludinggold (US$millions)
Conversion
rate(DEC,localA.S$)

33.0

190
625
669
524.6 11,850.3 12,691.0

1978

1988

1998

1999 I/

0

4,201

7,947

4,260

..

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
Compositlonof total debt, 1998(US$ millions)

(USS millions)

Totaldebtoutstanding
and disbursed1/

0

127

1,338

702

0
0

56
0

155
0

156
0

0

5

12

16

..

377
121
-3
5

313
275
43
213

428
191
344
392

IDA
Composition
of netresourceflows
Officialgrants
Officialcreditors21
Privatecreditors
Foreigndirectinvestment
Portfolio equity

G:9

0

0

IDA
Totaldebtservicepaid1/
IBRD

0

0

IBRD

1,338

_

F:1,975
C:204

,
D:556

0
0
..
..

E:3865

WorldBankprogram
Commitments3/
Disbursements 3/
Principal repayments
Netflows

0
0
0
0

75
44
4
40

186
134
3
131

176
218
6
212

Interestpayments
Nettransfers

0
0

1
39

9
122

11
201

A - I8RD
B - IDA
C- IMF

E - Bilateral
D0-Othermultilateral F - Private
G - Short-term

5/9/00
underoriginalHIPCInitiative.
in Naplesterms. Reflectsdebtforgiveness
1/ Afterrescheduling
2/ ExcludingIMFandincludingdebt reliefoncurrentpayments.
Management
ReformOperationprovidedas HIPCInitiativeinterimassistance.
3/IncludestheUSS150milliongrantundertheEconomic

- 33 -

Annex Bi
Page 1 of 1

CAS Lending Scenarios
Summary of Proposed IDA Program, FY2001-2003, by Case

Lending
FY
2001

Low case

High case

MunicipalDevelopment(US$30m)

Roadsand Bridges(US$80m)
MunicipalDevelopment(US$30m)
Natural ResourceManagement(UJS$1Om)

Roadsand Bridges(US$80m)
MunicipalDevelopment(US$30m)
Natural ResourceManagement(US$10m)
EconomicManagementand Private Sector EMPSO I- (US$100m)
Energy Reform(US$30m)

Rural Action(USS20m)

EconomicManagementand Private Sector EMPSO 1- (USS100m)
EnergyReform(US$20m)
Rural Action(US$40m)

Rural Action (US$70m)

Skills Development(US$SOm)
Health (US$40m)
Public Sector and Legal Reform(US$55m)

EMPSO II (US$100nm)
EnergyDevelopment(US$60m)

2002
Roads and Bridges (US$SOm)

2003

Base case

Health (US$40m)

Public Sectorand Legal Reform(US$55m)
Skills Development(US$SOm)
Health (US$40m)

Nonlending

Activity
2000 to
2003

Supportto PRSP
EnhancedHIPC
Public Sector Reforn Study
EnvironmentCriticalPressures
Public ExpenditureReview
Legal and Judicial Study
Povertyand Growth Linkages
Constraintsto Private Sector
HIV/AIDS
Disaster Mitigationand Management
SupportGlobal DistanceLeaming
Network (WBI)
Support SchoonetWorld Links for
Development(WBI)
MunicipalDevelopmentProgramsand
AFRICITIESpilots (WBI)
FinancialSector Advice
RegionalEnergyand Mega Projects
Advice
MaputoCorridor Advice
Private Sector CompetitivenessAdvice
RegionalTrade
EnviromentalFrameworkAssessment
Private Sector ConferenceTA
Country AssistanceStrategy

Low case

Base and high case

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes
yes

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes

yes

yes

yes
yes
yes
yes

- 34 -

Annex B2

Page1 of 1
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Indicator
PortfolioAssessment
Numberof ProjectsUnder Implementationa
Period(years)b
AverageImplementation
Percentof ProblemProjectsby Number cc
Percentof ProblemProjectsby Amounta c
PercentofProjectsat Riskby Numbera,d
Percentof Projectsat Riskby Amounta d
DisbursementRatio(%/.)e
Potfolio Management
CPPRduringthe year(yes/no)
TotalSupervisionResources('000US$)
AverageSupervision('000US$/project)

Item
Memorandum
ProjEval byOEDby Number
ProjEvalby OEDby Amt (US$millions)
% of OEDProjectsRatedU or HUbyNumber
% of OEDProjectsRated U or HUby Amt

1997

1998

1999

2000

18.0
4.8
16.7
12.1
38.9
32.1
19.4

15.0
5.1
0.0
0.0
6.7
2.7
18.5

13.0
4.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
22.9

15.0
4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
15.6

yes
2504.1
139.1

yes
2049.6
136.6

yes
1509.6
116.1

yes
1680.0
112.0

SinceFY 80
17
974.3
17.6
8.8

LastFive FYs
13
734.8
23.1
11.7

a. As shownin the AnnualReporton PortfolioPerformance(exceptfor currentFY).
b. Averageage ofprojectsin the Bank'scountryportfolio.
c. Percentof projectsratedU or HUon developmentobjectives(DO)and/orimplementationprogress(IP).
d. Asdefinedunderthe PortfolioImprovementProgram.
e. Ratioof disbursementsduringthe yearto the undisbursedbalanceof the Bank'sportfolioat the
beginningof the year: investmentprojectsonly.

- 35 AnnexB3
Page1 of 2

Bank Group Program Summary

Proposed 1BRD/IDABase-Case Lending Programa
Strategic

Fiscalyear

Project

US$(m)

Implementation

Rewardsb Risks(HIMILb
(HIMIL)

Rik(HM)b

2001

Roads and Bridges APL
MunicipalDevelopment
Natural Resource Management
Total

80
30
10
120

H
H
M

M
M
M

2002

Energy Reform
Economic Managementand Private
Sector Operation
Rural Action
Total

20

H

M

100
40
160

H
H

M
H

SkillsDevelopment
Health SWAP
Public Sector and Legal Reform
Total

80
40
55
175

H
H
H

M
M
H

TOTAL

455

2003

a. Thistable presentsthe proposedprogramfor the next threefiscalyears.
b. (H) indicateshigh; (M),moderate;and (L), low.

- 36 -

Annex B3
Page 2 of 2

IFC and MIGA Program, FY 1997-2000
1997

1998

1999

2000

123.7

0.5

11.1

3.1

0.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
97.0

55.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
45.0

0.0
92.0
6.0
2.0
0.0

81.0
19.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

47.0
0.0
53.0
0.0

45.0
55.0
0.0
0.0

100.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

19.0
81.0
0.0
0.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

40.0
1.0
40.0
1.0

2.8
2.0
42.8
3.0

0.0
0.0
42.8
3.0

Agribusiness,Manufacturing and Tourism
Manufacturing
Tourism

0.0
0.0

100.0
0.0

0.0
100.0

0.0
0.0

Total

0.0

100.0

100.0

0.0

IFC approvals (US$m)

Sector (%)
Finantial services
Food and agro-business
Hotels and tourism
Infrastructure
Manufacturing

Total
Investment instrument(%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total

MIGA guarantees approved (US$m)
Number of guarantees approved
MIGA outstanding guarantees (US$m)
Number of guarantees outstanding

Sector (%)

- 37 -

Annex B4
Page 1 of 1

Summary of Nonlending Services
Product

CompletionFY

Cost (USSOOO)

Audience'

Objective

Recent completions
PFP

FY99

70

Government,Bank,Donors, Public

Policy orientation

H[PCCompletionPoint

FY99

90

Government,Bank,Donors, Public

Policyorientation

EnhancedHIPCDecisionPoint

FY00

90

Government,Bank,Donors, Public

Policvorientation

Intenm PRSP Support

FY00

70

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

Policyorientation

Flood Emergency./Damage
Assessment

FY00

75

Govenfment,Bank, Donors,Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving

GrowthProspects

FY00

55

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

CountryAssistanceStrategy

FY00

230

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving;
public debate
Policyorientation;public debate

FinancialSectorStudy

FY00

157

Government,Bank

Policyorientation

Rural DevelopmentStrategy

FY00

115

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

Policy orientation;problemsolving;
public debate

Annual

340

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

Underway

Planned
Fonnal
PRSP Support
EnhancedHIPCCompletionPoint

FY01

85

Government,Bank, Donors, Public

Policyorientation,problemsolving,
public debate
Policyorientation;public debate

PublicSectorReformStudy

FY01

155

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

Policyorientation;public debate

PublicExpenditureReview

FY01

150

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

EnvironmentCriticalPressures

FY02

200

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

Constraintsto PrivateSectorDevelopment

FY02

170

Govemment,Bank, Donors,Public

Legaland Judicial Study

FY02

150

Government,Bank, Donors

Policyorientation;problemsolving;
public debate
Policyorientation;problemsolving;
public debate
Policy orientation;problemsolving;
public debate
Policy orientation;problemsolving,
public debate

Povertyand GrowthLinkages

FY03

150

Government,Bank, Donors

Policy orientation;problemsolving

CountryAssistanceStrategy

FY03

230

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

Policy orientation;public debate

PrivateSectorCompetitiveness

Ongoing

150

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

PrivateSectorConferenceTA

Ongoing

30

Government,Bank, Donors, Public

FinancialSectorAdvice

Ongoing

120

Government,Bank

Policy orientation;problemsolving;
public debate
Policyorientation;problemsolving;
public debate
Policyorientation;problemsolving

RegionalEnergyand MegaProjectsAdvice

Ongoing

150

Government,Bank, Donors, Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving

Maputo Corridor

Ongoing

80

Government,Bank, Donors, Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving

RegionalTrade

Ongoing

85

Government,Bank,Donors, Public

Policyorientation,problemsolving

FY01

90

Govenmment,
Bank, Donors,Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving

Ongoing

50

Govemment,Bank, Donors,Public

Policyorientation;problemsolving

Ongoing

ID

Government,Bank, Donors,Public

Policy orientation;problemsolving;
public debate

Informal (Policv advice and TA)

EnvironmentalFrameworkAssessment
DisasterMitigationand Management
Other
HRV/AIDS

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemnination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

- 38 -

Annex B5
Page 1 of I

Poverty and Social Development Indicators
Same region

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population,mid-year(millions)
Growth rate (% annual average)
Urban population(% of population)
Total fertilityrate (births per woman)

1970-75

1980-85

1992-98

SubSaharan
Africa

10.5
2.2
8.6
6.5

13.5
2.3
19.4
6.5

16.9
2.1
38.0
5.3

612.4
2.2
33.0
5.4

2,035.6
1.7
31.0
3.1

..

69.4
62.0
71.3
480
1,566
16

520

..

230
877
4

32

POVERTY
(%of population)
Nationalheadcount index
Urbanheadcountindex
Rural headcountindex

..
..

INCOME
GNP per capita (US$)
GDP per capita based on PPP
Telephonemainlines (per 1,000 people)

250

Lowincome

SOCIALINDICATORS
Illiteracy rate
(96of population 15 years of ageand above)
71

60

42

Male
Female
Gross primary enrollment rate
Total
Male
Female

56
86

43
75

34
50

62

71
79
60

77
84
69

108
113
103

Repetitionrate
Accessto safewater
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunizationrate
(%6under 12 months)
Measles
OPT

33

25

9
82
2

24
44
12

47
74
32

74

39
29

70
61

58
53

80
82

..
..

41

Total

Child malnutrition(% under5 years)
Wasted
Stunting
Life expectancyat birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per thousandlive births)
Under5 (per thousandlive births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female(per 1,000 population)
Matemal(per 100,000 live births)
HIV-AIDS
Sero-prevalenceof adult HIV infection(per 100K)

6

42
41
44

44
43
46

47
..
..

51
49
52

63
62
64

168
281

133
223

134
201

91
147

69
92

498
382

468
361

432
383

235
208

.,

..

400
354
1,100

..

..

14.5

7

al Refersto 1999.
1999 World DevelopmentIndicatorsCD-ROM,World Bank;African DevelopmentIndicators2000, World Bank; and, AfricaBriefings, World Bank.

- 39 AnnexB6
Page 1 of 3
Mozambique - Key Economic Indicators

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic product'

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

Agriculture

30

38

38

35

34

32

32

30

29

28

Industry

23

19

19

19

21

24

25

26

26

27

Services

47

43

43

46

45

44

43

44

45

45

114

102

102

98

98

89

90

91

88

87

20

23

19

19

20

35

35

22

19

20

14

12

10

11

9

11

15

13

10

11

6

11

9

8

11

25

20

9

9

9

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixedinvestmient
Governmentiinvestment
Private investment
(includes increase in stocks)
Exports (GNFS)b

14

15

15

13

12

13

14

18

24

23

Imports (GNFS)

48

40

36

30

30

38

38

31

32

30

Grossdomesticsavings

-14

-2

-2

2

2

11

10

9

12

13

-7

-2

-3

2

1

13

11

7

9

11

2267

2392

2842

3438

3893

4169

4317

4543

5024

5514

140

140

160

180

210

230

250

250

260

280

Grossdomestioproductatmarketprices

7.5

4.3

7.1

11.3

12.0

9.0

5.4

7.9

8.2

7.4

GrossDomesticlncome

2.3

6.7

6.3

11.9

12.9

14.1

4.3

7.5

7.3

8.0

5.1

2.0

4.7

8.9

9.5

6.8

3.5

5.5

5.8

5.0

Total consumption

-10.5

-8.0

4.3

6.0

10.8

6.5

0.8

3.3

1.3

3.8

Private consumption

-10.9

-4.5

4.7

5.9

9.4

6.5

-0.8

4.7

2.8

3.6

Gross national savings

Memorandumitems
Grossdomestic product
(US$ million at cun-ent prices)
GNPpercapita(US$,Atlasmethod)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 1995 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices

(Continued)

- 40 -

AnnexB6
Page 2 of 3

Mozambique - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS?
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise CIF
Resource balance
Net currenttransfers
Current account balance after all grants

Net private foreigndirect investment
Long-termloans(net)
Official

355

407

479

509

534

559

585

832

1202

164

174

226

230

248

260

285

511

840

1282
885

1075

1579

1653

1396

1590

1663

1018

899

955

938

881

727

783

760

868

1346

1317

1092

1226

1299

-662

-492

-475

-429

-540

-1020

-1068

-564

-388

-381

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

-300

-338

-422

-298

-483

-895

-845

-500

-387

-355

35

45

73

64

213

392

104

80

101

122

-24

19

175

116

57

242

190

-86

-175

-184

145

-29

100

49

17

-113

20

-120

-132

-119

76

67

40

355

170

34

-43

-65

-169

48

Other capital (net, mcil. errors & ommissions and debt

341

333

333

232

275

313

462

456

410

398

Change in reservesd

-52

-60

-159

-115

-62

-53

89

50

50

19

-29.2

-20.6

-16.7

-12.5

-13.9

-24.5

-24.7

-12.4

-7.7

-6.9

23.4

-2.9

31.0

1.7

13.0

2.4

7.2

95.2

73.1

1.3

5.2

-5.9

53.5

-6.9

1.4

3.2

9.4

2.6

2.7

2.7

-55.5

43.4

58.0

149.0

-31.2

35.7

-2.5

2.8

3.0

3.3

3.0

-25.3

8.2

5.7

19.3

52.0

-4.3

-17.5

10.7

4.5

Private

Memorandum items
(% of GDP)
Resource balance
Real annual growth rates ( YR95 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

- 41 -

AnnexB6
Page 3 of3

Mozambique - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)'
Currentrevenues

17.8

15.0

13.8

16.0

15.7

176

17.6

16.0

15.3

15.3

Current expenditures

14.7

10.3

9.6

10.8

11.4

12.3

13.5

12.1

10.8

10.9

3.0

4.7

4.2

5.3

4.3

5.4

4.1

3.9

4.5

4.4

Capital expenditure

15.8

14.0

11.5

13.2

10.6

11.7

15.6

12.7

10.3

10.4

Foreign financing

13.7

10.0

8.5

10.8

8.8

6.5

9.9

7.4

5.2

5.5

23.7

23.1

18.6

18.7

18.9

21.6

21.4

21.4

21.4

21.4

15.4

13.3

13.6

13.6

Currentaccountsurplus(+)ordeficit()

Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
GrowthofM2(%)

57.6

54.7

21.1

24.4

17.6

30.9

Price lndices( YR95 =100)
Merchandiseexportpriceindex

87.6

95.9

95.0

95.0

90.7

92.8

95.0

87.1

82.7

86.1

Merchandiseimportpriceindex

121.6

134.3

133.7

122.8

117.7

120.0

122.6

123.2

125.1

126.8

Merchandis. terms of trade index

72.1

71.4

71.1

77.3

77.1

77.3

77.5

70.7

66.1

67.9

Real exchange rate (US$/LCUJ

52.2

49.9

57.3

62.4

64.3

64.3

66.8

68.9

68.4

67.8

Consumer price index (% change)

63.1

54.4

44.6

6.4

0.6

2.0

9.5

5.0

5.0

5.0

GDPdeflator(%change)

59.4

52.0

40.9

11.1

3.8

5.2

10.2

5.7

5.0

5.0

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central govenunent.
f "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$9LCU denotes appreciation.

- 42 Annex B7
Page 1 of 1
Mozambique - Key Exposure Indicators

8689

9129

7731

7730

7947

4260

4106

4179

4174

4149

6968

7360

5885

5818

5972

1928

1480

1501

1527

1550

Net disbursements(US$m)a

156

4

162

138

70

254

334

-79

-126

Total debtservice paid (TDS) (US$m)a
of which:Public

117
117

128
128

139
135

106
90

155
104

156
86

176
50

179
48

222
51

254.2
54

2447.1
1962.2
383.3
307.4
33.0
33.0

2243.8
1808.9
381.6
307.6
31.3
31.3

1612.9
1227.8
272.1
207.1
28.9
28.2

1519.6
1143.6
224.8
169.2
20.7
17.6

1487.1
1117.5
204.1
153.4
29.0
20.0

761.9
344.9
102.2
46.2
28.0
15.3

701.8
252.9
95.1
34.3
30.1
9.1

502.5
180.5
92.0
33.0
21.5
5.8

347.2
127.0
83.1
30.4
18.4
4.2

323.58
120.89
75.241
28.109
19.828
4.2

714.0
4.2
3.6

890.0
6.1
4.8

1015.0
7.3
5.4

1162.0
9.4
10.5

1338.0
12.0
11.5

702.0
16.5
12.7

865.0
9.5
19.0

990.0
10.6
22.0

1164.0
11.5
22.6

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0

5.1
0.0

3.3
5.0

7.4
32.8

19.4
28.5

Debt outstandingand
disbursed(TDO) (US$m)a
of which:Public

-158

Debt and debt serviceindicators a

(%/-)
TDO/XGSb
of which:PublicTDO/XGSb
TDO/GDP
of which:Public TDO/GDP
TDSXGSb
of which:Public TDS/XGSb
IBRD exposureindicators (%)
IDATDO((US$m)
IDATDS(US$m)
IDATDS /PublicDS
IFC (US$m) c
Loans
Equityand quasi-equity

a. Afterreschedulingand HIPC Iniciativereliefincluding debtforgiveness.Includespublic and publicly guaranteeddebt,
non-guaranteeduse of IMF credits and shostterm capital.
b. "XGS"denotes exports of goodsand non-factorservices.
c. Refersto disbursementsfrom previousJuly I to June 30 of year where data is shown. Data for 1997 refers to disbursementsfrom
1992to June 30, 1997. Data for 2000 refersto disbursementsfrom Julyl,1999 to March30,2000.

1285.1
14.0
25.9

Annex B8
Page 1 of 2

Status of Bank Group Operations (Operations Portfolio)
Closed
Projects

17

Board
Date
Fiscal
Year
1992
1993
1993
1993
1994
1994
1994
1996
1998
1999
1999
1999
2000
2000
2000

Last PSR
SupervisionRating
ctive Projects
P001781
P001797
P001810
P001796
P001804
P001811
P001780
P001792
P039015
P001799
P001786
P052240
P049874
P042039
P070432

Agr. Serv.Rehab.
CapacityBuilding
Legal&PublicSectorCapacityBuilding
Rural Rehabilitation
2nd. Road and Costal
Financial SectorCapacity
Gas Engeneering
Health SectorRecovery
NationalWater I
AgriculturalSectorExpenditureProgram
Education SectorStrategicProgram(ESSP)
NationalWaterII
EnterpriseDevelopment
Railwayand Port Restructuring
Flood EmergencyRecoveryProject(FERP)
Total

Development
Obiectfves
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

ImDlementation
Progress
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

OriminalAmount in US$ Millions
IBRD
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
DisbursementsaI

IDA CanceL Undisb.
35.0
12.5
6.8
48.6
0.0
8.2
15.5
3.0
0.5
20.0
0.0
1.7
188.0
0.0
60.4
9.0
0.0
2.2
30.0
0.0
8.6
98.7
0.0
61.1
36.0
0.0
31.5
30.0
0.0
28.7
71.0
0.0
67.5
75.0
0.0
74.5
26.0
0.0
25.8
100.0
0.0
99.2
30.0
0.0
29.8

Orig. Frm Rev'd
18.3
3.0
9.7
0.0
3.5
0.8
1.5
0.8
55.5
0.0
2.0
0.0
8.6
0.0
58.9
0.0
6.1
0.0
6.8
0.0
7.1
0.0
1.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

812.8

179.3

15.5

506.4

4.6

-

- 44 Annex B8
Page 2 of 2
Mozambique
Statementof IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 3/31/00
(In US DollarsMillions)
Held
FY ApprnCompany
1995 AEFBonar
1996 AEF CahoraBassa
1997 Agrimo
1996/00 BIM
1998 BIM-INV
1996 CajuMocita
1997 MOZAL
1999 Maragra Sugar
1992 Polana Hotel
1997 SEF CPZ
1997 SEFCTOX
2000 SEFCaboCaju
1998 SEF Joao Jamal
1999 SEFROBEIRA
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed

Loan
Equity Quasi
Partic
0.26
0
0
0.18
0
0
1.86
0
0
0
7.50
0
0
0.30
0
2.35
0
0
55.00
0
65.00
10.30
0
0
1.40
0
0
1.00
0
0
0.73
0
0
0.58
0
0
0.24
0
0
0.21
0
0
74.1

7.8

65.0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.0

Approvals Pending Commitment
Loan
1997 AEFAfristem
1996 BIM
1999 SEF CTN
1999 SEF Extramac
Total Pending Commitment:

Equity

Quasi

Partic

0.6
10.0
0.7
0.4

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

11.7

0

0

0

Loan
Equity Quasi
Partic
0.26
0
0
0.18
0
0
1.86
0
0
0
7.50
0
0
0.30
0
2.35
0
0
27.0
0
58.50
0
0
0
1.40
0
0
1.00
0
0
0.73
0
0
0.30
0
0
0
0
0
0.21
0
0
35.3

7.8

58.5

0
0
0
0
0
0
()
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.0

Annex B9
Page 1 of 12

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country

Development
Objectives

Diagnosis

.____________

I

Government.
Strategy/Actions

Program

Matrix (FY01-03)

Selected Bank (underlined)
and Governmenit

Bank Group Instruments

Other Donors

Performance Indicators
.LINCREASING
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

SMUGTHEN7NA 0* Growth averagedmore
THE
PRIuVATE
than 10%in past 3 years;
SEC7OR
inflation downfrom 48% in
SEAtOR,Nt
1996to low single digits.
AD)THE
*
About 1,200
FIANCIAL
companiesrestructuredor
SECTOR
privatized.
* Soundprospectsfor
growth - esp. in agriculture,
manufacturing,tourism,
services,energy, mining,
* Sharp increasesin FDI
and more interestexpressed
by investors.
* Fiscal sustainabilityan
issue: economyand budget
heavily aid dependentfiscal revenueslow; and
debt level remainshigh.
* Economyhas high
operatingcost due to poor
infrastructure,bureaucratic
bottlenecks,inadequate
institutionaland regulatory
frameworks.
* Demonopolizationof
key sectorsneeded to lower
costs and improveservices.

Reduce fiscal imbalances
by increasingrevenues: finish
customsreform,strengthen
VAT,limittax and customs
exemptions,and improve
internaltax administration.
.
Aim governmentprograms
(esp. in infrastructure)at
improvinggrowth and poverty
reductionthroughstimulating
private sector developmentand
service delivery.
*

Improveinstitutionaland
regulatoryenvironmentfor
private sector development.
*
Develop and implement
regulatoryframeworkenabling
effectivedemonopolizationin
key sectors (e.g.transport,
telecommunications,energy).
,
*
Continueliberalizationof
trade regimeto stimulateprivate
sectordevelopment.
*

Povertyheadcountindex
reduced to 60% by 2004, from
70% in 1996/97.
*
Annual real GDP growth of
7% to 10%and inflationof 5% to
7%, for the period2001-2003.
* Fiscal deficitbeforegrants
within annuallimits established
under PRGF arrangementwith the
IMF.

IDA
Lendin:

*

*
Reductionin externaldebt in
NPV termsto the equivalentof
150 percentof exports (at end1998data) by achieving
completionpoint under Enhanced
HIPC framework.

Private SectorOp. (FY02)
Natural Resource (FY01)
Energy Reform (FY02)
*
Public Sector and Legal
Reform project (FY03)
Portfolio:
*
*

Economic Management
Reform Operation(EMRO)
*

Private Enterprise
DevelopmentProject (PODE)
* Financial Sector Cap. Bldg.
*
Flood EmergencyRecovery
Program (FERP)
Non-Lendine:
*
PER and IncidenceAnalysis
0 LgladJdca
td
*
Legal and Judicial Study
*
Povertyand Growth Links
* PRSP Support
*
Enhanced HIPC Initiative
*
Financial Sector(informal)
*

Private Sector
CompetitivenessAdvice
* Constraintsto PSD Study
* Regional Trade (informal)
* Regional Energyand Mega
*

.__
________
________________
___ _____________ _ _

_

Projects
advice

Performanceindicators to be reviewedand revised as necessaryfollowingformulationof full PRSP, scheduledfor completionin March 2001.

BilateralDonors:Austria;
Denmark;France (AFD); Italy;
Netherlands;Norway; Sweden;
UK; USAID
MultilateralDonors: ADB; EC;
UNIDO

AnnexB9
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE

Page 2 of 12

Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)

.

Develo.pme|t

SJNCtOtR
0 f ff f
ENvt.ONMI0wJ

FIA:
E

ffi

;

Private financialsector
includes 11 banks, a leasing
company,and 7 other
:financial institutions.
* Regulationsadopted
on licensing,capital
adequacy,and exposure
limits.
0* High intermediation
costs, including
inefficienciesin some
banks and limited
competitionfor bankable
credits,contributingto high
lendingrates.
* Access to credit
limited outsidemain cities,
esp. in rural areas.
0
Poor accounting
standards, contract
enforcement.
*

B kG u

eied)et

Di nosis

Maintainingthe stabilityof
the financial system;improving
financialoversightthrough
enhancedand proactive
supervision.
*
Assessmentof causes of
high intermediationcostswith a
view to reducingcosts.
* Broadeningthe financial
systemto increaserange of
productsand servicesavailable
and lower the cost of capital
throughcompetition.

n

e1

O

D

IFC
Expansionof IFC Project
Finance
* Financingand advisory
servicesfor megaprojects
* SME financing/advisory
services

*

*

*

________:______::________________

advisory
serviceson
a
r
e Equityinvestments,tertn
resourcesand technical assistance
to banks
*
Investmentsin new nonbank financial intermediaries,
includingmicrofinance,leasing,
insurance,and housingfinance
* Advisoryassistanceon
regulatoryand financialsector
issues
MIGA
* Guaranteesfor foreign
investors
Investmentmarketing
FIAS

assistance
to CPI

MIGA:
Strategv:MIGAseeks to strengthenMozambique'sprivate sector
by supportingprojects with high developmentimpactand those
investmentintermediariescharged with attractingforeign direct
investment.

IFC:
StrateIvF>ECis seeking opportunitiesacrossall sectors, with emphasisplaced onfinancing and advisoryassistancein
infrastructure;term resources, equityand institutionbuildingin thefinancial sector; support to well-conceivedlarge
scale resourcedevelopmentprojects; andfinancing,management,and technicalassistanceto SMEs. SME supporthas
beenconcentratedin the agribusinessand tourismsectors.

Port olio: MIGA'sportfolio consists of three guaranteecontracts
in the manufacturingand tourism sectors with a US$42.8m Gross
Exposure,of which MIGA 's Net Exposure is IUS$30.8m. MIGA is
also workingon a possible U)S$75 m power project.

Portfolio:IFC's Mozambiqueportfolio is dominatedby Mozal Aluminum;with other mainstream investmentsin the
Polana hlotel,Banco de Investimentosde Mozambique,MaragraSugar, Caju Mocita,Agrimo; and SME investments
in Bonar SociedadPesqueriaLtd., CahoraBassa Fisheries,CompanhiaAgro-Pecuariade MozambiqueLda.,
Companhiade Pescas da ZambeziaLda., Complexide Xai-Xai, Joao Jamal, Cabo Caiju, and ROBEIRA.

InvestmentMarketingServices:MIGIM will continueits support of
the InvestmentPromotion Center and the WorldBank-funded
technicalprogram over the next threeyears.

Pipeline: Projects in developmentincludeprivatizationof the nationai telecommunicationscompany, industrialpark
developmentin Maputo, other investmentsarisingfrom the developmentof the three transport corridors, termfinance
to the bankingsector, equity in leasingand microfinanceinstitutions,and a range of SME investmentsin agribusiness,
tourism,servicesand manufacturing.

AnnexB9
Page 3 of 12

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)

Dvelopment
Objectives

Diagnosis

Goverunent
Strategy/Actions

BookGroup Xstruetits

Slected Bank (underlIned)
and Government
Performance Indicators

Roads

IDA

DEmoPI
1Ni~SThtiCflJki?

LendinF
Lendine:
Network poor but
improving;many densely
populated and productive
areasnot connected.
.* Road managementand
maintenancevery weakand
underfunded.
* Nationalroad
constructionindustryweak.
*

Expand links to agricultural
areas;secure accessto ports;
upgradeinternationalcorridors;
improvecoastalnetwork for
tourism;improveNorth-South
transportroutes.
*
Improvesustainabilityof
road rehabilitation.
*
Improve road maintenance.
* Increaseprivatesector
involvementin road
maintenance.
* Improve institutional
frameworkfor sustained,
efficient,and transparentroad
management.
*

Meet annualtargets on
kilometersunder routine and
periodic maintenance(targetsto
be determined).
*
EstablishRoadBoard that is
independentof ANE.
*
Financingand allocation
functions (underroad fund!
separatedfrom manazementof
contracts and supervisionof
constructionand maintenance.
* Reduceproportionof
impassableroads to 6% in 2003
(from 10% in 1998).
*
Reduceproportionof roads
in poor conditionsto 26% in 2003
(from 32% in 1998).
*

Railwaysand Ports
* Rail and port network
largestin SSA after South
Africa; significantpotential
for foreignexchangeand
employment.
* Railway performance
1/3 of pre-warlevel;
infrastructuredamaged.
.
* CFM over-staffedand
institutionallyweak.
* Regulatoryframework
inadequate.
* Main ports and rail
lines under concessioning

agreements.

Implementfourfold
strategy:i) involveprivate
sector,throughconcessioning,
leasing equipment,joint ventures
and BOT arrangements;ii)
restructureCFM; iii) strengthen
Ministryof Transportand
Communications;iv) provide
appropriateregulatory
framework
*

Trafficfrom the neighboring
countriesto exceed 10million
tons (port) and 7 milliontons
(railways)by year 2002.
Concessionsfor all three
*
main port and rail systemsfully
operationalizedby end 2001.
p
*

*

Roads and Bridges(FY01)
Portfolio:

ROCS II
Non-Lendine:
*
Maputo Corridor(informal
policy advice)
*
PRSP Support

Other Donors

Bilateral Donors:Denmark;
FranceKuwait
(CFD);Fund;
Ireland;
Japan;
~KfW;
Norway;
Portugal;South Africa; Sweden;
Switzerland;UK; USAID

*

IDA
Portfolio
*
Railway andPort
Restructuring
IFC
Financingfor private
concessionaires
conce
ssionaires
*
Advisory assistanceon
privatization/concessioning
*
Workshop on international
practice in privateprovision of
infrastructure
*

._

MultilateralDonors: ADB;
BADEA; EC; IFAD; Islamic
DevelopmentBank;OPED;

BilateralDonors:France (MCF);
Italy; Spain; USAID

Annex B9

Page 4 of 12

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)

0

00 .^

~~Energy
*

Power grids limitedto

((.i'QNT. cities.

IDA
Undertakepower sector
structuraland pricing reforms.
*

*
Establishautonomous
* Export potential large
(coal and hydroelectricity). licensingand regulatorysystems
for
energy investments,incl.
Regulatory
reform,
*
and policy
....
development
megaprojects.

slow due to weakcapacity.
* Low householdaccess
to energy.

* Desien and implement
frameworkfor expansionof
electricityaccess. including
regionallvdifferentiatedtariffs
and separationof generation.
transmission,
and distribution
triffs.

*

Energy Reform(FY02)
Prtfolio

*

GasEngineering
Non-Lending

*

PRSP Support

BilateralDonors:Denmark;
Norway; Sweden;USAID
MultilateralDonor: ADB

* Implementnational
* Increaserevenuesfrom
IFC
investmentplan for community- electricityexports (from US$ 36.2
*
Financingfor private
million in 1998).
based biofuel supply
providers
0
Inraeacs
oeetiiy
management.
Increase
accessto electricity
*
Invest in public and private
sector capacity-buildingefforts. over the period 2000-2003 (from * Advisory assistanceon
privatization
5% of householdsin 1999)
(Quantitativetarget to be
establishedover PRSPprocess).

Water
Urban watersupply
poor, of low qualityand
reliability; sanitationand
drainage causeadditional
problems.
X rural
*Lowrurl
access
.: g Low
aces to
to
afe water, and poor
maintenance.
* Need for regional
..jS!S!
water
$.5\
S.... resource
management.

IDA
Portfolio
ImplementNationalWater
Policy,including:i) increased
beneficiaryparticipation;ii)
decentralizedautonomouswater
supplyand sanitationservices;
resources
iii)
integratedwater
management;
iv) capacity
building; vi) increasedrole for
the privatesector.
*

........

*
Urban: Increaseaccessto P
safe water in maiorcities to 50%
by 2004 (from 44% in 1998):

*

National WaterI
National Water11

Rural: Increaserural access
Non-Lending
to
40%
by
2004
to
safe
water
(fom 12%einte198)
40%Sbpport4NDP;
(from 12% in 1998).
* PRSP Support
Wae Rsure
WaterResources
Management:: National Water
IFC
*
Financingfor private
Policy and Water Law updated.
National WaterResources
operators
ManagementStrategvformulated * Advisoryassistanceon
privatization
with strong stakeholder
participation,by 2004.

Bilateral Donors: AusAID;

Austria;Canada; Denmark;
Finland; France (AFD); Germany;
Italy;KfW ; Netherlands;NDF;
Portugal;Sweden; Switzerland;
USAID

*

Donors: ADB; EC;
Multilateral
UNICEF

Annex B9
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country

Development
Objectives

Diagnosis

*
80% of Mozambicans
RURAL
live in rural areas,of whom
DEYBEtoWM&w' 70% are poor.
PRiOOlG

AGRXLTUE

Governsut
Strategy/Actions

*
Rural developmcntcentral
to povertyreductionstrategy;
elementsinclude (i) investment

Agriculturedominates in infrastructure;(ii) service
ruralmeeconomy;only 32%
AD
delivery,incl. agricultural
ofra
GDP,obut
olarg
p20otnil
extension;
(iii) establishing
good
of GDP, but largepotential; pocy,
institutional
and
only15% f aablelan
polcy,insttutonalandlivestock
cultivated.
regulatoryframeworks.
* Cereals and cassava
* Improveeffectivenessof
productionexceedsnational public servicedelivery and
needs,but there are interregulatoryfunctionsthrough
regionaldifferences.
implementingPROAGRI.
* Half of households
* Implementand enforcenew
marketoutput; of these,
lad law.
only30% of output sold.
*
Promotedecentralizationto
* Constraintsto growth
improveservice deliveryand
include:low capitalization; empowerrural poor.
limitedaccess to purchased
inputs; lackof land market;
poor rural infrastructure;
limitedaccess to credit,

Program

Page 5 of 12

Matrix (FYO1-03)

SelectedDank(underlined)
and Government
Perfortnance Indicators

Bank Group Instruments

Other Dopors

:

Annual percentageincrease
in agriculturalGDP.
*
Annual rcentage increase

IDA
Lendin-:
Roads and Bridges (FY01)

BilateralDonors:AusAID;
Austria;Denmark;Finland;
aNet(AFD); Germany;Ireland

in real value of export crops
i
*in smallholders'
Annual percentage
crop andincrease

Rural Action (FY02)
Eeg
eom(Y2
EnergyReform
(FY02)

Portugal; Sweden;Switzerland;
UK; USNID
K SI

*

0*

sales.

Portfolio:
*

Rural RehabilitationProject

*
AgriculturalServices
RehabilitationProject
*
PROAGRI
*
ROCS II
National WaterDev. I

*
*

Non-Lendint: S
RuralDevelopmentStrategy
Poverty and GrowthLinks
Public'ExpenditureReview

*

PRSP Support

*

IFC
* Investmentsin large-and
small-scaleagribusiness

MultilateralDonors: ADB;EC;
FAO; IBIS; IFAD; SADC; UNDP

Annex B9

Deielopment

ENSVANO SOUND
ENVIRONMJ0WTRL

* ' Diagnosis
Objectives

Rich endowment
*
largely unexploited.
Natural resources
contribute 45% of GDP and
70% important
Xof exports;
0
to rural populations.
0* Rapid growth could
threaten environment if not
appropriately managed.
0*

*

Interdependence with

neighboringcountrieshigh,

esp. in water resources.
*

Weak institutional

capacityto managenatural
resources through policy
formulation, regulation, and
enforcement.

Page 6 of 12

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)
Bank Group nstrumets
Selettd Biak (underlind)
Government
and Govenet
StrategylAc~~~~~~tious
A PerfomneIdctr
IDA and GEF

for environmental management

Regulationsadopted by end*
2000 that apply to the

and elaborate complementary
regulations, including for waste
management, environmental
management, marine pollution.

environment law (including on
waste management,
environmental standards, marine
pollution, CFC emission, and

Establish environmental
assessment review system across
ministries and build capacity to

protected areas).
Environmental assessment
*
review system established across

Management (FY01)
Portfolio:

buildingplan under

Boiest

*

Completelegal framework

*

implementand enforce,
*

Developwaterresource

managementprogram, including

with a view to disaster

prevention and mitigation.

Lending*
*

*

TasrnirCnevto

ministriesand related capacity-

i

Implementation.

A in FY02
R
)
ura chon (F
Municipal Dev. (FYOI)
Natural Resource

Coastal and Marine
*
*

National Waterl and II
PROAGRI

Non-Lending:
Environment Critical
Pressures
*
Environmental Framework
*

Assessment
I

PRSP Support

IFC
Extension of World Bank
*
standards to private sector and
financial intermediaries

Other

o

BilateralDonors: Denmark;
Finland; Netherlands; Norway;
USAID

Annex B9
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)
Government

Diagnosis

Dlevelopment

PRoxfM'oU

*

Local firms have

,"V,VO
VAf lox,

*

Created new Ministry of

and Government
Performance Indicators
*

strategiesfor vocational,
technical,and higher level

a
Few local firms are
ANPLODMrNT
EmPLOYMENT competingin marketsother

s Develop and implement
strategiesfor technicaland
vocationaltraining as well as
higher education
* Support entrepreneurswith
matching grant scheme.

education(specificindicatorsto
be establishedunder PRSP).
*
Increaseemploymentand
job creation(specificindicatorsto
be establishedunder PRSP).

* Educationsystemand
curriculanot meetinglabor
marketneeds.

* Promote interbusiness
linkages.
*
Build capacityamong local
entrepreneursin sectoral
programs:e.g. road construction.

IDA

Develop and implement

HigherEducation,Science,and
Technology

* Skills shortageis
constrainingemploymentof
Mozambicans.

Other Donors

*

limited abilityto compete,
(.70.PF.nDVENF&.sesp. internationally.

than most basic products.

Bank Group Instruments

Selected Bank (utnderlined)

Strategy/Actions

Objectives

Page 7 of 12

Lendin2:

a

S

Austria;Canada; Finland; France
(MCF) Germany Italy Japan

MunicipalDev. (FY01I)

Netherlands Spain; Sweden;
Switzerland;

Portfolio:

PODE
*
ESSP
*
ROCS 11
*
Human ResourcesCap.
Bldg.
Non-Lendine:
*

*
*

Bilateral Donors: AusAID;

Constraintsto PSD Study
PRSP Support

* Private Sector
Competitiveness(informalpolicy
advice)
* Support Global Distance
LearningNetwork (WBI)
* Support SchoolnetWorld
Links for Development(WBI)
IFC

* Advisory and technical
assistance for SMEsvia APDF
and AMSCO
* Expansionof SME
investmentswith local sponsors
* Investmentsin private
education

MultilateralDonors: EC

Annex B9
Page 8 of 12

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country

Program

Matrix (FY01-03)

EmpoWEMN
GovERNNCEAND
II. XMPR~~OVING
______________
IDA
*
Public ServiceReform
Develop and implement
*
Public sector small
Strategydefinedby end 2001.
eomsrtg.
PUBLtCSECWRand centralized,with poorly pulcsco
Lendin2:
a Municipalcapacitybuilding
public sector reform strategy.
paid and poorly qualified
*
MunicipalDev. (FY01)
entity established;50% of
*ofpersonnel.
Completeimplementation
t::::0:t:0000000
Rural Action (FY02)
*
membersand staff trained.
0* Careerand pay system of municipaldecentralization
PbiSetradLgl
*
New public accounting
*
processin new municipalities
reformed,administrative
Refo (FY03)
system implemented.
simplificationbegun; public and extendstatus to others.
)
orm(F
*
Devolve new powers and
service trainingstrategy
*
Econ. Management&
responsibilitiesto municipalities,
launched.
Private Sector Op. (FY02)
esp. in healthand education.
* SWAPs leadingto
Portfolio:
Devolve responsibilityfor
*
privatizationof service
*
PROAGRI
developingand implementing
delivery and devolutionof
districtlevel developmentto
decision-makingto
Health SectorRecovery
*
districts.
autonomousauthorities.
ROCSII
*
0* Decentralizationunder
new budget law.
way,3 ith
ne eleted way,with Implement
NationalWater I and 1I
0~~~~~~~~~~~~
33 newelected
*
Strengthenaccounting,
municipalities.
Legal & Public Sector
*
create new law of public assets.
0* Next stages of Public
Non-Lending:
* Continuecustomreforms.
SectorReform outlined.
* LegalandJudicialStudy
* Abide by the 25 Principles
MunicipalDevelopment
*
to CombatCorruption in African
Programsand AFRICITIESpilots
Countries.
(WBI)
0* Undertakecapacity
*
Public SectorReform Study
buildingprogramsthroughout
* PRSP Support
public sectorsystem.

IE
RlJ,FORMtNG

S*

IFC
a

AMSCOtraining on

corporategovemnanceand
accounting

Austria;
Donors:
Bilateral
Canada; Denmark; Finland;
France (MCF); Germany; Ireland;
Italy; Netherlands; Norway;
Sweden;
Spain;
Portugal;
Switzerland;UK, USAID.
D
s B;
Mltiteral
Multilateral Donors: EC; UK;
UNDP; UNICEF

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)
Development
Objectives

RtJUi;OFL4IY

Diagnosis

Government
Strategy/Actions

Legal andjudicial
sector outdated,inefficient
and poorly equipped;laws
complexand capacityto
enforcevery weak.

*

* Most lawyers,judges
in Maputo;legal help hard
to obtainelsewhere.
.
Weaklegal system a
. * legal
Weak
system a
major obstacleto private
sector growth.

*

*

* Legal sector slow to
reform,as sectorhighly
fractured,and Ministry
weak.
* Admin.Tribunal,
charged with approving
staffingchangesand public
accounts,needs reform.

Selected Bank (underlined)
and Goverrnment
Performance Indicators

Bank Group Instruments

Develop and launchlegal
sector reform plan.
OpnaCne
o uiil
e anTr
Studiesand Training,

Adopt new Commercial
Code, CriminalCode,Family
Law, CommercialRegister,
IncorporationAct, Labor Law,
and Civil Code; and simpler

IIA
Lending:
*
Public Sector and Legal
Reform (FY03)
Portfolio:

ReformCommercialCode,
CommercialRegister, and
IncorporationAct; establish
legal reform comnmission,focus
on family law, civil procedures,
and penal procedures.

methods for acquiringvisas.
*
Sector strategyfor the legal
and judicial sectors(including
Ministryof Justice)developed.

*
Legal and Public Sector
CapacityBuilding
*
Financial Sector Capacity
Buling
Building

* StrengthenAdministrative
Tribunaland the Inspectorate
General of Finances.

*

Non-Lending:
*
*

Legal and Judicial Study
PRSP Support

Annex B9
Page 9 of 12
Other Donors

BilateralDonors: Denmark;
Portugal; USAID
MultilateralDonors:EC;
UTNICEF

AnnexB9
Page 10 of 12

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FYO1-03)

HIV prevalenceis
III WA14.5% (1,140,000people)
* Prevalencehighest
along transportcorridors;
and increasingfastest
among the young.
Prevalence levelsin
*
Mozambiquelikely to rise
to neighboringcountries'
levelsof 20% or above.

'ijENPNGA

*

ImplementNationalPlan
for STD/HIV/AIDSlaunched in
1999for the years 2000-2002,
guided by NationalAIDS
Council.
* IntegrateHIV/AIDS
awarenessin all sectors and all
programs.
*

By 2002, at least 1,600,000
people with irregularsex partners
have accessto servicesto reduce
STD/HIVinfection.
By 2002, at least 15,000
*
livingwith HIV/AIDSand their
families with accessto services.
* By end2000. Bank portfolio
reviewedand retrofittedto
includeHIV/AIDS interventions
whereappropriate.

IDA

*

Lending
IncludeHIV/AIDS
i V/operations
c Ine
(where appropriate).
Portfolio:
*
*
*

HRSP
ROCS 11
PODE

*

HIV/AIDS
PRSP Support
IDA
Lending

Implementhealth program
*
focusingon: i) qualityof health
indicatorscontinueto be
services;ii) sector institutions,
poor.
supportservicesand sub.
Health service
*.0gU
.g0
ggg
0
health management
Helhaseimroviedbtnational
ytms i)hmnrsucsReduce
u
mrvd
coverageha
lthmanaresues
saytiona huac
coveragediffers widely by
cty.
regionand is low in rural
Addresshealth issue in all
*
areas.
sectors,and increasehealth
* Acute shortageof
sector budgetallocation.
qualifiedhealth service
personnel.

' *NG Health sector
IMPR

Donors:EC; UNDP;
Multilateral
UNFPA;UNICEF;WHO

Non-Lendin.:

*

HJ
0LT
Ui52

BilateralDonors:AusAID;
Germany;Netherlands;UK
USAID

Developand approve a new
*
Health Sector StrategicPlan by
end 2000.
Health SIP (FY03)
*
By 2003:
Portfolio:
HelhScoRcvrywizladUKUAI
indexof eeog-raphic
inequalitvin the provisionof
health careservicesto below 2.8
IFCOPCUNP
(estimatedto be 3.0 in 1998).
Investmentsin private
Increase proportionof health .
medical services
posts/centers stockedwith
Essential Drugs Programkits to
90 percent(from 88% in 1997).
* Increaseproportionof health
posts/centersstaffedwith trained
personnelto 90 percent (from
86% in 1997).

BilateralDonors: Canada;
Denmark;Finland;Germany;
Ireland; Italy;Japan; Netherlands;
Norway;Portugal; Spain;
MultilateralDonors: ADB; EC;
NFA
UNFHA
OPIEC; WFDP;

Nvelopment
Objectives

h4PROVINh
EDucATION

PRO3'TFCON

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMB3IQUE
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)
Bank Group Instruments
Government
Selected Bank (underlined)
andGovernment
Strategy/Actions
PerfornmangeIndicators

Diagtosis

* Enrollmentsince the
war doubled; gross
enrollmentat EPI 75%; but
quality low,due to lack of
qualifiedteachers,
textbooks,instruction
manuals,and classrooms.
.* Adult illiteracyhigh,
especiallyin rural areas and
among women.
. Low capacityto
provide seondarytand
tertviardeve
seoduation and

ImplementESSP launched
in 1998.Prioritiesare: i) teacher
training,pedagogicalsupport,
andsupply of teachingmaterials;
ii) constructionand
rehabilitationof schools,and
initiativesto increasefemale
enrollment;iii) institutional
capacity;and iv) strategiesfor
vocationaltrainingand higher
edctin
ig Create a new Ministryof
Higher Education,Science,and

vocationaltraining.

Technology.

* Governmenthas
several safety netprograms
aimedat vulnerablegroups.
However,with limited
budget and widespread
poverty,transfersare small
and coverage low.
* Limited sustainability
and efficacyof existing
pensionschemes.
* Capacityto anticipate
hazard events to prevent
and preparefor disasters
still weak.
* Disaster relief system
focused on aid coordination
functions adequately.

*

By 2003:
*
Increase proportionof
students passingkey primary and
lower secondaryexams: i! grade 5
from 54% to 75%: ii) grade7
from 37% to 60%: and iii) grade
10 from 33% to 55%.
*
Reductionof the average
repetition rate by half for primary
and lower secondarveducation.
Increasegross enrollment
r
i) ae
from1to
ra6%:an i) grade 6-7
from
715%
to 30%.
* Increasein girls' enrollment
and retentionrates at primary and
secondary schools.
*
Completionof study on
social securityreform,
CompletePRSP which
*
defines a socialprotection
strategy.

Review,as a part of the
designand implementationof
the PovertyReduction Strategy
Paper,the existingprogramsin
order to ensure appropriate
targeting,eligibilitycriteria,and
coveragelevelsas a step towards
developingprogramsfor
marginalizedgroups curTently
not covered.
*
Developregulationsfor
privatepension schemesand
undertake actuarialstudieson
the two main nationalschemes.
*
Place programsto support
the transitionof workersto other
productiveactivities,including
through training.
a Govemment
Strengthenthe
* Strengthenthe Government
agenciesresponsiblefor
anticipatinghazard eventsto
prevent and preparefor disasters.
*

IDA
Lendin:
.
Sklls Development(FY03)
Portfolio:
*
ESSP
*
HumanResourcesCap.
Bldg.
*

ICWFP;
Investmentsin private
education(tertiaryfocus)

Annex B9
Page 11 of 12
Other Donors

BilateralDonors:AusAID;
Austria; Canada;Denmark;
Finland; France (MCF);
Germany;Ireland; Italy; Japan;
Netherlands;Norway; Portugal;
Spain; Sweden;UK; USAID
MultilateralDonors: ADB; EC;
Islamic DevelopmentBank;
UNDP; UNESCO;UNICEF;
WHO

Uh
IDA

BilateralDonors:Canada;
Germany;Netherlands;Sweden

Portfolio
Railwaysand Ports
(retrenchmentcomponent).
(
*
FloodEmergencyRecovery
Project
*

Non-Lending
PRSP Support(policy advice
on emergencyrehabilitationand
socialprotection).
*

Pohcy advice and technical

~~~~~~assistance
on disaster mitigation
and management.
* Policy advice on pension
reform through Railwayand Ports
Restructuringand EMPSO.

MultilateralDonors: UNFPA;
UNICEF,WFP

Annex B9
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR MOZAMBIQUE
Country Program Matrix (FY01-03)

=:
tE.:00000 0.00* Mozamnbique'sshort.term externalfinancinggap
PARTN
~~

extemnalaid partnersthat
are assistingthe national
developmenteffort.

* Increased needs and
demandsfor a national
dialogue led by
Governmentto developa
long-term vision and
strengthenedpartnerships.

* Strengthenpartnership
amongthe Bank Group and
with IMF for quality
service delivery.

.
.
* Guide and coordinate
supportfrom development
reductionand priority
intermediateobjectivesthrough
several processes(including
PRSP, MTEF, SWAPs,annual
budget,local donorworking
groups,consultativegroup
meeting).
Governmentto lead a
nationalconsultativeprocessand
dialoguein developinga PRSP.
*

* Short-tertmexternal
financingneeds met.
meetings and informaldonor
g
*
Annual review meetingsfor
sector programs/SWAPs

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Bank
Group
* Supportnational
All extemal partners
developmentdialogue(incl. NGO
m
*

*
*

Developmentof a full PRSP *
in 2001 based on a national
dialogueand consultativeprocess,
inclusiveof all major stakeholders
includingextemal partners,
privatesector,academia,unions,
joumalists, NGOs,church groups,
etc.
*

*
Maintain strong Country
Team coordination,dialogue,
brainstorming,and cooperation,
includingteam membersfrom
WBI, IFC, MIGA and the Bank.
*
Maintain strong coordination
with IMF in economicwork,
PRSP, and HIPC.

Page 12 of 12

LoRegulraCosultaiveiGrupioureach
sal aid coordination,CU
SPA meetings
Anulmeig
CT meetings and retreats
CAS

PRSP Support

All Partners

WB Group and IMF

- 57AnnexB1O
Page 1 of 1

CASSummaryof DevelopmentPriorities
Networkarea

Country
performance

Major issue

Countrypriority

Bankpriority

Reconciliationof
countryand
Bank priorities

PovertyReduction& Economic
Management

Poverty
reduction

Fair

Widespread
poverty;
High
regionaldisparities

High

Economic
policy
Publicsector
Gender

Good
Fair
Fair

Sustaingrowth
Weakcapacity
Gapsinservice
access

High
High
Moderate

Fair

Pooraccessand High
aualitv
Pooraccessand High
qualitv
Targeting
given
Moderate
widespread
poverty

HumanDevelopment
Education
Health,nutrtion& population

Fair

Socialprotection

Fair

High
High
Moderate

High
High
Moderate

Environmentally& SociallySustainable
Development

Ruraldevelopment

Fair

Ruralpoverty,
limaedinfrastructure
and

Environment

Fair

Moderate

Socialdevelopment

Fair

Weakregulatory Moderate
andenforcement
caoacitv
Further
Moderate
decentralization

BCcess

High

tn markpts

High

Moderate

Finance, PrivateSector & Infrastructure

Financial
sector

Fair

Highintermediation
Moderate
costs;banking
supervision

High

Ongoingdialogue

Privatesector

Fair

High

Ongoingdialogue

Energy& mining

Fair

Redtape;market Moderate
entry(transport;
utilities)
Regulatory
High
environment;
private
sectorentry

Infrastructure

Fair

Sustainability
and High
institutional
framework
(roads)

High

High

- 58 -

ANNEXC
Page 1 of 3

The Government's Program,its Poverty Reduction Strategy, and the CAS
This World Bank Country Assistance Strategy has been designed around the Govemment's FiveYear Program and its emerging poverty reduction strategy.
A. The Five-Year Government Program (2000-2004)
The new GovernmentProgram (2000-2004),submittedto the National Assembly in March 2000,
is based on three pillars.
1. The pillar on economic development (increasingeconomic opportunities) emphasizesthe
objectives of poverty eradication and a reduction of regional developmentasymmetries
through growth. To this end, the Government's program is focused on maintaining a sound
macroeconomicenvironment, developingthe financial sector, and strengtheningthe capacity
of the national private sector. Particular emphasisis placed in developing agro-industry,
energy, mining, transport and transport corridors, communicationsand tourism. Technical
and vocationaltraining will aim at increasing employment and improvingthe capacity, skills,
and productivity of the labor force. The developmentof infrastructure,particularly in rural
areas, is central to the growth strategy. The environment for private sector development is to
be improved through continued efforts to remove red-tape.
2. The pillar on social development (improvinghuman capabilities) emphasizesimproving
health standards in order to improve productivityand living standards. The program places a
special emphasis is on the prevention of HIV/AIDS and malaria. Expanded and improved
education services will aim to reduce illiteracy. The Government's program emphasizes
improvingthe welfare and capabilitiesof women, in particular with regard to equal rights and
opportunities, especially in education.
3. The pillar on the organization of the state (improvinggovernance and empowerment) aims to
maintain social and political harmony, protect human rights, and effectivelydeliver public
services required for the poverty reduction effort. Consolidatinglaw and order and
maintaining national unity are priorities. Strengtheningand modernizing state administration,
along with decentralization,are important aspects of a strategyto improve the effectiveness
and responsiveness of the public sector. Developingpublic sector capacity, particularly at the
local level and in rural areas, will be central to this effort. Reforming public sector processes,
such as control and audit functions, is the focus of a strategy to improve the competence of
the public sector, improve transparency, and combat corruption. The Government program
stresses the need for increased efforts to enhance participation of citizens in economic, social
and political processes and to promote dialogue as a basic methodologyof governance.

- 59 -

ANNEXC
Page 2 of 3

B. The Plano de Accao para a Reducao da Pobreza Absoluta (PARPA) and the Interim
Poverty Reduction Strategy
In 1999 the Govemment elaborated an Action Plan for the Reduction of AbsolutePoverty (Plano
de Accao para a Reducao da Pobreza Absoluta - PARPA)which served as the basis for its
Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (interim PRSP), completedin early 2000. 1, 2 The
Government's PARPA and interimPRSP are a subset of its overall Five Year Program. These
documents outline nine key components of the Govermment'semerging poverty reduction
strategy, which are aligned under the pillars of the Govermment'sprogram.
1.

Economic Development (IncreasingEconomic Opportunities)

> Maintain rapid and sustainablegrowth, particularlyin agriculture, construction, and industry
> Increase agriculturalproductivity in the smallholdersector, particularlyin areas with high
agro-ecologicalpotential.
> Develop infrastructure in the rural areas.
> Promote employmentin rural and urban areas through vocationaltraining and the promotion
of income generating micro-projectsand enterprises, with particular attention to women, the
unemployed and socially excludedyoung people.
> Improve technical and institutional capacity to monitor, analyze and evaluate poverty in order
to improve knowledge of the phenomenonand select appropriate strategies to fight it.
2.

Social Development (ImprovingHuman Capabilities)

Develop human capital through public investment in education,health, and water and
sanitation services.
Protect the most vulnerable groups through social security and assistance programs.
>

3.

Organization of the State (Improving Governanceand Empowerment)

> Reduce regional asymmetriesby promoting decentralizationand empowerment.
> Improve the allocation of availableresources and external aid.
The Government intends to elaborate its Poverty Reduction Strategy more fully through a broad,
consultative process leading to a full PRSP in March 2001. While under the PARPA the
Governnent has commencedthe processes of selecting indicators for monitoringthe success of
its poverty reduction strategy, in developingthe full PRSP the Government will further refine the
set of monitorable indicators, adjust program targets in light of setbacks due to the February 2000
floods, and formulate.a strategy for the monitoring of these indicators.

1 TheGovernment'sinterimPRSPconsistsof thePARPAand a companiondocumentwhichadditionallyoutlinesthe
stepsto betaken towardsthe finalizationof a fullPRSP.
The interimPRSPwaspresentedby the Governmenton occasionof its decisionpointunderthe enhancedHIPC
framework.The Governmentintendsto completea fullPRSPby March2001,whenit expectsto reachthe completion
pointunderthe enhancedHIPCframework.

2

- 60 -

ANNEXC
Page 3 of 3

C. Link between the CAS and the Government Program and the emerging PRSP
There is a direct link between the Bank's Country Assistance Strategy, the Government's FiveYear Program, and its emerging Poverty Reduction Strategy as outlined in the PARPA and
interim PRSP (seetable below). The CAS program pillars are based on the pillars of the FiveYear program. Given its over-riding objective of supportingthe Government's program to reduce
poverty, the CAS is also closely aligned in supportingthe Government's emerging poverty
reduction strategy. In accordancewith its mandate, the Bank is not involved in issues of political
governance. It is also not involved directly in supportingthe Government's efforts to maintain
peace, ensure public safety, and protect human rights. These are areas where the Bank does not
have a comparativeadvantage and where other partners are active.
The CAS performance indicators are outlined in the CAS Program Matrix (see Annex B9). The
Bank will support the Govermuent's work to refine the indicators in its emerging PRSP and to
develop a monitoring strategy. CAS performanceindicators and targets will be reviewed upon
Government's completion of the full PRSP to reflect refined and revised targets and indicators in
the full PRSP.

Government
Government Program

Government
WorldBank
PovertyReduction Country
Strategy
Assistance

Five-Year Program (I-PRSPlPARPA)

Strategy

Economic Development
(IncreasingEconomic Opportunities)

* Privatesector,financialsector,
economnic
management
. Infrastructure
* Ruraldevelopmentand agriculture
* Environmentalmanagement
. Innovation,competitiveness,
employment

X

X

X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X

X
x

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

Organizationof the State
(Improve Governanceand
Empowerment)

. Publicsectormanagement
* Judicialandlegal
 Peaceand safety
Social Development
(ImproveHuman Capabilities)

*
*

.

Education
Health
HIV/AMDS
SocialProtection

. Rights

X

- 61 -

ANNEX D
Page 1 oft

MozambiqueCAS Consultations
How the CAS consultation process was conducted: The CAS consultationswere divided into two
rounds. In the first round, which occurred before national elections in December 1999 and enjoyed
Governmentparticipation throughout, representativesof the outgoing Government, the donors, civil society
and the private sector were invited to discuss the situation of Mozambique's people, their aspirations, and
their ideas for realizing those aspirations. In this round, Bank staff were listeners rather than participants.
In the secondround, which occurred in March 2000 with the new Governmentin place, the Bank returned
to the same constituencies to report what it had heard and learned in the first round, and to discuss the
outlines of the draft CAS. Because the consultationsstraddled national elections, the Bank was able in the
first round to learn from the experience of officials in the outgoing administration, and in the second round
to inform and consult with officials in the new administration about the new CAS.
September 1999: Country Team Retreat on the CAS (Maputo and Washington,D.C.)
November 1999: First "listening" round of consultations(Maputo,Beira, Nampula)
December, 1999: Presidential and parliamentary elections (Mozambique)
December 1999: Distillation of findings of first round (Maputo and Washington)
February 2000: Concept paper and upstream review (Washington)
March 2000:
Second "feedback" round of consultations(Maputo,Beira and Nampula)
April 2000
Distillation of findings of second round and finalization of the CAS (Maputo and
Washington)
June 2000:
CAS review by the ExecutiveDirectors
Who was consulted: In the first round, the consultations were held in a series of 12 meetings in Maputo
with several different groups includinghigh-level government officials, mid-level government officials and
project managers, municipal government, local bilateral and multilateraldevelopment partners, local and
intemational NGOs, national trade unions, the private sector (separatemeetings with the fonnal large-scale
enterprises,formal small-scale enterprises,and informal sector),religious leaders, academics, and
journalists. In the first round, two meetings were held in each of Beira and Nampula, for the private sector
and civil society and for governmentauthorities respectively. The second round of consultationsrevisited
each of these groups. In addition, separaterural consultationsusing participatory methods were held in
January 2000 to talk with villagers.
What was learned: In addition to discussing where Mozambiquewas today and their vision for the
country's future, there was substantialcommonality regarding the top issues and priorities that the country
needed to address:
1. Education - More vocational and tertiary education, educationto meet market needs; improved quality
of teaching; more schools (improve literacy); gender equity in educationalopportunities.
2. Governanceand public sector management - Improved capacity of civil service, economic
management, transparency and accountability,and rule of law; further decentralization; less corruption;
increased participation and communitydevelopment; improved public safety.
3. Agriculture and rural development - Better roads; expanded access to rural credit; improved rural
marketing; developed land market; rural water and electrification;improved agricultural extension;
improved food security; support to livestock, irrigation, and mechanization.
4. Private sector development - Improvedgovemance: clearer policy environment and enforced
legislation; trained managers and entrepreneurs;reduced red tape; access to cheaper financing; increased
employment for nationals; more industrializationand rural enterprise; growth throughout the country.
5. Infrastructure - More roads; improvedrural and urban water supply; increased access to electricity and
telecommunications;developed urban infrastructure; expanded irrigation; specific railway links, bridges,
ports rehabilitated or built.
6. Health - Improvedquality of and access to basic health care; prevention and control of malaria and
HIV/AIDS; reduced cost of medicine.

-

62 -

ANNEX E

Page 1 of 4

A Framework for Development Partnership
In Mozambique, there is an emerging consensus regarding the importance of defining the country's
development agenda, increasing government ownership, and fostering strong partnerships among
government, donors, civil society, and the private sector. The CAS process contributed to this consensus
and may initiate a wider Government-led dialogue to forge a common long-term vision and development
framework for Mozambique. Although Mozambique is not a pilot country under the Comprehensive
Development Framework (CDF)', in developing the CAS, a Framework for Development Partnership was
formulated which shares some of these principles and provides a useful way to map the broad array of
ongoing development activities while identifying potential gaps in Mozambique's development strategy.
It can be viewed as both a coordination tool and a process for stimulating discussion about Mozambique's
long-term development strategy.
In developing the framework, the activity areas listed were identified on the basis of priorities articulated
by the Government of Mozambique and among the development partners, including bilateral and
multilateral donors, private sector representatives, NGOs and civil society. The matrix above is the
summary of a more detailed matrix (see following pages) which attempts to capture the specific
commitments and current activities of the Government of Mozambique and its partners. This
information was obtained from the discussions with the Ministry of Planning and Finance, the
development partners, as well as from their various publications. The matrix represents a snapshot of the
existing development agenda and will change as more information is gathered and as priorities,
programs, and circumstances change over time.
Mozambique:
Increasing

3

Partner

Acivi

Economic

a)
3-Ea

Current

Activities

Opportunity

E

Increasing

g

Little

Focus

Partnership
Improving

Capabilities

Governance

EaJ8<8

r-

2

D

of the Development

a

Some

Focus

1*

Significant

Focus

High

Focus

The CDF is a conceptualtool that can helpa countryidentifyprioritiesand strategiesfor reducingpoverty.By
mappingout a holisticset of prioritiesforreducingpoverty,and the activitiesamongdevelopmentpartners,the C'DF
providesa mechanismfor encouragingbettercoordinationamongdevelopmentpartners.

Annex E
Page 2 of 4
Framework for Development Partnership
Ic0

I_o "nrriEon
t150mTianpPort. nergy.
F,nan-; Ind,otOy hmouing publi.work
and Comme.n

)

r0

Mnlstry1f

AmAilD: 2 7rAW-n
pro,J1d)
ns,4.10,
ImmoSo0

(NGO

MAi.10 1.SmthUb,n1,a Flod
2, J. Wa
Fn-,oln
So.fd.(UNICEF); 3.4r. RtrS
To,to}M.i.Bc0l-ido,

nl,
and

177oAgntik.
fdlesis.

Cawallt.

__________hwenaan,

6mnTorrirm

3.6m AIDS

I,o 1m

and

pntin

h..Rh
nommonco
national

4.40rc Itor
A.AD:
Dorolotonn

A
Awna

__

hndu,

mnonagntne
protdon

nolal

ndt na

t78.OmnG

and

12mL- I

7.2mnDsaster

L.Wand

3.t6mMbstryof
E,Mo.-,ent,
prondnal

mneP.,

Proiurement, State
_P001,
Admin.. F

d.ton

88m NatIorl

tribunl

7nAMtle,
.

s

CandnA 2.40,T.W0n
for HI.thoo R,nonna

UY
LU
ui

Dobhr k 37ooTnlo-W,tr
pownn rndor

Dneroork:48, Ag
fiDrn

Dtnwrk: 13.00,
of
Diap"-al
POo0kid,A.Coonoo
Zoon!tgt.oobrdir

Dtrosdrk: 136H000drb

02.40 Boin Wwrr
14BWd:
Fi
SAply. 6.6ooN.Ma.MUobnn
D,.

Fidond: 13.8A A, Ed
B0,oa 5.3mA Ed
Chi-0olo

Fi drd 4 OooCooOr t0olaod. 34n ICEP0A
Coppn Snrrice
fPorNan.a Rosoon

Finlaod. 44.90, M.oin
1rr016l 3.3onH,ld,
SDqipoASr

F-non (ADD): 23rA Cllo1a
Il0O-%n
ii6. 3.6r
p,
r 0pW, nqodp.;S.6n Mpoo
w0,0 3nsEDM -Oonoa,001

(A1D): 6.1m
F-toarc
3
4.50,.06,.
C kbokw;
h-,
brecdr g 4.0,
9r
40,000U0 3.8mro d
0-adig 6.9w
SidMdManko

M

e,

Mhninty of Inlenor

UCBrk;'

COo

4,Anoi0 1.3. Radio M.VinWk

O0,IWodo n
Dn-mak: 8.

D n.. : 136m
Edurra0i6

D-uimrk: 5.60,
it
Fanh
Prli

Finland: 12.90
FnoooooyEd(0SSP)

(Rd3a1d0:Ito Loon
Boldion
G(loo CapqoAcy

Eltnino;
Clan.,

1.3mMi).t

Foland: 2.1In,D-,n.
1.8r6Mrdi. Suppot4.2ro
00,0,,i0g (IFNDP)

FirArrd: 2.10 Dn-oooooy, I.8n Mdi9 Sqpo

_

C

1.5r

30 w l.
F-oe (MMC):3(M
F-MEnpon.Cobo D.1g6.

F
n (MCFI:) 2.10 Maiiom
Tr6ospa

1nOo-n,0y:10.4. Wa6rorrFlD
srWr46
Uer~~~~~.ub

Sppgly

3.70,t rdoBoad
t Odo,nno.
D
R.rd

R6.b;

Gnnay:
Robb

5.90, R,0r1

Srdids

26r

M-n,0b

Rw,1rdh
R

WYrM!l

95 Rorsd Rhbb
31.9r

S.b-m6s3

S.fW,s7.4m

Gnur.

Silo

MoO1n
t000; 80 Sobdation
EloiDcaOm
N-F.p0.5
11 9n -onoyjNnn
G-Woo
14r
ih.bN..I
Mnp-A Pst
lEd,iDer.fi
Pt rthrb
Oo.4t 0Ihw

nd

ltry: 14.4m B,,0
Csiddor.

Wonnn-

.01_

DOnak:n8.7nLOr

MIdNCO,ap-dAk

S

and oportS

.

7.3.,Donoiiog 1.300
adNot,onat
o04oo fo-Lo
Etnod

I 2,GndooCno
C.a0d00 7.60 Soojat Cna,d. 1.
fntnn SpoFp 13oo &006d001,o (Girt
ChrId - UNICEF); 1000
Grr w: 1.3, Food
rid
Ed..i3dOtd
Aid (O>iFAM)i 3.8rAtzdus
ld-fiWDo d Fond Aid
(W6rld Vi.i6)

t

Foonon(APD):
PROPARCO l000
S08,
Min.
2.6mBr-wery
250
N-ipdri
Mowd: 3.7n

2.6.

Clemon

AaoOia 3.20,D.-.&o
UNICEF. ADC)
.

400028,
i
-d
DeUh3CtiF
Poo
hf u
Moaoidl"d
(ECOTEC)

C.n,d.
3.60, hIono notnori n; 2A,010..
CaMd6brl'

p0I,.

-vrooo

Am0AID: 1.6rAMi.

AmAItD 2.25.
DnOotOFnOnp

1A2iD:
t.2n,
&

A-oola 1.6,. M,no-A
M
ion(CARE),
CondiOSd
1A.4 Mrn a S&w I
SndttodnoSy

Aonnni. 1.5ootR,00
Wannr(99/02); 0.591.
PROAGRt0IAm

nnr-nln.a G

_______

_______

1.0

F.dn

G-.My:
fr~r

10.3.3
n3wi-t
Bs

1.9R Trooin
; 3.5.

Rp-

Vn;rfirrd
i...

Rt, ld
IloRy.72.0,r,
D-1
n Mopt; 21.60
.00d0
Ibd
R-d
D-1,
,
3
.tmPROAG33

000,i0ry 4.900

G3tn y:

3.3mFr=ily

2.3.
R.4..ee

reowy:

Goonwoy:5.7c
Pdrn

Ed Sofd.DW

Iubsu,

nuits

F-0 (MCP): 1.5 Moio.;
Awn= rnw
ln4
I.0M

3.35.
rrd

Denonony

2.10Foi.yEd

h Ss dl

5sM.'b

:E-dEm

rmoe

Fs.dty3 5.3m
Vno-inoyFroly

10.4r Esplnooyin,,
Cr..i.nFond.60S,d1
Sokdebodooy W0000

tooly. 2 2nTeebrict
jtndo0y,
Sohool fo Sl
18.3m kd-HW,d Cm0pIt0
Marbt, M.m6tO0,

Qnrrr
F.frEd.

PtYiss/t'4uWh

T....&

R..

hidy: 25.Sn B0i,w W ,
oil Itd
3Sply, t.S
wbah bl-ds 12.6, P,b,
WoInrSmpply 2.10 Publi
SP.inb0 8.6m
WoOnrce
MU5lo.--oGb.R.ilony

Frane (4MCF):2.90,
ljnba itiuolio In
noPo-oii d Capital

__

rM.& 120 11,,
Bk,4 1.2 R,hnb 3
H8,01 Ctolerr, 2.4n
ll-atd
SIP.; I1.50
PROAGRIt:t5

I
d 30,So._ l
0hh ood ninng; 40Ed Bskd

tly: 3.6nl HOdb h
0n0bed.20011018
00j0ipmplrd; 2.3m
1,l08 lofdd hab
S.ofalt, 17.53 S.oi at
1.70
H _N0M0ne
dhob
Eain
Hyinn TA;

R dy: 3.7m
CnmpodiotUEM

3.__.hft.iii._

__

R

1I6m GoAd
ond:
00
D-nooiuioo
r0v
(IINDP)

1L11:2.Yn no.pnt0_
P0b6iiOrgoawtn

_

Annex E
Framework for Development PartnershipPae3o4

I,-:dnd

0
it

_

~~~~Nd.n
4m.
6:
AsvifflrhP.s.d
M

CSr
.. Um

RurAi
Nwm:*7m
..
P$
_W

Ndiwy:
Xh.~fl

1.6mi

-

3m

Ne"rl

&
N9m
W%i-

"lwkyIIi:]
1.4m

4.6mF.by Tt

z~~~~

3.5.

JlnJ:

old:7I.Ndd

24mob
R.6

h

~

9.3n

l_:

i

1.i:

R.

LiB V.H..fthb

.

~ ~~~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~.

RSwdo:1.4.PS
Pddriwe:
12.5m ew;4lobelp;21

pl

tA
3~~~~~.9mTfi

US: _)
sm

)hEr '

RSAiD h12 33m

i4Sp..PA.T

BAc

Ni-ID

UiC:i.56m

Vo

Sm-h

y

.mD

ptNca

m3p-mw

ILJ.
M-31.o-

U}C5.

.

S

U

UiC::mpob

3.9Mb

VP.%:2.mtel

wl ImW
oce
oo

3wa:3msmd3clinsi
eve
rpi22

wia:SmBt
i2mScdss

mB .S.
Q~~~~~~~~~~SV
dn-micdxirT

i

PSD

'A 111;:7.7am vb

m
D-roJ
; 27mwpii
- USi:
_ - h%-.7

USAI: 9 USkD: 27

.6

Poice
H TRiu

Swdeo: 2.8manc.
mi l7
ewiiieXi

S.Uw:73 32mPd ti
mEd,.m

Sweden i.WJA.Smiv
-dol
pmiS-dy

Swa:3mvl;ciwidSwia71mriy
tmin4 wor c d~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~S.t. Hcdd i
sIDirtims; sm

I5

2.6.wsPr4i
Pi:73m6-b:O.mi

b:I.m

3.2.:46m8

.*0

p.

~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
pn_diwot locid

8 8m Boiiy

6.7.Dcrq
Nenvy.W:
CinlAVp
ScciebHP

6TAd

Nmwy:& & 4io
CUPFft

CmI
(ipma

Ro-Ni i S

SpW

Swbs4mRulwrer
Siw:3SmR
bvelq

elric.mo

end2b

iDcirdm
N 4 _..p.... emuii2iti

3.4m
i'maW Pk ;S mji; 7mRuniRo irebsh Nima
2.foNi
32m
EerScp.i.. Rea;.; rss
dP
Sm; 7A. IP;
Zi8
EledriS
Teleewm

R
&8elz:.2

ATC
WD8

;'J"i~~~~.1

T.W.
Swedm,: 416.7R

3.6m

p-

p""

SpdicC mPaezmiSn.6

.4

3.

Pi:d

1.2mBPn

HIbnC-.

V ity, S
~~~~~~W.-dE2m

Nelhd_1W

9.3m .
ieSlc
1.aie N_FA

Nonq:
SR^bl

.- PW.~~

J

eq

ewe

pWb

2.ds

32:p Pblm .R:.3.4m

m

JSAIDp

1

JUD
4.6.

..3m

wlp

DD. ii i l

eosEpow
e.

ii2mC

Annex E
Page 4 of 4
Frameworkfor DevelopmentPartnership
_hii
nr......coa
EC: 19.4.1B3.Wdnr
Sypliy 3ES.mEomg-y
SdoWl.
GRi_ Ro25.9. Rheb Bi.ro
Z.ob-ii
1
Ro d;535.6.Roob
R.4

ADB UA501
Ee.-io R.b.

. f ...............
EC: 4aS ppopUo
9r
Tmor-- s_oOo

NdaWEN.Wo Ro4 l12.9Im
16.8S
L.opotLiR..b,;
n
19.4 Reb
R-mdT.lnoomI;S
24.6m
C. .B.oIon.li
MOZAL-ltnr

2S.4. R. HWth
rhb

ADB:UA 142.
ADB:UA 83Tele.os,
C.riw
d rnbb, no
-n*r.d
klcdrimoiVy,
ily
thd,
T . Wivt
r mI nolb fmit,iy
8.
.o.ioUiA UA
flry 6;&moldli._
tY do

ADB:UA 7mB...
hn.id

i
EC: 7AS Jdioiy

41

EhlnoEon
EC: 28.5.
3mOnoo
12 3.mMm.piipW EI-Oio
i.o
EC: 1.53 Dm oi

ADH:UA4Ot
Pny t-hb.
nihoom

UNDP: 5.m

0.6mAIDS UNDP:Zn

0

UNDP 66.oGovmce

UNDP:3.Zo l _cmod
M.onmm

I-

iE
111

13.
UNUPPA:

UNIChP61C
On

7Olicy
UNICEP12.7.n
U _
M_%~

mca,
dnlwpaM
5pn v diOC,odolooy

F

-J~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-

d

ad

nio.r.rb
moibmio6
m

UNICEF4.3P.liq;N UNICEF1102.
-dplod
polioy
S
y m.d
mdlngiw
d
dwlqpbildom

, B.-,ioo&
dewlqmp
mobiogmmi
dn
_t
band

UNICEFC.porirO
bufldidg

UNICEF.3.7. Childrigb.
mca
rigid nnr

iEdirn
UNICEF
nnarnmj-imlejoRoo

-ororor,n
bild

mp-nooomm

3m Di-mom
W ae?

WFP:23.
hUl
WHO.4mbdS._h

Im
_WBO:
Di..Pard
ad Conrol

ion.....
WB SUm nt
hU.
ppr

WB: 29mEocnn.,
Dm

5mCWB:400mT-apot 100m WB.S5mA&Sedtor cUB:
mho
p
rl
Wo,m 300 Go.

for

c,,i
i e~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~nomdmm.oo

13B

Wd: 100.
Adjlrr4o;.
ot
Ficoi.

m
UNFPA:3m G.ovmn,-

UNPPA:2.41 Yo.Wh UNFPA:1.5.
1.4mG-ndn

UNPPA:Zm
-j

mOc
rNE

Goveo .

'.o
EC: 2.6Nr4i<d
ReF0Y

EC 6.3. STD/AIDS E.C: 2.5BHn,id&
io -nRo1nR
1ic.
20.. ldth Sedor
o 4 5m TmimWi
Rbik m1..& offiol.I.;

UNDP:U2.lm.nUNDP:

Z

;,,i: i Cmahlmfrn
R qi,
......... .............;:::::.:

..

EC: 14.2a Z_be.
WmnnV.lUy MWO

EC: 3S8 Road
Rihb; 2lmMoir.
miswmoojno

W.

mol
lor

7

1m Edoc

3
WBElmlSW
WB:30. R AOm
Wdio m
30Mu
,oormg
dcedpD

&PoblicUl
a8

c p. Buildiog
C

Ei

IF Pn-iov_romnrmiof
lFC Fiooiio
ifior
1Andfiing ofpi-no
mOOortmm
Pojoor, Condmida
f1oilii,. ad
iof,
ad
;msaoidmobmtdi3 d-lonmO
o,oomiidoioioooioidobcbo
ofobiliti..
Eaoin,mooofono
n,icmifina;,o
lnmiog&hob.ig

n
IPC: I Eoor.im
&4
omomonriol
irty

fWB
ad. opnio
IFC fio00ond
nor
prOinos
IPC: Eoni

no

dim

Cro,_
ot000ff

AS
AmoAjo
AduimAAid Corn
Mio
Sim..0iool.
CmibWdo p_ S_t

CCLUSA

i

M-oebiqoo,

oli..

(A.o. iMiooofor-n..m

Comramorldmidn.

Dcv-)PRO
PR RAL,

OPMAD,PROLIDE

WAKELA. Wold
Viojon

doAroo

Ramooono0i.t0
i

ADPP (Strom
Chil,fr)iM.doo

AJODEMO, A.m.i.oo
mrselAMACO,

Mor A-.oo
Einod. ofthildroo.
oon doSChild-m
US -Ui OXFAM,

A., Mo,. D. APoio .
aidnde,
AMdEMO

Moi

-b, io ), 13TAmo
(IC."T ddTb

MEA.AGRICOOP.
-.
CEMAUDI
AMODERL.on m.l)oldnlvnt.

IFC FlASmo-i.

IPC: 9SU dind
imonslmmdo minon ryncd
lech
iot. WS6 pminoto imlntmm
nd
o..
d.nlopmnU SkAfii
DnrnlommnD Fifiloy,
Affi- Mangmno
S-i .on Cmo 00oy

'

RcddB0 CFD
(Ceim.c-F.ilAe
vimmo)

Mdhi-o;
MONASUG

(A-o Do. Modjoo.do
Mo..), AMI (fi..

ASio.Mnd1io
bmaEoinmod)

AMODEFA.
ANEMO,APOSRMO,
HoOpAS..MMs.
Mdo-e Mmd. MSRE,
MONASO,World
Vi.io

trn

Civic Rd A..o.

Rho ad D-Ipl);
GHD (Ho
fooH-moRigts)
(A...

I DH

MAP SECTION

K

/

C'

-'~~''-.-

~~~~~~~~~~

ZCCAOAr$

4

fA'b

LJWOCC'

N~~~&
S

)

-~~~

~~~~~~~~~~~NANGADB

1

7"''-',"""'

'


Ip

\Ncl~~~eAI
'K

TANZANIA

fENA

rr0-

IedaQoe

j~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~MCL

[-.-q

A

NSI A~~~~~~~~~~~~~~c3nI

fAcedo

MA lAW1

9'

-CHFUNCEINDM,

MARAVIA

----1-K

'24(42CC



'

ot

.

AA
M.TA~CUA
BIBA

'N

\

3-5:

IE

OJNA
M'>.L-J
CATEU
2323-NCA
F

uiA2S

(

o

N

7>

\B

14

I

MOB/UBCH

\

~t~tdo'
~

20'

7'

*

/

%~~>"

SOFA

'iA/

MZA
440

MB

IQUE

>>J23CAN1.A

CHANNEL

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0

BZ'N-j

tm/C]I
Marr

A

rocads

Operafional

~~~~~~~~~~~~-'~~~~~Currently
non-operational

-s-

C C./\IN-HAM

21

E-Selectecciftes

~~~~~

G~~~~~ZA

K. '~~~"tct'p

N

1
\,-r

N
C

B

<7

AFUICA

/

~ProvincecaIfas

~~~National
0'
capitol
0'~~~~~~~~~~~~'~~~~
~Distrid
bouTidaries
oloon

-

-

~~~,AICF<

Province

boundaries-

I~~~~nte-rnationatl

bondlaries

V--Al-UTO-

0

1122

200

30

00tAomop dooM,,imp, on til. port c ThoWorld BooBGrop.
jduoroI.R.
looltoto of c-y OO-itory;-r -y rodoo-clo
-N4N,orp-oc ) -ort 6o-drie..

'-SWAZILANUP

12'

1

2A8'ST

/

j/--->

'A

16

MACANC

VASN-'CN//C<AlIE~

-HIFLNCAl

~ A !1cj-"
~~~~-0'0'~

'3-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~BANE

BA~

0'CA

>Th

2

~~~~~~~~
COSTA ~~~~~~AB3-2CB~~~~~~~
a

Z-IMBABWE

E

2EC"NA

' 'K1

0'

,

RAI

AN

NAMP

L

MUTA

C

lB~

0

A

angra

0/CIA~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~MC-

-. 33.0

~ A v\
CHFUNDE~~~
'q~~r"'"""\
~ ~ ~ 

~~~

Cossocotizo
,-"

DAPRC1A~~SANC;

N

I

CNA

/,-T

0CMO

C3

-N'
ZAMBIA

<'.2r

~~~~~~~RCA
~~SOUT
Mo

0'2'

2

-cY

