d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of 
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No 60620-CO 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

AND  

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

FOR 

THE REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA 

FOR THE PERIOD FY2012-2016 

June 12, 2011 

Colombia and Mexico Country Management Unit 
Latin America and the Caribbean Region 

The International Finance Corporation 
Latin America and the Caribbean Region 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the 
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without 
World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(Exchange rate effective as of June 12, 2011) 
Currency Unit 
Colombian Pesos 
US$1.00 
COP 1,773 

FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 to December 31 

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
Metric System 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

Corporación Andina de Fomento 

Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
Adaptable program loan 

APEC 
APL 
CAF 
CAT DDO  Catastrophe deferred drawdown option 
CCT 
Conditional cash transfer 
CPPR  
Country Portfolio Performance Review  
CPS 
Country Partnership Strategy 
CTF 
Clean Technology Transfer 
DAC 
Development Assistance Committee (OECD) 
DDO 
Deferred drawdown option 
DDR 
Disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration 
DNP 
Department of National Planning 
DPL 
Development policy loan 
ECD 
Early childhood development 
GDP  
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environment Facility 
GFDRR 
Global Facility of Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery 
Government of Colombia 
International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development 
Inter-American Development Bank 
International Development Association 
Institutional Development Fund 
International Finance Corporation 
Internally displaced population 

GOC 
IBRD  

IDB  
IDA 
IDF 
IFC  
IDP 

IMF  
JSDF 
LAC 

NGO 
NTF 
NUTP 
OECD 

International Monetary Fund 
Japan Social Development Fund 
Latin American and the Caribbean Region (World 
Bank) 
Nongovernmental organization 
Norwegian Trust Fund 
National Urban Transport Program 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development 

M&E 

Monitoring and evaluation 
MESEP Misión para el Empalme de las Series de Empleo, 
Pobreza y Desigualdad  

MHCP 
NDP 
PFM 
PPP 
PSIA 
SFLAC 

SME 
SSC 
SSKE 
STI 
TA 
WBG  
WBI 

Ministry of Finance and Public Credit 
National Development Plan 
Public financial management 
Public–private partnership 
Poverty and Social Impact Analysis 
Spanish Fund for Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
Small and medium-size enterprise 
South-South Cooperation 
South-South knowledge exchange 
Science, technology, and innovation 
Technical assistance 
World Bank Group 
World Bank Institute 

IBRD 

Regional Vice President: Pamela Cox 
Country Director: Gloria M. Grandolini 
Task Team Leader: Sabine Hader 
Country Manager: Geoffrey Bergen 

IFC 

Vice President for LAC: Thierry Tanoh 
Director: Paolo M. Martelli 
Task Manager: John Barham 
Country Manager: Enrique Cañas 

ii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (FY12-16)  

Contents 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................................................................................   

I. 

II. 

INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................. 1 

COUNTRY CONTEXT ............................................................................................................ 1 
A. POLITICAL CONTEXT ............................................................................................................................ 1 
B. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND PROSPECTS ............................................................................... 2 
C. MACROECONOMIC OUTLOOK ............................................................................................................... 4 
D. POVERTY LEVEL AND TRENDS ................................................................................................................ 5 

III. GOVERNMENT’S VISION AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ..................................................... 6 

IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP .....................................................................................10 
A. LESSONS LEARNED FROM PREVIOUS CPS AND STAKEHOLDER FEEDBACK .................................................... 10 
B. PROPOSED WBG PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY ............................................................................................ 12 
C. THE WBG’S INDICATIVE PROGRAM...................................................................................................... 29 

D. DEVELOPMENT PARTNER COLLABORATION AND SOUTH-SOUTH KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE ............................. 30 

V. RISKS .....................................................................................................................................31 

ANNEX A: CPS RESULTS FRAMEWORK .........................................................................................34 

ANNEX B: CPS COMPLETION REPORT (CPSCR) .............................................................................45 

ANNEX C: THE IMPACT OF HIGHER FOOD AND COMMODITY PRICES IN COLOMBIA ......................77 

ANNEX D:  RECENT TRENDS ON POVERTY AND INEQUALITY IN COLOMBIA ..................................79 

ANNEX E: FISCAL RISK MANAGEMENT IN THE COLOMBIAN PUBLIC SECTOR .................................83 

ANNEX F: COLOMBIA AND SOUTH-SOUTH KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE (SSKE) .................................87 

ANNEX G: COLOMBIA CLIENT SURVEY 2011 ................................................................................89 

ANNEX H: COLOMBIA AT A GLANCE ............................................................................................91 

ANNEX I: SELECTED INDICATORS OF BANK PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND MANAGEMENT .......94 

ANNEX J: COLOMBIA SOCIAL INDICATORS ..................................................................................95 

ANNEX K: KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS ......................................................................................96 

ANNEX L: KEY EXPOSURE INDICATORS ........................................................................................98 

ANNEX M: OPERATIONS PORTFOLIO (IBRD/IDA AND GRANTS) ....................................................99 

ANNEX N: TRUST FUNDS OVERVIEW ......................................................................................... 100 

ANNEX O: IFC COMMITTED AND DISBURSED OUTSTANDING INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO .............. 101 

ANNEX P: MAP ......................................................................................................................... 102 

 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the collaboration and contributions of the 
Government of Colombia in the preparation of this Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) .  
This CPS was prepared by a team led by Sabine Hader (World Bank) in collaboration 
with John Barham (IFC) under the overall guidance of Gloria M. Grandolini and Enrique 
Cañas. Core CPS team members included: Paloma Anós-Casero, Diego Arias Carballo, 
Amparo Ballivian, Catalina Barjun, Harold Bedoya, Juan Carlos Belausteguigoitía, 
Daniel Alberto Benítez, Raja Bentaouet Kattan, Geoffrey Bergen, Díomedes Berroa, 
Greg Browder, Alejandro Caballero, Diana Cárdenas, Irene Chagasteles, Marie-Hélène 
Collion, Elena Correa, Mauricio Cuellar, Elizabeth Currie, Richard Damania, Antonio 
Davila-Bonazzi, Luís de la Plaza, Niels B. Holm-Nielsen, Leonardo Escandón, Talib 
Esmail, Angela María Fonseca, Beatriz Franco, Natalia Gómez, Eva Gutiérrez, Thomas 
Haven, Arturo Herrera, Federica Iorio, Theresa Jones, Irina Klytchnikova, Christoph 
Kurowski, Martha Laverde, Dolores López-Larroy, Esperanza Lasagabaster, Rogelio 
Marchetti, Andre Medici, Lars Moller, Fernando Montenegro, Edgardo Mosqueira, 
Xiomara Morel, Alicia Pérez, Hnin Hnin Pyne, Rekha Reddy, Camila Rodríguez, 
Mariangeles Sabella, Taimur Samad, David Sislen, Eduardo Somensatto, Claudia 
Tabuenca, María Clara Ucros, Joao Pedro Wagner De Azevedo, Eduardo Wallentin, and 
Fernanda Zavaleta.  

Invaluable inputs and suggestions were received from the broader Colombia Country 
Team and the peer reviewers: Sascha Djumena and Peter Siegenthaler, as well as from 
other participants of the concept review and regional operations committee meetings. 

 
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Colombia is an upper-middle income country with the fourth largest economy in Latin 
America. President Juan Manuel Santos assumed office in August 2010 with a strong 
political mandate that gave his ―national unity‖ coalition an 80 percent majority in Congress. 
The elections demonstrated the maturity of Colombia‘s democratic process and reflected a 
strengthening of political institutions. The new President is committed to continue 
implementing the core policy framework established by the previous government, while also 
promoting new reforms to boost growth and tackle poverty and inequality.  

Colombia has a solid and stable economy with a large domestic market and a rich 
natural resources endowment. A strong macroeconomic framework helped cushion the 
impact of the economic crisis. By 2010, the Colombian economy had fully recovered from 
the 2008-09 slowdown; GDP growth reached 4.3 percent in 2010, compared to 1.5 percent in 
2009. Private domestic demand, supported by higher consumer and investor confidence and 
access to cheap credit, has led the recovery process. On the supply side, the recovery was 
spearheaded by the mining and financial sectors.  

In December 2010, the Government launched its ambitious National Development Plan, 
called Prosperity for All. The overarching goals of this Plan are to increase employment, 
reduce poverty, and improve security. The Plan has three strategic areas: (1) Sustainable 
Growth and Competitiveness, (2) Equality of Opportunities for Social Prosperity, and (3) 
Consolidation of Peace. Moreover, it highlights four cross-cutting themes: (a) Relevance of 
International Relations, (b) Environmental and Disaster Risk Management, (c) Good 
Governance, and (d) Regional Development and Integration. 

This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) builds on the successful experience of the 
prior World Bank Group (WBG) strategy in Colombia. It aims to support the new 
National Development Plan. The WBG will step up efforts to enhance development impact 
through selectivity and to provide added value to the country. The IFC hopes to increase both 
its investment and advisory operations in Colombia, as market conditions permit. The WBG 
will carry out activities either through financial, knowledge, or convening services for which 
the Government or the private sector has expressed explicit need. These activities are 
combined as a results-focused package of support grouped under three strategic themes: (a) 
Expanding Opportunities for Social Prosperity; (b) Sustainable Growth with Enhanced 
Climate Change Resilience; and (c) Inclusive Growth with Enhanced Productivity.  

Despite the slow decline of poverty and inequality over the last decade, Colombia has 
continued to strengthen its social policies to expand opportunities to the majority of the 
population. Colombia‘s efforts to achieve lasting peace are also commendable. Still, the 
country‘s recent history has been marred by violence and armed conflicts that have precluded 
it from reaching its full development potential. Violence has displaced a large portion of the 
population, and the new Government has adopted policies to further promote peace.  

While in recent years progress has been achieved in fostering infrastructure 
investments, Colombia lags behind other Latin American countries. Management of 
infrastructure assets, including maintenance, and improved information systems remains a 
critical challenge within the context of Colombia‘s three-tier system of decentralized public 

  
 
 
administration. While urbanization rates have remained high, the quality of urban services 
has not kept up with the growth of cities. Environmental management and climate change are 
increasingly important areas of policy action in Colombia. Despite Colombia‘s major 
improvements in environmental management, environmental degradation affects public 
health and welfare in significant ways and compromises the country‘s potential for 
sustainable economic growth. 

Colombia also needs to focus on achieving faster and more inclusive economic growth. 
The country requires policy efforts geared toward converting the country‘s natural and 
human resources into a development pattern that accelerates growth and shares its benefits 
with broad segments of the population. In particular, it requires skillful management of risks 
and fiscal policy challenges associated with natural resources wealth and careful monitoring 
and evaluation of policies and programs conducive to inclusive growth. Transparent and 
effective public sector institutions (at national and subnational levels) and a friendly business 
environment will also facilitate 
this growth. And 
in support of 
innovation and 
entrepreneurship for higher productivity, the development in the financial sector must deliver 
efficient and stable services with access for all people.  

The programs under these strategic themes reflect current dialogue with the authorities 
and include the ongoing portfolio as well as new activities running until FY13. Within 
the framework of the National Development Plan, new activities beyond FY13 will be 
identified in agreement with the Government to acknowledge the needed flexibility and 
responsiveness to emerging requests. The CPS Progress Report, which is envisaged after the 
next Presidential elections in 2014, will provide an update on the WBG engagement.  

The IFC will seek investments in areas where it can add the greatest value . The IFC‘s 
main objectives are to foster greater entrepreneurship in advanced fields or in developing 
innovative business models. Investments will be focused initially on education, infrastructure 
development, investment climate, royalty management, and corporate governance. Also, IFC 
may engage with selected agribusiness clients to enhance yields and productivity. 

 
 
REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (FY12-16)  

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
Colombia is an upper middle-income country with substantial potential yet with 
relatively high rates of poverty and inequality. It has a solid and stable economy with a 
large domestic market and a rich natural resources endowment. At the same time Colombia is 
particularly vulnerable to natural hazards and faces an important challenge in consolidating 
peace following decades of internal strife and violence.  

2. 
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) covers the fiscal years 2012-16. It 
proposes a World Bank Group (WBG) integrated program of financial, knowledge, and 
convening services and has been designed to selectively support the Government of 
Colombia‘s (GOC) new National Development Plan (NDP) 2010-2014. The proposed CPS is 
also grounded in the LAC Regional Strategy and the WBG strategic themes. Its five-year 
span takes into account the GOC election cycle in order to provide a mid-term opportunity to 
address potential government and policy changes that will be reflected in the CPS Progress 
Report. The CPS core principles are flexibility, responsiveness, and innovation. Past 
experience has shown that WBG support to GOC is most effective by being adaptive and 
receptive to emerging needs rather than just a blueprint of the terms and scope of the 
partnership with GOC. The focus on innovation corresponds with the needs of a 
sophisticated middle-income country and the WBG‘s efforts to add value to the GOC 
program. The CPS lays out the guiding principles for shaping this partnership.  

3. 
This CPS provides a summary of (a) the country context, (b) the Government‘s 
vision and development challenges, (c) lessons learned from the implementation of the 
previous CPS as well as stakeholder feedback, (d) a proposed new strategy for the WBG, and 
(e) a description of risks in Colombia.  

II. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT  

A. Political Context  

4. 
President Juan Manuel Santos assumed office in August 2010 with a strong 
political mandate that gave his “national unity” coalition an 80 percent majority in 
Congress. He won the second round of the Presidential poll by more than 70 percent of the 
vote against a former mayor of Bogotá. Santos campaigned on a continuation of former 
President Alvaro Uribe‘s democratic security and economic policies. The elections 
demonstrated the maturity of Colombia‘s democratic process and reflected a strengthening of 
political institutions. The country has undergone a transformation since 2002, striving to 
move away from internal violence, drug trafficking, and weak institutions that has plagued 
the country for many years. Today, Colombia has a resurgent economy with promising 
prospects. It is a safer, more stable country that is more popular with foreign investors, and it 
aspires to join the OECD group of countries. 

1 

 
 
 
 
5. 
The Santos Administration registered several significant achievements early in 
its first term. This includes the restoration of diplomatic and trade relationships with 
Venezuela, which had been broken off shortly before the second round of the presidential 
elections in July 2010. Relationships were also fully normalized with Ecuador. Moreover, an 
agreement reached with the United States increases the likelihood that the bilateral Free 
Trade Agreement, which was signed in 2006, will eventually be implemented. Overall, these 
positive developments have helped boost the popularity ratings of the President and 
strengthened the national unity coalition.  

6. 
The Santos Administration has launched a very ambitious reform program. To 
consolidate the fiscal stance and manage windfalls from commodities production, Congress 
has approved a new fiscal rule, a reform of the royalties system, and a proposal to make 
fiscal sustainability a Constitutional criterion. Tax exemptions have been reduced, loopholes 
closed, and import tariffs lowered in an effort to enhance revenues and promote 
competitiveness. Legislation has been passed to reduce informality and encourage youth 
employment. A new legal framework is being introduced to improve the performance of the 
health system, including the enactment of an ordinary Health Law in 2011 . And, a Victims 
Law (Ley de Victimas) will compensate victims who have been harmed by actions as a result 
of conflict. 

7. 
Municipal and regional elections are scheduled for October 2011, and the next 
legislative and presidential elections are set for March and May 2014, respectively. The 
outcome of the municipal and regional elections will help to gauge the support for the 
various coalition members as well as the opposition during 2011–2015.  

B. Recent Economic Developments and Prospects 

8. 
Colombia is an upper-middle income country whose economic performance is 
typical of the major economies in Latin America. The economy is well endowed with 
natural resources, including oil, coal, gas, iron, and gold. The domestic market is sizeable, 
making it important for aggregate demand growth. Agribusiness (particularly coffee) and 
manufacturing (e.g., the car industry) are also relatively well developed. Improved security 
combined with business-friendly investment rules has led to a surge in foreign direct 
investment, particularly in the oil and mining sector.  

9. 
Following a longer period of broad-based economic growth, the economy was 
not affected too severely by the global economic crisis. Between 2002 and 2007, GDP 
growth averaged 5.0 percent per year on account of an improving security situation and a 
favorable external environment. The economy slowed down in 2008 to a growth rate of 3.5 
percent, as economic policies were tightened to address overheating. The country‘s strong 
macroeconomic framework and the resilience of the financial sector helped cushion the 
impact of the global economic crisis. Monetary policy responded swiftly as the policy rate 
was lowered from 10 to 3 percent. Fiscal policy also contributed to support aggregate 
demand. Countercyclical policies were combined with a flexible exchange rate regime, 
which acted as a shock absorber to counter the deceleration in external demand. By 2010, the 
economy had largely recovered from the slowdown, although a collapse in exports to 
Venezuela has held back some economic expansion. The GDP growth increased by 4.3 
percent in 2010 compared with 1.5 percent in 2009.  

2 

 
 
Table 1. Key Economic and Fiscal Indicators (percent of GDP) 

Real GDP growth (%) 
Inflation (avg. %) 
Oil price, Colombian mix (US$/bl) 
Gross national savings 
Gross dom. Investment 
Export growth (FOB, %)+ 
- Oil exports growth (%) 
Import growth (FOB, %) 
Current account balance 
Foreign direct investment (net) 
Gross reserves (months of G&S) ++ 
Total external debt +++ 
Total public sector revenues 
Total public sector expenditures 
Combined Public Sector balance 

Public debt 
- o/w foreign-currency 

GDP (US$ billions) 

2007 
6.9 
5.5 
66.2 
20.2 
23.0 
22.8 
15.6 
25.5 
-2.9 
3.9 
5.3 
21.5 

27.2 
28.2 
-0.7 

2008 
3.5 
7.0 
90.2 
20.5 
23.4 
26.3 
66.8 
20.7 
-2.8 
3.4 
5.1 
19.0 

26.3 
26.3 
-0.1 

2009 
1.5 
4.2 
56.6 
20.5 
22.7 
-12.2 
-16.0 
-16.0 
-2.2 
1.7 
6.2 
22.7 

26.5 
29.1 
-2.7 

2010 
4.3 
2.3 
73.3 
20.1 
23.2 
21.4 
54.4 
23.0 
-3.1 
0.1 
5.7 
22.6 

24.5 
27.3 
-3.0 

2011 
4.6 
3.3 
99.3 
21.9 
23.9 
25.6 
48.6 
12.6 
-2.1 
2.1 
6.6 
20.2 

25.2 
28.8 
-3.5 

32.7 
13.7 

30.8 
12.5 

36.3 
15.9 

36.7 
13.7 

35.8 
13.4 

2012 
4.5 
2.9 
100.1 
22.5 
24.6 
5.8 
10.3 
6.2 
-2.1 
2.2 
6.6 
19.9 

25.9 
28.5 
-2.5 

35.6 
13.3 

2013 
4.5 
3.0 
97.8 
22.9 
24.8 
8.3 
11.3 
7.0 
-1.9 
2.0 
6.6 
19.5 

25.9 
27.7 
-1.5 

2014 
4.5 
2.9 
96.9 
21.9 
24.1 
3.9 
3.6 
6.5 
-2.2 
2.1 
6.6 
19.2 

25.7 
27.3 
-1.3 

34.9 
13.1 

34.3 
13.0 

207.4 

244.6 

235.8 

288.2 

313.3 

332.1 

350.6 

369.9 

Note: +FOB = Free-on-board; ++G&S = Goods and services; +++Public and private external debt. 

Source: World Bank Staff projections based on DANE (the statistics agency), Central Bank, Ministry of 
Finance and Public Credit, and the IMF.  

10. 
As the recovery phase consolidates, Colombia is facing economic policy 
dilemmas similar to those experienced by other Latin American countries.1 On the one 
hand, the authorities face the challenge of keeping inflation expectations anchored in the face 
of higher economic activity and rising inflation. On the other hand, international capital 
flows are exerting appreciation pressures on the Colombian Peso and could also prompt 
credit booms and asset price bubbles, which would in turn destabilize the financial sector. On 
a positive note, the Colombian foreign currency bond credit rating was upgraded to 
investment grade for the first time since 1999 by Standard and Poor‘s (in March 2011) and 
by Moody‘s (in May 2011). This upgrade gives Colombia access to a new class of investors 
and may increase capital inflows further. In a move to return monetary policy to a neutral 
stance, the Central Bank increased the policy rate by 125 basis points during 2011, and this 
coincided with a slight decline in observed and expected inflation (despite higher global 
prices and a weather-related emergency.) The Government has taken a range of measures to 
smooth the exchange rate adjustment toward its long-term equilibrium value, including a 
program of reserve accumulation (with some sterilization), macro prudential measures, tariff 
and tax adjustments, as well as non-monetization of dollar proceeds. 

11. 
Colombia is experiencing some of the heaviest rainfall in recent history leading 
to widespread flooding and landslides. The heavy and prolonged rainfall that peaked in 
November and December 2010 (and which re-emerged in April 2011) is largely attributed to 
the meteorological phenomenon known as La Niña. Almost 3 million people, especially the 
poor, have been directly affected through loss of homes or being seriously deprived of access 

1 See ―LAC Success Put to the Test‖ (World Bank, 2011) for a detailed discussion. 

3 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
to most essential public services. Economic losses are expected to have exceeded 1 percent 
of GDP, but the weather shock has not derailed the economic recovery. The impact on food 
prices also proved temporary (see Annex C for details). The fiscal cost of the disaster 
increased the Central Government deficit by 0.2 and 0.4 percent of GDP in 2010 and 2011, 
respectively. 

C. Macroeconomic Outlook 

12. 
Colombia’s economy proved to be more resilient than other emerging market 
economies, and it is recovering steadily from the effects of the global crisis. This 
resilience is linked to a robust macroeconomic framework that rests on three mutually re-
enforcing pillars: (a) a responsible fiscal policy based on a credible medium-term fiscal 
framework and the introduction of a fiscal rule; (b) a monetary policy based on an inflation 
targeting regime (Consumer Price Index target of 3.0 percent with a tolerance of +/-1 
percent) complemented by a floating exchange rate with moderate interventions; and (c) 
sound macro and micro prudential policies combined with a solid financial system. In the 
short term, growth and domestic demand is likely to be boosted by consumer and investor 
confidence and the reconstruction program, as well as rising export volumes and solid 
commodity prices. 

13. 
The CPS baseline macro projections focus on the short- and medium-term 
outlook. The projections incorporate the effects of the 2010 La Niña episode and the 
government reconstruction program; the ongoing economic recovery; the latest assumptions 
of prospects for the global economy, including higher commodity prices; and recent Central 
Bank monetary and exchange rate policy announcements. The CPS baselines macro 
projections are summarized as follows: 

 Growth and inflation. Given the ongoing economic recovery, real GDP is expected to 
expand by 4.6 percent in 2011 and to converge to 4.5 percent in the medium term. 
Private consumption and private and public investment will sustain domestic demand 
growth in the short run. Inflation will stay on target (3 percent) over the projection 
period. 

 Fiscal accounts. The Ministry of Finance has presented a credible economic and 
fiscal strategy, which proposes a declining path for the fiscal deficit in 2011-13 in 
preparation for meeting the 2014 target stipulated by the new fiscal rule (a structural 
deficit of the Central Government of 2.3 percent of GDP). In line with the envisaged 
fiscal adjustment for the Central Government, the combined public sector deficit is 
also projected to decline from 3.0 percent of GDP in 2010 to 1.7 percent in 2014. As 
a result, public debt is declining moderately over the medium term. 

 External accounts. The current external account deficit widened during the 2010-11 
recovery as imports accelerated and factor income outflows increased. In the medium 
term, this deficit will narrow again as imports moderate and commodity exports 
continue to benefit from solid international prices and higher volumes. The deficit is 
largely financed by net foreign direct investment. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
D. Poverty Level and Trends 

14. 
Economic growth in recent years has been accompanied by poverty reduction . 
Between 2002 and 2009, poverty fell from 53.7 to 45.5 percent while the proportion of the 
population that could not satisfy basic nutritional needs (the extreme poor) declined from 
19.7 to 16.4 percent. While this is a positive development, Colombia‘s progress in reducing 
poverty, given its economic performance since 2002, falls below the performance of regional 
peers. Moreover, poverty levels remain relatively high given the country‘s income per capita. 
In part, this is explained by an unequal distribution of income, as reflected by the Gini 
coefficient, which is among the 10 highest in the world (see Annex D for details.) Food 
prices are also relatively higher in Colombia, which among other reasons is associated with 
the high cost of transport related to limited competition in the transport sector and unequal 
road access.  

Table 2. Poverty and Inequality in Colombia, 2002–05 and 2008–09 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2008 
53.7 
51.2 
51.0 
50.3 
46.0 
19.7 
17.0 
17.0 
15.7 
17.8 
0.594 
0.573 
0.579 
0.580 
0.589 

Poverty (%) 
Extreme poverty (%) 
Gini coefficient 

2009 
45.5 
16.4 
0.578 

Note: 2006 and 2007 data not available.  
Source: Misión para el Empalme de las Series de Empleo, Pobreza y Desigualdad (MESEP).  

15. 
Labor market rigidities and skill mismatches are also contributing to high -
income inequality. Colombian labor markets are still characterized by persistent, high-level 
unemployment (close to 12 percent in 2009), as well as pervasive labor informality, 
comprising 50-60 percent of the labor force depending on the definition used. Income 
generation opportunities for the extreme poor are very limited, with the unemployment rate 
close to 35 percent among this population. In addition, gender inequality in the labor markets 
contributes directly to inequality but also to further labor market rigidities.2 High minimum 
wages and labor costs, misperceptions of social security benefits, skill mismatches between 
labor supply and demand, and weak labor intermediation systems explain the poor 
performance in these labor market outcomes. 

16. 
Despite advances, pronounced inequalities remain in terms of access to quality 
social services. Capturing coverage of key services necessary for children, Colombia‘s 
Human Opportunity Index, while adjusting for fairness in its distribution among the 
population, is above the regional average. Encouragingly, between 1997 and 2008, there 
were significant improvements in opportunities for children to receive health care; attend 
preschool; complete high school; and, along with their families, gain access to electricity and 
telephones. Nevertheless, significant challenges remain for provision of social services in 
general, particularly in terms of unequal access to safe water, nutrition, food security, 
comprehensive early childhood development (ECD), and quality education and health 
services (see also Annex C, The Impact of Higher Food and Commodity Prices in 
Colombia). 

2 The ratio between female and male labor force participation was 0.54 in 2006, lower than the average for lower middle -
income countries (World Bank Gender Stats indicators,   http://www.worldbank.org/gender ; Data and Statistics). Women 
earned about 83 percent less than men after controlling for differences in education, age, and other characteristics; see H. 
Nopo, A. Moro, and A. Chong, eds., Discrimination in Latin America: An Economic Perspective (Inter-American 
Development Bank, 2009). 

5 

 
 
 
                                                 
III. GOVERNMENT’S VISION AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES  

17. 
In December 2010, the GOC launched its ambitious National Development Plan, 
called Prosperity for All 2010–2014 (Prosperidad para Todos 2010–14). The overarching 
goals of the NDP are to increase employment, reduce poverty, and improve security. The 
NDP has three main objectives: (1) Sustainable Growth and Competitiveness, (2) Equality of 
Opportunities for Social Prosperity, and (3) Consolidation of Peace. Moreover, it highlights 
four cross-cutting themes: (a) Relevance of International Relations, (b) Environmental and 
Disaster Risk Management, (c) Good Governance, and (d) Regional Development and 
Integration.  

18. 
Colombia also wants to strengthen its international image. Diversifying foreign 
relations and improving Colombia‘s image abroad are among the main goals of the Santos 
Administration. A key priority will be enhancing economic links with Pacific Rim countries 
and with countries in South and Central America. The GOC is also actively pursuing 
membership of APEC and OECD. For the latter, membership requirements are challenging, 
necessitating Colombia to continue addressing democratic as well as sound economic 
reforms.  

19. With the new National Development Plan the GOC will retain central elements 
of the previous administration’s economic policy, namely attracting foreign investment, 
fostering macroeconomic stability, addressing high unemployment and widespread 
informality, reducing poverty and inequality, restoring peace and security, and improving the 
business environment. Key development challenges include the following areas which are 
linked to the WBG program of support: to reduce poverty and inequality; to further raise 
human capital development, and to improve the impact of social services. 

20. 
To reduce poverty and inequality, the social protection system requires further 
integration and strengthening of institutional capacities. Although some social insurance 
schemes have significantly increased coverage levels, the social protection system as a 
whole, including health insurance, requires further integration to improve its reach and 
effectiveness. Likewise, the conditional cash transfer program Familias en Accion and the 
Juntos program, which focuses on reducing extreme poverty and involves tutors 
accompanying poor households to ensure their preferential access to social services, have 
significantly improved human capital development and opportunities among poor families; 
but enhancing coordination between the two programs remains a critical challenge. In 
addition, Familias en Accion and Juntos need to increase both coordination with social 
services in a broader way and effective coverage of internally displaced people. Finally, 
further creation of formal employment faces significant barriers — high labor costs, the 
relevance of skills, and a complex regulatory framework to establish businesses.  

21. 
To further raise human capital development, Colombia must continue to 
develop the education system at all levels. Despite substantial progress over the past 
decade, access to quality education remains unequal. Pronounced disparities persist with 
poorer regions exhibiting lower average enrollment rates and student achievement levels than 
wealthier regions, particularly at the secondary and upper-secondary levels. These disparities 
impact the performance of the education system as a whole; given its GDP per capita levels, 
Colombia performs subpar on international student assessments such as the Program for 

6 

 
International Student Assessment (OECD) and Trends in International Mathematics and 
Science Study (International Association for the Evaluation of Education Achievement). 

22. 
To improve the impact of social services, programs and systems require greater 
coordination, enhanced regulation, and accountability. At the core of this challenge are 
fragmented and insufficient information systems. The Ministry of Education‘s information 
system, for example, does not cover all institutions that manage government resources and 
provide education services. As the private (for-profit and not-for-profit) sector continues to 
play an increasingly important role in education (about 70 percent in preschool, 20 percent in 
primary and secondary education, and 43 percent in higher education), its full inclusion is a 
key consideration in further strengthening the education information system as a whole. 
Furthermore, institutional mandates of oversight, financing, and service provision within and 
across different levels of government remain blurred with often-weak coordination and 
accountability mechanisms. For example, some agencies are responsible for both provision 
of services and the monitoring and evaluation of said services, which can create perverse 
incentives. Combined, these deficiencies can negatively impact performance in Colombia‘s 
human development sectors, particularly those that are highly fragmented or involve multiple 
actors, such as health and early childhood development. 

23. 
Colombia has taken significant steps toward the consolidation of peace. Between 
2003 and 2009 the number of kidnappings was reduced by nearly 90 percent, acts of 
terrorism by more than 80 percent, and subversive activities by 64 percent. In addition, 
disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) programs have also led to 
disarmament of 45,000 ex-combatants via collective negotiations with paramilitary groups 
and individual demobilizations from left-wing guerrillas. Despite these advances, the 
consolidation of peace is still a very complex work in progress. Violence has migrated to the 
urban centers and into the border regions; criminals have designed new ways to organize and 
operate. More than 150,000 internally displaced families are expecting that their lands, 
confiscated by illegal actors, be finally restituted; and around 3 mil lion individuals of the 
internally displaced population (IDP) continue struggling in urban areas to find social and 
economic opportunities. Efforts to consolidate peace are not confined to police departments 
and criminal courts. They are part of a broader initiative involving the whole of Colombian 
society, promoting a citizenship culture based on the right and respect for peaceful 
coexistence and humanitarian and human rights more broadly, and strengthening and holding 
accountable democratic institutions and the justice system. It is essential to tackle the 
difficulties in terms of access, efficiency, and effectiveness of Colombia‘s judicial system to 
consolidate the peace process in the country that have been stymied by delays, costs, and 
complicated processes to access the justice system.  

24. While in recent years progress has been achieved in fostering infrastructure 
investments, Colombia lags behind other Latin American countries. Chile, a country 
with a smaller population than Colombia, has more than 2,400 kilometers of four-lane 
highways compared to only about 800 kilometers in Colombia. The challenges to improving 
the quality of public services, including transport and water, sanitation, and solid waste 
management, are likely to require regulatory reform, institutional improvements, and 
continued public investment and efforts to promote and attract private sector financing for 
infrastructure. Management of infrastructure assets, including maintenance, and improved 

7 

 
information systems remains a critical challenge within the context of Colombia‘s three-tier 
system of decentralized public administration. 

25. 
Cities have been the engines of Colombia’s economic growth. More than 50 
percent of Colombia‘s GDP growth in the last 4 decades can be attributed to economic 
development in urban areas. Today, 75 percent of Colombians live among five large cities, 
Bogotá, Cali, Medellin, Barranquilla, and Cartagena, which make these urban areas very 
densely populated, although economic density remains low. While urbanization rates have 
remained high, the quality of urban services has not kept up with the growth of cities. Land 
management and housing development for low-income segments of the population is a 
critical challenge, which the Santos Administration has identified as a policy priority.  

26. 
The Santos Administration’s renewed focus on urban services, urban land 
development, and expansion of housing for lower-income segments of the urban 
population aims to address inequity issues and also stimulate job growth. The 
Government‘s National Development Plan clearly highlights the need to manage urban 
growth through improvements in public transportation systems, developing financially 
sustainable approaches to expanding access to affordable housing, and consolidating many of 
the improvements in basic services coverage through improved management and service 
quality. Urban environmental issues — particularly in terms of air quality and management 
of wastewater — remain equally important challenges.  

27. 
Colombia is prone to natural disasters. While the extraordinary rainfall that 
plagued the country during 2010 and 2011 may not be directly linked to anthropogenic 
climate change, it highlights the country‘s continued vulnerability to an array of disaster risks 
and the likelihood that adaptation to climatic events will be a priority for this and future 
administrations. While Colombia, seen as a leader in managing disaster risk, has a 
sophisticated institutional arrangement in place to manage disaster risk, significant work 
remains in improving knowledge and risk assessments of territorial management; investing in 
critical infrastructure, like drainage systems; and ensuring that institutional reforms and 
investment are accompanied by robust enforcement of zoning requirements and building 
codes. Colombia‘s critical ecosystems also remain vulnerable to climatic events and the 
environmental services provided by many key ecosystems are crucial for the country‘s 
continued growth and development.  

28. 
 Environmental management and climate change are increasingly important 
areas of policy action in Colombia. Despite Colombia‘s major improvements in 
environmental management, environmental degradation affects public health and welfare in a 
significant way and compromises the country‘s potential for sustainable economic growth. 
Colombia has a long history of environmental and natural resource management policies and 
programs aimed to address issues of degradation and resource protection. The Santos 
Administration has made clear the centrality of environmental issues in its program, creating 
a dedicated Ministry of Environment. The proposed World Bank engagement under the CPS 
is wholly aligned with the Government‘s renewed focus on sustainable development, 
including positioning Colombia as a leader in the area of climate change. 

29. 
Colombia faces fiscal challenges related to managing the commodity boom, 
social security liabilities, and the risks associated with natural hazards. The economy is 
becoming increasingly intensive in commodity production. Oil production rose by 25 percent 

8 

 
in 2002–10, from 600,000 to 800,000 barrels per day, while coal production more than 
doubled from 40 million to 70 million tons. Macroeconomic challenges arise from the 
potential Dutch Disease effect of an appreciating real exchange rate as well as commodity 
price volatility, which increases economy-wide uncertainty. Given the fact that both national 
and subnational budgets rely on commodity revenue, this can give rise to reduced budget 
predictability and stability. Additional fiscal challenges relate to the Government‘s 
obligations to provide health care and pension. A strong expansion in subsidized coverage, 
rapid growth of demand outside the mandatory benefits package and a policy to harmonize 
health benefit packages for all individuals have contributed to rising health care costs. 
Meanwhile, pressures on the pension system arise from demographic change, migration of 
members from the defined contribution to the defined benefit system, and low coverage 
owing to high labor informality. Colombia is experiencing increasing economic losses as a 
result of natural hazards. Natural disaster events also represent a substantial fiscal contingent 
liability given potential losses to publically owned assets and the private assets of low -
income groups (which the Government would be compelled to partially compensate).  

30. Good governance and increased transparency in Colombia’s economy remains 
challenging and is one of the crosscutting priorities of the new Government. Although 
considerable progress has been made in improving the effectiveness and credibility of 
government institutions, increased transparency, accountability, and effectiveness remain 
challenging and require clear definition by the Government. The Government of Colombia 
realizes the necessity to increase transparency, improve management capacity, and 
strengthen the accountability of public institutions. Furthermore, citizen participation in 
politics and public debate, which is essential to generate social capital needs further 
encouragement. The subnational governments collectively execute expenditures worth 
roughly 10 percent of GDP (about a one-third of total public expenditures); they also raise 
roughly 3 percent of GDP in tax revenue. It is critical to improve subnational management 
capacity as new functions devolve to subnational governments. In addition to the challenge 
of good governance, the performance of public financial management (PFM) systems 
including public procurement is a critical factor for fiscal discipline, strategic allocation, 
operational efficiency, and transparency in use of public funds. A 2009 World Bank national-
level PFM and procurement report3 concluded that the PFM system in Colombia possesses a 
number of strengths that contribute to fiscal discipline and better control, such as legal 
powers to contain budgeted expenditures, timely monitoring of budget execution data and 
cash flows, centralization of revenues, and adequate debt management. In terms of 
operational efficiency, public procurement could be optimized. Some positive steps in 
modernizing the procurement system have been taken. With respect to the legal framework, 
for example, in 2007 and 2008, Colombia enacted a new law and associated regulatory 
decrees thereby making substantial progress toward bringing the Colombian system close to 
internationally agreed standards. Critical work remains in terms of ensuring sustainability of 
the procurement reform, including improving country institutional capacity; creating of a 
public procurement bureau; enhancing transparency; promoting participation of the private 
sector; and creating a more efficient, compliant mechanism.  

3 Colombia- National Level Public Financial Management and Procurement Report, World Bank, June 30, 
2009, Report No.: 55113-CO 

9 

 
                                                 
31. 
Aiming to grow at 6 percent per year, Colombia must progress in productivity 
and competitiveness to achieve this goal. Colombia's level of productivity is relatively low 
in a regional comparison. Low productivity, in turn, is linked to the labor market where a 
large proportion of workers and enterprises operate in the informal sector. Informal 
enterprises have limited access to credit, do not compete internationally, and have limited 
incentives to grow out of the shadow economy. To reduce the informality rate, the 
Government must generate an enabling economic environment that encourages formal job 
creation, invests in human capital, and manages individual incentives that favor informality. 

32. 
Colombia is lagging behind countries with similar characteristics in the 
development of science, technology, and innovation (STI). Colombia‘s STI sector growth 
(amounting to 11.9 percent annual growth in real terms from 2006 to 2009) has outpaced the 
economy‘s growth rate. As a result, investments in the sector have helped to expand basic 
infrastructure services to support STI development. In spite of these efforts, total investment 
in research and development in Colombia remains relatively low. It is 0.2 percent of GDP, 
compared to Argentina, which invests 0.5 percent; Chile, 0.7 percent; Brazil, 0.8 percent; and 
South Korea, 3.2 percent. The National Development Plan and the ―Plan Vive Digital 
Colombia‖ emphasize the Government‘s commitment to scale up investments into research 
and development and to address pending regulatory bottlenecks to reap its full potential.  In 
particular, the Government aims to address (a) organizational weaknesses; (b) the insufficient 
use of mechanisms to protect intellectual property rights; (c) limited access to financial 
instruments for innovative enterprises; (d) insufficient qualified human capital in relevant 
areas with an emphasis on innovation; and (e) insufficient incentives to retain the 
Colombians living abroad who have the potential to contribute to STI development. 

IV. WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP  

A. Lessons Learned from Previous CPS and Stakeholder Feedback 

33. 
CPS Completion Report. World Bank Group assistance to Colombia, an upper 
middle-income country with the third largest portfolio in Latin America and the seventh 
Bank-wide, offers lessons that are relevant to future Bank engagements with the country and 
with other middle-income countries. Overall, the FY2008–2011 CPS program performance is 
rated ―satisfactory‖ having achieved good progress toward all major expected outcomes. In 
this context, the Bank, in close coordination with the borrower, has incorporated a broad set 
of measures into both project implementation and supervision to strengthen the overall 
fiduciary control framework and to safeguard individual operations. 

34. 
The previous CPS was designed to be flexible and innovative in responding to 
Colombia’s financial and development needs. This flexibility has allowed the World Bank 
to explore new avenues of resources, mainly through trust funds, that financed unanticipated 
Government requests for knowledge and advisory services. Just-in-time technical assistance 
tailored for particular requests, policy dialogue, global knowledge transfer, and a fully 
integrated trust fund portfolio resulted in an important and innovative aspect of the program. 
While trust fund resources were not predictable at the outset of the CPS, the Bank ensured 
selectivity during implementation so that these resources were aligned with Government 
priorities. Colombia was also one of the first Bank clients to take advantage of the flexible 

10 

 
 
development policy loan (DPL) with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT DDO) 
as part of its integrated approach to disaster risk management. Combined with the other 
ongoing activities by the Bank — spanning the range of financial and knowledge services — 
Colombia has one of the most integrated programs in risk management of any Bank client. 
Its multi-year, knowledge and advisory programmatic approach, where IBRD had an on-
going engagement with the Government in key areas, defined the annual work program (for 
knowledge and convening services) according to the existing needs at the time. The IFC 
advisory program also expanded in Colombia, and its services were also based on strategic 
aims. This flexibility and just-in-time, multi-sectoral programmatic advisory approach 
proved to be effective and should be maintained.  

35. While all countries face risks, sound economic management, efficient and 
transparent institutions, good governance, and proactive social investments help 
mitigate the potential impact of internal and external risks. A strong institutional 
framework and an overall government commitment to a coherent development effort 
facilitate the design and implementation of a flexible, client-driven, assistance program. 
Looking forward it is important to agree with the authorities on an integrated package of 
financial, knowledge, and convening services with a focus on providing customized results-
focused development solutions in areas where the World Bank Group can add value.  

36. 
Engagement with Colombia is also effective on knowledge transfer utilizing the 
Colombian experience to the benefit of other, less-developed countries. Continued WBG 
engagement with Colombia offers a win-win situation as already shown with the mass transit 
system in Bogotá as well as the nationwide conditional cash transfer program Familias en 
Accion, which are similar to programs being developed in other countries around the world.  

37. 
Stakeholder feedback. In August 2010, after presidential elections, the WBG team 
engaged promptly with the new authorities. The WBG team prepared a set of thematic policy 
notes followed by an all-day meeting with President Santos and Government officials to 
discuss the new Government‘s potential priority areas, provide early input into the new 
National Development Plan, and seek feedback for the Bank‘s new CPS.  

38. 
Following these discussions the Government began formulating its National 
Development Plan, which was then subject to an extensive national consultation 
process. The exercise drew on the input of 16 administrative departments and an ample 
range of stakeholders from academia, NGOs, private sector, unions, the media, and — for the 
first time — indigenous peoples groups. As part of the CPS process, the Bank participated 
selectively in relevant Government consultation events. Given the extensive Government 
consultations on the National Development Plan and the relatively limited scope of the WBG 
in support of the National Development Plan, the WBG will continue to hold systematic 
stakeholder consultations in the process of developing new operational engagements and at 
mid- term CPS implementation.  

39. 
In addition, to complement the Government’s consultation efforts, the Bank 
carried out a national client survey. The survey process took place between February and 
March 2011, and offered some important inputs for the preparation of this CPS. Overall, 
stakeholders identified as the top development priorities in Colombia: (a) the reduction of 
poverty; (b) enhanced economic growth and employment generation; (c) improved education 
access and quality; and (d) peace. The survey suggests that the Bank is perceived to be 

11 

 
involved in some top development areas such as poverty and growth but less so in education 
where a plurality would like to see the Bank more involved. Respondents were mainly from 
government agencies (60 percent), followed by civil society organizations (18 percent), 
private sector (10 percent), academia (10 percent), and media (2 percent). For details, see 
Annex G. 

B. Proposed WBG Partnership Strategy  

40. 
The CPS aims to support selectively the new National Development Plan. The 
WBG will step up efforts to enhance development impact through selectivity, as a means to 
provide added value to the country. The WBG will carry out activities for which the 
Government or the private sector have expressed explicit need either through financial, 
knowledge, or convening services. These activities are combined as a results-focused 
package of support grouped under three strategic themes: (a) Expanding Opportunities for 
Social Prosperity; (b) Sustainable Growth with Enhanced Climate Change Resilience; and (c) 
Inclusive Growth with Enhanced Productivity. Each of these strategic themes has three areas 
of results with specified outcomes. The WBG aims to contribute toward these outcomes (as 
detailed in Table 3, 4, and 5 throughout the discussion of each theme below). In some cases, 
outcomes in this CPS cannot solely be attributed to the WBG since activities are often jointly 
accomplished with the Government or other partners.  

41. 
The programs under these strategic themes reflect the current dialogue with the 
authorities and include the ongoing portfolio as well as new activities running until 
FY13. Within the framework of the National Development Plan, new activities beyond FY13 
will be identified in agreement with the Government to acknowledge the needed flexibility, 
and responsiveness to emerging requests. The CPS Progress Report, which is envisaged after 
the next presidential election in 2014, will provide an update on the WBG engagement.  

42. 
The IFC expects to continue expanding its activities in Colombia supporting the 
National Development Plan. The IFC investments and advisory engagements will largely 
focus on enhancing the competitiveness of Colombia‘s private sector, and on increasing its 
capacity to generate new jobs. The IFC aims to support the private sector-oriented adult 
education sector, especially technical and vocational training for low- and middle-income 
students. Education is a critical factor in reducing inequality as well as raising productivity. 
Experience in other countries, such as Brazil, shows that working adults can double or trip le 
their incomes on graduation. IFC has already built up considerable experience in Colombia 
through its support for Uniminuto, a network of not-for-profit colleges, which enrolled 
26,500 students in 2009.  

43. 
The IFC aims to enhance Colombia’s infrastructure and logistics by expanding 
its work on structuring public–private partnership (PPP) projects in cooperation with 
government agencies. The IFC also intends to further improve Colombia‘s investment 
climate and trade logistics through its advisory services arm. The IFC expects to build on an 
active range of projects in Colombia currently focused on trade logistics and simplification of 
business registration processes. The IFC advisory services expect to expand with royalty 
management projects in the growing extractives sector. The IFC intends to increase financing 
of Colombian financial institutions, especially those focused on small and medium-size 
enterprises, low-income communities, and women. While small businesses typically employ 

12 

 
 
more workers than larger companies, insufficient financing affects their ability to survive and 
grow.  

44. 
The IFC also intends to maintain its commitment to corporate governance, an 
important issue given its substantial equity investments in Colombia and its ability to 
promote best practices in the field. Equity investments account for one-third of IFC‘s 
outstanding investments in Colombia. Housing may also become a growth area, with IFC 
supporting mortgage loans that benefit low- and middle-income groups. And IFC expects to 
ramp up its offering of technical as well as financial support for green-building codes and 
construction methods.  

45. 
Finally, the World Bank is offering its help to the Government in leveraging 
different sources of financing through its convening power, financial expertise, and 
relations. The Bank will work with Colombia to deliver financial structure to effectively 
leverage additional sources of financing and to tap into capital markets (e.g., Green Bond, 
Carbon Emission Rights sales contracts, joint financings, etc). In summary, Colombia has 
been a regional leader in the use of WBG risk management products and new financial 
structure and is expected to continue taking full advantage of WBG financial products. 

Expanding Opportunities for Social Prosperity 

46. 
Despite the slow decline of poverty and inequality over the last decade, Colombia has 
continued to strengthen its social policies to expand opportunities to the majority of the 
population. These efforts are concentrated in (a) enhancing social promotion and citizen 
security through increased coverage of safety nets and social protection programs for the 
poor and violence afflicted; (b) expanding educational opportunities for all; and (c) 
improving the performance of basic social services, such as those related to health, early 
childhood development, and education. The Bank has been an important partner in this 
effort, through investment loans and DPLs, grants, knowledge and convening services, and 
in-time technical assistance at Government‘s request.  

Table 3: Expanding Opportunities for Social Prosperity - Results Areas and Outcomes 

Improved Performance of Social 
Services 

Outcome 1: Strengthened 
information systems to monitor 
service delivery and strengthen 
accountability in health, education 
and ECD. 

Enhanced Social Promotion and 
Improved Citizens Security 

Improved Opportunities In 
Education 

Outcome 1: Better coverage of 
Unidos program (merger of two key 
poverty reduction programs). 

Outcome 2: Increase in the coverage 
of municipalities that offer active 
labor market policies to enhance 
labor productivity and reduce 
barriers to the employability of the 
poor. 

Outcome 3: Increase in number of 
land rights protected of internally 
displaced people who abandoned 
their land due to forced 
displacement. 

Outcome 1: Increase in enrollment 
rates (primary and lower secondary; 
and secondary education) of 
students from poor and rural 
households (31 poorest territorial 
entities, including 17 departments 
and 13 municipalities). 

Outcome 2: Increase in tertiary 
education enrollment of students 
from poor households. 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enhanced Social Promotion and Improved Citizens Security 

47. 
Enhanced social promotion is critical in the fight against poverty and more 
broadly against inequality. The Bank has been supporting the development of Colombia‘s 
social promotion system since the inception of the conditional cash transfer program 
Familias en Accion almost a decade ago. Since then, it has provided advice in the design, 
implementation, and evaluation of the Juntos and most recently Unidos anti-poverty strategy. 
Furthermore, its multi-year programs of knowledge and convening services have gone 
beyond supporting the social promotion system to promoting inclusive, equitable, and 
efficient social protection for all Colombians. In the future, these services will focus on the 
development and implementation of the National Plan for Social Prosperity — that will 
include analyses to support the Unidos strategy, which aims to improve the coordination and 
strengthening of the Familias en Accion and Juntos programs, helping ensure the alignment 
with other social services and income-generation and active labor market programs — and 
review of existing capacity and international experiences to develop a platform to promote 
social innovation. The Bank has also been supporting development of Colombia‘s social 
protection system through operations and advisory services, focused on achieving (a) greater 
integration, efficiency, and equity of social insurance through expansion of information 
systems for social security contributions and the centralized registry of beneficiaries of all 
social programs; (b) improvement of the targeting, efficiency, and articulation of social 
assistance programs (SISBEN); and (c) promotion of higher-quality training and employment 
services, as well as a strategy to promote income generation among the extreme poor, 
including social innovation and approaches that involve the private sector. Potential areas of 
knowledge services include support for the creation of a system that promotes labor market 
competencies and tackles barriers to employability, and design of temporary employment 
programs and a national labor intermediation system. 

48. 
The Bank is supporting Colombia’s efforts to achieve lasting peace and greater 
gender equity. The country‘s recent history has been marred by violence and armed 
conflicts that have precluded it from reaching its full development potential. Violence has 
displaced a large portion of the population. The Bank is actively supporting the joint efforts 
by the Government and the international community with knowledge and convening services 
as well as trust fund financing. The ongoing Peace and Development Project aims to assist 
vulnerable, low-income, and displaced populations in rural and urban communities in the 
conflict-affected regions; this assistance comes by reducing risk of further exposure to 
violence and mitigating the negative impact of possible derived effects. The Bank is also 
implementing a grant to protect the land and patrimony of internally displaced populations. 
The Bank plans to continue work in peace and development through technical assistance and 
several grants that will focus on youth at risk, Afro descendants, ex-combatants, displaced 
populations, gender issues, and strengthening policies and institutions to protect human 
rights. Given the high number of people affected by conflict in the country (about 15 percent 
of the total population), the Bank will continue to support Colombia in improving strategies 
to assist internally displaced populations in a comprehensive and sustainable way.  

49. 
Critical gender issues in Colombia include labor markets segmentation, 
domestic violence, and early childbearing. Gender issues are fully integrated in the WBG 
program and in addition the Bank offers several grants with a concrete focus on gender 
issues, specifically among IDPs. These are designed to (a) increase the economic 

14 

 
empowerment of women in IDP communities; (b) assist these women to join the formal labor 
force; (c) build the assets of internally displaced women (including greater food security); (d) 
help understanding of the causes of political and/or domestic violence against women and 
develop tools to mitigate it; and (e) increase participation of women in the Peace and 
Development Project. A recent review of this work by the Bank‘s Internal Evaluation Group 
highlights the need to support gender equality in the area of employment and opportunities; 
as a direct consequence, the Bank is closely engaged in supporting the Secretary for 
Women‘s Issues in the Presidency with an initiative to certify those businesses and 
enterprises that adopt gender-neutral employment policies. 

Improved Opportunities in Education 

50. 
In order to support continued economic growth and reductions in poverty and 
inequality, it is imperative that Colombia raise human capital development by 
improving opportunities in education at all levels. This includes improving quality in pre-
school, basic, and secondary levels; promoting relevance in upper secondary, including 
vocational and technical education; and increasing enrollment while decreasing dropouts at 
the tertiary level. The World Bank will continue to support Colombia in these efforts through 
several projects. The ongoing second phase of an adaptable program loan (APL) for the 
Rural Education Project further expands opportunities for non-urban students by 
supporting increased delivery of educational resources and implementation of flexible 
education models in rural areas. The Antioquia Upper Secondary Education Project 
supports the Department of Antioquia‘s efforts to improve access, retention, and outcomes 
among upper-secondary schools to improve the employability of young people and increase 
labor force competitiveness. The Education Quality Project aims to improve the design, 
application, evaluation, and use of assessments to inform policies and initiatives to enhance 
the quality of education. The first phase and upcoming second phase of an APL for the 
Student Loan Support Project has been instrumental in increasing enrollment and 
graduation rates among tertiary students from economically disadvantaged backgrounds. 
Complementary to the financial services, the Bank is involved in a multi-year Program of 
Knowledge Services, Skills for Shared Growth, as well as convening services to support 
GOC efforts to increase education quality and skill formation, identify determinants of 
student learning in order to better inform policy and improve technical and institutional 
capacity to conduct research, and to monitor and evaluate education policies and programs. 
In FY13, the program will include a joint World Bank/OECD review of the tertiary education 
system.  

51. 
The IFC plan to increase its operations in adult education, with a focus on technical 
and vocational training, fits well with this approach. The IFC aims to reach low-income 
students either through direct financing for technical and vocational colleges, or possibly 
through a loan program designed to meet students‘ needs. Complementary to these projects, 
the World Bank will continue to provide a multi-year program of knowledge and convening 
services to support efforts to increase education quality and skill formation. These services 
will include, among other activities, an assessment of teacher performance, policy notes on 
technical education, and the establishment of a comprehensive database of learning outcomes 
that allows tracking progress across various student assessments and the effect of time 
changes on overall student performance. 

15 

 
 
Improved Performance of Social Services 

52. 
Improving the performance of social services hinges on strengthening 
information systems and planning, coordination and accountability at and across all 
levels of government. In support of these goals, the World Bank will continue to provide a 
multi-year program of knowledge and convening services. In the short term, this program 
will assess the information systems in health, early childhood development, and education, 
and will issue recommendations to strengthen the systems using innovative information 
technologies and platforms. In health and early child development, the program will also 
assess accountability arrangements between central and local governments. In early 
childhood development, Bank efforts will support development of the national multi-sector 
strategy, De Cero a Siempre, which aims to consolidate currently fragmented efforts to 
provide young children of all families, particularly the poorest, with access to high-quality, 
comprehensive ECD services.  

53. 
The multi-year program of knowledge and convening services will be complemented 
through a DPL and three trust fund-financed projects. The enhancing governance and 
accountability arrangements of health insurance schemes in Mexico, Colombia and Peru 
seeks to analyze the current situation and explore options to enhance current organizational 
arrangements and information systems for improving governability of health insurance in 
Colombia. Implementing the Right to Health through Universal Health Insurance 
Project aims to strengthen participation of academic centers and civil society in developing 
instruments and foster dialogue on how to fairly and efficiently ensure rights in health. 
Furthermore, a Fiscal Sustainability and Growth Resilience DPL series will support the 
adoption of critical legal and regulatory reforms to better manage fiscal pressures stemming 
from the harmonization of benefit packages among population groups and to improve 
reimbursement practices and enhance the financial sustainability of the health system as a 
whole. In FY12, the Bank is also supporting the GOC with the Strengthening Governance 
of Early Childhood Development Programs (SFLAC grant), which includes provision of 
continued knowledge services to help improve coordination and governance arrangements 
under the ECD service delivery system, rationalize the existing complex set of overlapping 
programs, and design and provide technical assistance to implement a comprehensive 
information system for monitoring and evaluation. In addition, the Colombia Enhancing 
Governance, Transparency, and Accountability in Education Project (IDF grant) aims to 
strengthen education efficiency through improved monitoring, accountability, and oversight 
of the sector, including the establishment of a superintendence of education.  

Sustainable Growth with Enhanced Climate Change Resilience 

54. 
 The areas of sustainable urban development, environmental management, resilience 
to climate change, and disaster risk mitigation are high priorities for the World Bank‘s 
engagement under this CPS. These activities have gained prominence given the challenges of 
meeting Colombia‘s ambitious plans for growth and economic development with the explicit 
policy objectives of the new administration to make development environmentally and 
socially sustainable. The Bank-supported program aims to continue addressing the needs of 
Colombia‘s highly urbanized population – through better land management, improved 

16 

 
 
services, and governance – while maintaining Colombia‘s position as an international leader 
in environmental management. 

Table 4: Sustainable Growth with Enhanced Climate Change Resilience - Results Areas and Outcomes 

Improved Sustainable Urban 
Development 

Outcome 1: Increased population 
benefitting from improved 
transportation services in large 
cities. 

Outcome 2:  Increased population 
benefitting from improved 
transportation services in medium-
sized cities. 

Outcome 3: Improved institutional 
capacity of the Central Government 
to plan and deliver transportation 
services. 

Enhanced Disaster Risk 
Management 

Outcome 1: Strengthened technical 
capacity for disaster risk 
management at national and regional 
levels. 

Outcome 2: National Policy for 
Disaster Risk Management 
formulated. 

Improved Environmental 
Management and Climate Change 
Resilience 
Outcome 1:  Government has 
developed a national policy for 
climate change and a national low-
carbon growth strategy. 

Outcome 2: Government has 
mainstreamed improved 
environmental practices in the 
agricultural sector through a scaling-
up of silvopastoril livestock 
systems. 

Improved Sustainable Urban Development 

55. 
Seventy-five percent of Colombians live in cities. Colombia‘s largest city, Bogotá is 
home to 8 million; with 18,000 people per square kilometer, it is the densest populated city in 
the Western hemisphere. At the other end of the spectrum lie 927 municipalities with fewer 
than 20,000 people, fairly dispersed across the national landscape. Population density is the 
signature of Colombian cities, but economic densities are low. Bogotá, Medellín, and 
Bucaramanga rank among the 50 most densely populated cities in the world. Urbanization 
has stimulated the concentration of people and jobs, generating economies of scale and 
agglomeration. The urban economy has contributed much to Colombia‘s economic progress. 
Building on industry and services, the urban sector has contributed more than 50 percent to 
GDP growth over the past 40 years. A key goal of the Government‘s new National 
Development Plan is to improve the urban living environment, which includes improving 
access to and quality of basic services, improving the urban environment, and expanding 
access to affordable housing solutions for the poor.  

56. 
Over the last 30 years the World Bank has supported Colombia‘s urban development 
agenda on the national as well as subnational levels in urban housing, transport, solid waste 
management, and water and sanitation; and the Bank‘s current portfolio reflects the centrality 
of urban services and environment. The Bogotá Urban Services Project assists the District 
of Bogotá to implement a strategic portion of its 3-year Development Plan through urban 
transport solutions to improve mobility and strengthening of the cadastre system. The Bank 
is also supporting the development of sustainable urban transport in large and medium-sized 
cities through the Government‘s pioneering and widely recognized National Urban 
Transport Program (NUTP), which supports the financing of sustainable public transport 
systems. The IFC may expand a successful subnational financing program for urban 
improvement to other cities. In 2010, IFC committed a US$45 million senior loan to the 
metropolitan municipality of Bogotá to finance its 2007-2008 capital expenditure program 
and rehabilitation of streets, sidewalks, and bike paths. In the near term, Colombia is likely to 
access the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) resources to further develop low-carbon solutions 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for expanded public transport (a CTF Investment Plan totaling US$100 million was approved 
in 2010).  

57. 
In the area of water and sanitation, the GOC has been a leader in adopting 
sound water sector policies. Among the forerunners of decentralization, the GOC 
established a legal framework that clearly separates service provision from policy-making, 
thus allowing private sector participation. The key to success in the Colombian water sector 
reform has been the development of homegrown solutions and at times the skillful adaptation 
of models (successfully used elsewhere) suited to particular circumstances and culture of 
Colombia. As a result, Colombia has made substantial progress in the expansion of water 
supply and sanitation services. As of 2010, urban water supply access was over 95 percent 
(rural water supply coverage was 71 percent) although service quality remains uneven. 
Sanitation access has also improved significantly in recent years with urban coverage of over 
90 percent. Over the years, the World Bank has supported Colombia through advisory work, 
capacity building, and lending services. Since 1988, the World Bank has provided a series of 
loans with a total value of over US$700 million to the Colombian water supply and sanitation 
sector. The IFC is helping to finance Barranquilla‘s water and sewer system with a US$10.9 
million guarantee, and hopes similar risk management structures or direct financing 
programs can be used to support local infrastructure projects. Remaining challenges in the 
sector include the need to improve multi-city service quality, improve access in rural areas, 
and dramatically improve wastewater management.  

58. 
Ongoing operations within the sector include the La Guajira Water and Sanitation 
Infrastructure and Service Management Project, which aims to support the development 
of financial sustainable utilities in one of Colombia‘s lagging departments and to improve the 
quality of basic service delivery in La Guajira‘s 15 municipalities. The Rio Bogotá 
Environmental Recuperation and Flood Control Project is an example to urban water 
quality management, which aims to transform the Río Bogotá — a terribly polluted open 
sewer — into an environmental asset for the District of Bogotá by improving water quality, 
reducing flood risks, and creating multi-functional areas along the river.  

59. 
Among the challenges of solid waste management in Colombia, a significant 
proportion of solid waste is disposed of inadequately. Colombia‘s 1,102 municipalities 
produce approximately 28,800 tons of solid waste per day. Approximately 35 percent, or 
10,000 tons per day, of this waste is generated in Bogotá, Cali, Medellin, and Barranquilla, 
while medium-size cities and smaller municipalities generate the remaining 65 percent, or 
18,800 tons per day. It is estimated that a large proportion of this waste is inadequately 
disposed in open-air dumps, bodies of water, and other environmentally sensitive sites. 
Inadequate disposal results in environmental and health problems that include surface and 
groundwater contamination, air pollution, and increased vector-transmitted (flies and 
rodents) illnesses. The Bank has a solid waste management project under implementation 
that helps to address some of these key issues through public–private partnerships for the 
development and management of multi-municipal regional sanitary landfills.  

60. 
In the area of housing and urban land management, the Bank supports a broad 
thematic engagement related to a range of issues, from development of financial instruments 
for financing of urban investment to creation of public–private solutions for mixed-use and 
low-income housing. The Bank has been working closely with a range o f actors within the 
GOC and civil society in what the Santos Administration considers one of five ―engines of 

18 

 
growth‖ under the National Development Plan. The Bank‘s work includes financial support 
(through the Macroproyectos project); a range of knowledge services and delivery of just-
in-time technical guidance; and the use of the Bank‘s convening power, which included a 
visit by a high-level Colombian delegation to Washington, D.C., to help develop options for 
establishing tools, such as tax increment financing for developing urban infrastructure and 
urban renovation. This engagement is likely to continue in the coming years, especially given 
the National Development Plan‘s focus on regional differentiation and development of a 
multi-polar growth dynamic led by urban revitalization.  

Enhanced Disaster Risk Management 

61. 
Natural disasters are a challenge to sustainable development in Colombia. 
Colombia’s high rate of urbanization, compounded by the location of major cities in 
high-risk areas, and considerable environmental degradation have brought with them 
growing vulnerability to adverse natural events. Population growth and the increasing 
concentration of settlements, assets, and infrastructure mean that vulnerability to natural 
hazard events is on the rise. This, combined with global climate change and the expected 
increased climatic variability, is likely to exacerbate the country‘s exposure to floods, 
erosion, landslide, and drought. Annually, Colombia suffers from more than 600 natural 
disasters. In the past 30 years, Colombia has experienced 6 major earthquakes, 4 volcanic 
eruptions, major landslides, and extensive flooding. Recognizing that disasters are most 
effectively dealt with before they happen, Colombia has over the past 2 decades 
institutionalized a system for comprehensive disaster risk management that among other 
things seeks to reduce vulnerability by investing in risk mitigation, environmental 
management, and strengthening the integration of disaster risk management in urban and 
territorial planning. Improving Colombia‘s disaster risk management has been a central 
theme of the Government‘s overall policy program since 2002. Since 2004, the Government 
requested preparation of an APL series to support the implementation of its disaster risk 
management policies. Two loans are under implementation.  

62. 
The APL I, which finances investment by the Central Government, addresses the 
sector issues through components based on the 5 lines of action — (a) risk identification, (b) 
risk reduction, (c) institutional development, (d) risk awareness, and (e) risk financing — 
including activities aimed at increasing the effectiveness of investments in disaster risk 
mitigation and at addressing the need for contingency plans to cover fiscal shortfalls in case 
of a major catastrophe. The APL II, a direct loan to the District of Bogotá, aims at reducing 
the vulnerability of the Capital District of Bogotá to adverse natural events, by strengthening 
its capacity to manage disaster risks, and by reducing vulnerability in key sectors. The 
project will contribute to the District‘s long-term program to save lives and reduce social, 
economic, and financial losses resulting from earthquakes, floods, landslides, and other 
adverse natural events.  

63. 
In December 2010 during the country‘s worst rainy season in decades, the World 
Bank disbursed a DPL with a deferred drawdown option linked to catastrophic events (CAT 
DDO of US$150 million) to support Colombia in the face of the humanitarian emergency. 
The use of the CAT DDO reflects the Government‘s interest in expanding the use of 
innovative financing instruments to develop a comprehensive risk financing strategy. As in 

19 

 
 
other areas, the Bank‘s engagement in disaster risk management spans the broad range of 
lending, technical assistance, and knowledge services that support a variety of actors within 
Central Government, at the local level and in civil society. Given the focus on disaster risk 
issues as a result of the rains and flooding of 2010/2011 and the Bank‘s experience in helping 
the GOC effectively, it is likely that additional work in this area will take place that could 
include new lending operations for further financing of the APL series, a new CAT DDO, 
and subnational operations, including in Barranquilla (a flood protection project), as well as a 
continued engagement in technical assistance and other knowledge work. The Bank will also 
explore synergies between assisting internally displaced people and people affected by 
natural disasters, given the large numbers and geographical coincidences of these two 
groups.  

Improved Environmental Management and Climate Change Resilience 

64. 
As one of the most biodiverse countries on Earth, Colombia faces serious 
challenges related to environmental degradation, which affects public health and 
welfare and compromises the country’s potential for sustainable economic growth . An 
analysis of the costs of environmental degradation in Colombia indicates that the most 
significant costs are associated with urban environmental challenges — inadequate water, 
sanitation, and hygiene and ambient and indoor air pollution, mainly from increased child 
morbidity and mortality. Colombia also faces great challenges and opportunities on the 
―green‖ environment side related to protecting critical ecosystems, developing strategies and 
instruments for the sustainable use and protection of its rich forest resources, and taking 
advantage of the new climate financing instruments under development. The country‘s 
remarkable efforts to protect large amounts of its national territory put it in an excellent 
position to emerge as a leader in forest protection and environmental management. The CPS 
envisages a broad engagement in integrating environmental principles in sectoral policies (in 
particular those of the growth engines, such as infrastructure and mining), urban 
environmental management, ecosystem protection, and forestry and water resources 
management; this will most likely extend to potentially scaled-up engagement in climate 
change mitigation and adaptation, which seems to have taken on a new emphasis under the 
Santos Administration. In this context, the Bank is also helping to facilitate nascent work in 
developing a strategy for conservation and sustainable development in the Colombian 
Amazon, which might focus on supporting the needs of the Amazon‘s indigenous peoples 
who are disproportionately affected by poverty and violence. 

65. 
In recent years, the Bank has been actively assisting the Government of Colombia 
with a policy-based program of reforms that have been highly successful and have been 
accompanied by a program of technical assistance under the Sustainable Development 
Investment Project. This programmatic engagement aims to strengthen the Government‘s 
program for reducing environmental degradation in Colombia and is likely to continue and 
expand under the new CPS. This policy and knowledge engagement has gone hand in hand 
with a number of grant-financed and carbon finance activities. These activities include but 
are not limited to the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Integrated National 
Adaptation Project, a national program to define and implement specific pilot climate 
change adaptation; the GEF-funded Colombian National Protected Areas Conservation 
Trust Fund Project (soon to enter a stage of additional finance) that supports the 

20 

 
 
development of the National Protected Areas System by consolidating a Biodiversity and 
Protected Areas Trust Fund; and the GEF Sustainable Cattle Ranching Project, which 
supports the development of silvopastoril cattle ranching systems that greatly improve 
environmental management, provide financial and economic benefits to participating cattle 
farms, and incorporate an environmental services payment element for development of 
critical biodiversity corridors.  

66. 
The IFC sees strong potential demand in Colombia for its suite of climate-related 
products. These include credit lines for banks to support energy efficiency projects for 
corporate clients as well as direct financing to manufacturers to raise energy efficiency levels 
to boost operating margins as well as cutting greenhouse gas emissions. The IFC also intends 
to support energy efficient building codes through its investment operations and advisory 
service projects. 

67. 
In the new CPS period, the Bank is likely to be deeply involved in environmental 
management issues in Colombia, spanning urban environmental issues, forestry, climate 
change, biodiversity protection, and water management. And from an institutional point of 
view, the integration of environmental principles in sectoral policies could have a 
significantly high environmental footprint, unless environmental factors are considered in 
their expansion plans. At this moment, activities are ongoing to develop a national low-
carbon growth strategy to address a range of urban environmental issues (including through 
operations mentioned above) and to help Colombia take advantage of its vast human capacity 
and strong legal and institutional framework in ensuring that the institutional and governance 
aspects of environmental management are strengthened. 

Inclusive Growth with Enhanced Productivity 

68. 

Colombia also faces the challenge to achieve faster and more inclusive economic 
growth. The National Development Plan sets out to increase the country‘s growth rate from 
4 to 6 percent, cut the unemployment from 12 to 9 percent, and reduce the Gini coefficient of 
income inequality from 0.58 to 0.54. Achieving these challenging targets require policy 
efforts geared toward developing the country‘s natural and human resources into such a 
pattern that accelerates growth and shares its benefits with broad segments of the population. 
In particular, it requires skillful management of risks and fiscal policy challenges associated 
with natural resources wealth and careful monitoring and evaluation of policies and programs 
conducive to inclusive growth. Transparent and effective public sector institutions (at federal 
and subnational levels) and a friendly business environment will also facilitate this growth. 
And in support of innovation and entrepreneurship for higher productivity, the development 
in the financial sector must deliver efficient and stable services with access for all people. 
The Bank is supporting the Colombian Government in this endeavor through an array of 
financial and knowledge services discussed below. 

21 

 
 
Table 5: Inclusive Growth with Enhanced Productivity – Results Areas and Outcomes 

Improved Fiscal, Financial and 
Social Risk Management 

Outcome 1:  The Central 
Government meets the structural 
fiscal deficit target for 2014 (2.3% 
of GDP or less). 

Outcome 2:  Financial instruments 
to mitigate natural disaster risks 
have been implemented by 2013. 

Improved Productivity and 
Innovation 

Outcome 1: Strengthened capacity 
of COLCIENCIAS to promote 
human capital for knowledge 
economy, research and development 
and innovation.  

Outcome 2: Raised awareness of 
science, technology, and innovation 
in the Colombian society. 

Outcome 3: Improved regulations 
for business and property 
registration, and reform the 
legislation for secured transactions 
and the collateral registry.  

Outcome 4:  Higher financial 
inclusion measured by increased 
percentage of the population with a 
deposit account. 

Improved Public Sector 
Management and Equity and 
Efficiency of Economic Policies 

Outcome 1: Enhanced public sector 
efficiency and transparency by 
strengthening and expanding the 
individual management information 
systems that are the building blocks 
of an integrated, performance-
informed management model. 

Outcome 2: Management capacities 
at subnational level of governments 
are improved and have a positive 
impact in the quality of expenditures 
and the provision of services. 

Outcome 3: Improved quality and 
accessibility of the evidence base for 
decision making and particularly for 
policies and programs related to 
poverty reduction. 

Outcome 4: Improvement in the 
movement of cargo in and out of 
Colombia by enhancing automation 
through the VUCE system and 
improved handling of cargo at ports 
through risk-based policy and 
procedures. 

Improved Fiscal, Financial, and Social Risk Management 

69. 
Colombia has made good progress on the fiscal front over the past decade as 
illustrated by substantial reduction in public debt by about ten percentage points since 
2002. Yet, as previously discussed, the country faces fiscal challenges related to increased 
fiscal reliance on commodity revenues, substantial social security liabilities, and fiscal risks 
associated with natural hazards. 

70. 
The Santos Administration is pursuing fiscal reforms aimed at addressing some of 
these challenges. A new fiscal rule sets a deficit target for 2014 and commits the Government 
to undertake a medium-term fiscal adjustment of about 1.5 percentage points of GDP. The 
rule targets a Central Government structural balance by 2022. The fiscal rule legislation also 
introduces a savings and stabilization fund to reduce budget volatility associated with an 
increased fiscal reliance on commodities revenues (primarily oil, coal, and metals). A reform 
of the royalties system, which directs revenues from natural resources exploration toward 
subnational entities, complements these efforts by introducing a stabilization fund at the 
decentralized level. Congress has also approved an amendment to the Constitution that 
introduces fiscal sustainability as a criterion. The Government has also taken measures to 
reduce social security spending through legislative and administrative measures in the health 
sector, and it is preparing a financing strategy to mitigate fiscal risks from natural hazards. 
The Government‘s fiscal management program represents a substantial effort in tackling 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these challenges. Further progress, for instance in reforming the pension system, would 
nonetheless be warranted even following successful implementation of the reform program. 

71. 
Colombia has focused for many years in managing the risk reduction of its debt 
portfolio through a substantial increase in the share of local currency and fixed interest rate, 
the extension of maturities, and the smoothing out of the debt redemption profile. To meet 
the goals of its debt management strategy, Colombia has taken full advantage of IBRD 
financial products, both at the federal and subnational levels. As Colombia proceeds with 
active liability management of its debt portfolio in the future, it is expected that the country 
will continue using the embedded conversion options of IBRD loans to fix the interest rate or 
convert the loan currency into Colombian Pesos. In addition, Colombia has signed a Master 
Derivatives Agreement with IBRD that gives it access to a wider menu of financial products 
to manage risks related to commodity, weather, and natural disasters. The Master Derivatives 
Agreement would also help hedge the currency exposure generated by bond issuance in 
international markets in different currencies (e.g., in Japan). Subnationals, which have 
revenues in local currency (e.g., Bogotá, ICETEX), are also expected to continue with the 
practice of converting their loan disbursements into Colombian Pesos.  

72. 
Colombia is in the process of developing a broader approach to sovereign risk 
management. The country lacks a comprehensive fiscal risk analysis of the balance sheet as 
well as a specific framework for the design and implementation of a holistic risk 
management strategy capable of deliberating between (a) risk absorption capacity, (b) risk 
retention and transfer, (c) policy advice and institutional capacity for managing risk , and (d) 
potential financial products available for strategy implementation. Colombian authorities and 
the World Bank have enjoyed a long-lasting and fruitful partnership on issues relating to 
sovereign debt management in general and the reduction of financial vulnerabilities in 
particular, with Colombia being a regional leader in the use of the Bank‘s risk management 
products and services. As part of this ongoing partnership, the World Bank is assisting the 
Government of Colombia as it endeavors to develop and implement a more comprehensive 
sovereign risk management agenda (see Annex E for details). 

73. 
The World Bank also supports the Government‘s fiscal management program through 
a multi-sectoral, programmatic package of financial, knowledge, and convening services. 
Financial services include a DPL series (FY12-13) that support greater budget predictability 
and stability, improved management of public sector contingent liabilities, and improved 
disaster risk financing management. Knowledge services range from economic modeling 
support to commodity risks management. In the area of convening services, the Bank 
organizes various seminars with high-level government officials on royalties‘ reform, 
disaster risk management, and management of public sector liabilities.  

74. 
The Bank is also supporting efforts to strengthen the Colombian financial sector, 
which is considered underdeveloped. Data shows that different measures of financial 
system development are below the expected medium value given GDP per capita, size and 
demographics and is also below the regional media for LAC countries. Sound financial 
sector development is necessary to fund productive investment, to increase productivity, and 
to sustain growth. To this end, there is work underway to strengthen financial sector 
oversight, develop the financial sector, and improve access to finance. In the area of financial 
sector strengthening, the Bank plans to provide knowledge and advisory services in forms of 
(a) a Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC), with its recommendations, 

23 

 
including financial architecture, regulation, and supervision; (b) a review of the pension 
system; (c) continued ongoing work on capital markets development through the Efficient 
Securities Markets Institutional Development (ESMID) program. Furthermore, work to 
strengthen financial literacy and consumer protection is underway namely through analytical 
work to understand the financial management practices of the Colombian population and 
technical assistance to the financial sector on fee structures. In social risk management, the 
Bank will provide advisory services to improve the Government‘s ability to monitor social 
welfare impacts of crises (and related responses) at the national and local level. The Bank 
will also step in to strengthen the capacity of the Government and communities to prepare for 
crises. This work will include development of a management information system for social 
risk management and approval of a SFLAC recipient-executed grant to strengthen social risk 
management capacity at the Department of National Planning (DNP). 

Improved Public Sector Management and Equity and Efficiency of Economic Policies 

75. 
Colombian authorities have been focused on enhancing the equity, efficiency, 
and effectiveness of economic policies and public administration for more than two 
decades. Progress has been notable under the last two administrations, and the political 
commitment was renewed by the new Administration that put enhancing public sector 
management as a top priority in the National Development Plan. The Bank supports the GOC 
Good Governance and Decentralization Programs with specific focus in the national 
government‘s management institutions, the decentralization framework, and the governance 
and public management capacities at subnational level of government. 

76. 
The Bank‘s support in this area include the Consolidation of National Public 
Management Information Systems Project that aims to improve transparency and inter-
operability of the Government‘s main management information systems. The Subnational 
Institutional Strengthening Investment Loan, planned for FY12, will support the 
implementation of the decentralization reforms and the Government‘s strategy to improve 
governance and institutional capacities in subnational governments. The IFC hopes to expand 
its royalty management program in Colombia. There are three active projects in the country 
that are assisting local governments to improve transparency and accountability in their use 
of payments from extractive industry operations.  

77. Knowledge and advisory services will seek to strengthen territorial development 
through improved management capacities in departments and municipal governments . 
Bank assistance will focus on strengthening human resource management, financial 
management, and coordination with local organizations (public, private, and civil society). 
Specific activities include the design and piloting of the Rapid Assessments and Action 
Plans Methodology, which aims to improve management capacities in departments and 
municipal governments. In addition, a diagnostic and strategic planning tool based on the 
Capacity Development and Results Framework is being applied to assess and address 
institutional capacities of demand and supply-side institutions at the subnational level. The 
Bank also provides advisory services on the implementation of the Citizen’s Visible Audits 
Methodology, which promotes civil society participation and control in the execution of 
public investments. The regional study ―Fiscal Federalism/Decentralization in LAC” also 
contributes to generate and share knowledge on good practice related to intergovernmental 

24 

 
 
arrangements. Convening services include organization of workshops on mechanisms to 
improve national government tools to assess public management capacities at subnational 
level and to regulate and supervise the delivery of services by subnational governments; and 
the exchange of international experiences on policies to improve coordination among central 
and subnational governments as well as on budget management to improve expenditure 
efficiency. 

78. 
In the past few years, Colombia has also demonstrated a good track record in 
implementing public financial management. The Colombian PFM systems at central level 
perform close to international good practice, albeit with a few areas needing further 
improvement. The Bank has supported strengthening of the financial management and 
oversight systems in the country by using different financing instruments and advisory 
services to the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit, Department of National Planning, 
Supreme Audit Institutions, and National Accounting Office. In accordance with the Bank 
and regional governance and anti-corruption strategies, the Bank‘s financial management 
support to increase good governance and transparency during the CPS period will focus on 
(a) increasing reliance in PFM country systems (strengthening the capacity and independence 
of the Supreme Audit Institution); (b) increasing transparency at national and subnational 
levels by continuing with provision of advisory service on financial and fiscal reporting of 
public accounts; and (c) assessing fiduciary risks for project preparation and implementation 
support recommending appropriate strengthening mitigating measures. 

79. 
The Bank is also planning to continue to support the Government in establishing 
an enhanced and effective public procurement system and building better capacity of 
its institutions. Both at the national and subnational levels, the Bank will provide just-in-
time policy advice and financial support to assist the Government in designing and 
implementing key reforms in public procurement. These may include (a) the support to 
implementation of a procurement strategy; (b) issuance and implementation of an improved 
procurement law and regulations; (c) creation and support of a regulatory body in the context 
of an inter-institutional coordination effort; (d) transformation and roll-out of the new e-
procurement system (SECOP) that promotes transparency and competition in public 
procurement; and (e) implementation of cost reduction strategies (price benchmarking, 
consolidation for economies of scale). Furthermore, the Bank plans to provide technical 
assistance to the Government to evaluate specific sectors and government programs to 
uncover and deter public procurement deficiencies that may limit public services. The Bank 
could also help to strengthen inter-institutional coordination and information-sharing systems 
that will contribute to strengthening internal checks and balances.  

80. 
To address the challenges of low accountability and weak basis for managerial 
decisions, the Strengthening Public Information, Monitoring and Evaluation for Results 
Management Project has been helping the Government of Colombia to increase the use of 
information for policy design and accountability in a cost-effective way. The project supports 
the GOC SINERGIA program, which includes: (a) a system of monitoring indicators 
throughout the public sector and linked to the national budget (SISMEG); (b) a system of 
evaluation of public policies (SISDEVAL); and (c) a network of evaluation agencies 
throughout Colombia (RED de Evaluación), which includes support to subnational 
governments and therefore would be particularly attuned to the new Government‘s priority 
for decentralization. The Bank will continue to provide technical support to the National 

25 

 
Planning Department in consolidating results-based public management and rigorous 
evaluation of public programs and policies. 

81. 
The Bank also plans to provide analytical and advisory services to improve the 
equity and efficiency of economic policies, by improving the quality and accessibility of 
the evidence-base for decision-making. The main emphasis of this work is impact 
evaluation and assessment of economic policies and programs that contribute to poverty 
reduction, stronger labor markets, upward mobility, and gender. The Bank will continue 
supporting GOC efforts to improve inputs and methodology for poverty measurement 
through technical assistance for the MESEP and the new poverty committee and to improve 
household income measurement. It will also provide support to analyze the impact of high 
food prices on poverty through (a) a joint technical note with Department of National 
Planning on the impact of food prices on poverty; and (b) an approved SFLAC recipient -
executed grant that will support the ability of Department of National Planning to monitor 
the impact of food prices on poverty and evaluate its main determinants. The Bank will also 
support GOC efforts to measure and track inequality and upward mobility, and to better 
understand means to improve access to critical goods and services that can improve equity, 
mobility, and the strengthening of the middle class. In particular, the Bank plans to undertake 
the following activities: (a) Colombia Equity Assessment; (b) analytical work on Colombia 
as part of the Regional Mobility Flagship; and (c) approval of a recipient-executed trust fund 
for statistical capacity for the design on longitudinal surveys in Colombia (DNP/DANE). 

Improved Productivity and Innovation 

82. 
The Government of Colombia seeks to strengthen productivity, innovation, and 
entrepreneurship through increased coverage and better quality of financial and 
education services, and stronger national systems for innovation and technology 
transfer, with a special focus on improving productivity and innovation in small and 
medium-size enterprises and the agricultural sector. The Government has also 
emphasized its commitment to scale up investments in science, technology and innovation, 
as reflected in the National Development Plan and the ―Plan Vive Digital‖. 

83. 
To support innovation, competitiveness, and entrepreneurship, the Bank will provide 
a package of financial, knowledge, advisory, and convening services. The planned 
Innovation, Competitiveness and Entrepreneurship Investment Loan (FY13) will focus 
on the following priorities: (a) strengthen the national system for innovation and technology 
transfer; (b) strengthen financial mechanisms to support innovation (Bancoldex and Fondo 
Emprender); (c) strengthen the intellectual property rights protection system; (d) strengthen 
regional competitiveness; and (e) support 
technology 
transfer diffusion and other 
mechanisms seeking to facilitate productivity improvements in small and medium-size 
enterprises (SMEs). This loan builds on the Science, Technology, and Innovation (STI) 
Program that is currently under implementation and enhances the competitiveness and 
productivity of Colombian firms to foster sustainable growth and reduce economic 
disparities. The Program links specific STI investments to promote knowledge generation 
and absorption in Colombia to the national strategy for competitiveness and productivity and 
to the development of priority industrial sectors in relation with the Productive 
Transformation Strategy. Potential Bank knowledge and advisory services will broaden 

26 

 
 
support to include (a) reviewing the innovation system with focus on designing alternative 
models for channeling resources toward regional innovation projects; (b) providing 
international experiences on piloting projects to increase SME productivity and promote 
technological transfer; and (c) conducting cluster/value chain analysis. The proposed Bank 
support in this area will also focus on improving productivity of the service sector with 
technical assistance on the design of a service sector survey focused on the informal sector 
and analytical work on measurement of productivity in the service sector.  

84. 
The support for competitiveness and productivity growth are key features of the 
IFC strategy for Colombia as well as for the entire Latin American and Caribbean 
region. In addition to financing innovative companies and supporting efficiency gains, IFC 
also expects to increase its financing for Colombian companies investing overseas, as well as 
backing inward investment by companies based in developing countries. Outward investment 
by Colombian businesses enables them to achieve economies of scale needed to compete in a 
globalized marketplace, manage risk by reducing reliance on a single market, and increase 
their exposure to international best practices. 

85. 
The Bank plans to improve firm productivity growth through knowledge and 
advisory services to improve access to financial services. In particular this work will be 
structured around (a) expanding the use of electronic money and mobile banking, (b) 
supporting financial literacy, and (c) strengthening consumer protection. The IFC will 
continue ramping up its SME financing by providing dedicated credit lines to client banks for 
onlending to client companies. Although Colombia has made progress in strengthening its 
business regulatory environment, investment climate obstacles remain. Colombia‘s business 
entry and exit procedures are less efficient than those in industrialized countries and systems 
for secured transactions and collateral registration can be improved. The WBG plans to 
continue its technical assistance for improving the business regulatory environment, 
including advising on the drafting of a new law for secured transactions and the creation of a 
unified collateral registry. In addition, work will continue to simplify the areas of business 
and property registration, and construction permits. The WBG has three investment climate 
operations in Colombia at present.  

86. 
The Government has also requested the WBG to implement in 2012 the third Doing 
Business subnational study in collaboration of the Department of National Planning. The 
project goal is to promote competition for a better business environment in Colombia by 
benchmarking business regulations across Colombian cities and comparing them with 183 
economies.  

87. 
The IFC has also developed a vibrant microfinance industry in Colombia both 
through investments and advisory engagements. Microfinance is an important part of IFC‘s 
financial markets strategy in Colombia for its impact on low-income communities, women, 
and minorities. The IFC hopes to support the expansion of mobile banking services in 
Colombia. It also hopes to help provide insurance coverage for low-income groups through 
investments in second-tier insurance companies. The IFC microfinance portfolio consists of 
seven projects totaling US$40.9 million, which accounts for 10 percent of its financial 
markets portfolio in Colombia. The IFC advisory services also hopes to increase its 
engagement with the microfinance sector, assisting lenders to transition from NGO status to 
becoming regulated financial institutions. The IFC objectives for the microfinance sector in 
Colombia include: (a) increasing access to finance through programs aimed at micro, small 

27 

 
and medium-size enterprise; low- and middle-income segments; rural populations; women; 
and the underserved; (b) lowering intermediation costs through improved risk management 
and greater operating efficiencies; (c) deepening, broadening and diversifying financial 
sector participation to achieve greater financial sector stability; and (d) targeting programs in 
insurance and low-income housing. 

88. 
The Bank is also likely to play an important role in the area of infrastructure for 
growth and competitiveness during the CPS period . An initial activity, which emerged 
from the policy notes undertaken during the political transition period, has been launched to 
provide technical assistance in the redesign of the National Institute of Concessions, and the 
development of a new concessions entity. It is likely that this work will be complemented in 
the near future with further knowledge and convening activities, in conjunction with the IFC, 
related to the institutional and legal issues related to public–private partnerships in the 
infrastructure sectors. The IFC has worked successfully with the Government on structuring 
a PPP concession for the 1,071-kilometer highway, Ruta del Sol, and expects that close 
engagement with the authorities will lead to more PPP-related activities at national and 
departmental levels. 

89. 
Like infrastructure, another of the GOC “engines of growths” is mining and 
extractive industries. The Bank is now working with the Ministry of Mines and Energy 
through technical assistance activities related to improving the management of mining 
concessions information, including the social land environmental aspects of extractive 
industries. Given the expected continued importance of extractive industry growth in 
Colombia, it is likely that this will remain an important area in which the WBG maintains an 
engagement. As mentioned above, IFC advisory services expect to expand its royalty 
management program in Colombia to assist communities to better manage revenue from 
local mining operations.  

90. 
The World Bank is also focusing on improving competitiveness and productivity 
of the agriculture sector. With Bank support in 2002, the Government started a small pilot 
program called Rural Productive Partnership, which increases rural competitiveness and 
builds up rural entrepreneurship in a sustainable manner. The program supports demand-
driven partnerships between organized small producers and the commercial private sector 
with the objective to improve small producers‘ incomes through their participation in high-
value chains. To date, the program has supported 213 partnerships. The Government intends 
to scale up the program by adding 640 new partnerships by the end of 2014. The Bank is 
planning to help the Government to scale up this program under the title Small-holder 
Agriculture Competitiveness. The scaling up is likely to include linkages to other key 
policy programs in the areas of land restitution, agricultural innovations, as well as 
agricultural risk mitigation and risk management, as needed to improve the competitiveness 
of small-holder agriculture. The Agricultural Transition Project, currently under 
implementation, aims to strengthen the national agricultural science and technology and 
sanitary and phytosanitary systems by supporting joint participation of the public and private 
sectors through production chain mechanisms, thereby contributing to the competitiveness of 
Colombian agriculture and improving the accessibility of export-potential products to 
international markets. Land management and administration might also be an area in which 
the Bank could work under this CPS. The IFC may also engage with selected agribusiness 

28 

 
clients to raise yields and productivity through investment projects, advisory engagements, or 
a combination of both. 

91. 

The Agricultural Transition Project is appropriately complemented by the Science, 
Technology, and Innovation Project. The Bank builds on the well-established cooperation 
with the Government of Colombia in the STI and tertiary education sectors. The project‘s 
main objective is to increase access, quality, and coherence in the tertiary education 
subsector. Colciencias (Departamento Administrativo de Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación) 
was a co-implementing agency for this loan, which financed national doctoral scholarships, 
the acquisition of robust research equipment, and researchers‘ mobility programs. The 
project enhances the competitiveness and productivity of Colombian firms to foster 
sustainable growth and reduce economic disparities. The project links specific STI 
investments to promote knowledge generation and absorption to the national strategy for 
competitiveness and productivity and to development of priority industrial sectors under the 
Productive Transformation Strategy. 

C. The WBG’s Indicative Program  

92. 
In terms of financial services, the Government has indicated financing expectations of 
about US$1.1 billion in FY12. The FY11 financing program was lower than in recent years 
as a result of the Presidential transition period. For FY13-16 the lending program is expected 
to be US$800–1,080 million per annum. These are only indicative lending amounts. Actual 
delivery of the lending program will depend on Colombia‘s performance, IBRD lending 
capacity, demand from other borrowers, global economic developments, and disbursement 
profiles that keep exposure within the country limits. 

93. 
Trust funds will continue to be an integral part of the Bank‘s engagement with 
Colombia. As trust fund resources are not predictable for the purpose of the CPS, the WBG 
will ensure that activities financed by trust funds follow the thrust of this strategy in 
agreement with the Government counterparts.  

94. 
The CPS thematic areas will be managed under an enhanced thematic business model 
approach. This approach aims to improve the impact of the Bank‘s engagement in Colombia. 
Financial, knowledge, and convening services are managed as a comprehensive package of 
support under each theme to deliver timely and flexible development solutions.  

95. 
The WBG intends to monitor CPS results via (a) regular project/program supervision; 
(b) annual reviews of programmatic knowledge and convening services; (c) annual Country 
Portfolio Performance Reviews; (d) client demand and feedback, in particular with respect to 
knowledge and convening services; (e) Bank internal independent evaluations; and (f) the 
mid-term CPS Progress Report.  

29 

 
 
Table 6: Indicative World Bank Financial Services (FY12-13) 

FY-12 Lending Program  

      Commitment US$ million  

 Urban Transport (SIL)  
 CAT DDO II        
 Sustainable Development (TA-AF)  
 Fiscal Sustainability and Growth Resilience (DPL I)        
 Sub-National Institutional Strengthening (SIL) 
Small-holder Agriculture Competitiveness (SIL) 

350 
150 
  10 
300 
150 
150 

 Total:   

             1110 

FY13 Lending Program Pipeline       

Education Quality (P4R) 
Social Safety Net III (SIL)  
Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Phase 2 APL1    
Barranquilla Flood Protection (SIL)                     
Sustainable Development (DPL)  
Fiscal Sustainability and Growth Resilience (DPL II)  
Innovation, Competitiveness, and Entrepreneurship (SIL) 

150 
150 
100 
100 
100 
200 
100 

Total:   

              900 

Table 7: Indicative WB Knowledge and Convening Services (FY12) 

FY12 
Enhanced Social Promotion (P123158) (Programmatic)   
Improved Opportunities in Education (P123144) (Programmatic)  
Improved Performance of Social Services (P123301) (Programmatic)  

Urbanization Review (P121640) (Programmatic)                                                                  
Support to Infrastructure Concession Entity Restructuring (P125932)                                  
Low-carbon Development (P124909)                                                                                     
Strengthening Environmental and Natural Res. Institution (P123864) (Programmatic)        

Financial Sector Work (Programmatic)                                                                                           
Poverty, Labor Markets, Inequality and Monitoring and Evaluation (Programmatic)   
Strengthening Public Sector (Programmatic) 
Institutional & Mineral Rights (P125514)                                                                               
Productivity, Competitiveness and Entrepreneurship (P126865) 
Financial Capability Assessment (P122698)                                                                           

D. Development Partner Collaboration and South-South Knowledge Exchange  

96. 
Joint work with other development partners, both the Inter-American Development 
Bank (IDB) and Corporación Andina de Fomento (CAF), has entailed inter-disciplinary 
activities from conditional cash transfer (CCT) experiences to the harmonization of 
procedures for the STI project; energy-generation deals with IFC; and collaboration for 
completion of the NUTP system. Other bilateral donors have worked closely with the Bank 
providing grant funds for programs that are ranging from youth promotion, gender equality, 
and institutional strengthening to flood management and public transport.  

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97. 
South-South Cooperation (SSC) is an important national priority for Colombia. 
Colombia‘s National Development Plan identifies international relevance through South-
South Cooperation as a key cross-cutting theme, and the Government has striven to 
strengthen the planning, funding, and implementation of South-South Knowledge Exchange 
(SSKE) while promoting Colombia as a potential SSKE partner regionally and globally. 
Colombia and Indonesia co-chair the Task Team on South-South Cooperation, a working 
party of the OECD/DAC and an international coalition of countries, multilaterals, donors, 
academic institutions, and other stakeholders that aim to develop good practice and policy 
guidance for SSC activities. The World Bank Country Team is looking to include an SSKE 
component in its capacity development initiatives in Colombia and is promoting Colombia‘s 
participation in a WBI Pilot Brokering Mechanism supporting SSKE. The pilot aims to help 
countries document their knowledge-sharing needs and facilitate matches for exchanges 
between developing country partners. (Annex F provides further details regarding 
Colombia‘s role in SSKE and the Pilot Brokering Mechanism.) 

98. 
In addition, the Accra Agenda for Action created a mandate to review the SSKE and 
Triangular Cooperation. Colombia is the leader of this new initiative as a long-standing SSC 
practitioner. The public mass transit system in Bogotá (Transmilenio), which has been 
replicated in many countries, is a good example of technical cooperation and mutual learning 
and its contribution to development. 

V. RISKS  

99. 
Colombia is vulnerable to commodity price shocks and a deterioration of 
external financing conditions. Commodity exports accounted for 63 percent of export 
revenue in 2010 while 73 percent of foreign direct investment inflows are in commodity-
related projects (mainly oil). As a result, an adverse shock to oil and other primary exports 
(e.g., coffee) could result in a significant increase in Colombia‘s financing needs. A sudden 
deterioration of external financing conditions would also affect Colombia. Tighter global 
financial conditions would lower the inflows of private capital envisaged in the 
macroeconomic projections; and public external financing conditions also could be affected, 
even if the Government was to maintain access to international markets at favorable rates, 
possibly creating debt roll-over difficulties. The two-year US$6.2 billion (SDR3.87 billion) 
arrangement under the IMF Flexible Credit Line, approved in May 2011, will mitigate these 
risks continuing to provide space for policy flexibility while bolstering Colombia‘s access to 
international markets if tail risks were to materialize. 

100. Another external economic risk derives from a slower-than-expected global 
recovery. Earlier fears of a double-dip recession have not materialized, but there are 
important downside risks. Future developments in the United States, in particular, are of 
importance to Colombia. Substantially higher oil prices or a further decline in domestic 
housing prices could dampen confidence and consumer spending in the United States. This 
would reduce demand for Colombian exports. Higher global prices for Colombia‘s 
commodity exports will mitigate this impact, but the recovery of non-traditional exports 
(e.g., flowers) may be slower than expected. The Bank and the IMF are maintaining an on-

31 

 
 
going policy dialogue with the Government on macroeconomic policy issues, which may 
help detect early potential threats to Colombia‘s growth. 

101. Rising food prices. Since end-2010, global food prices have risen substantially and 
are now at levels comparable to the 2008 crisis with a risk that they may rise even further 
owing to global market conditions. High food prices raise macroeconomic as well as social 
concerns. Higher global prices are, to some extent, transmitted to domestic food prices, 
which in turn generate inflation. If the Central Bank evaluates that the price effect is 
permanent or that it affects expectations for inflation, then it may decide to tighten monetary 
policy, which would dampen the economic recovery. Higher food prices directly affect 
poverty given that a relatively higher share of household consumption is devoted to food 
expenses among the poor. The Government of Colombia can mitigate this impact through 
social programs, including an increase in the amount of conditional cash transfer. 

102. Policy slippages in implementing fiscal reforms. Given the high level of ambition 
for the fiscal reform agenda, there is a risk of slower progress in politically contentious areas. 
This unfortunately has been frequently the case in Colombia when dealing with structural 
fiscal reforms in the past (e.g., pensions, health care). This would call for frontloaded action 
in key policy reform areas that signal commitment to strengthening fiscal institutions and 
reducing fiscal risks. Moving forward with the most contentious issues first would signal 
strong commitment to reform and mitigate some of these risks. The Government has, to some 
extent, followed this strategy, for instance, by bringing forward the royalties reform and 
frontloading the fiscal adjustment. The Bank will stay engaged through its programmatic and 
comprehensive engagement in the fiscal reform program. 

103. Sustainability of reform efforts in disaster risk management. In the aftermath of 
the La Niña event, natural disaster risk management moved to the top on the political agenda. 
The Government designed an effective post-disaster financing mechanism; included the 
theme in the new National Development Plan; and between December 7, 2010 and January 6, 
2011, the issued several decrees to improve the country‘s future crises preparedness. While 
there are important indications that Colombia is heading toward an improved institutional 
framework, there is a risk that reform attention will be diverted as the memory of the recent 
disaster fades and other priorities rise up the political agenda. The Government has asked the 
Bank to be its strategic partner in moving the reforms forward, and the Bank can try to 
mitigate the risk by reminding the Government of importance of the agenda.  

104. Working at subnational level. As the Bank intensifies its engagement at the 
subnational level, fiduciary and safeguard risks will increase — as will the costs of attendant 
mitigation mechanisms. The Bank may also face potential reputational risks as it expands its 
support into regions where local governments might be subject to the influence of illegal 
groups and other non-state actors. The Central Government‘s commitment to work with the 
subnational authorities and the Bank to embed strong fiduciary measures will help offset 
these potential risks. 

105. Promoting peace, deposing violence. Peace has not been secured throughout the 
entire country. Poverty, corruption, and the drug trade remain significant challenges. A rise 
in urban crime and violence from illegal groups tied to the drug trade — some of which have 
been formed by former paramilitary combatants — represents an increasing security 
challenge and will require more attention from the Government during 2011–16. 

32 

 
Strengthened drug cartels in Mexico and Central America working closely with Colombian 
suppliers also impose a challenge for the authorities in the years to come. Beginning in early 
2000, the Bank has been closely involved with the Government in a range of activities 
related to community-driven conflict resolution and management as part of the peace pillar in 
the previous CPS. These activities are likely to continue in coming years as the new 
administration has broadly adopted policies to further promote peace. 

33 

 
 
Annex A: CPS Results Framework  

Country Development Goals 
(from NDP)  

Issues and Obstacles 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones 

WBG Program (and 
Partners) 

Expanding Opportunities for Social Prosperity 

Enhanced Social Promotion and Improved Citizens Security 

Social Protection: Families 
graduated from the Unidos 
Program that meet conditions to 
not be in Extreme Poverty 

Baseline:       0         (2011) 
Target:     350.000   (2014) 

Reduction in overall and youth 
unemployment rates: 

Baseline (2010):   12.0% (overall) 
and 21.6% (youth) 
Target (2014):    8.9% (overall) 
and 16.1% (youth) 

1. Weak coordination among 
programs for poverty reduction  

2.  Barriers to create formal 
employment, including high labor 
costs, relevance of skills, complex 
regulatory framework to establish 
businesses 

3. Deficiencies in enforcement of 
basic rights of IDP‘s 

1. Merger of CCT (Familias en 
Accion) and social promotion 
strategy (Juntos) into a single 
program (Unidos) 

Baseline:  Programs operate 
separately 

Target:  Programs merged 

2. Design and implementation of 
the program Trabajemos Unidos, 
to provide active labor market 
policies for the poor. 

Baseline:  0 

Target:  Program created and 
implemented at pilot or national 
scale 

 1. Better coverage of Unidos 
program (merger of two key 
poverty reduction programs) 

Baseline:  0 
Target: 1.5 million 

2. Increase in the coverage of 
municipalities that offer active 
labor market policies to enhance 
labor productivity and reduce 
barriers to the employability of the 
poor 

Baseline:  0 
Target:  300 new municipalities 

3. Increase in number of land 
rights protected of internally 
displaced people who abandoned 
their land due to forced 
displacement 
Baseline: 83.450 households 
(2.525.566 hectares) protected 
(2008) 
Target: 219.450 households X 
hectares (2014) 

Financial Services:  
Lending – Ongoing: 
Support for the Second Phase of the 
Expansion of the Program of 
Conditional Transfers-Familias en 
Acción Project – Social Safety Net 
II(P101211) 
Peace and Development (AF) 
(P051306) 

Lending – Pipeline: 
Social Safety Net III (SIL) (FY13) 
(P104507) 

Knowledge Services:  
Enhanced Social Promotion 
(P123158) (Programmatic)   

Financed by grants - Ongoing: 
Empowering young women affected 
by violence (JSDF, 
TF093829/TF093830) 
Soccer together (JSDF, No-code yet) 
Peaceful Dispute Resolution 
Services for the Poor (JSDF, 
TF091176, Recipient) 
Gender and IDPs (GENTF, 
TF095198) 
Protection of Land and Patrimony of 
IDPs Phase 3 (SPBF, TF094596) 
Access to Opportunities for Youth 
(JSDF, TF093141) 
Labor Reforming Cajas de 
Compensación Familiar (CCF) 
(PSIA, TF097240) 
Institutional Community 
Strengthening for Local Governance 
(JSDF TF091174) 
Youth Reintegration Project 
(Colegio del Cuerpo) (IF-P095598-
CAH-BB) 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development Goals 
(from NDP)  

Issues and Obstacles 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones 

WBG Program (and 
Partners) 

Study on conflict and education 
resilience in Antioquia as part of the 
global study ―Towards a Tool to 
Assess Violent Conflict and 
Educational Fragility/Resilience in 
Conflict-affected and Post-Conflict 
Countries‖(Fragile States Program – 
HDNED)  

Financed by grants - Pipeline: 
Strengthening Human Rights to 
Basic Social Services in Peace and 
Development Zones (NTF, 
TF096627) 

Convening Services:  
Financed by grants: 
Community Practice CCTs 
South-south transfer - labor 
Social network on health financing 
Natl. Tech. Comm. - IDP‘s Assets 
Protection Program  
Human Rights-Peace & Dev. 
Dialogue 
Support for South-South 
Dissemination on DDR (WBI 
initiative 

IFC Possible direct lending to 
and/or equity investment in 
microfinance institutions. Advisory 
services support for transitioning 
microfinance lenders to regulated 
institutions  
Low-income housing finance. 

Human Capital Formation: 
Education Coverage (Higher) 

   Baseline:  35.3%  (2011) 
   Target:     50%      (2014) 

Improved Opportunities In Education 

1.  Subpar learning outcomes 
compared to other countries in the 
region. 

2. Pronounced disparities in 
access and quality of secondary 
and tertiary education. 

1. Increase in enrollment rates 
(primary and lower secondary; 
and 
secondary education) of 
students from poor and rural 
households (31 poorest territorial 
entities, including 17 departments 
and 13 municipalities). 

Baseline: 
NER primary and lower 
secondary: 90.21% 

1. Enhanced policy framework for 
quality of education 

Baseline: Current framework 
Target:  Revised framework 

2. Improve national system for 
student assessments 

Baseline:  Current system 
Target:  Transformed system 

Financial Services:  
Lending – Ongoing: 
Rural education project (APL II) 
(P082908). 
Antioquia upper secondary 
education project (P052608) 
Second student loan project (APL 
II)-(P105164). 
Lending – Pipeline: 
Education Quality  project. (FY13)-
(P106693) 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development Goals 
(from NDP)  

Issues and Obstacles 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones 

NER upper secondary: 30.84% 
Target:  
NER primary and lower 
secondary: 94%   
NER upper secondary: 35% 

2. Increase in tertiary education 
enrollment of students from poor 
households  

Baseline: 75,000  
Target: 150,000  

Improved Performance of Social Services 

Early Childhood Attention to 
Vulnerable Children 
Baseline:   566,429 (2011) 
Target:   1,200,000  (2014) 

Access to Health: Coverage of 
Subsidized Regime 
Baseline:  90.2% (2011) 
Target:    100%   (2014) 

1.  Fragmented service delivery 
systems 

2. Blurred institutional mandates, 
fragmented financing and 
information systems and weak 
accountability arrangements 

1. Strengthened information 
systems to monitor service 
delivery and strengthen 
accountability in health, education 
and ECD 

Baseline: Multiple information 
systems do not effectively capture 
productivity and quality of 
services in health, education and 
ECD 

1. Develop information system for 
ECD 

Baseline:  Information system to 
be developed 
Target:  Plan for ECD information 
system developed  

2. Strengthen management and 
information system of the health 
insurance system for the poor 

Target: Unified information 

Baseline:  Reform strategy lacking 

WBG Program (and 
Partners) 

Risk Management: 
Local currency financing for 
ICETEX, Antioquia 

Knowledge Services:  
Improved Opportunities in 
Education (P123144) 
(Programmatic)  

Benchmarking of basic education 
system 
Joint OECD/WB Review  of the  
national tertiary education system 
Joint  OECD/WB Review   of the 
tertiary education system at the 
regional level (Antioquia)Review 
student loan and scholarship 
programs 
Diversify ICETEX financing 
portfolio 
Technical and Vocational Education 
Policy Note 
Financed by grants – Pipeline: 
Education Quality Report (ICFES)-
(P106710) 
Convening Services:  
SSKE CO- Morocco on Measuring 
Learning outcomes in Higher 
Education 
IFC ongoing and potential new 
projects in technical and vocational 
adult education 
Piloting financial literacy 
programs. 

Knowledge Services:  
Improved Performance of Social 
Services (P123301) 
(Programmatic)  

Financed by grants - Ongoing:  
Avian Influenza (TF 098473) 
Financial Capabilities and Education 
Measurement Project (FLIT 
TF097524) 
Financed by grants - Pipeline: 
Implementing the right to health 
(NTF, TF096788)  
Strengthening Governance of Early 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development Goals 
(from NDP)  

Issues and Obstacles 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones 

systems capture productivity and 
quality of services in health, 
education and ECD 

Target:  Reform strategy 
developed  

3. Strengthen information system 
of education sector 

Baseline:  Reform strategy lacking 

Target:  Reform strategy 
developed 

Sustainable Growth with Enhanced Climate Change Resilience 

Improved Sustainable Urban Development 

1.  Number of low income 
beneficiaries with access to 
housing units under 
Macroproyectos subprojects, The 
target would be 40,000 

Baseline: 0 (2011) 
Target: 40,000 (2014) 

Cities with urban mobility 
solutions in place 

Baseline:     10 (2011) 
Target:        30 (2014) 

Construction Dynamic-# of 
houses/apartments initiated in the 
2010-2014 period) 

 Base:          560.300 
Target:       1.000.000  

1. Infrastructure investments and 
quality of urban services has not 
kept up with the growth of cities 

1.Increased population benefitting 
from improved transportation 
services in large cities;  

2. Land management and housing 
development for low-income 
segments of the population 
remains a critical challenge 

Baseline: 460,000 (2011) 
Target:    1,800,000 (2014) 

2. Increased population benefitting 
from improved transportation 
services in medium-sized cities;  

Baseline: 0 (2011) 
Target:    150,000 (2014) 

3. Improved institutional capacity 
of the central Government to plan 
and deliver transportation services 

Baseline: n/a (2011) 
Target:  Improved (2014) 

WBG Program (and 
Partners) 

Childhood Development Programs 
(SFLAC TF099190) 
Colombia enhancing governance, 
transparency and accountability in 
education (IDF grant)  

Convening Services:  
Financed by grants: 
South-south transfer health sector 
regulation 
Community of Practice ECD 
North-South transfer ECD 
South-South transfer ECD 
ALAS – Colombia University and 
WB partnership on ECD 

Financial Services:  
Lending - Ongoing: 
La Guajira Water and Sanitation 
Proj (P096965). 
Bogota Urban Services AF 
(P074726)  
Solid Waste Mgmt Project 
(P101279). 
Macroproyectos Project (FY11)-
(P110671) 
Integrated Mass Transit Systems 
(P082466 / P114325) 
Rio Bogota Project (FY11)-
(P111479) 

Lending - Pipeline: 
National Urban Transport (FY12) 
(P117947) 

Knowledge Services:  
Financed by grants - Ongoing: 
Strategic Basin Planning for the Rio 
Bogota (WPP, TF095149) 
Regulatory Aspects of Transport 
(SFLAC, TF096162, Recipient) 
 Nordic Fund for Universal Access 
to BRTs (NF, P114302, Recipient) 
 Pilot Impact Evaluation Pereira 
BRTs-(NTF, TF096953, Recipient) 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development Goals 
(from NDP)  

Issues and Obstacles 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones 

WBG Program (and 
Partners) 

 Metro Study, Integration Public 
Transit Syst., SNTA (3 cities), and 
Comm. Campaign BRT 
Impl.(PPIAFs ,TF074726, 
Recipient)  
- Integration of Public Transit 
Systems (SFLAC, TF071296) 
- Cartagena Bus Rapid Transit 
System ( P11517, CF) 
Analyze the Experience of 
Specialized Water Operator in 
Colombia (SFLAC TF098814) 
Colombia Low Carbon Study 
(SFLAC TF098916) 
Cities Alliance-Macroproyectos de 
Interes Social Nacional (CITIES 
TF098963) 
Institutional Strengthening and 
Capacity Building to Support the 
Rio Bogota Environmental (SFLAC 
TF097840)  
Financed by grants - Pipeline: 
Public Transport Regulatory 
Framework (SFLAC, TF096162, 
Recipient) 
Water Resource Model (TF096847) 
AAA: 
Cities Alliance support for 
Macroproyectos: Developing a 
Policy and Program Framework 
 Urbanization Review II ) 
 Urban Renovation TA (2 cities) 
 PPIAF - Urban Renewal Financing 
Instruments 
Social Compact Work 

IFC  
Transportation, telecom, and multi-
sector projects 
Low income housing projects 
PPP structuring vehicle for  all types 
of infrastructure 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development Goals 
(from NDP)  

Issues and Obstacles 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones 

WBG Program (and 
Partners) 

Enhanced Disaster Risk Management 

Technical capacity of territorial 
entities and CAR in risk 
management (# of formulated 
plans per municipality) 

1. Need to improve territorial 
management; 

2. Lack of investment in disaster-
resistant infrastructure 

Base:     226      (2011) 
Target:  790       (2014) 

Municipalities assisted and 
recovered from rain season 

Base:       0     (2011)  
Target:    755 (2014) 

1.At least 50 percent of 
Colombian Municipalities with 
Municipal DRM plans 

Baseline: TBD (2011) 
Target:    50% (2014)

1.  Strengthened technical 
capacity for disaster risk 
management at national and 
regional levels  

Baseline: n/a (2011) 
Target:  Improved (2016) 

2. National Policy for Disaster 
Risk Management formulated. 

Baseline: No (2011) 
Target:    Yes (2016) 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development Goals 
(from NDP)  

Base:   12.6 million hectares 
(2011) 
Target: 15.6 million hectares 
(2014) 

Issues and Obstacles 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones 

3. Farming, ranching contribute to 
rapid deforestation and soil 
degradation 

Baseline: No (2011) 
Target:    Yes (2016) 

Target:    1 (2014) 

2. Government has mainstreamed 
improved environmental practices 
in the agricultural sector through a 
scaling up of silvopastoril 
livestock systems 

Baseline: 0 ha (2011) 
Targets:    50,500  ha (2016) 

2. Water quality monitoring 
network and information system 
strengthened. 

Baseline: Not fully operational 
(2011) 

Target:  Operational with 13 new 
water quality monitoring stations 
(2014) 

WBG Program (and 
Partners) 

(P115639) 
Sustainable Dev. DPL (FY13) 
Risk Management:  
Use of full menu of IBRD CAT risk 
financing instruments weather 
derivative and/or Catbond) 

Knowledge Services:  
Strengthening Environmental and 
Natural Res. Institution (P123864) 
(Programmatic) FY12 
Finance by grants – Ongoing: 
Low Carbon Growth (P123695) 
National Adaptation Plan 
(TF056350) 
Rio Amoya CF (TF053534), 
Jepirachi CF (TF051156), San 
Nicolas Carbon Sink CF 
(TF056577) 
INAP GEF, Mainstreaming Cattle 
Ranching GEF (TF096465), 
Protected Areas GEF(TF094084), 
Netherlands Conservation Incentives 
Grant 
FCPF Readiness (TF097224) 
GEF Protected Areas AF 
(TF056351) 
 Water Resources and Air Quality 
Management (SFLAC, TF097348) + 
Training (WPP, TF096847) 

Finance by grants – Pipeline: 
Course on hydrological modeling for 
decision makers (WPP financed) 
International Glacier network 
Low Carbon Development Study 
(P124909) 

IFC  
Green building codes, energy 
efficiency, cleaner production 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development Goals 
(from NDP)  

Issues and Obstacles 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones 

WBG Program (and 
Partners) 

Inclusive Growth with Enhanced Productivity 

Improved Fiscal, Financial and Social Risk Management 

1. The Central Government meets 
the structural fiscal deficit target 
for 2014 (2.3% of GDP or less). 

2. Financial instruments to 
mitigate natural disaster risks have 
been implemented by 2013. 

1. The Central Government 
overall deficit: 
Baseline: 3.9% (2010). Target 
3.5% of GDP or less by 2012 and 
3.2% of GDP or less by 2013. 

Economic growth (average for 
4yr-period) 

Baseline:   4,1% (2011) 
Target:      6,2% (2014) 

1.  Price fluctuations and 
exchange rate appreciation related 
to increased commodity 
production have important fiscal 
and economic impacts that need to 
be well managed at national and 
subnational levels. 

2. Public sector contingent 
liabilities related to pensions, 
health care, litigation, and natural 
disasters are sizeable and require 
sound management. 

3. There is scope for further 
improvement in the monitoring of 
social impacts of crises. 

4. The global crisis has exposed 
the need to enhance regulatory 
and supervisory standards for the 
financial system. 

Financial Services:  
Lending – Pipeline:  
Fiscal Sustainability and Growth 
Resilience DPL series (FY12-13)  

Knowledge Services:  
Financed by grants – Ongoing: 
National Level Public Finance 
Study (P106916) 
Knowledge and advisory services 
to improve the monitoring of 
social impact of the crisis 

Financed by grants – Pipeline: 
Institutional Mineral Rights 
Cadastre Reform (SFLAC) 

Banking ROSC and FSAP Update 
Analyzing the contribution to shared  

IFC 
Revenue management advisory 
services in mining (municipalities) 

Convening Services:  
Fiscal Risk Management 
(SFLAC).  This activity supports 
activities related to the improved 
management of health and pension 
liabilities. 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development Goals 
(from NDP)  

Reduced income inequality as 
measured by the Gini coefficient 

Baseline: 0.58 (2009) 
Target: 0.54 (2014) 

Issues and Obstacles 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones 

Improved Public Sector Management and Equity and Efficiency of Economic Policies 

WBG Program (and 
Partners) 

1 There is a need to increase 
transparency, improve 
management capacity, and 
strengthen the accountability of 
public institutions. 

2. Effectiveness and efficiency of 
public expenditures are poor due 
to lack of adequate and timely 
information on budget execution 
at national and sub-national level. 

3. Regulations and systems related 
with key public management 
systems including financial, 
investment, procurement and tax 
management are not linked, 
preventing the provision of 
reliable information on public 
expenditures and revenues, as well 
preventing to the M&E systems.  

4. Public management capacities 
at sub-national level of 
government are weak, preventing 
the adequate management of 
public resources and investments, 
as well the adequate provision of 
services.  

5. There is scope for improvement 
in the poverty measurement 
methodology in Colombia. 

6. There is scope to improve the 
existing M&E system for results 

7.  There is scope to improve 
access to information in the 
country, in particular timely and 
well documented access to 
surveys and administrative 
records. 

8. There is scope to improve 
economic policies to promote 
upward mobility and expand the 

1. Enhanced public sector 
efficiency and transparency by 
strengthening and expanding the 
individual management 
information systems that are the 
building blocks of an integrated, 
performance-informed 
management model, including: 
Sistema Integrado de Informacion 
Financiera SIIF-Nación, Sistema 
Unificado de Inversiones y 
Finanzas Públicas  
SUIFP and  
Modelo Único de Ingresos, 
Servicios y Control Automatizado   
MUISCA.  
Baseline: 2011 - Public 
Management Information Systems 
do not provide on time reliable 
information on expenditures and 
investments. 
Target : 2015 - Public 
Management Information Systems 
provide on time, reliable and 
consistent information on budget 
and investment execution. 

2. Management capacities at sub-
national level of governments are 
improved and have a positive 
impact in the quality of 
expenditures and the provision of 
services. 
Baseline:2011 - Lack of efficient 
mechanisms in the National 
Government to provide effective 
and efficient support to sub 
national governments for the 
strengthening of management 
capacities. 
Target: 2015 - A set of 
mechanisms have been put in 
place and are available to sub 
national governments to improve 
their management capacities. 

1. 100% of consolidated budget 
information 
(at 
the 
level of 
individual entities) is published 
online on a monthly basis within 
the first week of the following 
month  
Baseline: Currently not published  
Target :80% by  2014 

2. SIIF and SUIFP information on 
the allocation and execution of 
budget items is fully consistent. 
Baseline Not consistent today 
Target ?Consistency achieved by 
2013. 

3. A cloud computing scheme to 
provide financial management and 
monitoring 
services 
to 
local 
governments is implemented.  
Baseline: Currently not existing 
Target: First version operating by 
2013 

4. A program to increase 
managerial capacity at sub 
national level is implemented 
Baseline: Not existing 
Target: The program is launched  
in 2012 and by 2013 20% of low 
performing municipalities are 
included in the program. 

5. The FUT (Single Territorial 
Format) is implemented as the 
sole source of sub national budget 
and final reporting) 
Baseline  Limited coverage 
Target Sole source by 2012 

6. New poverty methodology is 
finalized and announced and well 
received by the public. 
Baseline: May 2011 official 
poverty methodology (based in 
1996 expenditure survey) 
Target: May 2012 revised  poverty 

Financial Services:  
Lending - Ongoing: 
Consolidation of National Public 
Management Information Systems 
Project (P106628) 
Strengthening Justice Services 
(P083904) 
Strengthening Public Information, 
Monitoring, Evaluation for Results 
Management SIL(P099139) 
Lending – Pipeline: 
Sub-National Institutional 
Strengthening (Royalties Reform)-
SIL (FY12) 

Knowledge Services:  
Financed by grants – Ongoing: 
Legal claims mgmt system (IDF, 
TF058311, Recipient) 
Expanded subnational rapid 
assessments of PSM  
Decentralization Study (P101308) 
Strengthening Procurement System 
(TF092702, Recipient) 
IDF Procurement Law Reform 
Implementation 
Advisory work on accounting and 
financial reporting standards  
Peaceful Dispute Resolution for the 
Poor (TF091176) 
Support for the creation of a central 
Procurement office 
Citizen‘s visible audits to improve 
public investment transparency and 
accountability (Global Partnership 
Facility, TF096676) 
Assessment for e-GP and Road Map 
Strategy 
 Preparation of National Standard 
Bidding Documents 
TA on  the review of the current 
subnational control systems 
TA in strengthening CGR inst 

AAA 
Poverty, Labor Markets, Inequality 
and Monitoring and Evaluation 
(Programmatic)  

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development Goals 
(from NDP)  

Issues and Obstacles 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones 

WBG Program (and 
Partners) 

middle class. 

9. There is scope to improve 
economic policies to strengthen 
the productivity of the informal 
sector, and in particular, service 
sector. 

10. Large percentage of the 
population has limited access to 
basic financial services. 
11. Colombia‘s free trade 
negotiations with the US and other 
countries necessitate efficient and 
transparent trade transactions that 
will serve to enhance Colombia‘s 
image in world markets as a 
trading partner, to generate 
savings for the private sector and 
improve transparency. This will 
serve to increase Colombian 
exports.  

3. Improved quality and 
accessibility of the evidence base 
for decision making and 
particularly for policies and 
programs related to poverty 
reduction. 
Baseline: 2011 - No micro data 
produced by DANE is made 
available to the public.  
Target: 2015 - Public guidelines to 
grant access to the micro data 
produced by DANE. 

4. Improvement in the movement 
of cargo in and out of Colombia 
by enhancing automation through 
the VUCE system and improved 
handling of cargo at ports through 
risk based policy and procedures.  

Baseline: 24 days for imports and 
23 days for imports.  
Target for 2014: 10 days to import 
and 9 days to export. 

methodology (based on the 2006 
expenditure survey) 

Strengthening Public Sector 
(Programmatic) 

IFC 
Infrastructure advisory, PPP 
structuring for highways, ports 
Simplifying municipal construction 
permits  

Streamlining trade logistics policies 
and procedures; enhance 
automation; improve risk 
management policy for trade 
logistics and border clearance 

Convening Services:  
Financed by grants: 
Seminar to discuss strategies to 
improve assessment methodology of 
subnationals 
Active participation in expert 
committee on poverty measurement  
Support to the Colombian M&E 
Network 
Worshop on Social Mobility  

Workshop on Food crisis and 
Poverty 

Workshop on the accelerated data 
program (ADP) with counterparts in 
DANE 

Financial capabilities (P122698) 

Investment in STI (% of GDP)             
1. 

 Baseline:      0.39       (2011) 
 Target:         0.70       (2014) 

2. 

Improved Productivity and Innovation 

1 Insufficient investment in 
science, technology, and 
innovation and weak 
coordination within the 
national innovation system; 
Inadequate stock of 
advanced human capital and  
low economic relevance and 
limited international 
linkages of existing public 
research, including linkages 
with the Colombian 
diaspora; 

1. Strengthened capacity of 
COLCIENCIAS to promote 
human capital for knowledge 
economy, research and 
development, and innovation.  

Number of journal articles by 
Colombian  researchers in SCI 
expanded per million population  
Baseline (2009): 48.0  
Target (2014): 58.5 

2. Raised awareness of science, 

1. At least 3 financing instruments 
designed and redesigned and 
approved by Colciencias Board of 
Directors by 2013. 

2. Monitoring and evaluation 
framework for social dissemination 
of STI defined by 2013. 

3.Number of additional families 
benefitting from high value 
agricultural value chains 
Baseline:  0 (2010) 
Target:  32,000 (2014) 

Financial Services:  
Lending – Ongoing: 
Agricultural Transition Project 
(P082167) 
Rural Productive Partnerships II 
Project (P104567) 
Science, Technology, and 
Innovation 
(P117590) 
Lending – Pipeline: 
Small-holder Agriculture 
Competitiveness (FY12) 
Innovation,Competitiveness, 
Entrepreneurship  SIL (FY13) 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Development Goals 
(from NDP)  

Issues and Obstacles 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones 

4.Design of pilots for enhancing 
technology transfer and diffusion. 

5.Disseminate good practices and 
regulatory reforms implemented  
by local Governments in the areas 
measured by the 2012 sub-
national Doing Business report in 
Colombia  

6. Scaling up of financial 
education strategy 

3. Limited productivity growth 
of SMEs; 
4. Regulatory obstacles for 
SMEs to start, operate and 
close businesses and 
underdeveloped systems for 
secured transactions and 
collateral registration  

technology and innovation in the 
Colombian society 

Total grant applications for 
research and development and 
innovation subprojects received 
yearly by COLCIENCIAS 
Baseline (2009): 2009 
Target (2013):  2674 

3. Improved regulations for 
business and property registration, 
and reform the legislation for 
secured transactions and the 
collateral registry.  

Efficiency of starting a business  
Baseline: 9 procedures, 14 days,  
Target (2014): 4 procedures, 6 
days 

4. Higher financial inclusion 
measured by increased percentage 
of the population with a deposit 
account.  
Baseline:  1,295 accounts per 
1,000 adults (2010)  

Target:  1,400 accounts per 1,000 
adults (2014). 

WBG Program (and 
Partners) 

Knowledge services:  
Cooperation agreement on 
Investment Climate  
Regional Doing Business Reform 
Advisory project 

Financed by grants – Ongoing: 
Innovation, Productivity and 
Entrepreneurship (TF096995) 
Financial capabilities and Education 
Measurement Project (P122698) 

Financed by grants – Pipeline: 

Agriculture Risk Management - 
modeling, advising and training to 
public and private sector on 
identifying, quantifying and 
addressing and financing systemic 
risks in the agriculture sector. 
SME factoring (primarily with 
grants) 
Analyzing the contribution to shared 
growth of existing instruments to 
promote public support for 
commercial innovation (Diagnostic 

Facility for Shared Growth, 

TF096995) 

AAA: 
 Productivity, competitiveness and 
entrepreneurship (Assessment of 
drivers of TFP growth, technology 
transfer diffusion mechanisms) 

PPIAF Support for the 
Reorganization of INCO 

IFC 
Gender and microfinance sector 
support 
Tier 2 insurance companies and 
mobile banking  
Transformation projects (agriculture, 
beverages, poultry, etc) 
Support PPP projects through 
investment. 

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex B: CPS Completion Report (CPSCR) 

COLOMBIA - CPS COMPLETION REPORT (CPSCR) FY 2008-2011 

CPS  
CPSPR  

March 4, 2008  
March 1, 2010   

Report No. 42847-CO 
Report No 52878-CO 

Contents 

I. INTRODUCTION 

A. COLOMBIA‘S ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL BACKGROUND 
B. WORLD BANK PROGRAM OF SUPPORT 

II. CPS PROGRAM PERFORMANCE 

A. OVERVIEW AND PRINCIPLES OF ENGAGEMENT 
B. PROGRESS BY STRATEGIC ENGAGEMENT THEMES (TOWARDS CPS OUTCOMES 

B.1. Sustained Equitable Growth 
B.2. Poverty Alleviation and Equity of Opportunity 
B.3. Environment and Natural Resources Management 
B.4. Peace and Development 
B.5. A State at the Service of its Citizens: Efficient and Effective Government 

III. WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE 
A. CPS DESIGN 

B. IMPLEMENTING THE STRATEGY 
C. MANAGEMENT OF RISKS 

IV. LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

CPSCR ANNEX 1. COLOMBIA CPSCR RESULTS MATRIX FY08-11 (as of Feb. 3, 2011) 

CPSCR ANNEX 2. CHANGES IN THE INDICATIVE LENDING PROGRAM FOR FY08-11 

CPSCR ANNEX 3. INDICATIVE AND ACTUAL KNOWLEDGE (AAA) PROGRAM FOR 
FY08-11 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 

1. 
This Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report (CPSCR) assesses the joint IBRD/IFC CPS 
for Colombia (FY2008-11).  It describes the support provided through an integrated package of financial, 
knowledge, and coordination services; evaluates (i) the achievements of CPS program outcomes; (ii) 
assesses World Bank Group (WBG) performance; and (iii) draws lessons for the preparation of the 
forthcoming CPS (FY2012-16). The March 1, 2010 CPS Progress Report (CPSPR) adjusted the original 
CPS program and strengthened its CPS Results Matrix. This CPSCR uses the updated CPSPR Results 
Matrix as the reference for assessing CPS program performance.  

A. Colombia’s Economic and Social Background 

1. During preparation of the CPS (2008-11), Colombia was enjoying a period of high economic 
growth (an average of five percent per annum for CY07 and CY08), growing consumption, 
accelerating investment, and rising confidence. This was due to a propitious external 
environment, improving internal security, access to new geographical areas and markets, 
expanding credit, and a natural resources boom. The improved economic conditions resulted in 
rising incomes, a reduction in poverty, and greater social sector coverage. But the international 
economic crisis 2008 brought a halt to the high growth period, and the near-future prospects were 
clouded by uncertainties concerning policy continuity and the need to tackle structural obstacles 
to increase long-term growth.  

2. The Government faced daunting and simultaneous challenges to achieve sustained peace, 
security, and economic stability.  As a result of successful demobilization negotiations, the 
Government had to reintegrate thousands of former combatants into civilian life and provide them 
with sufficient incentives not to re-arm or re-engage in illegal activities. The guerrilla and 
paramilitary activities and the narco-trafficking have continued to pose obstacles to achieving 
sustainable development in Colombia.  

3. The country‘s comprehensive social protection system limited the impact of the cri sis on poorest 
families. During the crisis, the Government effectively shielded social protection expenditures 
from broader cuts, and expanded programs targeted to the poor, such as Familias en Acción, the 
core conditional cash transfer program, and Juntos, the Government‘s strategy to provide social 
work assistance to the poorest families.  While challenges remain in terms of coverage and 
efficiency of the social protection system, the existing programs preserved a minimum level of 
benefits, contained the negative impact of the crisis on poorer households and shielded them from 
the downward adjustments that often result in losses of human, physical, and financial assets.   

B. World Bank Program of Support  

4. The current CPS, discussed by the Executive Board in April 2008, was prepared after a new 
political administration in Colombia came into office.  The structure of the CPS was aligned with 
the priorities identified in the new National Development Plan for 2006-2010 with a proposed 
IBRD engagement of a base lending of around US$4 billion (for the FY08-11) with an 
increasingly 
active 
IFC program. This was 
complemented by knowledge 
and 
coordination/convening services as well as specialized grants.  The CPS was designed to be 
flexible and innovative in response to Colombia‘s financial and development needs.  In keeping 
with past practice, the CPS allowed for innovative instruments in response to program needs.  It 
also called for increased coordination within the Bank Group and with other development 
partners. 

46 

 
 
5. The implementation of the strategy has proceeded for the most part along the lines established in 
the original CPS.  Most of the proposed activities outlined in the CPS were carried out, but 
adjustments were made to respond to unexpected developments (see Annex B). The ensuing 
international economic crisis in particular affected the financing needs of the Government, as well 
as their requirements for knowledge and coordination services.   

II. CPS PROGRAM PERFORMANCE 

6. Overall the CPS program performance is rated satisfactory as the program achieved good 
progress toward all major expected outcomes.   

7. The IBRD lending program proceeded faster than anticipated to the economic crisis in Colombia. 
During the CPS period, the Executive Board has approved 20 loans to Colombia amounting to 
US$3,703 million. In addition, during this same period, the Bank delivered an average of six 
analytical and advisory activities (SAP count) per fiscal year, ranging in topics from climate 
change, education quality, decentralization, financial sector access, poverty measurement (Human 
Opportunity Index), social protection, health system modernization and extractive industries. 
Disbursements for the CPS period have been around US$3.9 billion (average of US$975 million 
per FY), while overall exposure to Colombia rose to approximately US$7.5 billion. The Bank‘s 
response to the crisis has led to an acceleration of disbursements in the last couple years, not only 
because of fast-disbursing, policy-based loans but also because a few investment operations had a 
front-loaded disbursements profile. As a result, IBRD lending to Colombia increased from 
US$940 million in FY08 to US$1,275 in FY09, dropping to US$1,173 million in FY10 and 
projected at US$315 million in FY11. During the CPS period, the Bank had also around 27 grants 
from different trust funds totaling over US$60 million under implementation.  

A. Overview and Principles of Engagement 

8. The Bank followed three basic principles of engagement in developing its relationship with 
Colombia: flexibility, responsiveness and innovation. The flexibility granted by the CPS proved 
to be extremely perceptive. In the initial stages of the CPS, when the currency was strengthening 
and foreign capital flows were strong, Colombian authorities were focused on the innovative 
instruments available from the Bank and were particularly interested in domestic currency 
financing, as well as a mix of investment and development policy lending. More recently, the 
authorities have asked for support in dealing with the adverse consequences of the global crisis. 
This includes additional financing and technical assistance to help sustain and improve crucial 
government programs to attenuate the effects of the crisis.  

9. To support the emerging needs of the private sector, the IFC also adapted its Colombia strategy 
and diversified its portfolio with new projects in infrastructure logistics, microfinance, higher 
education, vocational training, agribusiness, natural resources (oil, gas, and mining), and energy 
efficiency. The IFC response also led to an increase in commitments and disbursements.  The IFC 
committed portfolio almost doubled from US$504 million in FY06 to US$881 million in FY10, 
as a result of financing 27 projects during this period (in agribusiness, the financial sector, 
manufacturing, infrastructure, extractive industries, and private equity fund) for a total 
commitment of US$846 million, including syndications.  These results were in great part due t 
the IFC decentralization process.  Today, the Bogotá regional hub office has 30 staff, a three-fold 
increase from 2006.  

10. In keeping with the principles of engagement, the World Bank Group has also provided an array 
of knowledge and convening services to Colombia, ranging from technical support embedded in 
the preparation of projects to analytical work specific for Colombia, along with both regional and 

47 

 
 
global studies, just-in-time technical assistance specifically tailored for particular requests, policy 
dialogue, and transfer of global knowledge. One important and innovative aspect of this work was 
its multi-year programmatic approach, where IBRD had an on-going engagement in key areas, 
and defined its annual work program according to the existing needs at the time.  The IFC 
advisory program expanded in Colombia, and its services were also based on a programmatic 
approach that supported strategic investments, with an emphasis on sustainable business advisory 
projects, investment climate work, and access to finance engagements. In August 2010, after 
elections, the Bank Group team prepared a set of thematic policy notes and met with the President 
Santos and Government officials to discuss potential priority areas and provide early input into 
the new National Development Plan.  

11. Financial innovation was a hallmark characteristic of the Bank Group‘s program. Colombia has 
always made effective use of the new Bank instruments, and in some instances has promoted and 
led the innovation.  During the CPS period, Colombia was one of the first countries to make use 
of the new contingent financing for natural catastrophes under the revised Deferred Drawdown 
Option (DDO) guidelines. Over the past few years, the Bank‘s Treasury Department has advised 
Colombia on several issues related to risk and debt management, including contingent liabilit ies.  

12. The Bank has advised Colombian authorities on strengthening of the Investor Relations Office, 
leveraging the Bank‘s expertise in accessing international markets and developing outreach 
materials. Complimentarily, the Bank continued providing local currency financing to sub-
national entities such as Cartagena, Antioquia, and Bogotá by converting outstanding loan 
amounts to pesos. 

B. Progress by Strategic Engagement Themes (Towards CPS Outcomes) 

13. The CPS Outcomes, Status and Evaluation Summary, and IBRD/IFC interventions that 
contributed to the CPS outcomes are summarized in the CPS Completion Report Matrix in Annex 
A. 

B 1. Sustained Equitable Growth  

14. Commendable macroeconomic management, improvements on institutions, and strengthening 
of the financial markets brought about economic growth and increase in competitiveness. 
Human capital growth was improved through enhanced quality of secondary and tertiary 
education programs.  

15. The work under this theme became crucial for the Bank‘s engagement following the onset of the 
economic crisis.  The WBG contributed to preserving economic growth and minimizing the 
impact of the crisis in Colombia through policy-based and IFC loans, as well as targeted 
interventions and provision of knowledge and coordination/convening services.  

16. The focus of the work was on the economy‘s competitiveness, the financial system, capital 
markets, infrastructure development and human capital. Among several loans, the most important 
were some development policy loans that supported important policy reforms in the areas of 
business efficiency and competitiveness, along with the reforms in the financial sector. The Bank 
supported implementation measures that helped keep the banking system adequacy ratio above 10 
percent. These policy-based loans also served to cover the fiscal needs during the crisis and to 
preserve macroeconomic stability.  This was accompanied by project lending in infrastructure. 

17. In the area of competitiveness, lending was buttressed by substantial technical assistance. 
Development policy lending on business productivity was the umbrella for the program and was 
part of a programmatic series that supported reforms in the areas of innovation and technology, 
quality standards, and private sector participation in infrastructure and logistics. The Bank also 

48 

 
 
supported labor market reforms through a multi-year knowledge service program that was the 
main input in the design of new policies to reduce informality and make the labor markets more 
efficient and flexible. A significant contribution was the assistance provided to the National 
Planning Department through studies and seminars in their formulation of policies for 
employment and income generation.   

18. In the area of financial sector development, the Bank provided development policy lending on 
finance and private sector development, which supported the recent legal reforms designed to 
strengthen financial sector resiliency and deepen capital markets. This was accompanied by 
knowledge services to improve the framework for consolidated supervision and to regulate over -
the-counter markets (i.e., advisory work on accounting and financial reporting standards and 
strengthening social accountability). The Bank also helped Colombian authorities to undertake a 
financial crisis simulation exercise. Through the FIRST program, Colombia received Bank 
support to correct any identified shortcomings.   

19. The IFC also made investments in key financial lending institutions in order to develop new 
services.  Since access to finance is low in Colombia, particularly in the rural areas, the joint 
Bank/IFC work in financial sector reforms greatly facilitated the IFC investment program to 
reach the underserved.  With significant involvement in Colombia‘s microfinance sector, IFC 
investments in 6 lenders enabled them to make almost 1 million loans for a total US$1.13 billion 
in CY2009, equivalent to about one-quarter of all loans by the IFC‘s Latin American 
microfinance lenders that year. Bancamia is a key IFC microfinance partner in Colombia and the 
country‘s third microfinance lender. The IFC invested US$10 million for a minority equity stake 
in the Bancamia in May 2010. In CY2009, Bancamia made over 300,000 loans for a total 
US$238.6 million, or an average of about US$800 per loan. Two-thirds of its clients are low-
income women living across 300 municipalities around Colombia. 

20. The IFC has also played a role in strengthening Colombia‘s conventional banking system through 
countercyclical investments. In May 2010, for instance, IFC committed US$23.5 million in equity 
and subordinated debt to finance acquisition of non-performing loans first originated by 
Bancolombia, the country‘s biggest bank. This transaction, signed in the aftermath of the global 
financial crisis, allowed a systemically important bank to dispose of its non-performing assets 
through a market-based mechanism. In addition to financing, IFC also provided a package of 
corporate governance advice and workout guidelines that set an example of distressed asset 
resolution. The IFC has been active in the global non-performing loan (NPL) market for over a 
decade and was able to use its expertise to benefit Bancolombia and assist in the development of 
an active NPL market in Colombia.  

21. The IFC and IBRD also closely coordinated their support to concentrate much of the project 
financing to improve the infrastructure in the country, particularly in areas of transport and basic 
services. This was complemented by investments to improve water and sanitation services, solid 
waste management, urban housing development, as well as renewable energy and energy 
efficiency. The Bank also supported the development of the urban mass transit program in six 
major cities, recognized as one of the most innovative and pioneering projects in LCR.  This has 
been accompanied by assistance to improve urban services in Bogotá, including preliminary 
studies on the viability of a metro system. Through a programmatic approach, IFC invested in 
transportation/logistic projects (roads, airlines, and ports) and leveraged its investments with 
Advisory Services on trade logistics and competitiveness.  This approach is exemplified by IFC‘s 
role in one of Latin America‘s most significant road projects. Ruta del Sol, a 1,000-kilometer 
highway linking Bogotá to the Caribbean coast. The IFC‘s Infrastructure Advisory Team acted as 
transaction adviser to Colombia‘s Transportation Ministry, assisting it in structuring and 
implementing a public/private partnership project for the concession of the highway. Colombia 
has achieved considerable success in attracting local contractors to other public–private projects, 

49 

 
but the Government felt IFC would be crucial in convincing large international groups to bid fo r 
such a large and complex project. The IFC completed the three-year concession process in 
August 2010. Contracts worth US$2.7 billion were awarded to companies from Argentina, Brazil, 
and Italy, as well as Colombia. In addition to reducing travel time between Colombia‘s biggest 
cities and the coast, Ruta del Sol will also improve access for once-isolated rural communities.  

22. One of IFC‘s largest exposures in Colombia is to Avianca, the national flagship airline. The IFC 
committed US$50 million in loans to the airline in September 2008 as part of a turnaround 
program being implemented by the troubled carrier‘s new owners. Avianca is an integral part of 
Colombia‘s transport system given the country‘s mountainous terrain and long distances between 
cities. The company was later able to merge with El Salvador‘s TACA, improving connections 
between Central America and the Andean region.   

B.2. Poverty Alleviation and Equity of Opportunity  

23. The Bank contributed to expanded coverage and quality of public services and social 
protection targeted to poor. Increased equality in the Colombian society and opportunities for 
the less fortunate especially during the period of the financial crisis mark a significant 
development in the fight against poverty including an expanded coverage and quality of public 
services. Support ranged from reforms in the health sector to improving the quality of 
education; promoting science, technology and innovation; and strengthening the social 
protection system. 

24. Significantly triggered by the onset of the crisis, the core of the support was through a loan to 
preserve the financing of the country‘s main social welfare program, Familias en Acción, a 
conditional cash transfer program. Among the Government initiatives in terms of providing social 
assistance and poverty alleviation is the creation of Red Juntos, which aims to reduce extreme 
poverty by providing extremely poor families with accompaniment and preferential access to core 
social services. The Bank‘s support to these programs includes continued knowledge services to 
help improve the protection under the social security system, rationalize the existing complex set 
of overlapping programs, and modernize the system of information and evaluation.   

25. The work in this area was based on the principle of increasing the equality of opportunities by 
expanding the provision of basic services.   As such, during the current CPS several loans were 
extended to expand services in key areas such as water and sanitation, and agricultural and rural 
development.  In the area of agriculture and rural development, the program included the support 
to small farmer organizations to increase market access for their products, and foster a sense of 
entrepreneurship. The program also included support for agricultural research and development as 
well as the strengthening of sanitary and phytosanitary systems along with the first public, high -
level bio-safety laboratory in the country. The IFC‘s US$30 million financing for Abocol helped 
improve agribusiness competitiveness by supporting the fertilizer sector.  

26. The Bank Group‘s support in this area also included substantial analytical and advisory service 
(i.e. publications on agricultural sectoral issues.)  

27. The program also included several projects in education, mostly in the rural areas, and focused on 
secondary school quality and enrollment. A core element was support to the student loan program 
geared toward giving access to secondary school education to indigenous people. As for the 
IBRD Antioquia Secondary Education project, completion rate in the poorest areas has 
dramatically increased. The IFC complemented the education initiatives by investing in 
Uniminuto, a higher-education institution that serves mostly students from lower quintiles of the 
population. Uniminuto aims to reach a total enrollment of 44,000 students by 2015, half of which 
will be women. In CY2009, the school had 26,000 students of whom 60 percent were women. 

50 

 
 
Uniminuto is focused on serving the lower two quintiles of Colombian society. Many of its 
students are from secondary cities, peri-urban, or rural areas.  

28. A key area of involvement was the support to improve the efficiency and sustainability of the 
Colombian health system.  The complexity of the financing and delivery systems, with cross 
subsidies and different forms of reimbursements, and coupled with a Constitutional Court ruling 
that guarantees the fundamental right to health, firmly established the need for regulatory reform 
to guarantee equal access to all citizens and a fundamental review and reform of the health sector.  

29. The Bank played a key coordination and supportive role in the updating of poverty measures.  
This work entailed naming a high-level Presidential Commission to assist the Government in 
updating its poverty measurements.  The lack of consistent information and the publication of 
recent poverty data created significant doubts about the accuracy of the preliminary figures. The 
work of the Bank and the Commission helped give credibility to the poverty figures. 

30. Several grants focused on gender issues and on strengthening institutions dealing with 
discrimination.  The Bank, with financing from the Japanese Social Development Fund, helped 
improve the skills of mostly young single mothers, who have been displaced by the violence in 
the country, to assist them to integrate in the formal economy.  Another grant supported the 
Presidential Secretary for Gender to institute a system of certification of businesses that promote 
gender equality and are apply gender-free policies.  

B 3. Environment and Natural Resource Management 

31. The considerable increase in design and implementation of knowledge and lending services in 
sustainable development dramatically increased awareness on environmental issues. The 
World Bank Group was able to provide input to national policy and help the Government to 
strengthen institutional capacity for managing environmental services and mainstreaming 
principles of environmental sustainability.  

32. The environmental sustainability activities ranged from loans to support policy reforms and 
implementation, to grants designed for piloting key protection and adaptation programs. This was 
complemented by many investment projects in flood protection, water treatment, and disaster risk 
management. A significant part of the program dealt with climate change adaptation programs.  

33. One of the first actions under the CPS was to provide financing and technical support for the 
implementation of important policy reforms. The work in this area involved updating the 
environmental health policies of the country, where new emission standards were applied. It also 
included updating the institutional structure to deal with the formulation and implementation of 
environmental policies.  

34. Under the CPS, there were several investment projects that contributed to environmental 
sustainability, including lending activities in water and sanitation and solid waste management. 
These activities are being complemented by two projects under supervision for disaster risk 
management, which are designed to improve the data gathering and analysis framework, along 
with reinforcing school and hospital buildings.  The Government also entered into a catastrophic 
risk deferred drawdown option (CAT DDO), the new financial instrument that provides 
contingency financing in case of a major natural disaster.  

35. The GEF supported a variety of activities, including conservation of national protected areas, and 
multi-country integrated Silvopastoral approaches to ecosystem management, an example of 
recent achievements under the National Protected Areas GEF with sustainable natural resource 
practices in place. Several other grants supported pilot programs of renewable energy, efficiency, 
and greenhouse gas reductions in the transport sector.  Colombia has also made effective use of 
carbon finance grants.  

51 

 
36. The IFC invested selectively in small hydro-generation in remote areas of Colombia and in 
thermal efficiency, consistent with its focus on reducing impact on climate change through 
renewal energy and cleaner, more efficient electricity generation. The IFC was instrumental in 
upgrading and expanding the Termoflores natural gas -fired electricity-generating plant in 
Barranquilla through a US$62.5 million loan package that included US$10 million in 
syndications. The project used energy efficiency gains and heat recovery to increase output 
without a significant increase in gas consumption.  

B 4.  Peace and Development 

37. The Bank played an important role in supporting the country’s efforts to achieve lasting peace 
and inclusive development. The Bank’s interventions contributed to improved effectiveness of 
Government’s peace initiatives by increasing awareness of global experience and piloting 
innovative models of participatory community development in conflict-affected zones.  
Colombia‘s recent history has been marred by violence and armed conflicts that have precluded 
the country from achieving its full development potential.  Violence has also displaced a large 
portion of the population. The Bank actively supported the joint efforts by the Government and 
the international community with both financing and coordination services.  

38. As an innovative approach to the gender, minority populations, and youth issues, the Bank 
integrated grant activities to the Peace and Development pillar. The Internally Displaced 
Women‘s Project was designed to increase the economic empowerment of women in 
communities of internally displaced populations by assisting them in joining the formal labor 
force, building their assets (including greater food security), and helping them to understand the 
causes of political and/or domestic violence against women and develop tools to mitigate them. 
The Bank closely engaged in supporting the Secretary for Women‘s Issues in the Presidency with 
an initiative to certify those businesses and enterprises that adopted gender-neutral employment 
policies.  The Human Rights Project‘s was designed to identify effective links between the nature 
and work of the Regional Peace and Development Programs, Government, other partners and the 
Bank, regarding human rights and to promote the introduction of human rights best practices in 
peace and development interventions.  The new operations, Afropaz, designed to strengthen Afro-
Colombian organizations, build social networks and empower communities to promote local 
development, and Access to Opportunities for Youth, designed to enhance the access of young 
men and women to opportunities for education, work and political participation, were recently 
declared effective. 

39. As part of the activities under this pillar, the Bank was a key player in the coordination of 
activities of the international community. The Bank led organizing and preparing the 
International Disarmament, Demobilization and Reparation Congress in Cartagena in May of 
2009. This Congress and the Education for Peace Partnership are examples of the catalytic role 
the Bank plays in promoting dialogue and disseminating experiences.   

40. Joint efforts with the International Organization for Migration, the Bank contributed to 
diminishing the risk of impoverishment of the displaced population and to the peace-building 
process, by promoting the application of measures for protection of patrimonial assets, providing 
land titles for those internally displaced populations whose rights have not been protected, and 
proposing public policy initiatives for restitution of properties of internally displaced populations. 
Under the two initial phases, more than 3 million hectares have been protected, equivalent to 
100,000 farms and 127,000 land rights, benefiting overall more than 95,000 individuals. A third 
phase was declared effective in August 2010, and project outcomes have been acknowledged and 
recognized by the new Government to the extent that the project will constitute the foundation of 
the land restitution and regularization flagship program of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development that will benefit 480,000 displaced and violence-affected families.  

52 

 
41. The Bank raised the awareness of the human challenges confronted by Colombians affected by 
violence through a unique publication, ―Voices.‖  The book, published in June 2009, contains 
stories of the experiences of individuals directly touched by the violence. A special exhibit, which 
included a collection of photographs and testimonials, was mounted in several Colombian cities 
and in Washington D.C. 

B 5.  A State at the Service of its Citizens: Efficient and Effective Government 

42. Excellent public financial management paired with an increase in the number of social 
programs contributes to Central Government efforts to improve public sector management and 
citizen services. The Bank’s supported programs improved public sector management and 
citizen services in support of Central Government efforts. 

43. The World Bank Group‘s expanded its support for institutional reforms and improvemen t in 
governance. Initiatives ranged from strengthening the public management information systems to 
integrating the tax and customs administration processes, implementing a system of monitoring 
and evaluation of government programs, expanding the assistance to sub-national governments, 
and assisting with the modernization of the judicial sector. One of the major achievements was 
the introduction of a new system for budget management throughout the Central Government.  It 
is a web-based system, with open architecture, which will greatly improve the efficiency of public 
financial management, expand access to information, and establish greater transparency.  The 
new system is being complemented with new norms and procedures for budgetary management, 
as well as the introduction of a single account for cash management.   

44. The support for improving the managerial systems was designed for the full application of 
country systems. The Bank accepted the use of Colombia‘s financial management system for its 
projects and programs. This was achieved with considerable support by several project loans that 
helped modernize the systems, and the progress achieved in streamlining implementation 
arrangements and the reliance on the Colombian Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) and sub-
national SAIs for external audits for Bank-financed projects.  The Bank provided extensive 
training and technical assistance to the SAI toward strengthening its staff capacity; and from 
2008, all projects with the exception of grants implemented by NGOs are audited by the SAI.   

45. A Public Financial Management (PFM) and Procurement Performance Assessment Report, which 
was authorized by the Government, concluded that PFM systems, institutions, and processes at 
the central level show advanced levels of performance, which are close to or follow good 
international practice.  There remain a few gaps where challenges and opportunities to further 
enhance PFM in the country could be pursued in the near future toward strengthening fiscal 
discipline and increasing operational efficiency and transparency. 

46. The program under this theme included targeted financing and a broad program of knowledge 
services.  During the last two years, several smaller loans were approved to improve the services 
of the state.  They included a loan to support building the Management and Planning System for 
the Government (SIGOB), a fairly advanced system of monitoring and evaluation of government 
programs, which is considered a leading program in Latin America.  This technical assistance 
loan is assisting with all of the evaluations of government programs being carried out by the 
National Planning Department. The Board has approved a follow-up loan for the Modernization 
of the Public Sector Management Systems. This operation is part of a series of loans that, over the 
years, helped modernize the budget and financial systems, along with the tax and customs 
agencies. The other important operation will be assisting with the process of judicial sector 
reforms, which remain a major development challenge for the country. 

47. Among the most promising work was the development of new relationships and support for sub -
national governments.  The public sector group has developed a new product called the Rapid 
Assessment and Action Plan (RAAP) for sub-national governments.  Public sector experts on 

53 

 
fiscal, budget, tax, financial management and information systems worked with local authorities 
to develop an action plan for key public sector reforms.  The first two studies were presented in 
cities where there has been tremendous improvement in the financial, fiscal, and managerial 
capacities. The IFC complemented this work with cities and regions on issues of regional 
competitiveness, local business climate, and management of royalties from mining development. 
The IFC‘s Advisory Services expects to expand its royalty management activities in Colombia, 
assisting companies and local communities in managing revenues from mining and oil producing 
projects. The IFC currently advises Ecopetrol, the state-owned oil company and is in advanced 
talks with other clients on future engagements. 

III. WORLD BANK GROUP PERFORMANCE 

48. The World Bank Group performance is rated satisfactory.  The CPS was relevant, aligned with 
the Government’s National Development Plan and its design and implementation of the 
program contributed to the achievement of CPS outcomes with a focus on results, and a timely 
adaptation to changing circumstances and priorities.  It delivered a package of services beyond 
those initially anticipated in the CPS, in response to both the emerging needs of the country and 
the impact of the international financial crisis.  

49. The success of the strategy and program was due in part to the continued Bank presence over the 
years, the close engagement with the client, WBG‘s responsiveness and an active supervision and 
follow-up to the projects and scheduled activities.   

 A. CPS Design 

50. The foresight to preserve the flexibility and to ensure full compatibility with the Government‘s 
program proved critical. In addition, the design of the strategy was constructed on the basis of 
extensive experience and understanding of the conditions and the development challenges of 
Colombia.  The initial CPS results framework entailed a mixture of outcomes and outputs and 
was therefore strengthened and updated in the CPSPR.  

51. The success of the Bank‘s program in Colombia owes much to the fact that the CPS was well 
aligned with the priorities of the Government, and thus equipped with strong local ownership.  
The strategic engagement areas of the CPS were fully consistent with the main building blocks of 
the National Development Plan.  

52. The Bank‘s ability to respond successfully to the changing circumstances in Colombia was rooted 
in the flexibility of the CPS design.  The Bank was able to adjust its program or reallocate staff 
and budgetary resources in response to the country‘s emerging financial and development needs, 
especially at a time when international markets were severely constrained. Colombia continues to 
promote innovation by taking full advantage of the new instruments and policies offered by the 
World Bank.   

B. Implementing the Strategy 

53. The overall implementation of the strategy was satisfactory.  The Bank followed essentially the 
overall thrust of the CPS, while having to make adjustments in response to the international 
financial crisis.  The initial program had to be altered slightly to include accelerated 
disbursements through policy-based loans and projects supporting budget programs.  Most of the 
potential investment projects initially identified in the CPS were carried out, and some new 
priorities were introduced as a result of continued dialogue with the authorities.  

54. As shown in the Results Matrix (Annex A), most of the activities of the WBG involved transfer 
of knowledge and provision of advisory and convening services.  Making effective use of the 
wealth of knowledge available in the Bank, Colombia also relied on the Bank‘s support to 

54 

 
evaluate different policy alternatives and proposals. While often associated with lending 
activities, much of the knowledge work was specifically designed to address direct requests or 
particular issues. An important characteristic of the Colombia program was the inclusion of 
programmatic multisectoral knowledge services, designed to be an open multi-year engagement 
in a particular area.  The annual activities were determined after a review of previous 
accomplishments and the evolving needs of the country.  Finally, during the political transition to 
a new administration in mid 2010, the Bank prepared policy notes in areas of special interest to 
the incoming authorities. These were discussed with the newly elected President Santos and 
Government members, and offered an excellent entry point for engagement with the new 
authorities.   

55. The implementation of the program entailed close supervision and periodic reviews of the 
portfolio.  The Bank‘s supervision occurred though continuous monitoring and evaluation of the 
activities, both at the project and country level. The high -quality of Bank lending during the CPS 
period was evidenced by a generally satisfactory progress in portfolio implementation and by the 
achievement of the project‘s development objectives (see Table 3.1). Policy-based lending played 
an important role in producing results.  

56. The current Administration has underlined the need to strengthen the institutional capacity of key 
government entities to optimize the implementation of investment projects, in particular civil 
works financed with public funds at the national level. The government, led by the Ministry of 
Transport, is exploring an appropriate strategy, including a review of the legal framework, 
enhancing procurement processes and external controls, in addition to strengthen the technical 
capacity of the executing agencies. 

57. To that end the Bank has maintained close scrutiny of the portfolio in Colombia and timely 
addressed procurement issues that have been uncovered during Bank supervisions. In addition, in 
close coordination with the borrower, the Bank has incorporated a broad set of measures into both 
project implementation and supervision to strengthen the overall fiduciary control framework and 
to safeguard individual operations. 

58. The 2008 Country Performance Portfolio Review (CPPR) focused on assessing the quality of the 
portfolio with respect to necessary adjustments in relation to the CPS. As a consequence of the 
CPPR, three projects were restructured that showed problems on implementation and slow 
disbursements. The 2010 CPPR focused on establishing a new coordination mechanism between 
the Ministry of Finance, the National Planning Department, the Social Action Department, and 
the Bank for the implementation and discussion of the grants pipeline.  

Table 3.1 Portfolio overview (data as of May 16, 2011) 

Variable 

FY2007 

FY2008 

FY2009 

FY2010 

FY2011 

Number of projects 

Net commitment (US$ million) 

Number of problem projects 

% at risk 

% proactivity 

% Realism Index 

Overage projects by FY 

Total undisbursed balance (US$ 
million) 

17 

1,900 

0 

0.0 

-- 

-- 

0 

20 

2,866 

2 

10.0 

-- 

47.5 

2 

15 

1,857 

1 

13.3 

50 

31.1 

1 

1,117 

1,488 

1,451 

Disbursement ratio by FY 

39 

48 

25 

18 

2,489 

2 

11.1 

-- 

40.7 

0 

885 

60 

22 

2,044 

2 

9.1 

-- 

44.4 

0 

734 

42.5 

55 

 
 
59. Much of work of the Bank Group was carried out in partnership with other development partners.  
The Bank continued to build excellent relations with groups involved in the development agenda 
of Colombia.  The work with agencies extending bilateral support included joint activities in the 
area of environment, climate change, and the peace and development agenda.  While the 
Government coordinated much of this work, the financing from bilateral partners was critical for 
the success of some Bank-supported programs.  The Bank has worked closely with the European 
Union and the UN System on peace and community development in areas affected by violence.   

60. The Nordic countries were also closely engaged, especially in the areas of environmental 
protection.  In several programs, the Bank co-financed and worked in close coordination with the 
IDB, such as in conditional cash transfers, water and sanitation, and science and technology.  The 
Bank and IDB also closely coordinated in furthering the development of country systems and 
prepared a program to pursue shared documentation.  The alliances also involved NGOs, 
particularly those involved with efforts to consolidate the peace process and create the conditions 
for more inclusive communities.  A well-publicized alliance took place with Shakira, a famous 
Colombian artist, who is leading an international effort to promote greater attention to early 
childhood development programs.  

C. Management of Risks  

61. The risks originally identified in the CPS were well managed.  The CPS anticipated potential 
difficulties emanating from external shocks. The subprime financial crisis and reductions in trade 
with neighboring countries actually materialized and led to the need for additional financing. 
Naturally, the overall magnitude of the crisis was beyond any initial estimate, and the rapid 
exposure to Colombia was not fully anticipated.  The domestic risks to the strategy, which 
included both overheating of the economy and political factors, did play a significant role.  In 
fact, the political transition was much smoother than foreseen with a continuity of programs and 
an excellent relationship with the new authorities. 

IV. LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

62. The CPS was designed to be flexible and innovative in responding to Colombia’s financial and 
development needs. The IFC also adapted its Colombia strategy and diversified its portfolio 
with new projects. This flexibility allowed the Bank to explore new avenues of resources, mainly 
through trust funds, that financed unanticipated Government requests for knowledge and advisory 
services. Just-in-time technical assistance tailored for particular requests , policy dialogue, global 
knowledge transfer and a fully integrated trust fund portfolio resulted in an important and 
innovative aspect of the program. Colombia was one of the first Bank clients to take advantage of 
the flexible DPL with Catastrophe Drawdown Option (CAT-DDO) as part of its integrated 
approach to disaster risk management. Combined with the other ongoing activities by the Bank -- 
which span the range of financial and knowledge services -- Colombia has one of the most 
integrated programs in risk management of any Bank client. Its multi-year, knowledge and 
advisory programmatic approach, where IBRD had an on-going engagement with the 
Government in key areas, defined the annual work program (for knowledge and convening 
services) according to the existing needs at the time. The IFC advisory program also expanded in 
Colombia, and its services were also based on strategic aims. This flexibility and just-in-time, 
multi-sectoral programmatic advisory approach proved to be effective and should be maintained.  

63. Good Governance and increased transparency in Colombia’s economy remains challenging 
and the performance of public financial management (PFM) systems including public 
procurement is a critical factor for fiscal discipline, strategic allocation, operational efficiency 
and transparency in use of public funds. The Bank will therefore continue to pay special 
attention to PFM issues to support the Government in enhancing its operational efficiency, 

56 

 
ensuring sustainability of the procurement reform, including improving country intuitional 
capacity, creating of a public procurement bureau, enhancing transparency, promoting 
participation of the private sector, and the creation of a more efficient compliant mechanism. 

64. With the Government of Colombia wanting to borrow more than currently possible under Bank 
exposure limits — it is advisable to agree with the Government on an integrated package of 
financial, knowledge, and convening services with a focus on providing customized results -
focused development solutions in areas where the Bank Group can add value. In this context, it 
will be important for the WBG to increase its efforts to leverage resources from other 
development partners and to maximize it development impact by created better synergies among 
different sectors in support of the Government‘s program. 

57 

 
CPSCR Annex 1 – Colombia CPSCR Results Matrix FY08-11  

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

Contribute to Government efforts to sustain growth 
i.e., through improving the business climate, 
measured by: 

 Reduce total number of administrative procedures 
for starting businesses by 50% with respect to 
baseline in 2004 

 Increase annual value of non-traditional exports to 
US$10 billion per year  

 Increase financial sector depth, reflected in total 
credit to the private sector (CTPS), growing to 
27% of GDP 

SUSTAINABLE EQUITABLE GROWTH 

ACHIEVED 
IFC Doing Business 2011 Report 

 Reduced starting business from 19 to 9 
procedures; led to reduction of bureaucratic and 
legal hurdles to incorporate and register a new 
firm 

 Improved close advisory on 9 categories of Doing 
Business in the last 3 years of the report, and have 
had a positive impact on attracting foreign 
investment to the country 

 Non-traditional exports averaged US$15.6 billion 
annually in 2007-2010 compared to 9.2 billion in 
2002-06 - an increase of 70 percent.' 

 Incentivized resource management projects in 
communities to take stronger control of royalty 
investment by getting local governments to 
account for their inputs in the design, process, 
and delivery of public works 

Financial Sector DPLs: 

 Growth in CTPS to 32.7% of GDP Bank-
supported implementation measures to keep the 
banking system adequacy ratio above 10% (June 
2010) 

 Increased macro stability through support for 
financial sector reforms: capital increase, 
strengthening of  liquidity regulation, enhancing 

Financial Services:  
 Business Productivity III (FY08/FY11/ICR:S) 

 Financial Sector Development DPL (FY10/FY12/(S/S)) 
 Productive Partnerships Project II(FY08/FY14/(MS/MS)) 

 Agricultural Transition (FY05/FY12/(MS/MS) 

Knowledge Services: 
 SME Finance ESW (FY08) 
 Strengthening arrangements to deal with financial crisis 
(TA) 
 Supervision of financial conglomerates (TF) 
 Trade Logistics Advisory Program (TF-IFC) 
 Streamlining trade procedures(IFC) 
 Deepening of capital markets 
 Competitiveness, innovation (ESW improving logistics 
and trade facilitation) 
 Financial sector policy note (FY11) 
 Extractive Industries Royalty Mgmt. (TF-IFC) 
 FIRST Strengthening Crisis Preparedness Framework 
(TF) 

Coordination/Convening Services : 
 Fiscal Risk Knowledge Management Services (FY11-12) 
 Colombia Lessons in the Agricultural Sector (En Breve 
Publication) 
 Presentation at Cenicafe‘s 60th Anniversary 
 Presentation at SAC Congress 
 Publications (video – press) on agriculture sector, BRTS,  
 WDR 2008 ―Agriculture for Development‖ – 600 
participants, PPP advisory work 

58 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

SUSTAINABLE EQUITABLE GROWTH 

powers to close illegal intermediaries  

 Adopted measures (improving professionalism of 
intermediaries securities market, protecting 
investor rights, increasing transparency, and 
regulating derivative products) adopted on 
financial front and derived from Finance DPL 

  Enhanced liquidity of the credit system 

Productive Partnerships Project II: 

 Created 48 partnerships to increase rural 
competitiveness and build up rural 
entrepreneurship in poor rural communities 

Agriculture Transition:  

 Increased the competitiveness of Colombian 
agriculture and improved the accessibility of 
export-potential products to international markets 
by strengthening National Agricultural Science 
and Technology and Sanitary and Phytosanitary 
Systems through the joint participation of both 
the public and private sectors. 
ACHIEVED 
Infrastructure Investments: 

 Expanded country‘s logistic infrastructure 
through IFC investments in national ports in 
Muelles El Bosque (Cartagena), SMITCO (Santa 
Marta) and TC Buen (Buenaventura) 

 Offered advisory services for structuring and 
implementation of Ruta del Sol bidding process 
(IFC). The project was successfully awarded to 3 
concessionaires through a competitive tender 

Infrastructure Development 

Structuring, financing, and continuing support of 
Ruta del Sol infrastructure project (a 950-km 
highway connecting Bogotá to the Caribbean coast) 
reducing travel time by 8 hours 

Expand coverage and quality of public services 
and social protection targeted to poor. Main 
outcomes include:  

Financial Services:  
 Bogota Urban Services AF (FY09/FY12/(S/HS)) 
 Science, Technology and Innovation (FY11/FY14/(S/S)) 
 Cartagena Bus Rapid Transit (CF) (FY11/FY14)  
 Investment with Municipality of Bogota (IFC) 
 CTF Bogota Transport SITP 
 Integrated Mass Transit Systems (AFII) 
(FY04/FY12/(HS/S) 
 Water and Sanitation Sector Support 
(FY05/FY11/(MS/MS)  
 La Guajira Water and Sanitation (FY07/FY12/(MU/MU) 

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

SUSTAINABLE EQUITABLE GROWTH 

Public Services 
 Inhabitants of 7 cities gain access to rapid mass 
transit though extension of Transmilenio model   

 10-15 departments carry out modernization 
plans resulting in improvement in the quality 
of water and sanitation service, including 
coverage, continuity, pressure, and water 
quality  

Water and Sanitation Sector Support Project  
Improve access to safe water and sanitation 

 Water Sector Reform Assistance (FY02/FY11/(S/S)  
 Cartagena Water Supply, Sewerage and Env. 
Management(FY00/FY09/ ICR: S) 
 Colombia Natural Gas (Fy06/Fy08) 

Knowledge Services: 
 PPIAF - Urban Renewal Financing Instruments 
 BRTS Video/Documentary 
 Participation in 3rd Road Safety Seminar 
 Participation in IDB Metro Conference  
 Mass Transport Systems series preparation (TFs) 
 Regulatory Aspects of Transport  
 Nordic Fund for Universal Access to BRTs  
 Pilot Impact Evaluation Pereira BRTs 
 Metro Study, Integration Public Transit System, SNTA (3 
cities) 
 Safeguard Workshops  
 Procurement Seminars with local BRTS teams 

Coordination/Convening Services: 
 Tax Increment Financing Study Visit 
 Launching of Transport on a Human Scale  
 South-South collaboration and knowledge transfer 
originating from the Colombian experience. Over 20 
countries, including China and Vietnam visited to learn 
about the NUTP.  

process with domestic and international bidders 

Bogotá Urban Services: 
 Improved quality of life of low income families 
by increasing access, coverage, quality, 
reliability, and inter-agency coordination in the 
provision of water, sanitation, transport and 
related basic services.  
 Improved city's mobility by providing better 
access to the public transport system, and 
improving road safety, traffic management and 
transport planning.   
 Strengthened the institutional and administrative 
framework for an efficient and sustainable 
delivery of urban services throughout the city. 

Mass Transport Systems Project: 

 Systems operating in 4 cities (2 more in 2011) 
 Approx. 1.7 million people per day use 
Transmilenio in Bogota (140,000 in Pereira) 

Water & Sanitation Support project: 

 1.4 million consumers receiving improved access 
to reliable and safe water supply (target: 1.2 
million).  

 271,072 consumers receiving improved sewerage 
services 

Water Sector Reform Assistance:  

The Project was successful in widening and 

60 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

SUSTAINABLE EQUITABLE GROWTH 

strengthening the pool of competent operators in 
the water sector in the Caribbean region of 
Colombia. Under the overall program, 36 
municipalities in the Caribbean region now have 
specialized operators; twenty five of these 
municipalities received World Bank financing. 

Improvements 
in 
service were demonstrated 
through: approximately 1.3 million people in the 
lower economic stratum (1, 2, and 3) receiving 
improved water supply service; an increase in the 
water supply infrastructure coverage for medium-
sized cities from 61% to 85%; an increase in 
continuous supply from 2% to 53% for the total 
Project population and; improved operational and 
commercial performance of 
the operators as 
measured by collection rate (85%-96%), micro-
metering (> 80%), and falling operating costs. 

All participating cities have 
responsible and 
dedicated operators; users are aware of efforts, 
implemented works, and improvements, and are 
satisfied with the results. 

Cartagena Water: 

 There is now universal water service coverage 
throughout 
the city, 
including 
the poorest 
neighborhoods. Cartagena‘s water coverage 
increased from 80 percent to 99.9 percent from 
2000 to 2009, corresponding to 78,300 new 
water connections. 
· Cartagena‘s sewerage coverage increased from 
69 percent to 86 percent from 2000 to 2009, 
adding 66,900 new sewer connections. 
· There are improved sanitary conditions for the 
low-income communities located in the Cienaga 
drainage basin and for the city in general as a 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

SUSTAINABLE EQUITABLE GROWTH 

result of the improved wastewater collection and 
conveyance system. 
 There is an on-going dispute between the Project 
implementing entity and the outfall contractor.  
Final outfall construction is underway with 
Government counterpart funds. The Bank is still 
involved in supervision and the ICR will be 
updated once project completed.  

Natural Gas Distribution for Low Income 
Families in the Caribbean Coast Project: 

 Connected up to 35,000 household to the natural 
gas distribution network 
Provided 35,000 households with three months of 
service after connection. 

CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND EQUITY 

Social Protection 

ACHIEVED 
Social Safety Net Series: 

 Ensure access to quality education, with joint 
federal/local programs reaching students in the 
poorest rural areas of the country (around 20% 
of jurisdictions) 

 2.7 million poor,  displaced and indigenous 
families enrolled in Familias en Acción 
 Supported the improvement of the country‘s 
social protection systems through financing and 
technical assistance for social safety net 

Human Capital Formation 

Strengthening education at secondary and tertiary 
levels with more focus on quality than coverage 
by: 

 Promote early childhood development through 
innovative conditional cash transfers and better 
targeted social and infrastructure services to the 

Uniminuto: 

 Uniminuto transaction will reach a total 
enrollment of 44,000 students by 2015, half of 
which will be women. 

LaRSDPL:  

Financial Services: 
 Social Safety Net II (FY09/FY12/(S/S)) 
 Social DPL (FY10/FY11/(S/S)) 
 Rural Education APL II (FY08/FY14/(MS/MS) 
 Antioquia Secondary Education (FY08/FY13/(S/S)) 
 Higher Education Improving Access (FY03/FY09/ICR:S)  
 Second Student Loan APL  (FY08/FY12/S/S) 
 Uniminuto Education Access (IFC) 
 Local currency financing for ICETEX, Identification of 
client‘s risk management needs 
 Loan customization 

Knowledge Services: 
 Education Quality I ESW (FY08) 
 Multi-year programmatic AAA – Health, Education, 

62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

poor  

 Expanding enrollment and reducing dropout 
rate, targeted to students from lower -income 
families   (ICETEX-ACCES loans for tertiary 
education reach  210,000 new students during 
CPS period) 

 Initiating Antioquia Education project pilots 
state-level mechanisms for improving secondary 
education enrollment and quality, benefiting 
22,000 local students   

POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND EQUITY 

 Strengthened Colombia's social protection 
system and improved the delivery of social 
services, (b) raised human capital formation, (c) 
improved employability, and (d) enhanced 
monitoring and evaluation systems for better 
transparency, social oversight, and results 
management in the social sectors. 
 Poverty and Jobs – (i) Promoted initiative (DNP-
led) of having a comprehensive monitoring 
system to measure impact of social crisis, (ii) 
strengthened institutional capacity of Government 
to refine system to measure poverty and a 
multidimensional approach with the Human 
Opportunity Index 

 Pensions – Provided inputs for discussion on the 
importance of expanding coverage with an 
integral approach 

 Cajas de Compensación – Added new elements 
to discussion on cost-benefit of services financed 
with the Parafiscales 

Engagement in Health Sector Reform: 

 Improved quality of health care and guaranteed 
financial and institutional sustainability of a 
universal and unified health insurance system by 
developing proposals to reform the sector and 
pilot cases 

Empowering Young Women Affected by 
Violence: 

 Improved skills of mostly young single mothers, 
who have been displaced by violence in country, 
enabling them to integrate in formal economy 

Social Protection 
 Engagement in the health sector reform through NLTA  
 Innovative arts-based education to displaced and violence 
affected communities (TF) 
 Policy Notes on ECD and quality of education,  and social 
protection  
 Workshops on improving social protection for the 
unemployed, including through reforms in unemployment 
insurance. 
 Target SMEs and student lending (IFC) 
 Leverage guarantees with knowledge institutions (IFC) 
 Informality Programmatic ESW (FY08) 
 Poverty and Jobs TA (FY08) 
 Poverty and Jobs II TA (FY09) 
 Poverty Monitoring TA (FY10) 
 Access to Opportunities for Young People (TF) 
 Empowering Young Women Affected by Violence (TF) 
 Inequality of Human Opportunities Index 
 Policy Note on labor markets 
 Labor Market Policies for the Poor 
 Transition from school to work & labor markets 
 Analyze health financing system 
 Pension (multifunds) support 
 Labor markets:  reforming Cajas de Compensación 
Familiar (CCF) 
 Piloting financial literacy programs (IFC) 

Coordination/Convening Services: 
 Active participation in expert committee on poverty 
measurement  
 International conference on poverty measurement 
 Support to M&E Network 
 Colombia a leading member of the CCT community of 
learning facilitated by the Bank. 
 Participation in international conference organized by  
Colombia on urban CCTs. 

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND EQUITY 

Coordination/Convening Services: 
 Roadshow launching of the WDR  
 Development Marketplace 2010 in Bogota 
 Insurance for the Extreme Poor - Bancoldex (recipient-
executed activity)  
 South-South high-level conference 
 ALAS – Colombia University and World Bank 
partnership on ECD 
 Support dialogue on ECD at Ibero-American Summit 

(through the Japanese Social Development Fund). 

Rural Education APL II: 

 Ministry of Education has signed official 
agreements with 16 participating territorial 
entities and 9 of them have already made financial 
contributions to the project. All 16 entities have 
viable and approved rural education plans and 
execution of subprojects is well underway. In 
2011, approximately 12,000 teachers will be 
trained in the use of information and 
communication technologies. 

Education ACCES Project: 

 Benefited 175,427 new students with ACCES I 
students loans  
 Benefited 89,287 new students with ACCES II 
student loans; 75,052 of these students came 
from the 2 lowest socioeconomic strata (between 
June 2008 and December 2010) 

Antioquia Education Project:  

 Increased upper secondary completion rate in the 
poorest areas from 81.2% to 90% (Progress: 
89.64% - 6/30/10) 
  Increased educational attendance to 10% in 
gross enrollment (Progress: 46% in 2007 to 56% 
in 2009) 
 Granted 5,944 CCT to secondary school students, 
including 119 indigenous (Progress: 21.8%; 
27,222 planned for 2013) 

Second Student Loan Support Project: 

64 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

POVERTY ALLEVIATION AND EQUITY 

 Increased coverage and equity of tertiary 
education system since program began in 2008.  
Reached 69.2% of students graduating from 
secondary education and continuing to enroll in 
tertiary education  (from 65% in 2008) 

65 

 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 

Provide input to national policy and help 
Government strengthen the institutional capacity 
for managing environmental services and 
mainstreaming principles of environmental 
sustainability. Milestones include:   

 Approval and implementation of a national policy 
on environmental health, covering water quality, 
urban and indoor air quality, and results Strategic 
Environmental Assessments (SEAs).  

 MAVDT Climate Change Unit strengthened and 
able to meet the environment goals of the 2006-
2010 NDP 

 Implementation of system to monitor and evaluate 
national and regional environmental management 
based on 6 sustainable development objectives 
linked to MDGs 

 MAVDT Water Resources Unit adapted in line 
with new water resource management reform 

Assist Government to reach MDG 7 (Ensure 
environmental sustainability), focusing on 
following subgoals:  

 Promote integrated water management knowledge 
measured by increase in percent of municipalities 
that have implemented Watershed Administration 
and Management Plans 

 Strengthen environmental governance measured 
by increased transparency, accountability, and 
public participation in environmental license 

ACHIEVED 
 Led to the government initiative of reducing 
sulfur content in diesel from 1,200 ppm to 50 ppm 
in Bogota (Sustainable Development DPL series)  
 Fostered design and implementation of policy 
reforms through substantial lending in sustainable 
development (Sustainable Development III DPL) 
 Increased awareness on coastal wetland 
protection, conservation of national protected 
areas, and Ecosystem Management (GEF 
initiatives) 

Disaster Vulnerability series: 
 Enabled Ingeominas to increase disaster 
prevention monitoring through assisting in the 
procurement process for the necessary equipment  
 Mainstreamed disaster risk management 
throughout health, education, social sectors and in 
the country 
 Increased interest and investment in disaster risk 
management and reduction, and vulnerabilities 
 Resettled 1,052 out of 1,075 households living in 
high-risk areas in permanent housing as of June 
30, 2010.  
 Retrofitted/reconstructed many schools and 
kindergardens to seismic resistant standards. 
 Reduced population at risk in public buildings 
from 575,000 to 252,000 (achieving beyond the 
end of project target of 450,000) as of June 30, 
2010,  
 Slower progress of retrofitting and repositioning 
of health infrastructure 
 Financed reconstruction /rehabilitation of 36 
schools (14 out of 22 elementary schools 
completed (target of 40) 

Financial Services: 

 Sustainable Development II and III DPL 
(FY07/FY10/(HS/S) 
 Sustainable Development Investment (FY06/FY12/S/S) 
 Solid Waste Mgmt. (FY10/FY14/(S/S)) 
 Rio Bogota Environmental (FY11/FY16) 
 Biodiversity in Sustainable Cattle Ranching (GEF) 
(FY10/FY16/(S/S) 
 Integrated Silvopastoril Eco Mgmt. (GEF) 
 Andean Conservation and Use of Biodiversity 
(GEF)(FY01/FY08/ICR:S) 
 Conservation of Protected Areas 
(GEF)(FY06/FY12/(S/S) 
 Mangrove Restoration and Carbon Sink (CF) 
 Rio Frio Waste Mgmt. /Jepirachi (CF) 
 Corporate Citizenship Facility (IFC) 
 Thermal Efficiency Investments (IFC) 
 Enhancing Local Benefits Business Line (IFC) 
 APL1 Disaster Vulnerability (FY05/FY12/(S/S))  
 APL2 Disaster Vulnerability(FY06/FY11/(HS/MS))  
 CAT DDO (FY09/FY12/(S/S)  
 Use of full menu of IBRD CAT risk financing 
instruments weather 

Knowledge Services: 
Energy-Mining:  
 Alternative Energy ESW (FY09) 
 Renewable Energy Sector Policy II (TF) 
 Alternative Energy and Bio-energy (TF) 
 Low Carbon Growth  
 Rio Amoya CF, Jepirachi CF, San Nicolas Carbon Sink 
CF  
 Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative EITI TA 

66 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 

process; improved identification of environmental 
priorities as a result of increased use of SEAs 
mainstream environmental considerations into 
policy  

 Prevention/control of environmental degradation 
by improving quality of urban water bodies, 
decreasing the number of open waste dumps, and 
implementing air pollution control strategy; and 
under National Protected Areas GEF, improved 
management systems by project year 5 of at least 
2 million hectares of core conservation areas 
(national parks) and 20% of conservation mosaics  

 Dialogue on climate change and renewable energy 
leads to increased sources of renewable energy 
and leadership role for Colombia in promoting 
South/South exchanges on climate change 

IFC: 

 Developed investment opportunities in 
cooperation with financial institutions and 
companies interested in energy efficiency and 
renewable energy   
 Maximized WBG impact in environmental 
sustainability by complementing Bank‘s use of 
grant instruments and leveraging private sector 
investments 

National Protected Areas GEF: 

 Met target of 2.2 million hectares of core 
conservation areas (9 NPAs) with management 
plans in place and 1.4 million hectares with 
sustainable natural resource practices in place 
 Met target of 3 surrounding territories 
implementing activities that promote ecological 
connectivity through biological corridors and 
restoration practices 
 Exceeded target with 9 NPAs implementing 
specific conservation management subprojects 
(target: 7) 
 Met target of 30% of families adopting 
sustainable production systems (68% over 
baseline) 

Amoya Environmental Services TF:  

 Started environmental education and awareness 
on role and services of Paramo  
 Awarded education grants  
 Upgraded April, 2010: Schooling program and 
facilities of 23 rural schools (April 2010)  
 Awarded full scholarships to 30 local children to 
pursue studies at Universities throughout the 
country 

(FY09) 
 Policy Options for Renewable Energy TA (FY10) 

Water Resources: 
 Water Resource Model  
 Water Resources and Air Quality Management 
Institutional Assessment and Mineral Rights Cadastre  
 Flood Protection in Barranquilla (Supervision  
funds)  
 Preparation Funds for urban flood prevention (GFDRR) 
 Application of the Earth Simulator for River Stream 
Flows (Knowledge Transfer) 
Environment: 
 Administration of Dutch Resources for National 
Protected Areas (TF) 
 Conservation Incentives for Land Mgmt. (TF) 
 National Adaptation Plan (TF) 
 INAP GEF, Mainstreaming Cattle Ranching GEF, 
Protected Areas GEF, Netherlands Conservation 
Incentives Grant 
 GEF Protected Areas AF  
 Risk Modeling Bogota (GFDRR) 
 CAPRA (GFDRR) 

Coordination/ Convening Services: 
 Identification mission for Potential Flood Mitigation 
Project  
 Technical Discussions for disaster impact analysis and 
evaluation (CAPRA) 
 Presentation at SNPAD (National System for Prevention 
and Attention to Disasters) 20 years, MHCP Risk 
Financing Workshop, Bogota Sharing Experiences Event, 
ACODAL (Colombian Association for Sanitary and 
Environmental Engineering) Annual Meeting 
 Workshops CEA Update study 
 Course on hydrological modeling for decision makers 
(WPP financed) 

67 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 

 International Glacier network 
 ―Grandes Sismos‖ Workshop 
 Assessment of Changes in bio-climatic Conditions in 
Paramo Ecosystems (KT) 
 Closing Workshop Biosafety Mgmt. to comply with 
Cartagena Protocol 
 Workshop Multi-country project to strengthen biosafety 
systems 
 Technical Assistance for Sustainable Development 
reforms  
 Regional study on climate change – forum with high level 
participation from GOC and experts 

68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) Rating 
PEACE AND DEVELOPMENT 

Contribute to effectiveness of 
Government’s peace initiatives by 
increasing awareness of global 
experience and piloting innovative models 
of participatory community development in 
conflict-affected zones by: 

 Providing technical advice on models of 
intervention for demobilized and 
displaced 

 Contributing to design of national 
reparation program 

ACHIEVED 
 Protected patrimonial assets of population at risk 
of displacement or already displaced 

 Derived framework from lessons learned to 
formulate a policy for land restitution under new 
Government  

 Increased awareness of peace process and called 
upon civil society by the launching of ―Voices‖  

 Enhanced synergies among the National 
Commission for Reparation and Reconciliation 
and the High Counselor for Reintegration, and 
gave advice and financing 

 Extending models of participatory 
community development in conflict-
affected zones (level of implementation 
of Annual Operation Plan in each of the 
5 project regions)  

Peace and Development Series: 

 At least 80% of targets are met in food security, 
basic sanitation, and productive subprojects for 
returned or relocated families 

Financial Services: 

 Peace and Development (AF) (FY04/FY13/(S/MS) 

Knowledge Services: 

 Peace Programmatic III (FY09) 
 Youth reintegration project (Colegio del Cuerpo)   
 Peaceful Dispute Resolution Services for the Poor  
 Capacity Building in the Pacific Coast (Afro -Colombians)  
 Gender and IDPs  
 Strengthening Human Rights to Basic Social Services in Peace and 
Development Zones  
 Support for South-South Dissemination on DDR  
 Protection of Land and Patrimony of IDP (TF) 
 Publication of ―Voices‖ (June 2009) 

 Going forward on IDP and with special 
focus on  vulnerable groups in urban 
areas 

 Benefited 6,478 families (81%) with food security 

 Benefited 7,900 families (46%) with income/job 
opportunities 

  Benefited 4,572 families (76%) with housing 
improvements 

 Benefited 75,000 families (poor, vulnerable and 
displaced) from productive subprojects  

 Disseminated total subsidiary agreements and 
other contracts totaling US$29.4 million by 
October 2007 (98% of loan).  

 Implemented 100% of Annual Operation Plans in 

69 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) Rating 
PEACE AND DEVELOPMENT 

each of the 5 regions (April, 2010)  

  Received satisfactory financial and procurement 
audits from partner organizations  

 Recorded a 38% reduction of overall displaced 
population between 2004-2009  

Human Rights Project: 

 Assisted in identification of effective links, with 
regard to human rights, between nature and work 
of the Regional Peace and Development 
Programs, Government, other partners, and the 
Bank 

 Promoted introduction of human rights good 
practice in peace and development interventions  

Afropaz: 

 Strengthened Afro-Colombian organizations by 
assisting in construction of social networks, 
empowering communities to promote local 
development, and improving Access to 
Opportunities for Youth 

70 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

A STATE AT THE SERVICE OF CITIZENS 

Improved public sector management and 
citizen services in support of Central 
Government efforts: 

 

Implement a M&E system within DNP to 
improve existing SIGOB information system 
for citizen control, including pilots in 2-3 
subnational entities to enhance data 
collection and processing 

 Strengthen capacity of central and 
subnational entities to manage resources and 
deliver social services in an efficient and 
transparent manner, promoting good practice 
models in procurement, anticorruption, and 
transparency 

 

Improve government-citizen service linkage 
through better communication, identification 
of citizen needs, and one-stop service centers 
to ease registration and access to government 
services 

 Strengthen services to tax payers to 
contribute to DIAN efforts to improve 
revenue collection procedures and expand 
the tax base 

 

Improve implementation of country systems 

ACHIEVED 
TAL - Strengthening Public Information, 
Monitoring, Evaluation for Results 
Management 

 SIGOB system was replaced by more modern 
SISMEG. Also, an Evaluation System was 
introduced, as well as a National Network of 
M&E institutions. Technical guidelines on 
M&E practices at the territorial level 
developed and budgets of Medellin and Pasto 
used them to present Performance Based 
Budgets to their Municipal Councils. 

 Developed Rapid Assessment and Action Plan 
(RAAP) - completed and tested for 2 
municipalities and improved public 
management capacity by providing Barranquilla 
and Cartagena with a solid roadmap  

 Improved and expanded municipal capacity by 
Central Government 

TAL to support the 2nd PSAL: 

 Increased number (3 to 13) of social/labor 
programs under DNP, MSP, and MEN being 
systematically and rigorously monitored, 
evaluated, and discussed with the public  
(06/30/09) 

Financial Services: 

 Strengthening Public Mgmt. M & E (FY09/FY14/(S/S)) 
 Consolidation of Public Mgmt. Systems 
(FY10/FY13/(S/S) 
 Justice Services Strengthening (FY10/FY14/(S/S)) 
 Education quality project (ICFES - IFC) 
 TAL to Support the Second Programmatic Labor Reform 
and Social Structural Adjustment Loan 
(FY05/FY09/(S/S)) 

Knowledge Services: 

 National Level Public Financial management and 
Procurement Report (FY09) 
 Decentralization Programmatic TA (FY10) 
 Institutional and Community Strengthening for Local 
Governance (TF) 
 Installing Basic Mgmt. Capacity in Chocó (TF) 
 Strengthening of the Procurement System (TF) 
 Preparation of National Standard Bidding Documents 
 Strengthening Social Accountability to Improve the 
Impact of Royalties (IFC-TF) 
 Peaceful Dispute Resolution Services for the Poor (TF) 
 Legal claims mgmt system (IDF, TF) 
 Assessment for e-GP and Road Map Strategy 
 Advisory work on accounting and financial reporting 
standards 
 TA on  the review of the current subnational control 
systems 
 Revenue management advisory services in gold mining 
(IFC) 

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPS Outcomes 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

IBRD/IFC Interventions 
Approval/Completion-date/ICR/ISR(DO/IP) 
Rating 

A STATE AT THE SERVICE OF CITIZENS 

Public Financial Management: 

Coordination/Convening Services: 

 Conference on results informed budgeting (FY08) 
 Fifth Annual Conference of the LCR Monitoring and 
Evaluation Network (Nov/09) 
 Seminar to discuss strategies to improve assessment 
methodology of subnationals 
  South-south transfer health sector regulation. 

 Supported achievement of 95% of national 
budget managed through SIIF (90% achieved, 
12/31/2009) 
 Contributed to having 1.5 million taxpayers 
updated and reviewed (4.6 million updated, 
12/09) 
 Expanded DIAN Integrated Tax and Customs 
Administration Model – (Restructuring decree 
on the model issued, 12/09) 
 Reached proportion above 75% of tax revenue 
paid voluntarily and on time for both VAT and 
for income tax (above 96% for both indicators) 
 Improved efficiency of public financial 
management, expanded access to information, 
and established greater transparency 

Co  Consolidation of National Public Management 
Information Systems:  

 Supported creation of  the Management and 
Planning System for the Government (SIGOB), 
a fairly advanced system of monitoring and 
evaluation of government programs 

72 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPSCR Annex 2: Indicative versus Actual Lending Program for the FY08-11 Colombia CPS (US$M) 

CPS 

CPSPR 

CPSCR 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

(Pipeline) 

FY11 

(Unconst.) 

FY10 

FY11 

  INVESTMENT OPERATIONS 

Antioquia Education 

Productive Partnerships 

Access to Higher Education 

Promoting Rural Education 

Departmental Water and Sanitation 

Building National M & E Systems 

Social Safety Net/Familias en Acción 

Improving Municipal Services 

Bogota Urban Services (AF) 

Macro-Urban Projects/Low Income Land and Housing 

Solid Waste Management  

Justice Services Strengthening 

Peace and Development (AF) 

Integrated Mass Transport Systems (AFII) 

Science, Technology and Innovation 

Rio Bogota Environmental 

Consolidation of National Public Information Systems 

Education System Modernization 

MAFP IV 

National Urban Transport Project 

Ruta del Sol/Road Infrastructure 

20 

30 

 300 

 40 

75 

 9 

20 

30 

 300 

 40 

 Dropped 

8.5 

636.5 

 Dropped 

 30 

40 

25 

250 

20 

20 

7.8 

300 

Slipped 

Slipped 

25 

300 

25 

250 

25 

Investment Operations Total 

474 

390 

675 

600 

20 

100 

250 

500 

870 

21 
Slipped to FY 12 

Dropped 
350 
Slipped to FY12 

Dropped 

373 

315 

73 

 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
       
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

(Pipeline) 

FY11 

(Unconst.) 

FY10 

FY11 

DEVELOPMENT POLICY LENDING/DDO 

Business Efficiency III DDO 

Sustainable Development III DPL 

Disaster Risk Management DDO 

Financial Sector  DPL 

Social DPL 

  Up to 650 

550 
(DPL) 

450  

150 

Development Policy Total 

650 

550 

600 

300  

500 

800 

300 

500 

800 

TOTAL Annual Lending 

1,124 

1,000 

1,000 

940 

1,275 

1,400 

870 

1,173 

315 

74 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 

75 

CPSCR Annex 3: Indicative and Actual Knowledge (AAA) Program for the FY08-11 
Colombia CPS  

Planned at 
Beginning 
CPS 

Actually Delivered at CPS 
Completion (CPSCR) 

Knowledge Services 

FY
08 

FY09 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 FY11 

Education Quality 









Informality Programmatic 







Poverty and Jobs for the Poor 







SME Finance 





Money Market Development 





 





High Level Seminar on Climate Change 





 





Alternative Energy 









National Level Public Finance 





Extractive Industries Transportation  Initiative 





Financial Sector Access 





Poverty and Jobs for the Poor II 





Peace Programmatic III 





Supervision of Financial Conglomerates 



 





CS Crisis Simulation Exercise 



 





Extractive Industries Transportation Initiative 



 





Education Quality II 







Sub-National Capacity Building 



Dropped 





Private Pensions Cost and Regulation 



Dropped





Support to Transfer Reform 



Dropped





Health System Modernization 









Policy Option for Renewable Energy 







Decentralization Programmatic 







Financial Conglomerates Supervision 

 



Strengthening Social Protection 



Poverty Monitor 



Strengthening the Crisis Preparedness Framework 



Poverty Measurement HOI & Labor Markets 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Corporate Governance ROSC Assessment 

Country Assessment GCMCG 

Policy Notes 







76 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
77 

Annex C: The Impact of Higher Food and Commodity Prices in Colombia 

As a net exporter of food, Colombia can reap benefits from higher agricultural prices.  In 2010, 
the country exported around US$5.7 billion (14 percent of total goods exports) of agricultural 
products and processed food and showed a food trade surplus of US$1.9 billion (0.7 percent of GDP). 
The main export product is coffee (US$2.2 billion), followed by vegetables and fruits (US$860 
million) and sugar (US$674 million). In spite of the commodity boom, Colombian agricultural 
exports have lost global market share, declining from an average 0.68 in the period 1995-1999 to 0.55 
in 2000-2009. Nonetheless, Colombia has a great potential to expand agricultural production and 
exports and the Government is taking measures to increase productivity. 

In contrast with global trends, food price inflation in Colombia is declining. Food price inflation 
fell from 4.8 percent to 2.8 percent between January and April 2011. As of April 2011, food inflation 
contributed by 0.8 percentage points to the overall rate of 2.8 percent (the weight of food items in the 
Consumer Price Inflation index is 28.2 percent). This trend is consistent with IMF (2011) estimates of 
the pass-through from world to domestic food prices. Colombia has the lowest estimated pass -
through among major Latin American economies (about 0.1), which is not even statistically 
significant. Local food prices could, however, increase in the future since the impact of the last global 
food price shock in 2008 appeared with a time lag (see Figure C1a). Given that poor people devote a 
higher share of their household budgets to food, they experience a higher rate of inflation than the rest 
of the population when food prices rise. In April 2011, the inflation rate of low-income groups was 33 
percent higher than high-income groups and 2 percent higher than the middle-income group. 

Figure C1a. Food price inflation (yoy, %) 

Figure C1b. Oil and transport inflation 
(yoy, %) 

Source: World Bank (GEM) and DANE. 

Colombia is a net exporter of oil, coal, gas, and metals, and experiences benefits as well as 
challenges of higher prices. In 2010, export of these commodities reached US$25.6 billion and 
contributed by 63 percent to total goods exports and by 73 percent of foreign direct investment 
(US$4.9 billion). Commodities also contribute by about 12 percent to total fiscal revenues. Higher 
commodity prices increase export and fiscal revenues thereby improving both the external current 
account and fiscal balances.  On the other hand, higher foreign exchange inflows add to appreciation 
pressures, which potentially undermine the competitiveness of non-commodity exports. Colombia 
can also not escape the negative impact of higher oil prices on the global economic recovery, and is 
particularly sensitive to developments in the US – its largest trading partner.  Recent measures taken 
by the government to manage commodity revenues, such as the introduction of stabilization funds at 
the national and subnational levels, are supported by this operation. 

Global food 
inflation 
(left axis)

Colombia 
food price 
inflation 
(right axis)

-4

1

6

11

16

-40

-20

0

20

40

60

80

M

a

-
r

6
0

p
e
S

-

6
0

M

a

-
r

7
0

p
e
S

-

7
0

M

a

-
r

8
0

p
e
S

-

8
0

M

a

-
r

9
0

p
e
S

-

9
0

M

a

-
r

0
1

p
e
S

-

0
1

M

a

-
r

1
1

WTI price
inflation
(left axis)

Colombia 
transport 
inflation
(right axis)

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6

100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60

M

a

-
r

6
0

p
e
S

-

6
0

M

a

-
r

7
0

p
e
S

-

7
0

M

a

-
r

8
0

p
e
S

-

8
0

M

a

-
r

9
0

p
e
S

-

9
0

M

a

-
r

0
1

p
e
S

-

0
1

M

a

-
r

1
1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The inflationary impact of higher global oil prices is modest owing to government intervention, 
but local fuel prices are likely to increase in the future to ensure fiscal balance.  In 2008, the 
Government abolished direct fuel price subsidies and introduced a Fuel Price Stabilization Fund, 
which works on the following basis.  During periods of low global prices, local pump prices are kept 
relatively higher and this gives rise to savings.  In spells of high oil prices, local prices are raised, but 
not fully, with the difference paid for by drawing down the savings of the Fund.  Given this 
mechanism, local transport prices have only followed the rise in global crude oil prices to some extent 
in recent months (see Figure C1b).  Econometric estimates of the pass-through suggest that it is the 
lowest in the region (after Mexico) at about 0.175 and statistically significant, according to the IMF 
(2011).  While the mechanism may work well in theory, the timing of its implementation gave rise to 
only a limited period of relatively low world prices and savings accumulation followed by a period of 
high prices.  As a result, the Fund recently exhausted its savings in end-2010 and registered a deficit 
of COP950 billion or US$530 million in end-April 2011.  To avoid fiscal imbalances, further local 
price increases would thus be necessary. 

78 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex D:  Recent Trends on Poverty and Inequality in Colombia 

Colombia is not a poor country, but it is a country with a lot of poor people.  The poverty rate 
and gap observed for Colombia is far greater than one would expect based on the level of 
Gross National Income per capita observed in the country (Figures D1 and D2). 

Figure D1. Poverty and per capita GNI relationship 

Figure D2. Poverty Gap and per capita GNI relationship 

Part of this is due to the high and persistent income inequality in Colombia. Between 1995 
and 2009, a period when most LAC countries observed an unprecedented reduction on 
inequality, Colombia experienced a relatively stable Gini Index (Figure D3a). Poverty 
reduction during the 2000-2009 could have been stronger if Colombia had experienced more 

79 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equitable economic growth (leading to lower inequality). Figure D3b simulates what would 
have happened to poverty in 2009 if Colombia‘s distribution of income was similar to that in 
other LAC countries.  For instance, had Colombia‘s Gini been similar to that of Mexico, 
moderate poverty would have been 38 percent; while if it had been at the level of Uruguay 
(the lowest in the LAC region), poverty would have been 26 percent. 

 Figure D3a. Evoluation of Gini for Colombia and LAC 

0.58 

0.57

0.57 

0.55

0.57

0.56

0.55 

0.53 

i

n

i

G

0.58

0.57

0.56

0.55

0.54

0.53

0.52

0.51

0.5

1995

2000

2005

2009

Colombia

LAC

Note: 70% of the LAC population; LCSPP s calculation based on SEDLAC data.

Figure D3b. Poverty in Colombia if the country had the Gini of selected LAC countries (Colombia 
average income from 2009 constant) 

Colombia

Brasil (2009)

Mexico (2008)
Ecuador (2009)
DR (2007)

Peru (2009)

Uruguay (2009)

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

)

%

(

a

z

e

r

b
o
P

0.600

0.550

0.500

0.450

0.400

0.350

Gini

Source: LCSPP calculation based on SEDLAC data.

Poverty (extreme and moderate) reduction in Colombia between 2000 and 2009 was entirely 
driven by growth, as inequality remained largely constant. During this period, Colombia 
experienced an average growth rate above the regional average. The Datt-Ravallion 
decomposition (Table D1) suggests that, on average, 46 percent of the poverty reduction 
between 2000 and 2009 among LAC countries can be attributed to growth and 54 percent to 
redistribution. In the case of Colombia, the share due to growth was 97 percent, while falling 
inequality contributed only 3 percent. The growth incidence curves for Colombia for 2006-
2009 suggest that the middle class benefited the most from the income growth experienced 
(Figure D4).  

80 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Countries 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
Mexico 
Panama 
Peru 
LAC 

Table D1 Datt-Ravallion Decomposition for Selected LAC countries 

2000-2005 
0.25 
0.43 
0.98 
0.43 
0.61 
1.40 
0.32 

Growth 
2005-2009 
0.51 
0.57 
0.97 
0.54 
0.80 
0.99 
0.60 

Average 
0.38 
0.50 
0.97 
0.49 
0.71 
1.20 
0.46 

2000-2005 
0.75 
0.57 
0.02 
0.57 
0.39 
-0.40 
0.68 

Resdistribution 
2005-2009 
0.49 
0.43 
0.03 
0.46 
0.20 
0.01 
0.40 

Average 
0.62 
0.50 
0.03 
0.51 
0.29 
-0.20 
0.54 

Source: LCSPP calculation based on SEDLAC data.  

The relatively high poverty levels in Colombia are partially explained by the relatively high 
levels of food prices. Table D2 shows the results of the International Comparison Program 
(ICP) 2005 prices indexes for food items for LAC countries. This analysis shows that food 
categories in Colombia were higher than regional average in 23 out of 29 catego ries (by an 
average of 16 percent). The high cost of logistics (ranking of 82 in the WDI Logistic Cost 
Index)4 the worst of the LAC region is expected to be a major factor behind the high food 
prices.5  Evidence suggests that logistic costs represent between 20 to 50 percent of food 
prices.6  

Country 

Venezuela  

Chile  
Colombia  
Brazil  
Peru  
Uruguay  
LAC  
Ecuador  
Argentina  
Bolivia  
Paraguya  

Table D2 Food price levels of LAC countries (ICP 2005) 

Food Price Level 
Index (World = 100) 

98 

90 
84 
77 
77 
77 
77 
74 
65 
50 
47 

Source: World Bank, 2005 International Comparison Program: Tables of Final Results. (Washington, DC, 2008) 

4 World Bank. 2010. World Development Indicators. http://data.worldbank.org/ . 
5 Schwartz, J. Mejorando la competitividad de Colombia .  Portafolio, 15 de Deciembre de 2009 
6 World Bank. Logistics, Transport and Food Prices in LAC: Policy Guidance for Improving Efficiency and 
Reducing Costs. Preparatory workshop for the Second Meeting of the Finance Ministers of the Americas and 
the Caribbean (2009). 

81 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
Figure D4. Growth incidence curves from 2005 to 2009 

82 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex E: Fiscal Risk Management in the Colombian Public Sector 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Fiscal risks can be broadly defined as deviations of fiscal outcomes from what was expected as the 
time of the budget or other forecast7 and can arise from both revenues and expenditures, principally 
as a consequence of exogenous shocks such as volatility of currency and interest rates, closure of 
international financial markets, natural disasters, volatility of commodity prices, etc., combined with 
the Government‘s exposure to these shocks. The time horizon should be defined for quantification 
and management of fiscal risk; in Colombia‘s case, it could include reference8 to the Government‘s 
Medium-Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF) in the next five to ten years, as well as next year‘s budget 
and possibly other fiscal forecasts. 

The Colombian authorities are well along the curve of identifying, quantifying, and managing various 
types of fiscal risks. The authorities acknowledge the obligation to address many of the potential risks 
— direct and indirect, explicit and implicit — by including them in the MTFF and in setting fiscal 
targets. However, it would be prudent for the authorities to decide on an explicit strategy for dealing 
with remaining sources of medium-term budgetary risk arising from factors such as natural disasters. 

II. 

SOURCES OF FISCAL RISK 

Initially the analysis has been limited to the central government balance sheet ,9 although the MTFF 
also applies to the consolidated public sector. The analysis includes the accounting balance sheet, an 
expanded ―fiscal‖ balance sheet, and contingent assets and liabilities, both explicit and implicit. 

Figure E1 

Figure E2 

The government asset and liabilities with potential fiscal risk can correspond both to an accounting 
and a fiscal simplified balance sheet (Figure E1). The Colombian Government has an accounting 
balance sheet so the main items could be analyzed in terms of fiscal risk, namely, identifying and 
ideally quantifying how much the value of the asset or liability change, given a movement in the 

7 Cebotari and others, Fiscal Risks: Sources, Disclosure and Management, (IMF, FAD, 2009). 
8  Country Insurance: Reducing Systemic Vulnerabilities in LAC (World Bank, Nov.2007), which concludes that countries 
should cover themselves against insurable external shocks, providing insurance is offered at reasonable costs, and having 
considered main fiscal risks arising from exogenous shocks. 
9 Ideally it would be extended to the public sector as a whole, due to the decentralized nature of the Colombian Government. 

83 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
source of risk (e.g., interest rates, currencies). The bottom items refer to a ―fiscal balance sheet‖, 
which is necessary to understand the risks to the Government‘s budget. The most important source of 
risk is usually the rate of economic growth, but it is possible to identify other vulnerabilities of the 
revenue and expenditure streams to factors that can decrease revenues and/or increase expenditures, 
in comparison to the original budget and other forecasts. 

It is also necessary to analyze sources of fiscal risk that are contingent on events/variables, namely, 
contingent liabilities and assets (Figure E2). In turn these can be classified as explicit or implicit: the 
former refers to Government‘s legal obligations to make a payment (liability) or receive revenues 
(asset) only if a particular event occurs. The latter refers to liabilities that arise but on which the 
Government is not legally obliged to act, and which are typically excluded from the Government 
balance sheet.  

A. Criteria for identifying sources of fiscal risk 

The criteria for identifying sources of fiscal risk are as follows: 

(a) 

(i) 

Government assets and liabilities that -- 
have a potential exposure to shocks (e.g., currency, interest rate, volatility in the price 
of commodities, credit defaults), which could impact the MTFF or other medium-term 
fiscal forecasts; and  
lack a reasonable or successful10 risk management strategy and/or have difficulties with 
its implementation, such that shocks may have a significant impact on fiscal forecasts 
such as the MTFF. 

(ii) 

For example, these could include a government loan portfolio whose value could be 
diminished by credit risk factors (e.g., default by the borrowers), or investments in state -
owned enterprises that go bankrupt.  

(b) Contingent liabilities with potential exposure to shocks (e.g., natural disaster that can have an 
effect on higher expenditure related to government insurance for agricultural produce, 
disaster mitigation expenditure for affected population, etc) with estimated expenditures not 
included in the medium-term fiscal forecasts, including MTFF. 

The contingent liabilities already included in the fiscal forecasts would not be considered 
fiscal risks as they are already taken into account (e.g., government guarantees for 
infrastructure) unless, as in the case of legal demands against the Government, there are flaws 
in the system for managing its risk (i.e., lack of an adequate information system on legal 
demands). 

The accounting balance sheet allows an identification of the government direct assets and 
liabilities, as well as explicit contingent liabilities; an economic balance sheet includes the 
Government‘s tax revenues and expenditures, as well as implicit contingent liabilities of 
various types.11  

10 The success of the strategy has to be analyzed in terms of whether it is indeed limiting/preventing a fiscal impact arising 
from the risks being dealt with and whether it is ―reasonable‖ from a technical point of view — for example, a debt 
management strategy that is highly speculative (i.e., based on market views) and that does take into account reducing 
medium-term cost within prudent risk limits would not be considered ―reasonable‖. 
11 In addition, the Colombian authorities have already estimated expected cost and maximum cost with 95% probability of a 
number of contingent liabilities.  

84 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
B. Current sources of fiscal risk for government finances 

 

Legal claims against the state  (risk quantification identifies as 18 to 82 percent of GDP 
in 2010, according to MTFF); 
 Oil price shocks (revenues are 13 percent of  fiscal revenues annually and rising; requires 
updated risk quantification); 
 Natural disasters (total value exposed is equivalent to US$173 billion, including publicly 
owned assets and the private assets of low-income groups). The fiscal risk is calculated 
by adjusting the value exposed with the probability of a disaster event. Estimated fiscal 
risk equivalent to US$316 million a year; PV is 18 percent of GDP in 2011-50 period.12  
 Agricultural subsidies (currently being estimated). 
 

There are other implicit contingent liabilities such as financial sector risk, which can be 
analyzed and quantified. 

III. WORLD BANK ADVISORY SERVICES/PRODUCTS FOR FISCAL RISK 
MANAGEMENT 

The World Bank is assisting the Colombian Government13 in its design of medium-term fiscal risk 
management strategies for the specific sources of fiscal risk mentioned above and for a 
comprehensive strategy for the central government, taking into account total fiscal exposure . Working 
closely with the Colombian authorities, it will do so by providing the following services and financial 
products: 

(f) 

(a) Definition of fiscal risk management objectives; 
(b) Identification, together with the Colombian authorities, of potential fiscal risks and mapping 
of those same risks, taking into account the accounting and fiscal balance sheet, as well as 
Colombia‘s explicit and implicit contingent liabilities; 
(c) Identification of methodologies/models for quantifying risk; 
(d) Quantification of fiscal risk; 
(e) Analysis of the Government‘s capacity to absorb some or all of the risk, that is whether it has 
a high degree of fiscal flexibility (e.g., provided by fiscal surpluses, fiscal buffers and 
stabilization funds, a low-debt level, a low-risk debt structure, diversified funding sources, 
lack of budgetary rigidities, etc.);   
Assistance to the Government in its design of risk management strategies, including: 
(i) Definition of objectives and time horizon for dealing with potential shocks, followed 
by evaluation of different risk-management alternatives, taking into account the 
following aspects: 
 
risk avoidance/reduction using policy dimensions; 
 
risk retention/self-insurance, related to the Government‘s macroeconomic 
capacity to absorb fiscal risk (e.g., natural hedges, fiscal buffers, contingent 
credits, 
instruments 
to 
leverage 
funding 
from 
international 
financial 
institutions, leveraging concessional financing for climate change, etc.); 
risk transfer, whereby fiscal risk is transferred to third parties market — using 
interest rate swaps, currency swaps into desired currencies, including local 

 

12 Study by ENS, quoted in Fiscal Risk DPL Concept Note. 
13 Fiscal risk can be analyzed and managed at the level of the public sector, the central government, sub -national 
government and/or different state-owned entities.  

85 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 

currency, natural disaster insurance, weather hedges as , for example, rainfall 
indexes, financing of low-carbon investments in the market, swaps, options 
and/or forwards for oil price risk, loans tied to oil price indexes, etc. 
cost-risk trade-off of alternative strategies and instruments; 
coordination of proposed alternatives with macroeconomic policy; 
constraints of the financial markets, which may limit the strategy choices; 
institutional capacity for risk management strategy design and implementation, 
including coordination among different government units (e.g., governance, 
strategy approval, delegation, accountability, reporting, technical capacity, 
etc.). 
(ii) Advisory services in the use of financial products for strategy implementation (e.g., 
CAT-Bonds, oil-linked debt) and analyze the different sources which provide these 
products; 
(iii) Training and institutional capacity building in all these areas, so as to make risk 
analysis and management sustainable in the future, be it at a central, state, and sub-
national government level.  

The different Bank departments will work together to provide an integrated, comprehensive fiscal 
risk-management service to Colombia. A simplified risk management exercise is described in Figure 
E3.  

Figure E3. 

. 

86 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex F: Colombia and South-South Knowledge Exchange (SSKE) 

World Bank Institute Brokering Pilot 

South-South Cooperation (SSC) is an important national priority for Colombia. 
Colombia‘s National Development Plan identifies International Relevance through South-
South Cooperation as a key cross-cutting theme, and the Government has striven to 
strengthen the planning, funding, and implementation of South-South Knowledge Exchange 
(SSKE), while promoting Colombia as a potential partner for SSKE regionally and globally. 
The Government has formulated approaches for South-South learning for the Caribbean and 
Mesoamerica, and established funding sources for SSKE, such as its Cooperation and 
International Assistance Fund. They are also planning a cooperation strategy with Africa and 
the Asia-Pacific region. Colombia‘s Accion Social has begun the important task of 
documenting the country‘s rich history of exchanges, which has included sharing knowledge 
in social promotion, disaster management, and other diverse sectors. Accion Social has 
developed a ―Good Practice‖ guide to catalyze the development of SSKEs and showcase 
Colombia as a potential knowledge supplier. Colombia is also active with international 
organizations and partners to improve the design and monitoring of SSKEs, with a view to 
strengthening the effectiveness of knowledge exchange within the global aid framework.  

Colombia’s strong commitment to SSKE, which parallels a growing international focus 
on South-South Cooperation, underlies 
its participation 
in a Pilot Brokering 
Mechanism supporting SSKE coordinated by the World Bank Institute (WBI), which 
aims to help countries document their knowledge sharing needs and facilitate ma tches 
for exchanges. In late 2010 WBI launched the Brokering Mechanism in response to 
increasing requests from client countries for assistance in systematically documenting 
knowledge offers and requests, identifying partners, and implementing follow-up learning 
activities. The Pilot is now working with 13 countries, and is expected to focus in 2011 on 
identifying a small initial set of supply and demand areas, assisting Country Teams in 
engaging governments to document these areas, and brokering matches, mainly through a 
community of practice and integration of requests and offers into an online portal. WBI can 
also provide assistance on implementing follow-up exchanges, particularly through its 
planned launch of an online SSKE Knowledge Hub, which will feature a design toolkit for 
exchanges and links to funding sources. Given Colombia‘s strong commitment and evidence 
of government interest in working with the World Bank on SSKE, the Country Team has 
chosen to participate in this Pilot. Over the course of 2011, the Country Team will work with 
Colombian authorities to identify initial supply and demand areas, document these areas 
using WBI templates, and provide assistance to identify matches within the evolving 
community of practice, which will engage network and country staff throughout the Bank.  

Initial dialogue with the Country Team and the Government on the Pilot has identified 
several possible areas for engagement. On the supply side, Colombia may be interested in 
sharing its expertise in public sector governance, health sector reform, urban mass transport 
(Transmilenio), and Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) programs. The World Bank is 
currently engaged in these areas, notably urban transport and social promotion. Colombia 
may be interested in being a knowledge recipient in early childhood development, royalty 
management and management of economic transitions, such as accession to the Organization 

87 

 
 
 
 
 
 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Colombia has already received 
funding for four active exchanges in these and other areas funded by the Knowledge and 
Learning Council through a WBI-sponsored South-South Knowledge Exchange Competition. 
These exchanges are detailed below: 
 Achieving Universal Health Care:  Colombia together with Chile and Turkey are 
sharing knowledge with the Philippines on options and strategies for expanding health 
insurance coverage and ensuring high quality healthcare. 

 Developing the Capacity of the Ecuadorian Ministry of Finance: Ecuador‘s Ministry 
is receiving assistance from counterparts in Colombia, Chile, and Peru to develop 
capacity in results based budgeting and management of fiscal contingencies. 

 Measuring Learning Outcomes in Tertiary Education: Colombia is helping the 
Moroccan government to build capacity to assess the quality of education in Moroccan 
universities and devise strategies for allocating resources.  

 Enhancing Knowledge on Employment Policies: Colombia along with twelve other 
nations mainly in Latin America and Asia are sharing knowledge on ways to design and 
implement employment programs in post-crisis settings. 

Colombia is a co-chair the Task Team on South-South Cooperation, an international coalition 
of countries, multilaterals, donors, academic institutions, and other stakeholders that aims to 
develop good practices and policy guidance for South-South learning activities. Launched in 
2009, the SSC Task Team has engaged in a global dialogue on South-South Cooperation in 
the context of the broader aid effectiveness agenda, including through analytical work, case 
study development, and a community of practice. Colombia‘s Director for International 
Cooperation in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs co-chairs the SSC Task Team, while technical 
leadership of the SSC Task Team resides in the Presidential Program for Social Action and 
Accion Social. Both the SSC Task Team and Colombia are expected to play important roles 
in the Fourth High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Busan, Korea in late November 
2011. 

88 

 
 
 
 
Annex G: Colombia Client Survey 2011 

Between February and March, 2011, 402 stakeholders of the World Bank Group in Colombia 
were invited to provide their opinions on the Bank‘s assistance to Colombia by participating 
in a country survey.  Participants in the survey were drawn from among the offices of the 
President, Vice President, Ministers, or Parliamentarians; employees of a ministry, 
ministerial departments, or implementation agencies; local government officials or staff; 
bilateral or multilateral agencies; private sector organizations; NGOs (including CBOs); the 
media; independent government institutions; trade unions; faith-based groups; academia or 
research institutes; and the judiciary.  A total of 147 stakeholders participated in the country 
survey (37%). Respondents were asked about the role and performance of the Bank as well 
as about general issues facing the country. 

Familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 7.1 on a 10-point scale (1 being not 
familiar and 10 being familiar). This was statistically similar to the FY ‘07 survey, in which 
familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 6.7 across all respondents. The Country 
Survey suggests that overall optimism about Colombia‘s future has increased since FY 07 
from 6.4 to 7.3.   

Colombia’s development priorities. While the same constellation of development priorities 
seems to be of most concern to stakeholders over the years, the research suggests that 
education is now of greater concern to respondents, whereas in FY 07, poverty reduction was 
considered by a strong plurality of respondents as the top development priority in Colombia.  
Aligned with this finding, fifty percent of respondents said that education was the key factor 
to reducing poverty (followed closely by employment opportunities).  Throughout the 
survey, peace and development was identified as an important factor in a number of 
challenges by a relatively noticeable percentage of respondents. 

The Bank Group’s top priorities. Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both 
geographic locations indicated that they thought the Bank‘s top priorities in Colombia were 
poverty reduction, economic growth, and infrastructure development. Respondents indicated 
that it would be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources on access and 
quality of education, infrastructure development, increasing employment, and reducing 
poverty.  

The World Bank’s value. They FY 11 Country Survey in Colombia suggests that while a 
significant majority would like to see the Bank more involved in the country, and overal l 
effectiveness ratings have gone up significantly since FY 07 (6.3 – 7.0)  greater emphasis on 
its knowledge might be worth greater consideration.  For example, ratings of the Bank‘s 
technical competence, producing and sharing knowledge and research that are useful, sharing 
knowledge about international best practices, and adapting knowledge to the country‘s needs 
have all gone down significantly since FY 07.  In addition, when asked how the Bank could 
be of greater value in Colombia, nearly all the top choices are related to knowledge sharing, 
knowledge coordination and knowledge services (in FY 07 there was more emphasis on 
financing) .  This is a critical aspect of the Bank‘s work in middle income countries. 

89 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strengths and weaknesses. While effectiveness ratings in terms of poverty reduction are 
still relatively low in Colombia, the Bank‘s ratings increased significantly in this area.  Its 
ratings also increased in work related to strengthening the environment and natural resource 
management (an emerging priority in the country), as well as broader issues such as ‗lending 
in a way that promotes effective development‘ and supporting ‗programs and strategies that 
are realistic for Colombia.‘ 

In terms of overall relationships, the Bank is considered highly respectful, and respondents 
note that they like to work with the Bank. This is similar to findings in all other Country 
Surveys in the region. 

90 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex H: Colombia at a Glance 

91 

Colombia at a glance5/13/11 LatinUpperKey Development Indicators AmericamiddleColombia& Carib.income(2009)Population, mid-year (millions)46.35721,002Surface area (thousand sq. km)1,14220,42248,659Population growth (%)1.41.10.9Urban population (% of total population)757975GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)229.44,0037,508GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)5,0506,9937,495GNI per capita (PPP, international $)8,60010,31512,466GDP growth (%)4.3-1.8-2.5GDP per capita growth (%)2.9-2.9-3.3(most recent estimate, 2003–2009)Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)168..Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)2817..Life expectancy at birth (years)737371Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)161919Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)54..Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)939295Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)939092Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)120118111Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)120114110Access to an improved water source (% of population)929395Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)747984Net Aid Flows1980199020002009a(US$ millions)Net ODA and official aid9089186972Top 3 donors (in 2008):   United States-14-19105636   Spain071385   European Commission051557Aid (% of GNI)0.30.20.20.4Aid per capita (US$)33522Long-Term Economic Trends1980199020002010Consumer prices (annual % change)26.529.19.22.3GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)27.626.134.32.8Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)47.3502.32,087.41,898.0Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)....1001201980–901990–20002000–10Population, mid-year (millions)26.933.239.846.32.11.81.5GDP (US$ millions)33,40140,274100,364287,4003.72.84.5Agriculture19.916.78.97.22.9-2.62.3Industry32.537.929.533.65.01.54.2   Manufacturing23.920.615.514.23.5-2.53.6Services47.645.461.658.93.14.54.6Household final consumption expenditure70.266.468.666.73.01.74.1General gov't final consumption expenditure10.19.416.711.24.210.53.8Gross capital formation 19.118.515.022.61.42.010.1Exports of goods and services16.220.616.416.57.55.35.7Imports of goods and services15.614.816.717.20.49.09.2Gross savings19.621.614.019.5Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary.  .. indicates data are not available.a. Aid data are for 2008.Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).      (average annual growth %)  (% of GDP)64202460-415-1930-3445-4960-6475-79percent of total populationAge distribution, 2009MaleFemale01020304050601990199520002008ColombiaLatin America & the CaribbeanUnder-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)-8-6-4-2024689505GDPGDP per capitaGrowth of GDP and GDP per capita (%) 
 
 
 
 
92 

ColombiaBalance of Payments and Trade20002010(US$ millions)Total merchandise exports (fob)13,15839,741Total merchandise imports (cif)11,78638,511Net trade in goods and services1,4111,230Current account balance7708,866   as a % of GDP0.8-3.1Workers' remittances and   compensation of employees (receipts)1,5784,023Reserves, including gold9,00628,463Public Sector Finance(% of GDP)Total revenue (including grants)23.824.5   Tax revenue14.417.6Current expenditure20.621.4Technology and Infrastructure20002008Overall surplus/deficit-3.2-3.1Paved roads (% of total)14.4..Highest marginal tax rate (%)Fixed line and mobile phone   Individual..33   subscribers (per 100 people)24110   Corporate3533High technology exports   (% of manufactured exports)7.73.8External Debt and Resource Flows2010Environment(US$ millions)Total debt outstanding and disbursed36,21959,644Agricultural land (% of land area)4038Total debt service8,2189,455Forest area (% of land area)54.954.6Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)––Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)..26.2Total debt (% of GDP)36.320.9Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)51,40346,921Total debt service (% of exports)45.018.7Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)10.7..Foreign direct investment (net inflows)2,1112,535CO2 emissions per capita (mt)1.51.4Portfolio equity (net inflows)1,332913GDP per unit of energy use   (2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)9.612.1Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)673665 World Bank Group portfolio20002010 (US$ millions) IBRD   Total debt outstanding and disbursed1,9207,504   Disbursements2661,279   Principal repayments242338   Interest payments12626620002009 IDA   Total debt outstanding and disbursed70   Disbursements00Private Sector Development20002009   Total debt service11Time required to start a business (days)–20 IFC (fiscal year)Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)–13.1   Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio107838Time required to register property (days)–20      of which IFC own account84686   Disbursements for IFC own account26152Ranked as a major constraint to business20002009   Portfolio sales, prepayments and   (% of managers surveyed who agreed)      repayments for IFC own account2074      Anticompetitive or informal practices..34.5      Crime..13.0 MIGA   Gross exposure970Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)9.557.0   New guarantees00Bank capital to asset ratio (%)11.212.2Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  2009 data are preliminary.5/13/11.. indicates data are not available.  – indicates observation is not applicable.Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).0255075100Control of corruptionRule of lawRegulatory qualityPolitical stabilityVoice and accountabilityCountry's percentile rank (0-100)higher values imply better ratings20092000Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World BankIBRD, 6,570IDA, 1IMF, 0Other multi-lateral, 8,161Bilateral, 514Private, 32,867Short-term, 4,110Composition of total external debt, 2009US$ millions 
 
 
 
93 

Millennium Development GoalsColombiaWith selected targets to achieve between 1990 and  2015(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)  Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition1990199520002008   Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)   8.313.516.816.0   Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)   ..60.064.045.1   Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)  3.43.12.62.3   Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)   ..6.34.95.1Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling   Primary school enrollment (net, %)71839490   Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)   748795110   Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)   53647291   Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)95969797Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women   Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)   108105104104   Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)   42454949   Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)   512128Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds   Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)   35312619   Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   28262216   Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)82828095Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths   Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)   14012011085   Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)   82868696   Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)   66727778Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases   Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)   0.10.30.50.6   Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)   54484336   Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)70576870Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs   Access to an improved water source (% of population)88909192   Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)68707274   Forest area (% of total land area)   55.455.254.954.6   Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)......26.2   CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)   1.71.61.51.4   GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)   8.28.69.612.1Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development      Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)   7.310.618.117.9   Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)0.00.85.791.9   Internet users (per 100 people)   0.00.22.238.5   Personal computers (per 100 people)   0.91.73.811.2Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  .. indicates data are not available.5/13/11Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).Colombia025507510012520002002200420062008Primary net enrollment ratioRatio of girls to boys in primary & secondary educationEducation indicators (%)02040608010012020002002200420062008Fixed + mobile subscribersInternet usersICT indicators (per 100 people)02550751001990199520002008ColombiaLatin America & the CaribbeanMeasles immunization (% of 1-year olds) 
 
 
 
 Annex I: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 

As            As of 5/12/2011 

Indicators * 
Portfolio Assessment 
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 

Portfolio Management 
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 

2008 

22 
3.6 
9.1 
5.9 
9.1 
5.9 
47.6 

2009 

2010 2011 

17 
3.2 
5.9 
4.8 
11.8 
6.9 
25.2 

21 
3.2 
9.5 
4.8 
9.5 
4.8 
59.9 

   22 
3.7 
9.1 
5.4 
9.1 
5.4 
42.5 

                    y 

                               y 

  y 

    n 

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by IEG by Number 
Proj Eval by IEG by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of IEG Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of IEG Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 
133 
10,513 
23.7 
18.2 

        Last 5 FYs 
13 
1,087.5 
16.7 
0.2 

*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, which includes 
all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year. 
a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). 
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio. 
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objective (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP). 
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program. 
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the beginning of the year: 
Investment projects only. 

94 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex J: Colombia Social Indicators  

95 

Latest single yearSame region/income group LatinLower-Americamiddle-1980-851990-952002-08& Carib.incomePOPULATION  Total population, mid-year (millions)30.136.544.5560.63,434.5    Growth rate (% annual average for period)2.01.91.31.31.1Urban population (% of population)65.670.574.278.341.6Total fertility rate (births per woman)3.42.82.52.42.3POVERTY(% of population)National headcount index..60.046.0....    Urban headcount index..48.030.7....    Rural headcount index..79.065.2....INCOMEGNI per capita (US$)1,2102,1004,6705,8011,905Consumer price index (2000=100)650158158142Food price index (2000=100)..........INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTIONGini index..57.258.9....Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)2.43.22.9....Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)..61.261.6....SOCIAL INDICATORSPublic expenditure    Health (% of GDP)....6.23.42.0    Education (% of GNI)......3.53.2Net primary school enrollment rate(% of age group)    Total..68879490        Male..64879491        Female..73889490Access to an improved water source(% of population)    Total..90939188        Urban..98999796        Rural..71777383Immunization rate(% of children ages 12-23 months)    Measles5195959382    DPT6186869279Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)..65425Life expectancy at birth(years)    Total6870737369        Male6466697067        Female7174767671Mortality    Infant (per 1,000 live births)3225172238    Under 5 (per 1,000)4331202650    Adult (15-59)        Male (per 1,000 population)237222202196197        Female (per 1,000 population)16212797107125    Maternal (per 100,000 live births)....130130300Births attended by skilled health staff (%)..86968969CAS Annex B5. This table was produced from the CMU LDB system.04/14/11Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due tochange from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before oneyear of age or at any time before the survey. 
 
 
Annex K: Key Economic Indicators  

96 

EstimateIndicator200620072008200920102011201220132014National accounts (as % of GDP)Gross domestic producta100.0      100.0      100.0      100.0      100.0          100.0      100.0      100.0           100.0           Agriculture8.1          7.8          7.6          7.4          7.2              7.0          6.9          6.7               6.4               Industry33.8        33.7        34.6        34.0        33.7            32.8        32.5        32.2             34.4             Services58.1        58.5        57.8        58.6        59.1            60.2        60.6        61.0             59.2          Total Consumption80.5        80.2        78.9        79.4        79.9            77.1        76.2        75.7             74.6          Gross domestic fixed investment22.4        23.0        23.4        22.7        23.2            23.9        24.6        24.8             24.1          Exports (GNFS)b17.6        16.5        17.9        16.0        15.1            17.5        17.6        18.1             17.9          Imports (GNFS)20.5        19.8        20.2        18.2        18.2            18.5        18.4        18.6             16.6          Gross domestic savings19.5        19.8        21.1        20.6        20.1            22.9        23.8        24.3             25.4          Gross national savingsc20.6        20.2        20.5        20.5        20.1            21.9        22.5        22.9             21.9          Memorandum itemsGross domestic product (US$ billion)162.8207.4244.6235.8288.2313.3332.1350.6369.9(US$ million at current prices)GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)344040604640505055106060671070407290Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 00 prices)   Gross domestic product at market prices6.76.93.51.54.34.64.54.54.5   Gross Domestic Income7.87.65.80.25.38.34.76.27.6Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 00 prices)   Gross domestic product at market prices5.35.62.30.23.13.43.33.23.3   Total consumption4.95.72.20.23.22.83.03.82.9   Private consumption5.15.92.2-0.33.12.94.73.83.3Balance of Payments (US$ millions)  Exports (GNFS)b285583421342671382374524054924580656314566720      Merchandise FOB239302938137095325633954649909528145722359456   Imports (GNFS)b303533744444773385004656951469546325851861792      Merchandise FOB239753008836320305103752143359460644930452500  Resource balance-1795-3231-2101-262-13293455343246274928  Net current transfers474352165512461443913987427345944940  Current account balance-2988-6018-6923-5141-8944-6440-7064-6636-8237  Net private foreign direct investment55588136834240492566540743171167841  Long-term loans (net)124827361336178155091830-1518-1220-1220    Official8691723123816171053791616416-73    Private37910139716444551039-2134-1636-1147  Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)-3841-9552-5378-203643-3915-767-1225-394  Change in reservesd2346982623134731361985191819652010Memorandum itemsResource balance (% of GDP)-1.1-1.6-0.9-0.1-0.51.11.01.31.3Current account balance (% of GDP)-1.8-2.9-2.8-2.2-3.1-2.1-2.1-1.9-2.2Real annual growth rates ( YR00 prices)  Merchandise exports (FOB)8.6%6.9%4.5%-2.2%2.2%3.1%8.1%9.9%7.1%  Merchandise imports (CIF)20.0%14.0%10.5%-7.3%14.7%7.3%6.6%13.7%7.0%(Continued)Projected 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex K: Key Economic Indicators (continued) 

97 

EstimateIndicator200620072008200920102011201220132014Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e  Total revenues27.327.226.326.524.525.225.925.925.7  Total expenditures28.128.226.329.127.328.828.527.727.3Statistical discrepancies-0.20.2-0.3-0.2-0.30.00.00.00.0  Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)-1.0-0.8-0.3-2.8-3.1-3.5-2.5-1.7-1.5  Capital expenditure5.56.45.06.25.96.56.96.96.7Monetary indicators  M2/GDP22.722.622.022.021.720.921.021.022.2  Growth of M2 (%)20.211.98.55.94.36.88.17.56.9Price indices( YR00 =100)  Merchandise export price index108.8107.1123.8120.0117.5146.1145.9146.8148.4  Merchandise import price index102.897.6100.8103.395.7100.3100.496.187.6  Merchandise terms of trade index105.8109.8122.8116.2122.7145.6145.2152.7169.4  Consumer price index  (% change)4.35.57.04.22.33.32.93.02.9  GDP deflator (% change)5.85.07.84.22.46.92.92.72.3a.   GDP at factor costb.  "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."c.  Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.d.  Includes use of IMF resources.e.   Consolidated central government.f.  "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.Projected 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex L: Key Exposure Indicators  

98 

EstimatedIndicator200620072008200920102011201220132014Total debt outstanding and 407024459346483535356467063180663556893171576disbursed (TDO) (US$m)aNet disbursements (US$m)a1174322023427260.75357.44582.42273.13994.43258.17Total debt service (TDS)105208451821087549455847911175956212413(US$m)aDebt and debt service indicators (%)   TDO/XGSb119.8109.994.4122.6127.7102.8101.698.396.5   TDO/GDP25.021.519.022.722.620.219.919.519.2   TDS/XGS31.020.816.720.018.713.817.113.616.7   Concessional/TDO2.52.12.14.03.94.03.83.73.6IBRD exposure indicators (%)   IBRD DS/public DS8.514.19.312.014.711.810.612.813.2   Preferred creditor DS/public28.038.932.236.629.634.529.930.227.1   DS (%)c   IBRD DS/XGS1.41.70.81.01.20.80.80.91.2   IBRD TDO (US$m)d456347565438657075037842811882428190      Of which present value of      guarantees (US$m)   Share of IBRD portfolio (%)445678887   IDA TDO (US$m)d322100000a.  Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-     term capital.b.  "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the    Bank for International Settlements.d. Includes present value of guarantees.e.  Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.Projected 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex M: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 

99 

IBRD/IDA Total Disbursed (Active) 1,294.00          of which has been repaid 34.12Total Disbursed (Closed) 6,175.92          of which has been repaid 2,260.08Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 7,469.92          of which has been repaid 2,294.20Total Undisbursed (Active) 741.38Active ProjectsProject IDProject NameDevelopment ObjectivesImplementation ProgressFiscal YearIBRDIDAGRANTCancel.Undisb.Orig.Frm Rev'dP074726Bogota Urban Services ProjectSHS200313026.6-3.4226.5P051306Peace and Development ISMS200437.80.123.6-3.03-3P082466Integrated Mass Transit SystemsHSS20047570.242.4-504.35P082167Agricultural Transition ProjectMSMS2005300.30.27P082429Disaster Vulnerability ReductionSS200526015022.5158.9721.36P083075GEF Integrated National AdaptationSS20065.40.10.1265P091932GEF National Protected AreasSS2006154.33.86P082520Sustainable Development Inv SS200670.30.29P085727Disaster Vulnerability Reduct. IIHSMS2006802.4439.64242.05P096965La Guajira Water and Sanit.MUMU20079080.080P082908Rural Education APL IIMSMS20084031.020.78P052608Antioquia Secondary EducationSS20082013.911.1P105164Second Student Loan SupportSS2008300126.9126.951.98P104567Second Rural Productive PartnershipsMSMS20083012.2-1.99P099139Strength. Public Info, M&E for Res. Mgmt.SS20098.55.02.11P083904Justice Services StrenghteningMSMS20102019.03.45P106628Consolidation of Nat. Publ Mgmt Inf.MSMS20102514.5-0.8255P104687GEF Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle RanchingSMS201076.3P101279Solid Waste Management ProgramMUMU20102018.05.66P117590Science Technology & InnovationSS20112525.0P111479Rio Bogota Environ InfrastructureSS2011250250.0P110671National Macroproyectos Social InterestSS20114040.0Overall Result2170.327.4153741.4-88.786.28Original Amount in US$ MillionsDisbursements Difference BetweenExpected and ActualSupervision RatingLast PSR  
 
 
 
 
Annex N: Trust Funds Overview  

100 

ProgramFundTrust Fund Name Grant Amount US (000)  Grant Closing date IDFTF058311Strenghening of the Legal Claims System4799/27/2010PSIATF097240Colombian Labor Markets: Reforming the Cajas de Compensación Familiar (CCFs)2512/31/2010PHRDTF056577San Nicolas Carbon Sink4984/5/2011DFSGTF096995Contribution to shared growth of existing instruments to promote public support for commercial innovation604/30/2011SFLACTF096162Advisory Services for the Formulation of Integrated  Public Transport Regulatory Frameworks3905/31/2011GFDRRTF096323Barranquilla- Preparation for integrated urban flood prevention investment project1506/22/2011AHITF098473Avian Flu Prevention and Early Response Project8906/30/2011GENTFTF095198Gender and IDPs: Integrating Gender into Peace and Development1006/30/2011GFDRRTF096324CAPRA5006/30/2011WPPTF096847Training Program for Water Resources Management Modeling in Colombia536/30/2011JSDFTF057249Innovative Arts-Based Education for Displaced  People in Cartagena10856/30/2011PPAIFTF074726Metro Study, Integration Public Transit Syst., SNTA (3 cities), and Comm. Campaign BRT756/30/2011GFDRRTF091242Risk Modeling for Hazard and Risk Management - Experience of Bogota: Apllication Reference Book1006/30/2011IFCTF093390Trade Logistics Advisory Program2106/30/2011FS-COTF094084Conservation Incentives for Land Management       642510/18/2011GEFIATF056351National Protected Areas 1500010/18/2011SFLACTF096015Preparation for Barranquilla Flood Management Project72511/1/2011SFLACTF096784Supervision Funds for the Preparation of the Barranquilla Management Flood Project3611/1/2011GEFIATF056350National Adaptation to Climate Change540012/31/2011SFLACTF098916Colombia Low-Carbon Study40012/31/2011PSIATF098305National Job Formation System2512/31/2011IDFTF092702Strengthening of the Procurement System3651/15/2012PPIAFTF099124PPIAF-Support to Concession Agency (INCO)2492/28/2012FLITTF097524Financial Capabilities and Education Measurement Project2002/28/2012PHRDTF093087Jepirachi Wind Farm Offset6753/30/2012GPFTF096676W2-Citizen´s Visible Audits to Improve Public Investment Transparency and Accountability7003/30/2012NTFTF096627Strengthening Human Rights and Rights to Basic Social Services in Peace and Development Zones4003/31/2012JSDFTF091174Institutional and Community Strengthening for Local Governance   15886/24/2012CITIESTF098963Cities Alliance - Macroproyectos de Interes Social Nacional2156/29/2012GFDRRTF098966Disaster Risk Management Analysis (CCDRMA)1006/29/2012FCPFRTF097224FCPF Readiness Grant2006/30/2012NTFTF096788Implementing the Right to Health through Universal Health Insurance in Colombia4006/30/2012IFCTF093766Strengthening Social Accountability to Improve Impact of Royalties in Colombia2506/30/2012GFDRRTF096953Pilot Impact Evaluation Pereira BRTs206/30/2012JSDFTF091176Peaceful Dispute Resolution Services for the Poor   19009/4/2012SPBFTF094596Protection of Land and Patrimony of Internally Displaced Persons - Phase III500010/29/2012SFLACTF097840Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building to Support the Rio Bogota Environmental20012/28/2012CFTF053534Rio Amoya Enviromental Services940012/30/2012IFCTF095026Extractive Industries Royalty Management23012/31/2012JSDFTF093829Empowering Young Women Affected by Violence in Colombia14836/11/2013SFLACTF097348Environmental System and Enhancing Sustainability in Water Resources and Air Quality Management7507/15/2013JSDFTF099171Soccer Together: Rethinking how to Improve Gender Equity and Inclusion in the Education System19003/31/2014JSDFTF093141Access to Opportunities for Young People in Colombia17347/28/2014GEFIATF096465Mainstreaming Sustainable Cattle Ranching Project70009/23/2015CFTF054033Rio Frio Waste Management10012/31/2016CFTF090526San Nicolas Carbon Sink and Arboreal Species Recovery48612/31/2018  68,171  
 
 
 
Annex O: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio 

101 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C U N D I N A -
C U N D I N A -
C U N D I N A -
M A R C A
M A R C A
M A R C A
BOGOTÁ
BOGOTÁ
BOGOTÁ
 Cordillera O rie nt a l 
 Cordillera O rie nt a l 

Pereira
Pereira
Pereira
Armenia
Armenia
Armenia
Ibaque
Ibaque
Ibaque
 Cordillera Ce
 Cordillera Ce
Neiva
NeivaNeiva

ntr
ntr

a
a

l
l

C
C

o
o

r
r

d
d

i
i

l
l

l
l

e
e

r
r

a
a

O
O

c
c

c
c

i
i

d
d

e
e

n
n

t
t

a
a

l
l

PicoPico
Pico
Cristóbal Colón
Cristóbal Colón
Cristóbal Colón
(5,775 m)
(5,775 m)
(5,775 m)

C A Q U E T Á
C A Q U E T Á
C A Q U E T Á

VA U P É S
VA U P É S
VA U P É S

G U AV I A R E
G U AV I A R E
G U AV I A R E

M E T A
M E T AM E T A

H U L A
H U L A
H U L A

C A U C A
C A U C A
C A U C A

C H O C Ó
C H O C Ó
C H O C Ó

A N T I O Q U I A
A N T I O Q U I A
A N T I O Q U I A

VALLE DEL
VALLE DEL
VALLE DEL
CAUCA
CAUCA
CAUCA

RISARALDÁ
RISARALDÁ
RISARALDÁ

QUINDIO
QUINDIO
QUINDIO

DISTRITO
DISTRITO
DISTRITO
CAPITAL
CAPITAL
CAPITAL

G U A I N Í A
G U A I N Í A
G U A I N Í A

V I C H A D A
V I C H A D A
V I C H A D A

C A S A N A R E
C A S A N A R E
C A S A N A R E

C E S A R
C E S A R
C E S A R

NORTE DE
NORTE DE
NORTE DE
SANTANDER
SANTANDER
SANTANDER

A R A U C A
A R A U C A
A R A U C A

A M A Z O N A S
A M A Z O N A S
A M A Z O N A S

N A R I Ñ O
N A R I Ñ O
N A R I Ñ O

P UTUMAYO 
P UTUMAYO 

C
C

A
A

L
L

D A S 
D A S 

C
C

Ó
Ó

R
R

D O B
D O B

A 
A 

B
B

O
O

LÍ
LÍ

A
A
V
V

R
R

B
B

C
C
A
A
O
O

Y
Y

Á
Á

S
S

U
U

C
C

R
R

E 
E 

S A N T A N D E R 
S A N T A N D E R 

T O LI M
T O LI M

A 
A 

Locas de
Locas de
Locas de
Cahuinari
Cahuinari
Cahuinari
La Pedrera
La Pedrera
La Pedrera

Puerto
Puerto
Puerto
Santander
Santander
Santander

Puerto
Puerto
Puerto
Pizarro
Pizarro
Pizarro

Puerto
Puerto
Puerto
Leguízamo
Leguízamo
Leguízamo

Puerto
Puerto
Puerto
Huitoto
Huitoto
Huitoto

Macujer
Macujer
Macujer

Calamar
Calamar
Calamar

Mapiripana
Mapiripana
Mapiripana

Santa Rita
Santa Rita
Santa Rita

Puerto
Puerto
Puerto
NuevaNueva
Nueva

e t a 
San Pedro
San Pedro
San Pedro
Chaviva
Chaviva
Chaviva

San Juan
San Juan
San Juan
de Arama
de Arama
de Arama

Garzon
Garzon
Garzon

Guapí
Guapí
Guapí

Ipiales
Ipiales
Ipiales

Gaviotas
Gaviotas
Gaviotas
V i c

Miraflores
Miraflores
Miraflores

San Vicente
San Vicente
San Vicente
del Caguán
del Caguán
del Caguán

Giradot
Giradot
Giradot

Buga
BugaBuga
Palmira
Palmira
Palmira

Cartago
Cartago
Cartago

Chiquinquirá
Chiquinquirá
Chiquinquirá

Socorro
Socorro
Socorro

Turbo
Turbo
Turbo

Yarumal
Yarumal
Yarumal

Quibdo
Quibdo
Quibdo

Puerto
Puerto
Puerto
AsisAsis
Asis

El Encanto
El Encanto
El Encanto

Lérida
Lérida
Lérida

Yavarate
Yavarate
Yavarate

Tabaquén
Tabaquén
Tabaquén

Brujas
Brujas
Brujas

San Rafael
San Rafael
San Rafael

El Baneo
El Baneo
El Baneo

OcañaOcaña
Ocaña

Maganqué
Maganqué
Maganqué

Leticia
Leticia
Leticia

Mitu
MituMitu

Puerto
Puerto
Puerto
Inirída
Inirída
Inirída

Puerto
Puerto
Puerto
Carreño
Carreño
Carreño

Florencia
Florencia
Florencia

Popayan
Popayan
Popayan

Cali
CaliCali

Pasto
Pasto
Pasto

San José
San José
San José
del Guaviare
del Guaviare
del Guaviare

Villavincencio
Villavincencio
Villavincencio

MocoaMocoa
Mocoa

Tunja
Tunja
Tunja

Yopal
Yopal
Yopal

Manizales
Manizales
Manizales

Bucaramanga
Bucaramanga
Bucaramanga
M a g d alena 

Monteria
Monteria
Monteria

Sincelejo
Sincelejo
Sincelejo

Valledupar
Valledupar
Valledupar

Cúcuta
Cúcuta
Cúcuta

Medellin
Medellin
Medellin

M
M

A
A

G
G

ALEN A 
ALEN A 
D
D

L A G
L A G

U
U

A JI R
A JI R

A 
A 

Arauca
Arauca
Arauca

Tumaco

Buenaventura

Acandí

Puerto Bolívar

Cartegena

Santa Marta
Barranquilla

Ríohacha

A T L Á N T I C O

R . B . D E
V E N E Z U E L A

B R A Z I L

P E R U

E C U A D O R

PAN

A

M

A

G u a v ia re 

N

e

g

r

o

Cauca 

A

t

r

a

t

o

h

a

d

a

P

a t í a 

Ptu
a
y

m

o 

Casanare 

A

t

a

c

a

v

i

M

Vaupés 

Caquetá

C

a

g

u

á

n

C a r i b b e a n S e a

Lago de
Maracaibo

PA C I F I C
O C E A N

To 
Maracaibo

To 
Mérida

To 
Guasdualito

To 
Ibarra

75°W

70°W

75°W

70°W

5°N

10°N

0°N

5°N

0°N

COLOMBIA

0

80

160

240

0

120

80

40

160

200 Miles

320 Kilometers

IBRD 33388R

FEBRUARY 2009

C O L O M B I A

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

DEPARTMENT CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

RAILROADS

DEPARTMENT BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

This map was produced by 
the Map Design Unit of The 
World Bank. The boundaries, 
co lo rs , denom ina t ions and 
any other information shown 
on this map do not imply,  on 
the part of The World Bank 
Group, any judgment on the 
legal status  of any territory,  
o r a n y e n d o r s e m e n t o r 
a c c e p t a n c e o f 
s u c h 
boundaries.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
