d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of 
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 58075-RW 

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

AND 

THE MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

FOR 

THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA 

February 9, 2011 

Eastern Africa Country Cluster 2 (AFCE2) 
Africa Region 

The International Finance Corporation  
Sub-Saharan Africa Department 

The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 

This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not 
imply a presumed outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and 
the updated document will be made publicly available in accordance with the Bank’s Policy on 
Access to Information. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF CURRENT COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY  

AUGUST 7, 2008 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 

(Exchange Rate Effective November 2, 2010) 
Currency Unit = Rwanda Francs (Rwf) 
US$1.00 = 579 Rwf 

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR 

July 1–June 30 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

AAA 
AfDB 
CAS 
CAS PR  
CPAF 
CPI 
DfID 
DHS 
DOL 
DRC 
EAC 
EC 
EDPRS 
EFA FTI  
FIRST 
FY 
GDP 
GAFSP 
GFCRP 
ICA 
ICT 
IDA 
IFC 
IMF 
JGA 
KCC 
MDG 
MDRP 
M&E 
MIGA 
MW 
PBF 
PEFA 
PFM 

Analytic and Advisory Activities 
African Development Bank 
Country Assistance Strategy 
CAS Progress Report  
Common Performance Assessment Framework 
Consumer Price Index 
UK Department for International Development 
Demographic and Health Survey 
Division of Labor  
Democratic Republic of Congo 
East African Community  
European Commission 
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy 
Education For All Fast Track Initiative 
Financial Sector Reform Strengthening Initiative 
Fiscal Year 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program  
Global Food Crisis Response Program 
Investment Climate Assessment 
Information and Communication Technology 
International Development Association 
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 
Joint Governance Assessment 
Kigali Convention Center  
Millennium Development Goal 
Multi-country Demobilization and Reintegration Program 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
Megawatt 
Performance Based Financing 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
Public Financial Management 

ii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PPP 
PRSF 
PRSG 
PSI 
REC 
RWF 
SME 
SWAp 
SWG 
UN 
VUP 
WBG 

Public-Private Partnerships 
Poverty Reduction Support Financing  
Poverty Reduction Strategy Grant 
Policy Support Instrument  
Regional Economic Communities 
Rwanda Francs 
Small and Medium Enterprise 
Sector-Wide Approach 
Sector Working Group 
United Nations 
Vision 2020 Umurenge Program 
World Bank Group 

Vice President  
Country Director  
Country Program Coordinator 
Country Manager 
Task Team Leader 

IDA 
Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili 
Johannes Zutt 
Marie-Hélène Bricknell 
Omowunmi Ladipo 
Johannes Widmann 

IFC 
Thierry Tanoh 
Jean Philippe Prosper 

MIGA 
Izumi Kobayashi  
Ravi Vish 

Arthur Mambou 

Thomas A. Vis 

iii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT  
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA  

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
I. Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 1 

II. Country Context ................................................................................................................................... 1 
A.  
Economic Context ..................................................................................................................... 1 
B.  
Policy, Operating and Political Context .................................................................................... 2 

III. Progress toward CAS Outcomes ......................................................................................................... 4 
A.  
Progress on CAS Strategic Theme 1: Promoting Rwanda’s Economic Transformation for 
Sustained Growth ...................................................................................................................... 4 
Progress on CAS Strategic Theme 2: Decrease Social Vulnerability ....................................... 6 

B.  

IV. Adjustments to the CAS, Partnerships and Progress in Implementation ............................................ 7 
A.  
CAS Program Adjustments ....................................................................................................... 7 
B.  
Partnership Arrangements ......................................................................................................... 7 
C.  
Implementation Progress ........................................................................................................... 9 

V. Risks ................................................................................................................................................... 10 

Annex 1: Updated Results Framework for the Rwanda CAS FY09-FY12 ................................................ 12 
Annex 2: Updated and Revised CAS Outcome Indicators ......................................................................... 18 
Annex 3: IDA Lending Program ................................................................................................................. 19 
Annex 4: IDA Analytic Program ................................................................................................................ 20 
Annex 5: WBG Collaboration..................................................................................................................... 21 
Annex 6: Rwanda Division of Labor .......................................................................................................... 22 
Annex 7: Use of Trust Funds in Rwanda .................................................................................................... 23 
Annex 8: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management ................................................. 24 
Annex 9: IDA Operations Portfolio ............................................................................................................ 25 
Annex 10: IFC Program .............................................................................................................................. 26 
Annex 11: Rwanda at a Glance ................................................................................................................... 27 

Map of Rwanda No. IBRD 33471 

iv 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT  
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA 

I. Introduction 
1. 
This Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report (CAS PR) assesses the 
implementation of the World Bank’s FY09-12 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 
Rwanda.1  The CAS supports flagship programs on growth and social protection as formulated 
in Rwanda’s Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS).  The CAS has 
two objectives: (i) to promote economic transformation and growth and (ii) to reduce social 
vulnerability.  Within these objectives, the CAS is supporting five CAS outcomes.  This CAS PR 
describes changes in the country context, progress toward CAS outcomes and any remaining 
challenges.  It sets out adjustments to the CAS program and partnership arrangements, and 
reports on implementation progress.  The last section updates the risk framework. 

II. Country Context 
A.  
Economic Context 
2. 
Rwanda experienced a slightly delayed impact of the global economic crisis but is 
already showing signs of recovery.  According to the IMF’s Staff Report for its 2010 Article IV 
mission and first Policy Support Instrument (PSI) review, growth of real gross domestic product 
(GDP) fell to 4.1 percent in 2009 from 11.2 percent in 2008, but is expected to rebound to 6.5 
percent in 2010.  Growth in 2009 was mainly driven by agriculture, with a rate of 7.7 percent.  
The expected recovery in 2010 will be driven by a rebound in growth in services and 
construction in addition to continued growth in agriculture.  The average growth rate of 2006-10 
is estimated at 7.3 percent annually and remains below the EDPRS target of 8 percent. 

3. 
Inflation has returned to single digit numbers as global food and fuel prices eased 
off.  Inflation retreated in 2009 from peak levels at end-2008, with the Consumer Price Index 
(CPI) standing at 22.3 percent.  So far in 2010, the CPI has remained under 5 percent, declining 
to 1.5 percent by end-September.  The decrease in import prices and good performance in food 
production were the major cause of this evolution.   

4. 
The trade deficit continued to widen during 2009, due to both a decreased demand 
for Rwanda’s exports and a significant growth in imports.   The trade deficit reached 16 
percent of GDP in 2009, up from 13.1 percent in 2008.  While imports continued to rise, external 
demand for Rwanda’s main export products fell.  Export values declined by 28.0 percent in 
2009, reflecting also lower international prices.  Import values grew by 16.4 percent in 2009, 
mainly driven by an increase in imported consumer and energy goods.  The current account 
deficit deteriorated to 7.4 percent of GDP in 2009, following a downward trend since 2007.  
Trade data for the first half of 2010 show slight improvements, mainly due to a rebound in prices 
and strong volumes of tea exports.  Going forward, the high trade deficit and low exports are key 
challenges that could derail Rwanda’s ambition to become a lower middle-income economy.    

5. 
The most recent Debt Sustainability Analysis of May 2010 confirmed that Rwanda 
remains at moderate risk of debt distress.  Rwanda’s central government external debt 

1 The CAS (Report No. 44983-RW) is dated August 7, 2008.  

1 

 
 
 
                                                      
(including guarantees) amounted to 14.4 percent of GDP at end-2009, with more than four-fifths 
owed to multilateral creditors.  Debt indicators remain most vulnerable to an export shock, 
further underlining the need to expand and strengthen the export base.  While the external debt 
dynamics appear sustainable, there are risks, especially in the short term, associated with 
additional non concessional external borrowing.  It would therefore be imperative to continue to 
carefully assess the economic viability of large investment projects, and consider financing 
options that incorporate participation from the private sector.   

6. 
Medium-term growth prospects are favorable, with growth benefitting from 
increases in agriculture productivity and recovery in services.  Increased investments in 
improved inputs (fertilizers and seeds) together with irrigation, extension in services and the 
dispatch of farm machinery will sustain the positive trend in the agriculture sector, while services 
will benefit from the recovery in lending activities.  Other factors that will have an impact are 
marketability, price developments, improved value chains, and a stronger role for the private 
sector, together with improvements in infrastructure (energy and roads).  Growth is also forecast 
to be supported by the Government’s strategic investments strategy, which is expected to lead to 
an increase in capital spending.  Rwanda’s medium-term framework expects real growth of 6 to 
7 percent per year for 2010-13.  The current account is expected to remain in deficit, due to 
higher capital imports associated with the expanding public investments program.  Imports are 
expected to outpace moderate expansion in exports.      

7. 
Macroeconomic prospects are favorable, but some potential fiscal risks remain.  
While the macroeconomic framework is considered adequate and the first review of the IMF-
supported PSI program has been satisfactory, there nevertheless remain risks with respect to 
potential future expenditures on the strategic investments and the need to increase revenue 
generation.  The overall fiscal deficit (excluding grants) increased in 2009/10 to 13.7 percent of 
GDP, from 11.5 percent in 2008/09, which was driven mainly by spending on RwandAir and the 
Kigali Convention Center (KCC), two of the government’s strategic investments.  Net lending 
increased in 2009/10 and was mostly absorbed by these investments.  For 2010/11, net lending 
will remain flat, with new net-lending planned to be mainly absorbed by RwandAir, due to the 
delay for an agreement on further KCC lending.  Future expenditures on the strategic 
investments could lead to an increase in net lending and have a negative impact on the fiscal 
deficit.  To minimize the fiscal deficit, revenues would need to continue to increase at ambitious 
levels—consistent with the EDPRS—by 2 percent of GDP between 2010/11 and 2012/13.  This 
will need to be backed by significant revenue administration reforms.   
B.  
Policy, Operating and Political Context 
8. 
The Government of Rwanda has identified six strategic investments to address 
Rwanda’s lack of economic infrastructure, which constitutes a binding constraint on 
increasing and diversifying exports.  A March 2010 government paper identified six 
complementary investment projects aimed at employment generation, poverty reduction and an 
increase in traditional exports (coffee, tea, mining and tourism) as well as new exports 
(horticulture, ICT, and business services).  The paper is a direct response to the trade deficit 
described above.  The six investments are: (i) Energy Rollout – an increase in household grid 
connections from 6 percent at end-2008 to 16 percent by 2013; (ii) Core ICT Infrastructure – the 
building of infrastructure for high-speed broadband; (iii) KCC – a five-star hotel and convention 
center; (iv) RwandAir – expansion of the fleet and flight connections of the state airline; (v) 

2 

 
 
Regional Railway – the building/rehabilitation of a railway linking Rwanda to Burundi and 
Tanzania; and (vi) Bugesera International Airport – the construction of a new international 
airport.  As discussed below, the World Bank Group (WBG) programs are largely already 
aligned with the strategic investments within the framework of the CAS.  

9. 
The Government of Rwanda has also adopted a new strategic approach to capacity 
strengthening, with a focus on identifying the main capacity constraints in priority sectors 
for export promotion and growth.  In an initiative related to the strategic investments with a 
focus on the public sector—but also aimed at increasing exports—capacity needs assessments 
have been carried out in the agriculture, electricity and mining sectors.  These assessments 
formed the basis for a US$34 million proposal of technical assistance support over the medium-
term to address staffing and skills gaps and strengthen the centre of government.  The initiative 
will help to address the issues of poor retention, high turnover and skills gaps affecting the civil 
service.  The Bank will support this new approach through measures further outlined below.   

10. 
In July 2010, the Government finalized a division of labor (DOL) exercise, which 
aimed to limit each development partner’s activities to three sectors.  Rwanda continues to 
be considered a model partner, which uses financial assistance effectively, and continues to 
attract a large number of donors.  There are currently 12 bilateral, 3 multilateral and about 16 UN 
organizations active in Rwanda.  The DOL is the Government’s attempt to reduce transaction 
costs and improve aid effectiveness.  To map partners to sectors, the government took into 
account financing gaps under EDPRS programs as well as specific donor characteristics such as 
a donor’s preferred aid modalities, track record, mandate, and global experience.  The DOL, 
presented in Annex 6, confirms the Bank’s priority engagement in three sectors—agriculture, 
energy, and transport (including ICT)—as well as some cross-sector areas.  The implications of 
the DOL on the Bank’s program are discussed further below.    

11. Other challenges in the operating context include the common performance 
framework that underpins IDA’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Financing (PRSF) as well as 
a re-examination by Government of its participation in regional projects.  With respect to 
the former, a Common Performance Assessment Framework (CPAF) has been in place since 
end-2008.  While contributing to improved alignment of PRSF prior actions with EDPRS 
objectives and targets as captured in the CPAF, this alignment effort has also generated some 
tensions, as the CPAF and the Bank are not always monitoring the same policies (this is 
discussed further below).  Regarding the latter, the Government has expressed concerns about 
the development effectiveness of IDA-supported regional projects as currently designed, noting 
that their success depends on the political will and readiness of other governments, which often 
results in slow progress in overall implementation.   

12. On the political front, recent negative perceptions of the scope and quality of 
democratic space in Rwanda, widely reported in the international media, could have a 
detrimental impact on the continued ability of Rwanda to attract high levels of 
development assistance.  While this development—further discussed in the risks section—does 
not currently warrant adjustments to the CAS, any significant decline in the volume of external 
financing made available to Rwanda over the medium term could jeopardize the achievement of 
CAS outcomes.  

3 

 
 
 
 
III. Progress toward CAS Outcomes 
13. 
Rwanda’s performance toward CAS outcomes has been largely positive, but 
important challenges remain.  Within the two CAS objectives of (i) promoting economic 
transformation and growth and (ii) reducing social vulnerability, the CAS heavily focused on 
activities under the first theme.  The recent DOL confirmed the priority engagement of the Bank 
within this theme, and the focus of the rest of the CAS period will be primarily on promoting 
economic transformation and increasing growth, especially of exports.  While the Bank under the 
DOL will no longer provide direct financing in some sectors—such as health and education—it 
will nevertheless continue to be a silent partner in social protection and support cross-cutting 
areas including skills, employment and demobilization.  This section provides only a broad 
account of progress on the CAS outcomes, with a focus on the remaining challenges.  A detailed 
assessment of progress towards CAS milestones and outcomes can be found in Annex 1.          
A.  
Progress on CAS Strategic Theme 1: Promoting Rwanda’s Economic 
Transformation for Sustained Growth 
14. 
The CAS outcomes under Theme 1 are improvements in (i) agricultural production, 
particularly for food crops; (ii) the access to and quality of key infrastructure services; (iii) the 
environment for sound private sector development; and (iv) the capacity to manage public 
resources at central and local levels.  

15. 
Progress toward the increase in agriculture production was considerable, but there 
is a strong need to improve the value of agriculture exports.  There has been considerable 
progress in intensification and increased production in marshland and hillside areas, targeted by 
both active Bank projects.  Production of rice and other food crops are expected to increase 
drastically over the rest of the CAS period.  The importance of agriculture for Rwanda’s 
development was underlined during the 2009 global economic downturn.  While other sectors of 
the economy were heavily affected and overall economic growth declined sharply, agriculture 
proved resilient and with a growth rate of 7.7 percent was the main contributor—by about 80 
percent—to growth.  Nonetheless, export values declined at the same time, due inter alia to the 
weak demand for Rwandan tea and coffee.  Going forward, the Bank will focus on further 
promoting horticulture, tea and other agriculture exports as part of a stronger focus on private 
sector development.       

16. 
Progress on improving transport infrastructure has generally been good, but high 
transport costs remain a key challenge.  Road rehabilitation resulted in a significant 
improvement in national road conditions, but accessibility in rural areas, where the majority of 
the population lives, remains poor, and most rural roads (about 70 percent) are in poor condition.  
Transport costs from the main ports in Mombasa and Dar es Salaam to Kigali are estimated to be 
at least 70 percent higher than in the rest of the East African Community (EAC) and account for 
about 40 percent of the cost of imported goods and 50 percent of exported goods.  A key 
challenge over the rest of the CAS period and the next CAS will be to improve further the 
condition of rural roads within Rwanda and transport links with the rest of the EAC.  

17. 
There has been good progress in the energy sector, but energy generation and access 
remain very low.  Generation capacity has increased from about 41 MW in 2004 to 84 MW in 
2010, but remains too low to support the country’s economic transformation, especially with 
respect to increased investments by the private sector.  Rwanda’s electricity access rate of about 

4 

 
 
 
8 percent is still the second lowest in EAC after Burundi and among the lowest in the world.  
Government and Development Partners in March 2009 agreed on the National Electricity Access 
Roll-out Program, which features among the country’s strategic investments and is supported by 
the Bank.  However, an increase in energy access will have to be accompanied by a parallel 
increase in generation.  Both challenges will remain key for the remainder of this CAS and the 
next.  As further outlined below, the WBG works closely with Government to support increased 
private as well as public-private investments in the energy sector.    

18. 
Rwanda has made good progress on the roll-out of ICT network coverage and 
development of ICT applications, but overall access remains low.  IDA supports the national 
data backbone—one of the strategic investments—by connecting Rwanda to neighboring 
countries and fiber-optic cables off the coast of East Africa.  In addition, there has been support 
to providing connectivity to key institutions and the development of several online services.  The 
remaining challenge will be to increase network coverage further.  In the medium term, a 
challenge will be to increase accessibility to a population with low levels of knowledge in ICT. 

19. 
There has been excellent progress in improving the regulatory business 
environment, but challenges remain to increase investments and trade.  Rwanda was named 
the top reformer in Doing Business 2010 and the second best reformer in 2011, having jumped 
from 143 to 67 and subsequently to 58 out of 183 countries.  It is now easier, faster and less 
expensive to do business in Rwanda.  Nonetheless, as noted above, the growing trade deficit 
presents some concern.  In addition, foreign direct investments, at about 0.5 percent of GDP, are 
well below the Sub-Saharan average of 2.5 percent.  The Investment Climate Assessment and 
other surveys point to a number of constraints beyond those measured by the Doing Business 
indicators, including low labor productivity, lack of skills, and limited access to finance and 
electricity.  As outlined further below, the WBG will collaborate on various fronts in order to 
improve trade and the environment for private investors further.  For example, the WBG’s focus 
in this area over the remainder of the CAS period will be to support the Government with the 
establishment of an effective public -private dialogue mechanism that will help set and 
implement a broader Investment Climate reform agenda focused on the private sector.  In 
addition, the WBG will help guide and focus the Government’s efforts to accelerate investments 
and exports in the horticulture and tea sectors by supporting an initiative that will combine 
efforts to address the binding constraints to more investment in these sectors with a parallel 
highly-targeted investment promotion effort.     

20. Key education indicators are largely on track, but there remains an acute shortage 
of skills to support the country’s economic transformation.  School completion rates and 
other indicators on education quality have improved but there remain questions about the 
sustainability of further progress in the education sector.  Education is no longer a Bank sector 
under the DOL.  Nonetheless, recognizing the issue of skills constraints mentioned above, the 
Government has requested the Bank to support addressing skills shortages as a cross-sector 
concentration by moving forward the planned Skills Development Project from FY12 to FY11 
and increasing its IDA amount from US$10 million to US$30 million.     

21. While there has been progress in strengthening the capacity to manage public 
resources, important challenges remain with respect to the broader reform agenda.  There 

5 

 
 
 
 
has generally been good progress in the areas of public finance management and strengthening of 
auditing and procurement functions of central and local government agencies.  Findings from the 
2010 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment exercise show some 
significant improvements inter alia in the areas of public expenditure management, budget 
reporting and procurement controls.  Improvements in procurement systems also resulted in the 
Bank approving Rwanda as the first pilot country for the use of procurement systems.  
Challenges for the rest of the CAS period remain regarding the broader aspects of civil service 
reform, including Bank support to the new initiative on capacity strengthening.    
B.  
Progress on CAS Strategic Theme 2: Decrease Social Vulnerability 
22. 
The CAS outcome under Theme 2 is to mitigate significant health and social risks to 
vulnerable groups and to social cohesion in Rwanda.  

23. 
There has been good progress on several health outcomes, but challenges remain 
with respect to maternal mortality, fertility, under-nutrition and population growth.  
Rwanda remains on track to achieve MDG4 on under-five mortality and has made important 
progress in terms of improving the efficiency and equity of health services, notably through 
performance-based financing.  Nonetheless, progress on MDG5 on maternal mortality has been 
uneven.  While the overall trend remains downward from 750 per 100,000 live births in 2000-
2004, previous estimates of 383 in 2008 had to be adjusted upwards to 540.  Further remaining 
challenges include high fertility (with a total rate of 5.5) and under-nutrition (with prevalence of 
stunting among under-five children at 45 percent in 2005/06).  Continued high population growth 
of 2.9 percent remains a key challenge, impacting not only on social outcomes but also economic 
development.  In line with the DOL, the Bank will phase out its lending activities in the health 
sector and contributions to health outcomes (including the ones in the CAS) will increasingly 
come from other development partners.  That said, the Bank will continue to provide analytic 
and policy support on a demand basis, especially on population growth and other demographic 
issues.           

24. 
There has been good progress in implementation of a social safety net, but 
challenges remain with respect to youth employment.  Government continues to expand 
services to the most vulnerable segments of the population under the Vision 2020 Umurenge 
Program (VUP).  Under the DOL, the Bank is a silent partner in social protection and continues 
to provide any required analytic support and potential financing in areas that are cross-sectoral.  
For example, the Bank currently provides technical assistance to generate lessons from the VUP 
and enhance sustainability through capacity strengthening.  One important area in direct 
relationship to the population growth issue mentioned above is youth.  Youth between the ages 
of 14 and 35 years currently constitute 40 percent of the population and 42 percent of these youth 
are either unemployed or work on seasonal small-scale agriculture.  The social and economic 
costs of the failure to include the youth in Rwanda’s development can be vast and can 
profoundly affect the well-being of society and the ability of Rwanda’s economy to grow at a 
rate that reduces poverty.  Going forward, the Bank will provide analytic support in the area of 
youth employment, with a potential financing operation envisaged for the new CAS. 

25. 
The Bank-supported demobilization, reinsertion and reintegration program for 
former combatants and government soldiers as well as their families progresses well, but 
challenges remain with respect to economic reintegration and pre-discharge orientation.  

6 

 
 
 
About 29,000 ex-combatants of the Rwandan Defense Forces and armed group members plus 
their dependents received reinsertion and/or reintegration support.  Going forward, the focus will 
be to provide for economic reintegration as well as to increase the provision of trauma 
counseling during pre-discharge orientation and strengthen gender-related issues.                 

IV. Adjustments to the CAS, Partnerships and Progress in Implementation 
26. 
The overall objectives as set out in the CAS remain valid and relevant.  While this 
CAS PR proposes no major changes to the CAS program, it proposes increased efforts in some 
areas in order to respond adequately to the changes in context and remaining challenges 
discussed above.  The following section presents: (i) proposed CAS program adjustments, 
including enhanced collaboration within the WBG and support to the new capacity strengthening 
approach; (ii) proposed changes in partnership arrangements, including the DOL, use of trust 
funds, regional projects and the CPAF; and (iii) progress on the implementation of the CAS 
program, including updates to the results framework.    
A.  
CAS Program Adjustments 
27. 
In order better to align support to Rwanda’s strategic investments plan, efforts are 
underway to deepen WBG collaboration.   With the exception of two out of six strategic 
investments—the regional railway and the airport—the realization of the investments plan is well 
underway.  Two investments—energy rollout and ICT—are supported by ongoing IDA projects.  
None of the other investments currently receive any direct IDA financing, although there is 
indirect support such as the feasibility studies for the railway done by AfDB.  Nevertheless, the 
WBG strives to make sure its activities are aligned with the key objectives of the strategic 
investments plan.  In particular, the WBG is focusing on support that can leverage the resulting 
enhanced investments in physical infrastructure.  During a June 2010 private sector development 
retreat, IDA, IFC and MIGA agreed on proposed focus sub-sectors on the basis of potential 
impact on export growth, jobs creation, and contribution to GDP growth.  As a follow-up, in 
November 2010, the WBG supported an agribusiness investors’ forum to help identify potential 
investors for Rwanda’s horticulture and tea sub-sectors.  Annex 5 shows the alignment of current 
IDA, IFC and MIGA activities, the proposed focus sub-sectors and cross-cutting issues.   

28. 
The Bank will support Government’s new strategic approach to capacity 
strengthening.  The Bank has been engaged in the preparation of the approach and is currently 
exploring options to support its implementation across all sectors through trust funds and the 
potential use of IDA16 resources in the next CAS.  It has also commenced new diagnostic work 
to help the Government identify structural civil service-wide constraints that continue to impede 
the development of sustainable institutional arrangements in Rwanda.  Instead of pursuing the 
idea of a capacity building filter attached to individual project preparation, as originally 
envisaged by the CAS, the Bank will support the new initiative with its potential to leverage a 
more strategic approach to capacity strengthening across the board.  The Bank will also explore 
opportunities to support the building of capacity of civil society and private sector actors.  These 
efforts come in addition to other efforts to strengthen capacity, for example the 2010 approval of 
Rwanda as the first pilot country for the use of country procurement systems.    
B.  
Partnership Arrangements 
29. 
The CAS priorities and the planned program for the rest of the CAS period are 
fully aligned with the DOL.  The CAS focus on agricultural production and basic infrastructure 

7 

 
services (in energy, transport and ICT) is fully aligned with the Bank’s sectors of engagement 
under the DOL.  The Bank will remain focused on a limited number of sectors in the spirit of the 
DOL and based on the Government’s request.  Ongoing lending activities in the health sector, 
which is not a Bank sector under the DOL, will not be succeeded by new investment projects in 
the sector, though Bank support may continue through technical assistance associated with the 
PRSF series in cases where the Bank and the Government agree that such support should exist.  
IDA projects in skills development, youth employment, private sector and any other cross-
cutting areas are exempt from the DOL.  The Bank also remains a silent partner in social 
protection.  Furthermore, providers of general budget support are in principle free to take part in 
any sector dialogue and the Bank on a demand basis may continue to provide technical and 
policy support in any sector.  Given Rwanda’s Vision 2020 objectives of private sector led 
development, there are no constraints on the sectors in which MIGA or IFC can engage. 

30. 
In order to improve further the alignment of the Bank’s program with the DOL and 
the CAS priorities, this CAS PR proposes a more explicit strategy for the deployment of 
trust funds in Rwanda.  Since FY02, about 42 Bank-administered trust funds (among 21 trust 
fund programs) have been active in Rwanda.  Together these trust funds disbursed about US$295 
million in FY07-09 and even exceeded IDA disbursements in FY09.  About 91 percent of 
disbursements during this time came from two large vertical funds, namely the Global Fund for 
Aids, Tuberculosis, and Malaria—in which the Bank serves solely as the trustee—and the 
Education for All Fast-Track Initiative.  There is a strong need for the Bank to consolidate its 
oversight of trust funds and ensure that they are closely aligned with the overall country program 
and consistent with DOL arrangements.  One future prerequisite for the use of trust funds in 
Rwanda will be their inclusion in the country program’s annual budget plan.  Annex 7 provides 
examples of the preferred use of trust funds as well as a menu of options for task teams on the fit 
of various trust fund programs with the CAS. 

31. 
A new approach might be needed in connection with support under regional 
projects that include Rwanda.  As mentioned above, the Government has recently questioned 
the development effectiveness of regional projects due to their complexity as well as the fact that 
they invariably require timely alignment of multi-country objectives in order to be implemented 
expeditiously.  Rwanda thus favors approaches to regional projects that cascade down Regional 
Economic Communities (REC), and thus have REC-wide commitment, as opposed to multi-
country approaches that may lack the commitment of one or more of the countries in the regional 
project.  An approach to be explored during the rest of the CAS period is to pursue regional 
projects only if they are based on clear demand within the EAC.   

32. 
It remains challenging to balance the CPAF process with the Bank’s policy 
requirements on development policy lending.  Formulation of CPAF indicators and policy 
actions takes place in the Sector Working Groups (SWGs).  While this process has resulted 
overall in greater participation of development partners in policy discussions and greatly 
facilitated the reform progress, there is also a significant variation in the quality of CPAF 
indicators and policy actions that come out of the SWGs.  The Bank currently co-chairs, through 
Rwanda-based sector staff, the agriculture, energy, public financial management and capacity 
building and employment promotion SWGs.  Other SWGs are co-chaired by other donors and 
have only limited Bank engagement due to the lack of Rwanda-based IDA staff in those sectors.  

8 

 
 
 
In these latter SWGs, the Bank’s emphasis on policy actions (which are the basis for policy-
based lending) is not shared by other donors, with the result that CPAF indicators in those 
sectors tend to be process- and not policy-based.  Going forward, the Bank will generally only 
include, as sectors of focus for the PRSF series, Bank DOL sectors or sectors in which the Bank 
co-chairs the relevant SWG.  The Bank will nevertheless continue to support the overall 
implementation of the EDPRS and its monitoring through a high quality CPAF.      
C.  
Implementation Progress 
33. While there have been some slippages in the planned IDA lending program, overall 
delivery is on track.  There have been three minor slippages, including: (i) the Electricity 
Access Scale-up Project slipped from FY09 to FY10, due to a prolonged discussion on the 
potential triggering of OP4.10 (Indigenous Peoples); (ii) the Second Emergency Demobilization 
and Reintegration Program slipped, due to the need to reconfirm the project’s financing in the 
wake of Rwanda’s shift to a fifty percent IDA credit/grant share between FY09 and FY10; and 
(iii) the Additional Financing to the Transport Sector Development Project moved to FY11 from 
FY10 to allow for more preparation time.  The Skills Development Project, on the other hand, 
was moved forward from FY12 to FY11 based on the Government’s increased priority for 
support in this area.  The only dropped project was the IDA Lake Kivu Methane Guarantee; a 
MIGA guarantee is planned instead.  The only project not anticipated in the CAS was the FY11 
East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project.  Every planned regional project 
(except the FY09 Communications Infrastructure Project) slipped by at least one fiscal year.  
Annex 3 presents planned and actual delivery of the CAS program and the remaining pipeline.    

34. 
The current IDA portfolio has nine projects with net commitments of US$237 
million.  Key sectors include: energy (33 percent); agriculture (29 percent); and private sector 
development (20 percent).  There is one problem project (4 percent), net commitments at risk of 
US$11 million and one over-age project (more than eight years).  The undisbursed balance as of 
January 2011 was US$144 million.  The current IDA operations portfolio is presented in more 
detail in Annex 9.  In addition, a total of three regional projects are active within Rwanda.  Most 
trust funds are programmatic and child trust funds.  Rwanda’s portfolio performance is good, 
with key project performance indicators above AFR and Bank-wide averages.  

35. 
IFC’s current total exposure in Rwanda is US$28 million in five projects.  IFC has 
invested US$10.5 million in Bakhresa Rwanda to transform wheat grain into wheat flour; US$4 
million in the Lake Kivu Methane Gas project; US$2.3 million in Hotel Mille Collines; US$7.3 
million in Tourism Promotion Services (operators of the Kigali and Lake Kivu Serena hotels); 
and US$4.4 million in Intraspeed Rwanda, a regional freight and forwarding company.  Thus, 
IFC’s top investments are in agribusiness (37 percent), tourism (34 percent) and transport/ 
logistics (15 percent).  In the financial sector, IFC has signed a local currency swap facility with 
the Banque Nationale du Rwanda to provide up to US$50 million local currency equivalent for 
long-term financing (up to 7 years) in Rwandan Francs.  A first agreement under this swap 
facility was signed in November 2010. In FY10, IFC committed a Tier II loan of US$2.1 million 
to Ecobank Rwanda (EBR) as part of the multi country IFC Capitalization Fund loan to the ETI 
Group and also approved a US$5.0 million trade finance line to the same Bank.  In FY08, IFC 
approved a US$2.0 million trade finance line for Banque Commerciale du Rwanda (BCR). 

9 

 
 
 
36. 
In addition to its investment projects, IFC provides various advisory services.  The 
Investment Climate Reform Project seeks to improve the regulatory environment, build 
institutions, and attract private sector participation in key sectors; IFC’s Credit Reporting 
program has been working closely with the central bank to develop the legal framework for 
sharing information and selecting a private credit bureau operator; and its Entrepreneurship 
Development Program promotes SME competitiveness through building capacity and linkages 
with larger firms as well as entrepreneurship among youth and women.  

37. MIGA’s activities consist of guarantees for two private investments in the financial 
sector, with a major guarantee planned for the energy sector.  The current gross exposure is 
US$17.3 million, including: (i) a US$9.5 million guarantee to ADC IT & Payment Solutions of 
Mauritius covering its equity investment in the Société Monétique et de Télé-Compensation au 
Rwanda (SIMTEL); (ii) a U$1.8 million guarantee to ShoreCap International of the Cayman 
Islands covering its equity investment in Companie Générale de Banque in Rwanda 
(Cogébanque).  The pipeline includes a US$99 million guarantee for ContourGlobal of the 
United States for its US$139 million equity investment in KivuWatt Ltd.  The latter is for the 
construction and operation of a 100 MW power-generation facility using methane gas from Lake 
Kivu.  The project is currently planned to be in two phases, with the initial phase covering 25 
MW of power generation.  Potential further investment guarantees in horticulture are 
forthcoming.    

38. 
This CAS PR provides some updates to the CAS indicators to improve quality and 
realism of the results matrix.  The results matrix with 23 indicators proved relevant to measure 
the outcomes that the Bank is trying to achieve.  CAS outcomes are well aligned to EDPRS 
objectives, with a majority of indicators directly derived from the CPAF.  As already anticipated 
during CAS preparations, some indicators required updating, due to either: (i) the use of a CPAF 
indicator, which had since been revised; (ii) a change in program delivery; or (iii) project 
restructuring.  Annex 2 provides an overview of the updated CAS outcome indicators.     

V. Risks 
39. Weak implementation capacity in the central administration continues to be a key 
risk.  The Government continues to seek to address this issue, which arises primarily from 
constraints in two areas.  First, there are significant skills gaps country-wide.  The growth 
diagnostics which informed the EDPRS identify skills shortages, together with weak 
infrastructure, as one of the two most important obstacles to economic growth.  Also, in a 2006 
manufacturing survey, 40 percent of firms in Rwanda reported the lack of skilled labor to be a 
major constraint for doing business.  By comparison, only 24 percent of firms in Tanzania and 30 
percent of firms in Uganda identified skills as a major or severe constraint.  Second, efforts by 
the Government to determine optimum civil service staffing levels have had impact.  Over the 
past ten years, Rwanda completed extensive civil service reforms characterized by downsizing, 
restructuring, and pay reform in addition to moving staff to sub-national levels.  Over 2004-07, 
the number of all staff in the central administration was reduced from 2,000 to 500.  A 2008-09 
functional review indicated possibly inadequate staffing levels for service delivery.  For 
example, the Ministry of Agriculture, with a 2009/10 budget of U$53 million, has only 31 posts, 
of which a third were vacant in late 2010.  As described above, the Bank will support the 
Government’s evolving strategic approach to capacity strengthening and civil service reform.   

10 

 
 
40. 
Rwanda remains vulnerable to exogenous shocks, including global economic 
slowdowns.  As described above, the global crisis decreased Rwanda’s GDP growth by about 7 
percentage points between 2008 and 2009.  Agriculture was the only sector that performed well 
during this period, and it remains a key sector in responding to external shocks and adding to 
GDP growth.  To help address the global slowdown, the Bank in FY10 allocated US$29.8 
million in additional resources to its Poverty Reduction Support Grant (PRSG) from the IDA 
pilot Crisis Response Window to protect spending on EPRS priorities in the wake of a reduction 
in export earnings.  In FY08, in the wake of the food and fuel price crisis, the Bank used US$10 
million in supplement financing to the PRSG from the Food Price Crisis Response Trust Fund to 
support a Government program aimed at sustaining food crop production and intensification.  
The Bank will continue to strive to utilize resources quickly to respond to external shocks.   

41. 
Changes in international perceptions about political governance and human rights 
in Rwanda may have a negative impact on the flow of development assistance.  Commentary 
in the international media around the August 2010 elections alleged suppression of various 
political opposition groups and individuals.  An August 2010 Amnesty International report 
alleged that Rwanda’s genocide laws are deliberately vague to allow criminalization of dissent.2  
In addition, a UN report on events in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) from 1993-2003 
alleges acts of brutality by the Rwandan Patriotic Army in the DRC during that decade.3  For 
several bilateral donors, issues of democratic governance, political and media freedom and equal 
access to justice are key factors in determining funding levels, including for general budget 
support, which amounted to about 41 percent of total Government spending in 2009/2010.  The 
Government views these reports as baseless and flawed, pointing, for example, to the numbers of 
its forces deployed as UN peace-keeping forces across Africa as an indicator of a disciplined 
force.  In addition, Rwanda continues to work on the redrafting of its genocide ideology laws.  
The Government also remains committed to finalizing the update of the Joint Governance 
Assessment (JGA) in the near future.  To date, no donors have indicated planned reductions in 
overall assistance, and so the achievement of development outcomes (including the ones 
supported by the CAS) is not currently at risk.  The Bank’s support for strengthened governance 
will continue within the parameters of its 2007 Governance and Anticorruption Strategy, 
including with regard to supporting the finalization of the JGA, and strengthening capacity of 
civil society and private sector actors.  

2 See Safer to Stay Silent: The Chilling Effect of Rwanda’s Laws on ‘Genocide Ideology’ and ‘Sectarianism’, 
Amnesty International, August 2010.  
3 See Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1993-2003: Report of the Mapping Exercise documenting the most serious 
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law committed within the territory of the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo between March 1993 and June 2003. United Nations Human Rights Commission, October 
2010.  

11 

 
                                                      
CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
CAS Outcome 1.1 Agricultural 
production—particularly for food crops—
sustainably raised 

2010 Status 

 Production of rice in targeted marshlands 
increased by at least 100% by 2012 
relative to the baseline (8,757 tons).  
[Updated Baseline.]  

 On track.  [9,052 tons 
by October 2010 with 
only few marshlands 
under production.]    

 At least 50% of farmers in targeted areas 
have adopted sustainable marshland or 
hillside intensification technologies by 
2012 (2008 baseline 25%).  

 On track. [No progress 
on indicator value but 
related activities are on 
track.] 

 Increase in use of Mineral Fertilizer from 
14,000 MT in 2006 to 47,600 MT in 
2011/2012. [Revised CPAF Indicator]  

 On track.  [27,906 MT 
of fertilizer used in 
2009/10.]  

CAS Outcome 1.2 Improved access to and 
quality of key infrastructure services 
Transport: 
 50% of paved roads in good condition 

 Achieved [72.9% of 

Transport: 
 83 km of the Kigali-Ruhengeri section of 
Kigali-Gisenyi road rehabilitated.  On track. 
[Rehabilitation work is underway.] 

12 

Annex 1: Updated Results Framework for the Rwanda CAS FY09-FY12 

CAS Milestones and Status 
 At least 1,400 additional ha of irrigated 
marshlands have been rehabilitated or developed 
by 2010 (EDPRS/PSTA indicator).  On track.  
[1,040 additional ha were developed by October 
2010 - 4,150 ha total from the 2008 baseline of 
3,110 ha.] 
 At least 4,200 additional hectares of hillsides 
have been sustainably developed by 2010 
(EDPRS/PSTA indicator).  Off track.  [2,828 
additional ha were developed by October 2010 - 
17,313 ha from the 2008 baseline of 14,485 ha.] 
 Milestones to increase farmer access to finance.  
Achieved [The PRSG series supported the 
operationalization of a microfinance credit 
fund.]  
 Extension Strategy fully operationalized in 30 
districts by 2009.  Not Applicable. [According 
to PRSGV, Belgium took the lead to support 
extension services.] 
 A charter for fertilizer importers/wholesalers, 
dealers, retailers is developed in Rwanda by 
2009.  Achieved.  [PRSGVI supported the 
development of an action plan for a private 
sector-led fertilizer distribution system.] 
 Common SLM Programmatic Framework 
Roadmap and Country SLM Investment 
Framework (CSIF) developed by 2010.  
[TerrAfrica indicator – status unclear.] 

WBG Program 
IDA Ongoing: 
 RSSP II (FY08) 
 Land Husbandry, Water 
Harvesting & Hillside 
Irrigation (FY10)  
 Integrated Management of 
Eco-Systems – GEF (FY05) 
 PRSF series 

IDA Pipeline: 
 Regional: Lake Victoria 
Env. Management (FY11) 
 Agriculture Additional 
Financing (FY12) 

Others (IFC & Trust 
Funds): 
 GAFSP additional financing 
to LWH (FY10)  
 USAID/CIDA additional 
financing to LWH (FY11)  
 IFC investment in Bakhresa 

AAA: 
 Multi-year Agricultural 
Policy TA (FY08 – FY12) 
 Sustainable Land 
Management (TerrAfrica; 
FY10) 
 Regional Agriculture 
Research TA (FY09) 

Other Donors: 
IFAD, EC, Belgium, AfDB, 
UK, US, Netherlands, Japan 
IDA Ongoing: 
 Transport Sector 
Development Project 
(FY08) incl. Africa 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
(average IRI less than 4m/km) by 2012 up 
from 23% in 2007.  

 Population having access to paved roads 
o Kigali: from 59% in 2005 to 69% in 
2009 and onwards; 
o Huye: from 12% in 2005 to 22% in 
2009 and onwards. 

2010 Status 
paved roads were in 
good condition as of 
June 2010.] 
 Achieved. [Kigali 
70%; Butare 47% as of 
December 2009.] 

Energy: 
 Reduction of unplanned outages 
(outages in minutes per month) from 
2,530 to 1,898 from 2009 onwards.   

 

120,000 additional households 
connected to electricity by 2012 (2006 
Baseline 91,332) (CPAF).    

 Achieved.  [As of end-
December 2009 there 
has been no load 
shedding in the 
Electrogaz Network.] 
  On track.  [Number 
of electricity 
subscriptions was 
159,516 in October 
2010 with goal to 
reach 270,000 in 
2011/12.]  

CAS Milestones and Status 
 550 km of paved trunk roads maintained by 
2011. N/A [Indicator not available.]  
 Complete and adopt the Transport Master Plan 
(TMP) by 2010. (CPAF policy action.)  Not 
achieved. [Completion and adoption of the 
TMP is a FY12 CPAF policy action.] 
 Complete District/Rural Road Condition 
Inventory by 2009 (CPAF policy action).  
Partially achieved.  [Road condition inventory 
for all classified district roads has been 
completed in 2009/2010.  However, no data has 
been collected for rural roads.]  
 Implementation of priority district/rural road 
maintenance program launched by end 2009. 
Achieved.  [Program was launched and 
implementation is ongoing.] 

Energy: 
 Jabana Thermal power plant (20 MW) in service 
by 2009.  Achieved.  [Jabana power plant 
became operational in May 2009] 
 Birembo substation completed and in service by 
2009.  Achieved [Birembo substation was 
completed in 2009 and is in service.]  
 SWAP in the energy sector in place and first 
investment prospects financed by 2009.  
Achieved.  [SWAP MOU signed in July 2008 
and investment prospects signed.] 
 Improved tariff structure in place (i.e. eliminates 
cross-subsidies from water, reflects cost 
structure of electricity, and differentiates 
between different customer types) by end 2009.  
Not Achieved. [Tariff study on improved tariff 
structure is still ongoing.]  
 Billing to supply ratio raised from 78% to 84% 
from 2009 onwards. N/A [Indicator not 
available.] 

13 

WBG Program 
Catalytic Growth Fund 
 PRSF series 
 Regional: East Africa Trade 
and Transport Facilitation 
Project (FY06) 

IDA Pipeline: 
 Transport Sector Dev 
Additional Financing 
(FY11) 
 Transport Project (FY12) 
 PRSG/F series 
 Regional: East African 
Transport Links (FY12) 

Others (IFC):  
 IFC investment in 
Intraspeed Rwanda  

Other Donors: 
AfDB, China, EC  
IDA Ongoing: 
 Electricity Access (FY10) 
 PRSF series 

IDA Pipeline: 
 Energy Additional 
Financing (FY12) 
 Regional: East Africa Power 
Market (FY12) 
 Regional: Rusumo Falls 
Hydro (FY12)  
 PRSF series 

Others (IFC, MIGA & 
Trust Funds): 
 Urgent Electricity 
Rehabilitation GEF (FY09) 
 IFC Lake Kivu Investment 
Project (FY TBD) 
 MIGA Guarantee to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 

2010 Status 

CAS Milestones and Status 

ICT: 
 ICT composite network coverage 
increased from 75% in 2006 to 100% in 
2012. 

 On track.  [82% 
national coverage - 
100% in urban areas 
and 79% in rural 
areas.] 

CAS Outcome 1.3. Improved environment 
for private sector development 
Financial Sector 
 International Financial and Reporting 
Standards implemented by all financial 
institutions by 2012.  

 Time to process a check reduced from 3 
days (2008) to 1 day in 2012. 

Business Environment 
 Number of days required to obtain a 
construction license reduced from 275 
days (2007) to 180 by 2012 (IFC). 
 Time required to export reduced from 60 
days (2007) to 40 days in 2012 (IFC).  

 On track.  [ICPAR 
will be responsible for 
disseminating the 
IFRS. See milestone.] 
 On track.  [Rwanda 
Integrated Payment 
Processing System 
(RIPPS) is scheduled 
to go live in December 
2010.  RIPSS will 
contribute to 
accelerating check 
processing. ] 

 On track.  [210 days 
in 2009.] 

 Achieved.  [38 Days 
in 2009.] 

ICT: 
 Technical, financial and corporate structure of 
Backbone system in place by 2010.  Achieved.  
 At least 10 public internet access points 
developed by eRwanda by 2010.  Achieved. [A 
total of 34 access points developed by 2010: 22 
for public usage; 12 for use by local 
governments.]  
 Price of wholesale international E1 capacity 
link decreased by 20% by 2010.  Achieved.  
[28% reduction – from US$10,000 in 2008 to 
US$7,200 in 2010] 

Financial Sector 
 ICPAR assisted in implementing new 
accounting law and standards by 2010. 
Partially achieved.  [ICPAR was created in 
early 2009, and started to organize training on 
auditing and standards. Its capacity is still very 
low.] 
 Automated clearing house (ACH) and Real 
Time Gross Settlement implemented to 
modernize the payment system by 2010. 
Achieved.  [The ACH and RTGS will be under 
the RIPPS which is expected to go live in 
December 2010.] 
 Leasing Law amendment adopted by cabinet by 
2009 (IFC). N/A [Awaiting IFC input.] 
 8 Financial Institutions launching leasing 
products by 2009 (IFC). N/A [Awaiting IFC 
input.] 
Business Environment 
 Licensing system simplified by reducing the 
number of overall licenses from more than 300 
in 2008 to 250 by 2010 (IFC). Achieved. [The 

14 

WBG Program 
ContourGlobal/KivuWatt 
Ltd. (planned FY11) 

Other Donors: 
EC, AfDB Netherlands, 
Belgium, GTZ 
IDA Ongoing: 
 eRwanda (FY06)  
 RCIP II (FY09)   

Other Donors: 
SIDA, EC, DfID, USAID, 
UNDP, Belgium, South Korea 

IDA Ongoing: 
 Competitiveness and 
Enterprise Dev. & 
Additional Financing 
(FY08) 
 PRSF series 

IDA Pipeline: 
 PRSF series 

Others (IFC& MIGA): 
 IFC Leasing Development 
Program (FY 07) 
 IFC investment in Hotel 
Milles Collines 
 IFC investment in Tourism 
Promotion Services  
 IFC investment in Ecobank    
 FIRST Initiative: second 
Phase (FY09) 
 MIGA Guarantees for 3 
private investments in 
financial sector (SIMTEL, 
Cogébanque) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 

2010 Status 

CAS Milestones and Status 
number of licenses was 185 as of October 
2010.] 
 14 Commercial Laws updated in line with 
international best practice by 2010. Partially 
achieved. [11 out of 14 laws have been updated 
as of October 2010.  The Competition and 
Consumer Protection Law; Draft bill on 
provisions applicable on privately financed 
infrastructure and the Contract Law are still in 
the process of being updated.] 

Skills Development 
 Primary school pupil to qualified teacher 
ratio reduced from 73:1 in 2006 to 61:1 
in 2012 (CPAF).  
 Transition from basic education (TC) to 
upper secondary education raised from 
82% in 2006 to 92% in 2012 (CPAF). 
 Skills Development indicator TBD as 
part of the planned ESW and the new 
operation. [Will insert once developed.]   

 Off Track.  [68:1 in 
2010 versus 67:1 in 
2008.] 
 On track.  [90.2% in 
2009.]  

Skills Development  
 National Skills Development Policy, including a 
Post-Basic Education policy in place by 2010. 
Achieved.  [Education Sector Strategic Plan for 
2010-2015 finalized in 2010.] 
 National Skills audit completed by 2009.  
Achieved.  [Skills audit completed in 2009.] 
 3,000 teachers hired on contract basis until 
TDM adopted.  Not achieved.  [2,000 teachers 
hired by 2008, but only 750 in early 2009.] 
 Develop and cost Teacher Development and 

15 

WBG Program 
 MIGA Guarantees for 
horticulture investments 
(planned FY11-12)  

AAA: 
 Financial Sector 
Assessment Program 
(FSAP) update (FY11) 
 Multi-year Just-in-time 
Policy Notes (FY09-12) 
 Employment and Growth 
Policy Note (FY11) 
 Study on EAC (FY11) 
 Investment Climate 
Assessment (FY09) 

Advisory Services IFC:  
 Entrepreneurship  and SME 
Development Program 
 Investment Climate Reform 
Program 
 Efficient Securities Markets 
Institutional Development 
(ESMID) 
 Credit Reporting program 
 Privatization of Rwanda Air  

Other Donors 
AfDB, DfID, USAID, 
Netherlands 
Ongoing: 
 PRSF series 
 PSCBP (FY05) 

IDA Pipeline:  
 Skills Development (FY11) 
 PRSF series 

Others (IFC): 
 IFC Africa Schools Rwanda 
Program (FY09) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 

2010 Status 

CAS Outcome 1.4 Capacity to manage 
public resources–at central and local 
levels—strengthened 
 Proportion of audited public agencies 
receiving unqualified public audit 
opinions increased from 1.7% in 2009 to 
7% in 2011.  [Revised Indicator] 
 Proportion of the value of procurement 
tendered competitively or justified 
increased from 86% in 2008 to 89% in 
FY12 (CPAF).  [Revised Indicator] 
 Finalization of a new national payment 
and retention policy by 2011.  [New 
Indicator] 

 Percentage of Districts which achieve a 
minimum of 80% of their service delivery 
and sustainable local development targets 
for which they are responsible as assessed 
by/in the IMIHIGO assessment report 
increased from 60% in 2006 to 75% in 
2012 (CPAF). [Revised Indicator.] 

 On track.  [Awaiting 
OAG update on this 
indicator.]  

 Achieved.  [100% of the 
value of procurement 
tendered competitively 
or justified in 
2009/2010.]    
 On track.  [Policy 
expected to be drafted, 
endorsed by key 
stakeholders and 
adopted by Cabinet in 
2011.]   

 On track.  [67% in 
2009/10.]  

CAS Milestones and Status 
Management (TDM) Strategic Plan by 2010. 
Achieved.  [TDM was adopted in 2009.]   
 Targets for classrooms rehabilitation and 
constructions under EFA FTI financing met. 
Achieved.  [Increase in classroom constructions 
from 2,315 in 2008 to 3,076 in 2010.] 
 Targets for procured textbooks under EFA FTI 
financing met. Achieved.  [Purchase and 
distribution of over 1.6 million textbooks 
between 200-2010.] 
 Targets for trained teachers under EFA FTI 
financing met. Achieved. [Exact targets were 
not available, but EFA-FTI contributed to 
increase in training of teachers, inspectors, 
directors and parent teacher associations.] 
Overall effectiveness/service delivery 
 Increased number of MDAs that have service 
delivery directories published.  Achieved.  [21 
out of 40 in 2010 from zero in 2008.] 
 MIFOTRA agrees with all PRSG ministries on 
staffing levels and ministerial structures for 
optimal performance within fiscal limits.  
Achieved.  

PFM 
 Increased number of budget agencies that 
produce annual financial statements within 
stipulated timeframe.  Achieved. [In 2009 100% 
of budget agencies produced statements – 56% 
on time from 17% in 2008.]  
 Number of projects from the district 
development plans implemented under the 
DCDP (disaggregated by type).  On track.  
[Select facilities built or rehabilitated by type 
under the project are: health: 11; classrooms: 
420; Water tanks: 131 etc.]   

16 

WBG Program 

Other Donors 
AfDB, DfID, Belgium, 
Netherlands, UNICEF, EC  

IDA Ongoing: 
 PSCBP (FY05)  
 MDTF for PFM Reforms 
(FY05) 
 PRSF series 
 DCDP (FY04) 
 E-Rwanda (FY07) 
 Statistics for Results (FY10) 

IDA Pipeline: 
 PRSF series 

Others (Trust Funds) 
 Economic Empowerment of 
Young Women – Adolescent 
Growth Initiative  
 Social Risk Management of 
Climate Change 

AAA: 
 Public Expenditure 
Management (Multi-year) 
 Capacity Building (FY11) 

Other Donors: 
DFID, UNDP, Belgium, GTZ, 
SIDA, USAID 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
CAS Outcome 2.1 Significant health and 
social risks—to vulnerable groups and to 
social cohesion in Rwanda—are mitigated 

Maternal and Child Health  

 % of assisted births in an accredited 
health facility increased from 28% in 
2006 to at least 60% in 2012 (CPAF).  

2010 Status 

 Achieved.  [66.2% in 
2009. Indicator to be 
verified through the 
2010 DHS.]  

Social Protection/Implementation of Vision 
2020 Umurenge program 
 Percentage of eligible households granted
public works in a sample of VUP pilot 
Sectors is 35% each year in 2008-12. 
(CPAF) [Revised Indicator.] 

Reintegration of ex-combatants  
 Up to 26,675 RDF and 11,292 Armed 
Group members and dependents received 
reinsertion and/or reintegration support by 
2012. [Updated Indicator.]    

 On track.  [91% of 
eligible households 
were employed in 
2009/10.] 

 On track.  [22,675 
RDF ex-combatants and 
6,292 Armed groups ex-
combatants received 
reinsertion and 
reintegration benefits by 
end 2008.] 

WBG Program 
IDA Ongoing: 
 CLSG series including 
Health Results Innovation 
Trust Fund  
 PRSF series 
 RDRP2 (FY10) 

IDA Pipeline: 
 PRSF series 

AAA: 
 Rwanda Health Study (FY08)
 Human Resources for Health 
(FY08) 
 Social Protection Study 
(FY08) 
 Youth and Gender in post-
conflict (FY08) 
 Social Risk Management of 
Climate Change (FY11) 
 Youth Employment Study 
(FY12) 
 On Demand Policy Notes in 
the Social Sectors (TBD) 

Other Donors: 
UNICEF, Belgium, DFID, 
Germany, USAID, SIDA 

CAS Milestones and Status 
Maternal and Child Health  
 Pilot reducing ticket modérateur and introducing 
conditional cash transfers for children less than 5 
and pregnant women by 2010.  Achieved.  [As 
of October 2010 a pilot initiative removing ticket 
modérateur for children under five has been 
implemented in two health centers in two 
districts.  Pregnant women are exempted from 
paying the ticket modérateur.] 
 Per capita allocation to Performance Based 
Financing (PBF) for health facilities and 
community health cooperatives reaches US$2.25 
by 2010 (CPAF).  Not Achieved.  [US$1.85 in 
2009.  Expected improvements in this indicator 
due to scale-up of the community PBF in 150 
sectors by end-2010.] 

Social Protection/Implementation of Vision 2020 
Umurenge program 
 Participatory Assessment is completed by end 
2009 of whether income-generating activities, 
direct support, public works and micro credits 
have been successful. Partially achieved.  [M&E 
survey was conducted and report is being 
finalized.  The survey was not participatory.] 
 Lessons of VUP pilot in 30 sectors are 
incorporated and extended to at least another 60 
sectors by end 2009.  Achieved.  [Lesson have 
been incorporated and extended to 90 sectors.]  
 Procedures for identifying vulnerable households, 
mode and amount of social assistance transfers 
and public works implemented by end 2009.  
Achieved. [Procedures have been agreed, 
incorporated in operational manuals for each of 
the VUP components and are being 
implemented.]    

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 2: Updated and Revised CAS Outcome Indicators 

Original CAS Indicators  
Updated and Revised Indicators 
CAS Outcome 1.1 Agricultural production—particularly for food crops—sustainably raised 
 Production of rice in targeted marshlands 
 Updated: The baseline is 8,757 tons instead of 
increased by at least 100% by 2012 relative to 
2,340 tons.  A 100% increase by 2012 is 
the baseline (2,340 tons).  
equivalent to 17,514 tons.                                       
 25% of farmers using chemical fertilizer by 
 Updated: Increase in use of Mineral Fertilizer 
2012 up from 12% in 2006 (CPAF indicator).  
from 14,000 MT in 2006 to 47,600 MT in 
2011/12 (Revised CPAF indicator).   
CAS Outcome 1.2 Improved access to and quality of key infrastructure services 
 Rural access indicator to be determined as part 
 Dropped. Project was moved to FY12.  
of the FY10 Rural Roads project. 
CAS Outcome 1.3. Improved environment for private sector development 
 Primary school pupil to qualified teacher ratio 
 Updated:  Primary school pupil to qualified 
reduced from 72.7:1 in 2006 to 56:1 in 2012 
teacher ratio reduced from 73:1 in 2006 to 61:1 
(CPAF). 
in 2012 (revised CPAF target). 
 Skills Development indicator TBD as part of 
 New:  [Once project results framework is 
the planned ESW and the new operation.  
further advanced.]  
CAS Outcome 1.4 Capacity to manage public resources–at central and local levels—strengthened 
 No. of targeted institutions that achieve at 
 Dropped.  
least 80% of their target outputs. 
 No. of budget agencies use internal capacity to 
prepare and publish audited financial 
statements with unqualified audit opinions.  
 No. of budget agencies with satisfactory 
compliance with national procurement 
policies and rules. 

 Revised: Proportion of audited public agencies 
receiving unqualified public audit opinions 
increased from 1.7% in 2009 to 7% in 2011.  
 Revised: Proportion of the value of procurement 
tendered competitively or justified increased 
from 86% in 2008 to 89% in 2011/12 (CPAF 
indicator). 
 New: Finalization of a new national payand 
retention policy by 2011.  
 Revised:  Percentage of Districts which achieve 
a minimum of 80% of their service delivery and 
sustainable local development targets for which 
they are responsible as assessed by/in the 
IMIHIGO assessment report increased from 
60% in 2006 to 75% in 2012 (CPAF indicator). 
CAS Outcome 2.1 Significant health and social risks—to vulnerable groups and to social cohesion 
in Rwanda—are mitigated 
 % of under five children using Insecticide 
Treated Long Lasting mosquito nets increases 
from 16% in 2006 to 85% in 2012 (CPAF). 
 Percentage of vulnerable men, women and 
children assisted through safety net schemes 
raised from 12% in 2006 to 20% in 2012. 
 Up to 28,500 former Rwandan Armed Groups, 
RDF and dependents received reinsertion and/ 
or reintegration support by 2011.    

 100% of Districts able to produce 
consolidated reporting on spending on an 
annual basis (i.e. on resources both from 
transfers and on own revenue) from 2009 
onwards up from 0% in 2007. 

 Dropped: Indicator is not supported by Bank 
program.  In addition, health is no longer a Bank 
priority under the DOL.   
 Revised:  Percentage of households granted 
public works in a sample of VUP pilot Sectors is 
35% each year in 2008-12. (CPAF) 
 Updated: Up to 26,675 RDF and 11,292 Armed 
Group members and dependents received 
reinsertion and/or reintegration support by 2012.   

18

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Orig inal CAS Program

Annex 3: IDA Lending Program 

Revis ed Program

Orig inal IDA 
Amount 
(US $ mi l l ion)

A ctual
A ctual (CLSG I)
FY10 (Electricity A cces s Scale-up and SWAp Developmen t Pro ject) 
Dropped
FY10
Actua l

A ctual
A ctual
FY11
FY12 (Trans po rt Secto r Pro ject)
FY12 (East Africa Transport Link s)
FY11

Add it ional A ctuals :
Second Emerg ency Demob ilizat ion and Rein teg rat ion Prog ram (from FY09)
Electricity A cces s Ro ll-Ou t (from FY09)
Commun ity Liv ing Standards Gran t (CLSG) II*
Reg iona l: East Africa Pub lic Hea l th Labora tory ( no t in CAS )

Planned
FY12
FY12

Add it ional Planned :
Trans po rt Secto r Developmen t Pro ject AF (from FY10)
Skills Developmen t Pro ject (from FY12)
Commun ity Liv ing Standards Gran t (CLSG) III*
Reg iona l: Lak e Victoria ( from FY10 )

Planned
Planned
Planned
FY11

Add it ional Planned :
Trans po rt Secto r Pro ject (from FY10 Ru ral Roads )
Reg iona l: East Africa Transport Link s ( from FY10 )
Reg iona l: Rusumo Fa l ls Hydro ( from FY11 )
Reg iona l: East Africa Power Mark et ( from FY11 )

Revis ed IDA Amount 
(US $ mi l lion)
National Reg ional CRW

         80.0 
             -  
      -  
           6.0 
             -  
      -  
             -               -  
      -  
             -               -  
      -  
             -               -  
      -  
         8 .0 
      16 .0 
     -  
        94 .0        16 .0 
      -  
         86.0 
             -   29.0 
         34.0 
             -  
      -  
             -               -  
      -  
             -               -  
      -  
             -  
            -  
     -  
             -  
            -  
     -  

           8.0 
             -  
      -  
         70.0 
             -  
      -  
           6.0 
 - 
- 
         5 .0 
      10 .0 
     -  
     209 .0 
       10 .0  29 .0 
       104.4              -         -  
             -  
            -  
      -  
             -  
            -  
      -  

         11.0              -         -  
         30.0              -         -  
           6.0              -         -  
         5 .0       10 .0 
      -  
     156 .4 
       10 .0 
       -  
     459 .4 
       36 .0  29 .0 
         70.0              -         -  
         30.0              -         -  
         30.0              -         -  
             -  
             -         -  

         40.0              -         -  
         8 .0 
      16 .0 
      -  
       10 .0 
      20 .0 
      -  
         6 .0 
      12 .0 
      -  
     194 .0 
       48 .0 

Fis cal 
Year

2009

2010

Poverty Reduct ion Strategy Gran t (PRSG) V
                 70.0 
Health /Social Pro tection DPL
                   6.0 
Electricity A cces s Ro ll-Ou t 
                 40.0 
Lake Kivu Methane Guaran tee
                   5.0 
Rwanda Demob ilizat ion and Rein teg ration Prog ram 
                   8.0 
Reg iona l: Commun ica t ions In frastructure Pro ject
                  8 .0 
Total
              137 .0 
PRSG VI 
                 86.0 
Land Harves ting W ater Managemen t and Hills ide Irrigat ion                 35.0 
Tran s po rt Secto r Developmen t Pro ject AF
                 25.0 
Ru ral Road s
                 25.0 
Reg iona l: East Africa Road Network
                  8 .0 
Reg iona l: Lak e Victoria 
                  7 .0 

2011

Total
PRSF VII** 
Reg iona l: Rusumo Fa lls Hydro 
Reg iona l: East Africa Power Mark et

2012

Total
IDA 15 Total
PRSF  VIII
A g ricu ltu re (Add it ional Fin ancing )
Energy (A dd it ion al Financing ) 
Skills Developmen t

              186 .0 
                 80.0 
               10 .0 
                  4 .0 

                95 .0 
              418 .0 
                 70.0 
                 30.0 
                 30.0 
                 10.0 

Total
              140 .0 
* Planned to be merged with PRSG in th e CAS, bu t remained s tandalone. 
** Due to the move o f Rwanda to an IDA b lend coun try , the FY11 PRSF cons is ts o f a cred it /g ran t mix rath er than 100 p ercen t g ran t financing . 

19

 
 
Fis cal Year
2009

2010

2011

2012

Annex 4: IDA Analytic Program 

Analytic and Advis ory Activities by CAS Theme 
Cros s -Cutting
Mu lt i-year Pub lic Expend itu re Managemen t TA
Mu lt i-year Jus t-in -t ime Po licy No tes (Finance/PSD)
Promote Economic Trans formation and Growth
Mu lt i-year Ag ricu ltu re Po licy TA
Inves tmen t Climate A s s es smen t 
Reg ional Ag ricu ltu re Res earch TA
Reduce S ocial Vulnerabil ity
Mu lt i-year Educat ion Po licy Analy s is
Health Study 

Cros s -Cutting
Mu lt i-year Pub lic Expend itu re Managemen t TA
Mu lt i-year Jus t-in -t ime Po licy No tes (Finance/PSD)
Promote Economic Trans formation and Growth
Mu lt i-year Ag ricu ltu re Po licy TA
Sus tainab le Land Managemen t TA
Reduce S ocial Vulnerabil ity
Mu lt i-year Educat ion Po licy Analy s is
Educat ion Coun try Statu s Repo rt 
Social Pro tect ion Study

Cros s -Cutting
Mu lt i-year Pub lic Expend itu re Managemen t TA
Mu lt i-year Jus t-in -t ime Po licy No tes (Finance/PSD)
Poverty Mon ito ring TA 
Promote Economic Trans formation and Growth
Mu lt i-year Ag ricu ltu re Po licy TA
Sus tainab le Land Managemen t TA
Financial Secto r A s s es smen t Prog ram (FSAP) update
Emp loymen t and Growth Po licy No te
Capacity Bu ild ing 
Reg ional EAC Study
Reduce S ocial Vulnerabil ity
Mu lt i-year Educat ion Po licy Analy s is
Pos t-Bas ic Educat ion Study
Social Ris k Managemen t o f Climate Change 
Cros s -Cutting
Mu lt i-year Pub lic Expend itu re Managemen t TA
Mu lt i-year Jus t-in -t ime Po licy No tes (Finance/PSD)
You th Emp loymen t Study 
Promote Economic Trans formation and Growth
Mu lt i-year Ag ricu ltu re Po licy TA
Reduce S ocial Vulnerabil ity
On Demand Po licy No tes in the Social Secto rs 
Mu lt i-year Educat ion Po licy Analy s is
Social Safet Nets Streng then ing TA

20

 
 
 
 
1.  Leveraging of WBG programs  
IDA 
Ongoing and planned programs 
in:  
 Agriculture – aimed at 
increased productivity and 
diversification including 
with respect to horticulture;  
 Energy – aimed at increased 
access; 
 Transport – aimed at the 
rehabilitation of rural/feeder 
and main roads; transport 
links with EAC.  

Annex 5: WBG Collaboration 

IFC 
Ongoing and planned programs in:  
 
Investment climate reform – aimed 
at increased investments, exports and 
employment linked to horticulture 
and Special Economic Zones, the 
level of Small and Medium 
Enterprise tax revenues, and 
increased access to finance for 
SMEs; 
 Entrepreneurship development – 
supporting the growth and 
competitiveness of SMEs and 
helping develop local entrepreneurs.  

MIGA 
Ongoing and planned 
programs in:  
 
Investment promotion 
–targeting of investors 
and supporting 
investment projects in 
priority sectors 
including energy and 
agribusiness;    
 PPP origination.   

2.  Focus sub-sectors   
 Horticulture (fruits and vegetables):  High potential impact on trade balance, jobs creation and high 
demand in global/regional markets.  Sector aligns well with ongoing support in agriculture and WBG 
is well placed to address remaining constraints including infrastructure (transport and energy) and 
investment environment. 
 Construction Materials:  High potential impact on trade balance, jobs creation and high local 
demand.  High prospect for investors from East Africa.    
 Tea:  High potential impact on trade balance, jobs creation and high demand in global markets (but 
lower in regional/local markets).  Favorable investor prospects and relatively few barriers of entry.  
 Mining:  The WBG also agreed to provide catalytic support at the margins for mining as a sector 
with a potentially high future impact.  This includes technical assistance for implementation of a 
framework for negotiations of production sharing and concession arrangements.     

3. Cross-cutting issues  
 Support to the implementation of Government’s SME strategy. Work program to be undertaken 
by IDA, Investment Climate Advisory Services and IFC advisory services. 
 A more holistic focus on access to finance. Work program to be led by IDA. 
 A concerted focus on post harvest and transport logistic. Work program to be led by IDA. 
 Acceleration of WBG work in the areas of tax reforms, land use programs and Special 
Economic Zones. Work program to be led by Investment Climate Advisory Services. 
 Support for the strengthening of the PPP institutional framework including WBG assistance in 
identifying a PPP pipeline. Work program to be led by IDA.     

21

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 6: Rwanda Division of Labor 

t

,

f

O
D

J

t

i

t

r

&

r

H

m

W

i
l
l
l

E
S
E
Y
T
E
A
F
a
d
o
o
n
g
o
r
r
u
e
a
e
d
u
c
u
a
e
a
r
r
s
a
n
c
p
n
r
e
e
e
c
a
e
c
u
r
a
h
s
g
s
n
c
h
o
r
u
n
p
y
e
P
y
r
d
a
S
o
y
r
o
u
u
c
a
p
n
o
S
P
e
o
r
L
s
u
e
a
e
z
o
e
n
r
a
r
c
n
r
a
p
c
n
y
o
s
n
u
d
n
C
g
o
o
a
T
n
n
C
o
u
E
n
C
n

t
t
i
t
I
t

i
t
f
t
l

M
m

c
s

i
l

m

i
l
i

&

&

&

&

R

t

i

l
i

t

i

,

t

t

i

a

r

t

t

i

t

i

o
n

t

t

t

i

,

i

t

r

D

i
i

e
/
a
v
v
o
c
F
n
r
e
s
o
n

L
a
o
e

m

w

&

,

f
f
‐
t

n

&

l

t

u

r

e

X 
S  
X 
X 
X 
 X 

X 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

X 
X 

X 
X 
 X 

S 
X 
S 

X 

X 
X 
S 
S 
S 

X 

X 
X 
 S 
 S 

 S 
X 
 S 
X 
 S 
X 
 S 

X 
 S 
S 
X 
X 
 X 

Belgium 
Canada 
Germany 
Netherlands 
Japan 
Sweden 
UK 
US 
AfDB 
EC 
Switzerland 
WB 
France 
Austria 
Luxembourg 
FAO 
UNDP 
ILO 
UNEP 
UNFPA 
UNESCO 
S 
X 
S 
UNHCR 
UN‐Habitat 
S 
UNICEF 
UNIDO 
X 
X 
X 
UN Women 
WFP 
X 
X 
IFAD 
WHO 
UNECA 
X 
S 
UNCDF 
S represents silent partnerships
X represents internal UN Lead 

X 
X 

X 

X 
S 
X 
S 
S 

 S 
X 
X 
X 

X 

22

 S 
X 
X 
X 

X 

S 
S 

X 
X 
X 

X 

X 

S 
S 
S 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Annex 7: Use of Trust Funds in Rwanda 

1.   
Budget support for Government designed programs:  Trust funds designed as budget support 
operations that directly finance Government priorities have proven successful in Rwanda.  Examples 
include:   
 EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund:  Considered to be a good model for the use of a large vertical fund.  The 
traditional use of the trust fund was adjusted to allow disbursement through country systems (as 
budget support).  The program was country-owned and financed directly government’s education 
plans.  Management of the EFA-FTI was taken over by DfID due to the Bank’s stricter requirements 
for management of large trust funds, but also due to education being a DfID priority sector.        
 Global Food Price Crisis Response Program:  Supplemental financing to the PRSG series in order 
to support private sector participation in fertilizer distribution.  
 Health Results Based Financing:  Supplemental Financing to the CLSG DPO, which financed a 
pilot to test performance-based financing for interventions with high impact on child and maternal 
health at the village level.  However, the trust fund proved somewhat inflexible for a proposed 
integration into PRSG series and was a key reason why the CLSG DPO had to remain standalone.     
2.   
Co-Financing for IDA investment projects:  Trust funds that co-finance IDA investment 
operations can in many cases be pivotal to the viability of the IDA program.  Examples include:  
 Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF):  The trust fund provides crucial financing to the ongoing 
Transport Sector Development Project with only US$11 million from the IDA envelope and US$38 
million from the ACGF. 
 Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Program (MDRP):  The MDRP provided vital 
co-financing to the IDA program with about 50 percent of resources.  The MDRP was one of only 
two country-specific multi-donor trust funds in Rwanda (together with the PFM fund). Closed in 
2009 and transitioned into the Transitional Demobilization and Reintegration Program (TDRP).   
 GAFSP, United States and Canada Co-Financing to LWH:  The LWH project was one of the first 
Bank operations to benefit from the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) with the 
award of US$50 million additional financing in June 2010.  The project assisted with the 
development of a common framework for engagement, which so far resulted in co-financing 
commitments from the United States and Canada. 
3.   
Financing of Analytic Work and Project preparation:  Trust Funds can provide important 
resources on top of the available Bank budget to finance analytical work and project preparation.  
However, trust funds should not be used to finance analytical work that is not funded from Bank budget 
and therefore does not fall within the CAS priorities.  Examples (good and bad) include:  
 Trust Fund for Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development:  The trust fund financed 
a study to examine program design and choices to implement the VUP (social protection) agenda. 
The work was done simultaneously with the preparation of the IDA CLSG and provided the analytic 
foundation for that development policy operation.   
 Trust Funds that finance global studies:  Bank-executed trust funds for global studies and surveys 
do not usually fall within the CAS, require substantial effort by high-level government officials and 
are considered to provide no benefits to the country.  Missions for these kinds of studies are often 
conducted without transparency or knowledge by country management and there is no follow-up in-
country about the findings of these studies.  
4.   
Technical Assistance:  Trust funds can be very useful if they provide highly specialized 
technical assistance.  They are not widely used in Rwanda, but one example includes:  
 Financial Sector Reform Strengthening Initiative (FIRST):  Six grants were made available to 
provide to support the Financial Sector Development Plan, microfinance, supervisory capacity, crisis 
preparedness, and banking.  FIRST consultants brought expertise and knowledge of the literature and 
experience of other countries, combined with high respect for the national perspective.  

23

 
 
 
 
 
Annex 8: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management 

As Of Date 1/12/2011

Indica tor
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projec ts Under Implementat ion a
Average Implementat ion Period (years ) b
Percent of Problem Projec ts by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projec ts by Amount a, c
Percent of Projec ts at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projec ts at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Rat io (% ) e
Portfolio M anagement
CPPR during the year (yes /no)

2008

2009

2010

2011

11
4.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
47.4

yes

11
4.1
18.2
13.4
18.2
13.4
30.1

no 

12
3.2
16.7
11.4
16.7
11.4
35.4

yes

9
3.6
11.1
4.6
11.1
4.6
11.9

no 

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions )
% of OED Projec ts Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projec ts Rated U or HU by Amt

S ince FY 80 La st Five FYs
51
6
1,188.4
223.9
45.1
50.0
31.0
44.7

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b.  Average age of projec ts in the Bank 's country port folio.
c .  Percent of projec ts rated U or HU on development objec t ives (DO) and/or implementat ion progress (IP).
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e.  Rat io of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank 's port folio at the 
     beginning of the year: Inves tment projec ts only .
*   A ll indicators are for projec ts ac t ive in the Portfolio, with the except ion of Disbursement Rat io,
    which inc ludes all ac t ive projec ts as well as projec ts which ex ited during the fiscal year.

24

 
 
 
 
Annex 9: IDA Operations Portfolio 

As Of Date 1/12/2011

Closed Projects

67

IBRD/IDA

Total Disbursed (A c tive)
          of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
          of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (A c tive + Closed)
          of w hich has been repaid

Total Undisbursed (A c tive)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (A c tive + Closed)

 88.71
 0.00
 795.49
 53.59
 884.20
 53.59

 136.36
 2.92
 139.28

Active Projec ts

Project ID

P097818
P112712
P057295
P070700
P066386
P105176
P079414
P114931
P111567
Ove ra ll Re sul t

Project Name

RW - Sus tainable Energy Dev. Proj (GEF)
RW Emergency Demob and Reintegrat ion
RW -Compet & Enterprise Dev (FY01)
RW -GEF Integr. Mgmt. of Crit l Ecosys tems
RW -Pub Sec CB TAL (FY05)
RW -Rural Sec tor Supt APL2 (FY08)
RW -Transport  Sec tor Development Projec t
RW :Land Husband,Water Harves t,Hill Irrig
Rwanda Elec t ric ity Access Scale-up Proj.

Last ISR 
Supervision Rating
Deve lopment 
Implementation 
Objectives
Progress
S
S
MS
MS
S
S
S
S
MS
MS
S
S
MU
MU
S
S
S
S

Difference Betw een
Expected and Actual
Disbursements

Fiscal Year

IDA GRANT Cance l. Undisb.

Orig.

Frm Rev'd

2010
2010
2001
2005
2005
2008
2008
2010
2010

8.0
46.8

20.0
35.0
11.0
34.0
70.0
224.8

8.3

4.3

0.1

12.6

0.1

6.7
5.8
3.2
1.1
7.9
15.3
8.0
31.1
65.1
144.1

1.6
-8.6
1.1
7.0
9.5
6.6
0.8
8.3
24.6

-2.6

3.3
0.7

25

 
 
 
Annex 10: IFC Program 

International Finance Corporation
Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio

Amounts in US Dollar Millions
Account ing Date as of : 12/31/2010

Comm itme nt
Insti tution
Fisca l Ye a r
Short Name
2009/ 2010
Ba khre sa Rw a nda
2007
Intra spe ed
2009
Lake Kivu Ene rgy
2007
Mi lle Col line s
2008/ 2010/ 2011 TPS (R)
Tota l Portfolio

Comm itte d 

Undisburse d Outsta nding

Loa n

Equi ty Qua si -Equity*

ALL

Loan

Equi ty Qua si-Equi ty

ALL

10.50
0
0
2.34
4.35
17.19

0
0
0
0
2.95
2.95

0
4.40
4.00
0
0
8.40

10.50
4.40
4.00
2.34
7.30
28.54

10.50
0
0
2.34
3.20
16.04

0
0
0
0
2.95
2.95

0
4.40
0
0
0
4.40

10.50
4.40
0
2.34
6.15
23.39

* Quasi-Equity includes both equity and loan types

26

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27

Annex 11: Rwanda at a Glance 

Rwanda at a glance

2/25/10

Sub-
Saharan
A f rica

K e y D e v e l o pm e n t Ind ic a t o r s

Lo w
inc o me

Rwanda

( 2 0 0 8 )

P o pulat io n, m id-year (m illio ns )
Surfac e area (tho us and sq. km )
P o pulat io n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulat io n (% o f to tal po pulat io n)

9.7
26
2.9
18

818
24,242
2.5
36

973
19,310
2.1
29

GN I (A t las m etho d, US$ billio ns )
GN I per capita (A t las m etho d, US$ )
GN I per capita (P P P , internat io nal $ )

4.7
440
1,010

885
1,082
1,991

510
524
1,407

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per c apita gro wth (%)

11.2
8.9

5.0
2.5

6.4
4.2

( m o s t r e c e n t e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 8 )

P o vert y headco unt rat io at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o vert y headco unt rat io at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expec tanc y at birth (years )
Infant m o rtalit y (per 1,000 live births )
C hild malnut rit io n (% o f children under 5)

77
90
50
109
18

51
73
52
89
27

..
..
59
78
28

A dult literac y, m ale (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literac y, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro s s prim ary enro llm ent , m ale (% o f age gro up)
Gro s s prim ary enro llm ent , f emale (% o f age gro up)

..
..
146
149

71
54
103
93

72
55
102
95

A c c es s to an impro ved water s o urc e (% o f po pulat io n)
A c c es s to im pro ved s anitat io n fac ilit ies (% o f po pulat io n)

65
23

58
31

67
38

N e t A id F lo ws

19 8 0

19 9 0

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 8 a

(US$ m illio ns )
N et ODA and o f f ic ial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2007):
   United Kingdo m
   United States
   Euro pean C o mm is s io n

154

288

321

713

0
7
21

1
13
36

53
23
49

95
91
79

A id (% o f GN I)
A id per c apita (US$ )

13.2
30

11.2
40

18.7
40

21.0
75

Lo ng - T e rm E c o no m ic T r e nds

C o ns um er prices (annual % change)
GDP im plic it def lato r (annual % change)

7.2
3.1

4.2
13.5

3.9
-3.0

15.4
17.4

Exchange rate (annual average, lo c al per US$ )
Term s o f t rade index (2000 = 100)

92.8
..

82.6
78

389.7
100

546.9
69

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 – 0 8
      (av erage annual gro wth %)
3.2
1.1
2.2
-0.2

P o pulat io n, m id-year (m illio ns )
GDP (US$ m illio ns )

5.2
1,163

7.2
2,584
  (% o f GDP )
32.5
24.6
18.3
42.8

8.0
1,735

9.7
4,457

2.5
6.7

A griculture
Indus t ry
   M anufac turing
Serv ices

45.8
21.5
15.3
32.6

37.2
13.6
7.0
49.2

37.4
14.1
4.5
48.5

0.5
2.5
2.6
3.6

2.5
-3.8
-5.8
-0.9

3.5
8.7
5.4
8.9

H o us eho ld f inal c o ns um pt io n expenditure
General go v ' t f inal c o ns um pt io n expenditure
Gro s s c apital fo rmat io n 

83.3
12.5
16.1

83.7
10.1
14.6

87.7
11.0
18.3

82.1
10.2
24.1

1.2
5.2
4.3

0.4
-2.6
0.4

..
..
..

Expo rt s o f go o ds and serv ices
Im po rt s o f go o ds and serv ices
Gro s s s av ings

14.4
26.4
13.3

5.6
14.1
11.3

8.7
25.7
12.9

14.9
31.2
28.3

3.4
2.6

-6.4
6.1

..
..

N o te: F igures in italic s are f o r years o ther than tho se spec if ied. 2008 data are prelim inary.  .. indicat es data are no t av ailable.
a. A id data are fo r 2007.

D ev elo pm ent Ec o no m ic s , D ev elo pment D at a Gro up (DECDG).

10

5

0

5

10

0-4

15-19

30-34

45-49

60-64

75-79

percent of total population

Age d istr ibu tion , 2008

Male

Female

0

50

100

150

200

250

1990

1995

2000

2007

Rwanda

Sub-Saharan A fri c a

Under -5 mo r tal i ty r ate (p er 1,000)

-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

95

05

GDP

GDP per c api ta

Growth o f GDP an d GDP per cap i ta (%)

 
 
 
 
28

Rwanda

B a l a n c e o f P a ym e n t s a nd T ra d e

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 8

(US$ m illio ns )
T o t al merchandis e expo rt s (f o b)
T o t al merchandis e impo rt s (c if )
Net t rade in go o ds and s erv ic es

90
328
-291

257
881
-727

Current ac co unt balance
   as a % o f GDP

-90
-5.2

-244
-5.5

Wo rk ers ' rem it t anc es and
   co m pensat io n o f emplo yees (rec eipt s )

7

51

Reserves , inc luding go ld

191

536

C e n t r a l G o v e r nm e n t F in a n c e

(% o f GDP )
Current rev enue (inc luding grant s )
   T ax revenue
Current expendit ure

20.2
9.7
13.2

27.1
13.5
15.1

T e c hno lo g y a nd In f ra s t ru c t u r e

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 8

Ov erall surplus / def ic it

0.8

0.5

P av ed ro ads (% o f t o t al)
F ixed line and m o bile pho ne
  s ubs c ribers (per 100 peo ple)
H igh t ec hno lo gy expo rt s
  (% o f m anuf ac t ured expo rt s )

8.3

19.0

H ighes t marginal tax rate (%)
   Indiv idual
   Co rpo rat e

..
..

..
..

1

14

0.6

16.3

E xt e rn a l D e b t a nd R e s o u rc e F lo ws

E n v i ro nm e n t

(US$ m illio ns )
T o t al debt o ut s t anding and disburs ed
T o t al debt s erv ic e
Debt relief (H IP C , M DR I)

1,272
35
908

679
19
225

A gricult ural land (% o f land area)
F o res t area (% o f land area)
Nat io nally pro t ec t ed areas (% o f land area)

68
13.9
..

79
19.5
8.1

T o t al debt (% o f GDP )
T o t al debt s erv ic e (% o f expo rt s )

73.3
21.4

15.2
4.9

F reshwat er res o urc es per c apita (cu. m et ers )
F reshwat er wit hdrawal (billio n cubic m et ers )

1,113
0.2

1,005

..

F o reign direc t inv es tment (net inf lo ws )
P o rt f o lio equit y (net inf lo ws )

8
0

103
0

CO2 em is s io ns per capit a (m t )

0.07

0.07

GDP per unit o f energy us e
   (2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equiv alent )

..

..

Energy us e per capit a (k g o f o il equivalent )

..

..

 Wo r ld B a n k G ro up po r t f o l io

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 8

 (US$ m illio ns )

 IB RD
   T o t al debt o uts t anding and disbursed
   D is bursements
   P rinc ipal repaym ent s
   Int eres t paym ent s

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

 IDA
   T o t al debt o uts t anding and disbursed
   D is bursements
   T o t al debt s erv ic e

692
37
11

242
41
2

P r i v a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e n t

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 8

T ime required t o s t art a bus ines s (days )
Co s t t o s t art a bus ines s (% o f GN I per capit a)
T ime required t o regis t er pro pert y (days )

–
–
–

14
108.9
315

 IFC (f is c al year)
   T o t al disbursed and o ut s t anding po rt f o lio
      o f which IFC o wn ac c o unt
   D is bursements f o r IFC o wn ac co unt
   P o rt f o lio sales , prepayment s and
      repayment s f o r IFC o wn ac co unt

2
2
0

6
6
3

Rank ed as a majo r c o ns t raint t o bus ines s
   (% o f m anagers surv eyed who agreed)
      Elec t ric it y
      T ax rat es

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 8

0

0

..
..

31.8
26.9

 M IGA
   Gro s s expo s ure
   New guarant ees

–
–

17
17

St o c k market c apit alizat io n (% o f GDP )
B ank capit al t o as s et rat io (%)

..
8.1

..

9.2

No t e: F igures in it alic s are f o r years o t her t han t ho se spec if ied.  2008 dat a are prelim inary.
.. indic at es dat a are no t av ailable.  – indic at es o bserv at io n is no t applic able.

2/ 25/ 10

Develo pm ent Ec o no m ic s , Develo pm ent D at a Gro up (DECDG).

0

25

50

75

100

Control of cor ruption

Rule of law

Reg ulatory q ual ity

Pol itical stabil i ty

Voice and accountabil i ty

Country' s percenti le rank (0-100)

higher v al ues impl y better ratings

2008
2000

Go vern an ce ind i cato rs, 2000 and 2008

Sourc e: Kaufmann-K raay -Mas truzzi , W orl d Bank

IBRD, 0

IDA , 242

IMF, 11

Other mu l ti -
lateral , 313

B i l ateral , 90

P ri v ate, 0

Short-term, 23

C ompo si tion o f to tal extern al d eb t, 2008

US$ m i ll ions

 
 
Mi l lennium Deve lopment Goa ls

Rwanda

With se lected targe ts to ach ieve b etween 1990 and  2015

(es t im at e c lo s es t t o dat e s ho wn, +/ - 2 years )  

G o a l 1: h a lv e t h e r a t e s f o r e xt r e m e po v e r t y a nd m a lnu t r i t io n
   P o v ert y headc o unt rat io at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulat io n)   
   P o v ert y headc o unt rat io at nat io nal po v ert y line (% o f po pulat io n)   
   Share o f inc o m e o r c o ns um pt io n t o t he po o res t qunit ile (%)  
   P rev alenc e o f m alnut rit io n (% o f c hildren under 5)   

G o a l 2 : e n s u r e t ha t c h i ld re n a r e a b le t o c o m p le t e p r im a r y s c ho o l ing
   P rim ary s c ho o l enro llm ent (net , %)
   P rim ary c o m plet io n rat e (% o f relev ant age gro up)   
   Sec o ndary s c ho o l enro llm ent (gro s s , %)   
   Yo ut h literac y rat e (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

G o a l 3 : e l im in a t e g e nd e r d i s p a r i t y in e du c a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
   Rat io o f girls t o bo ys in prim ary and s ec o ndary educ at io n (%)   
   Wo m en em plo yed in the no nagric ult ural s ec to r (% o f no nagric ultural em plo ym ent )   
   P ro po rt io n o f s eat s held by wo m en in nat io nal parliam ent (%)   

G o a l 4 : r e du c e und e r - 5 m o r t a l i t y by t wo - t h i rd s
   Under-5 m o rt alit y rate (per 1,000)   
   Inf ant m o rt ality rat e (per 1,000 liv e births )   
   M eas les imm unizat io n (pro po rt io n o f o ne-year o lds imm unized, %)

G o a l 5 : r e du c e m a t e r n a l m o r t a l i t y b y t h re e - f o u r t hs
   M at ernal m o rt alit y rat io (m o deled es t im at e, per 100,000 liv e birt hs )   
   B irt hs at t ended by s k illed healt h s t af f (% o f t o t al)   
   Co nt rac ept iv e prev alenc e (% o f wo m en ages 15-49)   

19 9 0
..
..
..

24.3

67
37
8
75

92

..
17

195
117
83

..

26
21

G o a l 6 : h a l t a nd be g in t o re v e r s e t h e s p re a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r d is e a s e s
   P rev alenc e o f H IV (% o f po pulat io n ages 15-49)   
9.2
   Inc idenc e o f t uberc ulo s is (per 100,000 peo ple)   
167
   Tuberc ulo s is c as es detec t ed under DOTS (%)   
..

G o a l 7 : h a l v e t h e p r o po r t io n o f p e o p l e wi t ho u t s us t a in a b l e a c c e s s t o b a s i c n e e d s
   A c c es s t o an im pro v ed wat er s o urc e (% o f po pulat io n)
   A c c es s t o im pro v ed s anitat io n fac ilit ies (% o f po pulat io n)
   Fo res t area (% o f t o t al land area)   
   Nat io nally pro t ec t ed areas (% o f t o tal land area)   
   CO2 em is s io ns (m et ric t o ns per c apit a)   
   GDP per unit o f energy us e (c o ns t ant 2005 P P P $ per k g o f o il equiv alent )   

65
29
12.9
..
0.1
..

G o a l 8 : d e v e lo p a g lo b a l p a r t n e rs h ip f o r d e v e lo pm e n t   
   Telepho ne m ainlines (per 100 peo ple)   
   M o bile pho ne s ubs c ribers (per 100 peo ple)
   Int ernet us ers (per 100 peo ple)   
   P ers o nal c o m put ers (per 100 peo ple)   

0.1
0.0
0.0
..

R wa nd a

19 9 5
..

51.2

..
..

..
..
..
..

..
32
17

193
115
84

..
..

14

7.0
241
34

64
26
13.4
..
0.1
..

0.1
0.0
0.0

..

2 0 0 0
76.6
60.3
5.3
20.3

68
21
10
78

96
33
17

189
113
74

..
31
13

4.7
348
32

65
25
13.9
..
0.1
..

0.2
0.5
0.1
0.1

2 0 0 8
..
..
..

18.0

94
53
22
…

100

..
56

103
62
90

540
52
29

2.8
397
25

65
23
19.5
8.1
0.1
..

0.2
13.6
3.1
0.3

Edu cation ind i cato rs (%)

Measl es immun i zation (% o f 1-year 
o ld s)

IC T ind i cato r s (p er 100 peop l e)

125

100

75

50

25

0

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

P rimary net enrol lment rati o

100

75

50

25

0

15

10

5

0

1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Rati o of gi rl s to boy s i n primary & s ec ondary 
educ ati on

Rwanda

Sub-Saharan A fri c a

Fi x ed + mobi l e s ubs c ri bers
Internet us ers

No t e: F igures in it alic s are f o r years o t her t han t ho s e s pec if ied.  .. indic at es dat a are no t av ailable.

2/ 25/ 10

Dev elo pm ent Ec o no m ic s , D ev elo pm ent Dat a Gro up (DECDG).

29

 
 
 
N O R T H

P R O V I N C E

W E S T
P R O V I N C E

S O U T H

P R O V I N C E

KIGALI CITY

E A S T
P R O V I N C E

N Y A G A T A R E

G A T S I B O

K A Y O N Z A

RWAMAGANA

K I R E H E

N G O M A

B U G E S E R A

GASABO

KICUKIRO

B U R E R A

G I C U M B I
Byumba

R U L I N D O

G A K E N K E

M U S A N Z A

RUBAVU

N Y A B I H U

NGO RO R E RO

R U T S I R O

K A R O N G I

N Y A M A S H E K E

N Y A M A G A B E

N Y A R U G U R U

R U S I Z I

GISAGARA

H U Y E

N Y A N Z A

R U H A N G O

M U H ANG A

K AMON Y I

NYARUGENGE

Bugarama

Rwumba

Kitabi

Ruramba

Kigembe

Munini

Karama

Karaba

Gatagara

Masango

Rusatira

Shyorongi

Kiziguru
Muhura
 Lac 
Muhazi

Kinyami

Mbogo

Lac
Kigarama
Mugesera

Sake

Rukara

Gabiro

Gatunda

Rilima
Gashora

Bugesera

Gikoro

Bicumbi

Kanzi

Rwesero

Cyangugu

Bulinga

Ngaru

Mulindi

Muvumba

Kagitumba

Kirambo

Butaro
Lac
Burera

Nemba

Busogo

Muramba
Kabaya

Kagali

Nyondo

Mabanza

Murunda

Gishyita

Bwakira

Ngoma

Kidaho
Burera

Gikongoro

Gitarama

Butare

Kinihira

Rubavu

Karago 

Rutsiro

Gatsibo

Nyagatare

Kabarore

Mukarange
Rwamagana

Kigabiro

Ndora

Gasaka

Ngoma

Kagano

Rubengera

Nyamabuye

Rukoma

Nyamata

Kicuro

Rugenge

Ndera 

Ruhango

Busasamana

Ngororero

Muhoza

Cyeru

Gakenke

Tare

Kamembe

Kibeho

Kibungo

Kirehe

Gisenyi

Mukamira

Gihingo   

Nyanza

Kibuye

KIGALI

D E M . R E P .
O F
C O N G O

B U R U N D I

T A N Z A N I A

U G A N D A

L a c K i v u

Lac
Ihema

Lac
Kivumba

Lac
Hago

Lac
Mikindi

Lac
Rwanyakizinga

Lac
Ruhondo

Lac
Nasho

Lac
Cywambwe

Lac
Mpanga

Lac
Rweru

Lac
Cyohoha
Sud

K

a

g

e

r

a

N

y

a

b

a

r
n

o

go 

Akanyaru 

m
Kag

t
i

u

a 
b

Kagera 

To 
Sake

To 
Rutshuru

To 
Kisoro

To 
Kabale

To 
Kikagati

To 
Kafunzo

To 
Bugene

To 
Lusahanga

To 
Kirundo

To 
Ngozi

To 
Kayanza

To 
Cibitoke

To 
Cibitoke

To 
Walangu

To 
Nyya-Ghezi

V

i

r

u

n

g

a

M

t
.

s

Volcan
Karisimbi
(4519 m)

30°00'E

31°00'E

29°30'E

30°30'E

29°00'E

29°00'E

30°00'E

29°30'E

30°30'E

2°00'S

2°30'S

2°00'S

1°00'S

1°30'S

1°30'S

RWANDA

0

10

20

30

0

10

20

30 Miles

40 Kilometers

I

B
R

D

3
3
4
7
1
R
2

J

U

N

E

2
0
0
8

RWA N D A

This map was produced by 
the Map Design Unit of The 
World Bank. The boundaries, 
co lo rs , denom ina t ions and 
any other information shown 
on this map do not imply,  on 
the part of The World Bank 
Group, any judgment on the 
legal status  of any territory,  
o r a n y e n d o r s e m e n t o r 
a c c e p t a n c e o f 
s u c h 
boundaries.

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

AKARERE (DISTRICT) CAPITALS

INTARA (PROVINCE) CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

AKARERE (DISTRICT) BOUNDARIES

INTARA (PROVINCE) BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

 
 
 
 
 
