d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Docum ent of 
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 61307 - ML  

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

AND 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

FOR 

THE REPUBLIC OF MALI 

FOR THE PERIOD FY08-FY11 

April 28, 2011 

Country Departm ent for Mali 
AFCW3 
A frica Region 

The International Finance Corporation 
Sub-Saharan A frica Departm ent 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the pe rformance of 
the ir official dut ies . Its contents may not othe rwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The last Coun try Ass istance Strategy for Mali (repor t No.41746 - ML) was d iscussed by the 
Board on February 5, 2008. 

CURRENCY EQU IVALENTS 
Exchange rate effective on Apr il 21 , 2011 
Currency Un it = CFA F ranc (CFAF) 
$1 = CFAF 449 

GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 – December 31 

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
Metr ic System 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREV IATIONS 

AAA 
AFD 

ARV 
BHM 

BoA 
CAADP 
CAS 
CASPR 

Anal yt ical and Ad visory Acti vit ies 
Agen ce Fran çai se de Développem ent 
(F ren ch A gency for Develo pment ) 
AfBD 
Afr ican Develo pment Ban k 
AMADER Agen ce Mali enne pour l e 
développ em ent d e l’én ergi e (Mal ian 
A gen cy for Ene rgy Deve lopment) 
AP I- Mal i Agen ce de Promoti on des 
Investi ssements (Malian In vestment 
Promot io n Agen cy) 
Antiret ro viral 
Banqu e de l ’Ha bi tat du Mali (Malian 
Hou sin g Ban k) 
Banqu e d’ Investi ssement du Mali 
(Mal ian In vestment Ban k) 
Ban k o f Afr ic a 
Comp reh en sive Afr ica A gr iculture  
Count ry Assist an ce Strate gy 
Count ry Assist an ce Strate gy Pro gress 
Report 
Cl imat e Chan ge 
Capac it y Devel opment 
Capac it y Enh an cement Need s 
Assessment s 
CFA Fran c 
Compagni e Mali enne pour l e 
Dévelop pement des T exti les (Malian 
Ginn in g Comp an y) 
Count ry Pro cu rement Assessment 
Report 
Count ry Strategic In vestment 
Framework 
Deve lopment Policy Loan 
Dipthe ria, Pertu ssis and Tetanu s 
Disaste r R isk Man agement 
Debt Su st ainab il it y Anal ysis 

DPL 
DPT 
DRM 
DSA 

CC 
CD 
CENA 

CFAF 
CMDT 

CPAR 

B IM 

CS IF 

EDM 

EFA-FTI 

ESSD TF 

EU 
E ITI 

ESW 
EU 
F IAS 
FSAP 
FY 
GAC 
GBD TA 

DTIS 
Diagno st ic Trad e Integrat ion Stud y 
ECF 
Ext end ed Cred it Fac il it y 
ECOWAS Economic Commun it y o f West 
Afr ican St ates 
Electri ci té du Mali (Electr ic it y o f 
Mal i) 
Educat ion For All – Fast -Track 
Init iat ive 
Tru st Fund for En vironment all y and 
So ciall y Su sta in abl e Devel opment 
Europ ean Un io n 
Ext ract ive Indu st r ies Tran sp arency 
Init iat ive 
Economic and Sector Wo rk 
Europ ean Un io n 
Fore ign In vestment Ad viso ry Se rvice 
F inanc ial Sect or Assessment Pro gram 
F iscal Yea r 
Go ve rn ance and Anti -Cor rupt ion 
Go ve rn ance and Bud ge t 
Decent ral izat ion TA o pe rat ion 
Gro ss Domest ic Prod uct 
Gl obal En viro nment Fun d 
Go ve rnment o f Mal i 
Growt h an d Po ve rt y Reduct ion 
Framework 
GSP 
Growt h Suppo rt P ro ject 
ha 
Hecta re 
HIV/AIDS Human Immun ode fic iency 
Viru s/Acqu ired Immuno de fic iency 
Synd rome 
In vestment Cl imat e Assessment 
In fo rmat ion and Commun icat ion 
Technolo gies 
Internat ion al Deve lopment Agen cy 
In stitut io nal Deve lopment Fund 

GDP 
GEF 
GoM 
GPRSF 

IDA 
IDF 

ICA 
ICT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IFC 
IMF 
K g 
JAS 
JSAN 
M&E 
MDG 
M IGA 

MoU 
MSME 
MTEF 
MW 
NRM 
OHADA 

ON 
PAGAM  
- GFP 

PAPAM 

PEFA 

PEMFAR 

PER 
PETS 
PFM 

Internat ion al F inan ce Corp oratio n 
Internat ion al Mon eta ry Fund 
Kilo gram 
Jo int Assistan ce St rat egy 
Jo int Sta ff Ad viso ry Note 
Mo nito r in g and eval uat ion 
M illenn ium Deve lopment Go al 
Mult ilat eral In vestment Gua rant ee 
A gen cy 
Memorand um o f Und erst and in g 
M icro, Sma ll an d Medium Ent erp r ises 
M id -Term E xpend iture F ramework 
Mega Watt 
Natu ral Resource Management 
Organi sati on pour l’Harmo ni sati on 
du Droi t des Affai res en Afri que 
(Or gan izat ion fo r the Ha rmon izat ion 
o f Bu siness Law in Afr ica ) 
Office du Nige r 
Plan d’Ac tion Gouve rnemen tal pour la 
Mode rnisation et le Renforceme nt de la 
Gestion des Finance s Publ iques (Ac t ion 
Pla n for Modern iz ing and Strengthe n ing 
Pub lic Fina nc ia l Ma na geme nt) 
Pro jet d’ appui à la productivi té 
agricole au Mal i (Agr icu lture 
Produc t ivity Pro ject) 
Publ ic E xp end iture and F inanc ial 
Account ab ilit y 
Publ ic E xp end iture Man agement and 
F inanc ial Acco untab il it y Review 
Publ ic E xp end iture Review 
Publ ic E xp end iture Trackin g Su rvey 
Publ ic F in an c ial Man agement 

PHRD 

P IU 
PRODEC 

PRSC 
PRSP 
PSD 
RH 
SDR 
SHA 

Japan Policy and Human Resou rces 
Deve lopment Fund 
Pro ject Implement ation Unit 
Pr ogramme de Développem ent 
Décen nal de l’Edu cati on (Ten Year 
Edcu at ion Deve lopment P ro gram) 
Po ve rt y Redu ction Suppo rt Cred it 
Po ve rt y Redu ction Strat egy Pape r 
Pr iva te sector d evel opment 
Reprod uct ive h ealth 
Sp ec ial Drawin g R ight s 
Secr étari at à l’Harmoni sati on de 
l’Ai de (Aid Ha rmon izat ion 
Secreta r iat )  
Su sta in abl e Land Man agement 
Small and Med ium Ente rpr ise 
Scal in g Up Ren ewabl e En ergy in Low 
Income Count r ies P ro gram 
SOTELMA Soci été d es Tél écommu ni cati ons du 
Mali (Mal ian Tel eco mmun icat ion 
comp an y) 
So cial Sa fet y Net 
Suppo rt and Tra in in g fo r 
Entrepreneu rsh ip Pro gram  
SWAp 
Sector -Wide App roach 
T/h a 
To n pe r h ect are 
TA 
Techn ical Assist ance 
UN 
Un ited Nat ion s 
UNDP 
Un ited Nat ion s De velop ment Pro gram 
WAEMU West Afr ican E conomic and 
Mo net ary Un ion  
West Afr ica Power Pool 
World Ban k Gro up 
World Ban k In st itute 

WAPP 
WBG 
WB I 

SLM 
SME 
SREP 

SSN 
STEP 

IDA 

IFC 

Vice P resid ent : Ob iage l i K. Ezekwesil i (AFRVP ) 
Act in g Cou ntry Directo r : Ou sman e Diagana (AFCW3) 
Task Team Lead er : Syb ill e Cryst al (AFCML ) 

Vice P resid ent : Th ier ry Tanoh (CXAVP ) 
Director :Yolande Duh em (CAFWO) 
Senior Count ry Office r : Jé rôme Cretegn y (CAFW3 ) 

Th e followin g Wo rld Ban k Group St a ff cont r ibuted to the prepa rat io n o f th e CAS Pro gress Report : Syb ill e C ryst al 
(TTL), Chr ist ian E gh o ff, Fil y Boua ré S isso ko , Cla ra An a Cout inho d e Sou sa, Ch eick Dio p, S imon Da vies, Tawfik 
Raml ootah, Fab io Gall i, Fabr ice Berthol et, Ol ivie r Durand, Abdoul aye Tou ré, Yeyan de San gho, A gad iou Dama , 
Taou fiq Ben noun a, P ie rre Kaman o ,  Aissatou Diack, Joh n May, Set areh Razma ra, Zié Co ulib al y, M ichel Noel, And ré 
Ryb a, Fadwa Benn an i, Leon ardo Iaco von e , Ma iko M iayke, M ichel Ro gy , Br igitte Bo coum, Amad ou Dem, Jérôme 
Créte gn y, Deo Nd ikuman a, Cono r Heal y, Kar ima Laoual i Lad jo, Moh amed Tou ré, Ro n ke Ogun sul ire, and Fran k 
Douamb a. The t eam bene fit ed from ad vice and gu idance from Ou sman e Diagana . 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MALI 
COUNTRY ASSITANCE STRATEGY 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I. 
II. 

Page 
INTRODUCT ION ...................................................................................................................... 1 
COUNTRY CONTEXT .............................................................................................................. 1 
A. Po lit ical and Secur ity Con text ............................................................................................... 1 
B. Economic Con text ................................................................................................................ 2 
C. Social and Pover ty con text .................................................................................................... 3 
III. CAS IMPLEMENTAT ION PROGRESS .................................................................................... 4 
A. Progress on CAS S trateg ic Ob jective I: P romo te rap id and broad -Based Growth ................. 4 
B. Progress on CAS S trateg ic Ob jective II: Strengthen Pub lic Sector Performance ................... 6 
C. Imp lemen tation Progress ...................................................................................................... 7 
D. Partnersh ip and the Aid Effectiveness Agenda ...................................................................... 9 
IV. STRENGTHENED AND EXTENDED CAS PROGRAM ....................................................... 10 
V. MANAG ING RISKS ................................................................................................................ 12 

L ist of Appendixes 

Country Specific append ixes 
Append ix 1 : Mali CAS Updated Resu lts Matr ix  
Append ix 2 : 
IDA Lend ing and Analytica l Program  
Append ix 3 : 
Status of MDG s 
Append ix 4 : 
IFC and M IGA P rograms 
Append ix 5 : 
Partnersh ip and Aid Effectiveness 
Append ix 6 : 
C limate Change Effects on Malian Main Development Sectors 
Append ix 7 : Mali Coun try At-A-G lance 

Standard CAS Annexes 
CAS Annex B2: 
Selected Ind icators of Bank Por tfo lio Performance and Management 
CAS Annex B3: 
IDA Program Summary 
CAS Annex B6: 
Key Economic Ind icators 
CAS Annex B7: 
Key Exposure Ind icators 
CAS Annex B8: 
Operations Por tfo lio (IDA and Gran ts) 
CAS Annex B8: 
Statemen ts of IFC‟s Held and D isbursed Por tfo lio 

Map No. IBRD 33443 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
The Country Assistance Stra tegy Progress Report (CASPR) reviews the relevance of the 
Bank’s FY08 -11 Country Assistance Stra tegy (CAS) for Mali. The CAS suppor ts Mali‟s second 
pover ty reduction strategy, the G rowth and Pover ty Reduction S trategy F ramework (GPRSF ), 
designed as the f irst phase of the 10-year action p lan to ach ieve the M illenn ium Developmen t Goals 
(MDG s). The 2007-2011 GPRSF promo tes strong growth of average 7 percen t per year and targets a 
reduction in pover ty incidence from 56 percen t in 2007 to 51.2 percen t in 2011 through wealth 
generation, emp loymen t creation and strengthened pub lic sector performance. T he GPRSF is 
ar ticu lated around three strategic p illars: (1) develop ing infrastructure and strengthen ing productive 
sectors; (2) conso lidating the pub lic sector str uctural reform agenda; and (3) s trengthen ing the social 
sector. The CAS selectively assists the Government of Mali (GoM ) in ach ieving its ke y GPRSF 
ob jectives. Th is CASPR prov ides an update on the country context , progress toward ach ievin g the 
CAS ob jectives and ou tcomes, evo lu tion of key r isks, and in troduces areas of emphasis in the 
framework go ing forward.  

2. 
The CASPR confirms tha t the stra tegic priorities of the CAS rema in relevant and well aligned 
w ith na tiona l prioriti es and the Africa Strategy, and tha t progress toward CAS outcomes is broad ly 
on track . The Bank‟s interventions, through its two strategic ob jectives to promote rap id and broad -
based growth and to strengthen pub lic sector performance, remain valid. G iven M ali land locked status, 
vu lnerab ility to external shocks, low level of human development, and admin istrative capacity 
constrain ts, the new Afr ica S trategy endorsed by the Board of D irector on March 1, 2011 provides a 
so lid framework for moving towards ach ie v ing the CAS strategic goals. In that context, the CASPR 
emphasizes the need for attention in the key areas of competitiveness and emp loymen t, vu lnerab ility 
and resilience, as well as governance and pub lic sector capacity wh ile dep loy ing our par tnersh ip fo r 
more inclusive growth and social cohesion. T herefore, dur ing the proposed CAS extension per iod, the 
Bank program will be a con tinuation of activ ities under taken to support the GoM to enhance the 
regu latory and institu tional framework for infrastructure a nd pr ivate investment to improve the 
provis ion of cr itical production factors as well as economic productiv ity and d iversif ication, and to 
strengthen pub lic sector eff iciency for improved access to and delivery of bas ic social services. In 
add ition, in ord er to take in to accoun t emerg ing challenges related to the vo latilit y of commod ity 
pr ices and the national and regional secur ity situation and to respond to GoM ‟s new pr ior ities, special 
emphasis will be devo ted to suppor ting the human development agenda a nd help in g the GoM to 
address the popu lation, education, youth, social protection, and urban and per i -urban challenges. 

A . POLITICAL AND SECURITY CONTEXT 

II. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT 

3. Ma li continues to enjoy political stability and is deepening its dem ocra tic process in the run 
up to the 2012 elections. Presiden tial and par liamen tary elections will take p lace in Apr il and Ju ly 
2012 respectively under a democratic system reinforced by the proposed constitu tional reform package 
that includes the creation of an up per house of Par liamen t, strengthen ing of independen t med ia and 
election watchdogs, and a new code of conduct for po lit icians. A referendum on the proposed changes 
is schedu led for 2011.  

4. 
Insecurity in Northern Ma li persists. The curren t situation resu lts from a conf luence of illic it 
traff ickin g, g lobal and regional terror networks, and armed groups connected in d irectly or d irectly to 
the legacy of armed insurgencies in the region. T he area h istor ically depends on trans -border f lows of 
goods and peop le, in par ticu lar with A lger ia, Maur itan ia and N iger. Mali‟s geograph ic position 
exp lains al-Qaida in the Islam ic Maghreb‟s presence in Nor thern Mali, a ligh tly popu lated area with 
few developmen t so lu tions and hence suscep tib le to i llicit economic activit y. To overcome th is 

- 1 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenge, Mali emphasizes the need for a regional “Sahelo -Saharan” so lu tion comb ined with well 
targeted development programs tailored to the specif ic needs of the Nor th of Mali . 

5. 
Ongo ing po litica l crisis in Libya and Cô te d’Ivo ire make s Mali even more vulnerab le to 
conflict and insecurity . Libya has a strong presence in Mali and p lays a prominen t ro le in the 
economy w ith major investmen ts in several sectors, includ ing banking, tour ism, and agr icu lture. 
Fur thermore, in the past, Libya‟s med iating ro le has been key in reso lv ing conf lict between Mali‟s 
cen tral Governmen t and the T uareg commun ities in the northern par t of the country. Libya is also 
home to thousands of Malian imm igran ts. In add ition to their common mem bersh ip in WAEMU, Côte 
d‟Ivo ire and Mali main tain strong economic, socia l and cu ltural relationsh ips. Cô te d‟Ivo ire remains 
Mali‟s b iggest par tner in the sub -region and its corr idor still represents the channel for abou t 40 
percen t of Mali‟s trade. In add ition, there is a sign if ican t number of Malians citizens livin g in Côte 
d‟Ivo ire.  

B . ECONOMIC CONTEXT 

6. 
Desp ite a difficult international environment, Ma li’s macroeconomic performance has been 
broad ly favorab le. The very lim ited in tegration of Mali with in ternational cap ital markets insu lated its 
economy from the d irect effects of the global economic slowdown. Remittances dropped somewhat as 
labor markets weakened in Europe, bu t budget suppor t by development partners was main tained. Real 
gross domestic product (GDP ) growth averaged 5.1 percent a year in the 2008 -2010 per iod dr iven by a 
strong performance of agr icu lture boosted by good climat ic cond itions, supportive po lic ies ( includ ing 
GoM‟s inpu t subsid ies) and robust pr ices for go ld (75 percent of expor ts) that more than offset the 
decline in go ld production. Th is contr ibu ted to the return of average inf lation to 2.2 percen t and 1.4 
percen t in 2009 and 2010 respective ly, af ter reach ing 9.1 percen t in 2008 due to the o il and food cr isis. 
Year-on -year inf lation reached 3.6 percent in January 2011 due to the r ise in in ternational commod ity 
pr ices and to trade d isrup tions linked to the turmo il in Cô te d‟Ivo ire. Favorab le terms of trade helped 
the external curren t account d ef icit (exclud ing off icia l transfers) decrease from 13.9 percen t of GDP in 
2008 to 9.0 percen t of GDP in 2010.  

7. 
F isca l performance in the 2008 -2010 period was in line w ith the GoM ’s program supported 
under the IMF ECF arrangement .  Desp ite the food and f uel cr isis of 2008, the basic f iscal def icit 
was main tained at the sustainab le leve l of 1.0 percent of GDP. With the imp lemen tation of an 
extraord inary program of investmen ts f inanced with resources from the pr ivatization of the telecom 
parastatal, SOTELMA, the basic def ic it is temporar ily unsustainab le but the GoM is imp lemen ting a 
cred ib le p lan to return the def icit to sustainab le levels by 2013. 

8. While the med ium -term macroeconomic outlook is favorable, Mali remains very vulnerab le to 
exogenous shocks tha t may hamper its grow th. Given the cr itica l importance of agr icu lture in growth 
performance and consumer pr ice trends, the Malian economy is par ticu lar ly vu lnerab le to climatic 
shocks. The economy is also vu lnerab le to terms of trade shocks. U ncer tain ties increased in recent 
mon ths with the po lit ical cr is is in Co te d‟Ivo ire and the po lit ical turmo il in Libya . Based on the above, 
real GDP growth is expected to be 5.3 percen t in 2011 and to remain at that level dur ing the 2012 -14 
per iod dr iven by h igh go ld, co tton and grain pr ices. Agr icu lture is projected to grow at 8.3 percen t in 
2011 and 6.3 percen t in the med ium term. Average growth rate for go ld is projected at 10 percen t in 
2012 and 2013 before go ld production starts declin ing moderately star ting in 2014. The recen t surge in 
commod ity pr ices is expected to cause a moderate increase in inf lation to abou t 4.5 percen t in 2011, 
return ing to below 3 percen t from 2012 . Buoyan t go ld and co tton pr ices are expected to more than 
offset h igh o il and food pr ic es thus help ing strengthen the external curren t account balance in 2011 
and beyond. The 2011 Budget Law targets a budget def ic it of 2 percen t of GDP, wh ich cou ld be 
revised to 2.5 percen t to accoun t for measures to mitigate the impact of the fuel and o il p r ice increases 
on pover ty. These cou ld include reducing impor t taxes on some food items.  

- 2 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
9. 
To increase its ab ility to respond to shocks, Ma li needs to accelerate actions to increase 
productivity and d iversify its economy. This is rendered more urgen t by th e pro jected decline of 
exist ing go ld production, Mali‟s main source of foreign exchange and an importan t source of f iscal 
revenues, wh ich has already increased deb t vu lnerab ilit ies. Wh ile the effects of r isin g commod it y 
pr ices have been rather positive on Mali on the supp ly side , with h igh go ld pr ices mitigating the 
decline of production in 2010 and the reinv igoration of cotton production as a resu lt of r is ing 
in ternational co tton pr ices, there is concern on the demand s ide with o il pr ices affecting the balance of 
paymen ts and the budget def icit as the GoM is reluctan t to pass the increase in international pr ices to 
domestic consumer s. In add ition, caution shou ld be exercised given the uncer tain ty of commod ity 
pr ices over the med ium and long term. In line w ith the new Afr ica S trategy, the Bank program is 
strengthen ing Mali‟s effor ts to raise agr icu ltural productiv ity, better link farmers to markets and 
increase resilience on the agr icu lture side through its support to Off ice du N iger (ON ) designed to 
improve the managemen t of irr igated agr icu lture, ongo ing analytical work on growth, and po licy 
d ialogue on the need for selectiv ity in the agr icu lture subsidy po lic y. The Bank is also suppor ting the 
estab lishment of a transparen t tar iff ad justmen t mechan ism for energy products. In add ition, the 2010 
Deb t Sustainab ility Analys is upgraded the r isk of deb t d istress from low to moderate due to increased 
vu lnerab ilities related to h igher vo latility of go ld exports.  

C . SOC IAL AND POVERTY CONTEX T 

10. Rap id popula tion growth and high levels of fertility pose cha llenges to economic growth, 
poverty reduction, and achievement of MDG s. Prelim inary resu lts of the 2009 popu lation census 
h igh ligh t the urgency in tacklin g demograph ic issues. At curren t net growth rate of 3.6 percent per 
year, the popu lation (1 4.5 million) will doub le in 23 years. W ith a total fer tility rate of 6.6 ch ildren, 
unchanged for the last two decades, and a mortalit y rate for ch ildren under f ive declin ing stead ily, 
popu lation in Mali is bound to continue to increase for a long time, g iven its age structure. With such 
popu lation growth, GDP per cap ita growth is on ly abou t 1.5 percen t. Mali‟s h igh popu lation growth 
pu ts excessive pressure on pub lic resources for service de livery. On ly 3 MDG s are likely to be 
ach ieved (see Append ix 3). 

11. Progress in expand ing access to potab le water has been made during the last decade, but the 
cha llenge rema ins to achieve the MDG targets. Access rate to safe dr inking wa ter is estimated at 73 
percen t in 2009 (78 percent of the popu lation served in rural areas and 91 percen t in urban areas). 
Wh ile progress in water supp ly is remarkab le, san itation remains confron ted w ith major challenges . 
On ly 32 percen t of househo lds have access to improved san itation services in rural areas and 45 
percen t in urban areas. T o sustain progress toward the MDG ach ievemen ts, it wou ld be necessary to 
provide water services to over 400,000 add itional peop le each year and san itation services to 720,000 
peop le. T h is wou ld cost abou t US$110 million a year for water supp ly (exclud ing large water 
production investmen ts) and US$30 million a year for san itation.  

12. To reduce poverty, Ma li need s to reach a higher level of GDP growth and better target pro -
poor expenditures . GDP growth has no t ach ieved the 7 percen t requ ired for rap id pover ty reduction. 
Pro jections in the 2009 GPRSF P rogress Repor t estimate p overty at 43.7 percen t in 2009 (53.5 percent 
in rural areas from 57.6 percent in 2006 against 23.5 percen t in urban areas from 25.5 percen t in 
2006 ). Actual poverty rates are expected in the coming months based on data from the 2010 househo ld 
survey. T he positive economic ind icators have no t translated in to much improved human developmen t 
ou tcomes. T he coun try ranks 160 ou t of 169 countr ies in UNDP ‟s 2010 Human Development Index.  

13. Ma li’s high vulnerab ility to a variety of shocks has increased the demand for social safety 
nets (SSN ) programs. The scope and coverage of the existing SSN system is too lim ited and most 
in terven tions (main ly food transf ers) are small in scale, designed as temporary programs , and f inanced 

- 3 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by external and ad hoc resources. Spend ing on SSN programs on ly corresponds to 0.5 percent of GDP, 
wh ile over 25 percen t of the popu lation is food insecure. G iven the needs of the chron ic poor and the 
limited f iscal space availab le for SSN programs, an expansion of the SSN programs and an allocation 
of scarce resources to well targeted and cost-eff icien t programs are necessary.  

III. 

CAS IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS 

14. Good progress toward CAS milestones and outcomes has been achieved and the CAS program 
is genera lly on track . Notab le advances have been made in relation to improved agr icu ltural 
productiv ity, irr igation capacities, competitiveness of selected supp ly chains, business environmen t, 
eff iciency of pub lic expend iture managemen t, 
immun ization coverage, and access 
to rural 
transpor tation, electr icity, and education ( in par ticu lar pr imary education). Progress has been 
particu lar ly slow in the health sector. Also , f ur ther progress will be requ ired dur ing the remainder of 
the CAS per iod, especially on key institu tional reforms wh ich have faced delays due to the time 
needed to reach a consensual approach rather than a lack of GoM ‟s commitmen t to the reform agenda. 
With regard to infrastructure, the key challenges that Mali needs to tack le are in the area of the 
institu tional and regu latory framework in the energy sector as well as electr icit y tar iff issues, and the 
restructur ing of the TRANSRAIL concession . Mali needs to fur ther promo te pr ivate investment with a 
regu latory framework for industr ia l zones and the imp lemen tation of the next phase of the investmen t 
climate reform program. Mali also needs to improve f iduciary oversigh t (especially external contro l). 
Special emphasis shou ld be p laced on improving equ ity and rele vance of the education system, the 
management of the health sector, and addressing the demand for and use of popu lation and 
reproductive health services given the h igh rate of demograph ic growth . AAA has been an impor tan t 
componen t of the CAS, both in addressing knowledge gaps in emerging country challenges and in 
suppor ting reforms at the sector leve l. IFC‟s strategy comp lemen ted IDA‟s efforts in the development 
of the pr ivate sector and the pr ivate delivery of health services . Details of progress to date and updated 
ou tcome ind icators are ref lected in the CAS resu lts matr ix (see Append ix 1).  

A . PROGRESS ON CAS STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE I: PROMOTE RAPID AND BROAD-B ASED GROWTH 

15. Agricultural productivity, irriga tion capacities, and competitiveness of selected supp ly chains 
improved . The Bank has suppor ted institu tional refo rms, investmen ts in irr igab le lands, and the r ice 
in itiative launched by the GoM as a response to the 2008 food pr ice cr isis . Mali adop ted a new pr ice 
mechan ism link ing domestic co tton pr ices to wor ld market pr ices . The pr ivatization of the four 
Compagn ie Malienne pour le Développemen t des Textiles (CMDT) subsid iar ies was launched and is 
expected to be f inalized by mid 2011 . T he PRSC ser ies has supported the pr ivatiz ation process and the 
adoption of the legis lative framework estab lish in g the regu latory structure for the cotton sector af ter 
the pr ivatization of CMDT. T he developmen t of new ly irr igated land developed led to a r ice 
production increase of 26,000 tons in 2010. Go ing forward, Mali needs to fur ther exp lo it its irr igation 
and commercial agr icu lture po ten tial and to d iversify its agr icu ltural productio n beyond co tt on and 
r ice at ON. T he Bank will strengthen its support to increase irr igation capacities, facilitate techno logy 
transfer to increase productiv ity w ith a par ticu lar focus on r ice, cowpea and milk yie lds , and improve 
competitiveness of selected supp ly chains by promo ting value add ition for agr icu ltural and livestock 
products.  

16. Work is ongoing to improve natura l resources management (NRM ) and resilience to climate 
change (CC). To help Mali‟s agr icu lture and natural resource -based economy to adapt to uncer tain 
climate , the Bank has provided analyt ical, TA and investmen t suppor t (cost benef it analys is , pub lic 
expend iture rev iew for NRM and sustainab le land managemen t - SLM, and a Coun try S trategic 
Framework for Sustainab le Land Managemen t) (see Append ix 6). T he Bank is help in g to strengthen 
the d isaster r isk managemen t (DRM) institu tional framework, reinforce key institu tions‟ techn ical 
capacities, and imp lemen t a p ilo t pro ject for vu lnerab le commun ities‟ protection , given that near ly 30 

- 4 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
percen t of Mali‟s popu lation lives in areas at r isk. The Agr icu lture P roductiv ity Pro ject is develop ing 
and d issem inating land managemen t too ls and good practices for agr icu lture investmen ts. Mali also 
benef its from the Integrated Land and Water Managemen t for Adaptation to C limate Var iab ility and 
Change trust fund wh ich suppor ts the estab lishmen t of an operational information system for DRM, 
CC and SLM. Go ing forward, the Bank will help strengthen the resilience of agr icu ltural and natural 
resources secto rs with the preparation of a regional Bank/GEF project in support of the Great Green 
Wall in it iative. T he Urban Environmen t Analys is cou ld help identify areas of co llaboration for 
sustainab le urban developmen t. 

17. There has been good progress on severa l transport outcomes to increase access. With the 
Bank‟s con tr ibu tion through the Second Transport P ro ject and Transpor t Corr idor Improvemen t 
Pro ject, abou t 1,450 km of key unpaved rural roads have been either per iod ically main tained or 
rehab ilitated and 220 km of key paved roads have been improved. The percen tage of main roads in 
good cond ition increased to abou t 64.8 percen t in 2011. Sustainab ility of road transpor t infrastructure 
has been enhanced by supporting the institutional developmen t of Road Fund and Au thor ity. A lso, 
Bamako‟s airpor t safety has improved as a resu lt of the investment in secur ity and safety equ ipmen t 
f inanced through the West and Cen tral Afr ica Av iation Secur ity P ro ject as well as the strengthen ing of 
the regu latory oversigh t of the airport operations by the C iv il Aviation Au thor ity . The restructur ing of 
the TRANSRAIL concession is still underway but is suffer ing from a lack of decision mak ing of the 
two governmen ts overseeing the c oncession. TRANSRAIL le gal pro tection from liqu idation will 
exp ire before June 2011 and the on ly cred ib le rescue package wou ld invo lve an immed iate jo int 
con tr ibu tion of CFA10 b illion from Senegal and Mali ahead of reach ing any agreemen t with the 
current or a new pr imary shareho lder on the revised terms of the concession con tract. Go ing forward, 
the Bank will focus on increasing all weather rural access, making rural and urban transpor t 
infrastructure more resilien t to climate change by focusing on the provis ion of better drainage, small 
structures and cu lverts, improving the quality and eff iciency of  urban transpor t systems, supporting 
transpor t facilitation and road transpor t infrastructure on key regional corr idors, and working with the 
governmen ts of Mali and Senegal to ensure the effective restructur ing of the TRANSRAIL concession 
through d irec t f inancia l suppor t to TRANS RAIL‟s 2020 investmen t p lan. 

18. Access to electricity improv ed but cha llenges rema in in the sector’s institutiona l reform and 
its susta inab ility . Bank support to rural electr if ication contr ibuted to incr ease access to electr icity to 
22 percent in 2010 (11 percen t in rural areas). Mali is on track regard ing the expansion of generation 
with the comp letion of two thermal generation p lan ts. In add ition, progress has been made on the 
regional power in tegration side with the 60MW Félou hyd ropower project expected to be 
comm iss ioned by end 2012. T he restructur ing of EDM -SA has been in itiated and the legal unbund ling 
of the water and electr icit y sectors is ongo ing. However, the imp lemen tation of EDM -SA recovery 
p lan is slow and the company‟s f inancial v iab ility deter iorated, impair ing efforts to improve its 
operational performance. In a context of r ising o il pr ices, the f inancial sustainab ility of the sector is a 
major issue. Fo llow ing the Ju ly 2009 ad justmen t of electr icity tar iffs, p rogress has been slow vis-à-vis 
the adop tion of the electr icity tar iff adjustmen t mechan ism . An in ter im tar iff mechan ism , wh ich 
def ines gu id ing pr incip les and the methodo logy for tar iff adjustments, was adopted in February 
2011.T he techn ical work to calibrate the tar iff formu la shou ld be comp leted in June 2011. Go ing 
forward, the Bank will support the GoM ‟s emphasis on increasing access and pursue techn ical work 
and d ialogue on institu tional, regu latory and tar iff issues, and on enhancing energy eff iciency and 
demand-side managemen t. In add ition, as part of the Scaling Up Renewab le Energy in Low Income 
Countr ies Program (SREP), AfDB, IFC and IDA w ill suppor t the GoM to develop an investmen t 
strategy for renewab le rural electr if ication with pr ivate sector invo lvemen t.  

19. Ma li has achieved considerable progress in improving the investment climate. SOTELMA, the 
national telecom company, has been pr ivatized. An investmen t promotion agency has been estab lished 
in 2006, and a one-stop shop for investors in 2009. It now takes 72 hours to regis ter a new business in 

- 5 - 

 
 
 
 
Mali. Documen tation requ irements for trade logist ics have been cu t, the property transfer tax rate has 
been reduced, and tax f ilin g has been conso lidated. As a resu lt of the imp lemen tation of a jo in t TA and 
partia l cred it facility by IFC and IDA, the share of shor t and med ium - term small and med ium 
en terpr ise (SME) cred it in total bank cred it has increased sign if ican tly. In add ition, the IFC and the 
Bank imp lemen ted several programs to improve SME productiv ity and skills, includ ing the Suppor t 
and T rain ing for En trepreneursh ip Program (STEP ), the T r ickle Up P rogram and the G rassroots 
Business In itiative. F inally, IFC trained more than 250 en trepreneurs in the advan tages of leasing, in 
partnersh ip with 10 professional associations. Desp ite th is progress, several challenges remain. T he 
new industr ia l zone law, approved by the Cab inet, has not been submitted to Par liamen t. There is no 
equ ipped industr ial zone in the coun try. As a resu lt, access to equ ipped agro - industr ial land is severely 
limited. Access to long-term cred it remains a severe constrain t for enterpr ises, in particu lar SMEs. To 
address these challen ges, the Bank will suppor t: ( i) preparation of the regu latory framework for 
industr ial zones fo llow ing the adop tion of the new law by Par liamen t; ( ii) in itial infrastructure 
investmen ts in the industr ial zone of Bamako-Sénou ; and ( iii) feasib ility stud ie s for agro-processing 
zones of S ikasso and Mopti. The Bank will also suppor t phase 2 of the investment climate reform 
program and the new wave of reforms in the information and commun ication techno logy sector.  

B . PROGRESS ON CAS STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE II: STRENGTHEN PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE 

20. Reforms are improving pub lic expend iture management. Impor tan t steps were taken by the 
Governmen t since 2007 in the con text of the imp lemen tation of the PAGAM -GFP, supported by the 
second PRSC ser ies. T he budget is prepared with increasing regard to Government po lic y, ref lecting a 
larger number of M in istr ies w ith ro lling MTEF s. Competitiveness, value for money and contro ls in 
procuremen t has also improved. Procur ement contro ls and regu latory bod ies have been estab lished 
and in 2010, open b idd ing procedure corresponded to abou t 77 percen t of the total recorded 
Governmen t con tracts. The effectiveness of in ternal contro ls has also improved, helped by concer ted 
efforts to increase capacity. F inally, good progress was made in budget reporting practices, as 
evidenced by the regu lar pub lication of in tra -year budget repor ts and the submiss ion of annual 
f inancial statemen ts to the National Assemb ly on time for the d iscussio n of the fo llow ing year budget. 
Areas in wh ich progress was unsatisfactory include external aud it and in tergovernmental f iscal 
relations. The framework for scru tiny of pub lic f inances and fo llow up by the execu tive is weak. 
S imilar ly, the framework for inter-governmen tal relations is inadequate, resu lting in lower than 
p lanned transfers of resources from the cen tral governmen t to the decentraliz ed le vel. T o advance 
pub lic f inance managemen t ( PFM) reform, the Government approved in 2010 the 5 -year PAGAM II, 
wh ich will benef it from Bank support though PRSCs and the Governance and Budget Decen tralization 
(GBD ) TA operation. Pr ior ities will include strengthen ing procurement practic es, includ ing through 
increased transparency and par ticipation, strengthened qualit y of budget repor ts and f inancial 
statements, strengthened capacity for f iscal operations in a con text of decen tralization and enhanced 
f iduciary oversigh t. 

21. Ma li has made significant progress in expanding access to education, especially basic 
educa tion. The Bank has continued its suppor t to the GoM‟s ten -year education program (PRODEC). 
Imp lemen tation of the PRODEC resu lted in increased gros s enro llmen t rates for pr imary and lower 
secondary education. Commun ities, Medersas and pr ivate schoo ls contr ibuted to th is increase. Pr imary 
comp letion rates improved go ing from 43.5 to 56.5 percent over the past f ive years and the gap in 
comp letion rates between boys and g ir ls declined from 15 to 8 percent. T he GoM performed well in 
terms of f inancing basic education with the share to pr imary education go ing from 35 to 40 percen t 
and the share of non- teach ing staff declin ing thereby improvin g the quality of education expend itures. 
However, there are ser ious regional and gender d ispar ities, par ticu lar ly in No rthern Mali. Efforts to 
improve qualit y have been made bu t equ ity and relevance of the education system remain prob lematic. 
Train ing goals were surpassed bu t on ly 300 schoo ls have the necessary books.  Secondary and post 
secondary, includ ing vocational education and train in g, are par ticu lar ly affected by the weak quality of 

- 6 - 

 
 
 
 
the system. Th is translates in to low literacy and skill levels, scarce qualif ied la bor, and almost non -
existen t and costly business suppor t services resu lting in low labor productiv ity . Go ing forward, the 
Bank will suppor t the GoM to better def ine and imp lemen t an education program to increase the 
ou tpu t and qualit y of the education system to improve the overall qualif ication of the labor force and 
to lin k the sector to the job market. 

22. Except for immuniza tion coverage, progress in the hea lth sector is too slow . Immun ization 
coverage has greatly progressed. T he percen tage of ch ildren under 1 year of age immun ized with 
DPT3 progressed from 68 percen t in 2006 to close to 100 percen t in 2009 . However, infan t mor tality 
at 103 per 1,000 live b irths and maternal mor tality at 830 per 100,000 live b ir ths remain very h igh . 
Reproductive health (RH ) ind icators are poor with on ly 57 percen t of deliver ie s attended by skilled 
personnel, and 8.2 percen t of 15-49 year o ld women using contraceptives. So far, on ly 2.9 percent of 
Malians have access to health mutuals. Qualit y of care remains a prob lem. Human resource reforms 
have been imp lemen ted bu t they are lim ited to the creation of a new d irectorate that has no t yet 
ach ieved its ob jective to post midwifes and nurses in the rural areas, thus resu lting in large inequ ities 
in access to quality health services. Go ing forward, in terventions have to be reinforced in the areas of 
RH, family p lann ing, and f inancia l pro tection of peop le requ ir ing access to health services. IFC 
suppor ts the pr ivate delivery of health services through the Health in Afr ica in itiative and is provid ing 
TA to estab lish a pub lic pr ivate d ia logue committee and to create a pr ivate health sec tor alliance, 
improve the regu latory framework govern ing the pr ivate health sector, and increase access to 
f inancing for the pr ivate sector. 

23. The na tiona l response to the HIV /AIDS and access to HIV /AIDS related services have 
improved . Sustained f inancial contr ibu tion to f igh t H IV /AIDS has enab led the provis ion of vo lun tary 
counseling and testing to more than 12,000 persons. Ou t of about 35,000 persons elig ib le for 
an tiretroviral treatmen t, 70 percen t have access to the treatment. Twen ty - two pr ivate centers now offer 
testing services and more than 70 enterpr ises and business associations have imp lemen ted an action 
p lan to f igh t H IV/AIDS. The GoM allocates abou t US$4 million every year to f igh t H IV /AIDS and is 
p lann ing to set up a ded icated fund to try to addr ess the unpred ictab ilit y of deve lopmen t partner 
fund ing. T he study to set up th is fund is ongo ing. T he Bank p lans to suppor t GoM by strengthen ing 
the system in p lace to d istr ibu te antiretroviral drugs and prov ide screen ing services. T he proposed 
Reproductive Health P ro ject w ill con tinue the d ialogue on strateg ic issues related to H IV /AIDS, 
includ ing its mainstreaming in the GoM‟s program. 

C . IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS 

24. Delivery of the p lanned IDA lending program has been on track and lending commitments 
exceed the indicative CAS program . Only the Governance and Budget Decen tralization TA operation 
slipped in order to fu lly align its design with the 2010 action p lan for modern izing and strengthen ing 
PFM. Mali has benef ited from increased IDA amoun t thanks to the p ilo t cr is is response window and 
reallocations. T he Urban Local Governmen ts Suppor t Pro ject will be delive red as p lanned. T he 
gran t/loan mix of IDA allocation in FY12 w ill be determined in June 2011 based on the r isk of deb t 
d istress now assessed a s moderate. Append ix 2 presents p lanned and actual deliver ies of the CAS 
program. 

25. While portfo lio qua lity is overa ll sa tisfactory , cha llenges remain especia lly in procurement , 
and monitoring and evalua tion (M&E). The curren t IDA portfo lio compr ises 10 operations, includ ing 
one IDA-GEF b lended operation, with net commitmen ts of US$568.5 million and an und isbursed 
balance of US$334.2 million. T he portfo lio focuses on agr icu lture, energy, and institu tional reforms. 
The Bank relies on annual development po licy loans to assist the GoM w ith key structural reforms. 
Weak procuremen t capacity at project level, procuremen t delays, and def iciencies in p lann ing 
projects‟ act iv ities persist. Effor ts are underway to ensure that all pro jects have a formal M&E 

- 7 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
framework and an operational mon itor ing system. The weak statistica l capacity is a main challenge in 
terms of resu lts mon itor ing. The GoM and the Bank are working closely to address these issues 
through jo in t annual Coun try Por tfo lio Performance Reviews, regu lar pro ject imp lementation reviews, 
and f iduciary train ings. In add ition, the decen tralization of the managemen t of the Mali program is 
progressing stead ily, thus provid ing enhanced and just- in- time suppor t. 

26. The Bank has developed sector -based and cross-cutting support in the area of governa nce. 
The Bank is suppor ting the GoM in strengthen ing the management capacity of the min in g sector and 
improv ing its governance. A governance structure for EIT I imp lemen tation was estab lished wh ich led 
to the designation of Mali as an EIT I cand idate coun try that is „close to comp lian t” in December 2010. 
In ternational validation of Mali‟s EIT I process is expected to take p lace dur ing 2011 when the country 
ach ieves Comp lian t Status. T he Bank carr ied ou t a governance assessmen t of the energy and transpor t 
sectors. Iden tif ied measures to deal with sign if ican t losses at the electr icity company, EDM, were 
in tegrated in the design of the Energy Suppor t P ro ject , and d iscuss ions took p lace no tab ly w ith regards 
to tack ling the pervasive con tro ls faced by the transpor t sector. The Bank is also focusing its 
governance work on streamlin ing the b idd ing process for greater transparency, enhancing the budget 
process. Two Pub lic Expend iture Tracking Survey (PETS) in education and health uncovered 
sign if ican t leakages in delivery of key services. Fo llow ing the suspension of some gran ts by the 
G lobal Fund to f igh t AIDS, T ubercu losis and Malar ia af ter conf irmation that US$4 million (36 percen t 
of the funds) were embezzled or un justif ied, the GoM prepared and shared a report of procurem en t and 
in ternal con tro l breached in the managemen t of these funds. The Bank is conducting a comprehensive 
f inancial managemen t and procuremen t assessmen t wh ich w ill resu lt in the design of a f iduciary 
capacity bu ild ing p lan that will cover cen tral, d istr ict and local levels, and of a governance 
strengthen ing p lan. The Bank‟s work has also star ted emphasiz ing the demand side of accountab ility.  

27. Cha llenges remain to better ma instream governance and anti -corrup tion actions in Bank’s 
operations, implement them a t the sector level , and build social accountab ility . The PRSC ser ies and 
the GBD TA operation will emphasize transparency, accountab ility and governance in pub lic 
expend iture managemen t and will bu ild capacity to carry out PETS. T he proposed Urban Local 
Governmen ts Suppor t Pro ject operation w ill aim to suppor t strengthened institu tional capacity of f ive 
targeted urban local governmen ts for improved serv ice delivery and enhanced governance and 
accoun tab ilit y at the local level bu ilt around an effecti ve f iscal framework designed to enab le 
pred ictab le resource transfers to urban local governmen ts. A comprehensive analys is of the 
governance agenda is under preparation to rev iew the legal, regu latory, institu tional, and po licy 
frameworks in p lace and their adequacy. T o tackle the emergin g challenges and slow imp lemen tation 
of key structural reforms, strengthened social accoun tab ilit y mechan ism s cou ld p lay a strong par t to 
improve good governance and serv ice delivery. The slow progress in EDM restructur ing, its recovery 
p lan and the electr icity tar iff adjustmen t mechan ism is linked to sector governance challenges. 
Bu ild ing po lit ical suppor t for the reform by better showin g the positive resu lts the reform wou ld br ing 
wou ld be key in the reso lu tion of the curr ent challenges.  A proposal under the demand for good 
governance window of the Social Development C ivil Society Fund has been accepted in order to carry 
ou t a study on instrumen ts and too ls for accoun tab ility for civil society representatives. 

28. The Bank committed to streng then capacity development (CD ). U sing the Capacity 
Enhancemen t Needs Assessmen t (CENA) approach sponsored by WBI in a few countr ies, four CD 
action forms were prepared on M&E, pub lic p rocurement, regu latory framework in the energy sector, 
and pub lic revenue admin istration. The f inancial and human capacity to imp lemen t the approach 
proved to be an obstacle to imp lemen t the approach . It was therefore on ly imp lemented through the 
IDF to strengthen the GPRSF resu lts framework wh ile the f ind ings of the o ther CD action forms were 
used for procuremen t train ing sessions and embedded in the Energy Sector Support P ro ject and two 
successfu lly comp leted IDF s on PFM. S tatistica l capacity developmen t was provided through 
househo ld survey analysis under the Belgian trust fund. CD needs are now being identif ied and 

- 8 - 

 
 
 
 
addressed through pro ject preparation and imp lemen tation and under var ious non- lend ing and trust 
fund activit ies.  

29. The Bank has streng thened its interventions to address gender-specific constraints. As a resu lt 
of the 2006 gender assessmen t, gender specif ic measures are incorporated in Bank‟s operations and 
non- lend ing activ ities and the Bank is advocating incorporating gender - responsive actions in to coun try 
strategy documen ts. Donors have suppor ted the GoM design a gender and equ ity str ategy. T hrough the 
Househo ld Energy and Un iversal Access (HEURA) Pro ject , women‟s associations manage some of 
the mu ltifunctional p latforms installed in 64 commun ities resu ltin g in 7, 200 connections. Under the 
Gender and Energy Program of the Afr ica Renewab le Energy Access P rogram, the HEURA Project 
strengthened the capacity of the national agency on househo ld energy and rural electr if ication, 
AMADER, to in tegrate gender activ ities . The Bank w ill now carry ou t a fu ll gender and energy needs 
assessmen t in selected villa ges to develop an action p lan for train ing, knowle d ge shar ing and CD 
activit ies for women in rural commun ities. Gender -specif ic measures were also incorporated in all 
agr icu lture, NRM and CC activ ities. T he main issues tackled relate to the vu lnerab ilit y of women and 
female-headed househo ld s, capacity bu ild ing for social institu tions and women‟s groups, and 
promo tion of specif ic adap tation strateg ies under the leadersh ip of women‟s organ izations. An ESSD 
TF on gender helped design an operation s manual wh ich addressed access to f inancial resources and 
train ing for female producer groups, and female par ticipation in agr icu ltural po licy decision making. 
Under the GSP, two women associations are par ticipating in the manag ing association of the match ing 
gran t fund under the En terpr ise Suppor t Services componen t . In the context of the analyt ical work on 
SSN, the Bank prepared a report on welfare effects of widowhood in Mali. Go ing forward, the 
upcoming RH constrain ts assessmen t will include social norms analyses that affect women ‟ RH 
cho ices and inform new socia l marketing campaigns to increase up take in family p lann ing use. T he 
preparat ion of the RH P ro ject w ill address gender issues as th ey are related to RH outcomes. In 
add ition, work has begun on a ser ies of pover ty and gender no tes using the 2010 Househo ld and F irm 
Enterpr ise surveys to inform the preparation of the new GPRSF. 

D . PARTNERSHIP AND THE A ID EFFECTIVENESS AGENDA 

30. The GoM and donors have made some progress on harmoniza tion and a lignment, but room 
for progress rema ins. A f irst jo in t donor assistance strategy (JAS) for the 2009 -2011 per iod was 
signed by 14 donors and focuses on resu lts and linka ges to the GPRSF with the view to improving 
comp lemen tar ities and jo in t po lic y matr ices, fund ing mechan isms, and review s. Key ach ie vemen ts 
include: improved d isbursemen t pred ictab ility; reduction in the to tal number of budget support 
tr iggers; increase in number of donors using d irect budget suppor t; and progress towards more 
programmatic approach es in some sectors (water, decen tralization and transport, and to some extent 
agr icu lture). Coun try- led aid managemen t is being strengthened t hrough the gradual operationalization 
of the GoM ‟s Aid Harmon ization Secretar iat (SHA). T he JAS II process will bu ild on the challenges 
faced in many coun tr ies to move forward w ith jo int programmin g and d iv is ion of labor . On its side, 
the Bank is advocatin g an incremen tal process with up- fron t focus on measurab le measures. T he 
deve lopmen t of a National A id Po licy shou ld prov ide increased vis ib ilit y and traction to aid 
effectiveness issues.  

31. Donor assistance is better coord inated a t sector level but rema ins fragmented overa ll, and the 
capacity of Ma li ’s institutions and financia l management mechanisms rema in weak . Three sectors 
are covered by sector budget suppor t (education, health, and decen tralization) and two other s are in 
process ( irr igat ion and water). Dur ing the CAS per iod, two new donors have star ted using budget 
suppor t, but the share of budget suppor t to to tal d isbursemen ts has gone down from 33 percent in 2006 
to 23 percen t in 2010. T he Bank chairs the donor working group on macro-economic issues , and 
progress has been made in terms of quality of the jo in t budget review. Efforts to harmon ize the 
cond itionality framework have reduced the jo in t tr igger matr ix to 39 tr iggers. The CAS per iod has 

- 9 - 

 
 
 
 
 
seen progress on a number of harmon ization ind icators (esp ecially the JAS, framework for budget 
suppor t and program -based approaches). However, reducing the use of pro ject imp lemen tation un it s 
has proved to be challeng ing. T he Bank is carrying out a P IU study to gain deeper understand ing of 
the dr ivers beh ind the creation of P IU s, and the impact on por tfo lio quality (see Append ix 5). 

IV . 

STRENGTHENED AND EXTENDED CAS PROGRAM 

32. D raw ing on the lessons from the imp lementa tion of its first two GPRSFs, the GoM launched 
in December 2010 the prepara tion of its GPRSF III. The 2009 Progress Repor t of the GPRSF II 
ind icates that pr ior ity measures for 2011 will focus on six areas: education, health, food secur ity and 
rural developmen t, developmen t of SMEs, reforms in the business env ironmen t, and the promotion of 
democratic governance. It fur ther lays ou t key challenges to ensur ing stronger growth, namely (a) the 
h igh popu lation growth with grow ing and unsustainab le pressure on production resources and 
increased demands in terms of nu tr ition, water supp ly, health, education an d train ing, (b) youth 
emp loymen t, (c) environmental degradation and CC, and (d) MDG ach ieveme nt. These challenges 
were reconf irmed dur ing the launch ing workshop for the new GPRSF that will cover the per iod 2012 -
17 to co incide with the electoral cycle. T he GoM also launched the process to update the JAS in 
February 2011. 

33. 
In light of these considera tions, the Bank proposes to ex tend the CAS period by one fiscal 
year. The extension will allow the Bank to fu lly align the preparation of its next CAS with the new 
GPRSF and the updated JAS. Dur ing the CAS extension per iod, the Bank‟s approach will be to: (a) 
main tain a continuous engagemen t on its activ ities to conso lidate gains to promote rap id and broad -
based growth and to help address cr itica l structural and governance related weaknesses in key 
productive sectors; and (b) increase its engagemen t to suppor t the GoM ‟s renewed strategic pr ior ities 
in human developmen t and service delivery (popu lation growth, education sector, you th, and urban 
water supp ly and san itation) in order to p lace greater emphasis on  inclusive growth. T o that effect, the 
lend ing program for the remainder of FY11 (Urban Local Governmen ts Support Project) will be 
delivered as p lanned and the Bank w ill deliver Reproductive Health and H igher Education P ro jects 
and prepare Youth Emp loymen t, and Water and San itation Projects in FY12. T he th ird PRSC ser ies 
will star t in FY12. It will be in tegrative and focus on reforms to strengthen governance foundations 
( includ ing PFM), reduce pover ty, and pro t ect the vu lnerab le. The IFC will con tinue to comp lemen t 
IDA activit ies to exp lore opportun ities to suppor t the pr ivate sector. 

34. The Bank w ill comp lement its lending support with targeted analytica l work and TA to tack le 
emerg ing cha llenges. Consistent with the GoM‟s commitmen t to bu ild ing its socia l protection base 
and the f ind ings of the Bank‟s FY11 Socia l Safety Nets review, and in a con tex t of h igh vo latilit y of 
commod ity pr ice, the Bank will con tinue to provide TA for po licy d ialo gue on social pro tectio n, 
includ ing suppor t to r eforms in con tr ibu tive and non con tr ibu tive schemes. Ongo ing analyt ical work 
on growth, gender ( includ ing a poverty prof ile) to suppor t the GoM‟s med ium term po licy formu lation 
on growth, and pover ty and gender challenges will be comp leted in FY12. In add ition, the Bank is 
provid ing TA for the preparation of the PEFA update, wh ich will inform revisions to be made to 
PAGAM II. T he analyt ical work program will also encompass TA for the information and 
commun ication techno log ies ( ICT ) sector, PRSP d ialogue and the preparation of a PRSP -JSAN. T he 
Bank will also continue to suppor t GoM activ ities to better engage its D iaspora in the transfer of 
knowledge and use of remittances for commun ity developmen t through the imp lemen tation of an 
Institutional Developmen t Grant and a Japanese Social Development Fund to conduct need 
assessmen ts at the commun ity le vel in the Kayes region. 

35. The Bank is respond ing favorably to the request for addressing the rapid popula tion grow th 
and higher educa tion cha llenges. The Bank will prepare a RH operation that takes in to accoun t the 
mu lti-sectoral d imension of RH and family p lann ing. T he operation will aim at increasing the demand 

- 10 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
for and use of reproductive health services w ith a clear focus on family p lann i ng, nu tr ition and h igh 
impact in terven tions proven to contr ibute to the reduction of maternal, neonatal and ch ild mor tality. In 
add ition, the Bank w ill pay special atten tion to improv ing g ir ls‟ education and will use the 
Demography and Economics S tudy as basis for pub lic debate and po lic y formu lation to strengthen 
incentives for addressing demograph ic challenges. T he GoM has renewed its focus on the impor tance 
of h igher education and skills development as a way to address shortcomings in the governance 
system, weak linkages between pub lic f inancia l managemen t, sector strategy and decentralization, the 
low le vel of labor productivit y on accoun t of insuff icien t and low quality of education . The Bank is 
expand ing its suppor t to h igher education and skills developmen t with the aim to bu ild a so lid 
foundation for growth and to create new opportun ities for youth to access the labor market. The FY12 
H igher Education Project aimed at improving the sector‟s rele vance, management and eff iciency will 
be comp lemen ted by an EFA -FT I G ran t Developmen t Po licy Support (curren tly under preparation) 
wh ich focuses on po licy and institutional reforms and the preparation of a You th Skills Developmen t 
operation (delivery in FY13) aimed at improving productiv ity, leadersh ip, and competitiveness. 

36. To better mitigate the consequences of exogenous shocks, the GoM has asked the Bank to 
help develop a comprehensive socia l pro tection stra tegy, including more efficient and relevant SSN 
programs. The pr ior ity actions toward the development of a more eff icien t and cost -effective SSN 
system wou ld include: ( i) strengthen ing the strategic, institu tional, and f inancia l framework for 
design ing, imp lemen ting, manag ing, mon itor ing, and eva luating SSN programs; and ( ii) develop ing a 
p lan for improv ing the effectiveness of the SSN system by reforming ex isting programs and design ing 
new ones aiming  to reduce small or ineffective programs wh ile strengthen ing o ther  v iab le programs 
with better targeting and ou tcomes. Go ing forward, the Bank will consider an operation to help 
deve lop a permanen t SSN system that addresses the needs of the chron ic poor and that can read ily be 
scaled up dur ing per iods of adverse natural hazards and exogenous shocks. 

37. A key priority for the GoM is to mob ili ze the financing for Wa ter Supp ly Pro ject (Kaba la 
Pro ject) to ensure adequa te water supply for Bamako and eradicate the recurrent wa ter shortages in 
most neighborhoods of the cap ita l city. Wh ile major investmen ts have been made to rehab ilitate and 
expand water and san itation infrastructure, investmen t sustainab ilit y remains an important challenge 
for the sector. Lack of main tenance and under investmen t pu t at r isk the gains made in the expansion of 
the service. T h is is evidenced by the large number of rural water systems that are no t operational and 
the insuff icien t water production and d istr ibution cap acity in Mali, and no tab ly Bamako. As the urban 
popu lation continu es to grow, especially the per i-urban areas of Bamako, the Bank w ill comp lement 
donor efforts by supporting the Kabala program with a targeted W ater and San it ation P ro ject in ear ly 
FY13.  

38. The Bank stands ready to help wea ther the impact of the insecurity in Northern Ma li as well 
as the reg iona l instab ility. Wh ile the GoM has a special investmen t program for the Nor thern part of 
Mali and is taking the lead in respond ing to the regional uncer tain ty, if needed, the Bank cou ld scale 
up development activ ities currently imp lemen ted in the Northern part of the country through its 
operations, and fur ther adap t its ongo ing pro jects. Fo llow ing the preparation of an internal no te on the 
po ten tial impact of the Libya cr is is , the Mali and the Post Conf lict and Social Developmen t Un it teams 
have star ted working together to prepare a fo llow through of the 2011 Wor ld Developmen t Repor t on 
conf lict, secur ity and developmen t for wh ich Mali was a focus coun try. The analys is will deepen the 
understand ing of the under ly ing factors beh ind insecur ity and how our operations can best mitigate 
secur ity r isks. Associated to th is, the Bank is par tner ing with the UN agencies , other mu lti- laterals, 
and b ilaterals to help the GoM deal with the conf lict and insecur ity . 

39. The ex tended CAS period approach is fully consistent w ith the new Africa Stra tegy’s 
Governance founda tions, in add ition to its pillars designed to address competitiveness and 
emp loyment, and vulnerab ility and resilience challenges. It also enables the Bank to target IDA 16 

- 11 - 

 
 
 
 
 
priority themes and results expecta tions. The Bank will (a) imp lemen t its por tfo lio of operations 
suppor ting infrastructure, agr icu lture productiv ity, and growth -or ien ted sectors, (b) launch the urban 
and GBD TA P ro jects to tackle urban ization challenges and the provis ion of bas ic serv ice delivery at 
the decen tralized level, and (c) bu ild on TA, analytica l work and trust funded ac tiv ities carr ied out to 
help tack le vu lnerab ility to commod ity pr ice f luctuations, better promo te climate change resilien t 
deve lopmen t, improve resilience to exogenous and natural shocks, and foster greater transparency, 
accoun tab ilit y and governance. In add ition, the Bank will engage more d irectly to help Mali address 
the low leve l of human cap ital and generate jobs, especially for the young popu lation. The Bank will 
also seek to renew the momen tum of economic reforms with a new PRSC ser ie s that will focus on a 
limited set of mu lti-sectoral issues to catalyze po licies for faster growth, a more com petitive economy 
with emp loymen t opportun ities, and better delivery of basic services. F inally, the Bank team w ill pay 
specia l attention to further scaling-up gender mainstreaming and effor ts on gender-related MDG s. The 
deve lopmen t of the new CAS will fu lly in tegrate gender and climate resilien t developmen t issues and 
strengthen its resu lts framework accord ingly.  

V . 

MANAGING R ISKS 

40. Overa ll, the risks assessed in the CAS rema in valid but the challeng ing interna tional and 
reg ional environment of recent months has somewha t ra ised the risk level. Wh ile Mali‟s po litica l 
env ironmen t still represen ts a lim ited r isk to the program , the 2012 electoral process is more than 
likely to main tain stab le po litical arrangemen ts based on democratic ru le. Mali is, however, h igh ly 
exposed to the po litica l uncer tain ties of its neighbors. Persistence of the cr isis in Cô te d‟Ivo ire and 
Libya cou ld have sign if ican t negative effects, through var ious transmission mechan isms , on the 
Malian economy and society at large. The Bank is prepar ing an analysis to better understand the 
under ly ing factors beh ind the insecur ity and how we can best respond through our development 
program. To min im ize the r isk of trade d isrup tions due to the po litical cr isis in Côte d‟Ivo ire, Mali has 
strengthened alternative trade rou tes and the Malian council of sh ippers has reached a customs 
agreemen t with the Ben in au thor ities to use the por t of Cotonou as an impor t/expor t gateway wh ich 
includes preferen tial arrangemen ts for customs clearance and o ther serv ices. T he potential increase in 
transpor tation costs as a resu lt of the d iversion of exports and impor t to more d istant por ts, fall in 
livestock expor ts and decline in remittances may be mitigated by the r ising demand for domestic 
products, resu lting from h igher domestic supp ly, h igher in ternational pr ices and transaction costs. The 
turmo il in Libya, cou ld affect foreign d irect investmen ts as Libya is a major investor in ON and 
tour ism and is f inancing a number of pub lic projects, as well as remittances and aid f lows.  

41. Ma li rema ins highly vulnerab le to fluctua tions in commodity prices , ex ternal shocks and to 
CC . Con tinued upward pressures in food and fuel pr ices in global markets cou ld affect Mali‟s 
inf lation, lead to an increase in pover ty, fur ther burden the budget, and have sign if icant f isca l impact 
depend ing on the GoM ‟s response to weather the pr ice increases. M itigation factors include Mali‟s 
strong record of pruden t macroeconomic management, in add ition to Bank suppor t to (a) enhance 
productiv ity and competitiveness of the co tton sector, d iversify agr icu ltural production and further 
deve lop commercial agr icu lture, and improve managemen t of natural resources to reduce vu lnerab ilit y  
and enhance resilience to climatic shocks,  (b) lower energy costs thro ugh connecting w ith lower-cost 
regional producers;  (c) reform the investment climate, (d ) strengthen PFM, and (e) mon itor closely 
parastatal compan ies‟ f inancial and cash positions and restructur ing effor ts. 

42. The upcoming presidentia l election might be a period of dela y in reform imp lementa tion. In 
the wake of the 2012 presidentia l elections, in ternal vested in terests may slow further reforms and 
comm itmen t to f inalize key structural reforms in energy, service delivery at decen tralized level, and 
investmen t climate may fade away. T he Bank will continue to engage through its operations and in 
d ialogue on the benef its of timely imp lemen tation of the reform agenda. 

- 12 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 1. MALI UPDATED CAS RESULTS MATRIX FY08–12 

Original CAS Outcomes  
and Indictors  

Revised CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
(If applicable) 
CAS Strategic Objective 1. Promote rapid and broad-based growth 
Agriculture productivity 
increases for specific crops in 
targeted areas:  
 Cotton yield increases by 15% 
from its 2005/06 level (950t/ha) 
by 2011. 
 Cowpeas yield increases from 
400 kg/ha (2004) to 600 kg/ha 
(2011). 

Competitiveness for selected 
supply chains improves in 
targeted areas  
 Mango exports progress from 
5,500t (2007) to 8,000t (2011). 
 Local potato seed production 
covers 60% of national needs 
by 2011 from ~  0% in 2007. 

Availability of credit for 
agriculture improved: 
 Credit granted by BNDA and 
MFIs to agriculture increases 
from CFA 70.3 billion (2003) to 
72 billion by 2011.   

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes 

Progress Towards CAS 
Milestones 

WBG and Development  
Partners’ Support 

Grower networks are in place 
for potatoes/cowpeas seed 
multiplication, and more and 
more farmers have adopted 
new post-harvest & irrigation 
technologies. 

Work has started on 
technology dissemination 
mechanisms and on 
improvement of research-
extension linkages. 
Coordination mechanisms 
along specific supply chains 
are in place: Two inter-
professional entities created 
for cotton and mangoes have 
been established; private 
operators and producers for 
fruit and vegetables filières 
are organized; and a fruit and 
vegetable packaging facility 
is functioning. 
New financing instruments 
(warehouse receipt, weather-
index-based insurance) have 
not been developed.   The 
study on weather index 
insurance and the regulatory 
framework for the warehouse 
were not done. Also, the 
microfinance institutions 
were not consolidated into 
networks. Focus was put on 
restructuring existing 
networks rather that bringing 
in the independent MFI into 

Ongoing lending: 
 Ag Competitiveness and 
Diversification Project 
 Rural Community 
Development Project + 
AF from the global food 
crisis response window 
 GEF Gourma Biodiversity 
Conservation Project 
 Growth support Project 
 Agricultural Productivity 
project 
 GEF Agricultural 
Productivity  
 PRSC 5 
 West Africa Agriculture 
Productivity Program  
 West Africa Biodiversity 
Project 
 IFC – Agribusiness: 
GRIMAS, Grand Moulin 
du Mali 

Planned lending:  
 PRSC-6 

AAA and TFs:  
 Rural Finance Study -
completed 
 Urban Environmental 
Analysis – to be 
completed by end FY11 
 Sustainable Land 
Management PER/CBA – 
completed 
 TA dialogue on SLM – 

 Indicator met. Cotton yield at 
1,020 t/ha. 

 Indicator met. Dissemination of 
selected cowpea seeds raised 
yields from 250 to 750 kg/ha. 

 Indicator met.  Mangoes export 
increase on the international 
market. Estimation: 10,000 t. 
 Indicator on track. The volume 
of potatoes marketed on the 
national and regional markets 
reached 29,000 tons. 

 Indicator met. Loans granted by 
MFIs  and BNDA totaled   161.1 
billion CFA in 2009 (most recent 
data available) 

- 13 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original CAS Outcomes  
and Indictors  

Revised CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
(If applicable) 

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes 

Progress Towards CAS 
Milestones 

Agricultural pressure on natural 
resources reduced in Office de 
Niger and cotton zones:  
 By 2011, cotton producing 
areas remain at 2006 level 
(500,000 ha). 

 

 Indicator met. Cotton 
production intensified without 
increased land extension. Cotton 
producing areas currently at 
250,000 ha. 

Indicator revised. Cotton 
producing areas remains at 
maximum of 2006 level. 
Revision to clarify that 
objective is to reduce land 
extension for cotton 
production to increase 
intensification of cotton 
production areas.    

networks.  

Work to disseminate 
sustainable land management 
tools & good practices 
integrated in agricultural 
investments to producers has 
started. 

WBG and Development  
Partners’ Support 

ongoing 
 CSIF – ongoing 
 DRM grant – ongoing 
 Integrated Land and 
Water Mgt. for 
Adaptation to Clmate 
Variability and Change 
TF - ongoing 

Partners: 
 AfDB, MCC, USAID, 
Denmark, Dutch, France, 
Canada, EU , IFAD, 
Swiss.  

 Indicator dropped since the 
evolution of salinity is difficult 
to assess and monitor on such a 
large scale area. 

 By 2011, soil salinity remains at 
its 2006 level in Office du 
Niger (20% of irrigated ha) 
zone. 
Improved donor coordination 
and country leadership: 
 GOM has set up a national 
pooled financing mechanism 
for agricultural development. 

Integration of Mali with regional 
and global markets by increased 
efficiency of transport operators 
(roads, railway, and air) : 
 Transport costs between 
unloading imported containers 
(20-foot TEV) from ship to 
final destination are reduced by 
at least 10%. Baseline: $1300 in 
2006.  

 Rail freight has increased  

With the set up of the FNDA 
mechanism and PAPAM 
implementation, work has 
started to move toward 
pooled financing mechanism 
for agricultural services co-
managed by producers and 
the GoM, as well as to 
formulate sector MTEF and 
its use for programming.  
Decrees and legislation to 
reduce security checkpoints 
and safety checkpoints to an 
agreed minimum on internal 
routes adopted. Sustained 
political commitment and 
capacity of GoM to enforce 
rules is needed. 

 Indicator on track. FNDA 
created but not yet operational. 
PAPAM operation now effective 
is supporting such instrument.  

 Indicator on track.  Indicator 
linked with ongoing progress 
from activities from the regional 
project. Outcome by end of CAS 
period will be conditioned by 
external context – crisis in Côte 
d‟Ivoire, and spike in oil prices. 
 Achievement of indicator is 

- 14 - 

Ongoing lending:  
 Transport Sector 2 + AF 
 WA Transit and Transport 
Facilitation Project 
 West and Central Africa  
Security Project 
 Growth Support Project 
 IFC – US$25 million 
investment in Aga Khan 
Foundation for Celeste 
Air which includes Air 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original CAS Outcomes  
and Indictors  

Baseline: 423,000 t in 2005. 
Target: 50% increase by 2011. 

GOM ensures effective 
leadership and coordination in 
transport sector: 
 Bi-annual joint evaluation and 
review missions conducted. 

 Joint evaluation matrix 
prepared and used as 
monitoring tool. 

More rural localities have year-
round transport access:   
 Less than 20% of rural 
population lives more than 2 
km from a year-round passable 
road. Baseline 2006: 41%. 

 % of main roads in good 
condition increases from 35% 
(2005) to 65% (2011). 
Improved air safety and security 
in Mali as measured by: 
 70% compliance rate with 
ICAO safety standards.  

Revised CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
(If applicable) 

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes 

Progress Towards CAS 
Milestones 

contingent on concession being 
restructured and political 
commitment or lack of from 
Malian and Senegalese Govt. 

 Indicator on track. Extensive 
consultations between donors 
and development partners are 
meeting on a regular basis with 
the Government to ensure 
coherence with the Govt. 
strategic objectives.  

National transport sector 
strategy study was completed 
jointly by GOM and other 
donors and national transport 
sector strategy adopted by the 
Authorities.  

WBG and Development  
Partners’ Support 

Mali, Air Burkina and Air 
Uganda 

AAA and TFs:  
 Governance diagnostic 
note - completed 

Partners:  
 AfDB, EU, MCC, BOAD, 
KfW 

 Indicator dropped. The sector 
has a coordinated approach 
between development partners 
and partners and the 
Government but in a less 
structured manner than through 
the monitoring of a formal joint 
evaluation matrix. 

 Indicator revised. Percentage 
of people who have access to all 
weather roads has increased in 
the project impact areas. 
Indicator reformulated since 
baseline data is only collected 
for project impact area.  
Baseline 2007:32%; target for 
end 2011:42%. 

1,450 km of rural/secondary 
roads rehabilitated by 2009.  

 Indicator on track. 40% of 
people who have access to all 
weather roads in the project 
impact areas at end 2010. 

 Indicator met. 64.8% of main 
roads are currently in good 
condition. 

 Indicator on track but 
implementation delays of IDA 
funded project and delays in 

- 15 - 

Funding mechanisms have 
been strengthened to ensure 
adequate resources for annual 
road maintenance overseen 
by the Road Authority 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original CAS Outcomes  
and Indictors  

Revised CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
(If applicable) 

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes 

Progress Towards CAS 
Milestones 

WBG and Development  
Partners’ Support 

 40% compliance rate with 
ICAO security standards.  

 Fewer than 10 serious airport 
security problems per year.  
 Time to clear arriving 
passengers reduced from 70 
minutes (2006) to 30 minutes 
(2011). 
Availability of critical 
production factors increased. 

Additional 30-45 MW of thermal 
capacity installed by 2011 to 
increase power system reliability.  

EDM SA achieves financial 
viability and operational 
efficiency through improved 
sector governance as measured 
by:  
 EDM maintains technical and 
non-technical losses below 
20%.  
 Electricity access rates have 
increased from 2% in 2005 to at 
least 6% in 2011 in rural and 
peri-urban areas. 
 Significant physical progress is 
made on electricity 
interconnection with 
neighboring countries: 
85% of planned transmission 
lines constructed. 

through the creation of a 
combined road agency and 
road fund and increased levy 
on fuel to fund road 
maintenance. 

Work is ongoing on the new 
regulatory framework for 
operation of road, air, and 
river transport agencies, and 
the concession contract 
between the GoM and a 
private operator. 

+80 MW of thermal capacity 
delivered first quarter 2011 to 
reduce power outages; Rural 
electricity access rates are 
increased to 11% today.  

EDM SA technical and 
nontechnical losses remain 
stable at 23%; tariff 
adjustment took place in July 
2009. Awaiting regulator 
decision on tariff indexing 
formula.  

Ongoing work on 
construction of transmission 
lines. Satisfactory progress 
on the Malian side. No 
progress on the Ivorian 
network. 

refurbishment of Bamako airport 
under MCA funded project.  
 Indicator on track but 
implementation delays of IDA 
funded project and delays in 
refurbishment of Bamako airport 
under MCA funded project. 
 Indicator met. 5 airport security 
problems in 2010. 
 Indicator met. About 30 
minutes to clear arriving 
passengers. 

 Indicator on track. +80 MW of 
thermal capacity confirmed for 
2012.  

 Investments to reduce technical 
losses only expected to have full 
effect in 2013. 
 Indicator met. 

  Indicator on track. Current rate 
of construction of the 
interconnection is 47.9%. 
However, ongoing crisis in Côte 
d‟Ivoire and lack of political 
commitment on the Ivorian side 
for the interconnection could 
compromise progress. 

- 16 - 

Ongoing lending: 
 Household Energy and 
Universal Access + AF 
 Energy Support Project 
 WAPP APL 2 Felou 
Hydropower Project + AF 
 PRSC-5 

Planned lending:  
 PRSC-6 

AAA and TFs:  
 AF with trust funds from  
Russia and The 
Netherlands – ongoing 
 Scaling Up Renewable 
Energy in Low Income 
Countries program 
(AfDB, IFC and IDA) – 
ongoing 
 IFC Kenie Hydro Project 
– ongoing 
 Governance diagnostic 
note - completed 

Partners:  
 AfDB, France, Aga Khan, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original CAS Outcomes  
and Indictors  

Revised CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
(If applicable) 

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes 

Progress Towards CAS 
Milestones 

Efficiency of commercial banks 
improved for better financial 
intermediation: 
 Spread between lending and 
deposit rates reduced from 
average of 9.1% in 2005 to 8% 
by 2009.  
 Ratio of gross NPL to total 
loans decreased from 29% in 
June 2005 to 10% by 2011. 

 Share of total credit to private 
sector to increase from 51.7% 
in Dec 2005 to 60% in 2009. 

Increase in private sector 
investment (domestic and 
foreign): 
 Number of formal 
manufacturing enterprises 
increased by 10% by 2011.  
Baseline: 350 firms in the 
manufacturing sector.  

 Access time to land by firms is 
reduced from 180 days to 30 
days. 

 Revised indicator.  Ratio of 
gross NPL to total loans 
decreased from 29% in June 
2005 to 17% by 2011. Target 
revised to 17 % (10% 
unrealistic) 
 Revised indicator. Bank credit 
to SMEs increase from 25.6% 
in 2006 to 30% of total loans 
and advances by 2011. Original 
indicator no longer tracked 
following restructuring of the 
project. Data for this indicator 
is collected through GSP 
Project. A proxy is being used 
to measure credit to SMEs. 

 Revised indicator. Time taken 
to approve new investments is 
reduced from 45 days in 2006 
to 15 days in 2011. Original 
indicator dropped following 
restructuring of the GSP 
Project.  
 Revised indicator. Number of 
days for property registration 
reduced from 44 days in 2005 
to 30 days by end 2011. 
Original indicator dropped 

GoM share in BIM reduced 
from 61.5 % in 2007 to 
10.5%.  
A strategy to reduce number 
of NPLs is not yet in place. 

 Indicator met. Spread between 
lending and deposit rates of 7.9% 
in 2009 (more recent data 
available) 
 2009 ratio is 22.6%. 

 The value for 2009 is 52.6% 
(latest data available).   

 Indicator on track. Time taken 
to approve new investments is 
currently 26 days. 

 Indicator on track. Current 
value: 29 days. 

- 17 - 

New civil and commercial 
procedures adopted. 
Investment promotion agency 
operational. Business 
licensing has been 
streamlined with the creation 
and operationalization of the 
one stop shop. 

Partial credit guarantee 
facility established and 
operating with 2 banks; trade 
finance guarantee launched 
with one bank.  

WBG and Development  
Partners’ Support 

BOAD, ECOWAS, EU, 
India, KfW, Sweden, 
Dutch 
Ongoing lending: 
 Growth Support Project 
 PRSC-5 
 IFC – financial markets 
(BoA Mali, Ecobank 
Mali) 
 IFC - tourism (Hotel 
Salam) ; food processing 
and packaging (GRIMAS 
– supports industries that 
supply to hotels; 
manufacturing of printed 
products (Graphique 
Industries – prints posters 
and brochures for tourism 
industry) 

Planned lending:  
 PRSC-6 
 Urban Local Governments 
Support Project 
 Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project 

AAA and TFs:  
 Rural Finance Study – 
completed 
 ICA update – ongoing 
 Programmatic TA: ICT 
policy dialogue - ongoing 
 IFC PEP-Africa 
/FIAS:TA in investment 
climate – ongoing 
 IFC  support to micro-
entrepreneurs program 
(STEP) – ongoing 
 IFC Africa leasing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
(If applicable) 
following restructuring of the 
GSP. 
 Indicator dropped following 
restructuring of GSP and 
indicator not being measurable.  

Original CAS Outcomes  
and Indictors  

 Total corporate tax burden 
reduced from 50% to 47% to be 
closer to level of best 
performers within WAEMU 
zone.  
Improved performance of 
nonagricultural sectors by 2011 :  
 Number of tourists increased by 
at least 30%. 
Baseline: 100,000 tourists in 
2005. 

 Indicator to  drop as it may 
not be relevant by end CAS due 
to international factors and 
instability in the North of Mali.  

  Indicator on track. In 2009, 
115,500 tourists arrived by air in 
Mali.  

 At least 3 new investments 
undertaken in small-scale 
mining activities.  

 Indicator revised. At least 10 
new investments undertaken in 
small-scale mining activities. 

 Number of people with access 
to information and 
communication technology 
doubled. 
Baseline: 23.5/10,000 
inhabitants in 2005. 

 Indicator revised: Teledensity 
increased from 2.5% (2005) to 
30% by end 2011. 

 Indicator on track. Several 
investments in small-scale 
mining sector already 
undertaken. 
 Indicator met. 

Increased productivity of 
targeted MSME 
 Increased sales. 
 Increased output. 
 Baselines and targets to be set 
once enterprises identified.  

 Indicator revised. Average 
revenue increase of beneficiary 
firms of STEP will increase 
from 25% in 2005 to 80% in 
2011.  Indicator is collected 
through GSP. 

 Indicator on track. 2009 value 
is 78%. 

- 18 - 

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes 

Progress Towards CAS 
Milestones 

WBG and Development  
Partners’ Support 

program - ongoing 
 Doing Business reviews 
(annual) 
 IFC Trickle up program – 
completed 
 IFC Grassroots Business 
initiative - completed 

AAA and TFs:  
 Mali – FSAP - completed 
 Regional FSAP - 
completed 
 ICA update – ongoing 
 Support to EITI 
implementation TF 

Partners:  
 AfDB, Denmark, France, 
EU, IMF, MCC 

Draft of PSD strategy 
prepared but not yet 
approved. Land tenure code 
not revised yet.   

 Privatization of SOTELMA 
completed in July 2009 and 
sector regulator‟s new staff 
trained; “One-stop-shop” 
focused on service to new 
entrepreneurs created; 
property registration eased by 
halving the transfer tax to 
7%; Tourism sector strategy 
completed and action plan 
adopted. 

Ongoing inventory of 
regulations completed and 
reform proposals designed by 
2009.   

Mining Code revised in 2011 
with a focus on incentive 
framework for improving the 
sustainable development 
impact of extractive 
industries activities. 
At least 50 MSMEs nation-
wide have managerial 
training every year; Number 
of college graduates trained 
to provide support to MSMEs 
increased from 15 to 50 in 
2009. 

STEP provided TA support 
to 1,200 MSMEs since 2005 
and PCG with BoA helped 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original CAS Outcomes  
and Indictors  

Revised CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
(If applicable) 

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes 

Progress Towards CAS 
Milestones 

WBG and Development  
Partners’ Support 

  Indicator on track. Timeliness 
improved and quarterly budget 
execution reports are published 6 
weeks after the end of the quarter 
since Q3 2009. Quality also 
improved. 
 Indicator on track. Timeliness 
of financial statements and 
quality is now assessed with a 
rating of C.  

 2010 PEFA rates procurement as 
C. Limited progress reflects 
delays in the implementation of 
reforms. 

extend term finance to SMEs. 
Assistance to BoA led to an 
increase in Bank‟s lending to 
SMEs from $4 m in 2007 to 
$37 m by end 2009. 

Implementing association 
established for the matching 
grants and institutional 
framework being finalized.  

PAGAM-GFP was revised to 
include intra-year reporting 
following the 2006 PEFA; 
The interconnection of MEF 
with finance departments 
(DAFs) of all ministries and 
the regional budget 
departments (DRBs) is 
complete.  Additional work 
ongoing to ensure the 
interface between PRED and 
the Treasury software. 

New laws and regulations for 
procurement adopted and key 
institutions put in place. 
Revisions of the laws made 
in 2011 to better align the 
laws with WAEMU 
guidelines. TA is planned 
from FY12 and this will help 
accelerate progress. 
PAGAM-GFP revised to 
incorporate actions to 
strengthen internal controls. 
PAGAM II adopted in 2010 
includes actions to strengthen 
external controls. Cabinet 

Ongoing lending: 
 PRSC 5 

Planned lending:  
 PRSC 6 
 Governance and Budget 
Decentralization TA 
operation 
 Urban Local Governments 
Support Project 
 Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project 

AAA and TFs:  
 CPAR – completed  
 PAGAM - completed 
 PEFA - completed 
 PEMFAR – completed 
 ROSC accounting - 
completed 
 Policy notes on growth- 
ongoing 
 PEFA update – ongoing 
 TA poverty monitoring – 
ongoing 
 TA action plan for ROSC 
– ongoing 
 TA poverty and PRSP 
brief – completed 

Strategic Objective 2. Strengthen public sector performance 
More transparent budget 
practices as measured by:  
 PEFA indicators on quality and 
timeliness of in-year budget 
reports and annual financial 
statements improved from D+ 
(2007) to at least C+ by 2011 

 Indicator revised. Timeliness 
of in-year budget reports from 
D+ (2007) to at least C by 2011. 

 New indicator: Timeliness of 
annual financial statements 
improved from D+ (2007) to at 
least C+ by 2011. 

Improvement in procurement 
practices as measured by: 
 PEFA indicator on procurement 
will have increased from C 
(2007) to at least B by 2011.  

Quality of internal and external 
budget control will have 
improved as measured by: 
 PEFA grades on internal and 
external audit have risen from 
D+ and D (2007) to at least C 

 Indicator revised. PEFA 
grades on internal and external 
audit have risen from D+ 

  Indicator on track. Achieved 
for internal controls; ongoing 
work on external controls with 

- 19 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original CAS Outcomes  
and Indictors  

(2011). 

Revised CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
(If applicable) 
(2007) to at least B (2011). 
 PEFA grades on external audit 
have risen from D (2007) to at 
least C (2011). 

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes 

Progress Towards CAS 
Milestones 

delays in the reform. 
 The PEFA grade on external 
audit remains at D but actions 
planned in 2011 may help 
improve the situation to D+. 

adopted an action plan to 
clear audit backlogs and to 
prepare the creation of an 
Audit Court in December 
2010. 

WBG and Development  
Partners’ Support 

 Governance note - 
ongoing 

Partners: 
 AfDB, EU, France, 
Canada, IMF, 
Netherlands, PAGAM, 
Sweden 

 Indicators dropped. A more 
objective indicator is proposed 
to measure policy-based 
budgeting. Similarly, a new 
indicator is introduced to 
measure PFM capacity at 
decentralized level focusing on 
the creation of systems rather 
than flow of funds.  
 New indicator. Share of 
primary expenditure of sectors 
for which statements of sector 
strategies exist and are fully 
costed, broadly consistent with 
fiscal forecasts. Baseline 
(2006): 48.2%; Target (2013): 
75% 
 New indicator. PEFA indicator 
on timeliness of reliable 
information to sub-national 
entities on their allocations. 
Baseline (2006): D; Target 
(2011): C 

Link between budget and sector 
strategies has improved as 
measured by:  
 Annual MTEF update to 
include sector operational plans 
(education and health). 

 Resources transferred from 
center to municipalities have 
doubled from 2007 level of 1 
billion FCFA.  

 Service delivery has improved, 
as evidenced by beneficiary 
surveys. 
Improve access to and quality of 
basic education, including 
strengthening of institutional 
management capacities as 

 Indicator on track. Much 
progress was made since 2008 in 
this area, with the expansion of 
the number of Ministries with 
MTEF.  

Mechanism in place that 
links transfer of resources to 
municipalities (2009). 

Ministries have at least 6 
weeks from time of budget 
circular to incorporate 
operational plans (2009). 

 Indicator achieved. Much 
progress made since 2008 with 
the expansion of the number of 
ministries with MTEF. 

 Indicator on track. Progress 
was made regarding the 
timeliness of information 
regarding the current budget but 
more needs to be done regarding 
information of the investment 
budget. 2010 rating: D. Work 
ongoing to improve the situation. 
  Indicator on track. Beneficiary 
survey to be undertaken in 2010 
under TA operation. 

- 20 - 

1,400 classrooms 
constructed; 6, 000 teachers 
trained; 3,000 community 
teachers trained and paid by 

Ongoing lending:  
 Devt. Learning Center 
 PRSC 5  
 IFC - US$11 million loan 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
(If applicable) 

Basis has changed based on the 
census with higher population 
growth from 2.6 to 3.6% annual 
population growth rate. 

Original CAS Outcomes  
and Indictors  

measured by: 
 67% primary completion rate 
by 2011 (disparities reduced 
between urban/rural and 
between girls/boys) Baseline: 
2005–06: girls 38%, boys 59%, 
total 49%).  

 70 % of primary students 
reaching average score in 
language, reading, and 
mathematics in grades 2 and 5.  

 Girls represent 50% of total 
primary students (2011) 
(Baseline 44.1% in 2005–06).  

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes 

Progress Towards CAS 
Milestones 

GoM; 100 % of community 
schools fully subsidized to 
reduce out of pocket 
expenses for poor families;  
National strategy for girls‟ 
education prepared and 
currently being implemented; 
Study completed to identify 
skill requirements to support 
economic growth.  

Only 74.1% Grade 1 
admission rate in 2009 
(target: 85%) 

  Indicator on track. Gross 
primary education enrollment 
rate in 2009/2010 is 76% (girls at 
67% and boys at 81%). Primary 
completion rate at 51% in 2009. 
New target for 2012: 70% 
primary completion rate and girls 
at 49% and boys at 51%. 
 Indicator on track.  58% of 
primary students reached 
average score in language, 
reading, and mathematics in 
grades 2 and 5 in 2009/2010 
period. 

 Indicator on track. Girls 
represent 45% of total primary 
students in 2009/2011. 2012 
target: 49%. 

Improve access to and quality of 
HIV/AIDS-related services as 
measured by: 
 At least 60% of adult people 
know 2 ways of HIV/AIDS 
transmission by 2011 (Baseline: 
36.5 % in 2002). 

 Condom use among men who 
have had sex with more than 1 
partner in last 12 months has 
increased from 33% to 45% by 

 Indicator dropped. Project 
results matrix revised following 
restructuring of project in May 
2009 to align indicators with 
the new WB HIV/AIDS 
scorecard. 
 Indicator dropped. Same as 
above. 

- 21 - 

More than 4,000 people 
living with HIV/AIDS have 
access to treatment and care; 
2225 non public testing 
facilities were operational as 
of end 2008. 

WBG and Development  
Partners’ Support 

to Graphique Industries 
which produces 
approximately 48% of the 
textbooks and 100% of 
the notebooks for the 
PRODEC program 

Planned lending:  
 Higher Education Project  
 PRSC 6 
 EFA/FTI Grant 
Development Policy 
Support 

AAA and TFs: 
 Skills development study 
– completed 
 TA youth initiative – 
completed 
 TA non formal education 
– completed 
 Education country status 
report – ongoing  

Partners:  
 AfDB, France, Canada, 
Germany, Netherlands, 
USAID, Denmark 
Ongoing lending:  
 HIV/AIDS MAP 
 PRSC 5  

Planned lending:  
 Reproductive Health 
Project 
 PRSC 6 

AAA and TFs:  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Revised CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
(If applicable) 

 Indicator revised: number of 
non public health centers to be 
25 by end 2011. Original target 
overambitious given available 
funds 
 Indicator revised: At least 
9,000 persons living with 
HIV/AIDS eligible for 
treatment are under 
antiretroviral drugs and 
monitoring by end 2011. 
 New indicator: 55,000 persons 
aged 55+ receiving counseling 
and testing for HIV and 
received their test results. 

Original CAS Outcomes  
and Indictors  

2011. 
 Testing services offered in at 
least 40 nonpublic facilities (up 
from 2) and all reference 
hospitals comply with national 
standards. 
 At least 10,000 persons living 
with HIV/AIDS eligible for 
treatment are under 
antiretroviral drugs and 
monitoring by 2010 (from 
3,000 in 2005). 

Use of health services increased 
as measured by: 
 70% of births assisted by 
qualified health personnel 
(Baseline: 51%, 2006).  
 4% of population covered by a 
health mutual (Baseline: 1.4%, 
2005). 

 90% immunization rates for 
DTCP3 (Baseline: 68% in 
2006).  
 Use of modern contraception 
increased to 500,000 couple-
years of protection (Baseline: 
256,000 in 2006). 

Aid harmonization increased 
and transaction costs reduced: 
 Joint framework for general 
budget support in place and 
followed.  

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes 

Progress Towards CAS 
Milestones 

WBG and Development  
Partners’ Support 

 Demography and 
economics – completed 
 TA Social safety nets – 
completed 
 TA Follow-up social 
safety nets – ongoing 
  Health country status 
report – ongoing  
 IFC – Health in Africa 
initiative 

Partners: 
 AfDB, EU, Belgium, 
Canada, France, Global 
Fund, Netherlands, 
Unicef, USAID 

Road map for reducing 
maternal mortality approved 
in 2009; Contracting of 
NGOs to increase coverage 
was implemented by 2009.  

Work ongoing to establish a 
system for rewarding 
performance of health 
district. 

GoM Harmonization 
Secretariat strengthened; 
Joint framework for general 
budget support prepared and 
MoU to apply framework 
signed; Program based 

 TA and ESW/AAA from 
WB, EC, and other budget 
support donors 

 Currently 57% of births assisted 
by qualified health personnel 

 2.1% of population covered by a 
health mutual in 2009 and 2.9% 
in 2010. 

 Indicator met. Immunization 
rates for DTCP3 at 101% 
currently. 

 Indicator on track. Use of 
modern contraception currently 
at 490,542 couple-years of 
protection. 

 Indicator met. 

- 22 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original CAS Outcomes  
and Indictors  

 Reduced number of parallel 
PIUs in Bank operations: 
maximum 4. 
 Program-based approaches: at 
least 66% of Bank portfolio. 
 Coordinated ESW/AAA: at 
least 66% of all Bank 
ESW/AAA. 
 Collaborative sections of next 
Country Assistance Strategy 
drafted and MoU signed by 
GOM and its main donors 
(including WB). 

Revised CAS Outcomes  
and Indicators 
(If applicable) 

Progress Towards CAS Outcomes 

Progress Towards CAS 
Milestones 

WBG and Development  
Partners’ Support 

 Only PAPAM and PRSC series 
with no parallel PIU. 

 Indicator met. 65% based on 
disbursements. 

 Indicator on track.  Good 
coordination with the Govt. 
 Indicator on track. Joint CAS 
prepared in 2009 and signed by 
main donors; new CAS 
preparation not yet started. 

approaches represented at 
least 42% of WB portfolio 
end 2009 and 50% of 
ESW/AAA with strengthened 
coordination during 
preparation.  

GoM H&A action plan not 
executed as planned; 
Reducing parallel PIUs to 8 
was not achieved. 

- 23 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPEND IX 2 . IDA LEND ING AND ANALYTICAL PROGRAM 

A . Planned Lending Program and Actua l Deliveries (FY08-12) 

CAS P lanned Lending 

US$ m 

Actual Lending 

US$ m 

PRSC II  

Total  
GEF WA Bios afety Project 

PRSC I II 
Energy Support P roject 
TA for Service De live ry 
Regiona l ope rat ion 

Total  
GEF Susta inab le Land Mgmt. * 

PRSC IV 

Agricu lture P roductivity Project 
Regiona l Operat ion 
Total  

PRSC V 
Urban Opera t ion 
Regiona l Operat ion 

Total  

42 

42 
25 

40 
75 
15 
8 

138 
6.3 

50-60 

70 
8-18 
138 

50-60 
70 
8-18 

138 

FY08 
PRSC II 

Total  
WA Biosafety P roject 
FY09 
PRSC III 
Energy support P roject 
Postponed to FY11 

HEURA Addit iona l F inanc in g 
HIV/AIDS Addit iona l F inanc in g 
Total  
FY10 wi th IDA operat ion 
PRSC II Addit iona l F inanc in g (G lo bal Food 
Cri si s Response Program) 
FY10 
PRSC IV (including $15.5 m from  G lo ba l 
Food Cri si s Response Program) 
Agricu ltura l P roductivity Project 
Fe lou Addit iona l F inanc in g 
Total  

GEF Agricultura l Product ivity 
FY11 
PRSC V 
Urban Loca l Governments Support Project 

Gove rnance and Budget Decent ra lizat ion TA 
Transport Secto r 2 Addit iona l F inanc in g 
Total  

42 

42 
3.9 

65 
120 
- 

35 
6 
226 

5 

70.5 

70 
14.2 
154.7 

6.2 

70 
70 

12 
23 
175 

11.2 

Rura l Community Devt. Add it iona l 
Financ in g (G lo ba l Food Cri si s Response 
Program) 
FY12 
PRSC V I 
H ighe r Educat ion and Skills Devt . 
Stren gthen ing R eproduct ive Hea lth 
Total 
*: Fu lly b lended w ith IDA Agricu ltura l P roductivity Project .  
**: Th ese est imates for FY12 a re indicat ive only and can change. Actua l a llocat ion in FY12 w ill depend on: (i) tota l IDA 
resources ava ilable, (ii) the country‟s perfo rmance rat in g; (iii) the performance and ass istance terms of other IDA borrowers ; 
(iv) the te rms of IDA's ass istance to Ma li (grants or cred its); and (v) the number of IDA -e ligib le co untries . IDA a llocat ions 
are made in SDRs bas ed on performance , and the US$ equ iva lent is dependent upon the preva ilin g exchange ra te . 

70 ** 
50 ** 
30 ** 
150** 

No indicat ive lendin g for FY12 

- 24 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B . Planned AAA Program and Actua l Deliveries  

CAS P lanned AAA 

Actual AAA 

Rura l F inance Study 
Demography and Economics 
PEMFAR 
Gove rnance D iagnost ic Study 
Pove rty and PRSP brief (TA) 

Growth note on min in g 
Skills Deve lopment S tudy 
Country Environmenta l Ass essment 
ICA Upd ate 

SLM Ad visory Services 

Growth note on tourism 
Socia l P rotect ion 
PEFA Update 
Pove rty and PRSP brief (TA) 

Growth note on light manufac turing 
Gove rnance Fo llow-up 
TBD 
TBD 

FY08 
De livered to c lient postponed to FY08 
De livery to c lient postponed to FY08 
De livery to c lient postponed to FY10 
De livery to c lient postponed to FY08 
De livery to c lient postponed to FY09 
ICT Policy D ia logu e - Pro grammat ic TA 
FY09 
Converted to policy notes on grow th  
De livery to c lient postponed to FY10 
De livery to c lient postponed to FY11 
Converted to a pilot of a new gene rat ion of investm ent and 
private sector growth d iagnost ic 
Work started in 2008 
Rura l F inance Study 
Populat ion and Deve lopment 
Gove rnance D iagnost ic Study 
Pove rty and PRSP brief (TA) 
ICT Policy D ia logu e - Pro grammat ic TA 
FY10 
Converted to policy notes on grow th 
Converted to Soc ia l Sa fety Nets TA 
Slipped to FY11 

Ma li FSAP 
Skills Deve lopment S tudy 
PEMFAR 
ROSC Accountin g 
ICT Policy D ia logu e - Pro grammat ic TA 
FY11 

Follow -up on Soc ia l Sa fety Nets TA 
Youth Init iat ive TA 
Non forma l Educat ion TA 
SME G rowth and D ivers if icat ion ICA 
Urban Environmenta l An a lysis 
Policy notes on growth 
PEFA Update 
Educat ion Country Status Report Upd ate 
Hea lth Country Status Report 
Pove rty Mon itorin g TA 
D ia logue on SLM (TA ) 
Deepen ing Te lecom Policy D ia logu e - Pro grammat ic TA 
Act ion p lan for ROSC  (TA ) 

- 25 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPEND IX 3 . STATUS OF MDGs 

Three MDGs are like ly to be ach ieved : (a) combating H IV/AIDS prevalence at 1.3 percen t in 2008 is 
projected to decline fur ther; (b) reach ing un iversal pr imary education : gross enro llmen t rates in 2009 
reached 80 percen t but the gir ls/boys par ity index remained at 79.4 percen t; (c) cu tting by half by 2015 
the propor tion of peop le withou t sustainab le acce ss to safe dr ink ing water : popu lation with access to 
dr inkin g water incr eased from 63.4 percen t in 2007 to 73 percen t in 2009. However, progress in 
san itation is lagg ing. Wh ile progress was made towards health related targets , Mali is un likely to 
ach ieve the goals of reducing ch ild mor tality and improving maternal health. Actions to eliminate 
gender d ispar ities show progress bu t resu lts are far from the MDG s: women in par liamen t leve l stands 
at 10.2 percent. 

Ma li – Progress toward the Millennium Development Goa ls 

Goal 

Current Status  GoM Ac tions to Accel erate P ro gress 

Th e GoM is impl ement in g inclu sive pol icy act ion s to in crease 
produ cti vit y an d redu ce vul ne rab il it y in th e agr icultural sector, from 
wh ich mo st o f th e poo r d er ive the ir in comes.  Action s a re al so o n go in g 
to imp ro ve basic in frast ru cture an d the o ve rall b u siness en vironment.  
Th e GoM pl an s to imp ro ve access, q ual it y and equ it y b y focu sin g on 
imp ro ved HR man agement, imp ro ved systems fo r the d istr ibut ion o f 
textboo ks, enh an ced mo n itor in g o f in vestment s an d throu gh e ffect ive 
decentral izat ion and greate r p art ic ip at ion at local leve l.  
Th e GoM h as d e fin ed p rior it y areas o f int ervent ion to p romot e gende r 
equ it y but sp ecific actio n s st ill need to b e d e fin ed. Areas selected 
in clude equ al access to edu cation and empl o yment, framewo rk to 
protect women from domest ic and oth er forms o f viol ence, and st ep s to 
en sure th at women p art ic ipat e in d ec ision makin g.   
Th e GoM pl an s to in crease th e ava ilabil it y o f skilled health p erso nnel, 
exten d access to immu nizatio n, impro ve san itat io n an d li vel ihoo d s o f 
hou sehol d s, inc rease access to in forma t ion on health care issu es and 
redu ce co st s o f ch ild h ealth ca re ser vices.  
Th e GoM act ion plan wh ich includ es free access to cesarean section s 
for po or women, inclu sio n o f sexu al educat ion in th e edu cat ion 
cur riculum, inc rease access to famil y pl ann in g, enh an ce d ecent ral ized 
pro vision o f h ealth services and commu n it y pa rt ic ip at ion.   
Th e GoM pl an s to enh ance mon ito r in g and evalu at ion e ffort s, int en sify 
act ion s to ch an ge b ehavio r, cont inu e research act ivit ies to b etter 
pro vid e health ca re to th o se a ffected b y th e viru s. A p ro gram is in 
place to imp ro ve d iagn o stic and e ffecti ven ess o f tub erculo sis 
treatment. Act ion s to comb at ma la ria focu s on p revent ion measures, 
in clud in g th rou gh san itat io n an d wid e d istr ibut io n o f mo squ ito n et s. 
Act ion s will be u nde rtaken to imp ro ve th e coll ect ion and t reatment o f 
data o n en vironment al issues, st ren gt hen t he role o f in st itut ion s in 
cha rge o f en vironmental issu es, take into accou nt en vironmental issu es 
in th e d esi gn o f strategies an d act ion s pl an s, d isseminat e in forma tion 
on int ernat ion al agreement s rat ified b y Mal i and en sure adeq uat e 
resou rces for d ecent ral ized en vironmental mana gement.  

Erad icate 
extreme 
po ve rt y an d 
hun ge r 
Ach ieve 
unive rsal 
prima ry 
educat ion 
Promot e 
gend er equ alit y 
and empower 
women 

Unlikel y 

Po ssible to 
ach ieve if some 
chan ges are 
made 
Po ssible to 
ach ieve if some 
chan ges are 
made 

Reduce ch ild 
mo rtal it y 

Off t rack 

Imp ro ve 
mat e rnal h ealth 

Off t rack 

Comb at 
HIV/AIDS, 
mal a ria and 
other d iseases 

Po ssible to 
ach ieve if some 
chan ges are 
made 

In su ffic ient 
in forma tion 

En sure 
en viro nment al 
su st a inab il it y 
(i ncludi ng 
sustai nable 
access to saf e 
dri nki ng wat er 
& sani tati on) 
Deve lop a 
glob al 
partn ersh ip fo r 
devel opment 

In su ffic ient 
in forma tion 

Act ion s pl ann ed b y t he GoM in clud e impro ved a id mana gement 
thou gh the ado ption o f comp uter ized systems, en han ced mon ito rin g o f 
the PRSP and t ight ened lin kages with the b ud get, to fac il itat e don or 
sup port ali gned with PRSP pr ior it ies, and impro ved go ve rn an ce.   

Sou rce: G ouve rneme nt of Mal i (2009 ), Deuxième Rappo rt de Mise e n œuvre des Object ifs du Millé nai re pou r le Développeme nt au Mal i. 

- 26 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPEND IX 4 . IFC AND MIGA PROGRAM 

1. 
IFC‟s investmen t portfo lio in Mali stands at US$53.3 million. Over the per iod under rev iew, 
IFC invested in the f inancial sector, agr ibusiness, services and infrastructure. 

Company 

Sector 

GR IMAS 

A gr ibu sin ess 

Grand Moul in du Mali 

A gr ibu sin ess 

Graph iqu e Ind u str ies 

Se rvices 

Ecob an k Mal i 
BoA Mal i 

Hotel Sal am 

S IECO 

To tal 

F inanc ial Ma rkets 
F inanc ial Ma rkets 

To ur ism 

 Se rvices 

Amount 
($m) 
19.0 

9.8 

9.2 

8.5 
5.2 

1.3 

0.3 

53.3 

2. 
Fostering private sector access to finance: IFC, jo in tly with the WB, imp lemen ted the 
IDA/IFC MSME program that aims to boost f inance for the development of th is underserved market 
segmen t. The assistance consists of a r isk shar ing facility on a new por tfo lio of loans to SMEs to 2 
selected banks, Bank of Afr ica (BoA) and Ecobank, and a n SME bankin g TA program to suppor t their 
activity in a secure and prof itab le manner. Assistance to BoA led to an increase in the bank‟s total 
lend ing to SMEs from about US$4 million in October 2007 to US$37 million in March 2011 w ith 231 
SMEs reached, wh ile Ecobank SMEs loans portfo lio is expected to reach $12.5 million. 

3. 
IFC provided to Ecobank a trade guaran tee under its G lobal Trade F inance P rogram, and is 
d iscussing with several other banks to boost Mali‟s in ternational trade activ ity. 

4. 
IFC, through its Cap italization Fund and Afr ican, Latin Ame r ican & Car ibbean Fund, in June 
2010, prov ided Ecobank Transnational Incorporated (ET I) with a cap italization package of up to 
US$150.14 million, includ ing US$7.2 million to Mali‟s subsid iary. 

5. 
Fo llow ing IFC benchmark bond issue in FCFA in 2006, IFC has p l ans for new issuances 
(possib ly in the form of a program) in the shor t term in order to boost on lend ing to pro jects in local 
currency. Other products are also at work in order to lend in FCFA to pro jects otherwise exposed to 
currency r isk.  

6. 
Agribusiness: In October 2008, a €8 million (approximately US$11 million) loan was 
comm itted for Groupe AM I, the largest pr ivate agr ibusiness group in Mali wh ich produces f lour, 
an ima l feed and bottled water.  T he purpose of the loan is to help f inance the company‟s US $25 
million expansion and product d iversif ication p lans. SMEs reached were 102 in 2010, versus a target 
of 40. O ther developmen t impact targets reached local supp liers and $3.5 million tax receip ts increases 
by 2012. 

7. 
In June 2010, IFC committed a €14 million (approx imately US$19 million) loan to Groupe 
Industr iel Mad iou S impara (GRIMAS ) wh ich produces carbonated soft dr inks, bottled water, performs 
and caps for p lastic bo ttles, and carbon d iox ide for beverages . T he purpose of the loan is to help 
f inance the company‟s €33 million expansion program in Mali, Senegal and Cote d‟Ivo ire.  

- 27 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developmen t impact targets include the creation of 100 new jobs, 30 percen t female emp loymen t, and 
creating linkages with local SMEs by 2014.  

8. Globa l Manufacturing and Serv ices: In June 2009, a €7.5 million (approximately US$9 
million) loan was committed for G raph ique Industr ies, the largest pr in ted products company in Mali 
supp ly ing textbooks and no tebooks to the education sector. The loan is being used to upgrade the 
company‟s mach ines and increase its overall capacity, quality and eff iciency, wh ich w ill allow it to 
expand its market to surround ing countr ies.   

9. 
Infrastructure: A US$25.0 million loan was comm itted in March 2010 to the Aga Khan Fund 
for Economic Developmen t (AKFED), for on- lend ing to its three Afr ican air lines includ ing i. e. Air 
Mali, Air Burkina and Air Uganda. T he purpose of the loan is to support the turnaround and expansion 
of the air lines, and help strengthen their competitive position especially in West Afr ica.  

10. 
IFC is also un leash ing key sectors‟ po ten tial with advisory services and expand ing pr ivate sector 
base with investmen t products. Advisory services include: 

 

Improv ing investment climate: IFC, through F IAS and PEP Afr ica, has been engaged, along 
with the Bank, in prov id ing suppor t to improve the investmen t climate. Phase 2 of the 
Investmen t C limate Reform program was launched in January 2010.  The aim of the 3 -year 
program is to improve the Do ing Business ranking, encouraging agr ibusiness inve stmen t, and 
improv ing the regu latory framework for industr ial zone developmen t. Phase 2 focuses on : ( i) 
the investmen t code,  tax regimes, and investmen t promo tion ; ( ii) special economic zones; and 
( iii) areas covered by Do ing Business - dealin g with construction permits, trad ing across 
borders, and enforcing con tracts. A reg ional investmen t climate team (F IAS /PEP Afr ica) was 
h ired in Dakar and one Operating Off icer in Bamako to ensure support to the day -to-day 
imp lemen tation of the program, includ ing in Ma li (Phase 2, FY09 and beyond). IFC is 
suppor ting regional in tegration through the regional OHADA - level reforms, im p lementation 
of new co llateral registr ies in the OHADA region, and imp lemen tation of a regional cred it 
bureau with in the UEMOA zone.  

 Capacity building program: IFC has comp leted dur ing the curren t CAS per iod several 
adv isory programs targeting SMEs, includ ing the Suppor t and Train ing En trepreneursh ip 
Program (STEP) focusing on micro en terpr ises, TUP (Tr ic k le Up Program- IFC funded), and 
IFC-GBI (Grassroo ts Business In itiative. These programs were not renewed as a resu lt of the 
refocus of IFC‟s advisory services (focus is now to prov ide standard ized products such as 
Business Edge, via in termed iar ies, such as trainers, f inancia l institutions or co rporates with 
reach to SMEs).  

 

IFC, through its A frica Leasing Program (ALF), is promo ting leas ing as an innovative 
alternative f inancial mechan ism to SMEs.  S ince June 2009, ALF in partnersh ip with 10 
professional associations trained more than 250 en tre preneurs on the advantages of leasing. 
Fur ther train ing/advisory services will target f irms ( leasin g compan ies, commercial and 
deve lopmen t banks, microf inance, equ ipment providers), business professionals ( lawyers and 
accoun tan ts) as well as local au thor it ies. ALF will assist the tax au thor ities to imp lemen t tax 
breaks. IFC is also con temp lating making investmen ts in leasing providers.  

 Hea lth in A frica initiative: IFC supports the pr ivate delivery of health serv ices through the 
Health in Afr ica in itiat ive , in co llaboration with the Gates Foundation, wh ich aims to increase 
the capacity of pr ivate sector health providers and improve the quality of their serv ices 
through investmen t and techn ical ass istance. A coun try assessmen t of the pr ivat e health care 
sector in Mali was carr ied ou t dur ing the CAS per iod. IFC committed to provid ing techn ical 

- 28 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
assistance in three major reform areas: (1) estab lish ing a Pub lic P r ivate D ialogu e Comm ittee 
and structur ing the pr ivate health sector through the creation of a Pr ivate Health Sector 
Alliance, (2) improv ing the regu latory framework govern ing the pr ivate health sector ; and (3) 
increasing access to f inancing for the pr ivate sector. Work has star ted in all three areas and a 
market study of the pr ivate health sector will be c arr ied ou t soon. 

11. Fu ture Suppor t: IFC p lans to continue its focus on ( i) improvin g the investment climate, ( ii) 
provid ing enhanced support to SMEs and micro -en terpr ises through f inancial in termed iar ies; ( iii) 
proactive project deve lopmen t, especia lly in infrastructure and agr ibusiness. In par ticu lar, IFC is 
looking at investmen ts in banks, agr ibusiness and clean energy pro jects, through d irect investments 
and the SREP facility in con junction with IDA and AfDB.  

12. M IGA remains open in Mali, and is very keen to support new projects. Curren tly, M IGA ‟s 
portfo lio consists of one con tract in the telecommun ication s sector, with a gross exposure of US$16.2 
million and a net exposure of US$14.6 million. M IGA‟s po litical r isk product may allev iate concerns 
for pr ivate sector investors who are keen to invest in Mali, but who remain apprehensive because of 
po lit ical r isks or governance issues. With regard to M IGA‟s product offer ings, wh ile M IGA support s 
projects of all sizes, its more streamlined Small Investmen t P roduct has proven usefu l for smaller sized 
investors in to a country. M IGA has recently extended its product line, and is now offer ing insurance 
cover for the Non-Honor ing of a Sovereign Guarantee, as well as its trad itional Transfer Restr iction, 
Expropr iation, Breach of Contract and War and C ivil D isturbance covers. 

- 29 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPEND IX 5 . PARTNERSHIP AND A ID EFFECTIVENESS 

Evo lution in context 

1. 
The government and donors have made some progress on harmoniza tion and a lignment, but 
room for progress rema ins.  A f irst jo in t donor assistance strategy (JAS ) for the 2009 -2011 per iod 
was signed by 14 donors and focuses on resu lts and the link to the GPRSF to improve 
comp lemen tar ities and jo in t po licy matr ices, fund ing mechan isms and review s. Some resu lts have 
been ach ieved, such as improved d isbursemen t pred ictab ilit y, reduction in the to tal number of budget 
suppor t tr iggers, increase in number of donors using d irect budget support, and move towards more 
programmatic approach in some sectors (especially water, decen tralization and transport, to some 
extent agr icu lture). The Bank has p layed a key ro le in ach iev ing these resu lts, although o ther donors 
(the EU) have been more active in the decen tralization and water sectors.  

2. 
GoM ’s technica l capacities to work on aid effectiveness ha ve increased . The governmen t‟s Aid 
Harmon ization Secretar iat is gradually becoming operational, and is co-chair ing the GoM -donor 
work ing group to update the JAS. It has led stud ies on the evaluation of Phase 2 of the Par is 
Declaration. It is also operationaliz ing the calendar to harmon ize sector review s with the annual 
GPRSF rev iew and lead ing work on a id pred ictab ility. T he government‟s 2007 -2009 Harmon ization 
and Alignmen t Action P lan will be updated when the JAS II is more clear ly def ined. A National Aid 
Po lic y is being considered to provide increased vis ib ility and traction to aid effectiveness issues.  

3. 
Some evo lution is seen in donor positioning and priority sectors, especia lly in macroeconomic 
management, the socia l sectors, and wa ter. The donor position ing tab le below was updated in 2010 
based on 2009 commitmen ts and position ing in 2010. As the tab le 1 shows, the EU, Canada, Denmark, 
and Germany have all increased their engagemen t in macroeconomic management. The education 
sector has seen incr eased par ticipation of USAID, France, and Canada, wh ile the Afr ican 
Developmen t Bank and Germany have reduced their engagemen t. In health , EU, USAID, Canada, and 
the Nether lands have increased focus bu t the AfDB, F rance and Germany have accorded lesser pr i or ity 
to th is sector. T he pr ior itization of the water sector has increased for the AfDB, EU, Denmark, and 
Germany, wh ile the rest of the donor group has main tained their engagemen t in the sector. C iv il 
society has received increased atten tion from France, Denmark, Canada and USA ID. 

Actua l sector and harmonization strategies 

4. 
Cha llenges rema in in streng thening the capacity of permanent country institutions and the 
country’s financia l management mechanisms. The CAS per iod has seen the creation o f new P IU s for 
the agr icu lture (not comp letely parallel) , energy and urban operations in sp ite of the effor t to move 
away from P IU s and specif ic procedures. T here is a need for the GoM to incen tivize civ il servants to 
manage donor -funded pro jects, mainstreamed in to e xistin g structures. T here is also no progress on 
in tegrating of the transpor t P IU in to the M in istry of Transpor t as foreseen in the CAS . T h is outcome 
ind icator has proven to be too op timistic. The Bank is carryin g ou t a P IU study in co llaboration with 
the M in istry of Economy and F inance to better understand the incentives dr iv in g the u se of P IU s and 
the impact of P IU s on por tfo lio quality. The Bank is also supporting strengthened country systems 
with gradual use of coun try systems for f inancial managemen t, with a treasury accoun tan t being 
assigned specif ically to each new Bank-funded operation. T h is shou ld contr ibute to reduce the need 
for external f iduciary support through P IU - type arrangemen ts. Over the remain ing CAS per iod, the 
Bank will promo te a coord inated donor approach to reduce P IU s, includ ing through increased use of 
programmatic sector approaches.  

1 The t able does not necessa r il y re fl ect chan ges in leve l s o f fund in g to a gi ven sector, but rathe r pr io r ities 
repo rted in the cont ext o f the 2 010 secto r mapp in g exe rc ise.  

- 30 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                               
5. 
Fragmented donor assistance is still a prob lem, in sp ite of progress on jo int fund ing 
mechanisms. Three sectors are covered by sector budget suppor t (education, health, and 
decentralization) and two o ther sectors are in the process ( irr igat ion and water). Dur ing the CAS 
per iod, two new donors have started using budget support, bu t the share of budget suppor t to tota l 
d isbursements has gone down from 33 percen t in 2006 to 23 p ercen t in 2010, wh ile it has increased for 
the Bank from 31 to 46 percen t. The Bank chairs the donor sector working group (SWG) on macro -
economic issues and progress has been made in terms of qua lity of the jo in t budget review. Efforts are 
under taken to harmon ize the cond itionality framework w ith the ind icators developed by the 
governmen t, and overall donors have reduced the jo in t tr igger matr ix to 39 tr iggers, under Bank 
leadersh ip, with a target of 30 tr iggers by end 2011. U se of national systems by donors remains fair ly 
low (32 percen t for f inancial management, 3 7 percen t for procuremen t), ref lecting the remain in g 
challenges related to strengthen ing coun try systems.  

6. 
In order to continue to streng then the capacity of permanent country institutions and the 
country's financia l management mechanisms, the Bank w ill continue to support sector ministries to 
develop program -based approaches. In sp ite of the creation of P IU s, the Bank has stimu lated 
program-based approaches in the agr icu lture and urban developmen t sectors, both being sectors where 
the Bank has comparative advan tages in terms of staff ing and level of fund ing. F ragmen tation remains 
vis ib le in the agr icu lture sector, for exam p le, with 33 donors, imp lemen ting over 248 pro jects through 
63 P IU s to deliver a to tal portfo lio of US$ 2.3 b illion. T he specif ic challenge for the agr icu lture sector 
is to gradually transfer imp lemen tation responsib ility to the pub lic and pr ivate actors in the sector, and 
to the newly created investmen t fund. The Foster ing Agr icu ltural Productiv ity Project (US$ 70 million 
IDA cred it) has leveraged substan tial co - f inancing from the Borrower, local farmer organ izations, the 
EU Food Cr isis Rap id Response Facility Trust Fund and GEF Gran t, in add ition to paralle l f inancing 
from IFAD and UNDP-GEF.   

7. 
Operations in education, transport, agriculture, and water are relying increasing ly on jo int 
sector reviews and paving the way for increased harmoniza tion where it is less advanced (energy, 
urban development). The transpor t sector has accomp lished some harmon iz ation , through the sign ing 
of a MoU between the key development par tners (EU, KFW, AfDB, IBD and BOAD ) and the G oM 
def in ing the harmon ization framework in terms of: (a) jo in t supervis ion miss ions, (b) use of same 
coord ination un it, (c) use of same procuremen t procedures, and (d) use of a sin gle M&E framework. 
The Bank has been invo lved in the energy sector, wh ich tog ether with the water sector, has supported 
the process of moving the electr icit y and water u tility company (EDM) towards more eff ic ien t pr ivate 
sector management. The Bank has also signed a MoU in the health sector (In ternational health 
Partnersh ip+ Compact), def in ing co llaboration modalities for donor alignmen t and aid coord ination, in 
line with the Par is D eclaration. The education sector MoU was renewed in 2010 to provide a 
framework for a mu lti-donor approach to support in the education sector. The last jo in t donor miss ion 
took p lace in June 2010 and resu lted in the endorsemen t of the th ird phase of the government 
education sector program, on wh ich to base the programs suppor ted by the participating institutions.  
The roadmap for the water sector con tinue s to constitute a key too l in the sector harmon ization 
process, creating cond itions for the gradual imp lemen tation of a true program approach in the sector. 
Donor coord ination on the Kabala water pro ject and the urban water sector reform is being 
coord inated with the dozen of partners invo lved in the program.  

Cha llenges for the rema ining CAS period 

8. 
The JAS exp ires in 2011 and the process to upda te the stra tegy was launched in February 
2011 in order to a lign donor support w ith the GPRSFIII . At th is stage, the GoM has not yet decided 
on wh ich approach it will fo llow. Based on the lack of substan tial evidence of the benef its of JAS 
processes (d iv is ion of labor and jo in t programming), the Bank is advocatin g for an incremental 
approach with up- fron t focus on measurab le resu lts of the chosen process. In paralle l, the UN is in the 
process of mov ing towards “deliver ing as one” and Mali is a focus coun try for the EU fast track 

- 31 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
in itiative for d ivis ion of labor among member states. All donors are more or less inclined to 
harmon ize, but the JAS II process will shed more ligh t on the d irection, w ith a determin ing factor 
being the leve l of leadersh ip of the governmen t in the process go ing forward. T he Bank is po ised to 
p lay a cen tral ro le in th is process, br ing ing to the tab le the exper iences learned elsewhere from sim ilar 
exper iences and a strong focus on resu lts management. T he CAS extension per iod will allow to better 
align with the JAS and PRSP updates.  

9. 
The Bank w ill continue to p lay a leading role in aid eff ectiveness issues . The remain ing CAS 
per iod will prov ide the opportun ity to analyze in ternal and external constraints to deepen ing aid 
effectiveness reforms and coord ination in key sectors.  The Bank is well positioned to par ticipate in 
po ten tial d ivis ion of labor exercise with the CAS focus on agr icu ltural production and basic 
infrastructure services ( in energy, water, transport, agr icu lture, and urban developmen t) being aligned 
with the Bank‟s sectors of comparative advan tage . Go ing forward, it will be ne cessary to f ind ways to 
deepen donor coord ination with strong focus on process con tr ibution to actual resu lts ach ieved in term 
of con tr ibu tion to the GPRSP III ob jectives. The CAS is fu lly in line w ith the new Afr ica Strategy‟s 
pr incip le to focus on a lim ited number of sectors. Extension of the CAS by one year will allow the 
Bank to approach the JAS II process with more f lexib ility and to con tr ibu te to setting new ob jectives 
for aid effectiveness in the con text of the JAS II, GPRSP III, and the 4 th H igh Level Forum on Aid 
Effectiveness schedu led for November 2011 .  

DONOR FUNDING REPORTED FOR 2010 

Rank Donor 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 
7 

8 

9 

USA (USAID + MCC) 

World Ban k 

Un ited Nat ion s, total 

Europ ean Un io n 

AfDB 

Canad a 
German y 

Neth erl and s 

Fran ce  

10 

Denma rk 

Amount 
(US$ million) 
213.0 

153.3 

103.0 

98.5 

95.8 

87.3 
67.3 

56.7 

53.4 

29.7 

Rank 

Donor 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 
17 

18 

19 

20 

Japan 

Swed en 

Bel gium 

Swit ze rland 

Sp ain 

Gl obal Fund 
Lu xemb ourg 

IFAD 

GAV I 

It al y 

Source : 2011 Pa ris Dec larat ion Survey, Ma li A id Harmonizat ion Secreta riat, March 2011 

To tal: 1,092.9 

Amount 
(US$ million) 
29.5 

26.6 

16.5 

13.8 

13.2 

10.8 
9.4 

7.9 

5.4 

1.9 

- 32 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EVOLUTION OF DONOR PROGRAMS IN MALI AND OF BANK POSITIONING 

Sector/ Donors 

The World 
Bank  

(a) 

(b) 

The World 
Bank as of 
end of CAS 
(a) 
(b) 

African 
Development 
Bank 
(a) 
(b) 

European 
Union 

MCC 

USAID 

France 

Canada 

Denmark 

Germany Netherlands 

(a) 

(b) 

(a) 

(b) 

(a) 

(b) 

(a) 

(b) 

(a) 

(b) 

(a) 

(b) 

(a) 

(b) 

(a) 

(b) 

Rural Development  
 
Energy 
Transport 
 
Environment 
 
SME/MSME 
 
Communications 

GPRSP Pillar 1:  Infrastructure Development and Strengthening the Productive Sector 
    
    
     
    
    
   
  
    
    
 
 
 
   
 
 

 
  

 

 

 

Public Adm. Reform 
Macroecon. Mgmt. 
Decentralization 
Governance 
Financial Sector 
Civil Society 

Education 
Health/Social Dev. 
HIV/AIDS 
Water & Sanitation 
Employment  
Urban 

 

 
    
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

    
    
 
 
 

 

GPRSP Pillar 2: Strengthening the Structural Reform Agenda 
 
  
   
  
   

  

 
 

 

 

  
 
GPRSP Pillar 3: Improve Delivery of Social Service 
    
    
 
    

 
   
 
   

 
 

  
 
 

  
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

  
  

Gender 
Culture 
Regional Integration  

(c) 

 

 

Cross Cutting Themes 

   

  

    
  
  
    
 

 

  
 
 
    

  

    
 
  
    

  

  

  

Sector priority:  : High    : Medium   : Low 
(a) As in the CAS; (b) Situation as of CASPR; (c) Urban Project in CAS lending program, but not included in CAS Annex 7 table . Highlighted cells signify change 
from 2007 to 2011. 

Note: The donors in the original CAS Annex 7 constitute the largest donors in 2010. Together, they account for about 88 percent of official ODA. The table reflects 
donor priority to a given sector, as per the 2010 division of labor exercise in Mali and not levels of funding to a given sector.

- 33 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPEND IX 6 . CLIMATE CHANGE EFECTS ON MALIAN MA IN DEVELOPMENT 
SECTORS 

1. 
The persisten t drough t has led to fair ly sign if ican t rainfall def icits, so that the migration of 
peop le and an imals became a main strategy to tack le these new precar ious environmen tal and climate 
cond itions. T he decrease in rainfall is go ing to entail land conf licts because of the reduction in arab le 
lands and rangelands, the migration of popu lations towards urban cen te rs, with as consequences the 
increase in unemp loymen t, insecur ity, and in commun ities‟ life, live lihoods and health. 

2. 
Agricu lture and wa ter resources : The increase in temperatures, comb ined with a decrease in 
precip itations and in the length of the rainy s eason, impacts on the agr icu lture production and 
consequently on food secur ity. By the year 2050, it cou ld become d iff icu lt to con temp late r ice farming 
through con tro lled water submersion as curren tly in the R ice O ff ices of Ségou and Mop ti as well as in 
San, withou t hydrau lic structures. Concern ing the fu ll contro l of parameters, the availab le vo lumes of 
water for off -season farming cou ld become lim ited given the weakness of the in pu ts of r ivers, main ly 
dur ing the per iod of low water in r ivers (report on th e Adaptation Strategy, 2007). 

3. 
Through the foster ing agr icu ltural productiv ity pro ject, several Sustainab le Land and Water 
Managemen t (SLWM) techno log ies for the agr icu ltural sector that are more resistan t to the impact of 
climate shocks will be in troduced . T he pro ject will help end users to adop t SLWM practices wh ich 
mitigate CC and sequester atmospher ic carbon ( in ter alia conservation tillage or conservation 
agr icu lture, agro- forestry, sustainab le grazing managemen t, sylvo -pastoral systems and improved 
forest managemen t). It will also suppor t SLWM practices that improve the ecosystem services 
provided by the so il – lead ing to increased b iomass production and more relia b le crop yie lds – and 
strengthen resilience in agr icu ltural live lihoods.  

4. Wa ter resources : Water constitutes the engine for the socio -economic deve lopmen t of the 
country. Though theoretically abundan t, surface and underground water resources are ser iously 
threatened by wastage and non -rational managemen t of networks, sed imen tatio n and sand si lting of 
water -courses, lakes, and ponds, var ious po llu tions, etc. Th is situation will be exacerbated by the 
effects of CC. The frequency of f loods, fo llow ing an increase in rainfalls, will c ause economic losses 
with curren t occupancy of its main water cou rses. Owing to the decrease in rainfall, the safe dr inking 
water supp ly for the popu lation and livestock will be very d iff icu lt fo llow ing the drying up of some 
wells or increase in their in -dep th. Due to the decrease in rainfall, the supp ly ing of deep aqu i fers 
through inf iltration has become very weak. In some regions, as in the Ban i -N iger sub-basin , aqu ifers 
have exper ienced the lowest leve l since 1987 (National D irectorate for Energy, 2006). 

5. 
The Bank is prepar ing the Bamako water supp ly pro ject. Several stud ies addressing the impact 
of CC on the sector will be ach ieved. The pro ject shou ld ensure the resilience of water and san itation 
infrastructure to CC as a major CC adap tation measure. The creation of safe water sources and 
effective san itation systems shou ld guaran tee pro tection from con tamination and destruction from 
natural d isasters. Synergy with the G lobal Facility for D isaster Reduction and Recovery throughou t 
the national f lood ear ly warn ing system shou ld be encouraged. 

6. 
Forest resources : T he forest sector p lays a decis ive ro le in the socio -economic and cu ltural life 
of Malian popu lations. It provides cap ital goods that no o ther sector c an provide (93 percen t of energy 
requ iremen ts, food products, and pharmaceu ticals, eco tour ism, b iod ivers ity conse rvation, improv ing 
the liv ing environmen t, etc. Natural formations underwent great changes, due especially to the ar id ity 
of the climate, successive drough ts, and an throp ic activ ities. In case of shortages or d isruption of rural 
production systems, some activit ies trad itionally considered secondary will become very impor tan t. 
For examp le, for some small basins such as D io la, Bougoun i, and Selin gué, wood -cu tting w ill be 
favored and will temporar ily be a source of income bu t on ly for a shor t per iod because th e forest 

- 34 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
p lateau of these zones will not withstand for long. The degradation of land cover will increase so il 
erosion and favor a b lockin g up of the water courses of water reten tion lakes. 

7. 
The Bank supported the elaboration of a Coun try Strategic F ramewor k for Susta inab le Land 
Managemen t (CS IF). A lso a gran t for DRM was approved to strengthen the DRM institutional 
framework, reinforce key institutions‟ techn ical capacities and imp lemen t a p ilo t project for vu lnerab le 
commun ities‟ protection. Mali also benef its from the In tegrated Land and Water Managemen t for 
Adaptation to C limate Var iab ility and Change Trust Fund to set up an operational information system 
for DRM, CC and SLM. Go ing forward, the Bank will help Mali strengthen the resilience of its 
agr icu ltural and natural resources sectors. 

8. 
Biod ivers ity: T he loss of b iod iversity is main ly attr ibu tab le to the loss and degradation of natural 
hab itats and, for some species, d irect over -exp lo itation. The loss and degradation of natural hab itats 
through activit ies such as wood cu tting, over -grazing, and cu ltivation of marginal lands are fur ther 
exacerbated by recurren t drough ts.  

9. 
Through the Gourma pro ject, the Bank suppor ted the elaboration of several commun ity 
deve lopmen t action p lan tak ing in to account the CC and b iod iversity issues. T he project is suppor t ing 
protection of natural hab itats in key conservation areas in and around the Gourma Elephan t Reserve. 

10. Energy sector : CC affects main ly two very vu lnerab le sectors, namely: the hydro -electr icit y sub-
sector and woody fuels. The growth rate of electr icity amoun ts, on average by year is 12 percent, of 
wh ich 15 percent for localities supp lied by the interconnected network and 10 percent for iso lated 
cen ters. Th is demand is essen tially met for more than 80 percent from hydro -electr icit y wh ich are 
water reten tion structures depend ing main ly on rainfall. Decrease in rainfall en tails production 
shortages that inf luence negatively the con tinu ity of electr ic energy supp ly servic e. 

11. Mali is a p ilo t country of the SREP, a targeted program under the S trategic C lima te F und (SCF). 
The aim of the SREP in Mali is to p ilo t and demonstrate, as a response to the challenges of CC, the 
economic, social and environmen tal viab ility of low carbon development pathways in the energy 
sector by creating new economic oppor tun ities and increasing energy access through the use of 
renewab le energy. Mu ltilateral development b anks wi ll assist the GoM in in it iating a process lead ing 
towards transformational change to low carbon energy pathways by exp lo iting the national renewab le 
energy potent ia l in p lace of fossil-based energy supp ly and ineff icien t use of b iomass. T he specif ic 
ob jective of the Malian investmen t p lan is to develop an in tegrated approach to deve lopmen t po licies, 
strategies and investmen t programs based on a coheren t and eff icie n t pub lic-pr iva te dynamic. 

12. Hea lth : The relationsh ips between health and the environmen t dealt with two d iseases: malar ia 
and men ingitis. For malar ia, an increase in temperatures will reduce the time of development of the 
parasite in its vector, wh ich w ill increase the vir tual capacity of the anopheles mosqu ito. As for 
men ingitis, its expansion cou ld be amp lif ied in the future, fo llow ing the mod if ic ation of the exten t of 
eco -climatic zones. Although, in situations of f lood ing, due to poor hyg iene and san ita tion and lack of 
clean dr ink ing water, there are far more cases of cho lera. It is also wor th no ting that the ou tdoor air 
po llu tion associated with greenhouse gas emissions from smokestacks, veh icles, and burn ing of waste 
can cause resp iratory d iseases, esp ecially in urban cen ters.  

13. Through its new Reproductive Health P ro ject (under preparation), the Bank is consider ing CC 
issues and efforts are targeted at increasing the demand for and use of reproductive health services 
with a clear focus on family p lann ing and other h igh impact in terven tions contr ibuting to the reduction 
of materna l, neonatal and ch ild mor tality, and at reinforcing of commun ity health service delivery 
capacity. 

- 35 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14. 
In fras tructures : In transpor t, the national road network compr ises 89,0 24 km of roads of wh ich 
on ly 3,387 km are paved. T h is makes roads very vu lnerab le to meteoro logical and hydro log ical 
phenomena such as wind, f lood ing, and surface water runoff resu ltin g in erosion and siltation 
processes. T he national r iver network will be ser iously hand icapped by an overall reduction in rainfall, 
d isturbance in the d istr ibution of precip itation, and the siltation of r iver courses. The lower ing of the 
average rainfall led to poor p lann ing such as construction of houses and infrastructure in the beds of 
r ivers and weaknesses in the d imension in g of some hydrau lic structures such as br idges, dams, drains 
and dykes. Th is situation resu lts in increasing human and mater ial losses in relation with f lood ing, 
of ten attr ibu ted to CC. 

15. Through its ongo ing pro jects and also the urban operation under preparation, CC issues shou ld 
be considered and tackled . These pro jects shou ld help the GoM rev ise its infrastructure norms and 
help make them resilien t to climate var iab ility and change. 

16. Crosscu tting cons idera tions: With regards to each sector‟s h igh inf luence on o thers, adapting to 
CC wou ld requ ire strong coord ination mechan isms, with an in tegrated systemic vis ion and approach. 
In th is regards, Mali is h igh ly committed towards the developmen t of its C lim ate Change National 
Po lic y and Strategy, with inpu ts from numerous in ternational stakeho lders , includ ing the Bank.  

17. 
In add ition, CC comb ined w ith the demograph ic growth and little p lann ing capacities are 
altogether con tr ibu ting to increase d isaster r isks. A number of activ ities are being suppor ted by the 
G lobal Facility for D isaster Reduction and Recovery (managed by the Bank) to suppor t coord ination 
( institu tional, po lit ical, legal and techn ical capacities) with regards to CC adap tation and d isast er r isk 
management. T hese activ ities will, among o ther objectives, assist Mali in the developmen t of a mu lti -
hazard ear ly warn ing system (food secur ity, f lood ing, drought and locust), preparedness and cr isis 
management capacities as well as mu lti-sectoral p lann ing capacities overall. 

- 36 - 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPEND IX 7 

- 37 - 

Mali at a glance4/5/11 Sub-Key Development Indicators SaharanLowMaliAfricaincome(2009)Population, mid-year (millions)14.5819828Surface area (thousand sq. km)1,24024,24217,838Population growth (%)3.62.52.2Urban population (% of total population)333628GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)8.9887379GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)6801,082457GNI per capita (PPP, international $)1,1901,9731,137GDP growth (%)4.55.26.2GDP per capita growth (%)0.92.73.9(most recent estimate, 2003–2009)Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)5151..Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)7773..Life expectancy at birth (years)485257Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)1018377Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)282528Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)357273Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)185459Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)100105107Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)8395100Access to an improved water source (% of population)566064Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)363135Net Aid Flows1980199020002009a(US$ millions)Net ODA and official aid262479288964Top 3 donors (in 2008):   European Commission424210149   Canada13211399   France451299882Aid (% of GNI)14.819.912.011.0Aid per capita (US$)37552776Long-Term Economic TrendsConsumer prices (annual % change)..0.6-0.72.2GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)16.34.95.63.6Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)211.3272.3712.0472.2Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)1021441001141980–901990–20002000–09Population, mid-year (millions)7.28.710.514.51.92.02.4GDP (US$ millions)1,7872,4212,4228,9960.84.15.3Agriculture48.345.541.636.53.32.64.8Industry13.215.920.624.24.36.44.5   Manufacturing6.58.53.83.16.8-1.45.1Services38.538.637.939.11.93.06.5Household final consumption expenditure87.479.879.476.80.63.20.7General gov't final consumption expenditure11.613.88.610.37.93.222.2Gross capital formation 15.523.024.622.43.60.46.2Exports of goods and services14.717.126.826.24.89.96.3Imports of goods and services29.133.739.433.86.63.53.9Gross savings........Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary.  .. indicates data are not available.a. Aid data are for 2008.Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).      (average annual growth %)  (% of GDP)10505100-415-1930-3445-4960-6475-79percent of total populationAge distribution, 2008MaleFemale0501001502002503001990199520002007MaliSub-Saharan AfricaUnder-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)-6-4-2024681012149505GDPGDP per capitaGrowth of GDP and GDP per capita (%) 
 
 
 
- 38 - 

MaliBalance of Payments and Trade20002009(US$ millions)Total merchandise exports (fob)5472,082   Total merchandise imports (fob)5952,295Net trade in goods and services-324-711Current account balance-227-876   as a % of GDP-9.4-9.3Workers' remittances and   compensation of employees (receipts)73308.2Reserves, including gold3811,528Central Government Finance(% of GDP)Current revenue (including grants)15.721.7   Tax revenue13.114.7Current expenditure11.613.0Technology and Infrastructure20002008Overall surplus/deficit-6.6-4.2Paved roads (% of total)12.118.0Highest marginal tax rate (%)Fixed line and mobile phone   Individual....   subscribers (per 100 people)028   Corporate....High technology exports   (% of manufactured exports)14.82.7External Debt and Resource FlowsEnvironment(US$ millions)Total debt outstanding and disbursed2,9601,904Agricultural land (% of land area)3232Total debt service9397.5Forest area (% of land area)10.710.1Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)79727.6Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)..2.1Total debt (% of GDP)122.221.2Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)5,4494,722Total debt service (% of exports)12.92.5Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)6.5..Foreign direct investment (net inflows)82427.6CO2 emissions per capita (mt)0.050.05Portfolio equity (net inflows)09.3GDP per unit of energy use   (2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)....Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent).... World Bank Group portfolio20002009 (US$ millions) IBRD   Total debt outstanding and disbursed––   Disbursements––   Principal repayments––   Interest payments–– IDA   Total debt outstanding and disbursed957698   Disbursements49160Private Sector Development20002009   Total debt service145Time required to start a business (days)–15 IFC (fiscal year)Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)–89.2   Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio789Time required to register property (days)–29      of which IFC own account579   Disbursements for IFC own account00Ranked as a major constraint to business20002009   Portfolio sales, prepayments and   (% of managers surveyed who agreed)      repayments for IFC own account90      Access to/cost of financing..63.6      Corruption..48.7 MIGA   Gross exposure016Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)....   New guarantees00Bank capital to asset ratio (%)....Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  2009 data are preliminary.4/5/11.. indicates data are not available.  – indicates observation is not applicable.Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).0255075100Control of corruptionRule of lawRegulatory qualityPolitical stabilityVoice and accountabilityCountry's percentile rank (0-100)higher values imply better ratings20092000Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World BankIBRD, 0IDA, 534IMF, 40Other multi-lateral, 556Bilateral, 983Private, 5Short-term, 7Composition of total external debt, 2008US$ millions 
 
 
- 39 - 

Indicator2008200920102011Portfolio AssessmentNumber of Projects Under Implementation a11131210Average Implementation Period (years) b4.03.94.05.2Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c18.215.48.30.0Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c11.81.10.80.0Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d18.215.416.710.0Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d11.81.11.20.4Disbursement Ratio (%) e22.920.721.314.4Portfolio ManagementCPPR during the year (yes/no)yesyesyesyesMemorandum ItemSince FY 80Last Five FYsProj Eval by OED by Number648Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)1,741.0429.9% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number40.650.0% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt32.540.6a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the      beginning of the year: Investment projects only.*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and ManagementCAS Annex B2 - MaliAs Of Date 4/6/2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 40 - 

2008200920102011*Commitments (US$m)Gross033.817.05.3Net**033.817.05.3Net Commitments by Sector (%)Food & Beverages034.533.50.0Finance & Insurance034.266.5100.0Pulp & Paper031.300Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)Guarantee034.266.5100.0Loan065.833.50*  As of March 31, 2011** IFC's Own Account onlyCAS Annex B3 (IFC) for MaliIFC Program, FY2008-2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Appendix B6 

Mali – Key Econom ic Indicators 

- 41 - 

Indicator2005200620072008200920102011201220132014National accounts (as % of GDP)Gross domestic producta100100100100100100100100100100   Agriculture37373640394039394040   Industry24242320212123232323   Services39394140403938383737Total Consumption89858797919288878585Gross domestic fixed investment23232219201821212122   Government investment89881189888   Private investment15141412101112131415Exports (GNFS)b26322629262527272726Imports (GNFS)37403643343335333131Gross domestic savings1115135131112141617Gross national savingsc1113136131114151516Memorandum itemsGross domestic product 53055866714687228996..........(US$ million at current prices)GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)440460530610680..........Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 87 prices)   Gross domestic product at market prices6.15.34.35.04.55.85.35.55.55.1Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 87 prices)Balance of Payments (as % of GDP)  Exports (GNFS)b26322629262527272726      Merchandise FOB2124222123242423   Imports (GNFS)b37403643343335333131      Merchandise FOB2531242425242322  Net current transfers65554444    Official (net)32221111    Private (net)26333322  Current account balance (including official transfers)-8-12.7-9.3-9.0-9.7-8.3-6.5-6.7Overall balance00.05.0-1.9-1.7-0.41.10.9 (Continued)Actual     EstimateProjected 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Appendix B6 

Mali – Key Econom ic Indicators 
(continued) 

- 42 - 

Actual     Indicator2005200620072008200920102011201220132014Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)d  Current revenues17.951.816.916.017.117.416.316.516.917.1  Current expenditures13.513.413.612.913.013.014.213.413.413.5  Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)4.538.43.33.14.14.42.13.13.53.6  Capital expenditure10.49.29.79.810.87.99.28.37.58  Foreign financing6.6-26.66.65.57.24.04.74.54.34.3Monetary indicators  M2/GDP30.030.429.427.928.127.927.729.029.930.8  Growth of M2 (%)9.510.98.08.416.08.99.311.811.510.8  Private sector credit growth (%)4.65.27.28.48.39.08.38.7  Government credit growth (net, %)0.5-3.2-13.92.58.54.5-1.0-1.2Price indices( YR87 =100)  Merchandise export price index....3.4..............  Merchandise import price index....3.4..............  Merchandise terms of trade annual % change (deterioration - )....0.036.727.7-1.312.8-8.14.90.8  Real exchange rate ....0.58.00.3-6.3........  Consumer price index  (% change)6.41.52.09.12.21.42.02.12.32.8  GDP deflator (% change)2.44.17.18.73.63.64.41.32.42.4a.   GDP at factor costb.  "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."c.  Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.d.   Consolidated central government.ProjectedEstimate 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Appendix B7 

- 43 - 

Actual     EstimatedIndicator200520062007200820092010201120122013Total debt outstanding and 326016561992212526672803298930943130disbursed (TDO) (US$m)aNet disbursements (US$m)a....101-9234428886468Total debt service (TDS)....20252629313131(US$m)aDebt and debt service indicators (%)   TDO/XGSb241.890.2104.884.5108.0121.3108.7104.5101.1   TDO/GDP59.327.027.824.228.330.029.128.127.7   TDS/XGS....1.01.01.01.21.11.11.0   Concessional/TDO93.795.196.895.994.193.994.194.594.8IBRD exposure indicators (%)   IBRD DS/public DS..................   Preferred creditor DS/public....48.555.257.648.649.949.150.2   DS (%)c   IBRD DS/XGS..................   IBRD TDO (US$m)d..................      Of which present value of      guarantees (US$m)   Share of IBRD portfolio (%)..................   IDA TDO (US$m)d1424297452534698775839888920IFC (US$m)   Loans   Equity and quasi-equity  /cMIGA   MIGA guarantees (US$m)16.216.216.216.216.216.216.216.216.2a.  Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-     term capital.b.  "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the    Bank for International Settlements.d. Includes present value of guarantees.e.  Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.Projected 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex B8 (IFC) - Mali 
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio 
As of 3/31/2011 
(In USD Millions) 

FY Approval 

Company 

Loan 

Equity 

Quasi 
Equity* 

GT/RM** Participant 

Loan 

Equity 

Quasi 
Equity GT/RM Participant 

Committed 

Disbursed Outstanding 

2009 
2009/ 2010/ 2011 
2009 
2010 
1994/ 1998/ 2003 
2001/ 2002/ 2009 

BoA Mali 
Ecobank Mali 
GMM 
GRIMAS 
Hotel Bamako 
PAL-Graphique 
Id 
1999/ 2004 
SEF SIECO 
1982/ 1983/ 1990/ 1993 SIKA 
Total Portfolio 

0 
0 
10.8 
6.5 
1.5 
10.7 

0.3 
0 
29.8 

* Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types. 

** Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products. 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 

6.0 
12.2 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
18.2 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
10.8 
4.7 
1.5 
8.5 

0.3 
0.0 
25.8 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 

2.8 
5.4 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
8.2 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

0 
0 
0 

- 44 - 

 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 45 - 

Closed Projects76IBRD/IDA *Total Disbursed (Active) 239.97          of which has been repaid 0.00Total Disbursed (Closed) 762.07          of which has been repaid 79.35Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 1,002.04          of which has been repaid 79.35Total Undisbursed (Active) 328.05Total Undisbursed (Closed) 10.63Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 338.68Active ProjectsProject IDProject NameDevelopment ObjectivesImplementation ProgressFiscal YearIBRDIDAGRANTCancel.Undisb.Orig.Frm Rev'dP052402GEF Gourma Biodiv Conserv SIL (FY05)SMS20055.50.800.80P082187Dev Learning Ct LIL (FY04) - (PCFD)MSMS20042.50.360.27P080935Growth Support SIL (FY05)MSMS20055533.9027.3016.77P082957HIV/AIDS MAP (FY04)SMS200431.51.34-6.26-0.76P073036Household Energy & Univ Access (FY04)SS200470.6516.09-19.918.50P040653Rural Com. Dev. (PACR)SS200671.225.0510.57P090075Transp Sec SIL 2 (FY07)SMS20079038.4229.14P081704Agr Compet & Diversif (FY06) - (PCDA)SS200646.418.5817.21P095091Agricultural Productivity (IDA)SMS20107068.728.09P108440Energy Support Project SIL (FY09)SS2009120125.5949.39P099709Agricultural Productivity GEF (SIP)SMS20106.26.200.50Overall Result557.2511.7335.05117.0924.51a/.  Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisalAs Of Date 4/6/2011CAS Annex B8 - MaliOperations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)Original Amount in US$ MillionsDisbursements a/Difference BetweenExpected and ActualSupervision RatingLast PSR  
 
 
 
 
 
Lac Niangay
Lac Niangay
Lac Niangay
Hombori
Hombori
Hombori
Tondo
Tondo
Tondo
(1,155 m)
(1,155 m)
(1,155 m)

S a h a r a D e s e r t 
S a h a r a D e s e r t 

M O P T I
M O P T I
M O P T I

S É G O U
S É G O U
S É G O U

S I K A S S O 
S I K A S S O 
S I K A S S O 

T O M B O U C T O U
T O M B O U C T O U
T O M B O U C T O U

K I D A L
K I D A L
K I D A L

G A OG A O
G A O

K A Y E S
K A Y E S
K A Y E S

K
K

O
O

ULIK
ULIK

O
O

R
R

O 
O 

B a
B a

o ulé
o ulé

N ig er 
N ig er 

N i g
N i g

e
e

r
r

LacLac
Lac
DéboDébo
Débo

Vallée d
Vallée d

u 
u 

e
e
Ti
Ti

l
l

m
m

s
s

i
i

a
a
V
V

llée de L’Azaouak 
llée de L’Azaouak 

Koulikoro
Koulikoro
Koulikoro

Sikasso
Sikasso
Sikasso

Ségou
Ségou
Ségou

MoptiMopti
Mopti

GaoGao
Gao

Kayes
Kayes
Kayes

Tombouctou
Tombouctou
Tombouctou
(Timbuktu)
(Timbuktu)
(Timbuktu)

Kidal
Kidal
Kidal

BAMAKO
BAMAKO
BAMAKO

Bougouni
Bougouni
Bougouni

SanSan
San

NionoNiono
Niono

Nampala
Nampala
Nampala

Kolokani
Kolokani
Kolokani

NioroNioro
Nioro
du Sahel
du Sahel
du Sahel

KitaKita
Kita

NaraNara
Nara

Kéniniébaba
Kéniéba

Koutiala
Koutiala
Koutiala

Bandiagara
Bandiagara
Bandiagara

Niafounke
Niafounke
Niafounke

Araouane
Araouane
Araouane

Douentza
Douentza
Douentza

Gourma
Gourma
Gourma
Rharous
Rharous
Rharous

Ansongo
Ansongo
Ansongo

Menaka
Menaka
Menaka

Bourem
Bourem
Bourem

Tessalit
Tessalit
Tessalit

Taoudenni
Taoudenni
Taoudenni

M A U R I T A N I A
M A U R I T A N I A
M A U R I T A N I A

A L G E R I A
A L G E R I A
A L G E R I A

B U R K I N A
B U R K I N A
B U R K I N A
F A S O
F A S O
F A S O

N I G E R
N I G E R
N I G E R

G H A N A
G H A N A
G H A N A

B E N I N
B E N I N
B E N I N

T
T
T

O
O
O

G
G
G

O
O
O

G U I N E A
G U I N E A
G U I N E A

S I E R R A
S I E R R A
S I E R R A
L E O N E
L E O N E
L E O N E

To To 
To 
El Mreîti
El Mreîti
El Mreîti

To 
To To 
Chenachane
Chenachane
Chenachane

To 
To To 
Poste Maurice
Poste Maurice
Poste Maurice
Cortier
Cortier
Cortier

To 
To To 
Abalessa
Abalessa
Abalessa

To 
To To 
Abala
AbalaAbala

To 
To To 
Ouahigouya
Ouahigouya
Ouahigouya

To 
To To 
Nouna
Nouna
Nouna

To 
To To 
Bobo
Bobo
Bobo
Dioulasso
Dioulasso
Dioulasso

To 
To To 
Korhogo
Korhogo
Korhogo

To 
To To 
Kankan
Kankan
Kankan

To 
To To 
Siguiri
Siguiri
Siguiri

To 
To To 
Kédougou
Kédougou
Kédougou

To 
To To 
Goudiry
Goudiry
Goudiry

To 
To To 
Kifa
KifaKifa

To 
To To 
 Ayun
 Ayun
 Ayun
el ’Atrous
el ’Atrous
el ’Atrous

To Néma
To Néma
To Néma

To  Niamey
To  Niamey
To  Niamey

To 
To To 
El Mreîti
El Mreîti
El Mreîti

C Ô T E D ’ I V O I R E
C Ô T E D ’ I V O I R E
C Ô T E D ’ I V O I R E

D I S T R IC T
D I S T R IC T
D I S T R IC T
D E BAMAKO
D E BAMAKO
D E BAMAKO

B a n i 

B

afin

g

5°W

0°

10°W

5°W

0°

10°N

15°N

20°N

10°N

15°N

20°N

25°N

MALI

IBRD 33443R

MAY 2009

M A L I

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

PROVINCE CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

RAILROADS

REGION BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

This map was produced by 
the Map Design Unit of The 
World Bank. The boundaries, 
co lo rs , denom ina t ions and 
any other information shown 
on this map do not imply,  on 
the part of The World Bank 
Group, any judgment on the 
legal status  of any territory,  
o r a n y e n d o r s e m e n t o r 
a c c e p t a n c e o f 
s u c h 
boundaries.

0

100

200

0

50

100

150

300 Miles

300 Kilometers

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
