d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Docum ent of 
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No.  59222-AR 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY PARTNERSH IP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

FOR 

THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC 

FOR THE PERIOD 2010 -2012 

February 24 , 2011 

Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay  
Country Managem ent Unit 
Latin Am erica and the Caribbean Region 

Th is documen t has a restr icted d istr ibu tion and may be used by recip ien ts on ly in the performance of their 
off ic ial du ties.  Its contents may no t o therw ise be d isclosed w ithou t Wor ld Bank author ization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The last Country Partnership Strategy for Argentina was discussed by the Executive D irectors on 
June 9 , 2009 (Report No . 48476 -AR ) 

CURRENCY AND EQU IVALENT UN ITS 
(A s of February 24 , 2011)  
Currency Unit = Argentine Peso 
US$1 = 4 .06 Argentine Peso 

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
Metric System 

FISCAL YEAR 
January 1 to December 31 

ABBREV IATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

Analytical and Advisory Activities 
M atanza-R iachuelo R iver Basin Authority 
Social Security Adm inistration 
Support for an Egalitarian Republic Party 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Consumer Price Index 
Country Partnership Strategy 
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report 
Contrato de Recuperación y Mantenimiento 
Fee Based Service 
G reenhouse Gas 
G ross Domestic Product 
Implementing Agency 
Institutional Development Fund 
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 
National Institute of Statistics and Census of A rgentina 
Information Technology 
Pan American Energy 
Procurement Plan Execution System 
Small and M edium Enterprise 
Sector Wide Approach 
Term inales R io de la Plata 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 

AAA 
ACUMAR 

ANSES 
ARI 

CAS 
CP I 
CPS 
CPSPR 
CREMA 
FBS 
GHG 

GDP 
IA 
IDF 

IFC 
IMF 
INDEC 
IT 
PAE 

SEPA 
SME 

SWAp 
TRP 
UNFCC 

Vi ce President : 
Pame la Co x 
Coun try Directo r: 
Penelop e Bro o k 
Task Team Leaders: Tat ian a Pro skuryako va 

Th ier ry Tanoh 
Paolo Ma rtell i 
Joh n Ba rham 

IBRD 

IFC 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Th e CPSPR was prepa red und er the gu id an ce o f Pen elope Bro o k , Cou ntry Directo r, LCC7C b y Tat iana 
Pro skuryako va (TTL), Al e jand ro Alcala, Yan in a Bud kin, Norb ert F iess , And rew Follme r, M ich el Ke r f, M ilagro s 

Mo st e ir in, Ra fael Ro fman, Fel ip e Saez, Ve ron ica Salat ino, Cec il ia S imkie vich an d Joh n Barh am. Cont r ibut ion s are 

grat e full y acknowled ged from El izab eth Adu, Bru ce Cou rtney, Barb ara H. M ie rau -Kl e in, Rakesh Nan gia , Reyn aldo 

Pasto r, Ale jand ro Sol anot and Laura Tuck who pro vid ed writt en comment s and to Ma rcelo Acerb i, Cr ist ian Aedo , 

Diego Ambasz,  Al exand re Arrobb io, Ana Bell ve r, Van in a Campo reale , Ra fael Cortez , M ichael Crawford , Robe rt 

Davis, An a Gro fsmacht, Th eresa Jon es, Fern ando Lavad en z, Ch in gboon Lee, Patr ic ia Lo pez, Catal in a Maruland a, 

Renato Na rdello, And res P izar ro, Renan Po ved a, Vero nica Ra ffo, Dan iela Rome ro, Ma rcel a Sal vador, Mar ia Marcel 

S il va, Al va ro Soler , Lu c ia Spinell i, Carlo s Velez and Xiaop in g Wan g fo r th e ir valu able in puts. Admin ist rat ive supp ort 

was p ro vid ed b y Mar iel a Al va rez, Carla Cutolo and Ge rald in e Ga rc ia .Th e World Ban k Group than ks Gabr iela Co sta, 

Nat ion al Director fo r Projects with Int ern at ion al Cred it In stitut ion s, M in istry o f E con omy and Publ ic Finan ce o f 

Argent ina, and An íb al Lóp ez, Directo r for Pro ject s with th e Wo rld Ban k, M in istry o f E conomy and Publ ic F in ance o f 

Argent ina, fo r the ir co ntr ibut ion s to th is CPSPR. 

 
 
 
 
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report 

Argentina 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

I.   INTRODUCTION ................................ ................................ ................................ .............1 

II.    COUNTRY CONTEXT ................................ ................................ ................................ ..2 

A. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS ............................................................................................................................ 2 
B. OUTLOOK ......................................................................................................................................................... 3 

III. PROGRESS TOWARD S CPS OUTCOMES ................................ ................................ ...5 

A. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION AND PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE ..................................................... 5 
B. RESULTS TO DATE .......................................................................................................................................... 7 
C. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CPS RESULTS FRAMEWORK .......................................................................... 12 

IV . FUTURE ENGAGEMENT................................ ................................ ............................. 13 

V . RISKS ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................... 14 

ANNEXES 

ANNEX 1: UPDATED RESULTS FRAMEWORK ................................ ................................ 16 

ANNEX 2: SUMMARY OF CHANGES TO CPS RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................ 32 

ANNEX 3. ARGENTINA LEND ING AND GEF PROGRAM , FY09-12 ................................ . 36 

ANNEX 4. OPERATIONS PORTFOLIO (IBRD/IDA AND GRANTS) ................................ .. 38 

ANNEX 5. AAA PROGRAM FY09-FY11 ................................ ................................ .............. 40 

ANNEX 6. SELECTED IND ICATORS OF BANK PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND 
MANAGEMENT................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 41 

ANNEX 7: SUMMARY OF JO INT GOVERNMENT -BANK WORKSHOP ........................... 42 

ANNEX 8. ARGENTINA: SELECTED ECONOM IC AND FINANCIAL IND ICATORS ....... 44 

ANNEX 9. ARGENTINA AT A GLANCE ................................ ................................ ............. 45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I.   INTRODUCTION 

1. 
The Board of Executive D irectors discussed the 2010 -2012 join t Bank-IFC 
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)1 for the Argentine Republic on June 9, 2009. This 
Progress Report (CPSPR) assesses the implementation at m idpoint of Bank’s Country 

Partnership Strategy w ith A rgentina.  The CPS provides strategic support to the A rgentine 
Republic in three key areas: sustainable grow th with equity, social inclusion, and improved 
governance. The strategy is focused on the implementation of existing portfolio and delivery of 
new investment lending and a range of know ledge services t o help achieve specific country 
development outcomes.  

2. 
The developm ent goals supported by the stra tegy remain valid, and there have 
been no significant changes in Governm ent priorities since the adoption of the CPS. The 
investment partnership between A rgen tina and the Bank has been stable and consistent since its 
adoption in 2004, focusing on the long -term goals of upgrading infrastructure, consolidating 

social gains and poverty reduction, and improving public sector capacity. The global econom ic 
crisis, the main source of uncertainty at the start of the CPS period, did not affect A rgentina as 
strongly as anticipated.   

3. 
Implem entation of the 2010 -2012 CPS is on track and yielding tangible results.  
The Bank has maintained a dialogue with the authorities in a reas that had been the central focus 
of the previous Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), while adding new initiatives, the most 
prom inent of which is engagement in the cleanup of the M atanza R iachuelo river basin. 14 
lending operations for the total amount of US$3,217 million2 have already been approved or are 
in advanced stages of preparation, with another 4 projects for about US$200 million indicatively 
planned before the end of the CPS period. Outcomes achieved to date are the result of long -term 
engagement as well as of new analytical work, policy reform s and investments. IFC 
commitments in A rgentina totaled $516 million in FY09 -10 and mobilized a further $325 m illion 
from participating investors. These resources were invested w ith 20 clients operating pr incipally 

in the oil and gas, trade finance, and mining and processing sectors. 

4. 
The Bank program for the second half of the CPS period is well defined. The main 
challenge for the next 18 months is to implement the large and complex portfolio of investments , 

building on experience and improved implementation capacity, and to implement the ongoing 
technical assistance program with high quality and responsiveness to Government needs. 
Possible changes in priorities after the upcom ing elections w ill be addressed as part of the next 
CPS preparation. For its part, IFC expects no significant changes in its approach for the 

1 Report No. 48 476 -AR 

2 The tot al takes into accou nt cancellat ion o f US$88 mill ion from th e Prevention and Man agement o f In fluenza Type 
Illn ess and Stren gthen in g o f Argent in a 's Ep id emiolo gical Syst em P ro ject, Lo an 78 43-AR. Note also that Matanza 
R iachu elo pro ject is not part o f th is total as it was appro ved un de r the pre viou s CPS, a lthou gh it s impl ementat ion 
began du rin g the cu rrent CPS pe riod.  

1 

 
 
                                                    
remainder of the CPS period. However, it does hope to support cro ss -border investments by 
A rgentine clients, and to finance emerging IT companies . 

5. 
Consistent w ith the results-based approach, this Progress Report fo cuses on the 
main achievem ents to date and propose s som e m inor course adjustm ents. Section II of the 
Report provides a summary of recent country developments. Section III desc ribes progre ss 
towards CPS outcomes and proposes changes to the results framework in light of implementation 

experience. Section IV sets out the program for the rest of the CPS period, and Section V 
contains a brief summary of key risks. 

II.    COUNTRY CONTEXT 

A . RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 

6. 
The effects of the recent econom ic crisis have been less severe than an ticipated. As 
A rgentina recovered from the profound c risis of 2001, its real G ross Domestic Product (GDP) 
grew on average 8.5 percent per year between 2002 and 2008. Economic activity started to slow 

in 2008 w ith a conflict over agricultural export duties during the first semester and the impact of 
the global financial crisis in September. Real GDP grow th declined to 6.8 percent in 2008 from 
8.7 percent in 2007, according to official statistics. Econom ic activity declined further in 2009 
due to a drop in external dem and, declining commodity prices, continued deterioration in 
investor confidence and a severe drought that weighed on agricultural production. Fiscal 

performance deteriorated con siderably in 2009 due to a decline in revenue stemm ing from lower 
econom ic activity, counter-cyclical stimulus and the sharp decline in trade and related tax 
revenue (the p rimary fiscal surplus fell from 3.1 percent o f GDP in 2008 to 1.5 percent of GDP 
in 2009). Increased econom ic uncertainty prompted an increase in capital outflows that offset 
improvements in the current account due to reduced domestic demand. G ross international 

reserves declined from a record of US$50.5 billion in April 2008 to US$47.9 billion at the end of 
2009. Foreign currency sales allowed the Central Bank to m aintain relative exchange rate 
stability.  G ross public debt declined from 66.4 percent of GDP (US$153 .0 billion) in 2002 to 
47.1 percent of GDP (US$160.9 billion) by end -September 2010.  

7. 
The economy rebounded strongly in 2010, fueled by fast growth in int ernal 
absorption, strong external demand (mainly Brazil and China), and commodity price 
improvements. A significant revitalization of industrial activity in automobiles, basic metals and 

textiles, and a normalization of agricultural production follow ing th e previous year’s severe 
drought have contributed to the economy’s dynam ism . Internal absorption has been boo sted by 
consumption, investment and an expansion of public spending. Real GDP is estimated to have 
grown by 9.1 percent in 2010 . 

2 

 
 
 
8. 
Poverty is declining. According to official statistics, poverty has declined from 13.9 
percent in June 2009 to 12.0 percent in June 2010 3. Unemployment is also falling, reaching 7.5 
percent in September 2010, from a peak of 9.1 percent in September 2009. Early indications o f 

trends in other social indicators (i.e., infant mortality and school enrollment) are also positive.  

9. 

Since December 2010, the Governm ent has been actively seeking an agreem ent 

w ith the Paris Club to restructure the official debt that has remained in defa ult since 2001, and 
an agreement w ith the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has also been reached to conduct a 
technical mission to A rgentina to help design a new nationw ide consumer price inflation index. 
In addition, the Government has been calling for a social pact between unions and employers to 
help anchor inflationary expectations.    

10. 

A long-standing delegation of legislative powers to the Executive branch expired in 

August 2010.   For decades many of the powers that in other countries are typically vested in the 
Legislative branch in A rgentina had been within the authority of the Executive. In 1994 
Constitutional reform restored these powers to the Legislative branch, including , among others, 
the authority to impose duties on trade and introduce chan ges to the public budget. The reform 
however did not take effect immediately and included a transitory clause granting a five -year 

period during which these powers would continue to be delegated to the Executive . This period 
was extended by Congress severa l times over the years until August 24, 2010, when Congress 
decided that such delegation to the Executive branch would no longer be authorized, thus 
recouping its full authority as set forth by the Constitution and restoring the balance of power 
between the branches of government.  

B . OUTLOOK  

11. 
The political agenda for 2011 w ill be dom inated by the upcoming presidential 
elections. While their outcome remains uncertain, no fundamental changes in policies are 
expected. Within the Peronist Party, there is an agreement that the state should maintain an 

active role in the economy, providing substantial investments in social program s and 
infrastructure. Representatives of the opposition Radical party and Support for an Egalitarian 
Republic (AR I) party tend to share this view , although they may differ on mechanism s for 
implementing such investments.  

12. 
Grow th is expected to continue in the near term . Real GDP is projected to expand 
by 9.1 percent in 2010 and by 5. 8 in 2011; growth is likely to dec elerate in 2011 due to an 
expected moderation in external demand, continued high inflation that w ill take its toll on 

3Data based o n o ffic ial in flat io n figu res, wh ich a re cont ested b y ma rket anal yst s. 

3 

 
 
 
 
                                                    
consumer confidence and real incomes, and the possibility that firm s w ill hold off investments 
ahead of the 2011 presidential elections.  

13. 
Inflation is accelerating . Fiscal stimulus, bottlenecks in production, energy shortages 
and a more relaxed monetary policy during the second half of 2010 are fueling inflationary 
pressure s. The gap between private and official inflation estimates remains w ide. According to 

INDEC, inflation in December 2010 reached 11.0 percent compared to estimates of around 25.0 
percent by market analysts fo r year -end. Some analysts expect inflation to accelerate further in 
2011 (29 pe rcent) as an expansionary fiscal and m onetary stance w ill likely be maintained in the 
run-up to October presidential elections.  

14. 
Fiscal accounts are stable . The primary balance is expected to post a surplus of 1.7 
percent of GDP and the overall balance a surplus of 0. 2 percent of GDP in 2010. Fiscal revenues 

have increased strongly during 2010 due to economic recovery, inflation gains and greater export 
tax revenue. Total revenue grew by 34.7 percent in 2010 compared to 18. 7 percent the previous 
year. Strong revenue perfo rmance has allowed the Government to maintain an expansionary 
stance w ithout endangering the primary balance; although expenditures have grown by 33.9 
percent, the primary fiscal result has remained positive at AR$25.1billion. Fiscal accounts are 

expected to deteriorate somewhat in 2011, as expenditures are likely to increase in the run -up to 
the October presidential elections. The primary balance is expected to remain positive at 0.8 
percent of GDP whereas the overall balance is likely to post a deficit of about 1.0 percent of 
GDP in 2011.  

15. 
The financing gap is manageable . A rgentina’s gross financing needs for 2010 
(US$12.8 billion) have been covered by the primary surplus and the US$6.6 billion fund created 
w ith Central Bank reserves in M arch 2010. G ross financing needs for 2011 (US$14.4 billion) 

and 2012 (US$11.8 billion) are high, but also manageable. The successful debt exchange in June 
2010 has opened the possibility for fresh financing from international capital markets 4. However, 
the Government will likely continue to rely on inter-public sector borrow ing (from the Social 
Security Administration (ANSES) and Banco de la Nación Argentina ) and the Central Bank 
(through the issuance of local currency and the renewed use of international reserves 5) to cover 
its financing needs.  

16. 

External accounts are deteriorating . During 2010, the trade balance posted a surplus 

of US$12.1 billion, equivalent to 3.8 percent of GDP – a 28.9 percent decline relative to 2009. 
The decline in the trade surplus occurred despite record soybean exports an d dynam ic 
manufactured exports to Brazil, as imports grew even stronger due to the econom ic recovery: 

4 In Decemb er 2010, th e Go ve rnment laun ched anoth er attempt to swap the rema in in gUS$6.1 bn o f de fault ed debt 
that was n ot ten de red dur in g th e two previou s debt restru ctur in gs (2 005 and June 20 10). Accordin g to o ffic ial 
prel imin ary est imat es, with th e th ree d ebt restru ctur in g init iat ives 93% o f d e faulted debt h as been rest ructu red. 

5 The d ec ree rul in g the exten sio n o f the 2010 Bud ge t to 2011 al so c reates a US$7.5b illion fun d furn ish ed with 
Central Ban k reser ves to se rvice d ebt with p r ivat e in vestors d ur in g 2011. 

4 

 
 
                                                    
exports grew by 23.0 percent, while imports expanded by 45.5 percent. The current account 
surplus is expected to narrow to 1.7 percent of GDP in 2010 (fro m 3.9 percent in 2009) and to 
decline further in 2011. 

17. 
Monetary accounts. Strong dollar inflows from trade surpluses and a commitment to a 
stable nominal exchange rate have led to record reserve accumulation, reaching US$52.2 billion 

at the end of December 2010. Net international reserves amounted to US$41.9 billion, equivalent 
to 78.0 percent of private M2, or 7.8 months of imports. At the same time, the nom inal exchange 
rate has appreciated by only 4.2 percent relative to 2009, trading at AR$3.98 per US$ at the end 
of December. Continued sterilization of dollar inflows and transfers f rom Central Bank’s profits 
to the Treasury have fueled a monetary expan sion well beyond the recently updated monetary 

target for 2010 – private M2 closed the year w ith a rate of g row th of 31.5 percent , exceeding the 
29.9 percent target for December 2010. In spite of high inflation, the nom inal exchange rate is 
expected to remain relatively stable in 2011. As long as A rgentina’s term s of trade remain 
favorable and the Brazilian Real, the currency o f A rgentina’s main trading partner, remains 
strong, the economy is expected to absorb the loss in competitiveness associated with a moderate 

real appreciation.  

18. 

Financial sector remains stable. During 2010, the financial system has remained 

stable characterized by strong liquidity and capital adequacy figures. In ad dition, credit growth is 
picking up while asset quality has reversed its negative trend in response to a more benign 
econom ic environment. Financial stability is likely to be maintained in 2011.  

III. PROGRESS TOWARDS CPS OUTCOMES 

A . PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION AND PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE 

19. 
New lending comm itm ents since the start of the CPS period include 12 investment 
operations for US$2,617 million6, with another 6 projects for about US$800 m illion planned in 
end of FY11 and FY12 (see Annex 3).  Infrastructure inv estments account for the largest share of 

new lending (36 percent), followed by health (29 percent) and social protection (27 percent). 
Across the board, new lending is focused on assistance to provinces: 10 projects approved so far 
under the CPS, accounting for 72 percent of the total lending amount, are funding expenditures 
at the provincial level either through direct sub -national lending, or by supporting Government 
transfers to the provinces. The new portfolio continues the traditional strong focus on results, 

w ith 8 out 14 new operations including results based financing. Ten recently approved projects 
have an explicit poverty focus, targeting disadvantaged social groups or regions.   

6 This is based on cu rrent assumpt ion s wit h respect to th e schedul e o f Boa rd p resentat io n o f p ipel in e op erat ion s and 
this Pro gress Rep ort. Basic Prot ect io n Boa rd d ate as o f 02/23/20 11 is 03/10/2 011.  

5 

 
 
 
 
                                                    
20. 
Portfolio performance during the first half of the CPS period has be en strong .    
The disbursement ratio in FY09 and FY10 has significantly increased from the FY08 levels 
(from 12.2 percent to 29.1 and 23.4 percent respectively), particularly reflecting progress under 

the infrastructure portfolio.  There are 4 problem projects representing 10.5 percent of projects 
by number, not including GEF.  

21. 

The focus on portfolio managem ent and intensive dialogue with the Governm ent 

to address issues affecting the portfolio has continued and strengthened.  Through the 
Improving Investment Portfolio M anagement: Building Up Institutions, System s and Human 
Capital Project funded by an Institutional Development Fund (IDF) G rant, the Bank is 
contributing to Government’s efforts to improve the design, preparation and approval of loans at 

the national and provincial levels, procurement capacity, and portfolio monitoring.  As an input 
to the mid-point evaluation of the CPS, the Government and the Bank carr ied out a workshop on 
challenges and risks faced in the preparation and implementation of in vestment projects, 
focusing on the area s of procurement, safeguard s and financial management.  A joint action plan 
defined at the workshop is now in implementation (see Annex 7).  

22. 

Analytical and technical assistance activities are also focused on i nfrastru cture, 

environment, social protection and health, sectors where the Bank has operational presence and 
active dialogue (see Annex 5).  There has been an increase in demand for Bank analytical 
services at the sub -national level, including a number of request s for Fee Based Services (FBS) 
for provinces in areas of public sector management and strategies for productive sectors.  There 
are currently three such operations underway in the provinces of Corrientes, Chaco and Cordoba.  

23. 
The International Finance Corporation (IFC ) program in Argentina during the 
past few years has been geared toward export -oriented sectors with clients with a solid track 

record, in sectors such as ag ribusiness, oil and gas, and information technology. Most recently, 
the strategy has been expanded and, on a selective basis, IFC has started to invest in new clients 
in strategic sectors such as ports, and in new sectors such as information technology. Although 
the Corporation remains closely engaged with A rgen tina, market conditions have presented fresh 
challenges to investment team s in the country. A combination of relatively low investment levels 

by highly rated corporations and substantial liquidity in the local financial system has led to a 
steady reduction in IFC commitments. Still with comm itments totaling $516 million in FY09 -
FY10 and an outstanding balance of $972.8 m illion for its own account and $861.6 m illion in 
investments by participants at the end of June 2010, A rgentina was IFC’s fourth largest ma rket 
worldwide in term s of outstanding balance and the second largest in the re gion after Brazil.  

6 

 
 
 
 
B . RESULTS TO DATE 

24. 

Overall progress towards expected CPS outcom es has been strong, particularly 

under the Sustainable Grow th and Social Inclusion pillars. Consistency over time in the 
strategic areas and priorities of Bank engagement means that some long-term program s are now 
bearing fruit and translating into country level outcomes.   In three specific areas – transport, 
health, and social protection – it is possible to report that CPS outcomes have made a significant 
contribution to A rgentina’s development goals. Likewise, in areas such as water and sanitation, 

rural education, agriculture and rural electricity, important achievements can be reported at the 
regional and local level.  The main results under the Improved Governance pillar have occurred 
in the area of efficiency of public institutions, with a more recent shift in client demand towards 
custom ized assistance to provinces in addressing their priorit y governance challenges, such as 
fiscal performance or social services delivery.   

Pillar I: Sustainable Grow th with Equity  

25. 
In line with the country’s goal of improving competitiveness and addressing resource 
degradation, the first pillar of the CPS emphasizes upgrading infrastructure in key sectors, 

improving competitiveness in agriculture and addressing selected issues of resource degradation.  
The most significant results achieved to date are as follows. 

26. 

Improved condition of national and selected provincial highway networks.  A 

major focus of Bank assistance in the infrastructure sector has been ensuring that the national 
highway network reaches the target of over 90 percent of roads in good condition.  The Bank’s 
contribution to this outcome has b een through the introduction and partial financing of outcome -
based rehabilitation and maintenance contracts (Contrato de Recuperación y Mantenim iento , or 

CREMA contracts) that currently cover over 70 percent of the national highway system of 
34,000 kilometers, and are also used as a network management tool in seven provinces. Based on 
the efforts since the late 1990s, in the course of 2009 -2010 the national road network achieved a 
steady state, that is, fully removed the backlog of deferred maintenance and now boasts over 98 
percent of roads in good condition, surpassing the CPS target.  Seven provinces using the 

CREMA system also achieved the same level of road quality, confirming the effectiveness of the 
model, which has now been adopted by other countrie s of the region including Brazil and Peru. 

27. 

Improved urban transport services.   The Bank has been supporting investments and 

institutional strengthening reform s in the urban transport subsector through a large program of 
lending (PTUBA, PTUMA ) and GEF (Sus tainable Transport and Air Quality) operations.  Bank 
support is focused on improving the quality and sustainability of urban transport system s in 
M etropolitan A reas of A rgentina, through the improvement of sectoral decision making and by 

giving priority to public transport modes and projects that have lower carbon -footprint and lower 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
impact on climate change.  While it is too early to assess overall outcomes, Bank -financed 
interventions include the rehabilitation of metro line A, urban transport transfer c enters, and 
road/rail underpasses in the Buenos A ires M etropolitan A rea, as well as enhanced decision 

making tools (surveys, transport models, strategic plans, feasibility and design studies) and 
setting up permanent statistical data gathering and results monitoring system s in Buenos Aires 
and in five medium size metropolitan areas. The Bank is also supporting the G overnment ’s 
efforts to improve road safety through an ongoing Road Safety Project. 

28. 
Improved water and sanitation services to the poor have been a major focus of the 
Bank’s partnership with the Province of Buenos A ires.  A series of three operations (including 
one Additional Financing) for an aggregate amount of US$470 m illion have been approved since 

2004 to support infrastructure investments in t he province, including in water and sanitation with 
the objective of expanding access to these services to 128,000 poor residents in areas with high 
sanitary or environmental vulnerability.   

29. 
Among the new water sector operations particularly notable are t he M atanza 
R iachuelo project and two projects in the Norte G rande provinces, a region that suffers from low 
coverage and poor quality of services in both water and sanitation. The M atanza R iachuelo 

Program (US$840 million) began implementation in recent mo nths, after initial delays reflecting 
the program ’s complexity and high profile. When completed, the project w ill directly benefit 2.1 
m illion people through the expansion of sanitation services and 5.7 million people through the 
protection of the water in take. Although it is too early to measure results, progress achieved so 
far in building institutional capacity of the M atanza R iachuelo River Basin Authority 
(ACUMAR) and in advancing the prequalification process fo r the large sanitation works, as well 

as the high priority assigned to the program by the national and sub -national authorities suggest 
that this program is likely to achieve its objectives. The two Norte G rande operations are 
expected to provide new coverage to 32,000 low income residents. Howev er it w ill take longer 
than the remainder of the CPS period for these recent operations to achieve intended results. 

30. 
Addressing the challenge of resource degradation.   Activities are underway in four 
critical areas.  The M atanza R ichuelo Program , mentione d above, supports the cleanup of the 

M atanza Richuelo urban river basin.  Through the Sustainable Natural Resources M anagement 
Project as well as GEF operations supporting biodiversity conservation, steps have been taken to 
control illegal logging in Chaco , set up monitoring units for fore st and deforestation assessments 
and build critical infrastructure to better protect national parks.  Under the M ining Environmental 
Restoration Project, a containment and monitoring system for uranium mining tailings has been 

put in place at M alargue site.  Finally, C lean Development M echanism s (CDM ) projects have 
enabled the elim ination of a total of 2,778 tons of Ozone Depleting Substance, far above the 
targets originally set.   

8 

 
 
31. 
Increased production diversification and p overty alleviation in the agricultural 
sector.  The World Bank is supporting A rgentina’s agricultural sector through a two -pronged 
approach: (i) production diversification in the non -pampean region through infrastructure 

investments geared towards commercial -scale agriculture, and (ii) improved productivity and 
sustainability of small scale production through the financing of investments and working 
capital. The first phase of this approach supported by the Provincial Agricultural Development 
Project has already produced results: cultivation in project areas increased by 55,000 ha; 
agricultural production grew by 210,000 tons, including a 109 percent aggregate production 

increase achieved by i rrigation subprojects in M endoza and Tucumán Provinces fueled, among 
others, by agricultural productivity increases of 80 percent in grapes, 188 percent in fruits and 
198 percent in vegetable yields (kg/ha); and export volumes of fruit (apples, pears, peac hes and 
cherries) in M endoza, and strawberries in Tucumán, also grew by 47 percent and 1.173 percent 
respectively.   The small -scale producers segment of the Bank agriculture sector strategy has 

focused mostly on the sustainability and improved income gene ration capacity of the rural poor.  
So far 10,306 productive subprojects have been completed benefitting 73,926 people.   

32. 
Improved access to rural electricity supply.  Through the Renewable Energy in Rural 
M arkets project7 the Bank is supporting the implem entation of a major initiative to improve 
access to electricity in rural communities w ith a particular emphasis on the electrification of rural 
households and schools using renewable sources such as w ind and solar energy.  Proposed 
outputs such as the elec trification of 25,000 households and 2,000 rural schools are on track to be 

met during this CPS period.   

33. 

IFC engagem ents in Argentina have been strongly centered on projects that 

support this pillar. In the area of infrastructure, IFC has financed several clients to upgrade port 
installations. IFC provided a loan to Noble A rgentina SA, an existing client, to support the 
construction and operation of a soybean crushing plant near Rosario. As well as raising export 
volumes, this project allowed Noble to expa nd and upgrade its environmental and social 
practices. IFC provided long term loans to Buenos Aires port operators TRP and Exolgan to 

increase trade volumes and cruise ship traffic.   

34. 

Supporting job creation and small and m edium -sized enterprises. An important 

component of IFC’S strategy in A rgentina has been to support job creation and meet the needs of 
low -income populations. Overall, the 20 investees in A rgentina that currently report employment 
to IFC provided about 67,000 jobs in 2009, compared with 39 ,000 jobs provided by 12 investees 
four years ea rlier. IFC has worked to channel financing to small companies and farm s that often 

struggle to find reasonably priced working capital lines. Local banks tend to favor larger and less 
risky corporate clients. However, key partner Banco Galicia used IFC credit lines to provide 
direct financing to export -oriented SMEs and small farm s, making over 12,000 SME loans in 

7 Appro ved in 1999 but still o n go in g wit h Ad dit io nal F inanc in g app ro ved in 20 08.    

9 

 
 
                                                    
calendar year 2009 for a total $719 m illion. IFC also worked with Banco Galicia to increase the 
availability of financial services in A rgentina's poorest and most underserv ed regions. 

35. 
Argentina’s strong human developm ent level has enabled the em ergence of a small 
but dynam ic IT sector. In FY09, IFC provided quasi -equity financing to G rupo ASSA, a small 
IT company that faced difficulties funding grow th plans due to the limited availability of long -

term capital.  

36. 

While Argentina is a relatively small source of GHG s, IFC has sought wherever 

possible to improve clients’ em issions profiles. In FY10 it provid ed $25 m illion in equity 
financing for A luar Aluminio A rgentino to complete expansion of its plant in the province of 
Chubut that set a benchmark for energy efficiency and environmental best practices in the 
region.  A luar expects to raise annual expo rts b y almost 25 percent to $730 m illion, as well as 

generate certified em ission reduction credits under the UNFCC’s C lean Development 
M echanism.  

37. 

The country’s strategic oil and gas industry has relied on IFC for long term 

financing. The Corporation provided f inancing for A rgentina -based oil producers D iadema and 
PAE for a total $205 m illion during the CPS period. These clients have also provided a key flow 
of resources fo r local and federal governments through the $1.4 billion in annual royalty and tax 
payments, as well as reducing A rgentina’s energy imports. Both operators adopted community 

development program s as well as complying w ith IFC Performance Standards, as have other IFC 
investees in this sector.  

Pillar II: Social Inclusion 

38. 
In line w ith the country’s goal of poverty reduction and consolidation of gains in health 
and education, the second pillar of the CPS is focused on improving the country’s social safety 
net and consolidating progress on selected health outcomes. Key achiev ements to date under this 
pillar include the following.   

39. 
Transformation of the social protection system .  Supported by a high ly productive 
dialogue and focused lending and analytical contributions by the Bank, a prom inent outcome 
proposed under the CPS – the move from crisis-time em ergency support to a long-term social 

protection system w ith expanded income coverage for vulnerable children—has been achieved. 
In November 2009 the Government introduced a universal child allowance, which provides 
about US$45 per month to 3.7 m illion poor children and youth under age 18 subject to school 
attendance and health check -ups. The implementation of the new program was facilitated by the 
close collaboration between ANSES and the Ministry of Health. By integrating and c ross-

checking the information on their databases, ANSES was able to register 230 thousand children 

10 

 
 
 
 
that were already enrolled in Plan Nacer, an ambitious Government program aiming to increase 
access to health services for uninsured women and children throu gh a results-based approach. 
Plan Nacer in its turn increased coverage by 71 percent because enrollment in the Plan is a 

condition of receiving the child allowance. 

40. 

Improved maternal and child health results .  Reducing infant and maternal mortality 

represents a key development goal for A rgentina.  Plan Nacer is the instrument to ensure the 
sustainability of the gains achieved in this indicator during recent years. The Bank has been 
supporting this program since its inception both through analytic work and a series of investment 
projects. The program has already yielded important results. As of September 2010, 1.47 m illion 
previously uninsured pregnant women and children have gained access to a defined package of 

essential health services. The share o f expect ant mothers in the poorest Northern provinces who 
receive pre-natal consultations by week 20 has risen to 52 percent from the baseline of only 3 
percent8. National immunization rates have reached 98.6 pe rcent (children under age 18 months 
receiving measles vaccine or triple viral coverage).   

41. 
Improved access and quality of education in the rural sector . A rgentina’s high 
levels of school attendance mask high rates of dropout and repetition and large differences in 

educational attainment by region, gender and socioeconom ic status. The Bank’s dialogue in the 
education sector focuses mostly in the rural areas where these issues are particularly relevant.  
Through the Rural Education Improvement Project the Bank is supporting selected investments 
in rural educational establishments ranging from improved teaching materials and training to the 
refurbishing of basic school infrastructure.  The solid progress in implementation of the project 
has generated improved teaching and student learning conditions as more than 95 percent of the 

schools in the rural areas have benefited from at least one activity included in the project. This 
has also translated into improved coverage, namely, a 5.6 percentage point increase (to 76.8 
percent) in transition between the 7th and 8th grade and promotion rates in grades 1 to 3 has 
improved from 76 percent to 83.2 percent. 

Pillar III: Improved Governance 

42. 
The CPS envisioned supporting country goals of expanding performance based 
management and improving the quality of public expenditures, enhancing service delivery 
outcomes and trust in institutions; and strengthening public sector capacity to spur investme nt 

and grow th. While these goals remain relevant, the Government has chosen not to seek Bank 
financing in support of performance based budgeting, and instead has asked the Bank to focus its 
efforts on improving the efficiency of national and sub -national public institutions. The Bank’s 

8 This imp ro vement inclu des two d iffe rent e ffect s: a cl ea r h ealth out come impro vement an d an imp ro vement in th e 
health in forma t ion syst ems and registrat ion p ro cesses. 

11 

 
 
 
 
                                                    
program has been adjusted to respond to this changing demand, requiring a corresponding 
adjustment in the CPS results framework.   

43. 
Improved efficiency of public institutions. The Bank has supported a number of 
initiatives aim ed at greater efficiency of public services. Assisted by the Institutional 
Strengthening of the National Social Security Adm inistration Project, the percent of people who 

report satisfaction by ANSES services grew from 45 percent to 78 percent between 2005 and 
2010. Investments and technical assistance financed by the Social and Fiscal National 
Identification System Project (APL 2) allowed the agency to bring the share o f correctly 
registered and identified population to 9 2 percent (up from 31 pe rcent in 20 08). 16 Government 
agencies and program s are using consistent common processes to identify entities and assets, and 

this number is likely to increase to 18 by the end of the CPS period . This is expected to 
contribute to the improvement of the efficiency, e ffectiveness, and impact of social services and 
fiscal program s at all levels of government. 

44. 
Improved governance at sub -national level.  In response to demand from sub -
national administrations, the Government and the Bank have agreed to devote a share of B ank 
assistance to addressing priority development challenges of several prov inces, including some 

structural service delivery vulnerabilities.  Ongoing and new projects in support of this agenda 
include the San Juan and La R ioja SWAps and a new operation i n the Salta province currently 
under preparation. Results of these projects are likely to be seen in the next CPS period.  

45. 

Governance and fiduciary issues are a cross -cutting them e in Bank program . 

Preparation and implementation support to all projects inc ludes a strong governance focus. 
Fiduciary considerations have been an important aspect of Bank’s p rogram in A rgentina since 
the 2006 CAS introduced a Fiduciary Action Plan as an essential complement to the 

implementation of a full investment partnership i n the context of relative fiduciary fragility. Over 
the years, a number of instruments developed to reinforce fiduciary monitoring and evaluation – 
including the Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA ), audit compliance monitoring, and 
concurrent audits—have shown their effectiveness in ensu ring the fiduciary integrity of the 
A rgentina investment portfolio. In addition, a Governance and Accountability Action Plan has 

been agreed for projects in the health sector, and its implementation is jointly reviewed by the 
Government and the Bank once a year. The Government and the Bank are collaborating on a 
series of capacity building initiatives in the governance area, including workshops on 
procurement, safeguards and fiduciary aspects of project implementation fo r agencies in all 
sectors.  

C . ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CPS RESULTS FRAMEWORK 

46. 
The main elem ents of the 2010 -2012 CPS results fram ework remain relevant, and 
the achievem ent of most intended results is on track . The follow ing adjustments are proposed 

in light of changes in priorities and implementation experience discussed above (see Annex 2).  

12 

 
 
 
47. 
First, som e originally envisaged areas of Bank assistan ce have been replaced w ith 
new areas that em erged as higher priority during implem entation . For example, operations 
in power transm ission, environmental management of extractive industries and public 

expenditure management did not materialize, and instead Bank resources were shifted to 
improving road safety and customized assistance to provinces, including the new focus on 
transport and water infrastructure in the Norte G rande region. Under the Governance Pillar, the 
Government decided not to seek Bank assistance for perfo rmance based budgeting, and instead 
asked to focus the effo rts on improving the quality of public instit utions, including at the 

provincial level.  

48. 

Second, the results fram ework has been adjus ted to improve clarity and ensure 

better alignm ent between Bank activities and expected outcom es . For example, result 
indicators for the education sector have been clarified to focus on rural education, which reflects 
the scope of Bank involvement in the sector. Indicators for public transport, natural forest 
management and solid waste management sectors, as well as for most of the Governance pillar, 
have been reformulated in line w ith the actual scale of Bank’s contribution. Similarly, indicators 

of portfolio performance have been clarified (e.g., by defining disbursement targets), and new 
expected outcomes have been introduced to reflect the results of joint Government/ Bank 
implementation workshop (see Annex 7 ), such as improvement of fiduciary and safegua rds 
capacity of Government agencies implementing investment projects, improvement of dialogue 
between the Government and the Bank on safeguard s and fiduciary issues, an d strengthening the 

coordination role of the Government. 

IV . FUTURE ENGAGEMENT 

49. 
The main focus of Bank’s engagem ent w ith Argentina for the rema inder of the 
CPS period is implem entation support for the large and complex portfolio of investm ents 
(see Annex 4). The Bank w ill work closely with the client to ensure that projects currently under 
implementation are executed in a smooth and efficient manner and produce the intended 
development results. 

50. 
The indicative Bank lending program for the remainder of the CP S period is well 
defined and project preparation has been advanced, taking into account expected difficulties 

in progressing new operations in the run -up to October 2011 elections. Four new lending 
operations are envisaged in the last year of the CPS (FY12). Additional Financing to Cordoba 
Roads (US$30 m illion) would allow for the expansion of this successful ongoing project. Social 
Inclusion Project (US$53 m illion) is focused on rural poverty alleviation. Sustainable Industrial 
Development Project (US$40 m illion) would support small and medium enterprises in A rgentina 

w ith inadequate access to credit to improve their compliance with environmental regulations, 
while simultaneously boosting their industrial competitiveness. Finally, a SWAp to the Province 

13 

 
 
 
of Salta (US$60 m illion) would continue building on the experience of o ther sub-national 
SWAps to address the key development challenges of the province. 

Country dialogue and non -lending work in the final part of the CPS period w ill 

51. 
focus on implem enting the ongoing program as well as on laying the foundations for the 
new CPS . The Bank w ill continue analyzing emerging issues and policy priorities that could 

serve as a basis for the new Country Partnership Strategy.  

52. 

IFC ’s strategy during the remainder of this CPS period is expected to remain 

substantially unchanged. Its focus w ill remain on export -oriented industries with a record of 
strong management and sound financial performance. It w ill continue to focus on job creation 
and on low -income groups. IFC remains committed to seeking more investments in ―Frontier‖ 
regions in the north of A rgentina. However, wherever appropriate, IFC could also engage with 

corporate clients making cross -border investments in the region or in emerging countries beyond 
Latin America. IFC also hopes to maintain its selective support for A rgentina’s e merging IT 
industry.  

V . RISKS 

53. 

 Notwithstanding upcoming presidential elections, political risk for the Bank’s 

lending program in the near future is assessed a s low . As discussed in paragraph 11, the 
major political parties share broadly common core policy goals, w ith which the Bank’s current 
investment program is broadly consistent. Two further factors p rovide substantial m itigation of 
the political risk. First, the bulk of the program will be in the implementation phase at the time of 
the upcoming political transition, and thus is unlikely to be affected in the absence of substantial 
changes in direction. Second, and more important, projects supported under the current CPS are 

focused on the areas of broad consensus and long term engagement.  

54. 

Macroeconom ic risks are moderate . In the medium term , accelerating inflation, due 

to continued expansionary macroeconom ic policies, higher wage demands and global 
inflationary pressures is likely to fuel uncertainty and threaten competitiveness. Fiscal 
expenditures w il l need to be adjusted and other measures may need to be adopted to rein in 
inflation and to ensure medium -term macro sustainability. 

55. 
Implem entation risks for the portfolio are substantial . The Bank’s portfolio includes 
many complex, large and high profile operations, particularly in the area of infrastructure, which 

are subject to a range o f implementation risks. In particular, portfolio includes seve ral Category 
A projects triggering a range of Bank safeguard policies. At the sub -national level, projects a re 
subject to additional risks due to lower implementation capacity in some provinces, and to 
changing political relations w ith the national level. Furthermore, upcoming elections may lead to 
additional implementation challenges due to possible staff turno ver. These risks are m itigated at 

14 

 
 
the level of specific projects through close supervision/ implementation support of the portfolio 
as well as at the country level through capacity building efforts in safeguards and procurement. 

56. 
Fiduciary risks are moderate. Public Financial M anagement (PFM ) system in 
A rgentina is well designed, has adequate legal basis and human resources have the required 
technical skills and qualifications. However, the PFM system has been operating below 

expectations. M ajor facto rs that have affected PFM are: (i) the incomplete budget coverage; and 
(ii) the control environment (sub -optimal level of rule enforcement and attitude towards 
internal/external audit recommendations). Incompatibilities between procurement requirements 
under the World Bank guidelines and national procurement regulations may also have impacted 
implementation of some projects. The Bank team is committed to working closely with the client 

to build better understanding of the Bank's policies and guidelines.  Ca pacity to implement 
procurement processes and implement public financial management is weaker at the provincial 
level, although there is variation across provinces. This may present additional challenges for 
projects implemented by provinces.  The Bank is addressing these risks both through attention to 
fiduciary concerns in project design and supervision, and through a program of capacity building 

activities that was designed and is implemented in close collaboration w ith the client.   

57. 

The risk of external or dom estic shocks is also moderate . Like other countries, 

A rgentina is vulnerable to natural disasters, changes in the external econom ic environment and 
domestic political tensions. The Bank portfolio includes several elements that seek to m itigate 
some of such risks, including a series of flood protection projects and operations in the area of 
environment, as well as socially targeted program s such as Plan Nacer and Basic Social 
Protection that could be used quickly to respond to an adverse event.   

15 

 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

Outcomes the Bank 
Program Expects to 
Influence 

Milestones 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

Annex 1: Updated Results Framework 

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY 

1. Infrastructure Development 

Upgrade Argentina’s 
infrastructure to address 
constraints on 
competitiveness, and 
underpin medium-term 
growth and poverty 
alleviation. 

Rate of infrastructure 
investment has been highly 
variable, declining from 3% of 
GDP in the 1980s to 1.7% in 
the 1990s to less than 0.5% in 
1995-2003.  

Transport Network Improved 
achieving a steady state as 
indicated by at least 90% of 
national and provincial18 
paved non-concessioned roads 
in good condition and no 
deferred maintenance factors 
affecting the network. 

16,700 km of the national 
network managed though 
CREMA. 

2,104 km of the provincial 
network managed through 
CREMA. 

98% of roads in good or fair 
condition as a share of total 
classified roads (13,416 km  
managed through CREMA as 
of November 2010) 

Increase capacity in key 
segments of the network. 

136 km of dual carriage ways 
constructed. 

Construction of dual carriage 
roads underway with an 
estimate 6 months delay from 
the original 5 years 
construction contract. Cost 
overruns may lead to increased 
budgetary contribution from 
the provincial government. 

National Highway Asset 
Management APL I and II 
(approved FY04 and FY07, 
respectively) (LEN) 
Provincial Road II (approved 
FY05) (LEN) 
Córdoba Road Infrastructure 
+ AF 
(approved FY07 and LEN, 
respectively) 

Infrastructure Project for the 
Province of Buenos Aires 
Infrastructure (APL1, II and 
AF) (approved FY05, FY07 
and FY11) (LEN) 

Norte Grande Transport 
(approved FY11) (LEN)  

Santa Fe Road Infrastructure 
Project 
(approved FY07) (LEN) 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

Outcomes the Bank 
Program Expects to 
Influence 

Milestones 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY 

1. Infrastructure Development 

Upgrade Argentina’s 
infrastructure to address 
constraints on 
competitiveness, and 
underpin medium-term 
growth and poverty 
alleviation. 

Argentina has a high index of 
road fatalities due to 
accelerated motorization in the 
absence of substantial public 
policy intervention. 

Help build institutional 
capacity of the National Road 
Safety  agency on the first 
phase in a longer term national 
objectives of reducing the 
severity and number of road 
accidents in Argentina. 

Establishment of a National 
Driver License Registry. 
Establishment of National 
Traffic Records and Infractions 
Registry System 
National Road Safety 
Observatory in operation. 

National Driver License 
established and operational in 1 
province and 7 municipalities. 
National traffic records in 
testing phase. 

Road Safety (approved FY10) 
(LEN) 

Improvements in infrastructure 
and services has not kept up 
with increase in public 
transport demand. Operational 
subsidies absorb an increasing 
share of public resources and 
lower incentives to operational 
efficiencies. 

Contribute to increased 
investments in public transport 
together with a rationalization 
of the current subsidy scheme. 

Strengthening of institutional 
planning capacities in the 
Buenos Aires Metropolitan 
Region and selected medium 
size cities. 

Transport infrastructure 
investments in medium size 
metropolitan areas (Tucuman, 
Mendoza and Posadas) lead to 
significant service 
improvements. 

Establishment and initial 
operation of a Public Transport 
Agency in the Buenos Aires 
metropolitan area. 

4 medium sized metropolitan 
areas have updated their origin-
destination household survey 

Investments are at design stage. 

Argentina Metropolitan 
Areas Urban 
Transport Project (PTUMA) 
(approved FY10) (LEN) 

Buenos Aires Urban 
Transport Project 
(PTUBA) and Additional 
Financing 
(approved FY97 and FY07) 
(LEN) 

GEF Transport and Air 
Quality (FY09) 

4% of population (mainly 
rural) lack access to electricity. 
There is always room for 
improving energy efficiency on 
the demand side. 

Increase rural access to 
electricity supply and promote 
energy efficiency while 
contributing to address climate 
change issues. 

25,600 households electrified 
with sustainable electricity 
services by 2012 

7,777 households have been 
electrified with the expectation 
that the full target will be 
achieved. 

PERMER + Additional 
Financing 
(approved FY99 and FY09) 

2,000 rural schools electrified 
with reliable, renewable 
electricity supply by 2012 

1,870 are expected to be 
electrified by 2012 (currently: 
1,377) 

Contracts to equip another 400 
households with wind power 
systems, 36 schools with solar 
power, 314 public buildings 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

Outcomes the Bank 
Program Expects to 
Influence 

Milestones 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY 

1. Infrastructure Development 

Upgrade Argentina’s 
infrastructure to address 
constraints on 
competitiveness, and 
underpin medium-term 
growth and poverty 
alleviation. 

and 59 solar water heating 
systems have been signed.   
Another 7 mini-grids which 
would serve a total of over 
1200 users are also being built. 

24.5 million CFL have been 
purchased using counterpart 
financing. 

GEF Energy Efficiency 
(Approved FY08) 

Matanza Riachuelo River Basin 
is the most contaminated river 
basin in Argentina and 
represents a case of critical 
social and environmental 
degradation. 

Integrated clean up of the 
Matanza Riachuelo River Basin 
consisting of sanitation, 
industrial pollution abatement, 
rehabilitation of low income 
neighborhoods and flood risk 
reduction. 

Establishment and operation of 
a multijurisdictional River 
Basin Authority. 

ACUMAR is fully operational 
and in charge of the CMR 
program. 

Initiate construction of trunk 
collection, transmission, 
treatment and disposal 
infrastructure for Matanza 
Riachuelo River Basin. 

Prequalification process for the 
construction of the left bank 
infrastructure is underway. 
Bidding expected to start in 
first quarter of Calendar 2011. 

Matanza-Riachuelo Basin 
Sustainable 
Development Project (APL-1) 
(approved FY09) (LEN) 

Limited access by poor 
population to water and 
sanitation services. 

Expand water and sewage 
coverage for poor residents in 
selected areas of BA Province. 

Initiate pilot plans for the 
rehabilitation of low income 
neighborhoods. 

Initial implementation of pilot 
plans in at least 2 
neighborhoods. 

Expand water and sewage 
coverage for 128,000 poor 
residents in areas of BA 
Province with high sanitary 
or environmental vulnerability. 

107,622 people with water and 
sewage coverage, from which 
85,219  have access to 
improved water resources and   
22,403 have new piped 
household water connections. 

Buenos Aires Province 
Infrastructure (APL-I, II and 
AF) 
(approved FY05, FY07 and 
FY11) (LEN) 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

Outcomes the Bank 
Program Expects to 
Influence 

Milestones 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY 

1. Infrastructure Development 

Upgrade Argentina’s 
infrastructure to address 
constraints on 
competitiveness, and 
underpin medium-term 
growth and poverty 
alleviation. 

Poor urban and productive 
rural areas affected by 
significant flood risk. 

Reduced flooding vulnerability 
in selected urban and rural 
areas. 

Initiate a program for 
strengthening water service 
providers in the Northern 
region of Argentina with the 
expectation of increasing water 
coverage for about 32,000 
additional beneficiaries in the 
medium term. 

City of BA: Reduce flood risk 
from biannual events to once 
every 10 years events for a 
population of about 100,000 
people living in the most 
critically flooded areas in the 
Maldonado Basin. 

Reduce flood risk for a 
population in selected 
provinces (Chaco, Corrientes 
and Santa Fe) of about 150,000 
and covering an area of about 
8,500 ha. 

Project at initial stage. 

Norte Grande Water 
Infrastructure (approved 
FY11) and Second Norte 
Grande Water Infrastructure 
(pipeline FY11) (LEN) 

City of BA: Short drainage 
tunnel completed. 18 months 
extension approved to allow 
full contract implementation. 

Urban Flood Prevention and 
Drainage (APL1) 
 (approved FY05) (LEN) 

PIDU: Slow implementation 
pace with only US$35 million 
in contracts signed and delays 
in contract implementation. 
Two year extension in process. 

Urban Flood Prevention and 
Drainage (PIDU) (APL2) 
(approved FY06) (LEN) 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

Outcomes the Bank 
Program Expects to 
Influence 
2. Towards More Sustainable Rural Development and Environmental Management 

Milestones 

Status 

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY 

Improve competitiveness, 
quality, and exports of 
agriculture and livestock 
production 

Building an even more 
competitive, diversified and 
inclusive agricultural sector 
will require strengthened 
national and provincial 
institutions. 

Contribute to increasing 
beneficiaries household 
incomes through improvements 
in farm productivity, expanded 
output and diversification to 
crops with higher added value. 

Provincial Agricultural Devt 
strategies designed and under 
implementation in at least 12 
provinces. 

Completed 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

PROSAP I and II 
(approved FY07 and FY09) 
(LEN) 

55,000 ha of increased land 
area under cultivation in project 
irrigation areas, achieved 
through six subprojects (66% 
increase from baseline) in CH, 
ER, MZ and TM. 

 210,000 tons of additional 
aggregate production achieved 
through four subprojects (109% 
increase from baseline) in MZ 
and TM 

 Increased agricultural 
productivity in project areas:  
80% (grapes) to 198% 
(vegetables) yield (kg/ha), 
increases achieved by irrigation 
subprojects in Mendoza. 

Increased agrifood exports 
value and its participation in 
national exports  

Satisfactory outcomes for 
72,000 beneficiaries 
Satisfactory subprojects 
completions for a target of 
12,000 subprojects. 
No specific outcomes were 
defined for subprojects. 

Completed 

Completed 

Completed 

Completed (agrifood exports 
value grew 38% from 2006 to 
2010, representing 56% of 
national exports) 

PROINDER and AF 
(approved FY98 and FY08) 
(LEN) 

Completed 

20 

Low priority assigned to rural 
poverty despite representing 
28% of Argentina’s poor and 
2.5times the poverty rate 
prevailing in urban areas. 

Support a strategy for poor 
rural communities that may 
lead to improved infrastructure, 
increased production of 
agricultural products for family 
consumption and increase value 
added and diversification of 
production.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

Outcomes the Bank 
Program Expects to 
Influence 
2. Towards More Sustainable Rural Development and Environmental Management 

Milestones 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY 

Address a growing 
problem of resource 
degradation. 

Increased contamination and 
resource degradation derived 
from disposal and poor 
management of solid waste. 

Increase 
investments 
in 
integrated urban solid waste 
management. 

11 provincial and municipal 
solid waste management plans 
completed by 2012. 

9 plans completed (4 Provincial 
and 5 Municipal). 2 provincial 
under preparation. 

Solid Waste Management 
Project 
(approved FY06)(LEN) 

At least 3 sanitary landfills 
built. 

2 large landfills contracts in 
process and 2 underway. 

At least 40 dumpsites closed by 
2012. 

Closing about 51 micro-
dumpsites in Cordoba. 

At least 3 solid waste recovery 
and transfer plants. 

Transfer station already built in 
Rosario.4 more plants planned 
to be built by 2012. 

Policy and incentive framework 
to engage landowners in 
sustainable forestry 
management (SFM) is not yet 
in place and the control 
framework is weak. 

Improving the policy and 
planning frameworks for the 
management of forest 
resources. 

Policy and incentive framework 
for sustainable forestry 
management in place, including 
funds available to small 
producers for conservation, tree 
planting and SFM. 

National Parks facing 
infrastructure and human 
resources deficits to maintain 
adequate protection levels in 
light of heightened tourism 
activity.  

Upgrading park management 
infrastructure and sustainable 
development opportunities in 
and around parks. 

Increased financial and 
institutional capacity of the 
National Parks authority in 
ensuring the protection of parks 
in a context of growing tourism 
activit ies. 

Development of a system to 
control illegal logging in the 
Chaco is underway, and 4 
regional monitoring units for 
forest and deforestation 
assessments are being installed. 
A plan for reform of the 
Direccion de Bosques has been 
completed and under review by 
SAyDS. Work with Plantation 
Forests is gaining momentum 
but still behind schedule. 

Major Infrastructure for Las 
Quijadas National Park is 95% 
complete. A contract for 
infrastructure works has been 
made for Talampaya Park, and 
procurement has advanced for 
infrastructure in Bosques 
Petrificados and Los Alisos 
Parks, Sustainable development 
projects are underway around 
Talampaya park. 

IBRD Sustainable Natural 
Resources 
Management Project. 
(approved FY08) (LEN) 

GEF Biodiversity 
Conservation in Productive 
Forestry Landscapes 
(approved FY07) (LEN) 

GEF Rural Corridors and 
Biodiversity 
Conservation 
(approved FY10) (LEN) 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

Outcomes the Bank 
Program Expects to 
Influence 
2. Towards More Sustainable Rural Development and Environmental Management 

Milestones 

Status 

PILLAR 1-SUSTAINABLE GROWTH WITH EQUITY 

Address a growing 
problem of resource 
degradation. 

Low priority assigned to 
environmental risk 
management in mining sector. 

Environmental plans for 
containment uranium mining 
tailings, developed  

Increase access to   
international carbon markets 

Mining sector environmental 
risk management policies of 
CNEA, and of the Secretaries 
of Mining and Environment 
strengthened. Containment 
system for uranium mining 
tailings completed and 
monitoring in place at 
Malargue site; environmental 
management plans 
(remediation, monitoring and 
consultation) prepared for 7 
other CNEA sites (closed 
uranium mines and/or 
processing plants) 

Argentine Carbon Facility in 
SAyDS strengthened and in 
capacity to advise and process 
CDM Project 

CDM projects contribution to 
CO2 reductions of about 
300,000 tons per annum. 

Eliminate an additional 109 
tons of Ozone Depleting 
Substances (ODS). 

80% of planned site 
remediation works completed 
in accordance with best 
international practices. Only 
one (Malargue) 
CNEA site has environmental 
management plans applied in 
accordance with best 
international practices. 

The original PDO target has 
been achieved, with a total of 
2,778 tons of ODS eliminated. 
With the additional subproject, 
a total of 2,887 will be 
eliminated 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

Mining Environmental 
Restoration Project 
(approved FY09) (LEN) 

Petrobras Gas Transport 
System Project 
(approved FY10), Salta 
Landfill Gas Capture Project 
(approved FY08), Olavarría 
Methane Capture Project 
(approved FY05) 
Forest Carbon Partnership 
Facility (approved FY09) 

Montreal Protocol Ozone 
Depleting Substances 

GEF Third National 
Communication to UNFCCC 
Project (pipeline FY10) and  
Kyoto Protocol Adaptation 
Fund 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

Outcomes the Bank 
Program Expects to 
Influence 
1.Supporting Progress Towards Permanent Safety Nets and Fostering Employment 

Milestones 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

PILLAR 2-SOCIAL INCLUSION 

Reduction in poverty by 
supporting the government in 
a long term strategy for 
Social Protection 

Limited coverage of social 
protection system, including 
key vulnerable groups, benefits 
in some programs inadequate to 
meet intended objectives, and 
issues of fiscal sustainability. 

Supporting the government’s 
efforts in developing and 
implementing a Universal 
Social Protection Strategy for 
the most vulnerable groups.  

Establishment of a universal 
allowance for vulnerable 
children (UAVC) under 18 
years old conditioned on 
compliance with education and 
health requirements. 

UAVC:3.8 million 
beneficiaries 

Basic Protection Project 
(approved) (LEN) 
Basic Protection AF (pipeline 
FY11) (LEN) 
Argentina Social Protection 
AAA 

Coverage under the UAVC 
benefits at least 90% of eligible 
population.  

Coverage under the UAVC 
benefits about 70% of eligible 
population. 

Social Programs towards the 
Bicentennial 
AAA (FY09) 

Limited educational and 
employment  service initiatives 
for the integration of the 
unemployed into the productive 
market place. 

Integrating marginalized 
groups into the productive 
marketplace 

Award of 100,000 secondary 
and primary education 
certificates of adult education. 

14,481 received certification. 

Heads of Household 
Transition Project 
(approved FY06) 

Participation of 250,000 
workers in competency based 
training courses. 

155,000 workers have 
benefited from competency 
based courses. 

Life Long Learning Project 
(approved FY07) 

Certification of 70,000 workers 
based on competency based 
occupational standards. 

31,506 workers certified 

Employment Inequality AAA 
(FY10 

Consolidate improvements in 
health indicators and 
improve quality. 

Population without health 
coverage is 35-39% 

2. Improving Selected Health and Education Outcomes 

Provision of provincial health 
insurance coverage for 
maternal child health 
beneficiaries (mothers up to 45 
days after delivery and children 
up to 6). 

Beneficiaries by end of 
December 2011: 1.7 million, 
corresponding to about 80% of 
the eligible population. 

Provincial Maternal-Child 
Health APL1&2 
(approved FY 04 and FY07) 

Beneficiaries by end of 
September 2010: 1.47 million 
covering about 70% of the 
eligible population. In Centro, 
Patagonia and Cuyo Regions 
coverage was 66% on average 
with more than 916,000 active 
beneficiaries, while in the 
Northern Region was 83% with 
more than 559,000 enrollees.   

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

Consolidate improvements in 
health indicators and 
improve quality. 

Population without health 
coverage is 35-39% 

Disparity in the provis ion of 
priority health programs rates 
across regions. 

PILLAR 2-SOCIAL INCLUSION 

Outcomes the Bank 
Program Expects to 
Influence 

Provision of selective insurance 
coverage for vulnerable groups 
(children up to 19 years, 
women up to 65 years) 

Improve effectiveness of 
Federal Public Health system in 
delivering results under seven 
priority health programs 
including breast and cervix 
cancer, diabetes, vaccine 
preventable diseases, 
HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis. 

Strengthen leadership of MoH 
and health sector governance.  

Milestones 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

Pending project approval. 

Provincial Health Insurance 
(pipeline FY11) (LEN) 

Essential  Public Health 
Functions Project (approved 
FY07) 

2nd Essential Public Health 
Functions Project (LEN) 
(Pipeline FY11) 

3 cases (all imported) 

1 case (imported) 

5 provinces certified 

6 out of 10 Programs 
accredited in Tucuman 

Observatory at pre design 
stage. 
GAAP agreed and under 
implementation. Reviewed 
jointly by the Bank and 
Government once a year. 

GPF Strengthening 
Governance in Argentina’s 
Health Sector 

Hospital Performance 
Assessment ( AAA) (FY11) 

Autochthonous measles cases 
are maintained at zero. 
Congenital rubella cases 
decrease to zero at the end of 
the project. 
Prevalence of smoking has 
decreased by 6% 
Argentina has certified in 90% 
of its Provinces with Chagas 
disease (17 out of 19 
Provinces), the interruption of 
vectorial transmission. 
85% of Provinces are 
accredited for public health 
functions and programs 
developed with a minimum 
standards and norms for all 10 
prioritized programs. 

Establishment of a National 
Health Policy Observatory 
aimed at improving the quality 
and access to information 
related to the performance and 
results attained by the health 
system in Argentina. 
Governance and Accountability 
Action Plan (GAPP) agreed 
and under implementation by 
the Ministry of Health. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PILLAR 2-SOCIAL INCLUSION 

Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

Reduce disparity in 
educational attainment 
between the urban and the 
rural sector. 

Argentina’s high levels of 
school attendance rates in rural 
areas masks high rates of drop-
outs and repetition in addition 
to quality issues. 

Outcomes the Bank 
Program Expects to 
Influence 

Improve completion rates for 
students in lower secondary 
rural education (grades7-9). 

Milestones 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

Increased school enrollment for 
children age 5 

On track to meet project target. 

Improve promotion rate in rural 
areas from EGB1 (grades1-3) 
to EGB2 (grades 4-6) from 
76% to 85% by April 2011. 

Target accomplished.  
Promotion rate in EGB1 in 
rural areas of 86 percent in 
November 2010. 

Rural Education 
Improvement Project 
(approved FY06) 

Increase the access of students 
completing the 7th grade to the 
8th grade of schooling in rural 
areas from 73% to 85% by 
April 2011 

The country presents advances 
in this indicator and the target 
is within reach. As of 
November 2010 the value of 
the indicator was 81 percent. 

Effective usage of Laptops in 
a school setting AAA 

Realign (better alignment of) 
educational policy and 
practices with emerging 
challenges. 

Threat to the country’s 
traditional regional leadership 
role in education attainment 
and quality. 

Existence of critical mass of 
policy and school-based 
innovations. 

At least one school-based 
innovation fully assessed and 
mainstreamed by 2015. 

Policy dialogue to be initiated 
in FY11/12. 

Lending and Policy Dialogue 
(FY12/13). 

Limited effectiveness of 
tertiary study programs in 
enabling access to labor 
markets. 

Increase understanding of  
linkages between tertiary 
education and labor markets 

Dissemination event to discuss 
with key stakeholders the main 
findings of the study. 

In preparation to be delivered 
in FY11. 

Tertiary Education AAA 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

Expand performance 
management and improve 
the quality of public 
expenditure,  enhance 
service delivery outcomes 
and build trust in institutions. 

Key challenges include: 

At National Level: 

Improving service delivery 
outcomes and build trust in 
Government.  

Making the public sector 
more accountable and 
responsive to the needs of 
citizens and the private sector. 

PILLAR 3-IMPROVED GOVERNANCE 
Outcomes the Bank 
Milestones 
Program Expects to 
Influence 
1. Strengthening Public Institutions 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

At National Level 
More transparent government 
decision-making processes, 
increased access to 
government-related 
information and improved 
service delivery, by  
strengthening the efficiency, 
effectiveness and 
transparency of the following 
institutions: 

ANSES 

SYNTyS  


 Consolidate and expand 
organizational reform of ANSES 
aimed at improving customer 
satisfaction in service delivery, 
including increased 
decentralization, timely 
determination of benefits and 
reduced claims against ANSES 
benefit determination. 

The percentage of physical 
persons that can be identified 
univocally by SINTyS has 
increased to 92%. 

The number of government 
agencies and programs using 
consistent common processes to 
identify entities and assets has 
increased. 

Institutional Strengthening of 
the National Social Security 
Administration Project 
(approved FY06)(ANSES II) 

Customer satisfaction grew 
from 45% to 78% between 2005 
and 2010. 
Reduction of average time in 
the provision of new benefits. 
(Baseline:140, Current:88, 
Target: 90) 
Level of quantitative error in 
pension reports: (Current: 4.7, 
Target: 7) 
Project Extended up to 
September 2012). 

92%already achieved. 

SINTyS APL 2   
(approved FY09) 

The number of government 
agencies and programs using 
consistent common processes to 
identify entities and assets has 
increased from 16 in 2008 to 22 
in 2010.  

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

PILLAR 3-IMPROVED GOVERNANCE 
Outcomes the Bank 
Milestones 
Program Expects to 
Influence 
1. Strengthening Public Institutions 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

Expand performance 
management and improve 
the quality of public 
expenditure,  enhance 
service delivery outcomes 
and build trust in institutions. 


Chief of Cabinet Office 


SINFO covers 90 percent of 
civilian national executive 
branch employees.  Personnel 
data that appears in both the 
SINFO and LUPI systems are 
consistent. 


SINFO covers 56% percent of 
civilian national executive 
branch employees.  LUPI still in 
development process. 

State Modernization II 
Project (LEN) 
(approved FY07) 

Electronic directory of 
Government procedures includes 
20 % of procedures that have 
been simplified and can be 
electronically processed. 
Progress is made towards 
offering transactional services. 

Electronic directory of 
Government procedures 
includes over 900 procedures 
and has over 2 million vis itors 
per year. Two transactional 
services have been implemented 
and two more are in process. 

User surveys showing improved 
service delivery in the agencies 
that have implemented the 
Citizens Charter 

User surveys show over 20% 
increase in service delivery 
satisfaction in the agencies 
implementing the Citizens 
Charter. The methodology is 
currently being revised.  

At Sub-National level: 

At Sub-National level: 

Strengthening Public Sector 
Capacity, which is facing 
significant limitations due to 
low provincial revenues and 
capacity in public sector 
management. 

Strengthening the efficiency, 
effectiveness and transparency 
of public expenditure 
management. 

Provide customized support 
and capacity building to sub-
national governments on 
public expenditure 
management, tax 
administration and public 
service delivery.  

In at least one province the time 
for key services and 
administrative processes has 
been reduced from 15 to 10 days. 

In at least one province , % of 
public employees included in the 
integrated personnel information 
and pay systems has increased 
from 0 to 30% 

Project Restructured: extended 
up to March 2012; change in 
PDO indicators. Contracting 
period up to March 2011. 
Implementation at initial stage. 

Subnational Governments 
Public Sector Modernization 
Project (LEN) (approved 
FY06) 

Project launched. 

Project not yet effective. 

San Juan SWAp  
(LEN) 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

PILLAR 3-IMPROVED GOVERNANCE 
Outcomes the Bank 
Milestones 
Program Expects to 
Influence 
1. Strengthening Public Institutions 

Expand performance 
management and improve 
the quality of public 
expenditure,  enhance 
service delivery outcomes 
and build trust in institutions. 

At Sub-National level: 

Provide customized support 
and capacity building to sub-
national governments on 
public expenditure 
management, tax 
administration and public 
service delivery.  

At Sub-National level: 

Strengthening Public Sector 
Capacity, which is facing 
significant limitations due to 
low provincial revenues and 
capacity in public sector 
management. 

Strengthening the efficiency, 
effectiveness and transparency 
of public expenditure 
management. 

Province of La Rioja: (i) 
Increased local tax revenue; (ii) 
Increased share of budgeted 
primary expenditures executed; 
(iii) Higher share of budgeted 
Projects which are drawn from 
the provincial development plan; 
(iv) Increased proportion of 
competitive bidding; (v) 
Increased efficiency in the 
management of irrigation water 
supply systems. 

Province of La Rioja: 
Diagnostic in Tax 
Administration, PFM, Public 
Expenditure Management and 
Procurement. 

Province of La Rioja: Draft 
Public Procurement Law 
prepared. 

Provinces of Buenos Aires, 
Cordoba, San Juan, Santa Fe: 
Diagnostic in PFM.  

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

Project not yet effective. 

La Rioja SWAp (LEN) 

To be delivered in FY11 Q4. 

La Rioja Governance 
Assessment & Public 
Financial Management 
Assessment (PFMA) (ESW) 

To be delivered in FY11 Q4. 

La Rioja Procurement 
Reform TA (NLTA)  

To be delivered in FY11 Q3. 

Sub-national Public 
Financial Management 
Assessment (PFMA): Buenos 
Aires, Cordoba, San Juan, 
Santa Fe (ESW)  

Province of Corrientes –
Strategic Plan (FFS) 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE 
Outcomes the Bank 
Milestones 
Program Expects to 
Influence 

Strengthen the capacity of the 
Government to prepare, 
approve and implement 
investment projects in line 
with the requirements of a 
medium-term investment 
partnership. 

Delays in approval of projects 
at the national level. 

Improved approval procedures 
of projects at the national level. 

Improved design, preparation 
and approval procedures of 
projects at the subnational level. 

Delays in processing large 
procurement contracts. 

Improved procurement capacity 
of agencies implementing 
investment projects. 

Improved monitoring capacity 
of central coordinating agencies 
(Ministry of Economy and 
Public Finance). 

 Time of approval of loans by 
the Government is reduced 
to a maximum period of 4 
months, aligning it with the 
approval of the loan by the 
Bank. 
 Time for approval of loans at 
the subnational level is 
reduced to a maximum of 6 
months, aligning it with 
approval by the Bank and at 
the national level. 

 80% PPRs rated S;  

 80% PPRs confirming 
qualified procurement staff 
have been appointed;  

 60% of procurement 
processes contracted as 
planned. 

 50% of projects provide 
reliable information on 
contracts and financial 
transactions, and this 
information is available in a 
consolidated system to be 
used by implementing 
agencies, and the 
Government and the IFIs for 
monitoring purposes. 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

Average time between Bank 
approval and effectiveness of 
loans has been reduced from 12 
months (FY07-FY09) to 6 
months (FY10-FY11). 

IDF: Improving Investment 
Portfolio Management – 
Building Up Institutions, 
Systems and Human Capital.   
(approved 2008) 

Strengthening and enhanced 
coordination of fiduciary 
team based in Buenos Aires. 

Training Program for 
implementing agencies and 
central coordination agencies 
supported by the Bank. 

 33% PPRs reflect an S rating 
and 55.5% reflect an MS 
rating in FY10.  
 58% of reviewed projects 
have procurement staff 
issues (appointment, lack of 
capacity, etc).  
 68%* of procurement 
processes contracted as 
planned by end of CY 2009. 

 Pilot including 32% of 
projects implementing 
interface between SEPA and 
UEPEX systems, which 
implies real time information 
on contracts and payments. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE 
Outcomes the Bank 
Milestones 
Program Expects to 
Influence 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

Strengthen the capacity of the 
Government to prepare, 
approve and implement 
investment projects in line 
with the requirements of a 
medium-term investment 
partnership. 

Fiduciary risk. 

Improved fiduciary risk 
monitoring systems. 

 Adjustment of existing risk 
assessment tools to ensure 
strategic focus on project 
fiduciary risks and results. 

Difficulties in compliance with 
safeguards and sustainability 
policies 

Improved safeguards capacity 
of agencies implementing 
investment projects. 

Improved dialogue between 
central agencies and the Bank 
on safeguards, and 
strengthening of coordination 
role by central agencies. 

 Framework Agreement for 
Phasing out PIUs 

 High level government 
officials, project 
coordinators and safeguard 
specialists in implementing 
agencies trained. 

 Gap analysis between 
country systems and Bank 
policies carried out. 
 Model documents for 
environmental and social 
safeguard compliance 
adopted. 

 Price Monitoring Mechanism 
in place. Applied by PIUs in 
their Procurement Plans and 
by the Bank in PPRs and 
bidding evaluation forms 
gradually since 2007. 
 Governance and 
Accountability Action Plan 
designed for health projects 
and ready to be applied to 
other projects if required. 

 Being applied for new 
projects. Action Plans for 
reduction in the use of 
individual consultants in 
place in certain operations 
(i.e. State Modernization 
Project) 

 Series of training events 
launched in March 2011. 

Training Program for 
implementing agencies and 
central coordination agencies 
supported by the Bank. 

 Gap analysis underway, 
jointly with Government. 

 Model documents under 
preparation. 

Gap Analysis between 
environmental and social 
country systems and 
safeguards and sustainability 
policies of the Bank. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Strategic Goals 
and Indicators 

Issues and Obstacles 

PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE 
Outcomes the Bank 
Milestones 
Program Expects to 
Influence 

Status 

Bank Program 
Instruments 

Portfolio riskiness 

Reduce portfolio riskiness 

Reduce APPs to 5% in number 
and 14% in amount. 

Strengthen the capacity of the 
Government to prepare, 
approve and implement 
investment projects in line 
with the requirements of a 
medium-term investment 
partnership. 

Slow disbursements 

Maintain adequate levels of 
project execution (i.e. 30% ratio 
of disbursements over signed 
contracts for infrastructure 
portfolio) and zero net transfers. 

 Achieve disbursement targets 
of around $ 800 million and 
25% disbursement ratio 
average during CPS period 
 Do not exceed -50 million 
net transfers in CPS FYs. 

 APPs** : 12% in number and 
17% in amount (Basic 
Municipal Services, 
Subnational Government 
Public Sector 
Modernization, Matanza 
Riachuelo, Natural 
Resources) 
 PPPs **: 10% in number and 
9% in amount (Mining 
Restoration, National 
Highway Asset 
Management, Natural 
Resources) 
 Risk flags: 29% projects 
have slow disbursement 
flags and 26% projects have 
procurement flags. 

 FY10: 
o Disbursements of $869 
Disbursement ratio of 
23.4%  
o Net transfers of -$45  
 FY11 (projected): 
o Disbursements of $900 
o Disbursement ratio of 26% 
o Net transfers of $140. 
 FY12 (projected) 
 Disbursements of $850 
 Disbursement ratio of 23% 
 Net Transfers of $20. 

*Target is based on Procurement Plans presented by projects taking exclusively those processes planned to be contracted during the corresponding calendar year. This figure includes 20 projects from which we were able to 
collect appropriate data. 

**APPs (Actual Problem Projects): Projects graded MU or U in Development Objectives or Implementation. PPPs (Potential Problem Projects): Projects with at least three risk flags. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 2: Summary of Changes to CPS Results Fram ework 

Pillar 1: Sustainable Grow th with Equity 

Deleted 

Added 

Reduced/Reformulated 

Issues and obstacles 

Outcomes the Bank 
expects to influence 

•Re fe rence to powe r and 
tran smission o f electr ic it y. 
•Re fe rence to impro ved 
en viro nment al 
mana gement cap ac it y in 
extract ive indu st ries. 
•Re fe rence to food qu al it y 
& sa fet y as the re is a 
ma rgin al contr ibut ion 
from th e Ban k. 

In all th ese cases n o Ban k 
inte rvent ion is en visa ged. 

Milestones 

Bank Program 
Instrumen ts 

•Ro ad Sa fet y issu es. 
•Publ ic Tran spo rt issue. 
•Spec ific issu e fo r 

PROINDER (Low priority 
assigned to rura l poverty) wh ich 
used to be merged w ith 
PROSAP a lthough be in g 
diffe rent, 

•Spec ific issu e fo r Matan za, 
mo st cont aminat ed r ive r 
basin in Argent ina. 

•Ro ad sa fet y outcomes. 
•Flood p rotect ion out comes. 
•Spec ific out comes fo r 
PROINDER , which we re 
missin g in previou s 

frame work (Support a 
production oriented investment 
strategy for poor rura l 
communit ies). 

•Spec ific d eta iled outcomes 
for Matanza wh ich we re 
missin g and are ach ievable 
dur in g CPS pe r iod. 

•Ro ad Sa fet y mil eston es. 
•Flood p rotect ion mil estones 
for th e two APLs wh ich we re 
missin g. 
•Spec ific mileston e s for 
PROINDER ,wh ich we re 
missin g b e fore (n umbe r o f 
satisfactory bene fic iar ies, 
etc) . 

•Ro ad Sa fet y Loan 
•Norte Grand e Tran sport 
•Norte Grand e Wat er 
•GEF Decentral ized Med ium 
S ize Grants P ro gram. 
•GEF Th ird National 
Commun icatio n s to 
UNFCCC P ro ject and Kyoto 
Proto col Adaptat ion Fund. 

•Publ ic t ran sport o utcomes 
redu ced in l ine with p ro ject 
outputs.  Delet ed re feren ce 
to in creases in p ublic 
tran spo rt r id ership.      
•Mod ified outcomes for 
natural fo re st man agement 
in l in e with p ro ject 
outcomes. 
•Sol id Wast e Management 
targe t s redu ced. 
•Mod ified PROSAP 
outcomes to al ign with 
pro ject’s o bjecti ves. 
•Mod ified mil eston es to 
re fl ect actual p ro ject 
ind icato rs fo r sol id wast e 
mana gement, n atural fo rest 
mana gement, n ational 
parks man agement, flood 
protect ion and publ ic 
tran spo rt wh ich we re ve ry 
amb itiou s or d id not re fl ect 
the actual cont r ibut ion o f 
these p ro ject s. 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country 
strateg ic goals 
and indicators 

Issues and 
obstacles 

Outcomes the 
Bank expects to 
influence 

Milestones 

Pillar 2: Social Inclusion 

Deleted 

Added 

Reformulated/Reduced 

•Sa fet y net s go al 
re formul ated for simplic it y 
and to b e mo re al ign ed 
with ban k pro gram 
outcomes. 
•Re formu lat ed to show the 
issu e o f l imit ed co ve ra ge 
o f soc ial protection syst em. 

•Ch an ged mileston es for 
Lifelon g Lea rn in g in l in e 
with pro ject ind icat ors. 
•Re formu lat ed mileston es 
on health in suran ce 
co ve rage to re flect 
contr ibut io n o f Ban k 
pro grams. 
•Limited mileston es o f 
educat ion to rural 
educat ion. 
•Limited co ntr ibut ion in 
high er edu catio n to the 
disseminat ion o f AAA. 

•Re fe rence to Uni ve rsal 
allowance for vuln erabl e 
ch ildren (UAVC ) as an 
accompl ishment . 
•Spec ific out come fo r 
Lifelon g Lea rn in g. 
•Spec ific out comes fo r 
ch ild health in su rance 
co ve rage, and othe r 
group s’ in suran ce 
co ve rage. 
•FESP spec ific out comes. 
•Spec ific ta rget for 
UAVC . 
•FESP spec ific mileston es 
in mo re det a il. 
•Re fe rence to Nat ion al 
Health Policy 
Ob se rvato ry. 
•Re fe rence to Go ve rn ance 
and Account ab ilit y Actio n 
Plan. 

•Re fe rence to d ec reases in 
mo rtal it y rates due to 
attr ibut ion issu es. 

•Re fe rence to n ew p urchasin g 
procedu res.. 
•Ho sp ital access mil eston es. 

Becau se the re wasn ’t a cl ea r 
ban k in vol vement in th ese 
areas. 

Bank Program 
Instrumen ts 

•Health sector go ve rn ance 
Pro ject   
•Health sector Sup port Project  

•GPF Stren gth en in g 
Go ve rn ance in 
Argent ina ’s Health 
Sector. 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pillar 3: Improved Governance 

Deleted 

Added 

Country strateg ic 
goals and indicators 

Issues and obstacles 

Outcomes the Bank 
expects to influence 

Milestones 

•Elimin ated issu e rel ated to 
public expend iture 
mana gement b ecau se the 
previo u sl y planned 
bud get in g acti vit y was not 
done. 
•Issues rel ated to 
per forman ce in formed 
bud get in g and compl iance 
with t he F iscal 
Respon sib il it y Law. 
In both cases th ere was no 
Ban k inte rvent ion. 
•All p re viou s milesto nes 
(some rel ated to 
per forman ce b ud get in g). 

•Focu s on stren gth en in g 
e ffic iency and t ran spa ren cy 
o f National A genc ies. 
•Pro visio n o f cu stomized 
assistan ce to pro vin ces. 

•Focu s on sp ec ific 
act ivit ies unde rtaken at th e 
national and subnat io nal 
level (SWAPs). 
•M ilest ones for Natio nal 

A gen c ies re fo rmulat ed in 

line with out comes. 

Bank Program 
Instrumen ts 

•Found at ion s for 
Pe r fo rmance In fo rmed 
Bud ge t in g Project 

•San Juan SWAP 
•La R io ja SWAP 
•Salt a SWAP 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Portfolio Performance Pillar 

Deleted 

Added 

Reformulated 

Issues and 
obstacles 

Outcomes the 
Bank expects to 
influence 

Milestones 

•F iduc iary Action Plan 
sin ce it was d one und er 
previo u s CPS. 
•Semi-Ann ual po rt fol io 
reviews b ecau se it 
wasn ’t stron gl y lin ked 
to an y out come . 

Bank Program 
Instrumen ts 

Miscellaneous  

•F iduc iary r isk. 
•Difficulties in compl iance with 
sa fegu ard s and su st a in ab ilit y 
polic ies. 
•Imp ro ved mo nito r in g capac it y o f 
cent ral coo rd inat in g agen cies 
(M in istry o f E conomy and Pu blic 
F inance) 
•Imp ro ved sa fegu ard s capac it y o f 
agen c ies implement in g 
in vestment pro ject s. 
•Imp ro ved d ialo gu e b etween 
cent ral agenc ies and the Ban k on 
sa fegu ard s, and st ren gt hen in g o f 
coordinat ion role b y cen t ral 
agen c ies. 
•Ma inta in ad equ ate l evel s o f 
pro ject execut ion ( i. e. 30% o f 
rat io o f d isbu rsement s o ve r sign ed 
contract s for in frastructu re 
port fol io ) an d zero net t ran sfe rs. 
•High leve l go ve rnment o ffic ial s, 
pro ject coord in ators and 
sa fegu ard sp ecial ist s in 
impl ement in g agen cies tra in ed. 
•Gap an al ysis between count ry 
syst ems and Ban k pol ic ies ca rr ied 
out. 
•Mod el do cument s fo r 
en viro nment al and so cial 
sa fegu ard compl iance adopted. 
•Reduce APPs to 5% in n umbe r 
and 14% in amount. 
•Ach ieve disbursement ta rget s o f 
arou nd $ 80 0 mill io n an d 25% 
disbu rsement rat io ave rage dur in g 
CPS pe r iod. 
•Do not exceed -50 mill ion net 
tran sfe rs in CPS FYs. 
•Tra in in g P ro gram for 
impl ement in g agen cies and 
cent ral coo rd inat ion agen cies 
sup port ed b y th e Ban k. 
•Compl ete column o n cu rrent 
stat u s o f mil eston es. 

•O ve rall po rt fol io 
per forman ce was replaced 
by ―po rt fol io r iskiness‖ 
wh ich is mo re accurate. 

•Stren gth en in g and 
enhanced coordinat ion o f 
fid uc iary t eam based in 
Bu eno s Aires. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 3. Argentina Lending and GEF Program , FY09-12 

APPROVED 

Fiscal 

Yea r 

Qua rter 

Project 

2009 

Q4 

Basic Prot ect io n P ro ject 

Q2 

Metrop olit an Areas Urb an Tran sport 

Pro vinc ial Road in frastru ctu re Project -AF 

2010 

Q3 

San Juan SWAp 

Prevention and Mana gement o f In fluen za 

Ro ad Sa fet y 

Bu eno s Aires in frastructu re - Ad d itio nal F in anc in g fo r APL1 

Q4 

Q1 

Nort e Grand e Tran sport 

Q2 

Nort e Grand e Wat er 

2011 

Second E ssential Publ ic Health Fun ction s  (FESP II)  

Pa rti al Cancellati on of H1N1 loan 

Q3 

La R io ja SWAp 

Basic Prot ect io n - Add it ional F in an cin g* 

TOTAL APPROVED  

TO BE APPROVED 

Fiscal 

Yea r 

Qua rter 

Project 

2011 

Q4 

Nort e Grand e Wat er 2 

Pro vinc ial Health In suran ce 

Co rdob a Road s Add it ion al F inan c in g  

Q1 

Ru ral Po ve rt y 

2012 

Su sta in abl e In du str ial De velopment  

TBD 

Salt a SWAp 

TOTAL TO BE APPROVED 

TOTAL PROGRAM  FY2009-2012 

*As of 02/23/2011, board d ate fo r this pro jec t is 03/10/2011. 

Amount      

(US$ million) 

450 

150 

175 

50 

229 

30 

50 

400 

200 

461 

-88 

30 

480 

2617 

Amount      

(US$ million) 

200 

400 

30 

52 

40 

60 

782 

3399 

36 

 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
GEF Program in Argentina FY10-FY12 

Fiscal 
Yea r 

2010 

Qua rter 

Project 

Ener gy E ffic ien cy Pro ject 

APPROVED 

 Su sta inabl e Tran sport and Air Qual it y 

Q2 

Q4 

2011 

Q3 

Th ird Nat ion al Commun icat ion UNFCCC 

TOTAL APPROVED 

TO BE APPROVED 

2011 

Q4 

Ru ral Co rr ido rs and B iod ive rsit y 

TOTAL GEFs APPROVED AND TO BE APROVED FY10 -FY12 

Amount      
(US$ million) 

15.15 

3.99 

2.4 

21.54 

6.3 

27.84 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 

Annex 4. Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 

As Of Date 2/23/2011 

Active Projects 

Difference Between 

Last PSR  

Expected and Actual 

Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Disbursements a/ 

Project 
ID 

Project Name 

Development 
Objectives 

Implementation 
Progress 

Fiscal 
Year 

IBRD 

IDA GRANT Cancel. 

Undisb. 

Orig. 

Frm 
Rev'd 

P105288 AR  APL2 Buenos Aires Infrastructure 

S 

S 

2007 

270 

5.9 

112.15569 

66.0556901 

P088220 AR (APL1)Urban Flood Preven&Drainage 

S 

S 

2005 

130 

47.4059367 

44.8171277 

P095515 AR (APL2) Prov Maternal-Child Health 

MS 

MS 

2007 

300 

135.952591 

135.952591 

P093491 AR (APL2)Urban Flood Prev.&Drainage 

MS 

MS 

2006 

70 

52.2036311 

52.2036311 

P106684 AR 2nd Prov Agric Dev 

S 

S 

2009 

300 

269.25 

70.35 

P101170 AR 2nd State Modernization 

S 

S 

2007 

20 

10.3481614 

9.21482807 

P116974 AR 3rd Natl Communication UNFCCC 

# 

# 

2011 

2.43921 

P095569 AR APL2 National Highway Asset Mgt 

S 

MS 

2007 

400 

224.113769 

219.780436 

P039584 AR B.A.URB.TSP 

S 

MS 

1997 

300 

0.043537 

12.6831208 

-87.273342 

1.3953244 

P060484 AR Basic Municipal Services Project 

MU 

MU 

2006 

110 

91.1591151 

82.5657817 

P115183 AR Basic Protection Project 

S 

S 

2009 

450 

3.0815 

1.0815 

P090119 AR Energy Efficiency Project 

S 

S 

2008 

15.155 

14.655 

9.5675 

P110599 AR Essential Public Health Functions II 

S 

S 

2011 

461 

461 

88.6111111 

P094425 AR GEF Biod.Conserv in Prod. Forestry 

MU 

MU 

2007 

7 

6.65 

P092836 AR Inst. Strengthening - ANSES II TA 

S 

S 

2006 

25 

16.3493286 

16.3493286 

P095514 AR Lifelong Learning Project 

S 

MS 

2007 

200 

111.187272 

6.18727178 

P095485 AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport 

S 

S 

2010 

150 

149.625 

P110462 AR Mining Environmental Restoration Proj 

MS 

MS 

2009 

30 

27.0307274 

17.7507274 

P120198 AR Norte Grande Road Infrastructure 

S 

S 

2011 

400 

400 

0.000002 

P120211 AR Norte Grande Water Infrastructure 

# 

# 

2011 

200 

200 

P117377 AR Prevention & Management of Influenza 

S 

S 

2010 

229 

98.6200058 

79.0200058 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 

P006043 AR RENEW.ENERGY R.MKTS 

S 

MS 

1999 

80 

38.7469602 

-11.25304 

25.049077 
-
79.422389 

P070963 AR Rural Education Improvement Project 

MS 

MS 

2006 

150 

70.4276114 

70.4276114 

P006041 AR SMALL FARMER DV. 

MS 

S 

1998 

120 

14.6040564 

-30.395944 

9.6040564 

P101171 AR SOC&FISC NTL ID SYS II 

S 

S 

2009 

20 

12.0265068 

1.45984011 

P113896 AR San Juan SWAP 

S 

S 

2010 

50 

50 

P089926 AR Solid Waste Management Project 

MS 

MS 

2006 

40 

30.8963942 

25.2963942 

P070448 AR Subnational Gov Public Sec Modernizat 

U 

MU 

2006 

40 

30.5475443 

30.5475443 

-
0.4949305 

P100806 AR Sustainable Natural Res Mgt 

MU 

MU 

2008 

60 

54.5995397 

25.5995397 

P106752 AR Unleashing Productive Innovation 

MS 

MS 

2009 

150 

133.714302 

16.0476356 

P105680 AR(APL1) Matanza-Riachuelo Development 

MU 

MU 

2009 

840 

835.9 

79.2333333 

P088032 AR(CRL1)Buenos Aires Infrastr SIDP(1APL) 

S 

S 

2005 

250 

50.0648824 

0.06488237 

0.0648824 

P099051 AR- SANTA FE ROAD Infrastructure 

S 

S 

2007 

126.7 

26.9526454 

26.9526454 

P099585 AR-Cordoba-Road Infrastructure 

S 

S 

2007 

75 

5.31254712 

3.97921378 

P090993 AR-Essential Public Health Functions 

MS 

MS 

2007 

220 

0.121267 

53.610573 

53.73184 

P114008 AR-GEF Sustain. Transp. and Air Quality 

MS 

MS 

2009 

3.987 

3.987 

2.33333334 

0.6666667 

P070628 AR-Provincial Road InfrastructureProject 

S 

MS 

2005 

325 

209.499415 

30.2594146 

P116989 AR-Road Safety 

S 

S 

2010 

30 

25.35858 

-4.6414167 

P005920 MP/AR-REDUCTION OF OZONE D 

S 

S 

1997 

25 

0.45020056 

-3.4637994 

-
3.4637994 
-
46.601112 

Overall Result 

6621.7 

53.58121 

6.064804 

4090.16961 

1127.68822 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 5. AAA Program FY09 -FY11 

Approval FY 

Project Name  

Theme 

Output Type 

Delivered to Client 

FY09 

FY10 

Co rr ientes FFS : Techn ical Assist an ce fo r the 
design o f an St rat egic Pl an  

Publ ic Secto r 
Go ve rn ance 

Non Lend in g - Techn ical 
Assist an ce 

Integrat ed F inanc ial Syst em o f P ro vin ce o f 
Bu eno s Aires 

Publ ic Secto r 
Go ve rn ance 

In stitut io nal Deve lopment Plan 
(Non Len din g - Techn ical 
Assist an ce ) 

Pro vinc ial Economic Memo randum Bu eno s 
Aires 

Publ ic Secto r 

Report - Publ ic Secto r stud y 

Lo gist ics II : A Deep Stud y o f Selected Lo gist ics 
Issues in Ar gent in a 

In frastructu re 

Report - In frastru cture Stud y 

Pro vinc ial Per forman ce In formed Bud ge t in g 

Publ ic Secto r 
Go ve rn ance 

In stitut io nal Deve lopment Plan 
(Non Len din g - Techn ical 
Assist an ce ) 

Gend er Equ it y in th e Pr iva te Secto r 

So cial 
Deve lopment 

Non Lend in g - Techn ical 
Assist an ce 

Currently Underway** 

Hi ghe r Edu cation 

 Educat ion 

Report - Edu catio n Sector Review 

AR Country F in an cial Account ab ilit y 
Assessment (CFAA) P ro vin c ial Leve l  

F inanc ial 
Man agement 

 Report 

FY11 

 Co rdob a Int rodu ct ion o f Per forman ce In formed 
Bud ge t   

Publ ic Secto r 
Go ve rn ance 

Non Lend in g - Techn ical 
Assist an ce (FBS*) 

 Access to Lon g Te rm Cred it 

F inanc ial and 
Pr iva te Secto r 
Deve lopment 

F inanc ial Sect or Workshop s 

AR Country En vironmental Assessment 

En vironment 

Count ry En vironment al An al ysis 
(CEA) - Report 

*FBS : Fee based se rvices 

** Th e AAA program for FY12 is be in g des igned as pa rt of the Bus iness P lannin g p rocess. 

40 

 
 
 
Annex 6. Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Managem ent 

A s Of Date 2/24 /2011 

Indicator 

2008 2009 2010 

2011** 

Portfo lio Assessment 
Number of Pro jects Under Imp lemen tation a 
Average Imp lemen tation Per iod (years) b 
Percent of P rob lem Projects by Number a , c 
Percent of P rob lem Projects by Amoun t a , c 
Percent of P ro jects at R isk by Number a, d 
Percent of P ro jects at R isk by Amoun t a, d 
D isbursemen t Ratio (%) e 

28 

4.2 

34 

4.2 

36 

4.2 

25.0 

2.9 

13.9 

31.3 

0.5 

17.9 

57.1 

20.6 

25.0 

60.0 

25.8 

29.3 

12.4 

29.1 

23.4 

38 

4.3 

10.5 

15.8 

21.1 

25.9 

21.6 

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Por tfo lio Performance (except for curren t FY). 

b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's coun try por tfo lio . 

c.  Percen t of projects rated U or HU on developmen t objectives (DO) and /or imp lemen tation progress (IP ). 

d.  As def ined under the Portfo lio Improvemen t Program. 

e.  Ratio of d isbursemen ts dur ing the year to the und isbursed balance of the Bank's por tfo lio at the  

     beginn ing of the year: Investmen t pro jects on ly. 

*   All ind icators are for pro jects active in the Por tfo lio , with the excep tion of D isbursemen t Ratio, 

    wh ich includes all active projects as well as pro jects wh ich exited dur ing the f iscal year. 

**D isbursement Ratio for FY11 has been annualized in base of d isbursements as of 02 /24/2011. 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 7: Summary of Joint Governm ent-Bank Workshop 

on Risks and Challenges in Implem entation of  Investm ent Projects 

In order to strengthen the implementation of Bank -financed investment portfolio in A rgentina, 

the M inistry of Economy and Public Finance and the World Bank invited a group of 
implementing agencies representing a w ide range of sectors to participate in a workshop held in 
Buenos A ires on November 9-10, 2010.  Forty-two participants included p roject coordinators 
and procurement, financial management and safeguard specialists from selected implementing 
agencies, as well as Bank team s providing implementation support to the same operations ( Task 

Team Leaders and procurement, financial management and safeguard specialist s).  

The methodology used during the workshop wa s the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) 
supported by Expert Choice, an effective and proven methodology and software for decision -
making. The methodology allowed eliciting the opinions from participants of the Government, 

the Implementing Agencies and the World Bank through a facilitation process and anonymous 
voting. The workshop aimed to: i) identify critical issues, risks and challenges affecting portfolio 
execution, including compliance w ith policy regimes (i.e. financial management, fiduciary 
policies and environmental and social safeguards) and monitoring system s, ii) carry out a 
collaborative and participatory decision -making process in the creation of a working agenda to 

enhance project portfolio execution, and iii) foster a trusting and collaborati ve environment, 
strengthen the dialogue between the parties and generate creative and effective solutions. 

The workshop provided a platform for frank discussion and allowed participants to work as one 
team , comm itted to the joint goal of implementing the i nvestment portfolio smoothly and 

efficiently, with the focus on development results.  Procurement and safeguards related questions 
received the highest prom inence in the discussion. In particular, participants agreed that capacity 
constraints in the implem enting agencies need to be addressed through improved training and 
recruitment procedures, and that the Bank would support these efforts by providing custom ized 
capacity building program in procurement and safeguard s. A detailed analysis on procurement 

post reviews of Bank portfolio in A rgentina has been completed and used as a guide to inform 
the ongoing preparation of procurement training for the implementing agencies. In parallel, the 
Bank recruited additional procurement staff in Buenos A ires office, an d both Government and 
the Bank are working on expanding the SEPA platform to include a secure information space for 
exchange of experience on procurement issues.    

On the safeguards side, following the workshop the Government and the Bank launched a 
detai led analysis of overlaps and gaps between A rgentina’s legal framework and the Bank’s 
safeguards policies, which would serve as a basis for developing clear guidance and sample 
standard documents facilitating the compliance w ith Bank safeguards in A rgentina portfolio, as 

well as inform capacity building efforts.  

42 

 
 
 
With respect to financial management, workshop participants agreed that this area represents the 
fewest concerns for the portfolio. The main challenges are to improve internal controls in 
operations implemented at sub-national levels, and to create an automatic link between SEPA, 

procurement information system and UEPEX , the Government 's FM system for external funding , 
which would allow the Government and the Bank have real time information on financ ial 
execution of projects.    

The Government and the Bank will evaluate progress in implementing the Action Plan 

developed at the workshop (see below ) tw ice a year, at the time of each country portfolio review .  

Workshop on R isks and Challenges in Implemen tation of Investment Projects:  Action Plan 

Action 

Primar y 
Responsibility 

Component 1:  Improvement o f pro curement per formance 

Creat e sp ace for exchan ge o f knowled ge and exp er ien ce amon g impl ementin g a gen c ies ( IA), 
and b etween them and th e Ban k  

Ban k 

Deve lop a procu rement tra in in g p ro gram o ffered b y an acad emic in stitut io n, to bu ild capacit y 
in impl ement in g agen c ies 

Re view co ntract in g p ro cedu res fo r co n sultant s b y IA to impro ve th e cond it ion s to attract and 
reta in qu alified pro curement sta ff 

En sure act ive pa rtic ip ation o f Ban k pro curement team in p ro ject prep aration from ea rl y st ages 
o f desi gn 

Stren gth en the pro cu rement team in th e Ban k to en sure t imel y and e ffect ive respon se to th e 
client and sup port p ro ject ob ject ive s 

Component 2: Impr ovement o f capa city to ef fectively ad dress  s afeguards and sustaina bility 
aspects of o perations  

Est abl ish and commun icat e to the cl ient cl ea r stru cture o f the Ban k's lo cal sa fegu a rd s team to 
en sure th at the cl ient has an easy po int o f cont act and recei ves con sist ent messages on 
sa fegu ard s issu es  

Stren gth en DNPOIC ' s lead coord in at ion role in sa fegu ard s an d su sta in ab il it y issu es o f 
operat ion s 

Est abl ish clear cr ite r ia and mo del s for appl icat ion o f Ban k sa fegu ard s polic ies to projects in 
Argent ina  

Component 3: Impr ovement o f int ernal control in financial manag ement 

Re view IA stru cture to adapt fin anc ial man agement teams to the new chall en ges 

Imp ro ve cap acit y o f u nit s at th e nat io nal l evel to supe rvise un it s at th e p ro vin cial le vel 

Stren gth en the Go ve rnment 's t eam cu rrentl y mana gin g UEPEX, th e Go ve rnment 's FM system 
for exte rn al fund in g 

Imp ro ve Gen eral Au d it Office cap ac it y to pe r fo rm techn ical aud it s gi ven th e inc rease o f 
result s b ased comp on ent s in op erat ion s 

Go ve rnment 

Go ve rnment  

Ban k 

Ban k 

Ban k 

Go ve rnment 

Ban k 

Go ve rnment 

Go ve rnment 

Go ve rnment 

Go ve rnment 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 

Annex 8. Argentina: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators 

2005 

2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010*     
estima te        

2011*     
forecast 

Real GDP a nd agg regate dema nd 1 / 

GDP (annua l %) 

9.2 

8.5 

8.7 

6.8 

0.9 

9.1 ² 

5.8 ² 

   Expor ts (annua l %) 

13.5 

7.3 

9.1 

1.2 

-6.4 

- 

- 

   Impor ts (annua l %) 

20.1 

15.4 

20.5 

14.1 

-19.0 

- 

- 

Public Secto r 4/ 

Na t io na l Government P r imary Ba lanc e (% o f GDP ) 

3.7 

3.5 

3.2 

3.1 

1.5 

1.7 ⁵ 

0.8 ⁵ 

Na t io na l Government O vera ll Ba lanc e (% of GDP ) 

1.8 

1.8 

1.1 

1.4 

-0.6 

0.2 ⁵ 

- 

Tota l G ross Pub lic Debt (% o f GDP) 

85.3 

76.6 

67.2 

56.4 

58.9 

- 

- 

Externa l Secto r 

Trade b a lanc e (c urrent US $ b ill io ns) 

13.1 

14.0 

13.5 

15.4 

17.0 

12.1 

10.2 ⁶ 

Merc hand ise expo rts (c urrent US $ b ill io ns)   

40.4 

46.5 

56.0 

70.0 

55.7 

68.5 

77.6 

Merc hand ise impo rts (cur rent US $ b ill io ns)  

27.3 

32.6 

42.5 

54.6 

38.7 

56.4 

67.4 

Current acco unt b a lanc e (c urrent US $ b ill io ns)  

5.4 

7.9 

7.5 

7.0 

11.5 

4.7 

3.2 

Current acco unt b a lanc e (% of GDP )  

3.0 

3.7 

2.9 

2.2 

3.9 

- 

- 

Gross interna t io na l reserves (US $ b il lio ns , end o f p er iod) 

28.1 

32.0 

46.2 

46.4 

47.9 

52.2 

52.5 

Prices , mo ne y a nd e xcha nge rate 

CPI (annua l %, end o f p er iod) 

12.3 

9.8 

8.5 

7.2 

7.7 

10.9 

14.4 ⁷ 

GDP def la tor (annua l % ) 

8.8 

13.4 

14.3 

19.1 

10.0 

17.1 ⁸ 

19.8 ⁸ 

M2 (annua l %, mo nthly average) 

23.8 

22.6 

21.1 

17.3 

11.5 

22.1 

27.9 ⁹ 

No mina l Exc hange R ate (AR $ p er US$, end o f per iod ) 

3.03 

3.07 

3.15 

3.45 

3.79 

3.98 

4.29 

Populat io n, Emplo yme nt a nd Pove rty 

Popula t io n, to ta l (mil lio ns) 

38.7 

39.1 

39.5 

39.9 

40.3 

- 

- 

Unemp lo yment rate (% ) 

10.1 

8.7 

7.5 

7.3 

8.4 

7.7 

7.4 

Urb an poverty headcount rat io at nat io na l po ver ty line (% o f pop ulat io n)  36.4 
* Unless otherwis e ind ica ted, 2010 es t ima tes and 2011 forec as ts cor respo nd to R EM (R elevam ien to de E xp ecta tiva s de M ercad o ) survey p ub lis hed by the C ent ra l Bank of 
Argent ina. 

29.2 

22.0 

16.6 

13.6 

- 

- 

1/ 1993 AR $. 

2/ The 2011 draft Bud ge t Law assumes annua l gro wth of 8. 9% in 2010 and o f 4.3% in 2011. 

3/ Inc lud ing inventory and s ta t is t ica l d iscrep anc y. 

4/ Accounts on a cas h b as is . 

5/ Own c a lc ula t io ns bas ed o n ac tua l f isca l d ata f ro m Min is t ry of F inanc e and no mina l GDP p ro jec t ions fro m R EM survey. 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 9. Argentina at a glance 

45 

Argentina at a glance2/23/11 LatinUpperKey Development Indicators AmericamiddleArgentina& Carib.income(2009)Population, mid-year (millions)40.3566993Surface area (thousand sq. km)2,78020,42248,659Population growth (%)1.01.10.9Urban population (% of total population)927975GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)304.13,8657,352GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)7,5506,8267,405GNI per capita (PPP, international $)14,12010,49612,763GDP growth (%)0.94.34.1GDP per capita growth (%)-0.13.13.2(most recent estimate, 2003–2009)Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)38..Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)717..Life expectancy at birth (years)757371Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)152020Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)24..Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)989295Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)989092Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)116118111Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)114114110Access to an improved water source (% of population)969395Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)917984Net Aid Flows1980199020002009a(US$ millions)Net ODA and official aid1916952131Top 3 donors (in 2008):   Spain012-630   Germany1841722   European Commission021017Aid (% of GNI)0.00.10.00.0Aid per capita (US$)1513Long-Term Economic TrendsConsumer prices (annual % change)100.82314.0-0.77.7GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)90.82,076.81.010.0Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)0.00.51.03.7Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)..851001331980–901990–20002000–09Population, mid-year (millions)28.232.536.940.31.41.31.0GDP (US$ millions)76,962141,352284,204307,155-0.74.35.4Agriculture6.48.15.07.50.73.52.5Industry41.236.027.631.8-1.33.86.1   Manufacturing29.526.817.521.2-0.82.75.8Services52.455.967.460.70.04.54.8Household final consumption expenditure63.077.170.758.3..2.84.7General gov't final consumption expenditure11.03.113.815.2..2.23.6Gross capital formation 25.314.016.220.9-5.27.411.1Exports of goods and services5.110.410.921.43.88.76.3Imports of goods and services6.54.611.516.0-5.815.69.2Gross savings22.813.413.024.4Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary.  .. indicates data are not available.a. Aid data are for 2008.Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).      (average annual growth %)  (% of GDP)64202460-415-1930-3445-4960-6475-79percent of total population01020304050601990199520002007ArgentinaLatin America & the Caribbean-15-10-50510159505GDPGDP per capita 
 
 
46 

ArgentinaBalance of Payments and Trade20002009(US$ millions)Total merchandise exports (fob)26,34155,669Total merchandise imports (cif)25,28138,771Net trade in goods and services-1,83217,825Current account balance-8,98111,515   as a % of GDP-3.23.7Workers' remittances and   compensation of employees (receipts)86660Reserves, including gold25,14747,967Central Government Finance(% of GDP)Current revenue (including grants)19.422.7   Tax revenue14.120.0Current expenditure20.920.2Technology and Infrastructure20002008Overall surplus/deficit-2.4-0.6Paved roads (% of total)29.430.0Highest marginal tax rate (%)Fixed line and mobile phone   Individual..35   subscribers (per 100 people)39141   Corporate3535High technology exports   (% of manufactured exports)9.19.0External Debt and Resource FlowsEnvironment(US$ millions)Total debt outstanding and disbursed140,914120,184Agricultural land (% of land area)4749Total debt service26,84312,127Forest area (% of land area)12.312.0Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)––Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)..6.5Total debt (% of GDP)49.639.1Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)7,3266,920Total debt service (% of exports)69.417.3Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)29.2..Foreign direct investment (net inflows)10,4184,009CO2 emissions per capita (mt)3.84.6Portfolio equity (net inflows)-3,227-212GDP per unit of energy use   (2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)6.26.8Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)1,6501,850 World Bank Group portfolio20002009 (US$ millions) IBRD   Total debt outstanding and disbursed8,7895,305   Disbursements1,0191,028   Principal repayments538793   Interest payments701169 IDA   Total debt outstanding and disbursed––   Disbursements––Private Sector Development20002009   Total debt service––Time required to start a business (days)–27 IFC (fiscal year)Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)–11.0   Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio2,3051,738Time required to register property (days)–52      of which IFC own account1,196850   Disbursements for IFC own account252153Ranked as a major constraint to business20002009   Portfolio sales, prepayments and   (% of managers surveyed who agreed)      repayments for IFC own account7480      Economic and regulatory policy uncertainty..16.5      Access to/cost of financing..15.7 MIGA   Gross exposure49135Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)58.415.9   New guarantees1270Bank capital to asset ratio (%)..12.9Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  2009 data are preliminary.2/23/11.. indicates data are not available.  – indicates observation is not applicable.Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).0255075100Control of corruptionRule of lawRegulatory qualityPolitical stabilityVoice and accountabilityCountry's percentile rank (0-100)higher values imply better ratings20092000IBRD, 5,069IDA, 0IMF, 0Other multi-lateral, 9,711Bilateral, 5,794Private, 78,350Short-term, 19,977 
 
 
