d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 65115-RU 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY  

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (CPS) 

FOR  

THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION  

FOR THE PERIOD 2012-2016 

November 18, 2011 

Russia Country Unit, World Bank  
Europe and Central Asia Region 

International Finance Corporation 
Europe and Central Asia Department 

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
Europe and Central Asia Department 

This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration.  This does not imply a 
presumed outcome.  This document may be updated following Board consideration, and the updated 
document will be made publicly available in accordance with the Bank‘s policy on Access to Information. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The last Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) Report No. 37901-RU was discussed by the Board of 
Executive Directors on December 14, 2006, and the last CPS Progress Report No. 49119-RU was 
dated July 30, 2009. 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 

Currency unit: Ruble (RUB) as of November 18, 2011 
US$1 = RUB 30.783  

RUSSIAN FEDERATION FISCAL YEAR 

January 1 - December 31 

WORLD BANK GROUP FISCAL YEAR 

July 1 – June 30 

          This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) was prepared under the guidance of Pedro Alba, IBRD Country 
Director, and Tomasz A. Telma, IFC Regional Director, by a team led by Lada Strelkova, Task Team Leader 
(TTL) and IBRD Country Program Coordinator for the Russian Federation .  The IFC team was led by Hester 
Marie DeCasper, Economist, IFC Central and Eastern Europe Department.  MIGA participation was led by 
Franciscus Linden, Senior Risk Managemen t Officer.   

          The CPS Core Team included: Anna-Maria Bogdanova, Zeljko Bogetic, Sylvie K. Bossoutrot, Anna 
Georgieva, Marcus Bernhard Heinz, Yuriy Myroshnychenko, Soren Nellemann, and Marina Vasilieva.  Core team 
support was provided by Michelle McCue and Zafar Ahmed (consultant). 

          The following Russia Country Team Members and other colleagues have also made important contributions 
to this strategy: Anastassia Alexandrova, Kosuke Anan, Angela G. Armstrong, Ivor Beazley, Vickram Cuttaree, 
Adriana Damianova, Irina Datsuk, Olga Emelyanova, Yanina Ermakova, Isak Froumin, Sophia Georgieva, 
Antonio Giuffrida, Matthias Grueninger, Maya V. Gusarova, Lawrence Bernard Kay, Toshiaki Keicho, Munawer 
Sultan Khwaja, Jens Kromann Kristensen, Julia Komagaeva, Galina S. Kuznetsova, Tatyana G. Leonova, Maria 
Malkova, Andrei R. Markov, Sarah G. Michael, Andrew Michael Mitchell, Amitabha Mukherjee, Mamta Murthi, 
Denis Nikolaev, Marsha M. Olive, Dragana Pajovic, Marina Paradzinskaya, Nicolas Perrin, John Daniel Pollner, 
Tatyana Ponomareva, Ljudmilla V. Poznanskaya, Jean-Louis Racine, Sevil Kamalovna Salakhutdinova, Andreas 
Schliessler, Tatyana Shadrunova, Maria Shmis, Tigran Shmis, Emily Sinnott, Sophie Sirtaine, Ivan Shulga, 
Christina Tippmann, Stepan Titov, Sergey Ulatov, and Kirill Vasiliev from IBRD, and Patrick Alexander Avato, 
Tatiana Bogatyreva, Elena Bourganskaia, Giovanni Daniele, Hester Marie DeCasper, Ivan Ivanov, Jesper Kjaer, 
Nena Stoiljkovic, Patrick Luternauer, Rolf Behrndt, Salah-Eddine Kandri, Timothy M. Krause, and Kristina 
Turilova from IFC.   Other members of the Bank-wide Russia Country Team (including IBRD, IFC and MIGA) 
have also contributed.   

          Special thanks are extended to the counterpart team of the Government of the Russian Federation. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

CPPR 
CPS 
DAC 
DFID 

CIF 
CIS 
CMDP 
CPRF 

BHPP 
BOP 
CBR 
CCA 
CIDA 

AA 
Agency Agreement  
AAA 
Analytic & Advisory Activities 
ACS 
Activity Completion Status 
AIDS 
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome 
APEC 
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
APG 
Associated Petroleum Gas 
BBB 
Better Business Bureau 
BEEPS Business Environment and Enterprise 
Performance Survey 
Bratsk Hydro Power Plant 
Balance of Payments 
Central Bank of Russia 
Central Customs Administration 
Canadian International Development 
Agency 
Cultural Investment Facility 
Commonwealth of Independent States 
Capital Markets Development Project 
Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation 
Country Program Portfolio Review 
Country Partnership Strategy 
Development Assistance Committee 
UK Department for International 
Development  
Deposit Insurance Agency 
European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development 
ECA 
Europe and Central Asia 
ECD 
Early Childhood Development 
EDB 
Eurasian Development Bank 
EE 
Energy Efficiency 
EMP 
Environmental Management Project 
ERPA 
Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement 
ERUs 
Emission Reduction Units 
ESMAP Energy Sector Management Assistance 
Program 
ESW 
Economic and Sector Work 
EU 
European Union  
EurAsEc Eurasian Economic Community 
EXT 
External Affairs Vice Presidency 
FBS 
Fee Based Services 
FC 
Finance Committee 
FDI 
Foreign Direct Investments 
FIL 
Financial Intermediary Loan 
FM 
Financial Management 
FMS 
Financial Management Specialist 
FIAS 
Foreign Investment Advisory Service 
FOB 
Free on Board 
FSAP 
Financial Sector Assessment Program 
FTP 
Federal Targeted Program 
FTS 
Federal Tariff Service 

DIA 
EBRD 

ICR 
ICT 

HIV 
HPP 
HRIP 
IBRD 

IDA 
IEG 
IFC 
IFIs 
IFRS 

FY 
GDLN 
GDP 
GFRP 
GHG 
GoR 
GPP 
GVEP 
GRP 
HCS 
HE 
HEIs 
HIPC 

Fiscal Year 
Global Development Learning Network 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Food Crisis Response Program 
Greenhouse Gas 
Government of Russia 
Gas Power Plant 
Global Village Energy Partnership 
Gross Regional Product 
Housing and Communal Services 
Higher Education 
Higher Educational Institutions 
Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries 
Initiative 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
Hydro Power Plant 
Health Reform Implementation Project 
International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development 
Implementation Completion Report 
Information and Communication 
Technology 
International Development Association 
Independent Evaluation Group 
International Finance Corporation 
International Financial Institutions 
International Financial Reporting 
Standards 
IMF 
International Monetary Fund 
IPO 
Initial Public Offering 
IT 
Information Technology 
JRSP 
Judicial Reform Support Project 
JSDF 
Japan Social Development Fund 
KIA 
Kazan International Airport 
LDPR 
Liberal Democratic Party of Russia 
LIC 
Low Income Country 
LISP 
Local Initiatives Support Project 
MDGs Millennium Development Goals 
MDRI Multilateral Debt Reduction Initiative 
MFC 
Multifunctional Service Center 
MIC 
Middle Income Country 
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
MIRPAL Support for Migration and Remittances 
Peer-Assisted Learning 
MOED Ministry of Economic Development 
MOES Ministry of Education and Science 
MOF 
Ministry of Finance  
MOHSD Ministry of Health and Social 
Development  
MOT 
Ministry of Transport 
MWWP Municipal Water and Wastewater Project 
NPAF 
National Pollution Abatement Fund 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

 November 2011 

PISA 

PDO 
PER 
PFM 
PIRLS 

NPLs 
Non-Performing Loans 
NW 
North West 
NWCA North-West Customs Administration 
ODA 
Official Development Assistance 
OECD 
Organization for Economic Co-operation 
and Development 
Program Development Objective 
Public Expenditure Review 
Public Financial Management 
Progress in International Reading Literacy 
Study 
Program for International Student 
Assessment 
PIU 
Project Implementation Unit 
PPP 
Public Private Partnership 
PR 
Progress Report 
QAG 
Quality Assurance Group 
RBOF 
Russian Bank Opportunity Fund 
R&D 
Research and Development 
RANEPA Russia Academy of National Economy and 
Public Administration  
READ 
Russia Education Aid for Development 
RER 
Russian Economic Report 
RSEFP Russia Sustainable Energy Finance 
Program 
Reimbursable Technical Assistance  

RTA 

TA 
TB 
TF 
TI 
TIMSS 

RUB 
SD 
SEZs 
SFD 
SMEs 
SVET 

Ruble 
Social Development 
Special Economic Zones 
Southern Federal District 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
Secondary Vocational Education and 
Training 
Technical Assistance 
Tuberculosis 
Trust Fund 
Transparency International 
Trends in International Mathematics and 
Science Study 
Task Team Leaders 
Technical and Vocational Education and 
Training 
Unified Energy System of Russia 
Vnesheconombank (State Corporation 
Bank for Development and Foreign 
Economic Affairs) 
VET 
Vocational Education and Training  
WBG 
World Bank Group 
WBI 
World Bank Institute 
WHO World Health Organization 
WTO 
World Trade Organization

TTLs 
TVET 

UES 
VEB 

Vice President 
Country Director 
Task Team Leader 

IBRD 
Philippe H. Le Houérou 
Pedro Alba 
Lada Strelkova  

IFC 
Dimitris Tsitsiragos 
Tomasz A. Telma 
Hester Marie DeCasper 

MIGA 
Izumi Kobayashi 
Ravi Vish 
Franciscus Linden 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOINT IBRD/IFC/MIGA 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (CPS) 2012-2016  
FOR 
THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................ I 

I. 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................ 1 

II.    RUSSIA: CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA ...................................... 2 

Country Background and Political Context .................................................................................................... 2 
Recent Economic Developments and Prospects ............................................................................................. 3 
Development Challenges and Opportunities .................................................................................................. 6 
The Russian Federation Strategy 2020 Update ............................................................................................ 12 

III.  WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR RUSSIA ............... 13 

A. Lessons Learned from FY07-11 CPS and Stakeholder Feedback ......................................................... 13 
Lessons from FY07-11 CPS Completion Report ......................................................................................... 13 
Findings from Recent IEG Evaluations ........................................................................................................ 15 
Feedback from Multistakeholder Consultations ........................................................................................... 15 

B. 

Proposed World Bank Group 2012-2016 CPS for Russia ...................................................................... 16 
WBG 2012-2016 CPS Overview ................................................................................................................. 16 
-   Principles of Engagement ........................................................................................................................ 19 
-  WBG Program of Support ........................................................................................................................ 20 
CPS Strategic Themes, Engagement Areas, Country Outcomes, and WBG Support .................................. 24 
-   Strategic Theme 1: Increasing Growth and Diversification ..................................................................... 25 
-   Strategic Theme 2: Expanding Human Potential ..................................................................................... 27 
-   Strategic Theme 3: Deepening Russia‘s Global and Regional Role ........................................................ 29 
-   Strategic Theme 4 (cross-cutting): Improving Governance and Transparency ........................................ 30 
Gender Mainstreaming ................................................................................................................................. 30 

C. 

Implementing the 2012-2016 CPS for Russia .......................................................................................... 31 
Fiduciary Environment for Bank Lending ................................................................................................... 31 
Managing the WBG Program ....................................................................................................................... 32 
Fostering Partnerships .................................................................................................................................. 33 

IV.    MANAGING RISKS ......................................................................................... 34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)                      

November 2011 

CPS  ANNEXES  

Annex 1: 
Annex 2:   
Annex 3:   
Annex 4: 
Annex 5: 
Annex 6:   
Annex 7: 
Annex 8: 
Annex 9: 
Annex 10: 
Annex 11: 
Annex 12: 

2012-2016 CPS Results Framework 
Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects  
Diversification and Competitiveness: Challenges and Opportunities  
Social and Human Capital Development  
Public Sector Governance in Russia  
Government‘s ―Development Strategy 2020‖ Update  
FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 
2012-2016 CPS Multistakeholder Consultations 
Overview of the Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program  
The Russian Federation as a Donor  
IBRD Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA) 
IBRD Country Financing Parameters for the Russian Federation  

CPS  STANDARD  ANNEX  TABLES 

Annex A2:   Country At-A-Glance  
Annex B2:   
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 
Annex B3:  
IFC Investment Operations Program and MIGA Guarantees 
Annex B3 
IBRD Indicative Financing Program, 2012-2016 
Annex B4 
IBRD/IFC Indicative Knowledge Services Program, 2012-2013 
Annex B5:   Russian Federation – Social Indicators 
Annex B6:  
Russian Federation – Key Economic Indicators 
Annex B7:   Russian Federation – Key Exposure Indicators 
Annex B8:  
IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio  
Annex B8:   
IBRD Operations Portfolio  

Medium-Term Macroeconomic Prospects (Baseline Scenario) 
Medium-Term Macroeconomic Prospects 
Simulation Results for Consumption Growth in Russia, 2011–12 
Russia:  History of IDA Contributions 
Ongoing Trust Funds of the Russian Federation 
CPS 2012-2016 Identified Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA) 

TABLES  

Table 1: 
Table 2  
Table 3: 
Table 4:  
Table 5: 
Table 6: 

BOXES  

Box 1:  
Innovations in Modalities of Cooperation at Sub-National Level 
Box 2.              Choice of RTA as a Knowledge Services Instrument 
Box 3:  
Improving Transparency and Procurement Management of IBRD Operations 
Box 4:  
Doing Business 2011 Results 
Box 5:  
Expert Thematic Groups Working on the Update of Strategy 2020 
Box 6:   
Structure of the Draft Strategy 2020 Update 
Box 7:   
Alignment of the CPS Outcomes to the Indicative Strategy 2020 Themes 
Box 8:  
Milestones of Russia‘s Development Aid 
Box 9:  
Russia‘s ODA: Highlights and Key Facts 
Box 10: 
Results Achieved under Russia-supported IDA/IBRD-administered Trust Funds 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)                      

November 2011 

FIGURES  

Figure 1: 
Figure 2: 
Figure 3:  
Figure 4:  
Figure 5:  
Figure 6: 
Figure 7: 
Figure 8:  
Figure 9:  
Figure 10:  
Figure 11:  
Figure 12:  
Figure 13:  
Figure 14:  
Figure 15:  
Figure 16:  
Figure 17:  
Figure 18:  
Figure 19:  
Figure 20: 
Figure 21:   

Russia: Demand Structure of Russia‘s Real GDP Growth ( percent) 
World Bank Oil Price Forecast for Average Crude 
The Impact of the Crisis on the Long-term Development Objectives in Russia 
Demand Structure of Russia‘s Real GDP Growth (percent) 
Oil Prices and the Trade Balance 
Current Account Balances and the Real Effective Exchange Rate 
World Bank Oil Price Forecast for Average Crude 
Bank Lending to Households and Non-financial Organizations 
Knowledge Economy Index 
Poverty in Russia 
Respondents (percent)) Saying they are Satisfied with Public Services 
Respondents (percent) Saying that Unofficial Payments are … 
Firms (percent) Using the Courts Saying that Courts are… 
Firms (percent) Reporting Unofficial Payments 
Firms Reporting that Unofficial Payments are Frequent in Dealing with… 
Firms (percent) Saying that Informal Gifts are Usually Requested or Expected 
Number of Days to Obtain Licenses, Permits, and Service Connections 
Percent of Senior Management Time Spent Dealing with Public Officials 
Firms (percent) Saying that Licenses and Permits are Not a Problem 
Volume of RTAs by Sectors, FY07-FY11 
Total Number and Volume of RTAs, FY07-FY14 

MAP OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION (IBRD NO. 33470) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)                      

November 2011 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  

i. 
Partnership of Choice.  The Russian Federation1 entered the global financial and 
economic crisis strong and emerged from it stronger than most.  The prudent macroeconomic 
management of the country‘s natural resources protected it from the worst effects of the economic 
downturn.  A strong countercyclical package financed through revenues from oil and gas, saved 
for a rainy day, helped keep unemployment and poverty in check.  But the crisis also served as a 
stark reminder for the Government that the country is too dependent on oil and gas and that it 
needs to free the economy from their own version of the ―resource trap‖.  Going forward, the 
World Bank Group (WBG) 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) will support Russia‘s 
efforts to (i) increase growth and diversification through better management of public finances, 
improved investment climate and innovation, stronger financial sector, better infrastructure , and 
more effective protection of the environment, (ii) expand human potential by strengthening 
skills and social services through improvements in education, health, and social protection, (iii) 
deepen Russia’s global and regional role related to its aspirations as a donor and the provision 
of global public goods and, as a cross-cutting theme, (iv) improve governance and 
transparency through more accountability and better service standards in public administration, 
procurement, and financial management.  These four themes are at the core of the CPS results 
framework presented in Annex 1.  

ii. 
Three-dimensional Engagement.  The WBG‘s engagement with Russia is unique in the 
sense that it is three-dimensional: national, regional, and global.  At the national level, the WBG 
will aim to maximize its development impact for the country mainly by trying to reach out to the 
poorer regions of Russia.  IBRD will explore more direct lending to Russia‘s regions in 
exceptional cases, sometimes working in partnership with institutions with presence and reach 
across all of Russia, and innovative ways of supporting IBRD analytical work and technical 
assistance in poorer regions. IFC will focus for instance on developing infrastructure in Russia‘s 
regions and municipalities, including through public-private partnerships (PPPs).  As the largest 
country in the world and a regional (Europe and Central Asia - ECA) growth and migration pole, 
Russia‘s national choices also have critical impact on regional and global challenges.  At the ECA 
regional level, the WBG will focus on supporting ―Russia as a donor‖ through technical assistance 
for capacity strengthening.  The Government will likely concentrate its development aid on poorer 
countries in ECA with which it still has strong economic and historical links.  At the global level, 
the WBG will provide quality advisory services and knowledge to support Russia‘s ambitions in 
providing global public goods.  It will assist Russia in enhancing its voice in international forums 
such as the G8, G20 and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), and will support the 
country‘s integration into the World Trade Organization (WTO).  

iii. 
Relevance through Innovation.  To stay relevant in an advanced Middle Income Country 
(MIC) like Russia, the WBG must innovate constantly.  In a huge economy like Russia, traditional 
WBG finance is important but can only have a limited direct impact.  The 2012-2016 CPS 
positions the WBG as a partner of choice for Russia based on its global knowledge leadership in 
development.  IBRD has built up and will continue to grow a larger than usual portfolio of 
technical assistance and analytical activities, especially Reimbursable Technical Assistance 
(RTA2), that help strengthen capacity and transfer knowledge to Russian institutions.  Flexibility 

1 Russian Federation and Russia are used as synonyms throughout this document.   
2 Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA) is also being referred to as fee-for-service (FFS) or fee-based services (FBS). 

i 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)                      

November 2011 

and speed of WBG knowledge provision will be the key in the coming CPS period to meet the 
often short-term demand of Russian clients for advice and project support for their development 
priorities.  While RTAs have the advantage of being fully driven by cl ient demand, traditional 
AAA could be better instruments to develop important or emerging topics that WBG staff may 
wish to bring to the attention of the Russian authorities and public.  A particularly innovative part 
of the program is the support for Russia as Donor, where WBG technical assistance for Russia 
will provide the Government with a kind of global positioning system for its development aid.  
This can help the country navigate its way through the establishment of a fully operational 
bilateral development agency while avoiding known pitfalls.  The novel development aid 
partnership between Russia and the WBG also includes policy dialogues on aid policies and 
practices and financial cooperation on development assistance funded by Russia through 
IDA/IBRD-administered trust funds.  Finally, innovation for the WBG can also simply mean 
using its toolbox of instruments more creatively than before .  This is particularly relevant with 
regard to the WBG work in Russia‘s poorer regions.  As the sub-national level is difficult to reach 
through regular channels, financial intermediary loans,  and other new modalities of engagement 
will be further explored as novel instruments in the Russia program.    

iv. 
Challenges Ahead.  The WBG program will address Russia‘s longer-term economic, 
social and environmental challenges.  As in many other major fossil fuel producers, Russia‘s 
resources are also the source of many of its development challenges.  Indeed, the dominant 
concerns for Russia‘s economic and social development remain the dependency on fossil fuel 
production and exports and the associated challenge of using oil and gas revenues effectively and 
efficiently.  To provide a platform for future economic growth, Russia needs to maintain stable 
macroeconomic conditions, despite its vulnerability to commodity price volatility, and create a 
diversified, efficient and sustainable product base.  Existing competition rules and the business 
climate provide insufficient pressure or incentives for innovation and investment, while the 
financial system remains underdeveloped in terms of its capacity to mobilize and intermediate 
savings, and is vulnerable to macroeconomic volatility.  In the labor market, skills mismatches are 
turning into an increasingly important development constraint.  While general poverty levels have 
fallen, vulnerability to poverty remains a concern.  Demographic and health trends are 
characterized by low fertility, high adult mortality and morbidity rates, and inefficient health 
spending.  Governance and corruption are recognized as major problems in Russia.  Recent and 
important reform efforts notwithstanding, the institutional structure and quality of public 
management are often weak.   

v. 
Strong and Coordinated WBG Program.  The indicative financing envelope for IBRD 
during the CPS period foresees total lending of up to US$5 billion, plus the mobilization of 
counterpart funds.  Actual lending volumes will depend on the country‘s performance and 
priorities, IBRD lending capacity, demand from other borrowers, and global economic 
developments.  In accordance with the Government‘s preferences, all IBRD lending is foreseen in 
the form of investment projects.  The IBRD financing program for the first two years of the CPS 
is reasonably defined and selective and includes projects in the areas of microfinance, financial 
sector development, energy efficiency, forestry protection, infrastructure development, and local 
government.  IBRD will continue to provide knowledge products—Economic and Sector Work 
(ESW), Technical Assistance (TA) and RTA—in support of all CPS strategic themes, covering 
priority issues such as macroeconomic management, diversification, investment climate, 
innovation, urban transport, health finance, labor markets and migration, expenditure efficiency, 
and strengthening procurement.  The majority of IBRD‘s technical assistance will be provided 
through RTAs.  IFC foresees total investments between US$3.8-4.8 billion for its own account 
during the five-year CPS period, plus significant mobilization of counterpart funds.  IFC 

ii 

 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)                      

November 2011 

investment and advisory operations are focused on improving Russia‘s competitiveness through 
greater resource efficiency, including use of renewable energy, broadening access to finance and 
infrastructure and increasing economic diversification (the first theme of the joint CPS).  Actual 
commitment levels will depend on market conditions, demand from clients , IFC additionality, and 
appetite of counterparts to provide financing alongside IFC.  MIGA will continue to support 
foreign investors through the provision of political risk guarantees. 

vi. 
Implementing the Program.  The WBG will set up a CPS implementation and results 
monitoring system that will be used to track progress in the WBG contributions towards achieving 
the country outcomes defined in the CPS results framework.  This review process would also 
provide inputs for the planned CPS Progress Report in 2014 when adjustments in the CPS results 
framework would be made, if considered necessary.   

vii. 
Fostering Partnerships.  The WBG will continue to support Russia‘s growing and varied 
civil society in its public-private partnership roles.  The WBG will also foster partnerships with 
leading Russian universities and academia.  The WBG will cooperate closely with other 
multilateral institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Eurasian Development 
Bank (EDB), the European Union (EU), and the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (EBRD).  

viii. Risks and Rewards.  The achievement of the intended results in this CPS faces political, 
economic, and implementation risks.  Political continuity and stability are accorded high priority 
by the Government.  The forthcoming presidential and parliamentary elections in 2011 and 2012 
could lead to some policy uncertainty and delays in implementing reforms.  Broad consensus on 
the key development challenges among most political contenders indicates that reform and 
institutional priorities will remain broadly constant, but 
the maintenance of prudent 
macroeconomic policies may be subjected to other political priorities.  Growth prospects remain 
vulnerable to large drops in oil and gas prices.  In the longer term, this risk is mitigated by the 
government focus on diversifying the economy and improving the fiscal non-oil balance.  
Nevertheless, if global conditions deteriorate , the focus of the WBG‘s program on longer-term 
development constraints would expand to help the authorities respond to the deteriorating 
economic circumstances.  Many of the proposed IBRD engagements under the CPS are likely to 
be through RTAs, which typically take time, often involve unique arrangements for each contract , 
and hence introduce a measure of planning uncertainty into the program.  Loan preparation in 
Russia is also lengthy.  Staff will address these implementation risks through engagement and 
consultations with clients and stakeholders.  Continued strong fiduciary controls, due diligence, 
and more transparency will be the main instruments to reduce governance-related risks.  Staff will 
continue to advocate and support improvements in country systems. 

iii 

 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 

November 2011 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
A Partner of Choice.  The previous WBG CPS for the Russian Federation was discussed by 
the Board of Executive Directors in December 2006.  It marked the WBG transition from ―a partner 
of necessity‖ to ―a partner of choice‖ for Russia and comprised a battery of innovations in engaging 
with a rapidly developing middle-income country (MIC) through a demand-driven and flexible 
approach similar to those adopted for other sophisticated MIC clients.  The 2009 Progress Report 
reaffirmed the relevance of the CPS pillars, made adjustments to respond to the effects of the global 
financial and economic crisis, and extended the CPS through FY11.  Russia‘s partnership with the 
WBG is a good example of the ways in which WBG instruments can be used in an advanced MIC. 

2. 
Continued Shift to New Modalities of Cooperation.  The 2012-2016 CPS serves as a 
customized WBG business plan in support of Russia‘s own development strategy and continues the 
shift to innovative modalities of engagement at global, regional (i.e., Russia‘s close neighbors), and 
national (federal and sub-national) levels.  It aligns the WBG program with the emerging ―Russia 
Strategy 2020‖ update and other documents around which there is wide consensus that is expected to 
be continued after the upcoming parliamentary and presidential elections.  The proposed CPS is 
designed to be demand-driven and flexible, positioning the WBG for a swift and sustainable response 
to any changes in government priorities.  A CPS Progress Report in 2014 will take stock of 
implementation and will allow the WBG to make mid-term adjustments in the strategy to ensure 
continued alignment with government priorities.   

3. 
Consolidated WBG Support for Russia.  The proposed 2012-2016 CPS aims to consolidate 
WBG support for Russia through greater synergy among the WBG members—IBRD, IFC, and 
MIGA—in support of the Government‘s development goals in diversifying growth through more 
effective management of public finances, better investment climate, stronger financial sector 
development, more sustainable development, and maximizing Russia‘s human potential through 
better education, health, social protection, and social inclusion .  The CPS is also aligning the WBG 
work with the Government‘s efforts to improve governance and transparency through accountability 
in public administration, procurement and financial management.    

4. 
Russia and the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) Regional Strategy.  The ECA Regional 
Strategy aims at inclusive and sustainable globalization through a focus on competitiveness, 
inclusion, and climate change.  Moreover, the Regional Strategy recognizes Russia‘s role as a major 
donor and growth pole in the ECA region and focuses on additional opportunities to deepen the 
WBG‘s partnership with Russia, especially in response to the 2009 financial crisis.   This is also in 
line with the WBG global agenda and strategic themes, including the Post -Crisis Directions (PCD). 
In consequence, the CPS builds on and aims to support Russia‘s growing global and regional roles as 
an engine of growth in ECA, as a donor of development assistance , and as a major force in 
addressing global problems drawing on the WBG expertise in economic policy, development 
cooperation and global public goods.   

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

II.    RUSSIA: CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA 

Country Background and Political Context  

5. 
Russia is very large and resource-rich.  At 17 million square kilometers, Russia is the 
largest country in the world, covering more than one-eighth of the Earth‘s inhabited land area, 
spanning nine time zones and a wide range of landforms.  It is exceptionally rich in mineral, energy, 
forest, and water resources.  Russia accounts for almost a quarter of the world gas market, is one of 
the two largest oil producers, and the fourth largest producer of electricity.  Because of its rich 
resource base, Russia plays a crucial role in global energy and resource markets. With a population 
of 142.9 million people in 2011, Russia is the world‘s ninth most populous nation, including 140 
recognized nationalities and 40 ethnic groups.  Moscow, the capital of Russia, is the most populous 
city in Europe. 

6. 
Russia is a middle income country (MIC) that strives to move to a high income status.  
In the period since 2005, the per capita GDP of Russia doubled to approximately US$10,500 in 2010, 
and the country moved to an upper MIC status.  The current country context was formed in the 
course of a decade of turbulent adjustment following the transi tion from a centrally planned to a 
market economy and another decade of rapid economic growth driven largely by natural resources, 
interrupted by the 2008-2009 global financial and economic crisis.  As a result of a strong fiscal and 
monetary counter-cyclical package, the country emerged from the global recession with lower-than-
expected unemployment and poverty and has returned to moderate growth rates.  To escape the 
―middle income trap‖, Russia‘s government pursues economic policy and institutional development 
that aim to modernize, diversify, and increase the competitiveness of the economy and improve the 
well-being of its citizens. 

7. 
According to the 1993 Constitution, Russia is a democratic federal law-governed state 
with a republican form of government, comprising 83 federal subjects.  The Federal Assembly is 
a two-chamber legislature: the lower house, the State Duma, has 450 deputies elected by proportional 
representation; and the upper house, the Federation Council, has 178 nominated deputies, two from 
each of Russia‘s 83 republics and regions.  The most important political parties currently represented 
in the Duma are: United Russia, the Communist Party of the Russian Federation (CPRF), Just Russia, 
and the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia (LDPR).   

8. 
The next parliamentary elections will be held on December 4, 2011, to be followed by 
presidential elections on March 4, 2012.  President Dmitry Medvedev came to power in March 
2008 and appointed Prime Minister Vladimir Putin.  This ruling tandem has operated well since then.  
According to recent polls, the approval ratings for both the president and prime minister remain high, 
albeit lower than in 2010.  The ruling party, United Russia, dominates the State Duma by holding 
315 seats.  The 2011 parliamentary elections will be the sixth in the history of modern -day Russia.  
Vladimir Putin announced that he will run for president.  According to latest public opinion polls, the 
political situation is not likely to change significantly after the elections, with the four leading parties 
retaining their dominance in the Duma.    

9. 
Russia plays an important role as an emerging donor.  It is working on becoming a 
significant provider of development assistance and is taking the lead in hosting conferences on 
cutting-edge development issues.  With these efforts Russia strives to integrate itself into the 
international aid architecture in line with OECD-DAC principles.  Russia as a donor already 
demonstrates strong support for the multilateral development system .  This includes a 65 percent 

2 

 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

increase in its IDA contribution during the most recent replenishment and a growing portfolio of 
IDA/IBRD-administered trust funds for the benefit of poor developing countries.  Befitting its weight 
at the ECA regional level, Russia plans to further consolidate its enhanced role as donor by 
strengthening the institutional framework through the creation of a bilateral aid agency. 

Recent Economic Developments and Prospects  

10. 
Russia has weathered the global crisis well despite the massive oil and capital account 
shocks.  This was mainly because of the large pre-crisis fiscal reserves and fiscal surpluses that 
allowed the Government to mount a large countercyclical stimulus package in support of the 
financial system, enterprises, and households.  Despite a large drop in real GDP in 2009 (-7.8 
percent), an acute liquidity crisis, and a sharp increase in unemployment, the crisis was managed 
without systemic bank failures, and the economic and labor market conditions began to improve 
during 2009 in line with the rise in oil prices and the recovery in domestic demand and credit.  Large 
increases in public sector wages and pensions cushioned the impact on the middle class and the poor, 
making the social impact less severe than it would otherwise have been.  With the cyclical demand 
recovery in the global and Russian economies as well as energy commodities, Russia‘s real GDP 
grew 4 percent, and unemployment fell 2 percentage points from its peak during the crisis to 7.2 
percent at the end of 2010. 

11. 
Following a cyclical recovery of oil prices, economic activity and employment during 
2010, Russia’s current macroeconomic situation remains favorable.  After a 4 percent growth in 
2010, the Russian economy continues to expand in an environment of declining unemployment (6.5 
percent in July 2011) and inflation, rising domestic consumption, and still high oil prices.  All sectors 
of the economy are growing and domestic consumption––while less buoyant than anticipated––
increasingly acts as an engine of demand growth (Figure 1).  With good harvest and favorable food 
price outlook, annual inflation is expected to end at around 7.5 percent in 2011, somewhat higher 
than the Government‘s target of 6-7 percent, but lower than at any time in recent years.  The federal 
budget is likely to be in near-balance in 2011.  A large current account surplus of almost US$70 
billion significantly exceeds the deficit in the capital account, which will allow the Central Bank to 
accumulate additional reserves. 

Figure 1: Demand Structure of Russia’s Real GDP Growth (percent) 

     Source: World Bank‘s Russian Economic Report No. 26: Growing Risks (September 15, 2011).  

12. 
Yet the risks to the global economy are growing and so are risks to Russia’s growth. 
Reflecting the slowdown in major developed economies, and rising risks associated with the 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

European debt crisis during the summer of 2011, the WBG‘s outlook for Russia‘s real GDP growth 
was revised to 4 percent in 2011 (down from 4.4 percent earlier in the year), and to 3.8 percent in 
2012.  This is predicated on the lower oil price outlook for Russia (Figure 2) and the global economy 
growing at more moderate rates, especially high income countries. 

Figure 2: World Bank Oil Price Forecast for Average Crude: 

Brent, Dubai, and West Texas Intermediate (WTI), simple average, US$/barrel 

125 

100 

75 

50 

25 

97.0 

79.0 

61.8 

103.0 

94.7 

92.5 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

    Source: Global Prospects Group. 

13. 
Beyond this favorable short-term picture lie heightened vulnerabilities of the Russian 
budget and long-standing structural issues.  First, there is the large non-oil fiscal deficit of about 
11 percent of GDP, compared with the sustainable 4.5 percent level.  Second, with much smaller 
fiscal reserves than before 2008, Russia‘s budget is now more vulnerable to a new, sustained drop in 
oil prices.  Third, Russia faces major structural problems in the medium term, including the need to 
significantly improve the investment climate, close large infrastructure gaps, diversify its export, tax, 
and broader economic base, improve governance, and strengthen institutions. 

14. 
In the baseline medium-term scenario, the Russian economy is expected to grow at 
moderate rates (Table 1). This forecast is based on the expected slowdown in global economic 
growth and a lower global demand for commodities and oil in particular than was the case just a few 
months ago.  It also incorporates the latest draft budget parameters for the federal budget 2012 -14, 
featuring very gradual adjustment and a gradual progress with structural reforms in the areas of 
public sector reforms, governance, and transparency.  Oil prices are now projected to gradually 
decline from US$103 per barrel in 2011 to US$88.5 per barrel in 2015.  With lower oil prices and 
global demand in the medium term and the closure of the output gap, the Russian economy would 
gradually slow from 4 percent growth in 2011 to a more sustainable pace of about 3.5 percent in 
2013-2015.  Real GDP expansion will be increasingly driven by domestic consumption, with 
investment demand also increasing at a slightly higher annual rate than real GDP.  Meanwhile, the 
negative contribution of net exports is likely to increase during the projection period with a 
deteriorating external current account but with continued, sizeable levels of international reserves. 

15. 
The fiscal situation is projected to remain stable in the short term but medium term-
fiscal adjustment is necessary for Russia to ensure long-term fiscal sustainability.  The new plan 
for fiscal consolidation is likely to be much less ambitious than previously announced while the 
widely debated reintroduction of a fiscal rule could be delayed until after 2015.  This is reflected in 
the recently announced draft budget plan for 2012-2014.  As a result, the consolidated budget will 
remain in deficit of about 1.6 percent of GDP in 2012-2015, while non-oil deficit will decline only 
marginally to about 10 percent of GDP in 2014 from 11 percent in 2011.  With low public debt and 
limited deficit, no significant financing issues arise, and the Government plans to finance the deficit 
from predominantly domestic borrowing.  Strategic, limited external borrowing, especially in the 
case of new drops in oil prices and fiscal revenues, is possible in 2012 -15.  In case of significant and 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

sustained drop in oil prices (e.g., to an average of US$60 per barrel over a period of one year), 
Russia‘s budget deficit could increase to about 5.5 percent of GDP, resulting in the need for rapid 
adjustment and financing (See Annex 2 for the implications of downside risks).  At the same time, 
the quality of the composition of public expenditures should be improved towards more productive 
expenditures, especially public investments in infrastructure, which has been identified as a key 
constraint of the investment climate and growth. 

Table 1:  Medium-Term Macroeconomic Prospects (Baseline Scenario) 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015 

National Accounts 

Real GDP growth rate, % 

Annual average GDP, billion US$ 

4.0 

1.76 

3.8 

1.94 

3.5 

2.08 

3.5 

2.19 

3.5 

2.29 

Fiscal Balance (general gov't) 

BoP 

% of GDP 

-0.2 

-1.6 

-1.5 

-1.6 

-1.7 

Balance on Current Account, % GDP 

3.8 

1.1 

0.1 

-0.3 

-0.8 

Gross reserves [incl. gold] million US$ 

513,028 

528,478 

533,683 

533,443 

518,664 

Memo: average oil price, US$/bbl 

103.00 

94.70 

92.50 

90.50 

88.50 

Relative Prices: CPI, annual average, % 

7.5 

6.5 

5.0 

5.0 

4.5 

Note: For more details, see Table 2 in Annex 2. 

16. While inflation is on a downward trend, sustained monetary restraint will be required 
to bring it down to low single digit levels in the medium term .  Although CPI inflation is on a 
downward trend, this has been mainly because of the seasonal decline in food prices.  Core inflation, 
excluding food and energy, has proven resilient to the monetary tightening so far.  On the assumption 
of a sustained disinflation policy, CPI inflation is projected, in the baseline, to gradually fall to 4.5 
percent in 2015 from the projected 7.5 percent in 2011.  External shocks due to food and energy 
prices and/or return of capital inflows as well as inflation inertia and institutional and structural 
factors (e.g., periodic increases in utility prices), however, could make disinflation mo re difficult. 

17. 
Some depreciation of the real effective exchange rate can be expected.  Given the current 
exchange rate policy (managed float moving to a fully flexible regime) and the deterioration of the 
external current account and the overall balance of payments position, the real effective exchange 
rate is expected to depreciate by an average of around 3 percent a year beginning in 2013.  Both 
upside and downside risks remain, mostly related to the volatility in oil prices and capital flows. 

18. 
Finally, on the structural reform front, the Russian economy is facing multiple, long-
term challenges.  These include, first and foremost, improving the investment climate, addressing 
the large infrastructure gaps, diversifying Russia‘s tax, export and broader economic base, and 
strengthening governance and institutions.  In each of these areas, Russia scores comparatively low 
on many measures of performance, especially for a very large middle -income country aspiring to 
achieve high-income status within the next decade.  These challenges underpin the Government‘s 
broader modernization agenda and the ongoing broad consultative discussions about the country‘s 
revised Strategy 2020.  The extent to which these long-term challenges are met will determine the 
longer-term dynamics of the Russian economy, its catch-up with developed countries, and its ability 
to improve the living standards of its citizens. 

5 

 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

Development Challenges and Opportunities 

A.    Growth and Diversification 

19. 
The dominant concern for Russia’s economic model remains the dependency on fossil 
fuel production and exports and the associated challenge of using hydrocarbon revenues 
effectively and efficiently.  Russia is a global energy powerhouse.  It is the world‘s largest exporter 
of natural gas and the second largest oil exporter.  Energy resources combined with stronger social 
and economic policies have resulted in rapid social and economic progress during 2002 -2008 and 
allowed it to weather the global crisis well .  At the same time, however, as in many other major 
hydrocarbon producers, these resources are also the source of many of its development challenges.  
Relative to its structural endowments and trade potential, Russia appears to be under -exporting.  
Only approximately 9 percent of total exports in 2009 were accounted for by high -tech exports, 
mainly from the defense industry.  There has been some shift to services over the years but the 
economic structure is dominated by large corporations with concentration in natural resources and 
low value added industries, while contributions from the SME sector are limited.  The financial 
sector remains underdeveloped in terms of its capacity to mobilize and intermediate savings and is 
vulnerable to fluctuations in commodity prices and capital flows. Capital markets are inadequately 
developed and gaps exist in the oversight of the banking system.   

20. 
Russian businesses are often inefficient and tend to operate at low levels of technology 
and knowledge.  Russia‘s product base has narrowed considerably over the past decade.  In 
manufacturing, value-added per worker is similar to that of workers in China and India, but when 
labor costs are accounted for, overall productivity is lower.  State-owned enterprises are present in 
more sectors of the economy than in any OECD country bar Poland.  These enterprises also account 
for around 17 percent of total employment.  Competition and the institutional and policy framework 
provide insufficient pressure or incentives to stimulate innovation.  A difficult environment for the 
financial system leads to deficiencies in new company formation.  External know-how transfers are 
limited with gross FDI inflows from 2005-2010 averaging a low 1.5 percent of GDP, with only 21 
percent of these funds going to non-energy manufacturing. 

21. 
Russia, as the largest country in the world by land area, faces significant challenges in 
development of its regions as average numbers for the country mask huge regional variations.  
Large and dynamic cities with high growth rates such as Moscow and St. Petersburg are highly 
congested and create substantial problems for urban transport management, while outside these cities 
poverty levels and unemployment can reach significantly high levels.  According to Rosstat, the 
average level of unemployment from November 2010 to January 2011 varied from only 1.4 percent 
in Moscow to 47.5 percent in the Republic of Ingushetia.  Headcount poverty rates (2008) ranged 
from 38 percent in Kalmykia (in the south) to 7.4 percent in oil-rich Khanty-Mansiysk.  Providing 
access to infrastructure of comparable quality is a principal development objective of the Federation, 
yet is also a significant challenge given its huge size. 

22. 
To provide a platform for future economic growth, despite its vulnerability to 
commodity price volatility, Russia needs to maintain stable macroeconomic conditions and 
create a diversified, efficient and sustainable product base.  Specific challenges that the 
Government faces include (i) the achievement of fiscal consolidation and a reduction of the non -oil 
deficit, (ii) promotion of innovation and SME growth to diversify revenue sources away from the oil 
and gas sector and generate employment, (iii) reforms to strengthen a vulnerable financial system, 
and (iv) the provision of sufficient investment in construction, maintenance and rehabilitation of 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

economic infrastructure while exercising sustainable environmental management.  The Russian 
Government has been working to address these challenges, always keeping the development of the 
regions in mind. 

23. 
Russia has a strong interest in continuing to improve efficiency and effectiveness of 
public financial management.  Among other measures, the Government already introduced a three 
year budget framework, implemented legal and institutional mechanisms for monitoring sub -national 
public finance and Treasury principles of budget execution, created budget authority at the municipal 
level, and adopted legislation on insolvency of budgets of the regions.  In late 2010 and 2011, Russia 
experienced large oil windfalls.  Rising public expenditure commitments—including on the military, 
public sector wages, and pensions—are threatening to undermine fiscal and overall macroeconomic 
stability.  The Government needs to substantially improve its long-term fiscal position by 
rationalizing public expenditures, managing the effects on public finances of an aging population, 
creating fiscal space for productive infrastructure spending, returning to an explicit fiscal rule, and 
broadening the tax base.  

24. 
The Government has renewed and stepped up efforts to improve the business 
environment.  Over the past few years these efforts have included the reduction of the burden of 
regulatory compliance on business, particularly in dealing with licensing and inspections at the sub -
national level, systematic monitoring of business environment indicators at the level of the regions, 
strengthening the enforcement of competition regulations , automating key administrative processes 
concerning business (e-filing of taxes), and stemming the proliferation of new regulations through 
the introduction of regulatory impact assessments.  Despite the promising recent initiatives aiming at 
improving the business climate, perception indicators of the business environment remain poor.  
Russia ranks 120th among 183 economies in the 2012 Doing Business report.  Government efforts 
now focus on streamlining key regulatory processes (e.g. , issuance of licenses and permits) and 
monitoring administrative corruption affecting business at the level of the regions, where most 
regulatory processes occur.  See further details in Annex 3. 

25. 
The Russian Government is prepared to address existing weaknesses in the financia l 
system.  Prudential and non-prudential supervision requires strengthening through an improved 
regulatory framework in line with the G20 objectives.  In particular, the Central Bank of Russia 
needs supervisory powers for several areas to mitigate banking sector risks.  Also, financial system 
assets are concentrated in the banking sector where loan quality may be overestimated and the level 
of provisions is still lower than it should be.  The breadth and depth of the equity, bond and 
investment fund markets remain well below capacity.  Russia‘s capital markets also face deficiencies 
in market infrastructure (clearing and settlement) and a small institutional and retail investor base.  
The issues in the banking system and capital markets mean that there are p roblems in access to 
finance.  The lack of access to finance is an obstacle for micro, small and medium firms, but is a 
particularly significant obstacle for medium and large firms .  Structural obstacles to an enhanced 
access to finance remain to be addressed. 

26. 
The Government regards infrastructure as a key development constraint with estimates 
for necessary investments at about US$1 trillion until 2020 .  According to a joint Bank/IFC study, 
Russia‘s potential energy savings are roughly equal to the annual primary energy consumption of 
France.  Russia‘s transport infrastructure is generally poor and has been declining because of 
underinvestment in maintenance and rehabilitation.  Major weaknesses are evident in the quantity, 
quality and institutions of several large infrastructure sectors.  Upgrading Russia‘s infrastructure 
would require not only significant investments but also a strengthening of the country‘s institutional 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

framework.  Russia‘s environmental management suffers from poor governance and sometimes 
obsolete management practices.  Environmental quality and control are poor for a majority of 
Russians living in the country‘s population centers.  This has detrimental effects not only for those 
peoples‘ well-being but also a significant negative impact on Russia‘s economy.  

B.   Skills and Social Services 

27. 
The Russian Federation has made significant achievements in social and human capital 
development.  The most notable achievements are in the areas of universal primary education, 
equality for women, eradication of extreme poverty and malnutrition, lowering child and maternal 
mortality, and reaching very high levels of higher education enrollment.  With t hese achievements, 
the Russian Government is increasingly focusing its strategies on moving Russia closer to the level 
of achievements of other G8/OECD countries.  In light of these ambitious goals, despite the 
impressive achievements to date, Russia is facing new challenges that w ill be critical to address if the 
government goals under the updated Strategy 2020 are to be achieved. 

28. While general poverty levels have fallen sharply since the early 2000s, vulnerability to 
poverty remains a concern.  Poverty rates are declining but remain significant with more than 18.5 
million Russians living in poverty in 2010.  Chronic poverty is now at about 7 percent, but the 
relatively high vulnerability to poverty affects about a quarter of the population (some 37 million 
people)3.  Efficiency in social spending, better targeting of social programs, as well as new transfers 
will be of critical importance in the future, especially with Russia‘s efforts to reduce the fiscal deficit 
and its exposure to changes in oil prices.  Social protection is the largest budget item (55 percent) 
within the social expenditures4.  Up to one quarter of social support beneficiaries are not poor.  
Furthermore, some of the social programs are suffering from low quality and weak integration with 
active policies that will bring people into jobs and out of poverty or social care.  As Russia continues 
to develop, social transfers and programs will take up an increasing share of the national budget as in 
other OECD countries.  Thus, enhancing its efficiency will be paramount as will be improving the 
quality of care and social programs. 

29. 
Demographic and health trends are characterized by low fertility, high adult mortality 
and morbidity rates, and inefficient health spending, in addition to a rising pressure on 
pensions.  The demographic profile of the Russian Federation shows a shrinking and aging 
population.  Average male life expectancy in Russia is only 62.8 years (13.8 years less th an the EU 
average), as opposed to 74.7 for women (7.9 years less than the EU average).  The excess mortality is 
overwhelmingly attributable to cardiovascular diseases, cancer, alcohol poisoning, as well as injuries 
due to traffic accidents.  According to Rosstat estimates, the working age population size will 
decrease by 10.4 million between 2011 and 2025, which is a major challenge for the Russian 
economy.  Labor force shortages are expected to be compensated through labor immigration.  
Progress has been made in the fight against AIDS/HIV and TB.  Still, Russia is among the 10 
countries with the highest multi-drug resistant TB burden in the world.  Furthermore, the Russian 
health system suffers from poor quality and inefficient spending with limited resources flowing to 
preventive care and an excessive amount of resources going to the hospital sector .  Despite these 
challenges, Russia‘s total health expenditures is only 5.4 percent of GDP compared to an OECD 
average of 8.8 percent.  Health indicators generally remain low in an international perspective and 

3 2004-2006 Household budget data.  A household with consumption below the poverty line for three consecutive years is 
considered chronically poor. 
4 Publicly financed programs in education, health, culture, mass media, sport, and social protection . 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

when compared to countries with similar levels of development.  Given the relative low retirement 
age and the aging population, the fiscal burden arising from pensions will continue to grow. 

30. 
Skill mismatches in the labor market are turning into an increas ingly important 
development constraint.  Professional education and the renewal of skills for labor market entrants 
as well as existing workers are critical for adopting new technologies, diversifying the economy , and 
improving productivity levels.  The latest EBRD-World Bank Business Environment and Enterprise 
Performance Survey (BEEPS) ranks skills as the number one concern for businesses in Russia.  This 
is further exemplified by the fact that excess labor market capacity appears to have been exhausted.  
Combined with the changes to the demographics of the Russian population, this indicates a serious 
and tightening bottleneck in the economy with regard to the provision of skilled workers, the quality 
of higher education5 and the renewal of skills within the existing labor force.  Labor force shortages 
resulting from demographic trends make the Russian economy dependent on immigrant labor.  The 
Russian Government is undertaking steps to attract more highly skilled immigrants to the country 
and is currently developing a scheme of organized recruitment of migrant workers.  During 1999-
2007, Russian GDP grew by an average of 7 percent annually with labor productivity growing an 
average of 6 percent per year accounting for 2/3 of the expansion in per capita GDP.  Both female 
and male employment rates are below the EU average.  The Russian Government is aware of the 
challenges which are to be addressed in the updated Strategy 2020.  See further details in Annex 4. 

31. 
The country’s strong economic recovery and downward poverty trends belie significant 
challenges of inequality and social exclusion.  Since Russia began its transition from a planned 
economy to a market economy some 20 years ago, economic growth has been steady and GDP per 
capita has increased threefold.  Inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient rose significantly, 
however, from 28.9 to 42.2 between 1992 and 2009.  Social stresses have been similarly magnified.   
Given that federal spending on social services in 2007-2008 already accounted for about 17 percent 
of GDP, or half of total federal spending6, and was further increased by around 1.3 percent of GDP in 
2009 and 2.2 percent of GDP in 2010, effectively addressing the issues of inequality and social 
exclusion will require an alternative preventative approach that can tackle the root causes of these 
issues. 

32. 
The sharp disparities in development and living standards among Russia’s regions 
require a differentiated policy approach.  Russia‘s achievements conceal huge variations among 
regions in the level of social spending and poverty rates.  For example, 82 percent of preschool 
education is financed through local government budgets, and therefore poorer regions will be more 
disadvantaged in their capacity to finance preschool education than richer regions.  Substantial 
differences among Russia‘s regions are also apparent in per student spending and in the quality of 
education at the primary and secondary education level 7.  Finally, vulnerable children including those 
with mental or physical disabilities and those who are infected with HIV suffer from educational 
exclusion.  Addressing these variations among the regions across the human development spectrum 
will be critical for maintaining the path of achievements and calls for a more differentiate d approach 
to policies and interventions. 

5 Russia places only 43rd in the country rankings compiled by OECD regarding readiness of the country‘s educational system for 
the knowledge economy.  It lags behind both developed and developing countries (Singapore (#1), India (#7), Czech Republic, 
Romania, Hungary, Estonia, Lithuania). 
6 The health and education sectors accounted for roughly 4 percent of GDP each, while social protection (insurance and social 
assistance) accounted for about 9 percent of GDP. 
7 In the worst-performing region, 29 percent of students did not pass a single subject in the 2008/09 Unified State Examination, 
while in the best-performing region only 3 percent of students failed to pass. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

C.    Russia’s Global and Regional Role  

33. 
Russia’s national choices have critical impact on regional and global challenges.  Russia 
is one of ECA‘s regional engines of growth, both as the major destination of exports and migrant 
labor from the CIS countries.  The Russian Government wants to support economic integration 
within the CIS, including the creation of a common migration space and common labor market, but 
also has to grapple with social integration and adaptation of labor immigrants.  The Russian territory 
contains about 22 percent of the world‘s undisturbed ecosystems.  These have global value and 
significance for biodiversity protection, carbon storage and sequestration, and other critically 
important environmental functions.  Strengthening forestry governance and management is 
particularly critical.  The country‘s forests are at risk from forest fire, pest and disease outbreaks, and 
low rates of reforestation.  Further strengthening of the national system for weather forecasting, 
hydro-meteorological services and climate monitoring remains a high priority for the Government as 
the impact of climate change is expected to increase the frequency of extreme and hazardous weather 
events.  Due to the large-scale economic development and climate warming in recent decades, 
Russia‘s remote Arctic areas have become more accessible, resulting in a significant increase in 
human activities.  This has led to more pressures on the pristine but fragile environment in the Arctic 
zone.  

34. 
At the ECA regional level, Russia has become a prominent emerging donor.  Over the 
last CPS period, it has implemented an ambitious development assistance program with significant 
contributions.  With the approval of 75 percent of the population according to a 2010 WBG-managed 
opinion survey by the Levada Center, Russia will focus its assistance on LICs and lower-income 
MICs in ECA where it has many social and economic ties, and will also become active in other LICs.  
As a member of the Eurasian Economic Community, it initiated the establishment of a regional 
multilateral mechanism (EurAsEC Anti-Crisis Fund) administered by EDB to help deal with crisis 
related challenges in affected EurAsEC countries.  Russian lead agencies have developed an 
understanding of the complexity of development aid communications and a sense of urgency for 
more active work in ensuring adequate information in support of Russian development aid.  The 
Russian Government now plans to create a stronger institutional framework for development aid.  It 
wants to set up a new bilateral development aid agency and enhance capacity within existing public 
agencies through better staffing, increased staff training, and development of expert potential. 

35. 
At the global level, Russia has made important steps toward deeper integration into the 
international community.  Russia is already a member of the G8, G20, and APEC.  It is also 
making significant progress toward becoming a member of the OECD and the WTO.  To reach its 
full potential as a prominent member of these global institutions, the Russian Government would like 
to employ the whole array of available policy instruments.  Yet, with regard to the area of global 
public goods, where Russia is showing special interest in decisive issues like financial stability and 
food security, the Department for International Financial Relations in the Ministry of Finance is 
understaffed and the Government needs to strengthen the institutional structures and technical 
expertise necessary to provide effective leadership.   

D.   Governance and Transparency 

36. 
In recent years, the Government of Russia has completed or initiated a number of 
major reforms in the public sector.  These efforts were intended to ensure sound management of 
public resources, create a more favorable business environment, and enhance public service delivery.  

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

Still, many challenges remain.  Annex 5 analyzes recent developments and their impact, the ma in 
challenges, and the Government‘s current strategies for improving public sector governance.   

37. 
Improving effectiveness and efficiency of public administration has been a high priority 
for the Russian Government in the last decade.  The Government has undertaken a major effort to 
clarify and delineate functions between levels of executive government and establish local self -
government.  The Government also launched a broad set of public sector reforms in areas such as 
civil service, budget process, and public administration.  Some of these reforms, however, were only 
partially implemented and are not fully visible to the average citizen.  The reforms are yet to translate 
into tangible and noticeable improvements in the quality and effectiveness of public administration in 
the eyes of the citizens and businesses.  Government functions and civil service staff kept growing 
between 2004 and 2010.  Government regulation is seen as excessive and often ineffective.  Public 
services are heavily embedded in traditional administrative arrangements, which often encourage 
corruption and are burdensome for citizens and businesses. 

38. 
Corruption has been recognized as one of the major obstacles for investments and 
growth.  In response, the Government has embarked on a comprehensive anti-corruption program.  
Anti-corruption efforts have received new impetus in recent years under the leadersh ip of  President 
Medvedev.  A Federal Anti-corruption Law and National Anticorruption Plan have been adopted and 
civil servants are required to declare their assets.  Surveys of corruption perceptions show that Russia 
continues to lag relative to the ECA region and in global terms.  The Government has made reform of 
the state contracting systems a key priority.  Reported unofficial payments to obtain public 
procurement contracts were relatively high (BEEPS 2008), with 30 percent of firms reporting having 
made such payments, amounting to an average 11.5 percent of the value of the contract.  Some 
improvements have been made, including introducing e-procurement through a single government 
portal, and according to Rosstat, competition in public procurement tenders has increased (average 
number of bidders in electronic auctions increased from seven in 2007 to 26 in 2009). 

39. 
The judiciary is viewed as weak despite some improvements in recent years.  Some high 
profile court cases have caused international concern about the full independence of the criminal 
justice system.  However, according to surveys by the Levada Center, citizens‘ confidence in the 
courts rose from 45 percent in 2006 to 64 percent in 2010.  According to the latest Business 
Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS), the share of firms using the legal system 
increased from 27 percent in 2005 to 43 percent in 2008, while only 3 percent of the companies 
surveyed reported corrupt practices.  Two areas stand out for continued state attention in the judicial 
system: (i) continuing the trend towards greater transparency and efficiency in the functioning of 
courts (through investments in information technology and disseminating information to citizens on 
judicial decisions and the functioning of courts), and (ii) strengthening the enforcement of judicial 
and administrative procedures through the bailiff system, ensuring efficiency, transparency and 
integrity. 

40. 
A further dimension of Russia’s governance challenge is to reduce the growing disparity 
among the regions.  The disparity is manifested in the lower human development indicators in rural 
areas.  Part of this will involve streamlining and targeting of federal support programs.  Sub-national 
governments (especially in less developed, lower-capacity regions) will also need assistance and 
effective incentives to implement the Government‘s reform agenda, with a focus on improving 
service delivery and investment (public and private) in infrastructure.  In poor performing regions 
special incentives and investment to build more basic capabilities may be needed.  Migration to 
major dynamic urban centers should not be discouraged.   

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

41. 
The challenge in the delivery of public services is to become both more efficient and 
more citizen/business oriented.  This would contribute to business confidence and citizen 
satisfaction in an environment of fiscal restraint.  Continued modernization of public service delivery 
across tiers and branches of government is designed to meet growing public expectations of user -
friendly public services and to achieve efficiency savings.  At the federal, regional , and local levels, 
the Government needs to expand new service delivery modalities, including the use of e-governance 
applications, use of service standards, administrative complaints procedures , and client feedback 
mechanisms.  Such initiatives should target important development constraints, such as the time 
required to complete land registration and issue of construction permits and business licenses. 

The Russian Federation Strategy 2020 Update 

42. 
The 2012-2016 CPS is aligned with the Russian Government’s own vision for 
development as laid out in the update of Russia Strategy 2020.  On November 17, 2008, the 
Government of the Russian Federation approved the “Concept of Long-Term Social and Economic 
Development of the Russian Federation through 2020”8.  The Government at the federal and regional 
levels was to follow the provisions of the Concept when preparing target documents, plans and 
statistics characterizing their activity.  The Concept was implemented as part of Russia‘s strategy to 
develop its economy into one of the world's top five economies and, along with this, to establish 
itself as a leader in technological innovation and global energy infrastructure, as well as a major 
international financial center.  By establishing itself as one of the leading economic powers, Russia 
could also continue to improve domestic living conditions to the level of developed countries and 
safeguard its national economic interests.  More than a narrow domestic strategy, the long-term 
strategy aimed to place Russia in an international context as part of the world‘s community to use 
international economic integration for achieving its domestic economic goals. 

43. 
Russia’s long-term economic development strategy to the year 2020 envisaged three 
stages.  The basic tasks and directions during each of these stages were identified as follows: 
 First stage (2008~2012): Prepare the institutional mechanisms needed to bring about 
economic reform, modernize the education and public health sectors, and commence 
projects related to the development of high technology and infrastructure 
 Second stage (2013~2017): Move towards an economy based on new technologies such 
as information and communications, biotechnology, and nanotechnology 
 Third stage (2018~): Strengthen the status of Russia in scientific research and 
development, and stabilize and develop an innovative economic system 

44. 
Development of resources and expansion of production infrastructure were the main 
tasks that Russia had to address.  The main tasks suggested as part of the long-term economic 
development strategy for the economic sector included development of Russia‘s regions and  human 
resources, improvement of the business and investment environment, development of innovative 
national systems, diversification of industries, increase of the competitiveness in the high technology 
sector, development of infrastructure, and development of potential resources. 

45. 
In January 2011, the Government initiated the preparation of an update of the Strategy 
based on the experience that had been gained during the global financial crisis.  The update of 

8 A detailed description of the November 2008 “Concept of Long-Term Social and Economic Development of the 
Russian Federation through 2020” is included in the 2009 CPS for Russia as Annex 2. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

Strategy 2020 aims to better address the post-crisis economic challenges facing the country and 
reflect post-recessionary realities of the world.  The updated strategy aims to take into account the 
new reality and provide solutions to the new challenges of economic modernization and overhaul of 
the social security system and public administration .  The key themes of the Strategy 2020 update 
are: new growth model, preconditions for growth, new social policy, balanced infrastructure 
development, and effective state.  See further details in Annex 6.    

46. 
The selected country level outcomes to which the CPS will contribute are well aligned 
with the Strategy 2020 thematic areas and objectives.  Some of the key Strategy 2020 themes and 
sub-themes are strongly supported by the CPS results framework, and ongoing and planned WBG 
engagements are envisaged to contribute to the achievement of these outputs and milestones.  Annex 
6 presents the alignment of the country development outcomes to which the CPS will contribute to 
the key themes of the emerging Strategy 2020 update.  The WBG engagements in energy efficiency 
and environmental management are aligned with ongoing sectoral strategies and programs, and 
supporting Russia as a donor is an ongoing engagement aligned with the 2007 Concept of Russia‘s 
Participation in International Development Assistance as indicated below.   

III.  WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR RUSSIA 

A. 

LESSONS LEARNED FROM FY07-11 CPS AND STAKEHOLDER FEEDBACK 

Lessons from FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

47. 
The previous CPS together with the CPS Progress Report covered the period FY07 -
FY11 and focused on maximizing the leverage of WBG international knowledge in its 
operations.  The WBG program brought its knowledge assets to bear at three levels: global (for 
Russia as a donor); national (for institutional and policy change) , and sub-national (targeting Russian 
regions).  The strategic pillars, as rephrased by the CPS Progress Report, were (i) diversifying the 
economy for sustainable development and growth, (ii) improving public sector management and 
performance, (iii) improving delivery of communal and social services, and (iv) enhancing Russia‘s 
global role.  The CPS Completion Report (see Annex 7) rated the WBG-supported program and 
WBG performance as satisfactory but considered the overall design of the results framework with 15 
outcome clusters and 44 milestones as unsuitable for an advanced MIC with highly sophisticated and 
fast changing demands.  It highlighted that a new partnership strategy should be flexible and 
demand-driven, built on principles of engagement rather than transactions tied to a rigid results 
matrix. 

48. With respect to Russia’s country development goals the CPS was fully adequate until 
the global financial crisis hit yet also flexible enough to allow the WBG to react swiftly to the 
dangers posed by the crisis.  The CPS was designed to support the Government‘s efforts to sustain 
robust growth for poverty reduction and higher living standards.  The WBG targeted binding 
constraints to growth within the Government‘s 2006-2008 strategy, including supporting policies for 
macroeconomic management, competition and diversification, investmen t climate, and infrastructure 
development.  The WBG supported significant public financial management (PFM) reforms and all 
elements of public administration reform.  In extending communal and social services, the WBG 
focused on housing, health, and education.  In supporting Russia‘s global role, the WBG 
concentrated its support on the development of a Russian Official Development Assistance (ODA) 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

strategy and the realization of expanded donor activities in line with the country‘s strategic vision.  
The CPS Progress Report in 2009 reoriented WBG policy and program focus on vulnerabilities 
facing households and the banking system as a result of the crisis.  It also revisited the Government‘s 
borrowing requirements for crisis recovery, fiscal consolidation, and infrastructure investments to 
serve anti-crisis and longer-term growth objectives. 

49. WBG lending during the period FY07-FY11 was modest in relation to the size of the 
Russian economy.  For the CPS period, new IBRD lending amounted to US$385 million.  The CPS 
Progress Report in 2009 authorized new borrowing of up to US$4 billion, including US$2 billion for 
budget support, but in the end the Russian Government preferred to borrow from capital markets.  
Since FY07, the IBRD portfolio has shrunk from 22 to 13 projects (US$1.206 billion as of June 30, 
2011) with overall satisfactory portfolio quality - with two exceptions.  On the other hand, 
Reimbursable TA/Fee-Based Services (40 completed and signed projects for about US$20 million) 
and sub-national lending (nine loans for US$162 million) emerged as new business lines.  IFC 
invested more than US$4.2 billion in 105 projects, of which US$1.3 billion was mobilized from 
partner financial institutions.  IFC‘s disbursed and outstanding portfolio in Russia as of June 30, 2011 
was US$2 billion, representing 6.3 percent of IFC‘s global portfolio.  An additional US$530 million 
is committed and undisbursed.  IFC portfolio quality remained high throughout the period FY07 -
FY11, with no crisis-related NPLs.  Russia is MIGA's largest net exposure almost entirely 
concentrated in Russia's financial sector. 

50. 
A principal finding of the CPS Completion Report is that the WBG increased its 
relevance in an advanced MIC based on global knowledge.  A culture of innovation and the 
flexibility to address fast-changing, sophisticated demands by the Government turned out to be key 
qualities for a successful WBG engagement with Russia.  Demand for IBRD fee -based knowledge 
services (FBS) doubled during the period and was applied to programs a t the global, national, and 
sub-national levels.  IFC was also able to offer new products tailored to changing market conditions 
while maintaining a strong investment program; these include risk management and non -performing 
loan advisory services, platforms for resolution of distressed assets and the scaling up of the Global 
Trade Finance Program. 

51. 
To remain relevant in advanced MICs, the WBG should innovate constantly. For this 
purpose, the WBG needs to maintain monitoring and analysis of cutting-edge policy issues.  The 
satisfactory rating for the WBG‘s performance is based both on CPS outcomes and on innovation.  
The WBG created a new platform for dialogue based on global knowledge.  Multiple areas remain 
where international knowledge can bring Russia further economic and efficiency gains.  Procurement 
and innovation policies are prime examples. 

52. With limited resources relative to the size of the country, the WBG should aim to 
maximize its development impact through deepened direct engagement in Russia’s regions.  
Experimentation in the regions influences national policy.  Demand-based delivery of global 
knowledge in the regions created a feedback loop for federal policy change.  While the development 
of RTA/FBS is extremely positive, the WBG should not overlook the needs of poorer regions.  Not 
surprisingly, most demand for FBS comes from wealthier regions.  A lending operation for the 
Northern Caucasus (the least advanced region) is under development, which will test the applicability 
of WBG‘s instruments under those local conditions.  Federal guarantees for sub-national lending and 
a lack of funds in less advanced regions to pay for RTAs are hurdles to be addressed by the federal 
authorities.  Also going forward, the WBG needs to make instruments as flexible as possible for 
diverse development needs in Russia‘s regions. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

53. 
The broadening of the global development community is an opportunity to ―modernize 
multilateralism‖.  The implications of making donor capacity-building a separate CPS pillar go 
beyond the Russia program, and beyond the World Bank Group as an institution.  The accession of 
advanced MICs like Russia to the ranks of development aid donors is beginning to change the 
international aid architecture with the sharing of new knowledge (including South -South dialogue) 
and the provision of additional development finance resources.  To avoid fragmentation and to 
achieve fast track integration of emerging donors into the multilateral donor community, the build -up 
of new institutional structures and expert capacity within the Government are necessary.   

Findings from Recent IEG Evaluations 

54. 
During the period FY07-11, the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) evaluated 13 
projects, of which 12 projects, or 92 percent, were rated Moderately Satisfactory or better for 
project outcomes.  This compares favorably with the ECA Regional and Bank-wide averages.  The 
key lessons focus on the need for a higher awareness of the economic, political and cultural context 
within which WBG-financed projects are implemented.  A related lesson is that client/stakeholder 
commitment and buy-in are key.  Positive examples in this respect include the Tax Administration 
and Modernization II Project under which technical groups of officials for each component had been 
organized that continued their work even when formal project activities were sta lled due to 
procurement issues, and the Health Reform Implementation and Municipal Heating projects that 
benefited from local champions and leadership.  Another lesson that summarizes finding from both 
project design and implementation is that flexibility is important for success.  The larger ambitious 
reform projects were considered to be too complex.  One of the lessons from the Capital Market 
Development Project was that a sequence of smaller, well targeted project s might have allowed the 
Bank to better adapt to changing client needs over time.  In a similar vein, the Implementation 
Completion Report (ICR) for the Sustainable Forestry Pilot Project noted that providing just -in-time 
policy advice is more helpful than large consultancy contracts.  On the need for flexibility during 
implementation, a lesson that IEG drew from the Development of the State Statistical Systems 
Project was the value of continuously engaging the borrower in an evolving and expanding project 
design leading to enhanced ownership and greater leveraging of IBRD lending resources for 
development results. 

55. 
IEG conducted a review of Bank engagement at the state level in Brazil, India, Nigeria , 
and Russia over 1998 to 2008.  The study confirmed the desirability of selective lending to a few 
focus states, not only in high performing states but also in poorer, low-capacity states with committed 
counterparts.  It confirmed the soundness of focusing on public finance management and found scope 
for greater impact from knowledge transfers.  IEG noted that Russia was unique in that there was 
growing demand for reimbursable technical assistance at the regional (oblast) level, reflecting the 
high quality of advice provided through the Bank‘s fiscal federalism loans. 

Feedback from Multistakeholder Consultations 

56. 
The WBG held consultations about the new 2012-2016 CPS for Russia with 
stakeholders across the country at the federal level and in the regions.  Between February and 
June 2011 a series of workshops and videoconferences, supplemented by a web-based consultation 
process, discussed progress achieved during the last CPS period and strategic challenges for the next.  
A main purpose was to identify existing successful approaches to socio-economic development in 
Russia‘s regions.  The WBG also made every effort to learn from participants where international 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

knowledge or finance could strengthen programs in the regions or address new priorities, and to get 
feedback on its performance in the country.  The consultations involved representatives of federal 
and local governments, civil society and business communities, think -tanks, academia, and other 
stakeholders.  For a more detailed overview of the multistakeholder consultations, see Annex 8. 

57. 
The WBG received in-depth feedback on the development priorities of the regions.  In 
line with the agenda at the federal level, local and regional authorities highlighted diversification of 
the economy in the regions through improvements of the investment climate and innovations as their 
top priority.  In this context, government representatives also expressed interest in the attraction of 
foreign direct investment and highlighted the importance of skills development and high er education 
for competitiveness.  Participants from less advanced regions focused on the need for more and better 
public infrastructure (in particular with regard to transport, water and sewerage).  Representatives 
from economic think-tanks and academia endorsed an increasing focus on working with the regions 
as timely and appropriate.  They also welcomed the WBG‘s wider menu of financial instruments in 
favor of regions, especially Financial Intermediary Loans (FILs) and sub-national lending. 

58. 
Civil society and the business community stressed the importance of access to services.  
Stakeholders emphasized the lack of available microfinance for SMEs and the importance of access 
to housing and social housing, as well as to energy.  They noted that this could also be pursued 
through Public Private Partnerships at the municipal level.  With regard to vulnerable groups , 
participants in the consultations saw a particular deficiency in opportunities for the you ng and 
disabled.  In terms of public goods provision the consultations yielded great interest in environmental 
protection and preservation of Russia‘s unique landscapes.  Finally, representatives also called for 
local initiatives at the community level to be better supported in order to strengthen civil society. 

B. 

PROPOSED WORLD BANK GROUP 2012-2016 CPS FOR RUSSIA 

WBG 2012-2016 CPS Overview 

59. 
The joint IBRD/IFC/MIGA CPS balances flexibility and responsiveness to a multitude 
of evolving needs with a strategic focus on country priorities within the WBG areas of 
comparative strength.  In this context, during the CPS period of 2012-2016, the WBG will support 
Russia‘s efforts to (i) increase growth and diversification through better  management of public 
finances, improved investment climate and innovation, stronger financial sector, better infrastructure , 
and more effective protection of the environment , (ii) expand human potential through 
improvements in education, health, and social protection to ensure socially inclusive development, 
(iii) deepen Russia’s global and regional role related to the provision of global public goods and 
Russia‘s growing role as a donor, and as a cross-cutting theme (iv) improve governance and 
transparency through more accountability and better service standards in public administration, 
procurement, and financial management.  Annex 1 presents a complete results framework based on 
these four themes. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

Strategic Theme 1: Increasing Growth and Diversification 

Management of Public Finances 
Outcome 1: Improved efficiency and effectiveness of public financial management 

Investment Climate/Innovation 
Outcome 2: Further streamlined and simplified business procedures and improved capacity to monitor and 
benchmark business regulations 
Outcome 3: Strengthened capacity to design and implement innovation and diversification programs in Russia‘s 
regions 

Financial Sector Development 
Outcome 4: Improved regulatory and supervisory framework for the financial sector and upg raded market 
infrastructure 
Outcome 5:  Increased depth and breadth in the financial sector and increased access to finance 

Sustainable Development and Effective Protection of the Environment 
Outcome 6:  Increased access to quality infrastructure assets and improved infrastructure services 
Outcome 7:  Enhanced competitiveness and sustainability of the economy via reduced resource  intensity of 
GDP 
Outcome 8:  Improved management of environmental risks and natural resources 

Strategic Theme 2: Expanding Human Potential 

Education, Health, and Social Protection 
Outcome 9: Increased quality and improved access, targeting, coverage, and efficiency of social services for 
human development 
Skills for Economic Development  
Outcome 10:  Professional education system produces adequate skills for increased competitiveness 

Socially Inclusive Development 
Outcome 11:  Increased social inclusion of vulnerable groups 

Strategic Theme 3: Deepening Russia’s Global and Regional Role 

Global Public Goods 
Outcome 12: Strengthened Russian participation in the provision of global public goods 
Russia as a Donor 
Outcome 13: Established an institutional structure for delivery of a bilateral and multilateral development 
assistance program  

Strategic Theme 4 (cross-cutting): Improving Governance and Transparency  

Public Administration, Procurement, and Financial Management  
Outcome 14:  Improved government transparency and accountability 

60. 
The WBG will work with the Government in a flexible manner at three levels: national 
(federal and sub-national), ECA regional, and global. Its strategic positioning toward Russia in 
this multidimensional relationship will continue to emphasize the WBG‘s global knowledge 
leadership in development.  The opportunity to strengthen institutional capacity, pilot innovations, 
and employ other multiplier effects of ―how‖ the WBG does its business, including implementation 
support, will be the main criteria in the selection of new activities.  IBRD will continue to provide 
intensive macroeconomic monitoring and analysis of fiscal policy and expenditure effectiveness.   

61. 
In the national dimensions (federal and sub-national), the WBG will focus on 
knowledge generation and transfer, institutional development, reaching out to Russia’s poorer 
regions, and supporting vulnerable groups.  Cutting edge delivery mechanisms, international best 
practice dissemination and other distinguishing characteristics of IBRD operations outweigh its role 
in providing financial capital.  At the federal level, the IBRD will continue to stay engaged in the 
major areas of investment climate, financial sector reform, upgrading of infrastructure , and public 
sector reform.  The Government and IBRD are considering an innovation in the modalities of 
cooperation at the federal level by providing fee-based preparation and implementation support to 
projects wholly subject to WBG policies but fully financed from the Russian federal budget ("Virtual 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

Project Loan").  However, the lessons learned from the previous CPS point to IBRD investment and 
TA operations having the biggest development impact when they can be targeted at the sub -national 
level and in particular at activities in the poorer regions.  The expected main outcome is an 
improvement in indicators in the regions, such as regional poverty levels or GRP in regions where 
the IBRD is active.  IFC will continue to support the growth and diversification of the private sector 
and increase its competitiveness through a range of investment and advisory services targeting 
priority sectors, including infrastructure, agribusiness and forestry, manufacturing (including high -
tech), and financial markets, with an overarching focus on increasing access to finance for SMEs, 
reaching poorer regions, promoting sustainable resource use, and mobilizing financing from partners.   

62. 
In order to have a clear impact on the sub-national level in the Russian context the 
WBG will have to use its toolbox of instruments more creatively than before.  IFC will leverage 
its global and country experience in the realm of PPPs to help Russia‘s regions structure and 
implement infrastructure investments.  IFC is also exploring innovative structures, such as the 
Russian Bank Opportunity Fund (RBOF), to increase access to finance for SMEs via bank networks 
in Russia‘s regions, and will seek to invest in value-added manufacturing, agribusiness and high-tech 
sectors in less developed frontier regions to help attract additional investment and strengthen local 
economies.  The Government and IBRD will explore direct lending to Russia‘s regions with a 
sovereign guarantee in exceptional cases, partnerships with institutions with presence and reach 
across Russia, and innovative ways of supporting IBRD analytical work and technica l assistance in 
less advanced regions.  With regard to new partners, IBRD will build working relationships with 
public sector banks with a reach into the regions to realize the potential of Financial Intermediary 
Loans (FILs) to support issues like energy efficiency or SME growth.  IBRD will also continue to 
use federal intermediaries for issues directly aligned with their remit such as housing or financial 
literacy.  Some ideas for innovations in modalities of cooperation at the sub-national level are 
presented in Box 1. 

Box 1. Innovations in Modalities of Cooperation at Sub-National Level 

 Financial Intermediary Loans.  FILs provide long-term financing to local financial intuitions to finance real 
sector investment needs.  In the case of Russia, the use of this instrument will be pursued more extensively 
through public sector banks in support of specific development areas in Russia‘s regions such as energy 
efficiency and SME development.  

 Supporting IBRD analytical work and technical assistance in less advanced regions.  In addition to the 
innovative instrument of direct lending to Russia‘s regions, the Government and IBRD are discussing a possible 
instrument for supporting analytical work and technical assistance in less advanced regions wh ich are often 
constrained in getting such assistance on a fee-for-service basis.   One idea that is being considered is the 
establishment of a federal fund with IBRD participation that could finance (fully or partially) such assistance.  

 Direct IBRD lending to Russia’s regions with a sovereign guarantee.  Direct lending to Russia‘s regions 
carries the potential of a large positive impact on modernizing some of the less advanced regions in the 
Federation.  The Government and IBRD are discussing principles of engagement with the regions that could 
then be tested in pilot operations in exceptional cases when the projects have innovative components that 
require IBRD experience.  The principles under discussion include: (i) focusing on less advanced regions, (ii) 
not undermining incentives for fiscal rectitude, (iii) focusing to the extent possible on sectors that are also a 
priority for the Federation, and (iv) diffusion of best international and national sectoral knowledge , and (v) 
strengthening public administration. 

63. 
In the regional (ECA) dimension, the WBG will focus on strengthening Russia as a 
donor.  Building on the success achieved by the Russian Government in creating the foundations for 
an ODA system, TA from IBRD will support the set up of a new Russian bilateral aid agency as well 
as the build-up of relevant sectoral expertise.  The WBG will coordinate more closely with Russia to 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

provide development aid to the poorer sub-region of the CIS.  The WBG will help in strengthening 
regional institutions such as the Eurasian Development Bank, which can serve as conduits for 
Russian financial support and expertise to the poorer countries in the CIS. 

64. 
In the global dimension, the WBG will focus on supporting Russia’s ambitions with 
regard to global public goods (GPGs).  It will make quality advisory services and knowledge 
available for the Government to enhance its voice in international forums as it prepares for 
presidencies of the G8, G20 and APEC.  The WBG will also provide support to Russia through 
lending, IDA/IBRD administered Trust Funds and FBS/RTA in handling critical issues related to the 
provision of global public goods.  This encompasses a wide agenda ranging from combating 
infectious diseases to climate change, financial stability, food security and other GPG concerns.  
With regard to global trade, the WBG will continue its assistance to Russia for integration into the 
WTO through TA for trade in services. 

-   Principles of Engagement 

65. Within the four strategic themes, based on the lessons from implementing the previous CPS , 
the feedback from the forward-looking multistakeholder consultations, and examples from other 
well-performing MICs, the CPS identifies the following principles of engagement in a program of 
support to the Russia development strategy: 

 Global Knowledge and Innovation.  The WBG will build on the achievements to date of 
developing a platform for dialogue and development solutions based on global knowledge.  
In doing so, the WBG will also leverage scarce WBG resources with Russia‘s own budgetary 
resources, by replicating the successful model that had resulted in a strong program of RTA s 
under the previous CPS.  The WBG will strategically use its own funds to support and 
complement the program of RTAs, as well as to conduct diagnostic and evaluation work of 
strategic importance for which RTA resources are not available or would not be app ropriate.  
The WBG will also use trust funds where feasible, especially for Russia‘s participation and 
contribution in global and regional initiatives.  IFC will apply its global experience in areas 
including renewable energy, PPPs in infrastructure, and SME finance to help open new 
markets in Russia and strengthen the role of the private sector. 

 Focus on Results.  Each of the projects and programs will be prepared and implemented with 
a focus on results.  This implies the employment of standard tools of managing for 
development results, such as results-oriented design, reporting and assessment frameworks. 

 Flexibility.  WBG engagement will continue to be driven by evolving country demands and 
priorities.  To this end, the WBG will maintain flexibility in its program within the 
parameters of the CPS strategic themes.  The WBG will be prepared to engage in new 
projects and new regions as demand occurs, as well as to adjust and modify ongoing 
programs as needed.  The WBG will also continue to explore ways for flexible use of 
existing and new WBG lending and non-lending instruments to adapt to emerging 
opportunities.   

 Selectivity.  The WBG will support priority activities addressing Russia‘s key development 
challenges in accordance with the CPS strategic framework.  Priority will be given to support 
for systemic solutions with lasting impact on institutional capacity and potential for scaling 
up.  The WBG will balance federal level cooperation with growing engagement with Russian 
regions and municipalities.  The WBG will respond to demands for assistance selectively, 
taking into account its own capacity to deliver and considering the comparative advantages of 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

the three parts of the WBG (IBRD, IFC and MIGA), while further increasing their 
collaboration.   

 Timeliness/Fast Response.  Success of the implementation of the strategy depends on the 
WBG‘s ability to respond rapidly to sophisticated demands by the Government.  Maintaining 
flexibility and selectivity of the program would allow the WBG to respond in a t imely 
manner with appropriate instruments.  The WBG may choose not to engage when a timely 
response is not feasible.   

 Coordinated WBG Support.  IBRD, IFC and MIGA programs will continue to develop 
synergies for offering development solutions to Russia.   

66. 
Following these principles will allow the WBG to scale up and maximize the impact of 
the WBG and government resources.  Selection of activities for WBG support will be guided by 
the Government‘s demand for WBG services, the above key principles for WBG engagement, and 
the WBG‘s capacity to respond to new assistance demands.    

-  WBG Program of Support 

WBG Ongoing Program 

67. 
Because of the continuity in the Russia Strategy 2020 and the 2012-2016 CPS approach, the 
ongoing WBG program is aligned with and supports the strategic themes of the CPS.  The current 
status of the ongoing program is as follows:  

 

 

IBRD’s loan portfolio in Russia as of end October 2011 consists of 10 investment 
operations with net commitments totaling US$987 million, of which US$512.2 million 
remains undisbursed (see Annex B8-IBRD).  The portfolio of investment loans is 
supplemented by one carbon finance project of US$40 million, and one GEF operation of 
US$23 million.  Overall portfolio quality is satisfactory, with two projects with unsatisfactory 
ratings (Judicial Reform and Registration Development Projects) which are being 
restructured.  Five projects were closed at the end of FY11.  Two more projects are scheduled 
to be closed in FY12.  
IFC’s outstanding portfolio of US$2 billion in 121 projects in Russia makes it IFC‘s 4th 
largest country exposure (see Annex B8-IFC).  In FY11, IFC invested $1,226 million in 
Russia, of which $387 million was mobilized from partners.  IFC has been seeking to further 
diversify the portfolio towards manufacturing and infrastructure, which currently account for 
26 percent and 20 percent of the outstanding portfolio, respectively, with the remainder in 
financial markets, and to increase the equity share of the outstanding portfolio from around 
27 percent currently (see Annex B3-IFC).  To the extent possible, IFC seeks to work with 
reputable local sponsors.  Around 60 percent of current portfolio projects have been carried 
out with local sponsors.   

 MIGA’s net exposure in Russia is slightly more than US$470 million in 13 active projects 
as of October 31, 2011 – MIGA‘s largest net exposure.  MIGA's exposure is almost entirely 
concentrated in Russia's financial sector, having mainly supported investments of global 
financial institutions into their banking, mortgage, and leasing subsidiaries in Russia in 2008 
and 2009.  However, MIGA recently signed its first guarantees supporting foreign 
investments in the telecom and agribusiness sectors, the latter in two of Russia's 'black earth' 
oblasts.  

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

WBG Indicative Financing and Guarantee Program 

68. 
IBRD Indicative Financing Envelope, Pipeline, and Instruments.  The indicative 
financing envelope for IBRD during the CPS period foresees total lending of up to US$5 billion, plus 
the mobilization of counterpart funds. Actual lending volumes will depend on the country‘s 
performance and priorities, IBRD lending capacity, demand from other borrowers, and global 
economic developments.  In accordance with the Government‘s preferences, all IBRD lending is 
foreseen in the form of investment projects.  The IBRD indicative financing program for the first two 
years of the CPS is reasonably defined and selective – see Annex B3 (IBRD).  The IBRD 2012-2013 
lending pipeline includes projects in the areas of microfinance, financial sector development, energy 
efficiency, forestry protection, infrastructure development, and local government initiatives with an 
expected total volume of about US$1.3 billion.  IBRD‘s lending pipeline supports all strategic 
themes, with a concentration on the first two strategic themes - growth and diversification, and 
human potential.  The indicative pipeline is composed of specific investment loans and financial 
intermediary loans and has the potential to expand once the financial intermediary tool is fully 
operational.    The program for the outer years of the CPS is to be further defined in the CPS Progress 
Report in consultation with the Government based on the evolution of the country priorities and with 
consideration of the WBG‘s comparative advantages and value-added.   

69. 
IFC Investment Plans.  IFC is planning investments between US$3.8-4.8 billion for its own 
account during the five-year CPS period, with the goal of mobilizing significant additional financing 
from the private sector, IFI, and government partners.  IFC‘s focus on improving Russia‘s economic 
competitiveness through greater resource efficiency and economic diversification ( the first theme of 
the joint CPS) is fully aligned with the themes of the CPS.  IFC's long term strategic priorities 
include (i) improving the resource efficiency of Russia‘s economy and reducing its greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions, with programs in Sustainable Energy Finance, Cleaner Production, Residential 
Energy Efficiency, and Renewable Energy, (ii) developing transport and municipal infrastructure, 
including through PPPs, and (iii) supporting greater financial intermediation and the growth of mid -
sized private sector banks, helping to increase access to finance to SMEs (see Annex B3-IFC).  
Across all sectors, IFC prioritizes investment in projects which contribute to greater economic 
diversification, particularly in less developed frontier regions, including in agribusiness, value-added 
manufacturing, and in hi-tech sectors.  IFC works closely with partners, including the Russian 
Government, IBRD, and other international financial institutions (IFIs) to mobilize additional 
financing and maximize its impact and reach. 

70. 
Russian Bank Opportunity Fund (RBOF).  In June 2011, at the St. Petersburg 
International Economic Forum, IFC and the Ministry of Finance signed an agreement under which 
Russia committed to invest US$50 million in the RBOF, a vehicle for IFC to mobilize financing to 
support the banking sector and boost access to finance for SMEs to increase economic 
diversification.  VEB and IFC signed a separate memorandum of understanding through which VEB 
is considering investing up to US$250 million toward the fund.  IFC will invest up to US$250 
million of its own funds. 

71. MIGA Guarantees.  MIGA will continue to support foreign investors through the provision 
of political risk insurance.  Supporting foreign investment in infrastructure, in close coordination 
with the IFC and IBRD, will remain a strategic priority for MIGA‘s activity in Russia.  In the 
financial sector, the Agency will continue to explore opportunities to support capital markets 
transactions, including asset-backed securitizations.  MIGA may also continue to promote the role 
and assist in the expansion of foreign banks in the Russian banking sector.  Areas for potential 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

further involvement in Russia include the manufacturing, agribusiness , and services sectors.  MIGA 
will also seek opportunities to support Russian companies by providing guarantees for their 
investments abroad.   

WBG Indicative Knowledge Services Program 

72. 
IBRD Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA).  Even with resumed lending, knowledge 
will continue to be IBRD‘s main product demanded by the Government.  In response, IBRD will 
continue to provide AAA products—Economic and Sector Work (ESW) and Technical Assistance 
(TA)—in support of all CPS strategic themes.  ESW products planned for the next 18 months include 
studies and reports on professional education and skills development , poverty and social mobility, 
urban transport, and environmental performance.  IBRD ESW, especially in the areas of poverty, 
labor markets, urban transport, and health financing, will address gender issues.  The periodic 
Russian Economic Reports (RER) will continue to analyze short -term economic developments and 
policies and present an economic and social outlook.  Non-reimbursable TA covers various sectoral 
aspects, such as diversification, investment climate, innovations, urban transport, health finance, 
labor markets, expenditure efficiency, and procurement system strengthening.  A particularly 
important part of IBRD‘s TA program supports the deepening of Russia‘s global and regional role 
related to participation in regional integration (APEC) and WTO accession, as well as the 
institutional strengthening of Russia‘s development aid program.   

73. 
IBRD Reimbursable Technical Assistance/Fee-based Services (RTA-FBS).  RTAs are 
provided in the areas of the government strategic priorities.  The provision of this type of technical 
assistance has been promoted under the previous CPS and now it substantiates the new CPS strategic 
themes.  RTAs are governed by the same standards as the rest of IBRD‘s program, and the same 
procedures of monitoring and evaluation apply.  During the CPS period FY07 -11, IBRD signed and 
completed around 40 contracts valued at approximately US$20 million.  Expectations are for a 
continued high demand for RTAs.  Box 2 presents some aspects of the choice of RTAs as an 
instrument in providing knowledge services.  The current RTA pipeline over the next CPS period 
includes around 20 pre-identified activities, and the program has the potential to achieve over US$30 
million.  With the RTA program having expanded so significantly, the WBG is faced with the need 
to exercise higher selectivity.  Annex 11 gives further details on the evolution and status of the RTA 
program.     

74. 
IFC Advisory Program.  IFC‘s advisory programs help lay the groundwork for future 
private sector investment, helping to create new markets in areas such as energy efficiency and 
renewable energy finance, and distressed asset resolution.  IFC takes a programmatic approach to 
developing the market for sustainable energy investment and resource efficiency through joint 
investment and advisory programs that address regulatory, knowledge and financing barriers helping 
to mitigate climate change and increase Russia‘s economic competitiveness.  These programs include 
Sustainable Energy Finance (FY05-FY12), Residential Energy Efficiency (FY10-FY15), Cleaner 
Production (FY08-FY12), and Renewable Energy (FY10-FY15).  IFC also adapted its Mortgage 
Market Development Project in response to the crisis in 2009 to create the Financial Markets Crisis 
Management Program (FY10-FY12), which helps build risk management and NPL management 
capacity in the financial sector.  New advisory programs may be added as they are developed in 
response to market needs, depending on institutional capacity and donor interest.  Annex B4 presents 
the combined IFC/IBRD indicative non-lending program, including the RTA pipeline, as of the 
beginning of FY12.  

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

Box 2.  Choice of RTA as a Knowledge Services Instrument 

The expansion of the RTA program has posed important questions about the use of the instrument.  First, 
given resource constraints in the budgets of Russia‘s regions, the federal authorities and IBRD are considering 
options for setting up a system to support access of poorer regions to RTAs.  Second is the choice between 
traditional AAA instruments and RTAs.  While RTAs have the advantage of being fully driven by client demand, 
traditional AAA could be better instruments to develop important or emerging topics that IBRD an d IFC staff may 
wish to analyze and in this way bring to the attention of the Russian authorities and public.  For example, the 
proposed report on poverty and inclusion across Russia‘s regions could help bring forcefully into the development 
agenda the poverty challenges still prevalent in Russia.  Traditional ESW instruments would be the preferred 
instrument also when IBRD wishes to maintain full independence (not only actual but also perceived) in its analysis, 
for example in the Russia Economic Reports that analyze recent economic development and prospects.  Traditional 
TA may be a better instrument than RTAs when Bank staff themselves would not be providing the bulk of the 
knowledge transfer but rather consultants, or when there are associated purchases of IT or other equipment.  Third, 
RTAs are generally proprietary to the client, and are not automatically disclosed.  While the Russian authorities have 
generally been open to sharing these reports, the lack of disclosure could reduce their development imp act or the 
ability of Bank staff to engage with other stakeholders.  Such considerations are a factor in staff decisions on 
whether to engage in a RTA.  Finally, it is important to avoid potential or perceived conflicts of interest, in 
particular avoiding proposing additional activities that could be construed to be developing Bank Group business in 
Russia.  These questions, as well as others emerging from the Bank's FBS/RTA program, are being considered under 
the ongoing Review of Fee-Based Services, being led jointly by ECA and OPCS. 

75. 
Russia-financed IDA/IBRD-administered Trust Funds.  The Russia-financed IDA/IRBD-
administered trust funds (seven single-donor and 11 multi-donor) are part of the ―Russia as a Donor‖ 
initiative and are primarily of regional and global nature for use outside of Russia.  They focus on the 
themes of infectious disease control, quality of basic education, energy access, food crisis response 
and social support programs.  The overall contributions over the past five years reached US$433.7 
million, 61 percent of which went to support Financial Intermediary Funds (FIFs) and the rest were 
allocated to IDA/IBRD-administered trust funds.  Annex 10 presents further details on the evolution 
and status of Russia as a donor, including a full list of Russia‘s IDA/IRBD-administered trust funds. 

IBRD-IFC Collaboration 

76. 
IFC and IBRD have a productive and often close working relationship in the Russian 
Federation, particularly in areas where the public and private sectors interact heavily.  
Collaboration is especially close in areas such as infrastructure and PPP development, energy 
efficiency and renewable energy markets, the financial sector, and the regulatory and business 
environments.  In general, IFC benefits from IBRD‘s ongoing dialogue with the Russian Government 
on policy matters and makes use of IBRD analytical work in its advisory operations.  The IBRD 
regularly calls on IFC‘s sectoral expertise and surveys, and benefits from IFC‘s close engagement 
with the private sector and its ability to lend to Russia‘s regions without a sovereign guarantee.  
Cooperation between the two institutions and MIGA is expected to strengthen over the CPS period in 
response to the Government‘s demand for greater coordination of World Bank Group activitie s.  
Promising areas for future collaboration include sub-national level and other infrastructure projects, 
energy efficiency projects, and financial markets initiatives. 

77. 
Infrastructure/PPP:  IFC-IBRD sub-national loans have supported nine projects to date in 
five regions, helping to repair and upgrade health services in Russia‘s regions and municipalities, 
district heating, water/wastewater infrastructure and road networks.  IBRD and IFC are cooperating 
on development of PPPs in Russia.  IBRD helps build institutional capacity and provides financing 
either directly or through financial intermediaries (e.g., VEB), and IFC provides advice to the private 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

sector, as well as financing.  IBRD/IFC will work on leveraging their recent experience from the 
Pulkovo Airport PPP to assist other regions with structuring and implementation of PPPs in transport 
and municipal utilities.   

78. 
Energy Efficiency/Renewable Energy: IFC and IBRD have worked closely with the 
Russian Government on policies to facilitate sustainable energy investment, collaborating on a major 
policy study and the subsequent enactment of the Energy Efficiency Law.  They will support 
engagements to enable the commercialization of energy efficiency finance with a proposed financial 
intermediary loan (IBRD) and advisory plus investments (IFC).  The latter program will be carried 
out in conjunction with EBRD.  IFC‘s Renewable Energy program consists of a GEF-funded 
advisory project to support renewable energy development in the country, plus eventual IFC 
investment. 

79. 
Financial Markets: IFC and IBRD activities in the financial sector are complementary, 
helping to strengthen the regulatory and supervisory frameworks for the banking sector and capital 
markets, improving risk management practices and deepening financial markets.  Together, these 
activities help to improve access to finance, particularly for SMEs.  For example, IBRD‘s proposed 
Microfinance Development Project at the sub-national level will enhance access to finance for the 
poor, especially outside major cities.  Likewise, IFC is focused on supporting well-managed private 
banks with networks in the regions to extend access to finance to a broader geographical area, 
including underserved regions and populations.  IBRD‘s Financial Sector Development project will 
support enhancements in the legal and regulatory framework for the financial markets and greater 
depth of financial services in Russia , while IFC‘s Global Trade Finance Program provides critical 
short term finance to facilitate the flow of goods and services.   

CPS Strategic Themes, Engagement Areas, Country Outcomes, and WBG Support 

80. 
In a country as big as Russia, the WBG influence is small in terms of both resources and 
ability to influence country outcomes.  Attributing progress toward any significant country 
outcome solely to WBG actions is not sensible or feasible.  Still, the WBG‘s efforts are focused on a 
relatively small number of key areas, with defined country outcomes to the achievement of which the 
WBG contributes by supporting processes, intermediate outcomes, and local results as presented 
below.  The Results Framework in Annex 1 is, thus, a non-conventional one, comprising country 
level (instead of CPS-level) outcomes and WBG‘s contributions in terms of milestones, outputs, and 
activities.  The following section presents the engagement areas, country outcomes , and WBG 
support by strategic theme.  Annex 9 contains a more detailed overview of the WBG program. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

-   Strategic Theme 1: Increasing Growth and Diversification 

National Goals: Reduce the federal fiscal deficit; diversify from dependence on energy extraction industries; 
improve the business climate, and strengthen productivity, competitiveness, and innovation; deepen the financial 
sector and strengthen regulations and oversight; improve management of infrastructure assets and expand quality 
services with private sector participation; decrease the energy intensity of the economy by 40 percent by 2020; adapt 
to and mitigate climate change challenges. 
Areas of Engagement and Country Development Outcomes to which CPS Contributes 
1.1:  Management of public finances 
        Outcome 1: Improved efficiency and effectiveness of public financial management 
1.2:  Investment climate/innovation 
Outcome 2: Further streamlined and simplified business procedures and improved capacity to monitor and 
benchmark business regulations 
Outcome 3: Strengthened capacity to design and implement innovation and diversification programs in Russia‘s 
regions 
1.3:  Financial sector development 
Outcome 4: Improved regulatory and supervisory framework for the financial sector and upgraded market 
infrastructure 
        Outcome 5: Increased depth and breadth in the financial sector and increased access to finance 
1.4:  Sustainable development and effective protection of the environment 
        Outcome 6: Increased access to quality infrastructure assets and improved infrastructure services 
 Outcome 7: Enhanced competitiveness and sustainability of the economy via reduced resource intensity of GDP 
        Outcome 8: Improved management of environmental risks and natural resources 

Area of Engagement 1.1:  Management of public finances 

81. 
Outcome 1: Improved efficiency and effectiveness of public financial management.  A key 
challenge for the Government is to restore some explicit rules that would guide fiscal policy in the 
medium term and limit pressures for unsustainable increases in expenditures.  The WBG, through its 
AAA and policy dialogue, will inform the policy discussions on the importance of returning to an 
explicit fiscal rule.  The ongoing and planned IBRD-financed projects in this area will enhance  the 
further strengthening of treasury functions and frameworks, the promotion of program budgeting, the 
efforts to increase taxpayer compliance, and the modernization of the Customs Department.  
Strengthening public financial management would have the added benefit of improving governance, 
accountability, and transparency.   

Area of Engagement 1.2: Investment climate/innovation 

82. 
Outcome 2: Further streamlined and simplified business procedures and improved 
capacity to monitor and benchmark business regulations.  A primary focus of the Government is 
the simplification and streamlining of business procedures, improving their enforcement record, 
improving the implementation of laws and regulations, and thus increasing the protection of 
investors‘ rights to strengthen stability and predictability of the business environment.  Russia has 
particularly low rankings in three areas measured by Doing Business:  Dealing with Construction 
Permits, Trading across Borders, and Getting Electricity.  The WBG will provide recommendations 
on how to improve the regulatory environment, and provide support, mostly through TAs, on various 
aspects of assessing the business climate and related rankings, and with advisory services on how to 
ease some of the key regulatory bottlenecks, particularly for trade finance, customs, export and 
import permits, and construction permits. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

83. 
Outcome 3: Strengthened capacity to design and 
implement 
innovation and 
diversification programs in Russia’s regions.  The Government is emphasizing and supporting 
innovation to further diversify the economy including the export base .  A national program for 
Regional Innovation Action Plans (RIAP) will be deployed and made accessible to regions aiming to 
develop their economies through the prism of entrepreneurship, innovation and technology, and help 
to improve efficiency and transparency of federal policies.  The Government has requested IBRD 
(with possible collaboration with the European Commission) to support the implementation of the 
program in four pilot Russian regions which can become a core instrument of Russia‘s 
Modernization Program.  Initiatives with the Ministry of Economic Development and the regions on 
competitiveness and export promotion may also be supported by WBG engagements and through the 
development of methodological recommendations.  Cultural heritage will be used as a means of 
promoting diversification and channeling development opportunities to local levels as communities 
in the Russian Federation take full ownership of their cultural assets to generate income , with 
selected projects supported by WBG financing.  

Area of Engagement 1.3: Financial sector development 

84. 
Outcome 4: Improved regulatory and supervisory framework for the financial sector 
and upgraded market infrastructure.  The Government intends to increase financial sector 
development, in line with G20 objectives, through improving regulations and supervision while 
meeting international macroprudential oversight guidelines.  One objective will be to improve 
supervisory standards in the financial sector so that they meet IOSCO (International Organization of 
Security Commissions) principles.  WBG will provide recommenda tions to support the adoption of 
G20 capital and liquidity practices, and advisory services towards increasing the number and ratings 
of IOSCO principles.  IBRD has been asked to deploy two TA projects to support the newly 
established market supervisory agency, one of which focuses on strengthening the microfinance 
system.     

85. 
Outcome 5: Increased depth and breadth in the financial sector and increased access to 
finance.  The Government aims to increase the breadth and depth of the sector and address the 
weakness in the institutional investor base and the small size of the retail investor base.  Increasing 
access would assist in the greater diversification of the economy through adequate funding being 
channeled to more, and more diverse, firms.  Increased financing would be provided to help meet the 
objectives of reducing the energy intensity of the economy.  WBG will provide support for some of 
these objectives through selected financial intermediary loans, in particular for catalyzing energy 
efficiency financing and investments.  As a part of wider financial sector development, the 
Government wishes to increase Moscow‘s standing as an international financial center and may 
request RTA support.  IFC‘s strategy of supporting well-managed private banks with networks in the 
regions via the Russian Bank Opportunity Fund, and otherwise seeking to increase access to finance 
for SMEs through targeted SME, trade and energy efficiency finance to these banks, support SME 
development and economic diversification.  Providing its products through banks with networks in 
the regions helps IFC to reach a broader geographical area, including underserved regions and 
populations. 

Area of Engagement 1.4: Sustainable development and effective protection of the environment 

86. 
Outcome 6: Increased access to quality 
infrastructure assets and 
improved 
infrastructure services, including through increased participation of the private sector in 
financing and management of infrastructure.  In order to achieve its objectives, the Government 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

has put high priority to attract private sector investment in infrastructure through the use of Public-
Private Partnerships (PPPs) at the federal level and in the regions.  The Russian Development Bank 
(VEB) was given a central role to develop PPPs in the regions.  The WBG will support these 
activities with an array of proposed engagements, many at the sub-national level, including project 
financing, AAA (TA and ESW), and a number of RTAs.  RTAs will strengthen the institutional and 
management capacities of AVTODOR (State Road Agency), and assist the Ministry of Transport to 
improve public and urban transport.  

87. 
Outcome 7: Enhanced competitiveness and sustainability of the economy via reduced 
resource intensity of GDP.  The Government has recently been vigorously pursuing a 
modernization agenda and energy efficiency (EE) has been recognized as one of the key elements.  
The importance of mobilizing commercial financing in achieving nation -wide energy savings targets 
was highlighted by the State Program, Energy Savings and Increase in Energy Efficiency through 
2020.  The WBG will provide support through its lending program (for example, through the 
financial intermediary project in support of catalyzing EE investments and availability of commercial 
financing), technical assistance, and IFC investment transactions and advisory. 

88. 
Outcome 8: Improved management of environmental risks and natural resources.  The 
Government is keen to improve Russia‘s environmental management systems to deal with past 
environmental liabilities and growing environmental risks and pollutions caused by climate change 
and large scale economic development.  Government initiatives include measures to protect the 
Arctic environment, improve forest fire prevention and forestry management, strengthen the national 
capacity to deliver reliable and timely weather, water, and climate information and services , improve 
the procedures and information flow of cadastre and registration data, and develop the National 
Spatial Data Infrastructure.  Selected elements of strategic environmental and natural resource 
management activities would be supported through several WBG engagements at the national and 
sub-national levels, such as developing systems for better management of forests and decrease fire 
risks, strengthening of hydrometeorological capacity, and contributing towards the development of a 
policy and institutional framework for the environmental issues in the Arctic zone. 

 -   Strategic Theme 2: Expanding Human Potential 

National Goals: Improve efficiency of social spending budgets and targeting; promote healthy lifestyles, improve 
quality and access of health care, and strengthen health financing; improve coverage and efficiency of early 
childhood development; flexibly align education and skills with labor markets; improve quality of primary and 
secondary education. 
Areas of Engagement and Country Development Outcomes to which CPS Contributes 
2.1: Education, health, and social protection 
Outcome 9:   Increased quality and improved access, targeting, coverage, and efficiency of social services for 
human development 
2.1: Skills for economic development  
 Outcome 10: Professional education system produces adequate skills for increased competitiveness 
2.3: Socially inclusive development 
Outcome 11: Increased social inclusion of vulnerable groups 

Area of Engagement 2.1: Education, health, and social protection 

89. 
Outcome 9: Increased quality and improved access, targeting, coverage, and efficiency 
of social services for human development.  A key current emphasis of the Government is on 
increasing the coverage of preschool services in selected regions coupled with increased efficiency in 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

the sector.  In the health sector, the major goals are to improve outcomes through support to health 
financing reforms and health services reorganization.  Russia is cooperating with other CIS countries 
on the basis of bilateral and multilateral agreements to ensure access to social services for migrant 
workers and their families.  The Government has been attempting to shift social services from 
institutionalized care provided to certain categories of beneficiaries to a more client -oriented and 
case-management based flexible system of social care with the focus on increasing the efficiency of 
budget expenditure and improving outcomes.  The WBG will contribute towards informing the 
policy dialogue on these issues based on proposed AAA and RTAs, provide support towards the 
development of pilots in Russia‘s regions to test provider payment reforms, support  the launching of 
household and provider surveys (for example, as part of the Regional Health Study), contribute  to 
the development of methodological approaches to measuring social sec tor performance, and finance  
efforts to increase coverage of preschool services in Yakutia. 

Area of Engagement 2.2: Skills for economic development 

90. 
Outcome 10: Professional education system produces adequate skills for increased 
competitiveness.  Russia aims to adjust the professional and vocational education system to the labor 
market needs of the regions in order to increase diversification and improve productivity.  The 
approach is to improve professional and vocational education systems through support of regional 
programs for Vocational Education and Training (VET) on a competitive basis.  WBG support 
(including WBI engagements) will be geared towards contributing to the development of an 
overview of the professional and vocational education systems and the related analysis to identify 
issues and challenges, and may include technical assistance for the development of Technical and 
VET programs in the regions for skills development and renewal. 

Area of Engagement 2.3: Socially inclusive development 

91. 
Outcome 11: Increased social inclusion of vulnerable groups.  The Government has been 
encouraging social sector innovations and partnerships that help to overcome social exclusion, 
vulnerability, physical constraints and other barriers for people with various special needs.  For 
example, this commitment features strongly in the Government‘s Sports Development Strategy 
which strives to create conditions for physical training and sports , including for those in vulnerable 
and marginalized situations.  By building on the universality of sports and its traditional importance 
in Russian society, a proposed IBRD project will create a new entry point for contributing towards 
the promotion of social inclusion, as well as the creation of space for promoting and providing 
additional social support services to vulnerable groups .  Issues of social inclusion of immigrants will 
continue to be addressed within the WBG‘s analytical work program on labor migration and 
remittances and the framework of the Migration and Remittances Peer-Assisted Learning (MIRPAL) 
network initiative. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

-   Strategic Theme 3: Deepening Russia’s Global and Regional Role 

National Goals: Strengthen Russia‘s role as a reliable international partner; expand Russia‘s role as a donor of high 
quality ODA; establish the necessary institutional structures to deliver multi and bilateral development assistance . 
Areas of Engagement and Country Outcomes Supported by the CPS 
3.1  Global public goods 
Outcome 12: Strengthened Russian  participation in the provision of global public goods 
3.2  Russia as a donor 
Outcome 13: Established an institutional structure for delivery of a bilateral and multilateral development 
assistance program 

Area of Engagement 3.1: Global public goods 

92. 
Outcome 12: Strengthened Russian participation in the provision of global public 
goods.  Russia aspires to integrate more fully into the international community and to become a 
reliable partner in resolving global problems.  The WBG will support the Russian Federation to 
strengthen its role as it seeks to broaden and deepen its global engagements.  In addition to WBG 
engagements which will support the enhancing of Russia‘s participation in the provision of global 
public goods (such as lending for energy efficiency relevant for climate change, or RTA support for a 
Eurasian Center for Food Security), the WBG will also provide technical advice and organizational 
support for the Russian presidencies in global forums beginning with APEC 2012.  Such TA will, 
among other objectives, contribute to strengthening capacity for the preparation of international 
forums and conferences, support the enhancing of technical expertise within the civil service, and 
offer programs for Russian engagement on the global level to help strengthen Russia‘s voice in 
ongoing discussions and increase its leverage in the provision of global public goods through 
multilateral channels.  

Area of Engagement 3.2 Russia as a donor 

93. 
Outcome 13: Established an institutional structure for delivery of a bilateral and 
multilateral development assistance program.  Russia seeks to expand its role as a donor of 
development assistance including the establishment of the necessary institutional structures to deliver 
a full program of multi- and bilateral development assistance.   Challenges include the lack of an aid 
agency for delivery of bilateral aid, the absence of a legal framework on development aid, the aid 
reporting system, monitoring and evaluation functions, and limited experience within lead ministries.  
The WBG will partner with the Government and support Russia‘s efforts as it strives to attain high 
quality standards for Russia‘s development assistance programs and to build a national ODA system 
aligned with OECD-DAC principles.  Russia is open to knowledge-sharing and dialogue with other 
emerging donors and is committed to supporting the poorest countries of ECA through implementing 
an innovative approach aimed at establishing programmatic trust funds. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

-   Strategic Theme 4 (cross-cutting): Improving Governance and Transparency 

National Goals: Increase transparency of government activities; achieve modern standards of public service 
delivery based on needs of citizens and businesses. 
Areas of Engagement and Country Development Outcomes to which CPS Contributes 
Public administration, procurement, and financial management  
Outcome 14: Improved government transparency and accountability 

94. 
Outcome 14: Improved government transparency and accountability.  The Government 
is keen to focus its efforts on increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of regulatory functions, 
increasing transparency of government activities, strengthening accountability, and achieving modern 
standards of high quality and more accessible, effective public service delivery based on the needs of 
citizens and businesses.  The Government has adopted legislation on access to information on the 
activities of public authorities and is improving budget transparency through introducing th e E-
Budget system.  It is also keen to improve the performance of the public procurement system, 
including the development of a new federal contract system.  Possible WBG technical assistance can 
contribute towards the development of frameworks and capacities for implementing selected 
programs designed to address some of these objectives including in the areas of program budgeting 
and procurement reform.  

Gender Mainstreaming 

95. While Russia stands relatively well compared with many other countries with respe ct to 
gender equality, there are many issues that need to be addressed.  Gender inequalities in Russia 
have both female and male dimensions.  Average male life expectancy in Russia is only 62 .8 years 
(13.8 years less than the EU average), as opposed to 74.7 years for women.  Women in Russia live 
longer but they bear a heavy burden of chronic diseases and live 7.9 years less than the EU average.  
Vertical and horizontal segregation persists in the labor market.  Women predominate in the low-
paying public sector.  The gender structure of public employment shows significant under -
representation of women in top positions and an overrepresentation in support -level positions.  In 
2009, only 20 percent of top level managers, top advisors or top specialists in feder al level civil 
service posts were women, while women accounted for over 83 percent of all junior support 
specialist positions.  Gender equality in political participation is still an issue in Russia.  Women 
represent only 14 percent of State Duma deputies.  Women face high degree of domestic violence: 
violence in one form or another is observed in every fourth Russian family.9   

96. 
The WBG works toward ensuring that gender considerations are mainstreamed into 
operations.  Examples of projects in the portfolio and pipeline that exhibit high level of sensitivity to 
gender include: 

 The Russia Local Initiatives Support Project (LISP).  The LISP approach of allocating 
micro grants to rural settlements to finance competitively selected small microprojects , which 
are initiated by the population, allows community groups to voice their needs.  The program 
helps in increasing the power of women, as part of local communities, by allowing them to 
actively participate in community meetings and to direct local community development in 
line with their and their families‘ needs.  Experience in Russia‘s regions where the project 
has been actively implemented (Stavropol, Kirov) shows that women are very active in using 

9 Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs, 2008. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

the project‘s consultation mechanisms and in setting local priorities.  The current approach to 
gender will be preserved in the planned follow-on project. 

 Central Asia Regional Migration Program (CARMP). CARMP, that also covers Russia in 
addition to Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Kyrgyz Republic, has a component to help labor 
migrants and their families benefit from a broader range of gender sensitive services provided 
throughout the migration cycle.  Given growing number of women migrant workers to 
Russia, such services are to be offered both in the country of origin and destination (Russia) 
to the benefit of both.  This component is being implemented mainly by the CARMP 
partners, International Organization for Migration (IOM) and UN Women, while IBRD 
contributes to the overall policy dialogue on migration policy and regional coordination and 
cooperation in the area of labor migration. 

 Microfinance Project.  Currently, the supply of micro credits only covers about 10 percent of 
the demand.  The project has the potential to significantly expand access to financial services 
to underserved Russian population.  Given the explicit targeting of women as good clients by 
many Microfinance Institutions and credit cooperatives, it is expected that women will 
particularly benefit from this project.   

97. 
In parallel, the WBG addresses gender issues in its non-lending work.  For instance, 
IBRD will continue the policy dialogue in support of efforts to change risk behavior (including 
tobacco and alcohol control, deaths due to road accidents) and support health promotion.  TA on 
health financing reform would support reallocation of healthcare system resources to higher impact 
health interventions with emphasis on health promotion, disease prevention, and management of 
chronic diseases to effectively confront health challenges.  Gender dimensions of poverty will also be 
analyzed as part of upcoming poverty assessment work in Russia. 

C. 

IMPLEMENTING THE 2012-2016 CPS FOR RUSSIA 

Fiduciary Environment for Bank Lending 

98. 
Fiduciary Risk Assessment.  Financial management risk for the majority of projects is 
substantial; however, risk mitigating measures 
incorporated 
into 
the project design and 
implementation ensure that the residual risk remains acceptable.  These measures have so far 
included: (i) adoption of a risk-based approach to financial management, which helps focus attention 
and resources on particular areas of vulnerability, (ii) at the project preparation stage, close work 
with client agencies to identify measures to mitigate fiduciary risks, strengthen controls , and develop 
borrower capacity, and (iii) at the project implementation stage, monitoring the continuing adequacy 
of the financial management arrangements and satisfactory implementation of action plans and 
performance of controls. 

99. 
Procurement Risk Assessment.  The procurement environment for World Bank projects in 
Russia continues to be complex and risky in spite of the efforts to improve the legal framework.  The 
Russian procurement system is based on the Public Procurement Law which is regarded as a ―direct 
action‖ instrument that leaves little space for interpretation and judgment.  It established an overly 
prescriptive, detailed framework that is difficult to amend through secondary regulations.  In spite of 
numerous amendments it still has several features that make the procurement procedures not fully 
consistent with good international practice in the area of procurement methods, qualification 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

requirements of suppliers, contractors and consultants, disclosure of estimated prices before 
competition, and planning, among others.  The Bank will maintain a strong dialogue with the 
Government in the interest of improving the existing national procurement system. 

100. Managing Fiduciary Risks. The general environment in Russia indicates that fiduciary risks 
linked to governance and anti-corruption may exist and go undetected.  To avoid such risks, IBRD-
supported projects follow IBRD procurement and financial management rules.  Traditionally, MOF 
and other ministries outsource fiduciary functions to Project Implementation Units (PIUs), whose 
staff are well trained in Bank financial management and procurement procedures .  A risk associated 
with the use of PIUs is that PIU staff, who are not considered civil servants, are not subject to the 
same scrutiny as civil servants in terms of reporting requirements and potential conflicts of interest.  
The Bank intends to review the issues related to reporting requirements for PIU staff and present 
alternatives to the Government.  Joint fiduciary reviews help to mitigate this risk.  Such reviews aim 
to assess the adequacy and quality of the Bank‘s fiduciary oversight of the portfolio in supervising 
procurement and financial management arrangements of individual projects and/or particular 
implementing entities.  The most recent procurement plan of each project is used to sample the 
contracts, and the same contracts are reviewed by procurement, financial management, disbursement , 
and technical teams.  The reviews may include physical inspection for selected contracts 
incorporating the representatives from the Department of Institutional Integrity (INT) in the Bank, if 
appropriate.  As a result of these reviews, specific recommendations are made for the procurement, 
financial management, disbursement, and governance aspects of the projects.  Box 3 presents an 
initiative aimed at improving the transparency and procurement management of IBRD operations in 
Russia. 

Box 3.  Improving Transparency and Procurement Management of IBRD Operations in Russia 

To further improve the transparency and procurement management of its operations in Russia at the request of the 
authorities, IBRD and Russian counterparts are embarking on implementing SEPA, a Procurement Plan Execution 
System.  SEPA is a Web-based regional procurement management system that provides all the information (from 
planning details to state of advance) linked to the contracts for projects financed by IBRD.  It promotes 
transparency, accountability and compliance in Bank-funded projects and brings significant value added to the 
procurement process.  For the Government, SEPA allows better planning, management and monitoring of public 
investments and expenditures together with building institutional capacity in these areas.  Private sector and citizens 
also benefit from the introduction of this system, since it provides detailed information on the contracts for projects 
financed by the Bank.  This innovative approach is considered to have increased the efficiency of procurement 
management in the Latin America region.  SEPA is now being used in 12 countries and is being replicated in others.  
In Russia, SEPA will first be piloted in a few projects, and improved if necessary, before expanding its use in all 
IBRD-financed projects in Russia. 

Managing the WBG Program 

101. WBG CPS Implementation and Results Monitoring.  The WBG will set up a CPS 
implementation and results monitoring system that will be used to track progress in the WBG 
contributions towards achieving the country outcomes defined in the CPS results framework.  Based 
on the results from the monitoring, the WBG will conduct an annual CPS implementation review for 
assessing progress under the CPS and possible adjustments to the WBG program.  This review 
process would also provide inputs for the planned CPS Progress Report in 2014 when adjustments in 
the CPS results framework would be made, if considered necessary.   

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

102. 
IBRD Program Management.  With the Government as its main client, IBRD‘s program 
management will also include an annual review process with the Government and will build on it 
with the purpose of strengthening portfolio implementation, improving lending efficiency, furthering 
the knowledge agenda, and leveraging resources through strategic partnerships with Russian 
institutions and multilateral agencies.  To maintain the quality of portfolio performance, the country 
management unit (CMU) works closely with project teams to ensure a proactive approach in solving 
issues during implementation.  

Fostering Partnerships 

103. Partnering with Civil Society and Think Tanks.  The WBG aims to support Russia‘s 
growing and varied civil society in its public -private partnership roles.  In 1999 the WBG established 
the Civil Society/NGOs Advisory Council that was joined by 25 civil soci ety organizations (CSO) 
from all over Russia.  In 2005 a group of 15 representatives from leading Russian think-tanks, 
academia and analytical departments of government agencies formed a joint Civil Society/Think -
Tanks Advisory Council with those CSOs to consolidate Russian experts‘ collaboration with the 
WBG.  The Council provides expert assessment of the Bank‘s work in Russia, including feedback on 
CPS and WBG policies and initiatives.  Since 2000 the World Bank Small Grants Program/Civil 
Society Fund is being implemented in Russia aimed at empowering marginal and vulnerable 
population groups.  Fourteen Russian CSOs participated in the Development Marketplace.  Seven 
indigenous people CSOs applied to the Grants Facility for Indigenous Peoples and four of those 
received grants. 

104. Partnering with Universities. The WBG fosters partnerships with leading Russian 
universities and academia.  Over the years the cooperation with universities has evolved into multi -
year programs for development and capacity building.  Since 2008 the Bank has worked closely with 
the State University-High School of Economics (HSE) on an RTA basis.  Until 2014 the WBG will 
support HSE in implementation of a Strategic Development Plan by providing independent 
evaluation and advisory services.  Another multi-year partnership during the CPS period between the 
WBG and the Federal State Government-Financed Educational Institution of Higher Education 
"Russian Presidential Academy of National Economy and Public Administration" (RANEPA) will 
also be implemented as an RTA.  The cooperation program includes advisory services to assist 
RANEPA in building institutional capacity and creating the necessary foundation for becoming a 
nationally and internationally recognized leading institution in the areas of public policy, public and 
business administration. 

105. Collaboration with Multilateral Institutions.  The WBG cooperates closely with other 
multilateral institutions.  IBRD conducts annual consultations with the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF).  In March 2011 the WBG signed an MOU with the Eurasian Development Bank (EDB).  The 
MOU envisions a wide range of opportunities for cooperation ‒ including joint investment projects 
and joint analytical work ‒ on issues such as integration processes throughout the EurAsEC, energy 
efficiency, and coordination of macroeconomic stabilization programs and economic stimulus 
measures (EurAsEC Anti-Crisis Fund).  IBRD will also provide fee-based analytical and advisory 
services to the EDB on operational issues, such as project design, capacity building , and training on 
project implementation.  The EU funded the European Neighborhood Policy East Countries plus 
Russia, Forest Law Enforcement and Governance (FLEG) Program (2008-2012) with EUR 6 million.  
The FLEG Program is being implemented by a partnership comprising IBRD, IUCN and WWF.  The 
EBRD is another vital working partner for the WBG in Russia, particularly for IFC.  About 28 
percent of IFC‘s joint activity with EBRD in the ECA region is concentrated in Russia, primarily in 

33 

 
 
 
  
  
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

the financial markets, transportation and manufacturing sectors.  As a regionally-focused institution, 
EBRD invests roughly three times more than IFC in Russia annually.  The two institutions share 
common focus areas, including SME finance, infrastructure, sub-national development, and energy 
efficiency, which in many cases facilitates coordination and cooperation, includ ing joint financing 
and advisory initiatives.  This cooperation is particularly valuable with larger projects, where neither 
organization can absorb the full exposure needed, and with local partners, where both can play a role 
in developing the company‘s capacity.  Cooperation on financing, including arranging syndications, 
has strengthened as a result of the financial crisis.  IBRD coordinates with EBRD on the Arctic 
agenda.  Both EBRD and IBRD have been invited to take part in the GEF-funded Arctic 2020 
program with separate projects. 

IV.    MANAGING RISKS 

106. The implementation of the proposed CPS program and the achievement of the intended 
results face political, economic and implementation risks.  The WBG is proposing measures to 
address and mitigate risks to the CPS program through its engagements, dialogue, consultations, and 
due diligence for implementation, fiduciary, and governance issues. 

107. Political Risks.  The forthcoming presidential and parliamentary elections in 2011 and 2012 
could lead to some policy uncertainty and delays in implementing reforms.  Rising expenditure 
pressures in the run-up to the elections may also slow down fiscal adjustment.  The executive and 
legislative structures at the federal level and in the regions are consolidated and dominated by a 
single party.  On the other hand, fragmentation of policies at the sub-national level due to frequent 
restructurings is quite common.  Risks to political stability and security persist from unrest in the 
North Caucasus.  In recent years, violence and an Islamist insurgency have spread from Chechnya to 
other areas of the North Caucasus, such as the neighboring republics of Ingushetia and Dagestan.  
Following the bombing of the Moscow Metro in March 2010 and of the city‘s busiest airport in 
January 2011, a risk of further high-profile terrorist attacks remains.  Broad consensus on the key 
development challenges among most political contenders indicates that reform and institutional 
priorities will remain broadly constant.  Political continuity and stability are accorded high priority 
by the Government.  The country leadership regularly monitors public polls for signs of social unrest 
and implements mitigation measures.  The Government, with IBRD support through the Local 
Initiatives Support Project (LISP), is also providing support to communities aiming at improving 
social conditions.   

108. Economic Risks.  Growth prospects remain particularly vulnerable to large and sustainable 
drops in oil prices, as well as the prices of gas and metals.  Significant worsening of the international 
economic environment with prolonged impact on global growth could result in significant 
contraction in demand for Russia‘s exports and fiscal revenues.  The Federal Government is aware of 
the long-term risks faced by the economy due to excessive reliance on extractive industries, ranging 
from vulnerability to terms of trade shocks, to the increase of rent -seeking opportunities, and the 
constraints for generating employment and broad based growth.  As a response, the ―Strategy 2020‖ 
aims to diversify the economy through proactive policies and defines SME development as a major 
priority.  If global conditions deteriorate further and lead to a significant drop in oil prices, the 
WBG‘s program could require a change from its current focus on longer term development 
constraints to help the authorities respond to the deteriorating economic circumstances.  Russia is 
also aiming to rebuild its fiscal reserves through accumulation in its sovereign wealth funds.  In the 
longer term, the economic risks will be mitigated by the Government‘s focus on diversifying the 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

economy and improving the fiscal non-oil balance.  The WBG, in close cooperation with other 
development partners, closely monitors and assesses macro developments and policies, and there is 
continuous policy dialogue with the Ministry of Finance on key economic policy issues and choices.   

109. Program Implementation Risks.  Loan preparation in Russia is lengthy.  The WBG will 
actively engage core ministries in the design of new projects to ensure continui ty in ownership and 
oversight if there are changes in management.  Staff will also continue to advocate and support 
improvement in country systems.  Specific program implementation risks in Russia concern: 

 Perceptions of corruption as a significant development challenge continue to be 
significant.   The presidential oversight administration recently estimated that kickbacks in 
state procurement programs may amount to as much as one trillion rubles (US$32.5 billion) a 
year.  In line with the high priority given by the leadership to combat corruption and reduce 
conflicts of interest among government employees and legislators, the WBG is cooperating 
with the Ministry of Finance to heighten oversight of all related risks in existing and new 
projects (see section on Fiduciary Environment above).  The Government regulates 
procurement procedures with extensive use of information technology, and project entities 
generally have good experience in Bank fiduciary procedures.  However, special care is taken 
in IT and other high risk contracts.  A study to identify potential procurement risks will 
further inform WBG operations. 

 Capacity for implementation in Russia’s regions is limited.  This challenge is related to 
Russia‘s multi-level governance system.  Many policies are designed at the federal level but 
most public services are the responsibility of sub-national governments, and success depends 
on the technical capacity and fiscal positions of regional and local executive authorities 
which vary widely.  While engaging at the sub-national programs, the WBG will pay special 
attention to the design aspects which address the existing limited capacities and the need to 
avoid technically difficult reforms and programs.  Many of the WBG engagements will 
directly or indirectly contribute to improving the capacity in the regions.   

 Reliance on RTAs introduces measure of planning uncertainty into the program.  Many 
of the proposed WBG engagements under the CPS are likely to be through RTAs which 
typically take time and often involve unique arrangements for each contract .  There are often 
uncertainties on RTA requests by various agencies. The WBG engagements with the less 
advanced regions will be dependent on the capacity to develop viable partnerships , as well as 
on addressing the challenge that these entities may not be able to pay for RTA by establishing 
a seed fund that could support assistance to poorer regions.  These concerns will be taken into 
account when the proposed RTAs are designed and negotiated. 

110. Development Rewards.  Notwithstanding these risks, the engagement between the Russian 
Federation and the WBG is expected to bring high development rewards for Russia, for the ECA 
region, and for the multilateral aid system.  For Russia, the development impact will come through 
the implementation of the WBG-supported program presented in this strategy, in particular through 
increased engagement on the sub-national level with Russia's poorer/less advanced regions.  For the 
ECA region, the positive influence will be channeled through Russia's role as a regional driver of 
growth.  For the multilateral development aid system, the reward will come as a result of Russia's 
expanding role as a donor. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 

November 2011 

JOINT IBRD/IFC/MIGA 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY (CPS) 2012-2016  
FOR 
THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION 

CPS Annexes  

ANNEXES  

Annex 1: 
Annex 2:   
Annex 3:   
Annex 4: 
Annex 5: 
Annex 6:   
Annex 7: 
Annex 8: 
Annex 9: 
Annex 10: 
Annex 11: 
Annex 12: 

2012-2016 CPS Results Framework 
Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects  
Diversification and Competitiveness: Challenges and Opportunities  
Social and Human Capital Development  
Public Sector Governance in Russia  
Government‘s ―Development Strategy 2020‖ Update 
FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 
2012-2016 CPS Multistakeholder Consultations 
Overview of the Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program 
The Russian Federation as a Donor  
IBRD Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA) 
IBRD Country Financing Parameters for the Russian Federation  

CPS Standard Annex Tables  

Annex A2:   Country At-A-Glance  
Annex B2:   
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 
Annex B3:  
IFC Investment Operations Program and MIGA Guarantees 
Annex B3 
IBRD Indicative Financing Program, 2012-2016 
Annex B4 
IBRD/IFC Indicative Knowledge Services Program, 2012-2013 
Annex B5:   Russian Federation – Social Indicators 
Annex B6:  
Russian Federation – Key Economic Indicators 
Annex B7:   Russian Federation – Key Exposure Indicators 
Annex B8:  
IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio  
Annex B8:   
IBRD Operations Portfolio  

MAP OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION (IBRD NO. 33470) 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

         November 2011 
Page 1 of 8 

Annex 1 

Country Development 
Outcomes to which CPS 
contributes 

RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 CPS Results Framework10  

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS Program 

World Bank Group Program 

Strategic Theme 1: Increasing Growth and Diversification 
National Goals: Reduce the federal fiscal deficit; diversify from dependence on energy extraction industries; improve the business climate, and strengthen productivity, 
competitiveness, and innovation; deepen the financial sector and strengthen regulations and over sight; improve management of infrastructure assets and expand quality services with 
private sector participation; decrease the energy intensity of the economy by 40 percent by 2020; adapt to and mitigate climate change challenges. 
Issues and Obstacles: 
 Rising public expenditure commitments threatening to undermine fiscal and macro stability 
 Challenging business environment and insufficient competitiveness 
 
Financial sector weaknesses, constrained access to finance, underdeveloped capital markets 
 Declining quality of infrastructure assets and services, and significant investment gaps 
Management of Public 
Finances 

NATIONAL 

Outcome 1: Improved 
efficiency and effectiveness of 
public financial management 

 Support improvements in the Treasury including the associated 
legal/regulatory framework, policies, systems, and operational policies 
 Augment efforts to ensure that all central government departments report 
expenditures on a programmatic basis with results indicators in FY14 
 Strengthen capacity in the Ministry of Finance and the Federal Tax 
Service to further modernize the Customs Department 
 Strengthen E-Budget systems 
 Support the preparation of a new Strategy 2020 

Ongoing Financing 
 
Treasury Development Project (FY02) 
 Customs Development Project (FY03) 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Fiscal and Public Finance Modernization Project  

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
ESW Russian Economic Reports 
 
TA Public Expenditure Performance Review 
 
TA Support to Strategy 2020 

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 
E-Budget Systems  

10 Notes:  
(1) The WBG indicative financing and knowledge services program is for the period 2012 -2013.  The program for the outer years of the CPS will be determined jointly with the 
Government and will be presented for Board discussion in the CPS Progress Report in 2014.  It is expected that the financing program in 2014-2016 will include operations 
in infrastructure, human development, regional development, and environmenta l management, as well as possible follow-on operations in land registration and customs 
management.  Some WBG engagements support more than one engagement area. 
(2) RTA: Reimbursable Technical Assistance, also being referred to as fee-for-service (FFS) or fee-based services (FBS). 
(3) AAA: Analytical and Advisory Activities including TA: Technical Assistance, and ESW: Economic and Sector Work. 
(4) FYs for ongoing projects in the third column refer to the fiscal year of approval. 

 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 1: 2012-2016 CPS Results Framework 

        November 2011 
                             Page 2 of 8 

Country Development 
Outcomes to which CPS 
contributes 

Investment 
Climate/Innovation 

Outcome 2: Further 
streamlined and simplified 
business procedures and 
improved capacity to monitor 
and benchmark business 
regulations 

Outcome 3: Strengthened 
capacity to design and 
implement innovation and 
diversification programs in 
Russia‘s regions 

Financial Sector 
Development 

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS Program 

World Bank Group Program 

 Provide recommendations to improve the regulatory environment as 
measured by various surveys including Business Environment and 
Enterprise Performance (BEEPS), annual Doing Business, and Sub-National 
Doing Business 
 Complete the second round of the Sub-National Doing Business 
assessment comparing 30 Russian cities for key areas of business 
regulations 
 Provide advisory services to reduce average customs clearance time, 
reduce the number of documents needed to export and import, and address 
issues relating to construction permits 

 Support the implementation of the regional innovation business plan 
program in four pilot regions 
 Support the deployment of the national program for Regional Innovation 
Action Plans (RIAP) by the Ministry of Economic Development (MOED) 
through issuance of methodological recommendations 
 Invest in the conservation, safekeeping, valorization and promotion of 
cultural heritage assets in four oblasts 
 Increase the number of visitors in cultural heritage sites under the Bank-
supported project (additional 10 percent by 2016 from baseline to be 
determined during project implementation)  

NATIONAL 

Ongoing Financing 
 Customs Development Project (FY03) 

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
ESW Policy notes on growth, jobs, and productivity 
 
TA Investment Climate/Doing Business  
 
TA Economic Diversification 
 
TA Diversification and Innovation 

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 
Investment Climate 

SUB-NATIONAL 

Ongoing Financing 
 
St. Petersburg Economic Development Project (FY03) 
 Cultural Heritage 2 Project (FY11) 

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 
Sub-national Doing Business  
 
Tatarstan Innovation Support  
 
Tomsk Innovation Strategy  
 Regional Innovation Action Plan  
 Cultural Heritage and Cultural Tourism Development in 
Tatarstan  

NATIONAL 

Outcome 4: Improved 
regulatory and supervisory 
framework for the financial 
sector, and upgraded market 
infrastructure 

Outcome 5: Increased depth 
and breadth in the financial 

 Improve access to finance for small proprietors and individuals and 
increase the number of members and clients of microfinance institutions and 
credit co-operatives  
 Increase aggregate investment of financial institutions through credit line 
to industry for energy efficiency improvements 
 Provide advisory services to increase the number of IOSCO 
(International Organization of Security Commissions) principles which are 
rated as ―broadly implemented‖ 

Ongoing Financing 
 
Financial Education and Financial Literacy Project (FY11) 
 
IFC direct financing to banks and private sector  

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Energy Efficiency Financial Intermediary Project  
 
Financial Sector Development Project  

               
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 1: 2012-2016 CPS Results Framework 

        November 2011 
                             Page 3 of 8 

Country Development 
Outcomes to which CPS 
contributes 
sector, and increased access to 
finance 

Sustainable Development 
and Effective Protection of 
the Environment 

Outcome 6: Increased access 
to quality infrastructure assets 
and improved infrastructure 
services including through 
increased participation of the 
private sector in financing and 
management of infrastructure 

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS Program 

World Bank Group Program 

 
 

Fiscal and Public Finance Modernization Project  
IFC Russian Bank Opportunity Fund (RBOF)  

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Financial Sector Development  
 
IFC Russia Financial Markets Crisis Management Project 

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 Development of Moscow as International Financial Center  

SUB-NATIONAL 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 Microfinance Development Project  

NATIONAL 

 Strengthen the capacity of AVTODOR (State Road Agency) to identify, 
prepare, procure, and monitor toll road projects 
 Improve the overall legal, regulatory, and institutional framework for 
PPPs 
 Reduce the number of pipe breaks in distribution networks in the cities 
participating in the Housing and Community Services (HCS) Project  

Ongoing Financing 
 Housing and Communal Services Project (FY08) 
 Carbon Finance 4 Rosneft Gas Flaring Reduction Project (FY09) 
 
IFC municipal and PPP finance 
 
IFC direct financing to private sector 

Outcome 7: Enhanced 
competitiveness and 
sustainability of the economy 
via reduced resource intensity 
of GDP 

 Increase energy savings under the Energy Efficiency Financial 
Intermediary Project 
 Increase the availability of commercial financing for resource and 
Energy Efficiency (EE) projects and provide advisory services 

Outcome 8: Improved 
management of environmental 
risks and natural resources  

 Provide financing towards the establishment of inter-regional Forest Fire 
Centers 
 Equip and train fire brigades in pilot regions and Pro tected Areas 
 Strengthen the institutional and management capacity for 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Forest Fire Response Project  
 
Energy Efficiency Financial Intermediary Project  
 VEB (Russian Development Bank) Infrastructure Financial 
Intermediary Project  
Environmental Monitoring Project  

 

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
ESW Environmental Performance Overview  
 
IFC Russia Sustainable Energy Finance Program 
 
IFC Russia Residential Energy Efficiency Program 
 
IFC Russia Renewable Energy 
 
IFC Russia Cleaner Production 
 WBI support to selected lagging regions and monocities 

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 

               
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 1: 2012-2016 CPS Results Framework 

        November 2011 
                             Page 4 of 8 

Country Development 
Outcomes to which CPS 
contributes 

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS Program 

World Bank Group Program 

hydrometerological service delivery 
 Contribute towards the development of a policy and institutional 
framework to deal with unique environmental issues in the Arctic Zone 

 

 

 
 

 

Improving Public Transport (in cooperation with the Ministry of 
Transport)  
Strengthening the Institutional and Management Capacity of 
Avtodor (State Road Agency) 
Improvement of Urban Transport in Russia 
Support to Institutional Strengthening and PPP Project 
Preparation  
International Water Academy  

SUB-NATIONAL 

Ongoing Financing 
 Housing and Communal Services Project (FY08) 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 Hydrometerological Modernization Project 2  

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Intelligent Transport System for St. Petersburg  
 
ESW Urban Transport Sector Overview 

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 
St. Petersburg Urban Transport 
Strategic Theme 2: Expanding Human Potential 
National Goals:  Improve efficiency of social spending budgets and targeting; promote healthy lifestyles, improve quality and access of health care, and strengthen health financing; 
improve coverage and efficiency of early childhood development; flexibly align education and skills with labor markets; improve quality of primary and secondary education. 
Issues and Obstacles: 
 Continuing vulnerability to poverty, and social and economic exclusion 
 
Poor targeting of social programs and inefficient public social spending 
 
Poor health outcomes with low life expectancy, high mortality rates and high burden of disease 
 Mismatch of skills and vocational education with labor market and business needs 
 
Inefficient use of ICT and other technology in educational institutions 
Education, Health,  and 
Social Protection 

NATIONAL 

Outcome 9: Increased quality 
and improved access, 
targeting, coverage, and 
efficiency of social services 
for human development  

 Increase coverage of preschool services in selected regions 
 Support efforts to increase the share of health resources channeled 
through Mandatory Health Insurance (MHI) funds 
 Develop regional pilots of provider payment reforms 
 Undertake pilots at the regional/ spending unit level to define a limited 

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Health Financing  
 
ESW Health Provider Survey  

               
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 1: 2012-2016 CPS Results Framework 

        November 2011 
                             Page 5 of 8 

Country Development 
Outcomes to which CPS 
contributes 

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS Program 

World Bank Group Program 

set of indicators to inform policy and evaluation 
 Enhance the use of ICT for development of education in selected 
educational institutions 

Skills for Economic 
Development 

Outcome 10: Professional 
education system produces 
adequate skills for increased 
competitiveness 

 Improve financial literacy of Russian citizens and strengthen consumer 
protection 
 Provide an overview of professional and vocational education systems 
and identify major issues and challenges 

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 Russian Academy of National Economy and Public 
Administration (RANEPA) Program  
 Russia Education Aid for Development - READ 
 Higher School of Economics II  
 READ II  

SUB-NATIONAL 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Preschool Education Project for Yakutia  

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Regional Human Development  

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 Yakutia Early Childhood Development Program  
 
Primary Health Care Provider Payment Reform in Kirov Region 
 
E-Education Project  
 Krasnoyarsk Technical Vocational Education and Training 
Program  
Provider Payment Reforms in Regions  
Tatarstan Social Protection  
Local Initiatives Support in Kirov  
Local Initiatives Support in Stavropol  

 
 
 
 

NATIONAL 

Ongoing Financing 
 
Financial Education and Financial Literacy Project (FY11) 
 WBI Engage Russian participants in global and regional events, 
connect to global development debates, help access e-Institute 
courses, develop knowledge and learning partnerships with 
Russian knowledge institutions 

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
ESW Professional Education and Skills  
 
ESW Poverty, Opportunity, and Social Mobility  

               
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 1: 2012-2016 CPS Results Framework 

        November 2011 
                             Page 6 of 8 

Country Development 
Outcomes to which CPS 
contributes 

Socially Inclusive 
Development 

Outcome 11: Increased social 
inclusion of vulnerable 
groups  

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS Program 

World Bank Group Program 

 Increase the access of vulnerable groups to sports and physical activities 
under the Bank-assisted project (measured by the percentage of sports 
facility users who are from disadvantaged groups; to be determined during 
project appraisal and implementation) 
 Inform the dialogue on issues relating to the social inclusion of 
immigrants 
 Increase the share of eligible settlement municipalities in the North 
Caucasus Federal Okrug (NCFO) implementing participatory initiatives 
according to community participation principles 
 Assist the regional governments of the Kirov Oblast and the Stavropol 
Krai in identifying key lessons and areas of improvement in their local 
initiatives support programs for vulnerable groups and territories 
 Introduce the best World Bank project supervision principles and 
practices in the Stavropol Krai and Kirov Oblast local initiative support 
programs. 

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 Higher School of Economics II  
 Russian Academy of National Economy and Public 
Administration (RANEPA) Program  

NATIONAL 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Social Inclusion through Sports Project  

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
Support for Migration and Remittances Peer-Assisted Learning 
(MIRPAL) Network Initiative 

SUB-NATIONAL 

Ongoing Financing 
 
St. Petersburg Economic Development Project (FY03) 
 Housing and Communal Services Project (FY08) 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 North Caucasus South Okrug Local Initiatives Support Project  

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 
Local Initiatives Support in Kirov  
 
Local Initiatives Support in Stavropol  
 Cultural Heritage and Cultural Tourism Development in 
Tatarstan  

Strategic Theme 3: Deepening Russia’s Global and Regional Role 
National Goals: Strengthen Russia‘s role as a reliable international partner; expand Russia‘s role as a donor of high quality ODA; establish the necessary institutional structures to 
deliver multi and bilateral development assistance. 
Issues and Obstacles: 
 
Lack of public discourse on global development aid and Russia‘s role in international development assistance 
 
Institutional framework for Russian development aid needs strengthening 
 
Limited initial capacity to manage role as donor and for related policy analysis 
 
Lack of adequate information support for Russian development aid 

               
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 1: 2012-2016 CPS Results Framework 

        November 2011 
                             Page 7 of 8 

Country Development 
Outcomes to which CPS 
contributes 
Global Public Goods 

Outcome 12: Strengthened 
Russian participation in the 
provision of global public 
goods 

Russia as a Donor 

Outcome 13: Established an 
institutional structure for 
delivery of a bilateral and 
multilateral development 
assistance program 

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS Program 

World Bank Group Program 

 Provide technical support for the planned establishment of the Eurasian 
Food Security Center (linked to CGIAR) and the International Water 
Academy 
 Strengthen national capacity for weather and climate risk management 
 Provide advice and organizational support for Russia‘s APEC Presidency 

Ongoing Financing 
 Hydrometerological System Modernization Project (FY05) 

GLOBAL 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Energy Efficiency Financial Intermediary Project  
 
Forest Fire Response Project  
 
Fiscal and Public Finance Modernization Project  
 Hydrometerological Modernization Project 2  
 
Environmental Monitoring Project  

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Support to Russia 2012 APEC Presidency 
 
TA Support to Strategy 2020 
 
TA WTO Monitoring and Analysis and Trade in Services  

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 
International Water Academy (in support of TF) 
 
Eurasian Center for Food Security (linked to CGIAR)  

ECA REGIONAL 

 Support the setting up of a Russian bilateral development agency 
 Advise on aligning the Russian national Official Development Assistance 
(ODA) system with OECD-DAC principles 
 Boost capacity for development aid delivery in priority sectors and areas 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Fiscal and Public Finance Modernization Project (component on 
aid agency) 

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Development Aid Program  
 WBI support to Russia as a Donor 

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 Russia Education Aid for Development – READ (in support of 
TF) 

               
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 1: 2012-2016 CPS Results Framework 

        November 2011 
                             Page 8 of 8 

Country Development 
Outcomes to which CPS 
contributes 

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS Program 

World Bank Group Program 

Cross-cutting Theme: Improving Governance and Transparency  
National Goals: Increase transparency of government activities; achieve modern standards of public service delivery based on needs of citizens and businesses. 
Issues and Obstacles: 
 Reform efforts yet to translate into tangible improvements in quality of public administration 
 
Public services heavily embedded in traditional administrative arrangements 
 
Little uniformity of scope and format of information disclosure of government activities 
 Concerns about quality of institutional systems and vulnerability to corruption 
Public Administration, 
Procurement, and Financial 
Management  

NATIONAL 

Outcome 14: Improved 
government transparency and 
accountability 

 Collaborate on the introduction of additional e-services for taxpayers 
using the e-government gateway 
 Augment efforts to prepare forest strategies which include forest 
governance issues 
 Provide independent advice on the update of the public procurement 
legislation and the federal contracting system 

Ongoing Financing 
 Registration Development Project (FY06) 
 
Judicial Reform Support Project (FY07) 
 
State Statistical System II Project (FY07) 
 GPF (Governance Partnership Facility): Support to the 
Ombudsman Office in Perm (FY09) 
TA EC  European Neighborhood Partnership Instrument (ENPI) 
East Countries and Russia FLEG (Forest Law Enforcement and 
Governance program) 

 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Fiscal and Public Finance Modernization Project  

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Program Budgeting and Expenditure Efficiency  
 
TA Procurement System Development  

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 
E-Budget Systems  
 Russian Academy of National Economy and Public 
Administration (RANEPA) Program  

               
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 
Page 1 of 7 

Annex 2 

Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects 

1. 
Russia has weathered the global crisis well despite the massive oil and capital account 
shocks but the crisis has altered the country’s long-term growth trajectory (Figure 3).  This was 
mainly because of the large pre-crisis fiscal reserves and fiscal surpluses that allowed the 
Government to mount a large countercyclical stimulus package in support of the financial system, 
enterprises, and households.  Despite a large drop in real GDP in 2009 ( -7.8 percent), an acute 
liquidity crisis, and a sharp increase in unemployment, the c risis was managed without systemic bank 
failures, and the economic and labor market conditions began to improve during 2009 in line with the 
rise in oil prices and recovery in domestic demand and credit.  Large increases in public sector wages 
and pensions have cushioned the impact on the middle class and the poor, making the social impact 
less severe than it would otherwise have been. With the cyclical demand recovery in the global and 
Russian economies as well as energy commodities, Russia‘s real GDP grew 4 percent and 
unemployment fell 2 percentage points from its peak during the crisis to 7.2 percent at the end of 
2010. 

Figure 3: .The Impact of the Crisis on the Long-term Development Objectives in 
Russia: Dynamics of GDP Level in Russia, 2007-2020 (q1-2006=100) 

Source: World Bank‘s Russian Economic Report No. 26: Growing Risks (September 15, 2011). 

2. 
Following a cyclical recovery of oil prices, economic activity , and employment during 
2010, Russia’s current macroeconomic situation remains favorable.  After a 4 percent growth in 
2010, the Russian economy continues to expand in an environment of declining unemployment (6.5 
percent in July 2011) and inflation, rising domestic consumption, and still high oil prices.  All sectors 
of the economy are growing and domestic consumption––while less buoyant than anticipated––
increasingly acts as an engine of demand growth (Figure 4).  With good harvest and favorable food 
price outlook, annual inflation is expected to end at around 7.5 percent, somewhat higher than the 
Government‘s target of 7 percent, but lower than at any time in recent years.  The federal budget is 
likely to be in near-balance in 2011.  And a large current account surplus of almost US$70 billion 
significantly exceeds the deficit in the capital account, which will allow the Central Bank to 
accumulate additional reserves. 

            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 2: Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects    

November 2011 
                                Page 2 of 7 

Figure 4: Demand Structure of Russia’s Real GDP Growth (percent) 

Source: World Bank‘s Russian Economic Report No. 26: Growing Risks (September 15, 2011). 

3. 
With almost two years of moderate growth, unemployment fell to 6.5 percent in July 
2011 but improvements in Russia’s regions are much more differentiated.  The unemployment 
rate fell in all districts in 2010 and continued to fall in the first half of 2011, especially in Moscow 
and St. Petersburg, which account for the bulk of the economic activity in the country.  But in some 
regions unemployment rates remain high or have increased in comparison with the similar period of 
the past year.  For instance, unemployment has increased in Altai republic , Chukotka autonomous 
okrug, Kamchatka krai, Lipetsk oblast, Mari El republic, Murmansk oblast, Smolensk oblast, Tomsk 
oblast, and Vladimir oblast.  In some other regions, with very high rates prevailing before the crisis, 
unemployment remains very high (North Caucasus federal district, reflecting structural, investment 
climate, and security factors). 

4. 
Yet the risks to the global economy are growing and so are risks to Russia’s growth.  
Reflecting slowdown in major developed economies, and rising risks associated with the European 
debt crisis during the summer of 2011, the WBG‘s outlook for Russia‘s real GDP growth was revised 
to 4 percent in 2011 (down from 4.4 percent earlier in the year), and to 3.8 percent in 2012.  This is 
predicated on the lower oil price outlook for Russia and the global economy growing at more 
moderate rates, especially high income countries. 

5. 
Beyond this favorable short-term picture lie heightened vulnerabilities of the Russ ian 
budget and long-standing structural issues.  First, there is the large non-oil fiscal deficit of about 
11 percent of GDP, compared with the sustainable 4.5 percent level.  Second, with much smaller 
fiscal reserves than before 2008, Russia‘s budget is now more vulnerable to a new, sustained drop in 
oil prices.  Third, Russia faces major structural problems in the medium term, including the need to 
significantly improve the investment climate, close large infrastructure gaps, diversify its export, tax, 
and broader economic base, improve governance, and strengthen institutions. 

Inflation 

6. 
Inflation is on a downward, short-term trend.  Although Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
inflation is on a downward trend with annual inflation in August 2011 at 8.2 percent, this has been 
mainly because of the seasonal decline in food prices. Core inflation (excluding food and energy 

            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 2: Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects    

November 2011 
                                Page 3 of 7 

prices) has proven resilient to the monetary tightening so far.  On the assumption of sustained 
disinflation policy, CPI inflation is projected, in the baseline, to gradually fall to 7.5 percent in 2011 
(compared with the government‘s target of 6-7 percent) with further declines in the medium term.  
External shocks due to food and energy prices and/or return of capital inflows as well as inflation 
inertia and institutional and structural factors (e.g., periodic increases in utility prices), however, 
could make disinflation more difficult. 

External Performance and Trade Integration 

7. 
High oil prices have helped strengthen Russia’s current account but capital outflows 
continued.  In the first half of 2011, the overall balance of payments (BoP) position deteriorated due 
to large net capital outflows, but Russia continues to enjoy a sizeable current account surplus.  With 
average oil prices remaining above US$100 a barrel, the external current account balance slightly 
improved to US$57.6 billion in the first half of 2011 from US$52.1 billion in the same period of 
2010, despite a surge in imports associated with continued increase in economic activity (Figures 5 
and 6).  The capital account, on the other hand, has considerably weakened because of increased 
capital outflows.  As a result, the overall BoP surplus has narrowed, albeit allowing the Central Bank 
of Russia (CBR) to accumulate about US$23 billion in foreign currency reserves. 

Figure 5: Oil Prices and the Trade Balance 

Figure 6: Current Account Balances and the 
Real Effective Exchange Rate 

8. 
Russia made 
important progress toward World Trade Organization (WTO) 
membership.  If the remaining issues are resolved, which is within the realm of possibilities, 
membership can be anticipated in early 2012.  At the same time, on July 1, 2011, the Customs Union 
among Russia, Kazakhstan, and Belarus became operational, reflecting Russia‘s concerted efforts to 
increase trade, energy, and economic integration with countries in its vicinity. 

Fiscal Sector 

9. 
High oil prices and seasonal delays in expenditure execution resulted in sizable 
surpluses of the federal budget.  Despite the recent declines in oil prices, average oil prices 
remained high (Figure 7).  According to preliminary estimates of the Ministry of Finance, the federal 
budget was executed with a surplus of 2.5 percent of GDP in January-July 2011, compared to the 1.3 
percent annual deficit stipulated in the amended 2011 budget.  The surplus was mainly due to higher 
revenues (thanks to oil prices which average US$117.10 per barrel of Brent in Q2 2011) that 
amounted to 21.8 percent of GDP compared to a targeted 19.3 percent in the Budget Law.  Execution 

020406080100120140101520253035404550552003Q12003Q32004Q12004Q32005Q12005Q32006Q12006Q32007Q12007Q32008Q12008Q32009Q12009Q32010Q12010Q32011Q1Trade balance, bln USD (left axis)Crude oil, Brent, $/b (right axis)8090100110120130140150-80-60-40-200204060CAB, no oil and gas, bln USDCAB, bln USDREER, 2005=100 (right axis)            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 2: Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects    

November 2011 
                                Page 4 of 7 

of expenditures in the first seven months of 2011 has been slow, with federal spending amounting to 
19.3 percent of GDP compared to 20.7 percent planned in the budget. 

Figure 7: World Bank Oil Price Forecast for Average Crude: Brent, Dubai,  
and West Texas Intermediate (WTI) (simple average, US$/barrel)  

125 

100 

75 

50 

25 

103.0 

92.5 

94.7 

97.0 

79.0 

61.8 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

Source: World Bank staff. 

10. 
Nevertheless, the budget remains vulnerable to a new, sudden drop in oil prices.  Non-
oil fiscal deficit remains at about 11 percent of GDP, much higher than the sustainable, long -term 
level of about 4.5 percent.  The 2011 budget amendment proposes modest adjustments but large non-
oil deficit and associated vulnerabilities will remain in the medium term.  In case of sustained drop of 
oil prices to about US$60 for a year, Russia‘s fiscal deficit would rise to about 5 .5 percent of GDP, 
resulting in a need for sizeable and rapid adjustment and financing. 

Financial Sector 

11. With improved liquidity and a continued decline in lending rates, robust credit 
recovery continues, but the share of total credits to the private sector in GDP remains below 
the pre-crisis level.  In January–July 2011, the total stock of credit to the private sector increased 19 
percent in nominal terms, year-on-year.  Credit to households, in particular (for example, mortgages, 
consumer loans and car loans), rose 25 percent during the first seven months of 2011, while credit to 
nonfinancial corporations increased 17.5 percent.  But the share of total stock of credits in GDP 
remains relatively low — about 41 percent at end-July 2011 (only 10 percent for household credits).  

12. 
Lending 
to 
small 
and medium-size 
enterprises 
(SMEs)—which 
suffered 
disproportionately during the crisis—however, is recovering slowly.  This suggests that banks 
still perceive SMEs and households as high-risk borrowers, often imposing prohibitive terms on 
consumer loans, limiting a more robust recovery of domestic consumption (Figure 8).  

            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 2: Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects    

November 2011 
                                Page 5 of 7 

Figure 8: Bank Lending to Households and Non-financial Organizations 

60.00 

50.00 

40.00 

30.00 

20.00 

10.00 

0.00 

-10.00 

-20.00 

Growth of credits to non-financial organizations, %, y-o-y 

Growth of credits to households, %, y-o-y 

Source: CBR and World Bank staff estimates. 

13. 
Official debt statistics indicate that access to longer-term credits by Russian banks and 
corporations improved in the first half of 2011, before the rise in debt uncertainties in Europe.  
According to CBR preliminary debt statistics, the outstanding external debt of the corporate sector increased 
to US$485.6 billion and that of the banking sector to US$157.0 billion by end-June 2011, while that of 
nonfinancial corporations rose to US$328.5.  The latest statistics also show that access to long-term external 
financing has improved for private banks and corporations.  The maturity structure of the private sector 
debt, in particular, indicates that both banks and nonfinancial corporations increased their long-term 
external liabilities in Q1 2011 (possibly reflecting future investment plans) while the share of short-
term debt in total liabilities has been reduced.  

Medium-Term Macroeconomic Prospects and Long-Term Challenges 

14. 
In the baseline medium-term scenario, the Russian economy is expected to grow at 
moderate rates (Table 2).  This forecast is based on the expected slowdown in global economic 
growth and a lower global demand for commodities and oil in particular than was the case just a few 
months ago.  It also incorporates the latest draft budget parameters for the federal budget 2012 -14, 
featuring very gradual adjustment.  Oil prices are now projected to gradually decline from US$103 
per barrel in 2011 to US$88.50 per barrel in 2015.  With lower oil prices and global demand in the 
medium term and the closure of the output gap, the Russian economy would gradually slow from 4 
percent growth in 2011 to a more sustainable pace of about 3.5 percent in 2013-2015.  Real GDP 
expansion will be increasingly driven by domestic consumption, with investment demand also 
increasing at a slightly higher annual rate than real GDP.  Meanwhile, the negative contribution of 
net exports is likely to increase during the projection per iod with deteriorating external current 
account but with continued, sizeable levels of international reserves . 

            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 2: Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects    

November 2011 
                                Page 6 of 7 

Table 2:  Medium-Term Macroeconomic Prospects 

National Accounts 
Real GDP growth rates, % 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015 

4.0 

3.8 

3.5 

3.5 

3.5 

Annual average GDP, million US$ 

1,765,175 

1,939,255 

2,083,199 

2,195,999 

2,291,042 

Fiscal Balances (general gov't) 

Non –oil  Balance 

% of GDP 

% of GDP 

-0.2 

-11.0 

-1.6 

-10.3 

-1.5 

-9.2 

-1.6 

-9.3 

-1.7 

-9.4 

BoP, million US$ 
Exports (GNFS) 
Imports (GNFS) 
Balance on Current Account, % GDP 
Gross reserves [incl. gold] 

Memo: average oil price , US$/bbl 

Relative Prices  
CPI, annual average, % 

Average REER change, %   

Debt, million US$  
DOD at end of year (LT, ext, federal gov't) 
DOD at end of year (LT,ext, private sector) 

505,191 
389,166 
3.8 
513,028  

103.00 

486,612 
423,507 
1.1 
528,478  

94.70 

496,915 
460,326 
0.1 
533,683  

92.50 

510,967 
485,525 
-0.3 
533,443  

90.50 

521,055 
507,686 
-0.8 
518,664  

88.50 

7.5 

14.7 

6.5 

5.0 

5.0 

2.8 

5.0 

-0.5 

4.5 

-1.5 

43,510.0 
324,769.3 

46,020.0 
329,815.4 

48,530.0 
343,852.4 

51,040.0 
355,081.9 

53,550.0 
364,065.5 

Debt/GDP ratio for total government debt (gross) 

0.10 

0.11 

0.15 

0.18 

0.22 

15. 
The fiscal situation is projected to remain stable in the short term but medium term-
fiscal adjustment is necessary for Russia to achieve long-term fiscal sustainability.  The new 
plan for fiscal consolidation is likely to be much less ambitious than previously announced while the 
widely debated reintroduction of a fiscal rule could be delayed until after 2015.  This is reflected in 
the recently announced draft budget plan for 2012-2014.  As a result, the consolidated budget will 
remain in deficit of about 1.6 percent of GDP in 2012-2015, while non-oil deficit will reduce only 
marginally to about 10 percent of GDP in 2014 from 11 percent in 2011.  With low public debt and 
limited deficit, no significant financing issues arise, and the Government plans to finance the deficit 
from predominantly domestic borrowing.  Strategic, limited external borrowing, especially in the 
case of new drops in oil prices and fiscal revenues, is possible in 2012 -15.  In case of significant and 
sustained drop in oil prices (e.g., to an average of US$60 per barrel over a period of one year), 
Russia‘s budget deficit could increase to about 5.5 percent of GDP, resulting in the need for rapid 
adjustment and financing.  At the same time, the quality of the composition of public expenditures 
should be improved towards more productive expenditures, especially public investments in 
infrastructure, which has been identified as a key constraint of the investment climate and growth.  In 
addition, this scenario assumes gradual progress on structural reform initiatives in the areas of anti-
corruption, privatization, and transparency. 

16. 
Some depreciation of the real effective exchange rate can be expected.  Given the current 
exchange rate policy (managed float moving to a fully flexible regime) and the deterioration of the 
external current account and the overall balance of payments position, the real effective exchange 
rate is expected to depreciate by an average of around 3 percent a year beginning in 2013.  Both 
upside and downside risks will remain, mostly related to the volatility in oil prices and capital flows. 

17. 
Given the sharply higher global risks, however, and the sensitivity of the Russian 
economy to swings in oil prices, it is useful to outline the implications of some downside 
scenarios. Using an empirical model linking oil prices, budget balance, consumption, growth, and 
unemployment, it is possible to illustrate the implications of ―moderate shock‖ and ―severe shock‖ 
scenarios in order to get a sense of how bad the economic and fiscal s ituation could get in case of 
sizeable new shocks.  

            
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 2: Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects    

November 2011 
                                Page 7 of 7 

18. 
Under the ―moderate shock‖ scenario, global growth outlook gradually deteriorates, 
reflected in lower oil price outlook to an average of US$80 (a drop of about US$15 compared with 
the baseline outlook) (Table 3).11 This results in the growth in 2011 and the fiscal balance and 
unemployment all being adversely affected in the last quarter of the year with moderate impact on 
the year as a whole. But in 2012, growth is cut by 2 percentage points and, without corrective 
adjustment, fiscal balance deteriorates sharply to 3.1 percent of GDP. The remaining balances of the 
Reserve Fund would likely be used to partly finance the gap with the remainder likely to come from 
domestic financing. Unemployment would trend back to 7 percent. 

19. 
Under the ―severe shock‖ scenario, global outlook is severely affected by the recession in 
one of the major economic blocks, resulting in a sharp contraction in global demand and demand for 
oil. Under these conditions, oil demand would fall sharply and prices could again average US$60 in 
2012 (as in 2009). Russia‘s economy would also enter a recession with negative growth and 
unemployment rising almost 1.5 percentage points higher than in the baseline outlook. In the absence 
of countervailing fiscal measures, fiscal balance would turn into a deficit of about 5.3 percent of 
GDP. Both scenarios would require significant, new fiscal measures consisting of tax, expenditure, 
and financing measures to close the resulting fiscal gaps. 

Table 3:  Simulation Results for Consumption Growth in Russia, 2011–12 

Scenario 1 (base case) 

Oil price 
(Brent), US$ 
UUUS$/bbl 
105 
95 

Oil price 
(Brent), US$ 
US$US$UUS
100 
$/bbl 
80 

Oil price 
(Brent), US$ 
US$/bbl 
90 
60 

2011 
2012 

2011 
2012 

2011 
2012 

Source: World Bank staff calculations.  

Unemploy-
ment rate, % 
6.6 
6.3 

Consumption 
growth y-o-y, % 
5.5 
5.3 

Unemploy-
ment rate, % 
6.8 
7.0 

Consumption 
growth y-o-y, % 
5.0 
3.0 

Unemploym
ent rate, % 
7.0 
7.5 

Consumption 
growth y-o-y, % 
4.6 
0.3 

3.3 
-1.5 

G
GG 
surplus/deficit, 
D
4.0 
% GDP 
-0.2 
P
3.8 
-1.6 
g
Scenario 2 (moderate shock) 
r
G
GG 
o
surplus/deficit, 
D
w
3.5 
% GDP 
-0.5 
P
t
2.0 
-3.1 
h
g
Scenario 3 (severe shock) 
r
G
GG 
y
o
surplus/deficit, 
-
D
w
% GDP 
-1.4 
o
P
t
-
-5.3 
h
y
g
r
,
o
y
w
% 
-
t
o
h
-
y
,
y
-
% 
o
-
y
,

20. 
Finally, under any scenario, on the structural reform front, the Russian economy is 
facing multiple, long-term challenges.  These include, first and foremost, improving the investment 
climate, addressing the large infrastructure gaps, diversifying Russia‘s tax, export and broader 
economic base, further strengthening of the financial sector, and strengthening governance and 
institutions.  In each of these areas, Russia scores comparatively low on many measures of 
performance, especially for a very large middle-income country aspiring to achieve high-income 
status within the next decade.  These challenges underpin the Government‘s broader modernization 
agenda and the ongoing broad consultative discussions about the country‘s revised Strategy 2020.  
The extent to which these long-term challenges are met will determine the longer-term dynamics of 
the Russian economy, its catch-up with the developed countries, and its ability to improve the living 
standards of its citizens. 

% 

11 Note that this is  not an improbable scenario given that US$80 in real terms is the current, long -term equilibrium 
level of oil prices according to the World Bank commodity forecasts; it would also be much more favorable than 
during the 2009 crisis when the World Bank oil price index averaged just above US$60 per barrel. 

            
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 
Page 1 of 4 

Annex 3 

Diversification and Competitiveness: Challenges and Opportunities 

Overall Assessment 

1. 
The Russian economy suffers from weak competition, a poor investment climate, and a 
lack of innovation which, in turn, limit its diversification. One of the consequences of this is that 
Russia‘s product base has narrowed considerably over the past decade.  Oil and natural gas exports 
comprised less than half of total exports in 2000 .  Ten years later they had grown to two-thirds of 
total exports.  Of the remainder, 15 percent was accounted for by other extractive industries and only 
9 percent by high-tech exports, mainly from the defense industry.  Most of the growth in Russian 
exports has come from exporting more of the same products and services to existing markets rather 
than through exporting new ones to old or new markets.  By contrast, other BRIC countries show 
more dynamism in their export performance. 

2. 
Relative to its structural endowments and trade potential, Russia appears to be under -
exporting.  According to the 2009 World Bank Enterprise Survey, 50 percent of Russian firms see 
local markets as their main sales destination – a large number, even when compared to large 
economies such as Brazil, where the corresponding share is only 35 percent.  Despite China‘s growth 
in world trade, its share in Russia‘s exports remained between 4 and 5 percent between 1998 and 
2008.  Furthermore, the decline in the share of services exported by Russia (from 11.4 percent of 
GDP in 1999 to 7.6 percent of GDP in 2008) is unique among the BRIC countries. 

3. 
State involvement in the economy is high.  State-owned enterprises are present in more 
sectors of the economy than in any OECD country bar Poland.  These enterprises also account for 
around 17 percent of total employment.  As shown by the OECD‘s 2008 Product Market Regulation 
Indicators, the average level of foreign participation in Russian firms was 2.7 percent in 2007.  In the 
EU-10 countries it was 7.5 percent. 

4. 
Firm productivity is weak in important sectors.  In manufacturing, value-added per 
worker is similar to that of workers in China and India, but when labor cost s are accounted for, 
overall productivity is lower.  Innovation in Russia also lags behind.  Business R&D has been 
declining in recent years, with expenditures dropping from a high of 0.88 percent of GDP in 2003 to 
0.65 percent in 2008.  Comparatively, OECD countries increased their average business expenditures 
on R&D in the same period, from 1.49 percent to 1.63 percent. 

Key Challenges 

5. 
Recent World Bank research focusing on key challenges in export competitiveness and 
diversification emphasized the importance of three binding constraints: the investment climate , 
competition, and innovation.12 

12 World Bank, Russian Federation: Export Diversification through Competition and Innovation: A Policy Agenda , 
2011  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
November 2011 
Annex 3: Diversification and Competitiveness: Challenges and Opportunities                                             Page 2 of 4 

6. 
Investment Climate.  The quality of the investment climate varies across Russia, but key 
surveys such as BEEPS, Doing Business and the Global Competitiveness Report continue to show 
that widespread problems exist. Doing Business 2012 reveals that it is particularly hard to deal in 
getting electricity (where Russia ranks 183nd out of 183 countries), with construction permits (rank 
178) and in trading across borders (rank 160).  These hurdles are combined with the difficulties 
entrepreneurs also face in starting a business (rank 111), weak protections for investors (rank 111), 
the difficulty in paying taxes (rank 105) and in getting credit (rank 98), see Box 4 for more details. 
Consequently there is a lesser propensity for firms to start, grow and compete.  This affects domestic 
competition, innovation, and the ability to compete abroad. 

Box 4: Doing Business 2012 Results 

-   Russia ranks 120rd out of 183 countries for its investment climate in Doing Business 2012, raising its position 
four places from last year or 21th among the 25 countries in Europe and Central Asia (ECA).  Despite notable 
improvements over last year, this suggests that businesses in the country continue to face operational hurdles in 
several areas.  According to Doing Business, Russian firms face considerable difficulties in dealing with 
construction permits, trading across borders and getting electricity, but also in starting a business, getting credit, 
protecting investors and paying taxes. 13 
-   When dealing with rules around construction permits Russian firms face some of the most difficult conditions 
analyzed by Doing Business. In Doing Business 2012 Russia is ranked 178nd on dealing with construction permits 
with the process of gaining a permit requiring 51 procedures and taking an average of 423 days with a cost of 
183,8 percent of the country‘s income per capita. -  On trading across borders, Russian firms face high hurdles. 
It takes on average 36 days to export a container of goods, at a cost of US$1,850. Eight documents are required 
for exports and 10 for imports. Russia ranks 160nd in Doing Business on this measure, or 20st in ECA as a whole 
or worse than any country in the OECD.  

-   When starting a business, Doing Business reports that Russian entrepreneurs must go through nine procedures 
to start a business, taking up to 30 days in the process and paying out up to 2.0 percent of Russia‘s per capita 
income.  Russia ranks  111th out of 183 countries on this measure, although it ranks higher than any other BRIC 
country   

-   Getting credit can also be difficult in Russia. On the Doing Business measure of getting credit, which analyses 
the protection of creditor and debtor rights in collateral and bankruptcy laws and the availability of credit 
information, Russia ranks 98th. Getting credit in Russia could be made easier by permitting an expansion in the 
range of assets that are allowed as collateral, while more general descriptions of assets to enable flexible security 
arrangements could also be permitted. 
-   When it comes to protecting investors, Russia ranks 111rd. This ranking reflects issues such as the insufficient 
disclosure of related party transactions to boards of directors, in annual reports, and to regulators. In addition, 
major transactions that involve potential conflicts of interest are not under sufficiently stringent requirements.  

-   Russian businesses also face bureaucratic hurdles when paying taxes. As of June 2011, it took on average 9 
payments and 290 working days per year for Russian businesses to comply with tax regulations.  Russia ranks 
105th on this measure, or 14th in the ECA region alone. 
- The Doing Business 2012 includes getting electricity as a new topic. Based on the information published in the 
Doing Business 2012 report, it takes 10 procedures, 281 days and 1,852.4% of income per capita to obtain 
electricity connections. Russia ranks last of all measured economies in the DB report . 

13 Doing Business concentrates on the biggest business centers in the countries it analyzes.  Russia‘s performance is thus assessed 
through Moscow‘s performance as the country‘s leading business center.  Given the size of the country (spanning 83 regions an d 
nine time zones), to obtain a more nuanced picture of Russia‘s regional comparative performance, the Russian Government and 
the World Bank conducted a first sub-national Doing Business assessment in 2009 in nine Russian regions beyond Moscow, 
covering the cities of Irkutsk, Kazan, Perm, Petrozavodsk, Rostov-on-Don, St. Petersburg, Tomsk, Tver, and Voronezh.  
Interestingly, compared to these cities, Moscow was ranked lowest overall while Kazan was ranked highest , with considerable 
regional variations.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
November 2011 
Annex 3: Diversification and Competitiveness: Challenges and Opportunities                                             Page 3 of 4 

7. 
Competition.  WBG research suggests that competition levels in Russia do not produce the 
kind of competitive pressures required for businesses to start innova ting and thus to become more 
efficient, and that firms tend to operate at low levels of technology and knowledge. This is also 
supported by the EBRD Transition Indicators, which show that enterprise development (firms 
changing to become more productive and competitive) in Russia lags behind that of Poland, Turkey, 
and the average in the ECA region.  The extent of monopoly power in some markets and the degree 
of state involvement in enterprise are key factors in the sub -optimal level of competition in the 
Russian economy.  According to a recent OECD report, between 2001 and 2007 the share of markets 
with power concentrated in a few firms increased from 43 to 47 percent, a high incidence of 
concentrated sectors compared to most developed economies. State involvement is particularly high 
in infrastructure and ―network‖ industries.  The Russian state wholly owns the companies in the rail 
transport and postal services markets, and has more than a 50 percent share of the gas, electricity, air 
transport, and telecommunications sectors. 

8. 
Innovation.  Russia has a long scientific tradition, but the contribution of science to 
economic activity is limited due to the low level of entrepreneurship and minimal application of 
science in business activity.  R&D investments are low in both the public and private sectors.  Russia 
specializes in products at the ―periphery‖ of the product -space map, meaning it has a comparative 
advantage in industries, such as raw materials and forestry, from which it is difficult to develop new 
products and skills that can be used in other industries.14  This hinders the process of economic 
diversification.  Furthermore, R&D investments in Russia translate into fewer outputs, such as 
commercialization of knowledge-goods, patents and publications, than in most OECD countries.  
This is despite Russia‘s large talent pool, a level of investment in R&D – particularly in engineering 
and science – and number of researchers that are comparable as a proportion of GDP to levels in 
R&D-intensive economies such as Germany and South Korea (and far ahead of those of Brazil, 
China, and India). 

9. 
There is also limited capacity for the implementation of innovation policies in the regions. In 
Russia, federal agencies such as the Ministry of Economic Development, the Russian Venture 
Company, and Rosnano play major roles in financing innovation support measures in Russia‘s 
regions such as venture funds, industrial technology subsidies, technology parks, technology transfer 
offices and research laboratories.  However, little of this support has been provided on the basis of 
transparent information about the state of the innovation system in the regions, or a clear 
understanding among regional stakeholders of the vision for the development of the innovation 
system. 

10. 
Overall conditions for innovation and commercialization of public research are gradually 
improving but important limitations remain. Despite recent advances in intellectual property 
legislation, loopholes and uncertainty relating to the full ownership of discoveries financed by public 
funding hinders private sector investments and the full development of the commercialization 
process.  Licenses are mostly granted on a non-exclusivity basis, which raises doubts about the 
capacity of firms to raise capital and carry on necessary investments.  The gap between the 
Foundation for Assistance to Small Innovative Enterprises (FASIE) programs and venture capital 

14 Product space analysis is based on an approach pioneered by Hidalgo, C.A, B. Klinger, A-L Barabasi, and R. Hausmann 
(2007) ―The Product Space and its Consequences for Economic Growth,‖ Science 317; 482-487. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
November 2011 
Annex 3: Diversification and Competitiveness: Challenges and Opportunities                                             Page 4 of 4 

funding continues to harm the emergence of Russian start -ups, despite recent initiatives to improve 
early stage financing in the country. 

Strengths and Progress to Date 

11. 
In recent years the Russian Government has been working to address some of the 
challenges highlighted above.  Its strategy for economic development to 2020 emphasizes greater 
domestic competition, the creation of an economic environment that will encourage long-term 
investments, and stronger foreign demand for Russian goods. 

12. 
There have been some recent improvements in the investment climate. The Russian 
Federation made it easier for domestic entrepreneurs in 2010 -2011, rising in the global rankings on 
ease of doing business to 120 from 124. One important change was the requirement for banks to 
release credit data, meaning that a private credit bureau could be established.  In 2010 property 
registration was made easier through simpler documentation requirements and, in 2011, the process 
of dealing with construction permits was simplified by the establishment of a single window for all 
land use procedures.  The Government is also planning further legislation to improve the process of 
dealing with construction permits.  For example, private developers will now be allowed to choose 
between government-run ―expertiza‖ and private legal engineering companies as third -party 
reviewers of compliance requirements. In addition, amendments to the Code of Administrative 
Offences will increase penalties on negligent public officials. Also the Russian Federation made 
registering property transfers easier by eliminating the requirement to obtain cadastral passports on 
land plots.  Russia made trading across borders easier by reducing the number of documents needed 
for each export or import transaction and lowering the associated cost.  The country made filing a 
commercial case easier by introducing an electronic case filing system.  And it made getting 
electricity less costly by revising the tariffs for connection.  Russia made tax compliance more 
difficult, however, by increasing the social security contribution rate for employers. 

13. 
Competition through increasing the role of the private sector in the economy will be a 
key part of the Government’s reforms over the next few years. It plans to sell stakes in 
strategically important firms currently owned by the state and to sell non -strategic assets elsewhere. 
The declared goals of this wave of privatization are (i) reducing government ownership in state-
owned enterprises, (ii) streamlining property still held by the state into a more coherent structure, and 
(iii) introducing new technologies and business methods into privatized enterprises.  

14. 
The Government has also been pursuing a number of policy measures to foster 
innovation.  There is an attempt to emulate the experience of Silicon Valley, as evidenced by the 
development of Rosnano and Skolkovo (a ―science city‖).  Cisco and Nokia have already committed 
to conduct research at Skolkovo. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 
Page 1 of 5 

Annex 4 

Social and Human Capital Development 

Achievements and Challenges  

1. 
Russia’s Social and Human Capital Development Goals.  With significant achievements 
and advances in social and human capital development15, the Russian Federation is increasingly 
focusing its strategies to move Russia closer to the level of achievements of other G8/OECD 
countries.  It has already met the goals of eradicating extreme poverty and malnutrition, achieving 
universal primary education, and promoting gender equality and empowering women.  The agenda 
going forward includes aligning the education system to the changing needs of the economy to boost 
competiveness, addressing non-communicable diseases, increasing life expectancy, and improving 
the quality and efficiency of social services as well as enhancing the targeting of social programs.  
The devolution of the provision of social services to different sub -national levels of government 
increases the challenges of achieving basic levels of quality and equitable funding in all regions and 
municipalities. To this can be added the need to address the fiscal and service delivery challenges 
posed by the fast aging population in Russia which underscores the critical importance of improving 
equity and efficiency in services and spending.  Shrinking of working age population challenges 
economic development. The Government is to address these risks through complex reforms in 
migration regulation.  In its National Development Strategy for 2012-2020 the Russian Government 
has already taken numerous steps and launched proactive actions to address the many issues.  The 
challenges in human development will require more differentiated approaches and policies if positive 
changes are to be achieved.  

2. 
Early Childhood, Primary, and Secondary Education. Primary education enrollment is at 
about 99 percent, while the objective of reaching full completion of primary education remains to be 
achieved (current level of 90 percent).  Given the progress made on primary enrollment, the 
Government aims to increase coverage of preschool education which is low compared to the OECD 
average.  About 78 percent of preschool education is financed through local government budgets, and 
therefore poorer regions are more disadvantaged.  Substantial differences among regions are also 
apparent in per student spending and in the quality of education at the primary and secondary level. 

3. 
Higher and Vocational Education, Productivity Growth, and Competitiveness. While the 
number of students pursuing higher education in the Russian Federation has significantly increased 
from 2.8 million in 1990 to 7.4 million in 2010 (equivalent to gross enrollment rate of about 83 
percent), Russia places only 50th in the country rankings16 compiled by OECD regarding readiness of 

15 The annex draws from UNDP National Human Development Report in the Russian Federation 2010: Millennium 
Development Goals in Russia: Looking into the Future , 2010. 
16 Recent international rankings of higher educational institutions have shown unfavorable performance of Russian 
HEIs.  According to Shanghai SJTU (includes 500 universities) only two universities in Russia are included in the 
international list in the 2011 ranking. English THES university ranking (includes 200 universities) excluded Russian 
universities from the international list (2010-2011 ranking). In comparison, 39 German and 22 Canadian universities 
were included in the SJTU list, while the THES list had 14 and 9 universities from those countries, respectively.  
Times Higher Education World University Ranking // http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world -university-
rankings/2010-2011/top-200.html,  
Academic Ranking of World Universities – 2011 // http://www.shanghairanking.com/ARWU2011.html   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 4: Social and Human Development 

November 2011 
                                Page 2 of 5 

the country‘s higher education and training systems for the knowledge economy and lags behind both 
developed and developing countries (e.g., Finland (#1), Sweden (#2), Denmark (#3), Singapore 
(#5), Malaysia (#49))17.  Thus, the Russian educational system has not transformed fast enough to 
keep up with demand for new jobs and specializations created by the new economy and the 
Government‘s goal of diversifying the economy further.  The lack of skilled labor and the renewal of 
skills will continue to constrain private sector growth and any effort to modernize public institutions 
further. Concurrently the shortage of skills is listed as the most severe constraint to private sector 
development and economic diversification. The Russian system of professional and vocational 
education is characterized by large numbers of relatively small vocational schools and narrow 
specialist offerings.  Regional Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) systems are 
in urgent need of reform to adjust to the labor market needs.  The need is for a shift towards an 
education system that supports continuing education, training, or renewal of skills in the economy.  
Given the tightening in labor market supply, the shortage of skilled labor could undermine any future 
productivity growth and competitiveness.  Figure 9 below illustrates how Russia compares with other 
countries on the four indicators of the Knowledge Economy Index.   

Figure 9. The Knowledge Economy Index 

Source: World Bank's Knowledge for Development Website (July 2009) 

4. 
Child Mortality and Maternal Health.  Child mortality and maternal health have improved 
since 1990 and the related indicators are on track to continue to improve over the coming years.  
Child and maternal mortality rates have improved considerably over the past decade (under -five 
mortality rate of 10.2 per 1,000 live births in 2009 compared to 21.5 in 1990, and maternal mortality 
rate of 16.5 per 100,000 live births in 2010 compared to 47.4 in 1990) but remain higher than in the 
European Union.  Births are almost universally attended by skilled health personnel, and since 1990 
the country has experienced a significant increase in access to contraception and decrease in the 
adolescent birth rate.  Progress has been made in the fight against TB (although Russia is among the 

17 OECD and World Economic Forum ranked 139 countries according to the readiness of their education systems for 
the new economic reality. The Global Competitiveness Report 2010 -2011 // 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GlobalCompetitivenessReport_2010 -11.pdf 

The Four Indicators of the Knowledge Economy Index 012345678910FinlandUnited KingdomUnited StatesGermanyJapanFranceHungaryPolandBulgariaRomaniaBrazilRussian FederationSouth AfricaKazakhstanChinaIndonesiaIndiaEconomic Incentive RegimeInnovationEducationICT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 4: Social and Human Development 

November 2011 
                                Page 3 of 5 

10 countries with the highest MDR TB (multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis) burden in the world), 
which augurs well for the country meeting the goal of halting and reversing the incid ence of the 
disease over the next decade.  Demographic and health trends are characterized by low fertili ty and 
high adult mortality and morbidity rates and inefficient health spending.  Adults, particularly males, 
suffer from higher levels of morbidity and disability and they have a far lower healthy life 
expectancy than in other G8 countries. 

5. 
HIV/AIDs.  Russia faces a rising HIV epidemic and infection rates are not slowing.  The 
official18 number of HIV cases in Russia was 529,828 in 2009.  The majority of HIV-positive people 
are of working age with the prevalence rate estimated at 1 percent for adults aged 15 to 49.  
Notwithstanding the rise in infection rates, there have been achievements in HIV detection and 
HIV/AIDS treatment, including increased availability of modern anti-retroviral (ARV) therapies and 
successful prevention of vertical transmission of HIV in pregnant women.  The survival rate among 
patients receiving ARV treatment has gone up and about 96 percent of those in need receive ARV 
treatment.  Budgets allocated to fight HIV/AIDS have increased almost 60 -fold since 2005.  
However, there is room for improved preventative policies to combat the epidemic.  

6. 
Gender.  The Russian Federation has already met the target of eliminating gender dispari ties 
in education19.  The share of women in secondary, vocational, and university education is 56.2 
percent — higher than in many OECD countries.  However, there remain critical challenges in 
reaching gender equality.  The quality of health services and par ticularly preventive care and sexual 
education for women are rather poor, with a relatively high (though declining) rate of teen pregnancy 
and frequent use of abortion to terminate pregnancies.  Despite the high proportion of public 
employees who are women, there is significant under-representation of women in top positions.  
Gender equality in political participation remains an issue in Russia: the share of political 
representatives and high-level politicians who are women is much lower than in OECD countries. 

7. 
Vulnerability to Poverty – Russians at Risk.  A substantial reduction in poverty has been 
achieved, with a fall in the percentage of individuals living under the national poverty line falling 
from 28.9 percent in 2000 to 13.1 percent in 2010.  Strong economic growth coupled with significant 
wage increases, increased working hours and falling unemployment were responsible for this 
dramatic fall in poverty.  While general poverty levels have fallen (chronic poverty is now at about 7 
percent), the relatively high vulnerability to poverty remains a concern.  Poverty levels remained 
broadly flat during and after the 2008 global crisis, allowing the Russian Federation to maintain the 
over 50 percent reduction achieved since 2000.  The Government managed to cushion any adverse 
social impacts through a large fiscal stimulus.  However, an estimated 18 million Russians are still 
living in poverty and large segments of the middle class remain vulnerable to new income shocks, 
such as inflation.  Spatial analysis of poverty in Russia reveals broad variations among Russia‘s 
regions in poverty reduction, with pockets of poverty and areas of high unemployment concentrated 
in the northeastern and southern parts of the country.  Poverty rates in the poorest regions are 45 
times those in the richest.  As elasticity of poverty reduction to economic growth has declined, 
bringing this significant proportion of the Russian population out of poverty will require better 
targeting and a mix of social programs and labor market interventions. 

18 However, the UN/HIV Program estimates the number at about 1 million in 2009. 
19 Rights are guaranteed under the Constitution and Labor Code. The Convention on the Elimination of all forms of 
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) was ratified by the Russian Federation in 1981. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 4: Social and Human Development 

November 2011 
                                Page 4 of 5 

8. 
Access to Social Services and Improving the Welfare of Russians.  Inequality of access to 
social services, particularly for those in rural areas , across different income groups and the more 
vulnerable in society, remains a challenge.  There is a large diversity in outcomes in the regions of 
the Russian Federation.  Certain regions have human development levels similar to European Union 
countries, while some have outcomes closer to those of much poorer countries.20  The National 
Development Strategy for 2012-2020 is currently being updated and seeks to address some of these 
challenges, most notably through the recommendations of Expert Groups working on ―Poverty 
Alleviation and Inequality‖, and ―Health and the Human Environment.‖ 

Figure 10: Poverty in Russia 

                Source: RER No. 25, June 2011. 

9. 
Efficiency in Social Spending and Services.  Efficiency in social spending, better targeting 
of social programs, as well as new transfers will be of critical importance in the future.  T he social 
protection system in Russia is suffering from the inheritance of the past.  Up to one quarter of social 
support beneficiaries are not poor as many social assistance benefits are not designed to really protect 
the poorest households.  Social assistance programs make no effort to help beneficiaries graduate 
from poverty.  Despite demographic, mortality, and morbidity challenges, Russia‘s total health 
expenditures are only 5.4 percent of GDP compared to an OECD average of 8.8 percent.  
Furthermore, the effectiveness of health spending could be significantly improved (e.g., more 
resources for primary care such as out-patient management of chronic disease, health promotion and 
disease prevention, general practitioners and family doctors) . 

Russian Government National Development Strategy 2012-2020 

10. Many of these challenges are already recognized by the Russian Government and are being 
addressed through existing interventions which will receive further emphasis in the National 
Development Strategy for 2012-2020. 

 Basic Education and the Knowledge Economy. The goals include increasing coverage of 
preschool services coupled with increased efficiency in the sector .  Strategies include improved 

20 Source: Chapter 9: Millennium Development Goals and Russian Regions in National Human Development Report 
in the Russian Federation 2010: Millennium Development Goals in Russia: Looking into the Future (2010) UNDP. 

15.213.313.413.213.113.112.811.62006200720082009201020112012Poverty rates21.718.919.018.718.618.618.116.52006200720082009201020112012Millions of people 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 4: Social and Human Development 

November 2011 
                                Page 5 of 5 

performance by the regional authorities and increased funding of the sector.  The Government 
aims to improve the quality of primary and secondary education through support of programs of 
school system development in the regions, including development of school infrastructure.  The 
Government is providing subsidies to budgets of the regions for modernization of school 
systems.  Reform activities include provision to schools of new equipment including computers 
and other ICTs, teacher training in the area of ICT and teacher qualification improvement, and 
development of distance learning. 

 Professional and Vocational Education. Government steps include support of programs for 
VET system development in the regions on a competitive basis.  The process of transferring of 
federal vocational institutions to regional subordination is almost completed in many regions of 
Russia, and currently the Government is supporting regional programs of VET system 
development that adjust education systems to the needs of the regions‘ economies.  The support 
includes co-financing from the Federal Ministry of Education and provision of assistance in 
dissemination of regional experience at the national level. 

 Health.  Additional resources to the sector were channeled through the ―National Priority Project 
Health‖ which focused on the themes of promoting healthy life styles, strengthening primary 
health care and disease prevention, increasing access and quality of specialized health care, 
improving mother and child health, and TB and HIV/AIDS.  The Government has been taking 
key steps including enacting a new federal Mandatory Health Insurance (MHI) law, increased 
payroll contributions to generate additional resources, and initiated health care modernization 
plans.  The Expert Group on ―Health and the Human Environment‖ is tasked with updating the 
National Development Strategy 2012-2020.  Among others, the draft recommendations include 
developing payment methods, developing integrated models of health care del ivery, and 
increasing accountability of health care providers to quality.   

 Social Protection, Social Transfers and Services.  Social protection systems are mostly a 
responsibility of the regions.  The Government has been trying to shift the social services 
paradigm from institutionalized care provided to certain categories of beneficiaries to a more 
client-oriented and case-management based flexible system and has been encouraging 
innovations and partnerships that help to overcome social exclusion, vulnerability, physical 
constraints and other barriers.  Given the devolution of authority, the Government may wish to 
look at furthering national minimum service standards and introducing stronger elements of 
incentives in the transfer of fiscal resources to the regions. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 
Page 1 of 7 

Public Sector Governance in Russia: Achievements and Remaining Agenda 

Annex 5 

1. 
In recent years the Government of Russia has completed or initiated major reform efforts 
intended to ensure sound management of public resources, create a more favorable business 
environment, and enhance public service delivery.  This Annex analyzes recent developments and 
their impact, the main challenges and the Government‘s current strategies for improving public 
sector governance. 

Public Finance 

2. 
Russia faces a dual challenge in public financial management: to achieve fiscal consolidation 
and reduce the non-oil deficit while boosting investment in economic infrastructure and human 
capital that will provide the basis for future economic growth.  Specific challenges that the 
Government faces include diversifying revenue sources away from the oil and gas sector, managing 
the effects on public finances of an aging population, and boosting investment in infrastruc ture and 
skills to address economic bottlenecks and sharp disparities among Russia‘s regions in development 
and living standards.   

3. 
The Government has largely completed a number of important improvements in public 
financial management, while initiating others.  Multi-annual budgeting, linked to results information, 
was introduced from 2007, helping ministries and regions to better plan their activities and 
investments.  Although the financial crisis forced its temporary suspension this practice was resumed 
in 2010.  Modernization and expansion of the automated Treasury system (combined with the single 
treasury account), has improved efficiency in cash and debt management and enabled up to date 
reporting on budgets and expenditures, not just within government but also to the legislature and the 
public (via the web). 

4. 
In 2010, the Government initiated a major program to raise the efficiency of public spending, 
which offers the prospect of further improvements in resource allocation and performance.  Major 
new initiatives that are underway will introduce program budgeting in 2014, overhaul the public 
procurement system and further integrate public finance management information systems.  A 
program to create autonomous agencies to deliver public services more efficiently and with greater 
accountability is also planned, but is proceeding more slowly. 

5. 
The program to improve the efficiency of public expenditures is likely to require sustained 
effort over a prolonged period to implement program budgeting, increase results orientation in the 
public sector, strengthen investment appraisal , and create effective and accountable autonomous 
agencies to deliver public services.  Expenditure controls (internal controls and internal audits) 
will also require modernization to support effective and accountable budget implementation.  
Across all levels of government investment in skills and the professionalization of public financial 
management, including internal and external audit functions, will be an important element of the 
strategy to improve performance. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 5: Public Sector Governance in Russia 

November 2011 
                                Page 2 of 7 

Sub-national Government 

6. 
Over the period from 2003 to 2009, the responsibilities of different levels of government 
were clarified and rationalized, creating a uniform national structure of regional and local 
government.  A large number of responsibilities were transferred to sub -national governments, while 
many unfunded mandates were eliminated and the system of intergovernmental transfers was brought 
into line.  From 2007, the Government has introduced a system for monitoring the effectiveness and 
efficiency of sub-national governments which provides a good basis for targeting efforts to 
strengthen public sector management, but also attests to the very uneven capacity of sub -national 
governments. 

7. 
A further dimension of Russia‘s governance challenge is to reduce the growing disparity 
among the regions manifested in the lower human development indicators in rural areas and 
migration to the major urban centers.  Part of this will involve streamlining and targeting of federal 
support programs.  Sub-national governments (especially in less developed, lower-capacity regions) 
will also need assistance and effective incentives to implement the Government‘s reform agenda, 
with a focus on improving service delivery and investment (public and private) in infrastructure.  In 
poor performing regions special incentives and investment to build more basic capabilities may b e 
needed. 

Tax and Customs 

8. 
The Government has made significant investments in improving tax and customs 
administration, aimed at reducing fraud and tax evasion and improving the business climate.  
Increasing automation, including electronic filing of tax returns, and the use of risk-based audit 
methods in tax and customs have helped to improve performance, but the average number of working 
days per year devoted to tax matters remains high.  Public perceptions of the incidence of fraud and 
corruption have reduced markedly although they remain high relative to other countries in the region.  
The Government has plans to introduce tax policy changes that would encourage new investment in 
the oil and gas sector, and to introduce a market based property tax.  The Federal Tax Service plans 
to invest in improving its business processes, reducing the scope for tax evasion while simplifying 
and improving its interface with taxpayers. 

9. 
The Government‘s strategy for tax policy modernization, including changes to the oil and gas 
tax regime, transfer pricing and real estate tax, should help to safeguard revenues while promoting 
new investment in key sectors.  Improvements in tax and customs administration should promote tax 
compliance while creating more user-friendly tax and customs services that impose less of a burden 
on businesses. 

Public Service Delivery 

10. 
Efforts to improve public administration have focused on improving the Government‘s 
responsiveness to citizens and simplifying complex procedures.  The main achievements have been 
the introduction of administrative regulations that set out the duties of public officials with regard to 
public service delivery and public service standards.  The Government is also experimenting with 
new service delivery mechanisms, including Multi-functional Citizen Service Centers (one stop 
shop) for service delivery and electronic government portals; streamlining regulatory requirements 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 5: Public Sector Governance in Russia 

November 2011 
                                Page 3 of 7 

and processes affecting business, including through regulatory impact assessment s; and the use of 
performance management instruments to enhance many aspects of public sector performance at the 
federal and sub-national levels. 

11. 
According to the Life in Transition Survey conducted by the World Bank and the EBRD, 
citizens‘ satisfaction with public services has improved significantly and the reported incidence of 
unofficial payments has declined between 2006 and 2010 (Figures 11-12). 

Figure 11: Respondents (percent)) Saying they 
are Satisfied with Public Services  

Figure 12: Respondents (percent) Saying that 
Unofficial Payments are Always/Usually Needed  

Source: Life in Transition Survey 

12. 
The challenge in the delivery of public services is to become both more efficient and more 
citizen/business oriented, contributing to business confidence and citizen satisfaction in an 
environment of fiscal restraint.  Continued modernization of public service delivery across tiers and 
branches of government is designed to meet growing public expectations of user -friendly public 
services and to achieve efficiency savings.  At the federal, regional , and local levels, the Government 
needs to expand new service delivery modalities, including the use of e -governance applications, use 
of service standards, administrative complaints procedures and client feedback mechanisms.  Such 
initiatives should target important development constraints, such as the time required to complete 
land registration and issue of construction permits and business licenses. 

Demand for Governance Improvements, Transparency and Accountability 

13. 
In spite of significant progress made in improving public sector effectiveness, experts 
recognize that the vast majority of public administration reform results remained internal and not 
visible to the public.  The reforms were to a significant extent driven by the state, they lacked 
mechanisms of civil society involvement in designing reform strategies and have not offered efficient 
mechanisms of partnering with civil society in the reforms implementation.  In the latest President‘s 
Address to the Parliament, President Medvedev stressed the need to involve civil society 
organizations in the delivery of social services, and the social partnership concept is receiving 
increased attention from the state. 

3442482826213268587559744251200620109242056197319101313520062010 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 5: Public Sector Governance in Russia 

November 2011 
                                Page 4 of 7 

14. 
Some progress has been made in improving transparency and accountability.  One of the key 
achievements in this area is the adoption of the federal law On Access to Information on the Activities 
of Public Authorities and Local Government Authorities , describing the rights of individuals and 
organizations to obtain access to governmental documents and stipulating the main principles and 
procedures for ensuring access to information.  The challenge, however, remains to make the 
disclosed information user-friendly and understandable for the public. 

The Judicial System 

15. 
The key constituent elements of the Russian judicial system (Constitutional Court, Supreme 
Court, Supreme Arbitration Court, the courts of general jurisdiction, the commercial court system 
and the Justices of the Peace) have been steadily modernizing their business processes and facilities.  
During the last five years the Russian Federation is estimated to have spent more than US$2 billion 
on judicial modernization (IT systems, physical infrastructure, security systems, salary increases).  
Law No. 262 which came into effect on July 1, 2010 mandates courts to publish their decisions.  A 
suite of IT applications is being rol led out across the courts of general jurisdiction to facilitate 
publication online and also improve court administration, case management , and other functions.  
This modernization has helped the commercial courts – the fastest reforming set of courts – to 
manage the spurt in cases arising from the financial crisis, which hit the private sector hard . 

16. 
As a result, survey-based ratings of the performance of courts (speed, ability to enforce 
decisions, fairness and impartiality) have trended upwards (see Figure 13) and compare favorably 
with the EU-10 countries and the overall average for the ECA region.  According to the 2008 
Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS), 43 percent of firms use the 
courts, one of the highest rates in the ECA region.  Firms using the courts in Russia expressed higher 
levels of satisfaction with the courts‘ speed and ability to enforce decisions than the ECA and EU -10 
averages, but lower confidence in the courts‘ impartiality and integrity (Figure 13).  In the Doing 
Business report of 2011, Russia ranks 18th among 183 economies in terms of the ease of enforcing 
commercial contracts through the courts, with Russian courts being faster and cheaper to use than the 
ECA and OECD averages.  According to surveys by the Levada Center, citizens‘ confidence in the 
courts rose from 45 percent in 2006 to 64 percent in 2010. 

Figure 13: Firms (percent) Using the Courts Saying that Courts are… 

Sources: BEEPS 2008; Life in Transition Survey 

36366994449214052quickfair, impartial, and uncorruptedable to enforce decisionsRussiaEU 10 ECA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 5: Public Sector Governance in Russia 

November 2011 
                                Page 5 of 7 

17. 
Against 
this positive backdrop, however, concerns persist about 
lack of 
judicial 
independence, corruption, conflict of interest, and undue influence tainting judicial decisions, 
especially in the lower courts.  With respect to the judicial branch, two areas stand out for continued 
state attention: (i) continuing the trend towards greater transparency and efficiency in the functioning 
of courts (through investments in information technology and disseminating information to citizens 
on judicial decisions and the functioning of courts) and ( ii) strengthening the enforcement of judicial 
and administrative procedures through the bailiff system, ensuring efficiency, transparency and 
integrity. 

Anti-Corruption and State Procurement 

18. 
Corruption is acknowledged to be a serious problem in Russia.  The presidential oversight 
administration recently estimated that kickbacks in state procurement programs may amount to as 
much as 1 trillion rubles (US$32.5 billion) a year.  Anti-corruption efforts have received new impetus 
in recent years under the leadership of President Medvedev.  A Federal Anticorruption Law and 
National Anticorruption Plan have been adopted and civil servants are required to declare their 
assets.  The BEEPS survey of firms points to some improvements regarding the frequency of 
unofficial payments (Figures 14, 15, 16).  Nevertheless, surveys of corruption perceptions show that 
Russia continues to lag relative to the region and in global terms. 

Figure 14: Firms (percent) Reporting 
Unofficial Payments  

Figure 15: Firms Reporting that Unofficial 
Payments are Frequent in Dealing with… 

Source: World Bank-EBRD. 2010. Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey. 

Figure 16: Firms (percent) Saying that Informal 
Gifts are Usually Requested or Expected 

Source: World Bank-EBRD. 2010. Business Environment and 
Enterprise Performance Survey 

62373031177RussiaECAEU 102005200822119.58.66.12.1tax administration customscourts2005200801020304050Application for an import licenseApplication for construction permitApplication for any license/ permitApplication for operating licensesApplication for electrical connectionTax inspectionRussiaECAEU 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 5: Public Sector Governance in Russia 

November 2011 
                                Page 6 of 7 

19. 
The Government has made reform of the state contracting systems a key priority.  Reported 
unofficial payments to obtain public procurement contracts were relatively high (BEEPS 2008), with 
30 percent of firms reporting having made such payments, amounting to an average 11.5 percent of 
the value of the contract.  Some improvements have been made, including introducing e -procurement 
through a single government portal, and according to Rosstat, competition in public procurement 
tenders has increased (average number of bidders in electronic auctions increased from seven in 2007 
to 26 in 2009).  Overhauling the federal contracting system is likely to produce multiple benefits, 
improving value for money in procurement, reducing corruption and increasing transparen cy, and 
supporting new forms of partnership between the public and private sectors.   

Regulation and the Business Environment 

20. 
In the past few years the Government has renewed and stepped up efforts to improve the 
business environment with a focus on promoting innovation and the development of small and 
medium-sized enterprises as a means of accelerating job creation and economic diversification. 
These efforts have included reducing the burden of regulatory compliance on business, particularly in 
dealing with licensing and inspections at the sub-national level; systematic monitoring of business 
environment indicators in the regions; strengthening the enforcement of competition regulations; 
automating key administrative processes concerning business (e -filing of taxes); and stemming the 
proliferation of new regulations through the introduction of regulatory impact assessment s. 

21. 
Despite these initiatives, perception indicators of the business environment remain poor, with 
Russia ranking 120rd among 183 economies in the 2012 Doing Business report.  Russia fares 
particularly poorly in getting electricity (183th position), in the ease of dealing with construction 
permits (178nd position), trading across borders (160nd position), starting a business (111th position) 
and protecting investors (111th position).  Red tape remains a major problem for firms.  Many 
business interactions with the public administration, especially obtaining import licenses and 
construction permits, are particularly time consuming and prone to unofficial payments (Figures 17, 
18).  The overall ‗time tax‘ is the second-highest in the ECA region, with firms reporting that 22.9 
percent of senior managers‘ time was spent dealing with government regulations and more firms 
saying that licenses and permits were a problem in doing business in 2008 than in 2005 (Figure 19).  
Accordingly, government efforts now focus on streamlining key regulatory processes (e.g. , issuance 
of licenses and permits) and monitoring administrative corruption affecting business in the regions, 
where most regulatory processes occur. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 5: Public Sector Governance in Russia 

November 2011 
                                Page 7 of 7 

Figure 17: Number of Days to Obtain Licenses, 
Permits, and Service Connections 

Figure 18: Percent of Senior Management Time 
Spent Dealing with Public Officials (all firms) 

Source: World Bank-EBRD. 2010. Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey. 

Figure 19: Firms (percent) Saying that Licenses 
and Permits are Not a Problem 

Source: World Bank-EBRD. 
2010. 
Business 
Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey. 

020406080100120Operating licenseImport licenseConstruction permitElectrical connectionWater connectionPermitsCompulsory certificatesRussiaECAEU 10764231211RussiaECAEU 1020052008384842294245RussiaEU 10ECA20052008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 
Page 1 of 6 

Annex 6 

Government’s ―Development Strategy 2020‖ Update 

1. 
In January 2011, the Government of the Russian Federation decided to update the ―Long-
Term Socio-Economic Development Concept until 2020‖ (―Strategy 2020‖) prepared in November 
2008.  It was decided that ―Strategy 2020‖ would be revised around sets of development challenges 
rather than sector blocks, and a broad public debate would be launched on the issues.  Five priority 
areas were identified: (i) a new growth model, (ii) human capital and better quality of life, (iii) a cost -
effective state and a new social contract between the state, business and society, (iv) overcoming 
territorial and information isolation, and (v) Russia‘s international role. 

2. 
Following the Directive signed by Prime Minister Putin, the Government created 21 expert 
thematic groups to work out recommendations for the socioeconomic strategy from 2012 to 2020 
(Box 5).  The Strategy 2020 update is prepared in a participatory and transparent manner: the general 
public and experts, federal and regional authorities, the business community, leading analysts, and 
prominent international experts take an active part in the discussions and further development of the 
update.  Nearly 2,000 scientists from all over the country were engaged in the effort, and draft reports 
and materials from all thematic groups were placed on a special website (www.2020strategy.ru).  The 
preliminary results were presented to the Government in August 2011 in the form of an interim 
report, and the final report is expected to be delivered to the Government by end -December 2011 
after broad discussions. 

   Box 5. Expert Thematic Groups Working on the Update of Strategy 2020 

(01) New economic growth model - securing macroeconomic and social stability  
(02) Fiscal and monetary policy, macroeconomic parameters underlying Russia's economic growth   
(03) Pension system reform 
(04) Strengthening market institutions 
(05) Transition from fostering innovation to innovation-led growth  
(06) Tax policy 
(07) Labor market, professional education, and migration policy  
(08) New school  
(09) Mitigating social disparity and overcoming poverty  
(10) Financial and banking sector development  
(11) Human health and habitat  
(12) Real federalism, local self-governance, and inter-governmental policy  
(13) Enhancing public investment and public procurement efficiency, adopting a federal contractual system  
(14) Reducing regulatory functions, promoting transparency and feedback wi th civil society and business  
(15) Public property management and privatization  
(16) Development of civil institutions  
(17) Government sector reform  
(18) Reform of natural monopolies  
(19) Developing transportation, communications and information  
(20) Russia's international standing: economic guidelines  
(21) Promoting economic and social integration in the post-soviet environment 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 6: Government‘s ―Development Strategy 2020‖ Update 

                                Page 2 of 6 

November 2011 

Vision 

3. 
The interim report on Strategy 2020 update (draft Strategy 2020) provides a comprehensive 
vision of Russia‘s development towards becoming a more diversified and innovative economy driven 
by private sector investment, a stable macroeconomic environment, a more efficient public sector, 
and better investment climate, skills, and infrastructure.  It identifies issues that the new government 
will need to address upon taking office after presidential elections in 2012.  The structure of the 
report reflecting the key challenges facing Russia is presented in Box 6.  

Box 6. Structure of the Draft Strategy 2020 Update 

I. 

II. 

New Growth Model 
 New economic growth model, ensuring macroeconomic and social stability 
 Strategies for better business climate and a more attractive investment potential in order to implement a 
sustainable growth model 
 From encouraging innovations to innovation-based growth  

Macroeconomics:  Basic Preconditions for Growth 
 Budgetary and monetary policy: macroeconomic parameters and development of the Russian economy 
 Tax policy 
 Pension system reform 
 Development of financial and banking sector 

III. 

New Social Policy: Development of Human Capital 
 Labor market 
 Migration policy 
 Professional education 
 Reducing inequality and overcoming poverty 
 Health care policy 
 New school 

IV. 

Infrastructure:  Balanced Development, Comfortable Living Environment 
 State housing policy 
 Overcoming territorial disunity 
 Removing constraints to heating and electric energy sector development 
 Overcoming informational disunity 

V. 

Effective State 
 Optimization of state presence: reducing regulatory functions and ensuring transparency 
 Development of the civil society institutions 
 Public property management and privatization 
 Raising efficiency of state investment and procurement, creation of federal contracting system 
 Public sector reform 
 Genuine federalism, local government, and interbudgetary relations policy 

VI. 

Annexes 
 Reform measures: time schedule, costs, and budget implications 

4. 
The draft Strategy 2020 notes that the current objective is to achieve a sustainable and 
balanced economic growth that through modernization and the creation of the appropriate post -
industrial infrastructure will transition Russia to an innovation -driven economy.  Thus the strategy is 
based on two pillars – a new model of economic growth and a new social policy.  To achieve its 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 6: Government‘s ―Development Strategy 2020‖ Update 

                                Page 3 of 6 

November 2011 

strategic goals, Russia needs to ensure not just growth, but sufficiently high growth rates of at least 5 
percent per year.  However, Russia needs not just economic growth, but high-quality growth. 

New Growth Model 

5. 
The new growth model is aimed at transforming Russia into a post-industrial economy.  The 
idea is to complement sustained efforts to maintain macroeconomic and financial stability with the 
removal of structural barriers to growth and with focused efforts for human capital development.  
Key challenges include lowering inflation, introducing fiscal rules to manage oil revenue volatility, 
developing early warning systems in the financial sector, improving the business climate, and 
promoting a competitive environment for businesses, export diversification and innovation.  
Additional priorities include encouraging innovation-driven growth, strengthening the comparative 
advantages in education and culture, creating a favorable environment for human development 
through reforms in education, healthcare, social protection and pension systems, strengthening local 
governments, and removing the monopoly of the state in the provision of services related to human 
capital development. 

6. 
In general, the draft Strategy 2020 envisages increased budget spending on social policy 
reforms (by about 4 percent of GDP by 2020) offset by reduction of other expenditures (sometimes 
accompanied by reallocation of funds within the social sectors) in order to maintain macroeconomic 
stability.  Very detailed costing of different reform measures and their potential implications for the 
general government budget are presented in the Appendix to the report.   

Growth Scenarios 

7. 
Growth scenarios leading to macroeconomic instability and inflation, as well as decreasin g 
support to vulnerable groups or higher social inequalities were considered to be unacceptable.  All 
reform measures have been grouped under three scenarios: scenario of inertia (development without 
any significant reforms or the low case scenario), reform scenario (certain reforms are implemented 
but there are significant vested interests of certain social groups which constrain more radical 
reforms, and that there are significant funding constraints), and optimal or high case scenario (budget 
resources and substantial political will to overcome vested interests).  Most of the reforms are 
assumed to be implemented under the second scenario, but reforms in education, health care 
(partially), transport infrastructure, housing policy (partially), and pension systems would be 
implemented under the high case scenario. 

8. 
The selected country level outcomes to which the CPS will contribute are well aligned with 
the Strategy 2020 thematic areas and objectives (see Box 7).  Some of the key Strategy 2020 themes 
and sub-themes are strongly supported by the CPS results framework, and ongoing and planned 
WBG engagements are envisaged to contribute to the achievement of these outputs and milestones.  
The WBG engagements in energy efficiency and environmental management are aligned with 
ongoing sectoral strategies and programs, and supporting Russia as a donor is an ongoing 
engagement aligned with the 2007 Concept of Russia‘s Participation in International Development 
Assistance as indicated below.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 6: Government‘s ―Development Strategy 2020‖ Update 

                                Page 4 of 6 

November 2011 

Box 7. Alignment of CPS Outcomes to the Indicative Strategy 2020 Themes 

Indicative Strategy 2020 Themes 

Country Development Outcomes to 
which the CPS Contributes 

Macroeconomics: Basic Preconditions for Growth 

Creating conditions for sustainable and well-balanced economic 
growth by ensuring macroeconomic stability including prudent 
fiscal and monetary policies, tax policies, customs modernization, 
and pension reforms 
Developing a better business climate that increases investment 
and competitiveness including ensuring legislative protection of 
competition, expansion of businesses‘ rights to protect their 
interests,  and facilitating and increasing the share of exports of 
non-resource products 
Strengthening the financial and banking sector by increasing its 
stability, developing and implementing a system of 
macroprudential regulations, implementing a road map for the 
implementation of Basel-2 standards, increasing the 
competitiveness of the sector, developing the market for domestic 
long-term investments, and increasing financial literacy 
Ensuring innovations-based growth by providing incentives to 
both the supply and demand for innovation and ensuring benefits 
accrue to innovators 

New Social Policy: Human Capital Development 

Implementing a strategy for the labor market and migration 
processes by emphasizing the liberalization of the labor market, 
policies for higher labor mobility, increasing Russia‘s 
attractiveness for high quality immigrants, improving labor 
legislation and its enforcement, and improving social protection 
mechanisms  
Strengthening the tertiary education system and stimulating 
professional skills development through effective contracts with 
teachers, developing a system of research universities, introducing 
applied qualifications, and increasing transparency of university 
entrances 
Addressing the issues of insufficient accessibility of preschool 
education, enhancing the quality of education (e.g., PISA scores), 
improving management flexibility, and developing continuous 
improvements in teaching quality 
Implementing a renewed health care policy by promoting healthy 
lifestyles, developing medical education, increasing the use of IT, 
reorganizing and restructuring outpatient and hospital care, 
implementing quality management systems, developing health 
insurance, and strengthening the market for health care services 
Reducing inequality and overcoming poverty by establishing a 
universal approach to targeting, developing a methodology of 
proxy means testing at the federal level, and encouraging regions 
to finance social protection within the framework of budget 
transfers 

Outcome 1:  Improved efficiency and 
effectiveness of public financial management 

Outcome 2:  Further streamlined and 
simplified business procedures and improved 
capacity to monitor and benchmark business 
regulations 

Outcome 4:  Improved regulatory and 
supervisory framework for the financial sector 
and upgraded market infrastructure 
Outcome 5:  Increased depth and breadth in 
the financial sector and increased access to 
finance 
Outcome 3:  Strengthened capacity to design 
and implement innovation and diversification 
programs in Russia‘s regions 

Outcome 9:  Increased quality and improved 
access, targeting, coverage, and efficiency of 
social services for human development 
Outcome 11:  Increased social inclusion of 
vulnerable groups 

Outcome 10:  Professional education system 
produces adequate skills for increased 
competitiveness 

Outcome 9:  Increased quality and improved 
access, targeting, coverage, and efficiency of 
social services for human development 

Outcome 8:  Improved management of 
environmental risks and natural resources 
Outcome 9:  Increased quality and improved 
access, targeting, coverage, and efficiency of 
social services for human development 
Outcome 9:  Increased quality and improved 
access, targeting, coverage, and efficiency of 
social services for human development 
Outcome 11:  Increased social inclusion of 
vulnerable groups 

Infrastructure: Balanced Development, Comfortable Living Environment 

Reforming the provision of state housing by developing self-
regulation in construction, design, and engineering, upgrading of 
communal infrastructures, improving the management of housing 
stocks, and improving mortgage finance 

Outcome 6:  Increased access to quality 
infrastructure assets and improved 
infrastructure services 

 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 6: Government‘s ―Development Strategy 2020‖ Update 

                                Page 5 of 6 

November 2011 

Indicative Strategy 2020 Themes 

Strengthening the transport systems to increase spatial 
connectivity by modernizing the automobile road network, 
decreasing the cost of road construction and maintenance, making 
road construction financing transparent, accelerating the 
development of urban transport, preventing stock degradation, 
developing a national highway system, connecting inaccessible 
regions, reducing cargo transport costs 
Increasing the competitiveness, financial sustainability, and 
energy and environment security of the Russian economy by 
reducing the energy intensity of the gross domestic product by 40 
percent through 2020 relying on realizing the energy efficiency 
potential, modernization and technological development, and 
rational and environmentally responsible use of energy resources21 
Modernizing and reforming Russia‘s environmental 
management systems by focusing on strategic alignment of 
national economic development, environmental protection, and 
environmental standards that contribute to human health and 
quality of life with priorities including (i) reduction of 
environmental impacts from industry; (ii) improving 
environmental quality standards, environmental and climate 
monitoring; (iii) developing incentives for effective economic 
development based on ‗green‘ technologies; and (iv) protection of 
the natural environment and biodiversity22 
Improving accessibility to ICT services, for example, by 
promoting fair competition in the telecom market, accelerating the 
modernization of telecom infrastructure, narrowing the IT divide 
and promoting equal access, implementing e-government 
solutions, and enhancing the application of ICT in the public 
sector 

Effective State 

Reducing regulatory barriers and ensuring transparency 
through the implementation of modern standards of service 
provision in governmental and municipal services for citizens and 
businesses, and debureaucratization 
Developing civil society institutions by ensuring competitiveness 
of the Russian society and state system, optimizing  public 
expenditure in the social sphere, and dividing responsibilities 
between the state and civic sectors 
Strengthening public property management and privatization by 
emphasizing a multisectoral, structural, and pragmatic approach, 
curtailing the proliferation of the public sector in the economy, 
regularly reducing the state's direct participation in the economy, 
and improving the quality of state management in companies with 
state participation 
Raising the efficiency of state investments and procurement by 
creating a Federal Contractual System (FCS), improving the 
current procedures under Federal Law 94, introducing FCS priority 
standards, applying standard state contracts, and monitoring 

Country Development Outcomes to 
which the CPS Contributes 

Outcome 6:  Increased access to quality 
infrastructure assets and improved 
infrastructure services 

Outcome 7:  Enhanced competitiveness and 
sustainability of the economy via reduced 
resource intensity of GDP 

Outcome 8:  Improved management of 
environmental risks and natural resources 

Outcome 6:  Increased access to quality 
infrastructure assets and improved 
infrastructure services 

Outcome 14: Improved government 
transparency and accountability 

Outcome 14: Improved government 
transparency and accountability 

Outcome 1:  Improved efficiency and 
effectiveness of public financial management 
Outcome 14:  Improved government 
transparency and accountability 

Outcome 14:  Improved government 
transparency and accountability 

21 This goal is defined in the ongoing State Program on “Energy Savings and Increase in Energy Efficiency through 
2020" that is complementary to the Strategy 2020 Update . 
22 This goal is defined in the Concept of Long-Term Social and Economic Development to 2020 (November 2008). 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 6: Government‘s ―Development Strategy 2020‖ Update 

                                Page 6 of 6 

November 2011 

Indicative Strategy 2020 Themes 

performance 
Modernizing the public sector in the provision of services by, 
among others, involving non-public organizations, giving 
consumers an opportunity for informed choice of a service 
provider, and developing the three-sector model for the provision 
of socially important services (open social and cultural sector, 
competition for quality, and promotion of PPP) 
Strengthening interbudgetary federal relations to enhance the 
renewal of autonomy of every level of government 

Russia’s Global and Regional Role 

Strengthening Russia's regional and global role through targeted 
international initiatives, projects and programs designed to provide 
adequate responses to contemporary global challenges and threats, 
initially through grants to international funds and programs of 
international development assistance, and in future through the 
establishment of a national system of instruments to provide such 
assistance on a bilateral basis23 

Country Development Outcomes to 
which the CPS Contributes 

Outcome 9:  Increased quality and improved 
access, targeting, coverage, and efficiency of 
social services for human development 
Outcome 14:  Improved government 
transparency and accountability 

Outcome 1:  Improved efficiency and 
effectiveness of public financial management 
Outcome 14:  Improved government 
transparency and accountability 

Outcome 12:  Strengthened Russian  
participation in the provision of global public 
goods 
Outcome 13:  Established an institutional 
structure for delivery of a bilateral and 
multilateral development assistance program 

23 This goal is defined in the Concept of Russia’s Participation in International Development Assistance (June 
2007). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 
Page 1 of 36 

Annex 7 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION 
World Bank Group (WBG) FY07-11 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Completion Report 

Date of CPS:  November 20, 2006 (Report No. 37901-RU), Board discussion on December 14, 2006 
Date of CPS Progress Report:  July 30, 2009 (Report No.49119-RU) 
Period Covered by the CPS Completion Report: July 2007 to July 2011  
CPS Completion Report prepared by:  
         Marsha McGraw Olive (IBRD), Hester Marie DeCasper (IFC), and Franciscus Johannes 
Linden (MIGA) with input from Marcus Heinz, Anna-Maria Bogdanova, and the WBG Russia 
Country Team 

I. 

Introduction and Overview 

1. 
The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) and CPS Progress Report period FY07 -11 
represents a case study of adaptation by the World Bank Group to growth dynamics and 
demand from an advanced Middle Income Country (MIC). The main event for both Russia and 
the WBG during the CPS period was the sharp fall in economic output and fiscal stress during the 
global financial crisis in 2008 and 2009. It highlighted the validity of the Government‘s strategy, 
supported by the CPS, to diversify the economy away from dependency on oil and gas revenues. At 
the same time, it demanded flexibility from the Government and WBG to work together in response 
to the crisis, to create new partnership mechanisms, and to re -orient the strategy to longer-term 
growth objectives. This experience underscores that strategic planning and evaluation in an advanced 
MIC should follow a different approach than the one taken by the previous first -generation results-
based CPS. The overall design of the results framework with 15 outcome clusters and 44 milestones 
was unsuitable for a country with highly sophisticated and fast changing demands. Going forward, a 
new partnership strategy for Russia should be flexible and demand-driven, built on principles of 
engagement rather than transactions tied to a rigid results matrix. 

2. 
A principal finding of this evaluation is that the WBG increased its relevance in an 
advanced MIC based on global knowledge. A culture of innovation and the flexibility to address 
fast-changing, sophisticated demands by the Government turned out to be key qualities for a 
successful WBG engagement with Russia. Demand for IBRD fee -based knowledge services (FBS) 
doubled during the period and was applied to programs at the global , national, and sub-national 
levels. IFC was also able to offer new products tailored to changing market conditions while 
maintaining a strong investment program; these include risk management and non -performing loan 
advisory services, platforms for resolution of distressed assets and the scaling up of the Global Trade 
Finance Program. Another finding is that the development impact of WBG operations can be 
maximized through direct engagement with Russia‘s regions, including through fee -based services 
and sub-national lending. Going forward, however, new approaches are needed to improve 
knowledge services and lending to less advanced regions.  Finally, IBRD innovated in response to 
the Government‘s interest in becoming a multilateral aid provider by creating a self-standing pillar 
on ―Russia as a Donor‖. 

3. 
This self-evaluation rates the WBG-supported program and WBG performance as 
satisfactory based on CPS outcomes (Attachment 1), a survey of Country Team members 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 2 of 36 

(December 2010), and feedback from seven regions in Russia. A draft version of the report was 
shared with the Government and the final text reflects comments received. Between FY07 and FY11 
IEG prepared 13 ICR reviews for projects (12 rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory, one rated 
moderately unsatisfactory), one PPAR (rated highly satisfactory), one comparative study of World 
Bank engagement at the State Level and one country study on World Bank support for the pension 
system. 
 Most CPS outcomes were achieved, to varying degrees, despite the global crisis. In areas such as 
financial sector regulation, the crisis ignited urgency for reform.  In others, such as attraction of 
substantial investment to non-oil tradable sectors, it highlighted the importance of IFC and 
MIGA as catalysts for private investment.   
 Areas falling behind, including infrastructure development, investment climate, and social 
protection, rose to become even higher priorities for long-term growth.  The WBG continued to 
advocate for necessary long term structural reforms even when the response to the immediate 
crisis took precedence. 
 Program outcomes and Bank performance were highly satisfactory in two areas: public financial 
management and ―Russia as a Donor‖. 

II. 

Progress toward Country Development Goals 

4. 
Russia was making good progress prior to the 2008-2009 global financial crisis. Living 
standards, human development indicators, and development in Russia‘s region all showed positive 
gains, although still mostly remaining below international comparators. During the crisis GDP fell 
sharply but Russia successfully preserved macroeconomic and financial stability. It used its strong 
fiscal position and large reserves to cushion the impact on the financial sector, firms and households. 
The authorities implemented a large anti-crisis policy package that included a gradual but still 
significant devaluation of the currency, support to banks and firms to strengthen balance sheets and 
roll over maturing foreign debt, and a large fiscal stimulus to maintain employment and incomes. The 
country emerged from the global recession with lower-than-expected unemployment and poverty. At 
the end of the CPS period, inflation represented the main macroeconomic concern for Russia. 

5. 
The WBG CPS reflected Russia’s own medium-term development strategy. It grouped 
Russia‘s country development goals into four strategic pillars. After the adoption of the 
Government‘s new ―Strategy 2020‖ in November 2008 these pillars were slightly adapted by the 
CPS Progress Report and titled as: diversify the economy for sustainable development and growth 
(Pillar 1), improve public sector management and performance (Pillar 2), improve delivery of 
communal and social services (Pillar 3), and enhance Russia‘s global role (Pillar 4). 

6. 
Structural reforms focusing on the investment climate and diversification of the 
economy (Pillar 1) progressed only slowly over the CPS period. There has been some shift to 
services in the Russian economy over the years but the economic structure is dominated by large 
corporations with concentration in natural resources and low value added industries, while 
contributions from the SME sector are limited . Although Russia‘s performance varies significantly 
across regions, most indicators suggest that the investment environment continues to make it hard for 
businesses to operate (dealing with construction permits, trading across borders, etc.). Competition 
and the institutional and policy framework remain inadequate to stimulate innova tion. Most 
businesses continue to operate at low technological levels. The WBG ―Doing Business Report‖ in 
2010 puts Russia only at rank 123 and gross FDI inflows from 2005-2010 averaged a low 1.5 percent 
of GDP, with only 21 percent of these funds going to non-energy manufacturing. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 3 of 36 

7. 
Infrastructure is emerging as a key development constraint .  Large and sustained 
investments are required to underpin a diversified, efficient and sustainable product base. The 
infrastructure gap estimates by the Russian Government are in the range of US$1 trillion over the 
next decade (Strategy 2020). Based on findings in IBRD‘s Public Expenditure Review (2011), 
significant improvements are needed in policy, institutional and funding mechanisms to meet federal 
infrastructure investment targets and remove bottlenecks to business growth.  

8. 
Regional development continues to be a challenge for the largest country in the world 
by land area. Uniformly low population densities make it difficult to capture agglomeration 
economies but at least there is measurable progress in convergence over the CPS period when 
measured in gross regional product (GRP). Nonetheless, great differences among regions and their 
respective challenges remain. While large and dynamic cities such as Moscow and St. Petersburg do 
well economically, they are highly congested and create substantial problems for urban transport 
management. Outside these cities, poverty and unemployment can reach significantly high levels. 
Twenty regions (out of 83) reported an average unemployment rate above 10 percent in early 2011. 

9. 
Efforts to improve the quality of public services (Pillar 2) have intensified. Streamlined 
standards for federal authorities in service delivery are beginning to induce cultural change in the 
bureaucracy. In some key areas, however, government units are understaffed and civil service salary 
structures make attraction and retention of qualified staff difficult. Some progress in service delivery 
is observable, even though the quality and even access to basic social and infrastructural services in 
less advanced regions are lagging behind. Multi-functional service centers, where they already have 
been established, have helped to cut in half the waiting time for some administrative services. The 
Government has also started to roll out the first wave of e-Government. 

10. 
Public financial management (PFM) underwent significant reforms during the CPS 
period. Decentralization and the introduction of a three-year budget framework, the automation of 
Treasury payment functions and reforms in customs administration to increase taxpayer compliance 
with the Customs Code all showed that the Russian Government has followed through with a strong 
commitment to modern principles of sound fiscal management. PFM implementation results , 
however, are uneven, in particular when comparing the federal level to the local level, where 
municipal reforms are just taking effect. 

11. 
The judiciary is viewed as weak despite some improvements in recent years. According 
to the latest Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS) the share of firms 
using the legal system increased from 27 percent in 2005 to 45 percent in 2008, while only 3 percent 
of the companies surveyed reported corrupt practices. IBRD (Judicial Reform Support Project) 
commissioned polls also show improved ratings for judicial transparency and efficiency with 64 
percent of respondents in 2010 expressing confidence compared to only 46 percent in 2006. 

12. 
Russia’s demographic profile shows a shrinking and aging population with pressure 
building up on social expenditures (Pillar 3). Spending on social services in 2007-2008 accounted 
for about 17 percent of GDP, or half of total spending. The health and education sectors accounted 
for roughly 4 percent of GDP each, while social protection (insurance and social assistance) 
accounted for about 9 percent of GDP. During the crisis, health and education budgets were kept 
stable and social protection spending was increased. The total amount of additional social protection 
expenditures is estimated to have been around 1.3 percent of GDP in 2009 and 2.2 percent of GDP in 
2010.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 4 of 36 

13. 
Health indicators generally remain low in Russia in an international perspective and 
when compared to countries with similar levels of development. However, measures undertaken 
to improve the health of the population, including the fight against HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis, 
have shown first positive results. Life expectancy at birth trended upwards according to the Human 
Development Report from 65.5 in 2005 to 67.2 years in 2010. 

14. 
Relatively low spending on education in Russia achieves good outcomes compared to 
OECD countries. Russia's achievements on international education tests vary. While Russian 
primary school students are the best readers internationally according to the results of the Program of 
International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS), Russia‘s achievements in Program for International 
Student Assessment (PISA) are modest. The average numbers for Russia, however, mask huge 
variations among regions, and skill mismatches in the labor market are an increasingly important 
development constraint.  

15. 
A substantial part of social protection expenditure is linked to social insurance (mostly 
pensions). Social assistance in Russia is mainly based on payments to specific categories of the 
population (privileges), while very little is spent on targeted programs .  Privileges generally do not 
reach the poor well, and hence achieve little in terms of poverty reduction.  Russia still lacks a 
unified nation-wide pro-poor safety net program or a coherent social safety net strategy. Federal/ sub-
national overlaps also impede improved targeting of social assistance and this remains an important 
area for further reforms. An IBRD Social Expenditures Review published in January 2011 provided 
the Government with benchmarks and options for the improvement of social service delivery. 

16. 
Russia plays important regional and global roles (Pillar 4) through its membership in 
the G8 and G20. Russia is becoming a significant provider of crisis response funds and development 
assistance. It contributed US$7.5 billion to the EurAsEC Anti Crisis Fund and its ODA equivalent 
financial flows increased from US$102 million in 2006 to an extraordinary US$785 million during 
the crisis in 2009 and then fell back to US$472 million in 2010, which is in line with the 
Government‘s ODA growth path.  

17. 
Russia is also taking a lead in hosting global conferences on cutting -edge development 
issues. Supported by the Bank and the OECD, Russia sponsored the Moscow International 
Conference on New Partnerships in Global Development Finance in February 2010. In November 
2010 the Bank lent its support to the First International Tiger Forum hosted by Prime Minister Putin 
in St. Petersburg for the Tiger Range Countries, including China, international organizations and 
civil society organizations. Mr. Zoellick, World Bank President,  participated in both of these 
conferences. 

18. 
As provider of global public goods, Russia’s position on climate change is evolving 
slowly. Energy efficiency is a high priority following the adoption of a landmark law in 2009, 
championed by President Medvedev; IFC and IBRD helped draft the law and continue to advise on 
secondary legislation. Russia established the legal framework for Joint Implementation (JI) projects 
in 2008 and approved a Climate Doctrine in 2009.  It is implement ing the regulatory mechanism for 
carbon finance and approved the first 33 JI projects.  Nevertheless, the regulatory process was 
unnecessarily protracted, involving multiple institutional actors and steps.  This hampered access to 
climate finance for much-needed energy efficiency investments constituting a missed opportunity for 
the country. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 5 of 36 

III. Development Outcomes of the Program 

19. 
At the beginning of the CPS period in FY07, the Russian economy had experienced 
eight years of robust growth from 1999 to 2006. With growing fiscal surpluses, federal authorities 
indicated their intent to stop borrowing from IBRD. Without expectations for significant lending on 
the federal level, the challenge for the WBG was to devise a flexible, customized country partnership 
strategy still relevant to the country. The CPS FY07-09 put international knowledge at the center of 
the strategy. This was applied at three levels:  global (for Russia as a donor); national (for 
institutional and policy change), and sub-national (targeting Russian regions). When the CPS period 
ended, in FY09, the Russian economy was plummeting to its lowest level since the depression of the 
early 1990s. The flexibility of the WBG approach enabled it to provide timely, crisis -relevant support 
in line with new demands from the federal authorities, as well as timely financing and advisory to the 
private sector. The WBG and the Government agreed that it was inappropriate to design a new 
medium-term strategy for Russia as it was coping with a global crisis.   Moreover, the existing CPS 
pillars continued to be relevant since they addressed long-standing structural weaknesses and 
national aspirations.  

20. 
The Progress Report extended the CPS to FY11 and shifted focus to anti -crisis and 
long-term growth objectives. The Progress Report retained new cooperation initiatives of the CPS, 
including the focus on regions, WBG sub-national lending, fee-based services, and a stronger role for 
IFC and MIGA in private sector development resulting from increased demand . As financial backing 
of the Russian Government‘s crisis response seemed necessary at the time , the CPS Progress Report 
also authorized new borrowing of up to US$4 billion, including for budget support. In the end a 
crisis- related DPO for US$2 billion was prepared but dropped after Russia decided to borrow from 
capital markets instead. 

Pillar 1: Diversify the Economy for Sustainable Development and Growth 

21. 
The CPS was designed to support the Government’s efforts to sustain robust growth for 
poverty reduction and higher living standards. The WBG targeted binding constraints to growth 
within the Government‘s 2006-2008 strategy, including supporting policies for macroeconomic 
management, competition and diversification, investment climate, and infrastructure development. 
Given growing fiscal surpluses, new lending was restricted in favor of Bank AAA, WBG sub -
national lending, and direct investments by IFC in non-oil sectors to increase economic 
diversification, with a sectoral emphasis on supporting regional banks, agribusiness, value -added 
manufacturing, and infrastructure. Jointly, the WBG aimed at supporting the development of land 
and property markets that are essential for business development, mobility, and revenue generation. 
At the outset of the crisis in June 2008, IBRD highlighted risks from an overheating economy, 
recommended policy adjustments to curb inflation, and called for re invigoration of structural reforms 
to make productivity the driver of sustainable growth. 

22. 
The strategy was relevant until it was interrupted by the global financial crisis. 
Structural weaknesses in the banking sector, reliance of the private sector on ext ernal financing, and 
a narrow economic base made Russia highly vulnerable to the unanticipated triple shocks of an oil 
price collapse, sudden capital outflows, and global credit tightening.  In September 2008, the Russian 
stock market lost about US$1 trillion in wealth. Making use of the flexibility embedded in the CPS, 
IBRD and IFC were able to rapidly shift course in October 2008 in order to ramp up advice and 
support for government anti-crisis programs; IFC also intensified portfolio monitoring, working 
closely with existing clients to help them weather the crisis.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 6 of 36 

23. 
The Progress Report shifted the strategy more toward anti-crisis and longer-term 
growth objectives. For IFC, in addition to increased support for portfolio clients, crisis response 
included provision of short-term liquidity and advisory services to address crisis-related needs of 
client banks and real sector clients, as well as actions to catalyze the market in distressed assets. IFC 
maintained a focus on competitiveness and long-term growth through joint advisory and investment 
programs to improve resource efficiency, invested in municipal and transport infrastructure , and 
helped position clients for post-crisis growth through provision of longer-term financing. IFC also 
helped bring financing back to the Russian market by arranging the first international syndication for 
a private Russian bank since the onset of the global credit crunch. For IBRD, it meant just-in-time 
advice on the fiscal policy response, protection of vulnerable groups, and financial sector reform. 
Taking into account the uncertainties in mid-2009, when the full impact on the Russian economy was 
still unknown, the Progress Report reoriented WBG policy and program focus on vulnerabilities 
facing households and the banking system. It also revisited the Government‘s borrowing 
requirements for crisis recovery, fiscal consolidation, and infrastructure investments to serve anti -
crisis and longer-term growth objectives. 

24. 
Impacts from the crisis were sizable yet lower than feared, with Bank policy advice playing a 
supporting role. Prior to the crisis, the Bank (including Treasury) helped the Government to establish 
the Reserve Funds that captured windfall oil revenues and provided a financial cushion to weather 
the crisis. During and after the crisis, Bank dialogue with the Ministry of Finance and policy analysis 
in Russian Economic Reports contributed to policy actions to mitigate poverty and employment 
impacts (see also Pillar 3). Bank recommendations were widely disseminated, includ ing via GDLN 
to the regions. The policy agenda for a DPO on public expenditure efficiency has been taken onboard 
by the Russian Government, although ultimately, the Russian Federation favored the option of 
issuing securities to attract funds from the international markets for budget support to an IBRD loan. 

25. WBG engagement prior to the crisis facilitated financial sector adjustment afterwards. 
The Capital Markets Development Project (CMDP) and TA to the Central Bank and Ministry of 
Finance contributed to financial sector reforms. The next CPS needs to further support the 
strengthening of the supervisory framework, meeting G20 recommendations, and Russia‘s goal to 
become an international financial center. IFC introduced new risk management standards for banks, 
advanced a transparent distressed asset resolution process, boosted provision of short -term finance 
and worked closely with the Ministry of Finance and Vnesheconombank (VEB) to create the Russian 
Bank Opportunities Fund (RBOF) that, once active, will support regional banks that finance SMEs, 
contributing to sustainable growth and economic diversification. This was in addit ion to providing 
more traditional financing to support banking sector liquidity and bank capitalization. IFC 
investments in Russia‘s financial sector over the three years from July 2008 to June 2011 totaled 
US$2.24 billion, including US$1 billion mobilized from partners. 

26. 
Despite a global success story in Pulkovo airport, public-private partnerships (PPPs) for 
infrastructure development are lagging. Though federal authorities recognized the importance of 
PPPs to reduce the massive backlog in infrastructure investment, the financial crisis and restrictions 
in the Federal Concession law reduced the formation of PPPs and use of the Federal Investment 
Fund. Based on a new law passed by the City of St. Petersburg and three years of advisory services 
on a fee basis by IBRD, a PPP for Pulkovo Airport reached financial closure in end -2010. The deal 
generated private investments of Euro 1.2 billion and won the Infrastructure Investor award for best 
global and regional (in ECA) PPP of the year. IFC and EBRD committed ―A‖ loans of €70 million 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 7 of 36 

(US$94 million) and €100 million (US$134 million), respectively, and jointly raised €200 million 
(US$268 million) in syndicated loans from a group of international banks.   

Pillar 2: Improve Public Sector Management and Performance 

27. 
The Government has made significant progress towards adoption of modern principles of 
sound fiscal management. The Bank supported the Ministry of Finance in implementing legal and 
institutional mechanisms for monitoring sub-national public finance, implementing management 
processes and expenditure controls for budget execution, creating budget authority at the municipal 
level, revising revenue and expenditure assignments, adopting legislation on insolvency of regional 
budgets, and operating a Regional Fiscal Reform Fund. Implementation of a three-year fiscal 
framework was temporarily suspended during the crisis but resumed in 2010. The next phase of 
cooperation will focus on public expenditure effectiveness drawing on the Public Expenditure 
Review published in February 2011. 

28. 
Results for the modernization of public administration and the judiciary are mixed. The 
WBG supported all elements of the public administration reform process through a DFID trust fund 
that closed in March 2011. It responded to demand across multiple agencies and regions. While 
showing results in each area supported by the WBG (e.g., government statistics), there are no 
champions for systemic reform below the level of the President. With regard to judicial reform, the 
results of the WBG‘s support to the Government remain unsatisfactory. Despite strong progress in 
the arbitration courts, led by a champion for transparency, the reform overall suffers from 
fragmentation and weak oversight. 

Pillar 3: Improve the Delivery of Communal and Social Services 

29. 
A model for delivery of better housing and communal services is evolving at the 
municipal level. Following a decade of support to create modern land and property markets, the 
WBG aided the growth of the mortgage industry and financially-viable utilities. IBRD lending for 
water quality and district heat established the principle that tariffs can be rai sed if quality and service 
are improved, while targeting housing subsidies to the poorest.  Currently, the Housing and 
Communal Services project is applying these lessons by providing investments for utility 
modernization in return for tariff and subsidy reform by municipalities. IFC programs for greater 
energy efficiency in housing markets also contribute by providing financing mechanisms whereby 
homeowners are able to invest in capital improvements, reduce energy use and waste, and raise their 
standard of living. 

30. 
Results of IBRD-supported pilot projects in the health sector have shown encouraging 
trends. WBG-managed health pilots in the regions of Chuvashia and Voronezh provided a national 
model for restructuring health systems.  Changes introduced by the Government show that primary 
care and outpatient services increased as hospital beds in tertiary units declined.  Single -channel 
payment replaced fragmented systems. For example, general practitioners delivered care to 65 
percent of the population in Chuvashia in 2008, up from 13 percent in 2003.  A WBG sub-national 
loan to Chuvashia financed complementary medical equipment.  In addition to this US$6 million 
local currency loan, IFC invested US$62.5 million in private health sector services over the CPS 
period. 

31. 
Government efforts to reduce mortality and incidence rates of TB-AIDS are beginning 
to show some results. The IBRD-supported TB-AIDs project helped to overcome resistance in the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 8 of 36 

medical community to adopt WHO protocols for TB treatment and clinical practices for HIV-AIDs. 
Implementation support included international observers to ensure treatments reached patients. 
Procurement and payments were monitored for 380 million dosages of drugs and 35,335 sets of 
equipment for approximately 3,000 federal healthcare institutions in 85 regions. Treatment 
effectiveness was verified during independent monitoring visits to 60 regions.  

32. WBG support for the Government in the education sector was wide -ranging and 
included early child care for migrants to ICT for rural youth, benchmarking for world-class 
universities, and financial education for consumers. The Russia Education Team innovated in 
what it financed – such as a highly successful E-Learning Project and a new project on Financial 
Literacy and Financial Education. The team also demonstrated the value of demand-driven fee-based 
services for education. The sector has secured contracts for US$4 million over that period to deliver 
international knowledge in addressing issues in early child care, vocational, and higher education.     

Pillar 4: Enhance Russia’s Global Role 

33. 
The CPS outcomes in support of the country development priority comprised the 
development of a Russian ODA strategy and the realization of expanded donor activities in line 
with the strategic vision. Substantial progress is evident in this area and overall the expected 
outcomes were achieved. The WBG in collaboration with other partners (DFID, OECD) provided 
key support for the successful re-emergence of ―Russia as a Donor‖. The Russian Federation 
formulated an overarching policy statement for its ODA activities in 2007 (―Concept for Russia‘s 
Participation in International Development Assistance‖). This strategic vision was approved by the 
President of the Russian Federation. It established key orientations and objectives for the country‘s 
future aid program based on OECD-DAC principles and the achievement of the MDGs. The concept 
lays out a two stage process to build a national ODA system. Ultimately, the plan anticipates the 
establishment of a specialized Russian aid agency (yet to be realized) and the formulation of separate 
three-year work programs for Russia‘s development assistance. IBRD has directly supported the 
Russian Federation‘s efforts to develop an ODA strategy during the CPS period and a demand driven 
World Bank Trust Fund (―Russia as a Donor Initiative‖), financed with a grant of US$870,000 by 
DFID, supported the development of main elements of the future Russian aid architecture. IBRD, 
alongside the OECD, also supported the preparation of the Moscow International Conference on 
New Partnerships in Global Development Finance (February 17-18, 2010) in which Mr. Zoellick, 
World Bank President, participated. 

34. 
The Russian Federation has significantly scaled up its development assistance and 
broadened its engagement in development cooperation during the CPS period. The Russian 
Federation currently provides most of its development aid through multilateral channels , including 
through IBRD Trust Funds. Russia has constantly increased its IDA contributions since IDA12 and 
has pledged US$173.5 million (0.51 percent burden share) for the latest IDA16 replenishment. As of 
March 2011, its contributions to World Bank administered Single and Multiple Donor Trust Funds 
have reached a total of US$461.7 million (including US$257 million for the Global Fund to Fight 
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria). Following its ODA strategy and in line with G8 commitments, the 
Russian Federation focused its activities as a donor during the CPS period on six themes: Quality of 
Education, Access to Energy, Infectious Diseases, Public Financial Management, Financial Literacy, 
and Migration. Russia also supported activities in the area of Crisis Response with significant 
contributions. The WBG has supported Russia with its new engagement in these initiatives  and 
helped with the desired build-up of expertise in the Russian aid system, as is particularly evident 
from the creation of the ―Russia Aid for Development‖ (READ) Trust Fund. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 9 of 36 

35. 
The WBG helped lay the basis for carbon finance and concluded two deals. Following 
the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol by the Russian Federation in 2005, the WBG invested 
considerable resources over four years to help Russia prepare environmentally sustainable projects 
using carbon market tools. Several operations were initiated but only one was concluded: 
Komsomolskoe Associated Gas Flaring Reduction Project. Prepared together with OAO NK Rosneft, 
it will reduce about 2 million tons of CO2 emissions. IFC completed one carbon finance deal in 
Russia during the CPS period in cooperation with CoreCarbon, reducing 2-3 million tons of nitrous 
oxide emissions from a fertilizer plant. However, overall Russia underexploited its reserves in 
utilizing carbon finance instruments. 

36. 
IFC took a comprehensive approach to catalyze the market for investments in energy 
efficiency, renewable energy, residential energy efficiency, and resource efficiency.  IFC and 
IBRD have worked closely with the Russian Government on policies to facilitate investment in the 
sector, including publication of a major policy study discussed at the highest levels of government.  
In addition to direct financing and advisory services to financial institutions and real sector 
enterprises, IFC engages with a broad range of stakeholders to educate the market about the benefits 
of investments in sustainable resource use, provides sector benchmarking and disseminates best 
practices.  IFC climate change projects in Russia between July 2007 and June 2011 reduce direct 
CO2 emissions by 490,000 tons annually.  IFC‘s Sustainable Energy Finance and Cleaner Production 
Programs have facilitated US$213 million in credit lines by IFC, of which US$97.5 million has 
already reached end users, and have generated over US$40 million in annual energy cost savings for 
companies. 

IV. WBG Performance 

37. 
The WBG has a modest program in relation to the Russian economy. GDP reached a 
level of US$1.5 trillion in 2010 while for the whole CPS period new IBRD lending amounted to a 
total of US$385 million. IFC invested more than US$4.2 billion in 105 projects, of which US$1.3 
billion was mobilized from partner financial institutions. Russia is MIGA's largest net expos ure 
(US$450 million as of June 30, 2011) almost entirely concentrated in Russia's financial sector , yet 
there have been no new guarantees issued for investments since September 2009.  

38. 
Since FY07 the IBRD portfolio has shrunk from 22 to 13 projects (US$1.206 billion as 
of June 30, 2011). Loan preparation in Russia is lengthy. Portfolio quality is overall satisfactory, 
with two exceptions in the Judicial Reform Support Project and the Registration Development 
Project. FBS and sub-national lending (nine loans for US$162 million) emerged as new business 
lines. Nonetheless, the financial terms and conditions of these instruments are not well suited to the 
circumstances of less advanced regions which are most in need of WBG support.  

39. 
IFC’s disbursed and outstanding portfolio in Russia was US$2 billion (as of June 30, 
2011), representing 6.3 percent of IFC’s global portfolio. An additional US$530 million is 
committed and undisbursed.  IFC portfolio quality remained high throughout the CPS period, with no 
crisis-related NPLs.  During the CPS period, IFC introduced the following joint advisory-investment 
programs aimed at improving resource efficiency among private sector businesses: Russia Cleaner 
Production Program (2008), Russia Renewable Energy Program (2010), and Russia Residential 
Energy Efficiency Project (2010).  IFC began offering structured finance products in Russia during 
the early years of the CPS period, including partial-credit guarantees to sub-national entities and 
securitizations of mortgages and auto loans.  IFC also boosted provision of trade finance, risk 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 10 of 36 

management products such as swaps, and local-currency financing during the latter stages of the CPS 
period in response to unmet demand from the private sector. 

40. WBI supported and complemented the rest of the WBG through capacity strengthening 
and learning programs. All programs were aligned with the strategic dimensions of the CPS pillars 
and with the WBG‘s strategic approach to engage in regions where development has been uneven 
and capacity needs were the greatest. WBI worked jointly with the ECA GDLN Network to reach out 
to Russian regions through the GDLN Russia Affiliates Network and worked closely with local 
partner institutions such as universities and research think tanks.  

41. 
The WBG was catalytic by focusing on policy and institutional advice with broad macro 
or microeconomic impact, investments in the regions with strong demonstration effect, 
mobilization of other funds, and new markets underserved by the private sector.  To strengthen 
impact in a vast country with a strong financial position, the CPS introduced six distinctive features 
to WBG engagement.  Making ―Russia as a Donor‖ a self-standing pillar was particularly effective, 
as discussed above.  Additional features included: 

42. 
Regional focus. With federal endorsement, IBRD provided direct services to 12 regions. 
Demand evolved from successful earlier engagements that received national attention. Similarly, IFC 
prioritized less advanced frontier regions for investment and advisory services. However, without 
federal guarantees for direct IBRD lending and federal support for WBG knowledge services, 
outreach to less advanced regions has proved difficult (see also below). 

43. 
Fee-based services. All services were provided on a demand-driven basis in line with WBG 
guidelines, quality control procedures, and usually with support from network anchors. Total contract 
value of 40 completed and signed projects for FY07-FY11 is approximately US$20 million. All FBS 
are provided on the principle of full-cost recovery.   

44. WBG piloted sub-national lending without sovereign guarantees. These loans met a vast, 
heretofore unmet demand for essential investments in infrastructure services in regions with limited 
access to long-term commercial finance. Nine operations for a total investment of US$162 million 
are completed or disbursing. Demand dropped during the financial crisis due to high cost of 
borrowing (pricing is market-based). Financial conditions are also not apt for less advanced regions. 

45. 
Stronger role for IFC and MIGA in private sector development. IFC and MIGA contributed 
increasingly to the pillar on economic diversification, linked closely to SME development. Demand 
for IFC financing and advisory services grew during the crisis, particularly for shorter term 
instruments and risk management and distressed asset solutions. IFC programs are helping to open up 
new markets, particularly those linked to mitigating climate change and increasing resource and 
energy efficiency to boost competitiveness.  

46. 
Realization of projects on the basis of ‘new modalities.’ The Government wants to 
eventually shift to a non-lending relationship in which the WBG provides implementation and 
advisory services for projects without sovereign borrowing. A numbe r of projects were identified for 
the so-called ‗new modalities‘ when the global financial crisis hit (e.g. , Financial Education and 
Financial Literacy reverted to a loan). The Ministry of Finance and the WBG are working on sample 
agreements to govern the “new modalities” for which a pilot project will be identified in the next 
CPS period.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 11 of 36 

V. 

Lessons and Recommendations 

47. 
To remain relevant in advanced MICs, the WBG should innovate constantly.  For this 
purpose, the WBG needs to maintain monitoring and analysis of cutting-edge policy issues. The 
satisfactory rating for the Bank‘s performance is based both on CPS outcomes and on innovation.  
The Country Team rose to the challenge of a non-lending CPS. The WBG created a new platform for 
dialogue based on global knowledge. Sources and uses of such knowledge were diverse: federal 
country experience (e.g., Australia, Canada, US for the Treasury, Tax and Public Finance projects), 
international benchmarking (world class university study by the HD anchor, Doing Business), 
international standards (WHO for TB-AIDs, OECD for ODA), international good practices (oil 
reserve fund, long-term fiscal rules, PPP for Pulkovo airport, distressed asset markets, consume r 
financial protection), and AAA on Russia‘s global role (WTO, energy efficiency). There remain 
multiple areas where international knowledge can bring Russia economic and efficiency gains in the 
next CPS.  Procurement and innovation policies are prime examples here. 

48. With limited resources, the WBG should aim to maximize its development impact 
through deepened direct engagement in the regions. Experimentation in the regions influences 
national policy.  Demand-based delivery of global knowledge in the regions created a feedback loop 
for federal policy change.  Examples include services in Tatarstan for innovation policy, poverty 
analysis, and world-class universities; in Stavropol and Kirov for increasing public participation in 
budgeting; and in St. Petersburg for PPPs.  

49. 
Less advanced regions and vulnerable citizens need higher attention. While extremely 
positive about the development of fee-based services, Country Team members do not want to 
overlook less advanced regions. Not surprisingly, most demand for FBS comes from wealthier 
regions (the exceptions are Stavropol and Kirov for the Local Initiatives Support mechanism). A 
lending operation for the Northern Caucasus (the least advanced region) is under development, which 
will test the applicability of Bank instruments under those local conditions. Federal guarantees for 
sub-national lending and a lack of funds in less advanced regions to pay for FBS are hurdles to be 
addressed by the federal authorities. Also going forward, the WBG needs to make instruments as 
flexible as possible for diverse development needs in the regions. 

50. 
The broadening of the global development community is an opportunity to ―modernize 
multilateralism‖. The implications of making donor capacity-building a separate CPS pillar go 
beyond the Russia program, and beyond the World Bank as an institution. The large new 
commitments made by the Russian Federation to crisis response internationally, while facing a fiscal 
crisis at home, show that multilateralism in the twenty-first century is evolving. The accession of 
advanced MICs like Russia to the ranks of development aid donors is beginning to change the 
international aid architecture with the sharing of new knowledge (including South -South dialogue) 
and the provision of additional development finance resources. To avoid fragmentation and to 
achieve fast track integration of emerging donors into the multilateral donor community, the build -up 
of new institutional structures and expert capacity within the Government are necessary. 

Attachments:  

Attachment 1: CPS FY07-11 Results Summary 
Attachment 2: CPS FY07-11 Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries 
Attachment 3: CPS FY07-11 Planned Non-lending Services and Actual Deliveries 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 12 of 36 

CPS FY07-11 Results Summary 

PILLAR 1: DIVERSIFY THE ECONOMY FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND GROWTH 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: PROMOTE PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT 

Attachment 1 

CPS Outcome 

Strong progress in land 
registration and cadastre 
listings 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved 
The procedure of cadastre recording was simplified. The number of steps 
requiring the client to interact with the cadastre offices in connection with 
transactions in immovable property was reduced.  The requirement of a technical 
inventory for secondary 
transactions was abolished. A mass appraisal 
methodology was created and tested. The legal base for the Unified Real Estate 
Cadastre was created. Integration of land and real estate data is progressing well. 
All 40 participating regions installed and tested equipment and software for 
inter-relations between managerial levels and integration of data on all types of 
immovable property. 
Measured progress: The average time for completion of transactions in 
immovable property was reduced to 51 days in 2009 (Baseline (2004): four 
months). Regulatory changes have had considerable effect, but reorganization 
and adaptation to new technologies in offices moderated (and sometimes 
reversed) time savings. The average time a client spends in a cadastre office (per 
visit) decreased to 59 minutes in 2009 (Baseline (2004): two hours). Seventy 
percent of surveyed clients (2009) were satisfied with the operation of cadastre 
offices. 
Bank Group impact: The Cadastre Development Project served as a pilot for all 
governmental reforms in the area of real estate cadastre and registration. The 
mass appraisal methodology (and its test under the project) is the major source 
for the setting of taxation rates for immovable property. 
Enabling/disabling factors: Market competition was introduced to technical 
inventory services (in 2009, 245 survey firms were accredited). The cadastre and 
registration offices were unified both at the federal and regional levels. However, 
the land market is underdeveloped due to weak protection of property rights. No 
improvement was noticeable in the International Property Rights Index (63rd 
place among 70 countries surveyed in 2007; same in 2010). 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

Property registration remains a key issue for unlocking the dynamic growth potential of the Russian economy. 
Exposure of responsible government staff to international best practice is essential for nurturing domestic progress. 
The new program should ideally target real estate market development (including land markets), improvement of 
services, and protection of legal rights to immovable property. 
Bank Group Contributions: P078420 Cadastre Development Project (SIL) Approved: July 2005; Status: Closed 
(June 2011); Latest ISR Rating: Satisfactory; ICR Rating: Not available 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: PROMOTE PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT 

CPS Outcome 

Financial sector regulation 
reform implemented  

Availability of finance for 
Russian entrepreneurs 
increased 

Status: achieved 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Capital markets legislation was enacted to stimulate the development of the 
domestic capital markets and strengthen investor protection through increased 
transparency and effective market surveillance (e.g. , law on insider-trading and 
price manipulation; increased protection of bond holders‘ rights in the 
eventuality of default; amendments to the Securities Market Law on disclosure to 
strengthen transparency, etc). Access to capital market for private companies 
increased as a result of facilitation of capital raising through IPOs and new 
corporate debt issuance. 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 13 of 36 

Measured progress: Equity market capitalization as a percentage of GDP fell to 
60 percent in 2009 after peaking at close to 100 percent in 2007 (Baseline 
(2000): 17.2 percent). Bond market size as a percentage of GDP went to 5.2 
percent of GDP in 2009 (Baseline (2000): 0.5 percent). IPO volume (in US$ 
billions) rose from 0.01 in 2003 to 1.13 in 2010. The number of corporate d ebt 
issuers increased from 168 in 2004 to 405 in 2010. The volume of bonds issued 
rose from US$9.6 billion in 2004 to US$67.1 billion in 2010. 

Bank Group impact: The debt and asset management capacity of the MOF was 
strengthened through the development of the legal and organizational framework 
underpinning the new Financial Agency responsible for managing sovereign debt 
and assets, including the Sovereign Wealth Fund.  The institutional capacity of 
the FFMS benefited from an automated document workflow system supporting 
the modernization and automation of the business functions of the Securities 
Regulator. Specifications and design of a modern and comprehensive 
information analytical system to strengthen Central Bank oversight and 
monitoring of national payment system were developed. 

IFC invested more than US$3.4 billion in 120 projects in Russia‘s private sector 
and mobilized US$1.3 billion from partners, including commercial banks and 
other development finance institutions. Financial markets investments (US$1.9 
billion, plus mobilization of US$1.1 billion) to regional banks supported trade, 
SME, mortgage and energy efficiency finance as well as risk management and 
distressed asset resolution. From 2006 to 2010, IFC‘s portfolio clients in the 
banking sector provided around 360,000 SME loans and held an outstanding 
SME portfolio of US$4.6 billion at the end of 2010 . IFC‘s portfolio clients 
provided approximately 168,000 microfinance loans over the same period, and 
held an outstanding microfinance portfolio of almost US$23 million at the end of 
2009. The Russian Bank Opportunity Fund (RBOF; MOU signed with Ministry 
of Finance, June 2011) will support regional banks that finance SMEs and play a 
critical role in funding regional growth.  RBOF will also complement IFC‘s 
comprehensive advisory programs for regional banks seeking to improve risk 
management and NPL management. IFC provided in-depth advisory services to 
eight financial institutions, advised 27, and trained 115 entities in portfolio and 
risk management strategies and resolution of distressed assets. IFC delivered 
diagnostics with recommendations to advisory clients and provided follow up 
advisory services in selected cases. 

MIGA issued nearly US$581 million in new guarantees supporting investments 
of global financial institutions into their banking, mortgage and leasing 
subsidiaries in Russia. MIGA guarantees support manufacturing projects in the 
consumer goods industry and financial institutions interested in regional 
expansion and consumer and SME credit and services. 

Enabling/disabling factors: The financial crisis led to a ―credit crunch‖ (that has 
eased since 2009) and increased awareness for the necessity of stronger 
supervision and enforcement. The Bank Group‘s rapid response was possible 
because of the existing deep engagement in the sector and the continuity of 
dialogue since the 90s. The institutional investor base is still shallow due to 
underdevelopment of insurance and non-government pension funds.  NPLs 
continue to constrain lending to corporations and SMEs. Credit growth in 2010 is 
lower than in 2007.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 14 of 36 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

There were no major bank failures during the financial crisis, in part due to strong synergies between Bank and IFC 
policy guidance and lending.  Continued engagement in the sector enabled flexible, just -in-time response by IBRD 
and created demand for FBS. The remaining issues in the banking system and capital markets continue to create 
structural problems for firms. The lack of access to finance is the single highest obstacle fo r medium, small, and 
micro enterprises, and is the second highest obstacle to larger firms after tax rates. Access to financial services 
improved from 109 th in 2009 Doing Business to 89th in 2011. Still, about 60 million Russians have no access to 
financial services. 
The Bank should put an emphasis on further strengthening of the supervisory framework, help meet G20 
recommendations and should try to support Russia‘s goal to become an international financial center. 
IFC should continue its work on strengthening bank risk management, help establish infrastructure for the 
transparent distressed asset resolution process (i.e ., NPLs sold on stock exchange), and assist in preparing for the 
implementation of Basel II and III policies. IFC should also enable equity investments (complemented by debt 
instruments and advisory services) to improve bank fundamentals and efficiency, facilitate the consolidation and 
stabilization of the private banking sector, and help improve the intermediation and access to finance for SMEs and 
entrepreneurs. IFC should also strive to promote the sustainable presence of institutional investors in Russia. 

Bank Group Contributions: P042622 Capital Market Development Project (TAL) Approved: May 1996; Status: Closed 
(November 2010); ICR Rating: Satisfactory; IEG Rating: Moderately Satisfactory P122493 FBS to Central Bank of Russia; 
Approved: June 2010; Status: Ongoing 
P104863 Financial Sector Assessment Program update (FSAP); Approved: February 2008; Status: Completed; P108310 Post 
FSAP TA on Banking Supervision, Insurance and Pension; Approved: February 2008; Status: Completed; IFC Russia FM Crisis 
Management Program (2010-present) and Russia Banking Advisory Program (2007-2010); IFC Financing to private banks and 
non-bank financial institutions 
COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: MAINTAIN MACROECONOMIC STABILITY 

CPS Outcome 

Fund for Future Generations 
created according to good 
international practices 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved 
The Stabilization Fund was divided into the Reserve Fund (to insure the budget 
against oil price fluctuations) and the Fund for Future Generations (invested in 
longer-term assets). Total accumulation reached a peak of US$580 billion.  
These reserves enabled Russia to finance the fiscal cost of anti-crisis measures 
implemented in 2008 and 2009 (around US$90 billion, or about 7 percent of 
GDP) from internal sources and relieve social impact and pressures on the 
currency.  As a result, the financial crisis was managed with much lower -than-
feared social impact, without a currency crisis or a failure of any major bank. 
Bank Group impact:  The Ministry of Finance developed the new Financial 
Agency (under Capital Market Development Project) to manage sovereign debt 
and assets, including sovereign funds.  Bank AAA helped resolve questions and 
controversies related to investment strategies and potential uses for the Funds: 
Policy recommendations by the Bank were adopted on long-term fiscal 
planning and management of oil revenues (e.g., budget for 2009-2010 prudently 
based on conservative oil price assumptions). The Russian Economic Reports 
provided regular monitoring and timely, evidence-based policy analysis and 
advice on macro policies.  From 2006 to 2010, IFC‘s client companies 
contributed to macro-stability through tax payments of over US$5.7 billion. 
Enabling/disabling factors: The Government sterilized large balance of 
payments inflows and resisted temptations to spend oil windfalls. Strong 
leadership by the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank was reinforced by 
technical inputs (Treasury) and analytical work (Bank).  

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS FY 12-16 

Objective and timely policy advice that feeds into the authorities‘ policy cycle strengthens champions for prudent 
fiscal and debt management.  Future support is needed to underpin on-going fiscal consolidation, implement 
improvements in public expenditure efficiency and program budgeting, and develop institutions to manage 
sovereign debt and assets.  
Bank Group Contributions: ESW Russian Economic Reports Approved: 2001; Status: Ongoing; ESW Long Term 
Fiscal Risks and Fiscal Sustainability Approved: June 2008, Status: Completed; P042622 Capital Market 

 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 15 of 36 

Development Project (TAL) Approved: May 1996; Status: Closed (November 2010); ICR Rating: Satisfactory; 
P119392 Public Expenditure Management and Efficiency TA Approved: September 2009; Status: Completed 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: INCREASE DIVERSIFICATION OF THE ECONOMY 

CPS Outcome 

Special Economic Zones, IT 
parks, and investment fund 
projects implemented 
according to best practices 

Attraction of substantial 
private investment to non-oil 
tradable sectors 

Russian firms monitored 
clearly and benchmarked 
relative to the past and other 
countries on competitiveness 
measures. 

Increase in innovation rates 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: partially achieved 
With few exceptions, Russia‘s companies find themselves only at the margin of 
the modern ―knowledge economy‖. Competition and the institutional and policy 
framework remain inadequate to stimulate innovation. Most businesses continue 
to operate at low technological levels. Government investments in ―innovation 
infrastructure‖ include science parks, technology-transfer organizations; i.e., 
Rosnano, (to commercialize nanotechnologies) and a high-profile R&D center in 
Skolkovo. The Fund for Assistance of Small Innovative Enterprises (FASIE) 
received funding of RUB2.4 billion in 2010. 
Measured progress: The WBG ―Doing Business Report‖ in 2010 puts Russia 
only at rank 123 and gross FDI inflows from 2005 -2010 averaged a low 1.5 
percent of GDP, with only 21 percent of these funds going to non-energy 
manufacturing. Patent applications of Russian residents decreased from 27,884 
(2006) to 25,598 (2009), while non-resident patent applications increased from 
9,807 (2006) to 12,966 (2009). 
Bank Group impact: Russian firms were benchmarked for competitiveness (see 
ECA flagship report for comparison with other firms in the region). Policy 
recommendations were provided for innovation-oriented exports. The Bank is 
advising the Russian Venture Company (RVC, a public company holding 
RUB28 billion as seed capital) on global approaches to strengthening innovation 
management networks. The Association of Innovative Regions was created under 
the Ministry of Economic Development based on findings of FBS to Tatarstan 
that national policies must be complemented with regional policies. The Bank 
was requested to continue support to Regional Action Plans and an Innovation 
Observatory. 
IFC investments in the real sectors during the CPS period (US$1.4 billion plus 
mobilization of US$243 million) comprise manufacturing, including chemicals, 
glass, wood processing, machinery, metallurgy, electronics, construction, real 
estate and retail (US$427 million plus mobilization of US$5 million); 
agribusiness, including food and beverage manufacturing/processing and agri-
infrastructure 
(US$316 million plus mobilization of US$48 million); 
infrastructure, including transport, logistics and municipal services (US$466 
million plus mobilization of US$173 million); IT and communications 
infrastructure and services (US$107 million plus mobilization of US$18 million); 
private and municipal healthcare services (US$69 million); and oil, gas and 
mining (US$50 million).  IFC investment in extractive industries was less than 4 
percent of total IFC real sector investment. 
Enabling/disabling factors: The Government declined to borrow for SEZ/IT 
project (withdrawn from Bank pipeline in 2008). Russia‘s investments in 
innovation support measures are not yet matched by outcomes, partly due to a 
focus on equity investments and physical infrastructure without adequate 
attention to constraints on overall business productivity and soft measures of a 
national innovation system. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

 Bank engagement depends on demand, which declined at the federal level as oil prices rose and increased when 
financial crisis exposed vulnerability to oil price shock. Nevertheless, the Tatarstan FBS has had a strong 
demonstration effect on other regions and is now informing federal policy. Work initiated with the Bank in 2008 did 
not lead to direct lending, but at the end of 2010, the Ministry of Economic Development approached the Bank to 
conduct an assessment of the Russian SEZ framework on an FBS basis. 
IFC remains an important investor for economic diversification.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 16 of 36 

Going forward, the Bank should combine specific advice on innovation policy with dialogue on export 
diversification. 
Bank Group Contributions: ESW Russian Economic Reports Approved: 2001; Status: Ongoing; ESW ECA 
Flagship Report ―Unleashing Prosperity:  Productivity Growth in Eastern Europe and FSU‖; Approved: 2007; 
Status: Completed; ESW Export Diversification, Competition and Innovation; Approved: 2010; Status: Completed; 
P109701 TA Regional Development Strategies Approved: 2008; Status: Completed; P118130 FBS Support for 
Innovation in the Republic of  Tatarstan Approved: 2009; Status: Completed; P123690 RU Innovation EFO 
Approved: August 2010; Status: Completed; P125925 FBS Nurturing Innovation Management in Russia Approved: 
2010; Status: Completed; IFC Financing and Advisory Services related to resource efficiency 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: CORRECTING SPATIAL IMBALANCES AND PROMOTING 
GROWTH POINTS 

CPS Outcome 

Selected regions with Bank 
support (development 
strategies) improve climate for 
growth and investment 

Drafting of national regional 
strategy for promoting growth 
points 

Improvement in regional trade 
through reduction in 
transportation logistics costs 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: partially achieved 
For Russia‘s 11 macro-regions, the coefficient of variation of population is 2.5 
(a lower value indicating more uniformity), but for Canada‗s 11 provinces it is 
14.8. This spatial dispersion continues to impede capture of agglomeration 
economies in Russia. Internal migration remains a contested issue. Spatial 
policies continue evolving at the national level. A national regional strategy for 
promoting growth points has not been adopted so far.  
Measured progress: In 2010 the number of SMEs in St. Petersburg, where the 
Bank was active with support, reached 228,000 (Baseline (2003): 97,000; Target 
(2010): 189,000) and private transactions for land and real estate exceeded 
210,000 (Baseline (2003): 90,400; Target (2010: 127,200). Over 4,600 people 
out-migrated from Northern Territories during three migration wave s (fourth 
wave was not endorsed by the Government). 
Bank Group impact: The Bank supported higher economic development in St. 
Petersburg and outmigration from Northern regions through lending. It 
contributed to policy debates on sources of regional growth and increased the 
focus on importance of migration, trade and agglomeration as a preferred 
strategy to address spatial inequalities.  Discussions with the Government 
showed that one-size-fits-all national regional development policy is unlikely to 
be successful in Russia. In a Country Economic Memorandum the Bank 
documented a decline in the differentiation of regions by gross regional product 
(GRP) and growth of consumer prices. It benchmarked 10 regions on key 
investment climate issues, leading to demand for a repetition in 30 regions 
(which will also document changes in the first 10).  Demand-driven advisory 
services through FBS contributed to planning of new investments and raising 
financing (e.g., Euro 1.1 billion for Pulkovo airport). The Moscow Urban 
Transport – Bridge reconstruction program contributed to the construction of six 
pedestrian underpasses and established a Traffic Management Center.  The Bank 
supported benchmarking of regional authorities on ease of trading across 
borders, which highlighted constraints. Bank dialogue with Avtodor (new 
agency for federal toll road construction and maintenance) remains in the early 
stages. The Customs Development Project targeted a reduction in compliance 
costs for border crossings. Thirty-three percent of IFC investments (US$1.1 
billion) targeted frontier regions. 
Enabling/disabling factors: A number of regional authorities showed strong 
commitment to improve the business climate in their localities to underpin 
socio-economic progress.  At the national level, the Government put greater 
focus on balanced regional development in the wake of the financial crisis, 
partly due to stress in ―mono‖ (one company) towns.  Infrastructure financing 
remains a high priority for the Government yet demand at the federal level did 
not materialize as expected.   
―Progress in housing reform‖ outcome was moved to Pillar 3 because it is better 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 17 of 36 

aligned with CPS outcomes under the Country Development Goal linked to 
affordable housing. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

The Bank Group can contribute directly to regional development through lending and policy advice.  Further 
engagement with less advanced regions is dependent on a federal support mechanism for Bank activities there but 
bear prospect of high development impacts.  Interlocutors for national policy are dispersed among agencies and 
think-tanks. Bank Group influence to date has been primarily in raising awareness. Careful diagnostics of regional 
development constraints and specifics are likely to be needed in formulating and implementing effective individual 
regional development strategies.  At the end of the CPS period demand was increasing at the regional level for long -
term, regional socio-economic strategies and investment climate assessments. The Bank should continue planning its 
support for socio-economic development in interested regions following a demand-driven approach.  With regard to 
infrastructure as a factor for regional development, strong demand by regional authorities for advisory services on 
transport and logistics is not matched by federal agencies (except under the Customs Project). The Bank should 
concentrate on implementation of the public expenditure effectiveness agenda in large infrastructure sectors to 
improve Operations and Maintenance (O&M) as well as investment efficiency. Going forward, further promising 
infrastructure activities in regions could be linked to facilitating investments in major transport hubs (St. Petersburg, 
Moscow) and to making use of financial intermediaries. 
Bank Group Contributions: Country Economic Memorandum Regional Development Approved: 2009 Status: 
Completed; GDLN seminars on Russian Economic Reports and regional development strategies for regions 
Approved: 2000; Status: Completed; P046061 Moscow Urban Transp. (SIL) Approved: February 2001; Status: 
Closed (December 2008); ICR Rating: Satisfactory; IEG Rating: Satisfactory; P064328 Northern Restructuring 
Project (SIL) Approved: June 2001; Status: Closed ICR Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory; P069063 St. Petersburg 
Economic Development Project (FIL) Approved: May 2003; Status: Ongoing Latest ISR Rating: Satisfactory; 
P072960 Customs Development Project (SIL) Approved: April 2003; Status: Ongoing Latest ISR Rating: 
Satisfactory; P105815 Sub-national Doing Business TA Approved: April 2007; Status: Completed; P108703/704 
FBS Transport Nadzemny Express PPP St. Petersburg Approved: August 2007; Status: Completed; P109067 FBS 
Western High Speed Diameter/Orlovski Tunnel Approved: September 2007; Status: Completed ; P109593 FBS 
Transport Pulkovo Airport Expansion PPP St. Petersburg Approved: October 2007; Status: Completed; P109701 TA 
Regional Dev. Strategies Approved: 2008; Status: Completed; P110746 FBS Transport Kazan International Airport 
Approved: March 2008; Status: Completed; P114071 FBS Transport Volgograd Feasibility By-pass Approved: 
December 2008; Status: Completed; IFC Financing and Advisory Services in Frontier regions 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: REMOVE INFRASTRUCTURE BOTTLENECKS TO GROWTH IN 
TRANSPORTATION, ENERGY, AND OTHER AREAS 

CPS Outcome 

Improvement in overall legal, 
regulatory and institutional 
framework for PPP 

Successful formation of PPPs 

Key (with economic impact) 
infrastructure created in the 
context of Bank projects 

Power sector able to attract 
investment resources at good 
terms (under guarantee) 

Effective allocation of 
Investment Fund and Federal 
Targeted Program resources. 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: partially achieved 
Public-private partnerships (PPP) for infrastructure development are lagging. 
The financial crisis and restrictions in the Federal Concession Law reduced the 
formation of PPPs and use of the Federal Investment Fund .  The power sector 
restructuring has been completed. Most of thermal generation assets and 
regional power supply companies have been privatized. Many power sector 
companies are floated on the Russian stock exchange. Investments in the power 
sector are mostly funded through depreciation charges and commercial 
borrowing. 
Bank Group impact: Four FBS agreements with St. Petersburg laid the basis for 
Russia‘s first concessions in the transport sector. Pulkovo Airport reached 
financial closure and raised Euro 1.1 billion in the first major PPP in Russia 
(IFC Euro 170 million). The Moscow Urban Transport – Bridge reconstruction 
program contributed to the construction of six pedestrian underpasses and 
established a Traffic Management Center (it continues to operate after project 
completion).  The Bank assisted in the creation of regulatory institutions (the 
Federal Tariff Service and Regional Energy Commission), introducing a 
competitive wholesale market to trade electricity by reorganizing the former 
vertically 
integrated national monopoly RAO-UES. The Bank provided 
recommendations on 
improvement of efficiency and quality of public 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 18 of 36 

expenditures and PPPs in the transportation sector. 
 IFC invested US$466 million in transport and municipal infrastructure during 
the CPS period and mobilized an additional US$173 million.  Included in this 
total are US$162 million in IFC-Bank Sub-national loans supporting nine 
projects in Kamchatka and Moscow oblasts, and the Republics of Chuvashia, 
Mariy-El and Bashkortostan. Sub-national lending has helped repair and 
upgrade regional and municipal health services, district heating, 
water/wastewater infrastructure and road networks, including rural road 
networks, improving delivery of social services and facilitating access to 
markets. For example, projects in Chuvashia financed modernization and 
construction of 550 km of rural roads and resurfacing of 450 km of major road 
networks, helping to connect around 120,000 people in rural areas to all weather 
road networks by 2012.  
Enabling/disabling factors: Key aspects included the recognition of the 
importance of the PPP role to reduce the massive backlog in infrastructure 
investment by the federal and regional authorities. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

Despite the financial crisis, a best practice case of PPP was possible due to the Bank making itself a trusted partner 
following strong operational experience in St. Petersburg.  The demonstration effect of Pulkovo increased the 
demand for Bank best practice in PPPs at the federal level. This underlines the high importance of delivering high 
quality results in FBS. IFC is also looking at several new PPP financing opportunities in the St. Petersburg area, 
where the regulatory framework for PPPs is already in place. IFC is considering providing advice on waste 
management planning and deal structuring to other cities using experience from the St. Petersburg market. Based on 
the findings in the PER for transportation sector, significant improvements are needed in policy, institutional and 
funding mechanisms to meet federal infrastructure investment targets and remove constraints on business.  Future 
Bank TA and FBS will need to address this more systematically.  
Bank Group Contributions: WBI Workshop on PPP in Infrastructure (December 2007); P046061 Moscow Urban 
Transport Project (SIL) Approved: February 2001; Status: Closed (December 2008); ICR Rating: Satisfactory; 
P050891 Electricity Sector Reform (TAL) Approved: June 1997; Status: Closed (December 2006); P109594 FBS 
Urban  PPP Unit in St. Petersburg Approved: October 2007; Status: Completed; P112597 Public Expenditure 
Review Approved: October 2009; Status: Completed; P124597 TA and FBS St. Petersburg PPP Program 
Development Approved: October 2010; Status: Ongoing; IFC Financing and Sub-national loans together with IBRD 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: REMOVE INFRASTRUCTURE BOTTLENECKS TO GROWTH IN 
TRANSPORTATION, ENERGY, AND OTHER AREAS 

CAS Outcome 

Enactment of energy 
efficiency law and 
development of secondary 
legislation to enable both 
public and private 
investments into energy 
efficiency projects across 
Russia. 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved 
The landmark law on ―Energy Efficiency Involvement and Energy Saving‖ was 
adopted in November 2009. The ―Action Plan on Energy Efficiency and Energy 
Saving‖ was approved by the Russian Government in December 2009. Ministries 
are developing 70 related by-laws to facilitate investments with WBG assistance. 
Several energy-efficiency measures were introduced. 
Measured progress: In 2008, the amount of standard fuel saved amounted to 
38M tons (potential is up to 420M tons) 
Bank Group impact: The Bank assessed the effectiveness of regional energy 
efficiency (EE) policies in meeting energy supply and demand challenges.  As 
outcomes of the study, IFC and IBRD developed two regional action plans for 
Vologda and Leningrad oblasts with input from regional stakeholders, assisted 
Arhkhangelsk and Murmansk oblasts to calculate EE potential and assess 
existing EE policies, and published a toolkit to disseminate learning to a broader 
audience.   
Based on the IFC/IBRD study of EE policies in the residential housing sector, 
IFC has prepared US$134 million worth of investments in energy efficient 
renovations of residential multi-family buildings to avoid at least 128,000 tons of 
GHG emissions per year through its Residential Energy Efficiency Project. 
Enabling/disabling factors: The regulatory and market enabling environment for 

 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 19 of 36 

investment is still evolving. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

Energy efficiency is viewed mainly as a national concern in Russia (there is less interest in the global public goods 
dimension). Timely ESW by Bank/IFC directly influenced demand for legislation and created high-profile support 
by the President and Prime Minister for greater energy efficiency. Positive stimulus from analytical work and high-
level policy support notwithstanding, practical demonstrations are still needed to develop markets in private sector 
investments. Future WBG activities should also aim to reach EE potential in the regions. 
Bank Group Contributions: ESW Energy Efficiency Study in Russia Approved: 2007; Status: Completed; IFC 
Russia Residential Energy Efficiency Project Approved: 2010 Status: Ongoing 

PILLAR 2: IMPROVE PUBLIC SECTOR MANAGEMENT AND PERFORMANCE 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: CREATION OF AN EFFICIENT, MODERN, AND PROFESSIONAL 
CIVIL SERVICE THAT IS MOTIVATED TO IMPROVE THE INVESTMENT CLIMATE AND QUALITY OF 
PUBLIC SERVICES 

CPS Outcome 

Realization of public 
administration reform 
program for reorganization of 
apparatus and conversion to 
new principles 

Significant initiatives taken in 
regions for reforming 
government administration 

Relatively rapid progress on 
administrative reform in 
regions where IBRD is 
engaged 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved 
Efforts to improve the quality of public service have intensified. Streamlined 
standards for federal authorities in service delivery are beginning to induce 
cultural change in the bureaucracy. 
Measured progress: The quality of public service delivery has improved, 
especially in multi-functional service centers (MFCs) with 102 MFCs in over 46 
regions established between 2007- 2010 leading to waiting time for some 
administrative services there cut in half. 
Bank Group impact:  The Bank directly supported the Government‘s Strategy for 
Public Administration Reform (2008-2010), with priority in Southern and North 
Caucasus Federal District (least advanced region).  Support was provided to 
implement performance management and performance budgeting.  The Bank 
enhanced performance management approaches and supported better linkages 
between policy priorities and the budget. Selected performance management 
tools were implemented at the federal and regional level.  Performance reporting 
practices were enhanced by tightening definitions and quality of indicators used 
by the Ministry of Regional Development to assess performance of regional 
executive authorities.  The functions of the Khanti-Mansiysk Autonomous Okrug 
Government have been reviewed and civil servants trained to apply functional 
review approaches to improve government performance .  The Bank helped to 
enhance the regulatory environment for businesses, especially competitiveness 
and SME business environment  with Improved environment for private sector 
expansion in St. Petersburg.  Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) was 
institutionalized at the federal level and piloted at the sub-national level in North 
Ossetia Republic.  Administrative barriers and informality studies have been 
undertaken in selected regions of Southern and North Caucasus Federal Districts 
(in cooperation with ICAS).  Administrative regulations and service standards 
for key public services have been improved with Bank help. A survey of public 
services delivery 
through MFCs 
informed 
the Ministry of Economic 
Development of the gaps and further priorities in improving service delivery. 
Enabling/disabling factors: The lack of full fiscal autonomy in regions and 
incomplete civil service reform retards effectiveness of the public sector. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

The focus of the Russian Government on performance management, together with decentralization of operational 
decision making, led to better service orientation by agencies .  Public administration reform is most successful at the 
regional/local level when addressed systematically across sectors, including fiscal and social issues.  This was 
achieved when TA complemented other Bank projects (noted under various CPS outcomes).   
Future work should build on achievements in increasing engagement of communities in setting budget priorities to 
improve public service delivery.  Depending on demand, there is scope for imp rovement to professionalize the civil 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 20 of 36 

service and implement modern management practices. 
Bank Group Contributions: GDLN Series on results-based management for Regions (2007); GDLN workshop on 
sharing international experience and dialogue among six Russian regions. Launching MFCs (2008); P069063 St. 
Petersburg Economic Development Project (FIL) Approved: May 2003; Status: Ongoing Latest ISR Rating: 
Satisfactory; P106543 WB-DFID Trust Fund ―Support to Public Administration and  Governance in Russia‖ 
(November 2007 – March 2011); P110048 TA Advisory Services: Khanti-Mansiysk Autonomous Okrug-Yugra  
Approved: November 2007; Status: Completed 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: FISCAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
DECENTRALIZATION/CREATION OF EFFECTIVE LOCAL SELF GOVERNANCE 

CPS Outcome 

Good progress on the 
development of local self-
government in pilot rural 
areas  

Increased capacity of 
Municipal Associations 

Measureable increase of 
participation of the 
population in public decision-
making in the three regions of 
the study.  

Development and piloting of 
new modalities of interaction 
between the government and 
the population in the process 
of public decision-making. 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved 
The administrative, political and fiscal decentralization mandated in 2006 was 
path-breaking.  The transition was fairly smooth. In 2009, transition to local self-
government was completed, creating 10,000 new administrative units.  
Measured progress: More than 400,000 people in 85 municipalities (out of the 95 
eligible) benefited from Local Initiative Support Project (LISP) implementation. 
Overall financing exceeded US$4 million in three years with US$1 million 
equivalent of settlement level co-financing. Participation increased from 50 to 81 
communities in Round Three and in Stavropol the number of project applications 
increased from 61 in 2007 to 119 in 2010. 
Bank Group impact:  The Bank developed and tested replicable models of 
capacity building for settlement-level administrators (both elected and appointed) 
and methodologies for effective public hearings mandated under the new 
legislation. It advised the Ministry of Regional Development on indicators of 
local government effectiveness. It developed locality cards as examples of data to 
be collected by national statistical agencies. It helped design new formats for 
interaction between local government officials and the population (to be 
continued with the help of a US$750,000 JSPF grant to the Perm administration).  
In pilot rural settlements, 22 local governments/community working groups 
comprised of settlement administrative staff, elected deputies and community 
members were formed and trained. Five hundred people benefited from pro bono 
legal consultations from the trained local legal and Rural Municipal Consultants. 
Enabling/disabling factors: The quality of local government is highly uneven, 
training and capacity building programs are insufficient, and programs for 
support of local initiatives have not been developed, minimizing incentives for 
inclusion of the population into public decision making and processes of local 
governance. Settlement-level statistics are not consistently collected by Rosstat. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

A rigorous assessment methodology enabled the Bank to demonstrate that one -shot training is insufficient to alter 
local perceptions of effectiveness of local administration. In contrast, on -site capacity building and experience by 
villages in local decision-making can lead to significant improvements.  A short implementation period (no more 
than two years) is important to ensure timely contribution to the country work program and momentum in the 
reforms.  The Bank is applying findings in preparation of the Local Initiatives Support Project (LISP). 
Bank Group Contributions: P110537  Quality of Local Governance TA financed by JSDF Approved: April 2009; 
Status: Completed; P121856  FBS Advisory Services TA for Kirov Oblast LISP Implementation Approved: Apr 
2010; Status: Completed; P121866 FBS TA to Support the Stavropol Krai LISP Implementation Approved: March 
2010; Status: Completed 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: IMPROVING THE EFFICIENCY AND RESULTS ORIENTATION OF 
BUDGETING AT THE FEDERAL AND SUB-NATIONAL LEVELS 

CPS Outcome 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 21 of 36 

Successful realization of three-
year budgetary framework at 
the federal level 

Status: achieved 
The MOF introduced three-year budget framework in 2008.  
Measured progress: There was a 40 percent reduction in late filing of tax 
returns by mid-2008; regions where tax reforms were implemented were 180 
percent more efficient than those without reforms in obtaining higher tax 
revenues as a share of expenditures in tax collection; and there was an increase 
of almost 200 percent in tax returns filed by mail or electronically . By 2011, all 
spending units in the country are covered by centralized payment processing.   
Federal Treasury Automation System (FTAS) was implemented in 21 regions. 
Bank Group impact: The Bank supported legal and institutional mechanisms, 
including a system to monitor sub-national public finance in MOF, the 
implementation of Treasury principles of budget execution , the creation of 
budget authority at municipal level, the revision of revenue and expenditure 
assignments, a law on insolvency of regional budgets, and a mechanism for 
operation of the Regional Fiscal Reform Fund.  Related support included the 
modernization of tax administration and the modernization of Treasury 
functions. 
Enabling/disabling factors: Enabling factors include a highly professional team 
in the MOF that leads national reform through cutting-edge knowledge 
management practices in tandem with regional offices. The implementation of 
medium-term fiscal framework was suspended temporarily during the financial 
crisis; the resumption in 2010 demonstrates strong commitment to implement 
modern principles of sound fiscal management. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

The next phase of cooperation should focus on the program budgeting and expenditure effectiveness agenda arising 
from the Public Expenditure Review; the analysis by the World Bank prepared for the Ministry of Finance was 
completed in the first Quarter of 2011.   
Building on the 2010 PER, a programmatic TA program should work with the Ministry of Regional Development 
and relevant line ministries to identify alternative approaches to measure expenditure performance for education, 
health, and social protection at sub-national and spending unit levels. This should be followed by the 
implementation of an agreed approach in a number of regional case studies .  
Bank Group Contributions: P058587 Regional Fiscal Technical Assistance Project (TAL) Approved: December 
1999; Status: Closed (June 2011); Latest ISR Rating: Satisfactory; P064508 Treasury Development Project 
(Adaptable Program Loan) 
Approved: June 2002; Status: Active; Latest ISR Rating: Satisfactory; P066155 Tax Administration Modernization 2 
Project (SIL) Approved: October 2002; Status: Closed (June 2008); ICR Rating: Moderately Satisfactory; IEG 
Rating; Moderately Satisfactory; P112597 Public Expenditure Review (PER) Approved: October 2009; Status: 
Completed 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: IMPROVE THE JUDICIARY AND OTHER KEY PUBLIC 
INSTITUTIONS 

CPS Outcome 

Continued improvements in the 
quality of Russian statistics as 
targeted in Stat projects  

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved 
A law governing official statistics was passed. There has been an improvement 
of the quality and availability of information through free-of-charge access to 
official statistical publications and internet access to databases. 
Bank Group impact: Bank Group engagements supported activities which 
included: the transition to performance-based budgeting; the adoption of 
international standards in statistical products (e.g., national accounts, balance of 
payments) for improved macro planning and forecasting; integrated processing 
systems tested in 15 pilot regions; introduction of international standards and 
methodology (e.g., transition from census-based to integrated census-sampling 
framework of statistical surveys); establishment of the National Statistical 
Council (2010) for development of strategic issues and methodology comprised 
of leading Russian economists and recognized statisticians.  
Enabling/disabling factors: There has been strong leadership by federal and 

 
 
 
 
  
  
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 22 of 36 

local users. Flexibility by the Bank to the needs of clients proved central to 
success. 
 Rosstat adopted 
the participatory approach. 
 Good project 
management was exercised by the beneficiary institution. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

The principal lesson is that international knowledge can be integrated into national institutional frameworks only 
very gradually. Slow disbursement of the second project was primarily due to procurement issues as a result of 
limited expertise in the statistical field at local levels and for advanced tasks at international levels. 
Bank Group Contributions: P050487 Development of State Statistical System Project (SIL) Approved: May 1999; 
Status: Closed (Dec 2006); ICR Rating: Satisfactory; IEG Rating: Satisfactory; P092429 Second State Statistical 
System (APL) Approved: June 2007; Status: Ongoing; Latest ISR Rating: Moderately Satisfactory 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: IMPROVE THE JUDICIARY AND OTHER KEY PUBLIC 
INSTITUTIONS 

CPS Outcome 

Progress in judiciary reform 
in context of project 
(information transmission and 
disclosure) 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: partially achieved 
Progress is strongest in arbitration (commercial) courts and weakest in Courts of 
General Jurisdiction. The publication of arbitration court decisions on the unified 
web-portal has been achieved. The Law on Securing Access to Information on 
Courts‘ Activities (December 2008) now increases information for public and 
the mass media.  
Measured progress: Periodic surveys show improved private sector and public 
rating for judicial transparency and efficiency (64 percent respondents expressed 
confidence (2010) versus 46 percent in 2006.  All courts financed by the project 
publish judicial decisions more quickly. 
Bank Group impact:  Twenty legal aid centers were set up in Perm krai and 
Leningrad oblast to pilot contrasting approaches. The experience from the 
contrasting pilots positively influenced legislation on free legal aid in the 
Russian Federation, making certain non-state actors are eligible to provide such 
legal aid.  These centers provided 9,780 citizens with 12,287 legal aid 
consultations 
(December 2010). Target group comprises non-working 
pensioners, invalids and low income citizens.  Interventions contributed to better 
treatment of poor litigants including monitoring progress of 80 court cases from 
lodging of complaint to rendering of court decisions.  
Enabling/disabling factors: Factors include the recognition by the Russian 
Government of the corruption problem and current strong intention to fight it. 
There is strong leadership in successfully reforming judicial agencies. However, 
there is fragmentation of oversight for judicial reform and weak implementation 
support, particularly on IT procurement. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

The Bank project appropriately complements the Federal Targeted Program on judicial modernization.  However, 
not all parts of this Program are advancing equally mainly linked to IT procurement problems. Project complexity 
and governance are hindering restructuring.  Bank procurement should be strengthened in the next CPS period. 
Bank Group Contributions: P089733 Judicial Reform Support Project (SIL) Approved: February 2007; Status: 
Ongoing; Latest ISR Rating: Unsatisfactory 

PILLAR 3: IMPROVE THE DELIVERY OF COMMUNAL AND SOCIAL SERVICES 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: IMPROVE THE QUALITY AND QUANTITY OF AFFORDABLE 
HOUSING AND UTILITIES AVAILABLE TO THE POPULATION, INCLUDING FACILITIES FOR 
MIGRANTS IN GROWING REGIONS 

CPS Outcome 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 23 of 36 

Increases in affordable housing 
as measured from Bank 
infrastructure and housing 
projects or IFC mortgage 
support 

Progress in housing reform 
(utilities prices, competition in 
the industry, etc.) in regions 
participating in housing and 
communal service project or 
receiving IFC support 

Implementation of National 
Project in Housing 

Regional pilots launched for 
reforming housing sector 

Continued rapid growth of the 
mortgage market 

Status: achieved 
Regions and municipalities seeking access to investment financing are more 
willing to implement housing and communal service reform programs. 
Measured progress: In 2008, 21 percent of families purchased standard 
dwellings with the use of credits or own funds. New housing construction 
totaled 63million sq.m (twice as much as annually in 2000-2002).  The financial 
viability of the communal entities in the cities improved, and percentage of 
entities having losses from main activities decreased almost three times 
compared with the baseline.  Percentage of private companies managing 
communal sector facilities on the basis of concession agreements and other 
agreements in the total number of communal entities increased more than three 
times and almost reached the projected target value.  Percentage of multi-family 
buildings managed by professional management companies increased more than 
four times and is approaching the target value. One hundred percent of the 
participating cities completed monetization of housing allowances, and 
transferred cash payments to individual social accounts of citizens. About 4.2 
million residents (45 percent more than anticipated) benefited from improved 
water and wastewater systems. Good quality drinking water was provided 24/7 
(98 percent of samples meet quality standards). Water utilities improved 
financing working ratios from 0.95 to 0.85 .  Municipal subsidies decreased and 
are now targeted to the poorest households. Quality and energy efficiency of 
heat and hot water service improved considerably (heat composition fell 12 -17 
percent and DHW by 5-10 percent).  Funds spent by cities for heating have 
decreased 2 percent per year in 2007. The cost-effectiveness of subsidies has 
improved. Municipal subsidies for heating services in project cities dropped 
from RUB 535 million (baseline) to RUB 78 million (the level achieved at the 
end of the project), housing allowances are better targeted (20.3 percent versus 
100 percent of population). 
Bank Group impact: From 2007 to 2009, IFC‘s investment client banks 
provided over 150,000 housing finance loans and held an outstanding mortgage 
portfolio of US$4.3 billion at the end of 2009.  From FY05 to December 2008, 
advisory project pilot banks disbursed 110,858 mortgage loans worth US$6.8 
billion, with extremely low delinquency rates.  A borrower manual on rights 
and responsibilities was published. Modernized regulations on investor 
disclosure were devised. One hundred and twenty mortgage specialists were 
trained in loan restructuring, pricing and portfolio management by IFC.  
Institutional capacity was built within the department of HCS in the 
Municipality of Nizhnevartovsk city. The activity was only partially completed 
due to financial constraints. Based on a demand-driven study of housing 
construction issues in the Rostov oblast, the study led to recommendations and 
an action plan for better supply of affordable housing to the population and 
stabilization of the price situation in the Southern Federal Okrug. 
In 2010, IFC launched a Residential Energy Efficiency Project focused on 
unlocking the flow of finance to facilitate common area renovations in multi -
story apartment buildings, where the majority of Russians live. IFC and EBRD 
are advising the Ministry of Regional Development on structuring the proper 
regulatory framework, and will pilot financing mechanisms 
to allow 
homeowners to invest in capital improvements, increase energy efficiency and 
raise their standard of living. The program aims to facilitate at least US$134 
million of investment into energy efficient renovations of res idential multi-
family buildings. To date IFC has disbursed US$10 million under the program 
to one client bank in the Rostov oblast. 
Enabling/disabling factors: The creation of the legal basis for mortgage 
operations was eased through using synergies in IFC/Bank policy advice and 
programs. The delay in declaring effectiveness and start of the Housing and 
Communal Services loan was caused by Russia‘s reluctance to borrow from the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 24 of 36 

Bank, which lasted from 2007 until the fall of 2009.  In response to the financial 
crisis, IFC refocused the mortgage market program in FY09 on diagnostics and 
client real estate portfolio stress testing, and tools for lenders to manage loan 
portfolios and distressed assets.  

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

 Housing issues are decentralized to the lowest level of government. To have high impact, the Bank should 
concentrate on working with regions and require maintenance of financial management (FM) reforms in utilities. 
These FM reforms should be accompanied by reforms to target social protection to the poorest. Future engagement 
will depend on performance of the investment phase of the Housing and Communal Services Project.  The financial 
crisis slowed progress but WBG program adjustments are facilitating reform momentum. 
Synergies in Bank and IFC programs create stronger outcomes. 
Future engagement may be facilitated in case of increased pace of implementation of IBRD HCS project and the 
first project results.   
By focusing on innovative products, such as residential energy efficiency, IFC can continue to have an impact in the 
sector in spite of limitations to traditional mortgage lending resulting from the c risis.   
Bank Group Contributions: ESW Housing Market Study in Southern Okrug (2005-2007); ESW  Housing Supply 
(2007); ESW  Housing Study (2008); IFC Russia Primary Mortgage Market Development Project (2005 -2008/9); 
IFC Russia Residential Energy Efficiency Program (2010-Present); P008832 Municipal Waste and Wastewater 
Project (SIL) Approved: December 2000; Status: Closed (April 2009); ICR Rating: Moderately Satisfactory; IEG 
Rating: Moderately Satisfactory; P038551 Municipal Heating Project (SIL) Approved: March 2001; Status: Closed 
(June 2008); ICR Rating: Satisfactory; IEG Rating: Satisfactory; P079032 Housing and Communal Services Project 
(SIL) Approved: February 2008; Status: Active; Latest ISR Rating: Moderately Satisfactory; P082018 Kazan 
Municipal Development Project (Programmatic Structural Adjustment Loan) Approved: February 2005; Status: 
Closed (December 2006); ICR Rating: Satisfactory; IEG Rating: Satisfactory; P110048 FBS Khanti-Mansiysk 
Autonomous Okrug-Yugra (Assistance in Developing Housing and Communal Services in Nizhnevartovsk) 
Approved: November 2007; Status: Completed 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: IMPROVE HEALTH OF THE POPULATION, INCREASE LIFE 
EXPECTANCY, AND REVERSE NEGATIVE DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS 

CPS Outcome 

Signs of reversals in negative 
health status trends 

Successful implementation of 
National Project in Health and 
other programs supported by 
international organizations 
(e.g., World Bank, Global 
Fund) 

Reforms of health care system 
implemented in pilot regions 
with good results that are being 
emulated in other regions 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved 
Average life expectancy in the two pilot regions is increasing and infant 
mortality is declining. 
Measured progress: In 2008, general practitioners delivered care to about 65 
percent of the population in Chuvash Republic, up from 13.1 percent in 2003; in 
Voronezh, from 3 percent to 30 percent. Patient satisfaction over 2002-2007 
increased from 48 percent to 65 percent in Voronezh; from 67 percent to 73 
percent in Chuvash Republic. A 10 percent mortality reduction was reached 
among new cases of TB and 5 percent decrease in new TB cases. The 
percentage of HIV-positive infants born to HIV-infected women decreased from 
13.2 percent (base line) to 10.6 percent in 2009; incidence rates of syphilis, 
gonorrhea and others STIs and prevalence rate of HIV reduced considerably. 
Bank Group impact:  Impacts include: Primary health care strengthened vis-à-
vis hospital services (50-60 percent of total regional health budgets, up from 30-
40 percent in 2002); a national model for restructuring was demonstrated; 
Chuvash Republic transitioned to a primarily single -channel system of health 
finance, reducing fragmentation of sector finances; a performance-based 
remuneration system for general practitioners was introduced ; at federal and 
oblast levels, new standards and protocols strengthened federal stewardship for 
effective regulation of a highly decentralized system: 400 standards and 
protocols were approved and enacted by MHSD, including 310 standards for hi -
tech health service provision, 88 standards for specialized care provision, and 
46 for emergency care.  IFC investments in private and municipal health 
services over the CPS period totaled US$69million. 
Enabling/disabling factors: Significant AAA leading up to projects reversed 
opposition in the medical community to adoption of international prac tices, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 25 of 36 

particularly for TB-AIDs.  

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

Vision and willingness to experiment existed on the part of the regional political and health officials. Solid 
analytical work combined with strong coordination among international agencies provided critical underpinning to a 
complex National Targeted Program on TB-AIDs. Regional pilots demonstrated more cost-effective health services 
are possible given leadership in government and health system. Health status depends on more than the health 
system; federal leadership is needed to reverse negative trends from lifestyle and environmental factors. 
Bank Group Contributions: GDLN workshop series on H1N1 Pandemic Response in ECA (2009); ESW ―Public 
Spending in Russia for Health Care : Issues and Options‖ (2008); P046497 Health Reform Implementation Project 
(SIL) Approved: March 2003; Status: Closed (April 2009); ICR Rating: Satisfactory; IEG Rating: Satisfactory; 
P064237 Tuberculosis & AIDS Control (SIL) Approved: April 2003, Status: Closed (April 2009); ICR Rating: 
Satisfactory; IEG Rating: Satisfactory; P115338 - Chuvash Health – Sub-national Loan Approved: March 2009; 
Status: Ongoing; IFC financing of private sector health service providers 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: MODERNIZE THE EDUCATION SYSTEM WITH GREATER 
RELEVANCE TO THE DEMANDS OF AN OPEN MARKET ECONOMY 

CPS Outcome 

Realization of objectives set out 
in Bank assistance to federal 
and regional education 
programs for modernizing 
curriculums, particularly in 
access to high quality education 
using ICT 

Successful implementation of 
National Project in education 
on regional education 
programs. 

Successful implementation of 
National Project in Education 
on innovative universities 

All schools connected to the 
internet. 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved 
The unified collection of digital resources with more than 100,000 learning 
items has been established and is accessible to all Russian schools through the 
Internet. All schools are connected to the internet. 
Measured progress: The implementation of the strategy led to improvement in 
international ranking from 500-600 range in 2009 to 400-500 in the Times 
Higher Education Supplement ranking. Since 2005, ICT skills of advanced 
teachers doubled while the number of inexperienced users declined by 200 
percent. Ninth graders performing above average on use o f ICT increased from 
48 to 63 percent. Benefits are equal in urban and rural schools. 
Bank Group impact:  Access to education of higher quality was provided (with 
special focus on students from remote and rural areas) through wide 
introduction of modern educational technologies enhanced by ICT as supported 
by the E-Learning Support Project. New performance based salary schemes, per 
capita financing mechanism for general education, and new education 
governance schemes were developed and piloted within the Education Reform 
Project and have been disseminated throughout the country (in 36 regions) 
within the National Priority Project ―Education‖.  The E -Learning Support 
Project increased competence in information and communication technologies 
(ICT), a central factor in world economic competitiveness. Seven pilot regions 
became leaders in applying ICT in education. Based on outcomes , an additional 
30 regions adopted the program.  About 130,000 teachers were trained and 10 
pedagogical universities educated 3,900 future teachers. A national curriculum 
of 75,000 new digital teaching resources is being used in 13 subjects for all 
grades. Russian masterworks are now a digitally protected heritage, available to 
all students in the country. The number of students enrolled in distance learning 
courses under the project was over 37,000 and more than 10 percent of total 
enrollment came from rural populations. The number of students participating 
in ICT-based educational projects (including students, receiving support in 
preparing for the Unified State Examination) was 23,000.  Vocational education 
development programs were developed with special focus on the linkages 
between vocational education and the labor market in two regions under FBS 
agreements: Tver oblast and Krasnoyarsk krai. A study of Russian students‘ 
high achievements in PIRLS examined and disseminated successful teaching 
and learning practices.  
ECD and preschool education systems improved through (i) introduction of 
modern curriculum, (ii) strengthening the quality assurance system, and (iii) 
increasing access to ECD services.  The quality of the ECD systems of six 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 26 of 36 

regions were reviewed, policy recommendations were developed, disseminated 
and adopted.  
Higher education system development program and institutional strategies for 
universities were developed in Tatarstan. As the result, three universities 
received federal government awards for the implementation of their strategies. 
The Institutional Strategy of the Higher School of Economics as leading 
Russian university in area of social and economic sciences was developed and 
approved by the Government.  
Enabling/disabling factors: Focus of the Russian Government on education 
issues as the priority direction of Russia‘s development in the CPS period was 
key. High demand from regional authorities was also evident. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

Demand-driven FBS enabled the Bank to discover strong regional need for reform of ECD and tertiary education.  
Institutional development of leading universities provided impulse for the improvement of other higher education 
institutions.  Greater focus on and support to regional reforms can lead to federal policy improvements. 
Bank Group Contributions: P050474 Education Reform Project (SIL) Approved: May 2001; Status: Closed 
(December 2006); ICR Rating: Satisfactory; IEG Rating: Satisfactory; P075387 e-Learning Support Project 
(Adaptable Program Loan) Approved: March 2004; Status: Closed (June 2008); ICR Rating: Highly Satisfactory; 
IEG Rating: Highly Satisfactory; P092430 - Education Advisory Services Approved: December 2004; Status: 
Completed; P108590 FBS Education Khanty-Mansisk AO Approved: August 2007; Status: Completed; P111759 
FBS Tver Oblast Vocational Education Approved: April 2008; Status: Completed; P108590 FBS Education Khanty-
Mansisk AO Approved: August 2007; Status: Completed; P108985  FBS Higher Educ.  Kazan Approved: September 
2007; Status: Completed; P111119 FBS Higher School of Economy Approved: March 2008; Status: Completed; 
P113989  FBS Higher Education Kazan II Approved: Nov 2008; Status: Completed; P123357 FBS E-Education in 
Tatarstan Approved: July 2007; Status: Ongoing 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: IMPROVE EFFECTIVENESS OF SOCIAL ASSISTANCE 

CPS Outcome 

Measured progress in regions 
targeted for poverty reduction 
and social assistance support in 
the World Bank poverty work. 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: partially achieved 
Social protection, mostly pensions, makes up a large part of the federal budget 
but is still badly targeted at the poor. Social protection spending increased from 
2009 onwards despite the crisis. Labor market policies for the unemployed were 
introduced at the regional level to mitigate the impact of the crisis on 
employment, in addition to weekly monitoring of labor market indicators. 
Measured progress: The national poverty rate fell from 13.4 percent in 2008 to 
13.2 percent by end-2009 and then to 13.1 percent in 2010. The total amount of 
additional social protection expenditures (including increased transfers to 
regions to cope with the social and labor market impacts of the crisis at the 
regional level) is estimated to have been around 1.3 percent of GDP in 2009 
and 2.2 percent of GDP in 2010.  
Bank Group impact:  The Government revised its labor market strategy (based 
on Bank TA) to redesign labor market programs used during the crisis to deal 
with post-crisis challenges.  Based on regional analysis in Tatarstan and on-
going dialogue, Rosstat is increasing public access and analysis of Household 
Budget Surveys, which will form the basis for better poverty analysis and 
targeting of social programs. Based on Bank social expenditure analysis, the 
Ministry of Regional Development requested TA on methodology for 
performance evaluation of sub -national expenditure efficiency. In 2010 
Moscow City requested Bank FBS to develop a framework for regular 
monitoring of the social protection system efficiency and living standards in 
Moscow. 
Enabling/disabling factors: The Bank experienced difficulties engaging with 
less advanced  regions due to their lack of funds and an absence of guarantees 
from the federal level. Federal/regional overlaps impede improved targeting of 
social assistance. There is huge heterogeneity across regions in the pace and 
scope of reforms. 

 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 27 of 36 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

Further engagement with less advanced regions is dependent on a federal support mechanism for Bank act ivities 
there. Lending and knowledge services for less advanced regions bear prospect of high development impacts. A 
regional analysis of social protection should be undertaken. The plan is to identify a methodology to be used to 
analyze sub-national social protection programs (targeting, coverage, and benefit adequacy). Then, the proposal is to 
work with the Government to use regional Household Budget Survey (HBS) data to carry out regional case studies 
on social protection spending. Anticipating, measuring and estimating likely poverty and labor effects of an evolving 
crisis may help formulate and implement timely policy response, thereby limiting the social impact. Regular, timely 
updates of labor/poverty effects of major shocks (e.g., food price inflation) and highlighting policy choices and 
trade-offs can focus policy attention and help improve policy formulation. Follow-up labor market work should 
begin with a net impact evaluation of active labor market programs in a pilot region. 
Bank Group Contributions: ESW Russian Economic Reports (including regular updates of labor and poverty 
developments) Approved: 2001; Status: Ongoing; P112803 Regional HD Public Expenditure Review Approved: 
April 2009; Status: Completed; P118448 Labor Market Monitoring and Policy Assessment TA Approved: December 
2009; Status: Completed; P122457  FBS Moscow Social Protection Approved: December2010; Status: Completed 

PILLAR 4: ENHANCING RUSSIA’S GLOBAL ROLE 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: DEVELOPING AND ARTICULATING ROLE AS AN EMERGING 
DONOR 

CPS Outcome 

Development of an ODA 
strategy 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved 
The Russian President approved the Concept of International Development 
Cooperation and Action Plan for implementation in June 2007. Planning is 
underway for the establishment of a bilateral aid agency to be supported by a 
medium-term work program.  
Bank Group impact:  Bank TA ―Russia as a Donor Initiative (RDI)‖ financed 
by DFID strengthened Russian ODA statistical capacity, the creation of a 
development focused university curriculum and the establishment of a strategic 
communications program for development aid.  RDI advisory group (Ministry 
of Finance, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Education and Science, 
Ministry for Civil Emergencies and Rossotrudnichestvo; co-chaired by the 
Bank) conducted policy dialogue on capacity building. UNDP, Oxfam, G IZ, 
USAID participated as observers. 
 The Bank-supported 
International 
Conference on New Partnerships in Global Development Finance (Moscow, 
February 17-18, 2010) launched ―Moscow Process‖ to broaden the global 
development community and modernize multilateralism. 
Enabling/disabling 
factors: There 
is strong dedication of 
the Russian 
Government to fulfilling its G8 commitments.  However, there was limited 
initial capacity within primary counterpart Russian government ministries and 
agencies. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

The accession of advanced Middle Income Countries like Russia to the ranks of development aid donors is 
beginning to change the international aid architecture with the sharing of knowledge (South -South dialogue), and the 
provision of additional financial resources. To avoid fragmentation and to achieve fast track integration of emerging 
donors into the multilateral donor community, the build -up of new institutional structures and expert capacity within 
the government are necessary. The Bank with its hub function for the international donor community is in a prime 
position to support Russia in this. To keep the momentum going, the new CPS should include demand -driven TA to 
support institutional capacity development of a new bilateral aid agency, once a decision is reached in Government. 
Bank Group Contributions: GDLN Food and Fuel Price Crisis series (2008); P104803 - Development Aid Program 
Support TA Approved: May 2008; Status: Ongoing; P115468 FBS Capacity Building to Support Russian Education 
Aid for Development (READ) Program Approved: December 2008; Status: Ongoing; MOU with Eurasian 
Development Bank/AntiCrisisFund on capacity-building and cooperation (2011) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 28 of 36 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: DEVELOPING AND ARTICULATING ROLE AS AN EMERGING 
DONOR 

CPS Outcome 

Expanded donor activities 
realized according to 
articulated vision 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved 
Before 2007 Russian donor activities concentrated mainly on debt relief. Acting 
on G8 commitments and based on its ODA concept, Russia from 2007 onwards 
expanded its donor activities to ―Quality of Education‖, ―Access to Energy‖, 
―Infectious Diseases‖, ―Public Financial Management‖, ―Financial Literacy‖ and 
―Remittances‖. In 2009 Russia acted as crisis response donor and contributed 
US$7.5 billion to EurAsEC-Anti Crisis Fund administered by the Eurasian 
Development Bank (EDB), US$50 million to the World Bank managed Rapid 
Social Response and US$15 million to the World Bank managed Russia Food 
Price Crisis Rapid Response Trust Fund for Tajikistan and Kyrgyz Republic. 
Measured progress: Since 2006, Russia has significantly scaled-up and 
diversified its official development assistance (ODA). According to Russian 
statistics compiled in accordance with OECD-DAC methodology, ODA from the 
Russian Federation (excluding debt relief for the poorest countries) grew from 
US$102 million in 2006 to US$785 million in 2009 (0.065 percent ODA/GNI). 
For 2010, Russia is estimated to have generated ODA amounting to US$500 
million.  
Bank Group impact: As of March 2011 Russian contributions to World Bank 
administered Single and Multiple Donor Trust Funds have reached a total of 
US$518 million (including US$317 million for the Global Fund to fight AIDS, 
Tuberculosis and Malaria) 
Enabling/disabling factors: At the program level, a strong multilateral focus was 
endorsed by Russia‘s ODA strategy. The effects of the global financial and 
economic crisis together with volatile oil prices influenced Russia‘s fiscal 
position and priorities. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

The lack of a TF framework agreement with Russia has incurred unnecessarily high transaction costs. The 
development of a World Bank-Russia TF Framework Agreement (FA) should be pursued.  
There is a need for better and more systematic communication with Russia as a donor on results of the Russia-
funded TFs in order to demonstrate effective fund management, progress in disbursement and the results achi eved, 
as well as optimize the learning experience for participating Russian aid specialists. This would also provide a sound 
basis for Russian authorities to consider follow-up and new financing successful activities as a donor ( including 
Repeater Trust Funds). 
Bank Group Contributions: GDLN Support for community of practice (MIRPAL) (2010 -present) on labor migration 
and remittances; TF 070664 Public Expenditure Management and Peer-Assisted Learning (PEM-PAL) in the 
Europe and Central Asia Region Agreement: 2007; Status: Ongoing;TF 70783 Russian Federation Booster Program 
for Malaria Control in Africa Agreement: 2008; Status: Ongoing; TF 071069 Financial Literacy and Education 
Agreement: 2008; Status: Ongoing; TF 071154 Russia Education Aid for Development Agreement: 2008; Status: 
Ongoing; TF 071223 Energy Small and Medium Enterprises Support in Sub -Saharan Africa Agreement: 2009; 
Status: Ongoing; TF 071577 Multi-Donor Programmatic Trust Fund Europe and Central Asia Public Finance 
Management Agreement: 2009; Status: Ongoing 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: FULFILLING INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS FOR GLOBAL 
PUBLIC GOODS 

CPS Outcome 

Legal and institutional 
framework established for 
carbon finance 

Increased number of carbon 
finance operations in the 
country with increasing 
awareness of climate change 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved 
The legal framework for Joint Implementation projects was established in 2008. 
A Climate Doctrine was approved in April 2009. ―Energy Efficiency in Russia: 
Untapped Reserves‖ led to landmark EE law and the signing by President 
Medvedev of a decree to cut the energy intensity of Russia‘s economy by 40 
percent by 2020. The Russian Government requested IBRD in 2010 to prepare 
a project to reduce greenhouse gases through the removal of barriers related to 
energy efficiency investments. 

 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 29 of 36 

problems 

Measured progress: Bank carbon finance deal with Rosneft to reduce gas-
flaring for a reduction of 2M tons of ERUs. IFC carbon finance deal with 
CoreCarbon reduced 2-3 M tons of nitrous oxide emissions. 
Bank Group impact: IFC‘s Russia Sustainable Energy Finance Program 
(RSEFP; 2005-present) is developing a marketable energy efficiency product 
for industry and EE investments. Since program launch in 2006, the RSEFP has 
facilitated US$188 million in IFC commitments and US$73 million in EE 
projects financed by six partner banks, resulting in over US$32 million in 
energy cost savings to companies and annual avoidance of around 370,000 tons 
of CO2 emissions. IFC/IBRD provided assistance to four oblasts in NW Russia 
on EE action plans and incentives for renewable energy investments. IFC/Bank 
Russia Renewable Energy Program 
(2010-present) 
is working with 
stakeholders, including the Government of Russia, to design a comprehensive 
approach to grow the renewable energy market in Russia.  IFC expects to 
facilitate at least US$360 million through the program to create a demonstration 
effect in the market. IFC‘s Russia Cleaner Production Program (2008 -present)  
promotes resource efficiency in industry through equipment modernization, 
improved management practices, waste management and product and process 
re-design, resulting in reduction of emissions and other wastes as well as in cost 
and energy savings 
Enabling/disabling factors: Russia‘s goals in Energy Efficiency and Climate 
Change are driven by domestic economic interests reducing incentives to make 
use of instruments geared towards global public goods. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

Russia is not seen as taking up a global leadership position in climate change. Nonetheless, c limate issues became 
more visible on the national economic agenda. The adopted Climate Doctrine with Implementation Action Plan 
made the country‘s position and approach to the climate change agenda more solid and sustainable. However, Russia 
underexploited its reserves in utilizing the carbon finance instruments under the current commitment period .  
Bank Group Contributions: GIS Options Study in Russia; ESW ―Energy Efficiency in Russia: Untapped Reserves‖ 
(2007-2008); P102324 CF 4: Rosneft Gas Flaring Reduction Project (Carbon Offset) Approved: September 2008; 
Status: Ongoing Latest ISR Rating: Moderately Satisfactory; IFC Russia Sustainable Energy Finance Program 
(2005-present); IFC Russia Cleaner Production Program (2008-present); IFC Russia Renewable Energy Program 
(2010-present) 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: FULFILLING INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS FOR GLOBAL 
PUBLIC GOODS 

CPS Outcome 

Addressed environmental 
issues to provide local and 
global benefits 

Modernize Meteorological 
Systems 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved  
Major deterioration of hydrometeorological services in Russia occurred since 
mid-1980s primarily due to lack of investment in modern technology and 
degradation of its observation networks. The decline affected all elements of the 
RosHydromet system. Further degradation of the RosHydromet system has 
been stopped.  
Measured progress: Average response time to requesters from any point in 
Russia is reduced to 12 hours (instead of 14 days as initially targeted). About 92 
percent of World Meteorological Organization reporting stations now report 
data to GTS on time. 
Bank Group impact:  Responding to the federal request to modernize key 
elements of RosHydromet‘s technical base and strengthening its institutional 
arrangements, the project is making good progress in reach ing its development 
objectives. Lead time for national and regional weather forecasts increased 
considerably: projected lead indicators are reached or exceeded. Four 
computing centers (in Moscow, St. Petersburg, Novosibirsk, and Khabarovsk) 
equipped with new supercomputer complexes are testing and operationalizing 
new forecasting models (with higher resolution for weather forecasts and 
emergency 
response, and also seasonal weather 
forecasts based on 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 30 of 36 

hydrodynamic modeling and using the ensemble method). There are no 
infrastructure bottlenecks in collecting and transmitting data within Russia or 
globally: the end target was achieved. Russia Hydromet Modernization 
triggered the development of similar operations in ECA and other regions in the 
Bank. 
Enabling/disabling factors: This was not a CPS Outcome in the 2006 CPS or 
2009 CPS PR. It was added subsequently due to strong government demand 
and for full accounting of contributions under Russia‘s Global Role . 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

The CPS needs to be flexible enough to provide room for fast changing, sophisticated demands from Upper Middle 
Income Countries like Russia. Strengthening provision of high quality weather, climate and hydrological services 
proved to be an important element in adapting to climate change and towards sustainable development. Long term 
engagement is needed to achieve significant and sustainable results in such institutionally and technically 
challenging sectors. A follow up operation is being considered by the Government aimed to improve the national 
capacity to deliver reliable and timely weather, water and climate information. 
Bank Group Contributions: P082239 Hydrometeorological System Modernization Project (SIL) Approved: March 
2005; Status: Ongoing Latest ISR Rating: Satisfactory 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: FULFILLING INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS FOR GLOBAL 
PUBLIC GOODS 

CPS Outcome 

Addressed environmental 
issues to provide local and 
global benefits 

Strengthened the forestry 
sector  

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: partially achieved 
In 2007 a new Forest Code was introduced, which decentralized the 
responsibility for fire fighting to the subjects of the Russian Federation. Federal 
legal responsibilities and associated physical and human capabilities were 
considerably weakened by the reforms, which left federal agencies unable to 
fully compensate and backstop regional weaknesses. The full effect of the 
change in the Forest Code was not foreseen by Russian policy-makers. There has 
been significant under-investment in forest fire-fighting equipment since the 
Soviet era. 
Measured progress: The area of forest covered by improved forest and pest 
management systems rose from zero in 2000 to 559 million ha (in 2010, area 
under satellite fire monitoring) and 85 million ha (in 2009, area under pest 
management with remote sensing data).   
Bank Group impact:  With strong support from the EU and strong cooperation 
with WWF and IUCN, Russian regions were provided with recommendations on 
the development and implementation of the strategy for sustainable forestry. The 
Bank reduced the risk of corruption in the forestry sector by analyzing existing 
policies and legislation to identify gaps and to propose anti -corruption measures 
and recommendations on law enforcement procedures. The analysis identified 
numerous loopholes and perverse incentives that drive both forest fire s and poor 
governance. Recommendations of 
the Forestry Law Enforcement and 
Governance have been taken into consideration in the recent and proposed 
changes to the policy and legislative framework. The Bank created special 
training courses (including curricula materials for professional development 
program comprising six modules) on forest law enforcement as a part of a 
continuous education program for managers and specialists from forest 
management authorities. The Bank raised awareness and the standard of 
education of 
forestry professionals significantly 
in order 
to 
increase 
understanding of forest governance issues with specific reference to forest fires.  
Arkhangelsk oblast approved ―Standard guidelines for the development and 
implementation of coherent interventions to prevent and reduce illegal logging 
and illegal timber trade‖ in 2010. On the basis of these recommendations, the 
responsible forest agency will revise and elaborate the regional action plan. 
Training and awareness raising has focused on the private sector, particularly 

 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 31 of 36 

with respect to forest certification, timber tracking systems , and the impact of 
both the EU Legal Timber Law and the US Lacey Act. All of these initiatives 
should help address the trade and use of illegally sourced timber in Russia. 
Bank support allowed for survey and swift remedial actions over much bigger 
areas during large outbreaks of pests which typically follow forest fires. 
Improved forest fire monitoring and communications systems were established 
in seven regions, and 45 brigades were equipped and trained. This resulted in 
improved response times and better coordinated response leading to smaller 
areas burnt. 
Enabling/disabling factors: This was not a CPS Outcome in the 2006 CPS or 
2009 CPS Progress Report. It was added subsequently due to strong government 
demand and for full accounting of contributions under Russia‘s Global Role .  

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

The CPS needs to be flexible enough to provide room for fast changing, sophisticated demands from Upper Middle 
Income Countries like Russia. In light of severe problems caused by the forest fires in European Russia in 2010, a 
clear need has materialized to enhance fire prevention, management and control , and at the same time, to support 
forest management more generally to address the perverse policy incentives and to develop and test silvicultural 
systems less prone to fire; there is also a need to promote sustainable forestry practices amongst private sector 
actors. 
Bank Group Contributions: P053830 Sustainable Forestry Pilot Project (SIL); Approved: May 2000; Status: Closed 
(May 2010); ICR Rating: Moderately Satisfactory; IEG Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory P111139 Improving 
Forest Law Enforcement and Governance in the European Neighborhood Policy East Countries and Russia TA 
Approved: October 2008; Status: Ongoing 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: FULFILLING INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS FOR GLOBAL 
PUBLIC GOODS 

CPS Outcome 

Addressed environmental 
issues to provide local and 
global benefits 

Supported Global Tiger 
Initiative 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: achieved 
Russia played a leading role in the Global Tiger Initiative (GTI) – an alliance of 
governments, international agencies, civil society, and the private sector united 
to save wild tigers from extinction and integrate conservation into the 
development agenda.  Through its active participation in the Global Tiger 
Initiative, Russia has developed and adopted the new ―Strategy for Conservation 
of the Amur Tiger in the Russian Federation‖ (approved 2010), as well as the 
Action Plans for its implementation till 2020 at the federal level and at the level 
of two involved regions (Khabarovsk kray and Primorsky kray). This strategy is 
Russia‘s concrete and successful national contribution to the Global Tiger 
Recovery Program. 
Bank Group impact:  The Prime Minister partnered with the World Bank to 
organize and host the Global Tiger Summit (St. Petersburg, November 2010) 
attended by heads of governments, senior officials from 13 tiger range countries, 
and CSOs. The summit adopted the Global Tiger Recovery Program, a flagsh ip 
example of country-led collaboration on transboundary and global conservation 
issues.  
Enabling/disabling factors: This was not a CPS Outcome in the 2006 CPS or 
2009 CPS Progress Report. It was added subsequently due to strong government 
demand and for full accounting of contributions under Russia‘s Global Role . 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

The CPS needs to be flexible enough to provide room for fast changing, sophisticated demands from Upper Middle 
Income Countries like Russia. Support to the country‘s active involvement in the global agenda helps activate and 
promote necessary national action in key areas of environmental sustainability. In the next CPS , it is recommended 
that the Bank continues to support Russia in implementing the Global Tiger Recovery Program and develop a joint 
agenda in the area of biodiversity of regional and global significance . 
Bank Group Contributions: P116149 - Global Tiger Initiative TA Approved: April 2009; Status: Ongoing; GEF 
Support to Global Tiger Summit (2010) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 32 of 36 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: FULFILLING INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS FOR GLOBAL 
PUBLIC GOODS 

CPS Outcome 

Addressed environmental 
issues to provide local and 
global benefits 

Strengthened environmental 
management 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: partially achieved 
Environmental quality and control are poor for a majority of Russians living in 
the country‘s population centers. This has detrimental effects not only for those 
peoples‘ wellbeing but also a significant negative impact on Russia‘s economy. 
Russia inherited obsolete technologies continue to generate pollution and 
wasteful use of natural resources. The inefficient environmental quality 
management systems severely restricted the ability of the Government to address 
the issue of deteriorating environment.  
Measured progress: Reduction in emissions (discharges, wastes): emission – 
123,000 t., discharges – 35,000 t., wastes – 255,000 t. as of December 2010 
(targets are largely met). 
Bank Group impact:  The Environmental Management Project (EMP) assisted 
the Russian authorities in the implementation of the National Pollution 
Abatement Facility (NPAF) – a credit line for pollution abatement projects 
(amount of total investments – US$78 million). Half of NPAF funds were 
invested in seven pollution abatement projects, including modernization of four 
large pulp and paper mills in Archangelsk oblast, and mitigation of the 
consequences of Siberian silkworm outbreak. The Bank supported 
the 
establishment of the system of air quality monitoring in the Ural and Upper 
Volga region.  IFC contributes to stronger environmental management practices 
in the private sector through application of Policy and Performance Standards on 
Environmental and Social Sustainability to all investment projects, minimizing 
their 
impact on 
the 
environment 
and on 
affected 
communities.  
IFC has also begun environmental and social risk assessment of its Advisory 
Services projects, using 
the Performance Standards as 
the framework.  
Enabling/disabling factors: This was not a CPS Outcome in the 2006 CPS or 
2009 CPS Progress Report. It was added subsequently to fully account of 
contributions under Russia‘s Global Role. Inefficiencies in the environmental 
quality management system and the absence of adequate technical assistance at 
the national and regional levels have limited the initial potential of EMP 
implementation. The latest environmental problems in Russia, including summer 
2010 fires, prompted the Russian Government to look at the problem in a new 
way, and introduce new projects and programs. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

Institutional and financial risks associated with the proposed on-lending arrangement proved to be much greater than 
anticipated. The main project result is the establishment of a mechanism to finance pollution abatement projects. 
However this mechanism can be implemented in future only when brought in conformity with the existing 
legislation.  Future priorities for the new CPS have been indicated by the Ministry of Natural Resources and the 
Environment and include increased cooperation with the Bank in dea ling with past environmental liabilities, 
biodiversity, water management, protected areas management, climate change and associated weather and 
catastrophic risk insurance. 
Bank Group Contributions: P008821 Environmental Management Project (FIL) Approved: November 1994; Status: 
Closed (June 2011); Latest ISR Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory 

COUNTRY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: FULFILLING INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS FOR GLOBAL 
PUBLIC GOODS 

CPS Outcome 

Supported measures to 
mitigate global food price 
crisis 

Status and Evaluation Summary 

Status: partially achieved 
Before the severe drought in 2010 Russia was the world‘s third largest wheat 
exporter. In response to the global food price crisis and following up on 
commitments made to the G8, the Russian Government is committed to 
undertake – jointly with the CGIAR and the Bank – a Russian Agricultural 
Development Aid Cooperation initiative aimed to improve food security in the 

 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 33 of 36 

Eurasian region and globally, enhance environmental sustainability of 
agricultural production, in particular in response to climate change, and  build 
the capacity of the Russian Federation in providing agricultural advisory services 
in international initiatives on these subject matters. 
 Bank Group impact:  Under this activity the Bank is provid ing advisory services 
in support of Russia‘s efforts to establish the Eurasian Center for Food Security 
(ECFS), which is being established as a national center with regional outreach to 
selected countries of Eurasia. Over a period of several years , ECFS is expected 
to develop into an internationally recognized institution.  The Bank prepared 
policy notes focusing on grain production and trade. The findings regarding state 
involvement in Russia‘s grain trade were taken into account when the ―United 
Grain Company‖ was established in 2009. 
Enabling/disabling factors: This was not a CPS Outcome in the 2006 CPS or 
2009 CPS Progress Report. It was added subsequently due to strong government 
demand and for full accounting of contributions under Russia‘s Global Role . 
There is strong commitment of the Russian Government to G8 initiatives, on the 
one side, and lack of strong willingness of the Russian Ministry of Agriculture to 
cooperate with the Bank, on the other side. 

Lessons and Suggestions for CPS 2012-2016 

The CPS needs to be flexible enough to provide room for fast changing, sophisticated demands from Upper Middle 
Income Countries like Russia.  The Bank‘s role in Russian agriculture development should be increased 
considerably since this country has untapped potential in the production growth to meet the increasing food demand 
of the world. The food price crisis has exposed existing and potential weaknesses and vulnerabilities of households, 
governments, and the international economy to food and nutrition insecurity. Russia, with its vast potential in 
agriculture, could significantly contribute to increased food security regionally and globally. The WBG in the next 
CPS period is well-placed to support Russia in this role. 
Bank Group Contributions: ESW Russia Grain Reserves Study (2009); FBS in support of Russia‘s efforts to 
establish a Eurasian Center for Food Security (ECFS) Approved: March 2011; Status: Ongoing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 34 of 36 

CPS FY07-11 Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries 

Attachment 2  

US$M 
IBRD 
200.0 

PROGRESS REPORT (07/30/2009) 
STATUS actual/dropped 

Actual 

US$M 
IBRD 
200.0 

CPS PLANS (11/20/2006) 
FY 
PROJECT 

2007 

Housing & Communal Services Reform 
Project 
IT Parks 

Judicial Reform Support 
State Statistical System  2 
2008 Microfinance Infrastructure  
Special Economic Zones 

2009 

South Okrug Local Initiatives 
SUAL Guarantee (Komi Commercial) 
Science and Technology 
Public Sector Efficiency 
Municipal Budgeting 

PRG Related Activity - Guarantee 
Subtotal FY07-09 

PROGRESS REPORT (07/30/2009) 
2010 
PCG for VEB Infrastructure Finance 

2011 

20.0 

50.0 
10.5 
50.0 
50.0 

300.0 

20.0 (TBD) 

TBC 
TBC 
TBC 
TBC 
TBC 

50.0 
10.0 
21.0 (TBD) 

Dropped 
Lack of ownership from 
the borrower 
Actual 
Actual  
Forwarded to FY12 
Dropped 
Institutional changes and 
lack of ownership from the 
borrower 
Forwarded to FY12 
Dropped 
Dropped 
Dropped 
Dropped 
Change of borrowing 
policy, zero-lending 
approach 
TBC 
Forwarded to FY10 
380.5 
Subtotal FY07-09 
260.0* 
*Loan amount for the project approved during FY07-09 
COMPLETION REPORT (06/30/2011) 
Forwarded to FY12 
500.0 (TBD) 
Additional Actual (ongoing) 
Projects: 
Cultural Heritage II 
Financial Education and 
Literacy 

100.0 
25.0 

Subtotal FY10-11 
Total FY07-11 

300.0 
680.5 

Subtotal FY10-11 
Total FY07-11 

125.0 
385.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 35 of 36 

CPS FY07-11 Planned Non-lending Services and Actual Deliveries 

Attachment 3 

CPS PLANS (11/20/2006) 
FY 
Product 
2007 
Programmatic Poverty 
ICA (Russia-Region) 
CEM (Stage 2) 
Water Quality Management Improvement 
Housing 
CPAR-RU 
Industrial Pollution Abatement 
Housing Market Study 
Performance-Based Budgeting 
Rural Finance/Rural Sector Dialogue 
Assess & Model Reform Impact  
G8 Advisory Services 
Agricultural Policy Monitoring  
Public Administration Reform in RU 
Self-Governance and Civic Engagement 
Youth Empowerment andSecurity 
GDLN 
Russian Economic Report 
EDUC/SP Advisory Services 
Civil Service Reform TA 

PROGRESS REPORT (07/30/2009) 
Status actual/dropped 
Actual  (FY09) 
Actual  
Actual (FY08) 
Actual  
Actual  
Actual  
Actual  
Actual  
Actual  
Actual  
Actual (FY07) 
Actual  
Actual  
Actual  
Actual (FY08) 
Actual (FY09) 
Actual (FY09) 
Actual  
Actual  
Actual  

Additional Actual Products 
Evaluation and Modeling Reform IMF 
Development Aid (to be completed in FY12) 

2008 

SO Okrug Human Development 
Russian Economic Report 

Actual (FY07) 
Actual  

Additional Actual (ongoing) Products 
HD Advisory Services 
Energy Efficiency Study 
Environmental Performance Overview 

2009 

Financial Sector Dialogue 
Russian Economic Report 

Actual  
Actual  

Additional Actual (ongoing) Products 
Policy Note on Demography 
Economic Diversification 
Regional Program Development Strategy 
HD Advisory Services 
Forest Reform TA 
Quality of Local Governance 
State Grain Training 
Russia Grain Reserve Study 
Consumer Protection 
Vulnerability Review 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 7: FY07-11 CPS Completion Report 

                          November 2011 
                            Page 36 of 36 

PROGRESS REPORT (07/30/2009) 
2010 
Regional HD PER 
Public Expenditure Review (ESW) 
Growth and Regional Development (ESW) 
Russian Economic Report 

COMPLETION REPORT (06/30/2011) 
Actual  
Actual (FY11) 
Actual (FY11) 
Actual  

Additional Actual (ongoing) Products 
Policy Dialogue TA on PPP 
Long-Term Fiscal Sustainability 
HD Advisory Services 
Environmental Liabilities 
Labor Market Monitoring and Policy 
Assessment 
Crisis Response TA 
Energy Efficiency (follow up) 
Russian Economic Report 
RU Financial Sector Review 
Regional HD Public Expenditure Review 

2011 

Russian Economic Report 

Actual 

Additional Actual (ongoing) Products 
HD Advisory Services 
Health Financing 
RU Innovation TA 
RU Financial Sector Monitoring 
RF DFID TF for Govern. Pub. Admin 
Social Expenditure Efficiency 
Diversification and Innovation Support 
Monocities TA 
New Labor Markets 
GDLN Coordination in Russia 
Financial Literacy TA 
SO LISP TA 
RU Economic Diversification (ESW) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 
Page 1 of 4 

Annex 8 

2012-2016 CPS Multistakeholder Consultations 

Background 

1. 
The consultations of the WBG in Russia with the main stakeholders helped for early 
identification of the key challenges facing the country at the federal level and in the regions, and for 
testing the proposed CPS strategic themes and messages.  In February and June 2011, the WBG in 
Russia, in cooperation with the World Bank‘s Global Development Learning Network (GDLN), 
Charities Aid Foundation-Russia (CAF-Russia), and the Institute for Contemporary Development 
(INSOR), organized a series of consultation workshops and videoconferences across the country to 
discuss the progress achieved during the previous CPS period and strategic challenges for the next 
partnership period.  These workshops and videoconferences involved representatives of the federal 
and local governments, civil society and business communities, think -tanks, academia, and other 
stakeholders.  The participants were chosen from the WBG‘s wide network of contacts and partners 
at the national, regional, and local levels. 

Purpose and Process of Consultations 

2. 
The main purpose of the consultations with stakeholders in the regions was to identify 
successful approaches to socio-economic development in Russia‘s regions, which may not be 
currently recognized at the federal and international levels, as we ll as to share the WBG‘s approaches 
to new partnership with Russia and new financial instruments.  Also, the WBG was looking forward 
to learn where international knowledge or finance could strengthen programs in the regions or 
address new priorities, and to get feedback on its performance in the country. 

3. 
The first round of consultations was held in February 2011, building on the WBG‘s 
successful ongoing dialogue with the federal government of the Russian Federation on identifying its 
key priorities and challenges for the country‘s socio-economic development, as well as on areas 
where collaboration with the WBG could be most useful.  Consultations brought together 42 
representatives of local authorities from seven regions of Russia, including Perm and Stavro pol krais; 
Tatarstan and Chuvash republics; and Kirov, Tver, and Yaroslav oblasts.  In the course of the 
discussions, the WBG learnt about priorities, challenges, and successful approaches to socio -
economic development in the regions.  The consultations helped identify how collaboration with the 
WBG could be most useful and efficient.   

4. 
In early June 2011, following initial discussions with representatives of Russia‘s civil society 
organizations that indicated their interest in taking active part in the pr eparation of the CPS, the 
WBG sought feedback from representatives of the civil society at the federal level and in the regions.  
The two consecutive videoconferences were attended by over 60 participants representing more than 
40 different regional civil society organizations, business associations and academia from eight 
regions of Russia: Buryatia, Karelia, and Tatarstan republics; Krasnodar and Perm krais; Novosibirsk 
and Ryazan oblasts; and Moscow.  The consultations provided a venue for a meaningful exchange of 
views with federal and regional governments, as well as with a variety of stakeholders on Russia‘s 
most critical development challenges, as well as on policy options and programs that could address 
these challenges.  Also, the consultations helped increase government‘s and stakeholders‘ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 8: 2012-2016 CPS Multistakeholder Consultations 

November 2011 
                                Page 2 of 4 

understanding of the WBG‘s work and activities in the Russian Federation.  Pedro Alba, the World 
Bank Country Director and Resident Representative in the Russian Federation, led the Bank‘s team 
of experts, which facilitated the discussions. 

5. 
Later in June 2011, the WBG held consultations with the economic think-tanks and academia 
in partnership with the Institute for Contemporary Development (INSOR), one of the leading socio -
economic think-tanks in Russia.  The workshop engaged more than 30 participants in the 
consultations representing about 20 different think-tanks and stakeholder agencies, most of which 
actively participated in the discussions sharing their views and perspectives on the WBG's role in the 
new CPS period.  The WBG‘s team of experts was led by Zeljko Bogetic, Lead Economist and 
Country Sector Coordinator (CSC) for Economic Policy for Russia. 

Results/Outcomes of the Discussions 

6. 
Regional Authorities: In the course of two sessions of 3.5 hours each with representatives of 
local authorities, the WBG received in-depth feedback on development priorities of Russia‘s regions. 
Substantively, the WBG in Russia heard that: 
 Diversification of the economy through improvements to the investment climate and 
innovations are at the top of everyone's list in the regions, similar to the federal level agenda.  
 All seven regions wanted to attract foreign direct investments.  
 Many regions also highlighted the importance of skills development for business and higher 
education more generally to contribute to competitiveness.  
 From the less advanced regions, the WBG understood that public infrastructure (particularly 
water and sewerage, and transport) remains a critical need.  
 Tver Oblast gave a strong positive evaluation of the IBRD assistance since 2003, particularly 
for public finance, education and culture.  
 Representatives of the Chuvash Republic were greatly appreciative of the IFC/IBRD sub -
national loans.  They expressed interest in additional financing for rural water projects. 

7. 
Civil Society, Business Communities, Academia, and Other Stakeholders: Seven themes 
prevailed during the discussion: 
 Access for SMEs to microfinance at reasonable terms and long maturity, which is particularly 
important for SMEs in agriculture and operating in monocities 
 Access to housing and social housing, as well as to energy, are the issues at the municipal 
level 
 Support to local  initiatives at the community level 
 Environmental protection and landscape preservations 
 Creating opportunities for development for children and young generations  
 Providing access to employment to people with disabilities 
 Public private partnerships at the municipal level 

8. 
Economic Think-tanks and Academia: Four themes permeated the discussion, which 
touched upon a number of issues: 
 There was consensus that, while the WBG continues to work closely with federal agencies, 
key development issues in Russia are in the regions.  The WBG's increasing focus on 
working with the regions is timely and appropriate.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 8: 2012-2016 CPS Multistakeholder Consultations 

November 2011 
                                Page 3 of 4 

 The participants welcomed and expressed interest in the WBG's wider menu of financial 
instruments, especially Financial Intermediary Loans (FILs) as well as greater use of 
guarantees and opportunities for lending (and on-lending) to the regions.  
 Several participants felt that the WBG's non-financial support (technical assistance, capacity 
strengthening, and knowledge sharing) is extremely important and in several cases even more 
important than direct financial support.  
 Several participants argued that statistics partnership with Rosstat (Russian Statistical 
Agency) via technical assistance from IBRD could help improve the quality and standards of 
statistical information, including on national accounts.  

9. 
Mr. Storchak, Deputy Minister of Finance, participated in the entire meeting to facilitate the 
dialogue between the Ministry and think-tanks regarding the new CPS.  At the outset, Mr. Storchak 
stressed the important contribution that the WBG made to Russia's priorities and development 
programs in all three main lines of business: lending, technical assistance, and analytical support as 
well as to Russia's emerging role as a donor and a member o f G20.  He stressed, among others, the 
strong results of the regional fiscal technical assistance project, and projects on cultural heritage, 
education and health, as well as the past budget support operation for the Russian regions.  Mr. 
Storchak also emphasized the importance of the WBG's global and comparative knowledge and 
analytical work in informing Russia's policy debates and choices.  In that sense, he emphasized that 
the new CPS represents and should reflect a continuity of the WBG's engagements and results. 

CPS Formulation and Consultation Process 

10. 
The CPS process was launched internally during the Russia Country Team retreat in June 
2010.  The discussions on the CPS then went through various stages of brainstorming, debating, 
working group discussions, government and external consultations, and 
inte rnal reviews.  
Organizationally, a CPS Core Team served as the nucleus for the work, which has involved the entire 
country team. 

11. 
Following is a summary of major events that took place throughout the almost year -long CPS 
discussions and consultation process, including the highlights of each activity. 

Main Steps of CPS Preparation  

Highlights 

Discussed initial strategic direction the new CPS 

Possible volume of lending for the next CPS period of US$1 
billion per year, which was announced by Prime Minister Putin 
after the meeting with Mr. Zoellick, World Bank President, 
during ―The Tiger Summit‖ in St. Petersburg.  

Discussed outcomes at the technical level with representatives of 
the Ministry of Finance 
Preliminary structure of the new CPS and proposed strategic 
themes were discussed and broadly endorsed  
 (See details in earlier section of the Annex) 

June 9-10, 2010 – Russia Country Team 
Retreat 
November 2010 - First Meeting with 
Representatives of the Government  

March-April 2011  - First round of CPS 
Completion Report discussion 
March 28, 2011 – CPS Concept Review, 
chaired by Philippe Le Houérou, ECA VP 
Multistakeholder CPS Consultations: 
- February 15, 2011 – VC consultations with 
regional authorities 
- February 16, 2011 – VC consultations with 
regions 
- June 2, 2011 – VC consultations with 
regional and federal CSOs, academia  and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 8: 2012-2016 CPS Multistakeholder Consultations 

November 2011 
                                Page 4 of 4 

Main Steps of CPS Preparation  

business communities 
- June 10, 2011 – Workshop/Consultations 
with think-tanks 
May 31 and July 11, 2011 - Country Team 
Discussions of Draft CPS Outline 

June 6, 2011 - Second Meeting with 
Representatives of the Government  

September 24, 2011 - Third Meeting with 
Representatives of the Government 
October 3, 2011 -  Regional Operations 
Committee (ROC) Final Review 

October 28 and November 7, 2011 - Formal 
communication from Government on CPS 
November 9, 2011 - Meetings with 
Development Partners  
November 3 - Submission of CPS for Final 
Internal Clearances 
[December 20] – CPS discussion by the 
Board of Executive Directors of the WBG 

Highlights 

The Russian Country Team was involved in the discussion of the 
proposed CPS outline and in brainstorming of the possible results 
framework approach 
At the meeting with Deputy Minister of Finance Sergei Storchak, 
and Director of International Affairs Department Andrei 
Bokarev, the proposed CPS outline was endorsed. Preliminary 
feedback received during the meeting and the follow-on written 
comments were reflected in the draft CPS. 
Discussion on the draft CPS with the representatives of the 
Russian delegation during the 2011 Bank-Fund Annual Meetings 
Received additional guidance and overall support from 
management to proceed with CPS processing for Board 
discussion 
Government no-objection to disclose the CPS at the time of 
circulation to the Board of Executive Directors of the WBG 
Meetings and consultations with representatives of the embassies 
and other development partners - planned 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 
Page 1 of 10 

Annex 9 

Overview of the Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program 

This Annex provides a detailed overview of the WBG program with brief descriptions of the various 
indicative engagements (IBRD financing, AAA, RTA, and IFC activities) under the four CPS 
Strategic Themes.  Some WBG engagements support more than one Strategic Theme.  The lending 
program for the outer years of the CPS will be determined jointly with the Government and will be 
presented for Board discussion in the CPS Progress Report , and may include operations in 
infrastructure, human development, regional development, and environmental management, as well 
as possible follow-on operations in land registration and customs management.     

Strategic Theme 1: Increasing Growth and Diversification 

Areas of Engagement and Country Development 
Outcomes to which CPS Contributes 

World Bank Group Program 

Management of Public Finances 

Ongoing Financing: See Annex B8 

Outcome 1:  Improved efficiency and effectiveness of public 
financial management 

NATIONAL 

Investment Climate/Innovation 

Outcome 2:  Further streamlined and simplified business 
procedures and improved capacity to monitor and 
benchmark business regulations 

Outcome 3:  Strengthened capacity to design and 
implement innovation and diversification programs in 
Russia‘s regions 

Financial Sector Development 

Outcome 4:  Improved regulatory and supervisory 
framework for the financial sector and upgraded market 
infrastructure 

Outcome 5:  Increased depth and breadth in the financial 
sector and increased access to finance 

Sustainable Development and Effective Protection of 
the Environment 

Outcome 6:  Increased access to quality infrastructure 
assets and improved infrastructure services 

Outcome 7:  Enhanced competitiveness and sustainability 
of the economy via reduced resource intensity of GDP 

Outcome 8:  Improved management of environmental 
risks and natural resources 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Energy Efficiency Financial Intermediary Project    
 
Forest Fire Response Project   
 VEB (Russian Development Bank) Infrastructure Financial 
Intermediary Project   
Environmental Monitoring Project  
Financial Sector Development Project   
Fiscal and Public Finance Modernization Project   
IFC Russian Bank Opportunity Fund (RBOF)  

 
 
 
 

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Economic Diversification  
 
TA Investment Climate/Doing Business  
 
ESW Environmental Performance Overview  
 
ESW Policy notes on growth, jobs, and productivity  
 
TA Diversification and Innovation  
 
TA Support to Strategy 2020  
 
TA Public Expenditure Performance Review  
 
ESW Russian Economic Reports  
 
TA Financial Sector Development  
 
IFC Russia Cleaner Production  
 
IFC Russia Financial Markets Crisis Management Project  
 
IFC Russia Sustainable Energy Finance Program  
 
IFC Russia Renewable Energy  
 
IFC Russia Residential Energy Efficiency Program  
 WBI Support to selected lagging regions and monocities to 
identify and address development challenges, organize 
knowledge exchanges among Russian regions and globally, 
deliver learning events 

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 
Investment Climate  
 
E-Budget Systems  
 
Improvement of Urban Transport in Russia  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 9: Overview of the Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program 

                         November 2011 
                            Page 2 of 10 

 

 

 

Improving Public Transport (in cooperation with the Ministry 
of Transport)  
Strengthening the Institutional and Management Capacity of 
Avtodor (State Road Agency)  
 Development of Moscow as International Financial Center  
 
Support to Institutional Strengthening and PPP Project 
Preparation  
International Water Academy  

SUB-NATIONAL 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 Microfinance Development Project  
 Hydrometerological Modernization Project 2  

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Intelligent Transport System for St. Petersburg  
 
ESW Urban Transport Sector Overview  

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 
Tatarstan Innovation Support  
 
Tomsk Innovation Strategy  
 
St. Petersburg Urban Transport  
 
Sub-national Doing Business  
 Cultural Heritage and Cultural Tourism Development in 
Tatarstan  
 Regional Innovation Action Plan  

Note: The indicative financing and knowledge services program is for the period 2012-2013.  The program for the outer years of the CPS will be 
determined jointly with the Government and will be presented for Board discussion in the CPS Progress Report. 

Area of Engagement 1.1:  Management of public finances 

Outcome 1: Improved efficiency and effectiveness of public financial management   

Indicative Financing:  The WBG will continue the ongoing support through the Treasury 
Development Project (FY02) and the Customs Development Project (FY03) with a proposed Fiscal 
and Public Finance Modernization Project and a possible follow-on customs modernization project 
later in the CPS period.  These engagements are aimed at supporting the Government through policy 
advice and capacity strengthening in the Ministry of Finance and the Federal Tax Service towards 
enhancing the fiscal regime to encourage business investment, streamline the intergovernmental 
fiscal system, and increase oversight of financial risks.   

Indicative Knowledge Services:  IBRD will monitor and inform the fiscal policy debate and continue 
to provide policy advice through the Russian Economic Reports, and WBG participation in major 
policy and economic forums and policy discussions.  The dissemination of the 2011 Public 
Expenditure Review (PER) will be followed up with a Public Expenditure Performance Review.  An 
RTA is also proposed for strengthening the E-Budget System. 

Area of Engagement 1.2: Investment climate/innovation 

Outcome 2: Further streamlined and simplified business procedures and improved capacity to 
monitor and benchmark business regulations 

Indicative Knowledge Services:  The WBG will continue its support in the area of investment climate 
reforms through TAs (e.g., Investment Climate/Doing Business) and RTAs (Investment Climate, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 9: Overview of the Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program 

                         November 2011 
                            Page 3 of 10 

Sub-national Doing Business).  The second round of sub-national Doing Business assessment in 30 
Russian regions will be completed by April 2012 supported by the related RTA.  Further advisory 
services will include contributions  in the areas of dealing with construction permits and trading 
across borders, and may also provide support for the streamlining of processes such as starting a 
business, paying taxes, closing a business, registering property, getting credit, protecting investors, 
and enforcing contracts. 

Outcome 3: Strengthened capacity to design and implement innovation and diversification 
programs in Russia’s regions  

Indicative Financing:  The Ministry of Economic Development and the regions may request 
additional support for strengthening competitiveness and support for development initiatives in the 
regions focused on economic diversification and innovation during the latter part of the CPS period. 

Indicative Knowledge Services:  The Government has requested an RTA for the implementation of 
the innovation business plan program in four pilot Russian regions.  Specific regions have already 
requested support for innovation programs and strategies, including Tartarstan and Tomsk.  More 
generally, IBRD plans to prepare policy notes on growth, jobs, and productivity.  The IBRD RTA for 
Cultural Heritage and Cultural Tourism Development in Tatarstan will suggest ways to develop the 
region‘s cultural assets into sustainable sources of income that provide a broad range of benefits to 
communities using cultural heritage as an entry point for local development. 

Area of Engagement 1.3: Financial sector development 

Outcome 4: Improved regulatory and supervisory framework for the financial sector and 
upgraded market infrastructure   

Indicative Financing:  WBG engagements during the CPS period will include a Financial Sector 
Development Project which will enhance the orderly expansion of financial markets to serve better 
the needs for corporate finance by supporting financial market stability through a modernized state -
of-the-art regulatory framework and 
the 
implementation of strengthened supervisory and 
enforcement mechanisms.  Long-term direct IFC investments in well-managed private sector banks 
will increase banking sector efficiency and contribute to competition in a sta te-dominated sector.   

Indicative Knowledge Services:  The Financial Sector Development Project will be augmented with 
an associated TA.  An RTA for the Development of Moscow as an International Financial Center 
will support the Government‘s goals in this respect.  IFC advisory will strengthen the sector and its 
oversight functions (e.g., improving risk management practices of private banks, lowering Non-
Performing Loans). 

Outcome 5: Increased depth and breadth in the financial sector and increased access to finance   

Indicative Financing:  The proposed Energy Efficiency Financial Intermediary Project will help to 
catalyze financing of energy efficiency investments through providing seed money and TA to 
systemically important banks and strengthen the institutional capacity of the recently established 
Russian Energy Agency.  The proposed Microfinance Development Project at the sub-national level 
will support the Government in developing a sustainable, safe and sound national financial 
cooperative and microfinance system in order to enhance access to financial services by the poorer 
and underserved segments of the population, especially outside of the two large cities.  IFC will play 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 9: Overview of the Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program 

                         November 2011 
                            Page 4 of 10 

a critical role in helping towards deepening the sector (e.g., expansion of non-bank financial services, 
trade finance, access to finance for energy efficiency and renewable energy) and making it more 
competitive, and contribute to increasing the flow of finance for the Russian private sector including 
for MSMEs both through direct investments and via dedicated loans to partner financial institutions.  
IFC will also seek opportunities to invest in non-bank products and services, including insurance and 
pensions, to help in increasing the depth of financial markets.  SME development is further assisted 
by IFC‘s strategy of supporting well-managed private banks with networks in the regions via the 
Russian Bank Opportunity Fund (RBOF).  IFC also reaches SMEs through targeted SME, trade and 
energy efficiency finance to Russian banks.  Providing its products through bank s with networks in 
the regions helps IFC to reach a broader geographical area, including underserved regions and 
populations.   

Area of Engagement 1.4: Sustainable development and effective protection of the environment 

Outcome 6: Increased access to quality infrastructure assets and improved infrastructure 
services, including through increased participation of the private sector in financing and 
management of infrastructure   

Indicative Financing:  The proposed VEB (Russian Development Bank) Infrastructure Financial 
Intermediary Project will support the development and financing of infrastructure projects in the 
regions, including PPP projects.  Additional engagements in infrastructure are also envisaged for the 
outer years of the CPS and will be determined with the Government.  IFC is focused on helping to 
address bottlenecks to growth created by inadequate or outdated infrastructure, especially in transport 
and logistics (airports, ports, roads, warehousing) and at the sub -national level (municipal utilities 
and transport).  Building on the successful experience with the Pulkovo Airport PPP, IFC will 
explore additional PPP opportunities in areas such as waste management and water treatment in the 
St. Petersburg area where the regulatory framework for PPPs is already in place.   

Indicative Knowledge Services:  Proposed AAA include ESW on Environmental Performance 
Overview, TA on Intelligent Transport System for St. Petersburg, and ESW on Urban Transport 
Sector Overview.  Ongoing and proposed RTAs include continued support to St Petersburg Urban 
Transport, and Support to Institutional Strengthening and PPP Project Preparation.  Engagements 
with more oblasts/cities such as Moscow are under discussion, and RTAs are envisaged to provide 
assistance in Improving Public Transport in cooperation with the Ministry of Transport, and agencies 
with responsibility for PPPs such as Avtodor.  IFC will consider providing advice on waste 
management planning and deal structuring to other cities using experience from the St. Petersburg 
market.  The World Bank Institute (WBI) will work jointly with ECA teams to help selected Russian 
lagging regions and monocities to identify development challenges, organize and facilitate 
knowledge exchange activities among Russian regions, and connect them to provinces in other 
countries and cities facing similar problems.  WBI will also provide advice and support in 
development of strategies and policies.   

Outcome 7: Enhanced competitiveness and sustainability of the economy via reduced resource 
intensity of GDP   

Indicative Financing:  In consultation with government stakeholders and in coordination with main 
donors that have ongoing energy efficiency (EE) related programs in Russia, IBRD developed a 
project that includes a financial intermediary loan to a systemic bank (Gazprombank), and a GEF 
grant.  The GEF grant will support the Russian Energy Agency‘s efforts to create the environment 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 9: Overview of the Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program 

                         November 2011 
                            Page 5 of 10 

enabling commercial financing of EE investments, and help Gazprombank to implement its EE credit 
line, co-financed by the IBRD loan, and to scale-up its EE lending business.  The Energy Efficiency 
Financial Intermediary Project would provide support from the WBG for this outcome.   

Indicative Knowledge Services:  Beginning in FY05 IFC successfully piloted an approach combining 
financing with technical assistance to banks, project owners, and service providers to design and 
implement viable EE projects through the Sustainable Energy Finance Program which is expected to 
phase out in FY12.  Using the same programmatic approach, IFC has launched the Cleane r 
Production Program to assist in improving resource efficiency among real sector clients, the 
Residential Energy Efficiency Project to help homeowners invest in the energy efficiency of 
residential buildings, and the Renewable Energy Program, which suppor ts the government objective 
of sourcing up to 4 percent of all energy from renewable sources by 2020 by helping to create the 
regulatory framework for investment in the sector. 

Outcome 8: Improved management of environmental risks and natural resources   

Indicative Financing:  The proposed Forest Fire Response Project will contribute towards decreasing 
the number of fires of human origin through support for increasing public awareness and education, 
working with communities, publicizing fire danger and hazard ratings and re -establishing systems of 
control.  The project will also provide support for enhanced targeted investments to improve forest 
fire detection and management, forest regeneration and restorat ion, and the establishment of 
integrated 
forest management 
information 
systems. The proposed Hydrometeorological 
Modernization Project 2 will support the provision of necessary information to protect society and 
the economy from a wide range of hydrometeorological and climate related hazards, and help in 
improving access to more reliable and abundant information to the international hydrometeorological 
community.  Other proposed engagements include the Environmental Monitoring Project and 
projects during the outer years of the CPS to be specified through discussions with the Government , 
which may address issues of past environmental liabilities , spatial data, and land registration.  The 
collaboration in cleaning past environmental liabilities could be expanded to include the Arctic zone, 
with a focus on institutional strengthening to ensure sustainability of the environmental efforts in this 
critical area.  In addition to implementing existing programs focused on sustainable resource use, IFC 
will seek opportunities to invest in sustainable forestry and in agribusiness projects which help in 
improving resource efficiency and minimizing environmental impacts.  IFC‘s globally recognized 
Policy and Performance Standards on Social and Environmental Sustainability are applied to all 
advisory and investment operations. 

Indicative Knowledge Services:  An ESW on Environmental Performance Overview is planned.  The 
proposed RTA for Improving Public Transport (in cooperation with the Ministry of Transport) would 
help in the development of a federal level regulatory framework for vehicle emission standards .   

Strategic Theme 2: Expanding Human Potential 

Areas of Engagement and Country Development 
Outcomes to which CPS Contributes 

World Bank Group Program 

Education, Health, and Social Protection 

Ongoing Financing: See Annex B8 

Outcome 9:  Increased quality and improved access, 
targeting, coverage, and efficiency of social services for 
human development 

NATIONAL 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Social Inclusion through Sports Project   

Skills for Economic Development  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 9: Overview of the Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program 

                         November 2011 
                            Page 6 of 10 

Outcome 10:  Professional education system produces 
adequate skills for increased competitiveness 

Socially Inclusive Development 

Outcome 11:  Increased social inclusion of vulnerable 
groups 

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
ESW Professional Education and Skills  
 
TA Health Financing 
 
ESW Health Provider Survey  
 
ESW Poverty, Opportunity, and Social Mobility  
 
Support for Migration and Remittances Peer-Assisted Learning 
(MIRPAL) Network Initiative 

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 Russia Education Aid for Development - READ (in support of 
TF) 
 Russian Academy of National Economy and Public 
Administration (RANEPA) Program  
 Higher School of Economics II  
 READ II  

SUB-NATIONAL 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 North Caucasus South Okrug Local Initiatives Support Project  
 
Preschool Education Project for Yakutia  

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Regional Human Development  

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 
Local Initiatives Support in Kirov  
 
Local Initiatives Support in Stavropol  
 
Primary Health Care Provider Payment Reform in Kirov 
Region  
 Yakutia Early Childhood Development Program  
 Cultural Heritage and Cultural Tourism Development in 
Tatarstan  
 
E-Education Project  
 Krasnoyarsk Technical Vocational Education and Training 
Program  
Provider Payment Reforms in Regions  
Tatarstan Social Protection  

 
 

Note: The indicative financing and knowledge services program is for the period 2012-2013.  The program for the outer years of the CPS will be 
determined jointly with the Government and will be presented for Board discussion in the CPS Progress Report. 

Area of Engagement 2.1: Education, health, and social protection 

Outcome 9: Increased quality and improved access, targeting, coverage, and efficiency of social 
services for human development   

Indicative Financing:  The proposed IBRD-supported Preschool Education Project for Yakutia will 
finance the implementation of the best approaches for cost-efficient expansion of the Early 
Childhood Development (ECD) system and support the formulation of country level policies to apply 
the same methodologies in other regions.  Further support for projects in human development may 
materialize through discussions with the Government.  IFC will seek opportunities to invest in health 
sector-related non-bank financial services, including insurance and pensions, and to invest directly in 
private sector health care providers.   

Indicative Knowledge Services:  The WBG will support government efforts to improve the delivery 
of health, education and social protection services through the provision of mainly technical 
assistance on methodological approaches to measuring social sector performance and the use of such 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 9: Overview of the Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program 

                         November 2011 
                            Page 7 of 10 

tools to influence policy formulation.  Indicative AAA include TA on Health Financing, ESW on 
Health Provider Survey, and TA on Regional Human Development.  Proposed RTAs at the sub-
national level include the Yakutia Early Childhood Development Program, Primary Health Care 
Provider Payment Reform in Kirov region, Provider Payment Reforms in Regions, and Local 
Initiatives Support in Kirov and Stavropol.  The E-Education RTA in Tatarstan allows the WBG to 
assist in the introduction of ICT in education to change traditional teaching and learn ing patterns.  
The Republic of Tatarstan has approached IBRD with a request for an RTA on Social Protection to 
assist in building an efficient system of high quality demand -based social services by introducing 
modern service standards and promoting competitive participation of non-governmental entities in 
service provision.  The RTA in support of the Russia Education Aid for Development (READ) 
program is intended to strengthen institutional, expert, and research capacity in Russia for more 
broad and effective involvement in development aid.  As a result of this program, Russian experts 
and expert organizations will be working in several CIS/ECA countries (including in WBG 
operations) and in other development agencies.   

Area of Engagement 2.2: Skills for economic development 

Outcome 10: Professional education system produces adequate skills for 
competitiveness   

increased 

Indicative Knowledge Services:  The WBG-supported AAA on Professional Education and Skills 
will provide an overview of professional and vocational education systems in Russia, identify major 
issues and challenges, and provide an analysis of Russian skills development systems with a focus on 
the professional education sector (tertiary education) to inform engagements going forward.  
Proposed RTAs include support for the Krasnoyarsk Technical Vocational Education and Training 
Program which will allow the piloting of best approaches to serve better the economy and society of 
Russia‘s regions.  Two large RTA projects will support the Higher School of Economics II Project, 
and the Russian Academy of National Economy and Public Administration (RANEPA) Program .  As 
the connector of knowledge and innovations, WBI will engage Russian participants in global and 
regional networks, connect to global development debates and discussions on acute economic topics, 
help access the WBI e-Institute learning courses, and continue to develop knowledge and learning 
partnerships with Russian knowledge institutions (universities, think-tanks). 

Area of Engagement 2.3: Socially inclusive development 

Outcome 11: Increased social inclusion of vulnerable groups   

Indicative Financing:  The proposed Social Inclusion through Sports Project will pilot and test 
innovative approaches in six regions to use sports as an entry point for social integration of 
vulnerable groups (including the disabled and at-risk children and youth).  By building on the 
universality of sports and its traditional importance in Russian society, the project will help to create 
a new entry point for promoting social inclusion, as well as space for promoting and providing 
additional social support services to vulnerable groups.  It will improve their access to better health, 
education and vocational training, and serve to increase their confidence, social skills and 
engagement in productive activities that lead to economic development.  The project will also 
strengthen the capacity of municipalities to plan for, and deliver, services to disadvantaged groups.  
The North Caucasus South Okrug Local Initiatives Support Project will contribute to the 
improvement of the quality of local social and communal services through improved capacity of 
local authorities to manage these services with increased participation of citizens and communities in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 9: Overview of the Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program 

                         November 2011 
                            Page 8 of 10 

targeted municipalities.  The issue of the social inclusion of immigrants, with a focus on the legal 
framework for labor migration in Russia, will continue to be considered within the WBG‘s analytical 
work program on labor migration and remittances as well as within the framework of activities of the 
Migration and Remittances Peer-Assisted Learning (MIRPAL) network initiative, supported by the 
WBG and evolving in close collaboration with the Government. 

Strategic Theme 3: Deepening Russia’s Global and Regional Role 

Areas of Engagement and Country Development 
Outcomes to which CPS Contributes 

World Bank Group Program 

Global Public Goods 

Ongoing Financing: See Annex B8 

Outcome 12:  Strengthened Russian participation in the 
provision of global public goods 

GLOBAL 

Russia as a Donor 

Outcome 13:  Established an institutional structure for 
delivery of a bilateral and multilateral development 
assistance program 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Energy Efficiency Financial Intermediary Project   
 
Forest Fire Response Project   
 
Environmental Monitoring Project   
 Hydrometerological Modernization Project 2   

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Support to Russia 2012 APEC Presidency  
 
TA Support to Strategy 2020 
 
TA WTO Monitoring and Analysis and Trade in Services  

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 
Eurasian Center for Food Security (linked to CGIAR)  
 
International Water Academy (in support of TF) 

ECA REGIONAL 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Fiscal and Public Finance Modernization Project  

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Development Aid Program  
 
Support for Migration and Remittances Peer-Assisted Learning 
(MIRPAL) Network Initiative 
 WBI Support Russia to shape a focused and structural 
approach in playing its role as a development partner and to 
develop an effective system of knowledge transfer and 
engagement in global development dialogues 

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 Russia Education Aid for Development – READ  

Note: The indicative financing and knowledge services program is for the period 2012-2013.  The program for the outer years of the CPS will be 
determined jointly with the Government and will be presented for Board discussion in the CPS Progress Report. 

Area of Engagement 3.1: Global public goods 

Outcome 12: Strengthened Russian participation in the provision of global public goods   

Indicative Knowledge Services:  The WBG will support the Russian Federation to strengthen its role 
as it seeks to broaden and deepen its global engagements.  In addition to WBG engagements which 
will enhance Russia‘s participation in the provision of global public goods (such as the Forest Fire 
Response Project, Energy Efficiency Financial Intermediary Project , Environmental Monitoring 
Project, Hydrometerological Modernization Project 2), the WBG will also provide technical advice 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 9: Overview of the Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program 

                         November 2011 
                            Page 9 of 10 

and organizational support.  Such TA will, among other objectives, help in strengthening the capacity 
for the preparation of international forums and conferences and enhancing technical capacity within 
the civil service, and offer programs for Russian engagements on the global level to help in 
strengthening Russia‘s voice in ongoing discussions and increasing its leverage in the provision of 
global public goods through multilateral channels.  Possible TA includes Support to Russia 2012 
APEC Presidency as well as upcoming G8 and G20 Presidencies, Support to Strategy 2020, and 
WTO Monitoring and Analysis and Trade in Services.  Proposed RTAs, including Russia Education 
Aid for Development – READ, International Water Academy, and Eurasian Center for Food Security 
will further support Russia‘s global aspirations.   

Area of Engagement 3.2 Russia as a donor 

Outcome 13: Established an institutional structure for delivery of a bilateral and multilateral 
development assistance program   

Indicative Lending:  WBG support will include a component in the Fiscal and Public Finance 
Modernization Project to set up a bilateral development agency under the responsibility of the 
Ministry of Finance.   

Indicative Knowledge Services:  WBG support will include technical advice on establishing a fully 
operational bilateral development agency, assistance in strengthening of associated development 
policy capacity in responsible Russian ministries and agencies, and the WBG partnership with the 
Russian Government through the channel of the EurAsEC-AntiCrisis Fund (administered by the 
Eurasian Development Bank) which would contribute to the fast track integration of Russia into the 
international donor community.  TA on the Development Aid Program to support some of these 
efforts is planned.  The WBG is attracting Russian experts through the Donor Funded Staffing 
Program.  A prospective trust fund framework agreement with IBRD will permit the reduction of 
transaction costs for processing new programs and trust fund agreements with Russia as a donor.  
Several Russia-supported programmatic multi-donor trust funds (MDTFs) are currently under 
preparation.  The process is coordinated by the joint Russian MOF-IBRD Aid Coordination Working 
Group established in 2010 for overall coordination of new initiatives and monitoring progress of joint 
programs towards development results.  Planned funding activities include an ECA Capacity 
Building Trust Fund and an ECA Statistical Capacity Development Fund.  WBI can support these 
efforts as it works with donors, learning institutions, and centers of excellence to help shape, 
customize, and deliver content locally.  It links global sources of knowledge through its platforms for 
South-South exchange and innovation, and connects, through WBG operations, to the best sources of 
knowledge and finance and to partners who provide funds and expertise.  WBI can help Russia to 
shape a focused and structural approach in playing its role as a development partner and assist in 
developing an effective system of knowledge transfer and engagement in development dialogues.  
Given that Russia is a major destination for labor immigrants from other CIS countries, some of 
which strongly depend on labor migrants‘ remittances from Russia, WBG will continue providing 
technical assistance and organizational support to Russia‘s leading role in the regional dialogue on 
migration and remittances issues within the CIS, in particular through supporting the activities under 
the MIRPAL network practitioners. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 9: Overview of the Indicative World Bank Group (WBG) Program 

                         November 2011 
                            Page 10 of 10 

Strategic Theme 4 (cross-cutting): Improving Governance and Transparency 

Areas of Engagement and Country Development 
Outcomes to which CPS Contributes 

Public Administration, Procurement, and Financial 
Management  

Outcome 14:  Improved government transparency and 
accountability 

World Bank Group Program 

Ongoing Financing: See Annex B8 

NATIONAL 

Indicative Financing (2012-2013) 
 
Fiscal and Public Finance Modernization Project   

Indicative AAA/Others (2012-2013) 
 
TA Program Budgeting and Expenditure Efficiency 
 
TA Procurement System Development  

Indicative RTA (2012-2013) 
 
E-Budget System  
 Russian Academy of National Economy and Public 
Administration (RANEPA) Program 

Note: The indicative financing and knowledge services program is for the period 2012-2013.  The program for the outer years of the CPS will be 
determined jointly with the Government and will be presented for Board discussion in the CPS Progress Report. 

Outcome 14: Improved government transparency and accountability   

Indicative Financing:  The ongoing Judicial Reform Support Project (FY07) will continue to 
contribute to increasing the efficiency and transparency of the delivery of justice, thus raising trust 
and confidence in the judiciary.  Ongoing engagements such as the Registration Development Project 
(FY06, plus possible additional financing in the later years of the CPS), and the State Statistical 
System II Project (FY07) also contribute to this outcome as will the proposed Fiscal and Public 
Finance Modernization Project. 

Indicative Knowledge Services:  The TA on Program Budgeting and Expenditure Efficiency can 
provide support in strengthening the program in improving the efficiency of public expenditures, 
implementing program budgeting, increasing results orientation in the public sector, strengthening 
investment appraisal, and creating effective and accountable autonomous agencies to deliver public 
services.  The ongoing TA program for the EU-funded Forest Law Enforcement and Governance 
(FLEG) in the European Neighborhood Partnership Initiative (ENPI) East Countries and Russia is 
providing key support for addressing governance, natural resource management, monitoring and 
forest trade issues within Russia and the region (the ENPI East countries), and timber trade with the 
EU.  The possible TA for Procurement System Development can assist the efforts to overhaul the 
federal contracting system to produce multiple benefits, improve value for money in procurement, 
reduce corruption and increase transparency, and support new forms of partnerships between the 
public and private sectors.  The RTA for the Russian Academy of National Economy and Public 
Administration (RANEPA) Program, the component for E-Budget System under the ongoing 
Treasury Development Project, as well as a related RTA for implementation support, will also help to 
boost government programs in these areas.  A Governance Partnership Faci lity (GPF) funded TA on 
Support to the Ombudsman Office in Perm helps to facilitate citizen participation in public life, the 
provision of materials, platforms and campaigns on issues of public interest, and mediati on among 
local governments, public service providers, and citizens to redress complaints.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 
Page 1 of 10 

Annex 10 

The Russian Federation as a Donor 

1. 
Russia aspires to be one of the 21st century’s leading global economies.  The country is 
willing to integrate itself more fully into the international community including as a donor of 
international development assistance. Russia is already on track to becoming a member of the 
OECD.  The Russia-WBG development aid program is the most extensive to date for the WBG‘s 
cooperation with a MIC client supporting the country‘s aspiration to become an international aid 
donor while offering broader opportunities for country participation in the multilateral aid system. 

Achievements to Date 

2. 
Early Steps and Key Milestones.  Following its G8 presidency in 2006 and initiation of 
OECD accession talks in 2007, Russia took a number of steps to increase its development aid profile 
and significantly scaled-up and diversified its official development assistance (ODA) equivalent 
flows. In June 2007 the President of the Russian Federation adopted the national aid str ategy 
“Concept for Russia’s Participation in International Development Assistance” . This strategic 
document established key orientations and objectives for the country‘s future aid program based on 
OECD-DAC principles of ownership and alignment, predictability and transparency, accountability 
and monitoring, and the achievement of the MDGs as the basic reference point.  Box 5 presents the 
milestones of Russian development aid over the past several years. 

Box 8. Milestones of Russia’s Development Aid 

 

 

 

 

 

2005 - Russia G8 team study tour to the WBG in Washington, DC  

2006 - G8 presidency, Russia-WBG Joint Statement on development aid cooperation signed by World Bank 
President, Mr. Wolfowitz and Minister of Finance Kudrin 

2007 - Development aid concept ―Russia‘s Participation in Development Assistance‖ approved ; first 
IDA/IBRD-administered trust fund signed; high level study tour  

2007–2009 - Russia-WBG development aid cooperation strategically outlined and included as one of the 
key pillars of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY07-FY09 and also continued in CPS Progress 
Report till FY11 

2009 - EurAsEc Anti Crisis Fund established; Russia‘s annual aid reaches US$785.02 million 

 February 2010 - MinFin-World Bank-OECD International Conference on New Partnerships in Global 
Development Finance; WBG President, Mr. Zoellick – Russia Deputy Prime-Minister, Minister of Finance 
Kudrin Joint Statement on development assistance cooperation in the countries of ECA region; World 
Bank-MinFin Aid Coordination Group created; Russia G8 accountability report published 

 

January 2011 - Workshop ―Strategic Communication for Russia‘s Development Aid Program‖ ; draft 
framework paper for aid strategic communications elaborated; survey of public opinion on attitudes of 
Russian adult population to development aid  presented 

 December 2010–March 2011 - Modular development aid training program developed and tested by a 
group of Russian academics jointly with UK Institute of Development Studies (IDS)  

 May 2011 – Russia G8 accountability report published 

3. 
Overview of Russia’s ODA.  Russia increased its ODA equivalent flows from about US$50 
million in 2002-2003 to US$102 million in 2006.  During the global financial crisis, Russia‘s 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 10: The Russian Federation as a Donor 

        November 2011 
                               Page 2 of10 

development aid contributions grew to US$785.02 million.  This extraordinary increase is mainly 
linked to the provision of emergency aid and was aimed to mitigate the adverse impact of the 
economic crisis, especially in the CIS region.  Also during the crisis, Russia initiated the 
establishment of an innovative crisis response cooperation mechanism — EurAsEc Anti-Crisis Fund 
— in the amount of US$10 billion with a Russian contribution of US$7.5 billion24.  In 2010, Russia 
returned to its medium-term ODA growth path with ODA equivalent flows amounting to US$472.32 
million. Much of Russia‘s ODA is provided through multilateral channels, including the WBG, the 
UN system, major global initiatives, and special-purpose funds.  Russia has increased its assistance to 
IDA (see Table 4) and supported a number of global development initiatives by contributing to 
various multilateral agencies, and specifically to the IDA/IBRD-administered trust funds25.   

Table 4. Russia:  History of IDA Contributions 

Basic 
(US$M) 

Basic 
share 
(%) 

Suppl 
(US$M) 

Basic 
(US$M) 

% of Total 

Suppl  
(US$M) 

Basic 
US$M 

% of 
Total 

Suppl 
(US$M) 

IDA0 

IDA1 

IDA2 

IDA3 

IDA4 

IDA5 

IDA6 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

FY84  

IDA7 

SFA  

IDA8 

IDA9 

IDA10 

INTF 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

126.00 

0.00 

9.11 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.86 

0.00 

0.20 

IDA11 

15.34 

IDA12 

4.01 

IDA13 

10.12 

IDA14 

24.87 

MDRI 

32.00 

IDA15 

67.90 

3.04  

IDA16 

108.39 

0.20 

0.03 

0.08 

0.14 

0.09 

0.25 

0.35 

10.48 

0.28 

 16.50 

33.68 

40.96 

67.50 

Amounts for HIPC and arrears clearance, if any, are shown as supplemental.   
Supplemental amounts also include credit accelerations. 
MDRI amount represents latest cost update. 

Data provided by Department for Concessional Finance and Global Partnerships (CFP), IBRD 

4. 
Public perception of Russia’s Development Assistance. A survey conducted by the WBG 
confirmed the low level of knowledge of the general population and of opinion makers about 
development aid issues.  Coverage of Russian development aid is still limited to occasional 
statements of the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials.  These lead ministries 
recognize the complexity of development aid communications and a sense of urgency for more active 
work in this area exists.   

5. 
Russia’s Aid Architecture. Russian development aid is currently implemented at the 
ministry level. The Russian Government, however, plans to establish a specialized Russian aid 
agency that will take the lead in execution of most of the Russian bilateral aid programs. The 
Government also plans to formulate a separate three-year work program for its development 
assistance.  Box 6 presents highlights and key facts about Russia‘s ODA. 

24 This contribution would not count as ODA according to the OECD -DAC statistical manual. 
25 A Trust Fund (TF) is a financing arrangement established with contributions from one or more external 
donor(s)/partners, and in some cases, from the World Bank Group, to support development-related activities. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 10: The Russian Federation as a Donor 

        November 2011 
                               Page 3 of10 

Box 9. Russia’s ODA: Highlights and Key Facts 

 Russia’s commitment to multilateral aid mechanisms. Russia pledged US$108 million to IDA15, 
becoming the third largest nontraditional donor after Korea and Brazil, and increased its contribution to 
IDA16 by 60 percent, reaching US$182 million. Russia is participating in a variety of multilateral initiatives - 
(i) UN system, (ii) Global Funds, (iii) FAO; (iv) IDA/IBRD-administered TFs - Rapid Social Response, 
READ, Energy Access, Malaria Booster Program, etc, and (v) initiated establishment of an innovative 
regional multilateral mechanism (EurAsEc Anti-Crisis Fund). 

 Expansion of Russian aid directed to ECA countries, CIS in particular.  In 2008-2009, Russia provided 
direct concessional financing to Armenia, Kyrgyz Republic and the establishment of a multilateral US$10 
billion EurAsEc Anti-Crisis Fund that is coordinated with WBG and IMF support to eligible CIS countries. 
Using the channels of the EurAsEc Anti-Crisis Fund, Russia provided US$63 million as grant to Tajikistan in 
2010.  Several IDA/IBRD-administered Russian trust funds are targeting poorer ECA countries – Food 
Facility, READ, Public Finance Management TF, etc. 

A strong development aid partner relationship exists between Russia and the WBG.  The relationship 
between Russia and the World Bank on development aid issues includes three primary elements: (i) policy 
dialogues on aid policies and practices, (ii) IDA/IBRD TA supporting strengthening Russia‘s capacity as a 
donor, and (iii) financial cooperation on development aid (IDA/IBRD-administered trust funds).  

Cooperation with the World Bank Group 

6. 
Russia as a Donor - a Key Pillar of the FY07-11 CPS.  The Russia-WBG development aid 
cooperation program was implemented as part of the CPS and included three elements: (i) 
development aid policy dialogue, (ii) capacity strengthening of Russia as a donor through technical 
assistance program, and (iii) a program of financial cooperation with Russia as a donor. The program 
has now achieved all of its objectives. It delivered several major outputs including: (i) an 
international conference on ―New Partnerships in Global Development Finance‖ cosponsored by the 
Russian Ministry of Finance, the WBG, and OECD in February 2010, (ii) a series of workshops, 
training programs and other capacity strengthening events for key Russian Federation Government 
agencies, universities, media, and experts, and (iii) a series of Russian financial contributions to a 
broad range of IDA/IBRD-administered trust funds, with pledges exceeding US$185 million.  In 
many cases, these trust fund contributions have been part of programs with strong operational and 
strategic partnership between Russia and the WBG, involving knowledge sharing and continued 
engagement from Russian counterparts at a strategic governance level.  Other important grant 
contributions include increasing Russia‘s support to IDA16 (table above), Russia‘s contribution to 
the Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFTAM, US$257 million), and to the 
Vaccine Advance Market Commitment (AMC) program. 

7. 
Capacity Building for the Russian Development Aid System.  The WBG has been 
involved in policy advice and capacity strengthening for Russia‘s development aid since the 2006 G8 
Summit in St. Petersburg. The WBG assisted key Russian Government ministries in developing 
critical policies and functions for effective donor assistance, such as aid reporting and statistics, aid 
strategic communications, and training for development. The program was supported by an 
IDA/IBRD-managed DFID trust fund of US$0.8 million.  The Government has requested a US$7 
million RTA/fee-based service TA program to strengthen capacity for providing development 
assistance in education. The program is progressing well and is currently in its third year of 
implementation. A similar RTA program recently started in ECA agriculture policy research (US$6 
million). 

8. 
Russia’s IDA/IBRD-administered Trust Funds.  Russia‘s IDA/IRBD-administered trust 
funds cover development and global public goods issues and are focused on the themes of infectious 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 10: The Russian Federation as a Donor 

        November 2011 
                               Page 4 of10 

disease control, quality of basic education, energy access, food crisis response and social support 
programs, and covered 18 trust funds (seven single-donor and 11 multi-donor). The overall 
contributions in five years reached US$433.7 million, 61 percent of which went to support Financial 
Intermediary Funds (FIFs) and the rest were allocated to IDA/IBRD trust funds primarily of regional 
and global nature.  The full list of Russia‘s IDA/IBRD-administered trust funds, with contribution 
amounts and development objectives are presented in Table 5 at the end of this Annex.  Box 10 
below presents some examples of results achieved under Russia-supported trust funds. 

Box 10. Results Achieved under Russia-supported IDA/IBRD-administered Trust Funds - 
Examples 

Russia Food Price Crisis Rapid Response Trust Fund for Tajikistan and the Kyrgyz Republic 
(TF071232, US$15 million)  

This fund was established under the World Bank Global Food Crisis Response Program (GFRP) with the main 
purpose to reduce the negative impact of high and more volatile food prices on the lives of the poor; to support the 
governments of Tajikistan and the Kyrgyz Republics in the design of sustainable policies that mitigate the adverse 
impacts of high and more volatile food prices on poverty while minimizing creation of long -term market distortions;  
and to support broad-based growth in productivity and market participation in agriculture to ensure an accelerated 
and sustainable food supply response in the Eurasia region.   

Results achieved: 

◦ Ongoing Tajikistan Emergency Food Security and Seeds Imports Project benefited about 94,000 
households in increasing domestic food production and reducing livestock losses ─ exceeding the original 
target of 55,000 households initially planned to be covered by the project  

◦ 

FAO distributed soft wheat seeds and fertilizer to about 1,000 households affected by the earthquake at 
the beginning of 2010 

◦ Potato seeds and fertilizer were distributed to over 4,000 households in the remote mountainous areas, 
and 64 community production groups have been established 

Booster Program for Malaria Control  (TF 070783, US$15 million) - Zambia country program 

The support from the Russian trust fund has contributed to a major impact on malaria control in Zambia through the 
procurement of approximately 300,000 long-lasting insecticide treated nets (LLINs), the scale-up of the insecticide 
residual spraying campaign (program covers 1.5 million households) , expansion of community driven malaria 
control projects, and strengthening of monitoring and evaluation.   

Results achieved: 

In recent years, Zambia has made impressive inroads in reducing malaria‘s toll.  This decline coincides with the roll 
out of IDA and Russian trust fund supported interventions which supported the Government of Zambia‘s National 
Malaria Strategic Plan (2006 – 2011).  With support from IDA and the Russian Federation Trust Fund, tremendous 
progress has been made toward achieving the goals of the National Malaria Strategic Plan: 

◦ Overall malaria deaths fell by 47 percent since 2006 

◦ 

50 percent of children under five are now sleeping under bed nets (24 percent in 2006); 70 percent of 
pregnant women are receiving intermittent preventive treatment for malaria as part of routine 
antenatal care (as compared with 59 percent baseline in 2006) 

◦ Malaria cases and related deaths in children under age five declined 29 and 33 percent from 2006 to 
2010, respectively, while the percentage of children with severe anemia declined 68 percent from 13.3 
to 4.3 percent (most moderate and severe anemia in children are caused by malaria) over the same period  

◦ 

66 percent plunge in malaria deaths since 2000 has resulted in Zambia reaching the 2010 Roll Back 
Malaria target of a 50 percent drop in malaria mortality 

9. 
Management of Trust Funds Program Implementation.  The IBRD Country Unit in 
Russia leads program implementation as part of the strategic country relationship agenda, with 
support by the Department for Concessional Finance and Global Partnerships (CFP) and continuous 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 10: The Russian Federation as a Donor 

        November 2011 
                               Page 5 of10 

involvement of IBRD‘s regional departments and thematic sectors (education, human development, 
PREM, SDN, WBI and others).  CFP was engaged in support of key events, applying its broad 
experience for donor outreach.  A joint Russian Ministry of Finance -IBRD Aid Coordination 
Working Group created in 2010 in implementation of a Joint Statement countersigned by World 
Bank President, Mr. Zoellick, and Minister Kudrin meets on a regular basis to monitor and evaluate 
the status of the Russia-WBG development aid cooperation program to ensure overall coordination of 
the new initiatives, and to agree on necessary next steps and actions. 

Future Agenda 

10. 
Development Aid Dialogue. Russia and the WBG maintain an active development aid 
dialogue.  Some of the recent agreements reached include the following: 

 

 

IBRD and the Eurasian Development Bank (EDB) signed a Framework for Cooperation 
in March 2011.  The agreement defines forms of collaboration under the EurAsEc Anti -
Crisis Fund (ACF).  The ACF supports low-income countries on ODA terms and is 
managed by EDB.  The Framework Agreement includes parallel co-financing of investment 
projects, joint analytical work (to also include macroeconomic forecasting), and IBRD 
advisory services to EDB on the design and implementation of investment projects as forms 
of cooperation.  An Indicative Implementation Plan for the particular activities under the 
Framework Agreement for FY12 has been developed and signed by the IBRD and EDB. 

IBRD-Russia Trust Fund Framework Agreement is under preparation.  The preparation 
of such a framework agreement has been suggested by the Russian Ministry of Finance.  
Such an agreement would permit the reduction of the transaction cost of processing new 
programs and trust fund agreements.  

 Russia is implementing an innovative approach aimed at establishing programmatic trust 
funds focused on the ECA region.  Several Russia-supported programmatic multi-donor 
trust funds (MDTFs) are currently under preparation by various IBRD teams. The process is 
coordinated by the joint Russian MOF-IBRD Aid Coordination Working Group established 
in 2010 for overall coordination of new initiat ives and monitoring progress of joint 
programs towards development results.  The following programmatic trust funds have been 
recently established or are expected to be established soon: 

 Programmatic Public Financial Management (PFM) Trust Fund of US$18 
million to support research and analysis, training, institutional development and 
capacity building programs in ECA countries in strengthening their PFM systems has 
been established (approved by the Bank on October 7, 2010; Administration 
Agreement countersigned on December 17, 2010, US$6 million of the Russian 
contribution has been paid). 

 ECA Capacity Building Trust Fund (under preparation - estimated at US$23 
million) would provide grants for preparation of IDA, IBRD and ACF projects, with 
an objective to improve the quality and speed of project preparation in low income 
countries of ECA.  A peer-assisted learning network on development projects 
management will supplement the project preparation grants window.  

 ECA Statistical Capacity Development Fund (under preparation) would provide 
country grants for capacity development and restructuring of national statistical 

 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 10: The Russian Federation as a Donor 

        November 2011 
                               Page 6 of10 

systems, strengthening the use of statistics through improved data dissemination, 
addressing urgent issues such as preparation of a census or establishing a business 
register in a particular country, and training the staff of National Statistical Offices 
(NSOs) of the low income countries.  

 Eurasian Center for Food Security (ECFS) – in execution of the Russia 
Agricultural Development Aid Cooperation (ADAC) Initiative, 
the Russian 
Federation has committed to allocate US$28.5 million to provide: (i) US$15 million 
contribution to the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 
(CGIAR) MDTF; (ii) direct financing of US$6 million from the Russian federal 
budget to the Moscow State University for establishment at its base of the new 
Eurasian Center for Food Security (ECFS) for ECA countries; and (iii) RTA of 
US$7.5 million to be provided by the IBRD in support of the ECFS establishment 
(Contribution Agreement on CGIAR MDTF countersigned by the MOF on June 28, 
2011; US$4.5 million has been paid; RTA Agreement for US$6.48 million signed on 
June 17, 2011 and is under implementation).. 

 ECA Water Academy (under preparation) - allocation of US$20 million for trust 
fund to establish and operate the ECA Water Academy along with accompanying 
RTA from the IBRD is being considered.  It is expected that the Water Academy 
would be based in St. Petersburg and would offer mid-career officials and senior 
professionals from ECA countries the essential knowledge to successfully design, 
plan, implement, and efficiently manage sustainable water services in the ECA 
region. 

11. 
Russia’s Institutional Capacity as a Donor.  Strengthening the institutional framework for 
Russia‘s development aid is at the top of the Government‘s agenda.  Challenges include the lack of 
an aid agency for delivery of bilateral aid, the absence of a legal framework on development aid, the 
aid reporting system, monitoring and evaluation functions, and limited capacity within Russian 
Government counterparts.  In particular, the Russian Ministry of Finance confirmed the desire to start 
reporting on aid flows according to OECD-DAC methodology and has asked the WBG to support 
efforts to establish a bilateral aid agency. These milestones should be reached by the end of 2012. 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has requested the WBG to continue TA in the area of development 
aid communications.  In the medium term, Russia would be interested to establish a follow-up 
program of international TA for strengthening development aid capacity based on the initial results 
of the current DFID-supported Russia as a Donor Initiative program (closed at the end of March 
2011). 

12. 
Focus on Results from Russia’s IDA/IBRD-administered Trust Funds.  The Russian 
Government continues to maintain a strong focus on results achieved under the Russia -supported 
trust funds.  The Government has consistently communicated to IBRD the importance of reporting 
clear results and making all possible efforts to keep within the agreed timetables and deadlines.  
Documented progress under on-going trust funds will be regarded as a precondition for financing of 
related new and follow-up programs.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 10: The Russian Federation as a Donor  

         November 2011 
Page 7 of 10 

Table 5.  On-going Trust Funds of the Russian Federation 

# 

Type 
of TF 

Countries Participating in  TF Program 

Objectives 

1 

TF070783- FREE STANDING - COFINANCING/BOOSTER PROGRAM FOR MALARIA CONTROL 

 Single        Mozambique, Zambia 

To strengthen malaria control efforts in two Booster Program  
Countries:  Mozambique, Zambia 

 sub TF070783-WHO 
sub TF070783- Malaria Booster Program 
sub TF070783- Junior Professional Officers 
Program and Externally Funded Staffing Program 

 2 

 TF071223-ESME-ENERGY SME SUPPORT TO SUB SAHARAN AFRICA (SSA)  

 Single  Mali, Tanzania, Rwanda, Senegal, Kenya, 
Botswana 

To provide additional financing and technical assistance to Small 
and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in selected countries in Sub -
Saharan Africa to strengthen their capacity in providing energy 
services to poor communities 

3 

TF071069-FINANCIAL LITERACY AND EDUCATION (FLIT) 

Total 
Commitments 
according to AA 
(US$) 

Paid Russia's 
Contribution 
(US$) 

20,000,000 

4,000,000 
15,000,000 
1,000,000 

15,000,000  

30,000,000 

30,000,000 

 Single  Mexico, Colombia, Namibia, Zambia, 
Malawi, Uruguay, Papua New Guinea, 
Brazil, India, Uganda, South Africa 

To improve financial literacy of individuals and households in 
order to promote understanding of, and informed participation in, 
social insurance and social risk management schemes 

15,000,000 

14,000,000 

4 

TF071154-RUSSIA EDUCATION AID FOR DEVELOPMENT (READ) 

 Single  Angola, Armenia, Ethiopia, Mozambique, 
Zambia, Vietnam, Tajikistan, Kyrgyz 
Republic 

To support the improvement of education quality and student 
learning outcomes through the design, implementation, and use 
of robust student assessment systems  

32,000,000 

23,000,000 

5 

TF070893-PROVISION OF JUNIOR PROFESSIONAL OFFICERS FROM THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION 

 Single  

To bring young professionals from Russia into the Bank in 
accordance with the diversity objectives of the institution 

650,000 

254,085 

6 

TF070895-RUSSIA EXTERNALLY FUNDED STAFF PROGRAM 

 Single  

To achieve the Bank's diversity targets 

350,000 

0 

 
 
 
          
 
    
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 10: The Russian Federation as a Donor 

# 

Type 
of TF 

Countries Participating in  TF Program 

Objectives 

7 

TF071232-GLOBAL FOOD CRISIS RESPONSE PROGRAM 

 Single  Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan 

To reduce the negative impact of high food prices on the lives of 
the poor in a timely manner, support the Tajik and Kyrgyz 
governments in the design of sustainable policies that mitigate the 
adverse impacts of more volatile food prices on poverty, and 
support broad-based growth in productivity and market 
participation in agriculture to ensure an adequate supply response 
as part of a sustained improvement in food supply 

        November 2011 
            Page 8 of10 

Total 
Commitments 
according to AA 
(US$) 

Paid Russia's 
Contribution 
(US$) 

15,000,000 

15,000,000 

8 

TF051061-EDUCATION FOR ALL-FAST TRACK INITIATIVE (EFA-FTI CATALYTIC TF) 

 Multi-
donor  

To mobilize resources for low-income countries with sound 
education sector plans and domestic commitment to achieve the 
MDG for Primary Education  

10,000,000 

8,000,000 

9 

TF054402-EDUCATION PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT FUND (EPDF) 

 Multi-
donor  

5,200,000 

5,200,000 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

1.  To increase the number of low-income countries with sound 
and sustainable education sector plans, embedded in Poverty 
Reduction Strategies, which prioritize the achievement of the 
MDG for primary education with gender equity by 2015, 
focusing on countries that do not have their own capacity and 
lack donor support to develop and undertake a credible national 
education sector plan 
2.  To strengthen Government technical and institutional capacity 
in developing policies and national education plans capable of 
providing and sustaining complete primary education for all 
children of acceptable quality 
3.  To improve understanding of the conditions under which 
certain policies and reforms may be successful through better 
monitoring and evaluation knowledge sharing across countr ies 
4.  To strengthen donor partnerships at the country level around 
the Government's plan  

10 

TF069001-GLOBAL FUND TO FIGHT AIDS, TUBERCULOSIS AND MALARIA (GFTAM) 

 Multi-
donor  

To increase resources to fight three of the world's most 
devastating diseases and to direct resources to areas of greatest 
need 

257,000,000 

257,000,000 

  
         
 
         
 
                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 10: The Russian Federation as a Donor 

# 

Type 
of TF 

Countries Participating in  TF Program 

Objectives 

11 

TF070515-AVIAN AND HUMAN INFLUENZA FACILITY (AHIF) 

 Multi-
donor  

To minimize the risk and socio-economic impact of avian 
influenza (and other zoonoses) and of a possible human pandemic 
influenza in developing countries lacking adequate domestic 
resources and capacity to combat the disease  

12 

TF07071-COMMERCIAL DEBT REDUCTION FACILITY 

 Multi-
donor  

13 

TF050576-AFGHANISTAN RECONSTRUCTION 

 Multi-
donor  

Afghanistan 

14 

TF07137-RAPID SOCIAL RESPONSE 

Multi-
donor 

To finance the reconstruction priorities of Afghanistan. Of US$ 4 
million, US$2 million are preferenced for the Strengthening 
Higher Education Program (SHEP), and the Kabul Polytechnic 
University in particular 

To safeguard lives and livelihoods during and after the global 
crises by promoting social protection measures such as social 
safety nets and maintenance of access to basic health, nutrition, 
education and other vital services for communities, especially  
poor and vulnerable groups 

        November 2011 
            Page 9 of10 

Total 
Commitments 
according to AA 
(US$) 

Paid Russia's 
Contribution 
(US$) 

3,000,000 

3,000,000 

5,000,000 

5,000,000 

4,000,000 

4,000,000 

50,000,000 

49,999,987 

15 

TF071093-SOUTH-SOUTH EXPERIENCE EXCHANGE FACILITY 

Multi-
donor 

To meet the immediate practical operational knowledge gaps by 
catalyzing the sharing of developing country experiences between 
practitioners; document and disseminate lessons learned through 
an experiences exchange library 

1,500,000 

700,000 

16 

TF071577-PFM-ECA REGIONAL PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT 

Multi-
donor 

Europe and Central Asia (ECA) 

To support improvements in public financial management in 
Europe and Central Asia (ECA), with emphasis on IDA borrowing 
countries, as an important element of stronger governance and 
improved conditions for economic and social development in ECA 

18,000,000 

6,000,000 

  
         
 
         
 
                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 10: The Russian Federation as a Donor 

# 

Type 
of TF 

Countries Participating in  TF Program 

Objectives 

17 

TF070664-PUBLIC EXPENDITURE MANAGEMENT AND PEER-ASSISTED LEARNING (PEMPAL) 

Multi-
donor 

Europe and Central Asia (ECA) 

To facilitate regional exchange of knowledge and experience 
among the countries of the ECA region on public expenditure 
management (PEM) based on the principles of peer assisted 
learning, and using benchmarking as a tool to stimulate capacity 
building and the development of network of peers, with a 
particular focus on IDA countries 

        November 2011 
            Page 10 of10 

Total 
Commitments 
according to AA 
(US$) 

Paid Russia's 
Contribution 
(US$) 

2,000,000 

2,000,000 

18 

TF069018-CONSULTATIVE GROUP ON INTERNATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH (CGIAR) 

Multi-
donor 

To support agricultural research, increase production of healthy 
food 

15,000,000 

4,500,000 

TOTAL 

433,700,000 

397,654,072 

  
         
 
         
 
                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011 

Page 1 of 4 

Annex 11 

IBRD Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA26) 

1. 
Russia as a high-end middle-income country has demonstrated sustained high demand for 
knowledge services over the past decade.  As institutions and country systems have strengthened, 
supported by a favorable fiscal environment before the global financial crisis of 2008 -2009, the 
emphasis on IBRD knowledge activities has expanded from transferring knowledge through specific 
investment lending also to knowledge provision through TA loans and analytical and advisory 
services.  Both projects approved in December 2010 (Financial Education and Financial Literacy 
Project and Preservation and Promotion of Cultural Heritage in Russia Project ) demonstrate that in 
the post-crisis period knowledge and capacity building remain essential components of investment 
lending.  In addition, the Russian Government has expressed interest in the Bank‘s instruments and 
policies at the implementation stage, i.e., the knowledge of how things can be done and not only the 
knowledge about what has to be done.   

2. 
RTAs are provided in the areas of the Government‘s strategic priorities, and the provision of 
this type of technical assistance has been fully in line with the previous Country Partnership Strategy 
(CPS) and now substantiates three out of four strategic themes of this CPS: (i) Increasing Growth and 
Diversification, (ii) Expanding Human Potential, and (iii) Deepening Russia‘s Global and Regional 
Role27.  

3. 
RTAs are governed by the same standards as the rest of the WBG‘s program including for 
monitoring and evaluation. During the FY07-11 CPS period, IBRD signed and completed around 40 
contracts valued at approximately US$20 million28.  The current RTA pipeline over the next CPS 
period for 2012-2016 includes around 20 pre-identified activities, and the program has easily the 
potential to achieve over US$30 million (see Table 6).  Increased contract amounts and number of 
RTAs will require the WBG to execute even higher levels of quality control and monitoring.  The 
WBG needs to take more systemic steps to introduce the RTA M&E systems.  To avoid any 
distortions in competition, knowledge transfer through RTAs is provided only if the requested 
product is not available in the market. 

4. 
In Russia, as in other MICs, an area of demand for RTAs is support for preparing and 
implementing 
large-scale 
infrastructure projects, especially 
those based on private -public 
partnerships (PPPs).  St. Petersburg Pulkovo airport expansion is a good example of WBG advisory 
services in developing PPP.  Pulkovo attracted more than Euro 1.2 billion of private investments and 
was awarded the title of "Global PPP deal of the Year" by Infrastructure Investors in 2011.  As 
international experience and analytical components are often the critical success factors in the human 
development and social assistance sectors, demand from clients has led to widespread use of RTAs in 
these sectors also.  The amount of RTAs provided in human development has increased four times to 
almost US$3 million in FY11 mostly for health care and education system development.  Finally, 
starting from 2009-2010 RTAs are also provided for investment climate monitoring and capacity 
building for ODA management.  The number and volume, and the sectoral distribution of RTAs , are 
presented in Figures 20 and 21.  

26 Reimbursable TA (RTA) is also being referred to as fee-for-service (FFS) or fee-based services (FBS).  
27 FY12-16 CPS has an additional cross-cutting strategic theme ―Improving Governance‖.  
28 Pricing of RTAs is based on individual evaluation of each request.  All RTAs are provided on the principle of full -
cost recovery.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 11: IBRD Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA) 

November 2011 
                                Page 2 of 4 

Figure 20. Volume of RTAs by Sectors, FY07-FY11 

$3,000,000.00 

$2,500,000.00 

$2,000,000.00 

$1,500,000.00 

$1,000,000.00 

$500,000.00 

$0.00 

Human Development 

Private Sector and Finance 

Sustainable Development 

Public Sector Management 

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

Figure 21.  Total Number and Volume of RTAs, FY07-FY14 

$14,000,000 

$12,000,000 

$10,000,000 

$8,000,000 

$6,000,000 

$4,000,000 

$2,000,000 

$0 

16 

16 

$11,802,185 

20 

22 

$6,531,408 

$9,365,1

13 

15 

$3,753,176 $5,270,777 

$5,462,745 

$6,507,54

$4,000,000 

$2,736,900 $2,639,141 $2,385,127 

$587,278 

1 

$3,902,446 

6 

$2,507,547 

FY07 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

FY11 

FY12 

FY13 

FY14 

25 

20 

15 

10 

5 

0 

Revenue Earned by FY 
Planned (Pipeline) RTA projects 
Number of Projects per FY (concluded and signed) 

s

t

c
e

j

o

r

P

f

o

r

e

b

m

u

N

5. 

IBRD‘s collaboration with Russia in RTA now includes four dimensions:  

 Global level: RTAs help strengthen Russia‘s capacity to participate in the provision of Global 
Public Goods. In a ―learning by doing approach‖, Russian officials benefit from IBRD 
knowledge in handling funds channeled to developing countries.  One example of such 
cooperation is an RTA linked to the ―Russia Education Aid for Development (READ)‖ 
program dedicated to global student assessment.  The program includes seven developing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 11: IBRD Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA) 

November 2011 
                                Page 3 of 4 

countries (Angola, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Zambia, Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, and 
Vietnam) supported by a Russian financed TF of US$32 million for a period of five years 
flanked by an RTA agreement of US$3 million. 

 Regional level: Russia‘s regional role is especially important in relation to its role as a donor 
in CIS countries. Potentially, RTAs are being provided in various sectors to strengthen the 
capacity of Russian and regional institutions to help in neighboring countries, including 
improvement of Public Financial Management and capacity strengthening for the Eurasian 
Development Bank.  

 Federal level: The demand for RTAs from the Federal Government is expanding, especially 
in the critical areas of the development agenda.  A recent RTA example is the ongoing 
cooperation on investment climate assessment and on health insurance reform.  Looking 
forward, the Federal Government is interested in tapping into IBRD‘s skills and expertise in 
project preparation, design, implementation and monitoring.  To this end, a concept of a new 
instrument is currently being considered by the Ministry of Finance and IBRD.  The so-called 
―Virtual Project Loan‖ would provide project support assistance for fully government-
financed projects on a reimbursable basis.  

 Sub-national level:  The largest amount of RTAs in Russia has so far been provided at the 
sub-national level in the regions.  IBRD responded to demand from both richer and poorer 
regions, although unfavorable fiscal conditions in poorer regions made waivers from the 
principle of full cost recovery necessary in some areas.  The lack of client funds often limited 
options for IBRD engagement in regions where access to knowledge and expertise is critical 
for launching crucial development programs. 

6. 
One of the challenges identified by the WBG while setting up the framework of RTAs in the 
Russian Federation is to elaborate a mechanism that would allow less economically advanced regions 
to access the RTA instrument in order to profit from best practice and knowledge transfer.  One of 
the possible solutions is the creation of a ―seed‖ fund established by the Federal Government and the 
IBRD to support analytical work and technical assistance in these regions. 

Table 6. CPS 2012-2016 Signed Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA) Agreements 

Project 

Name 

Region 

Delivery 

Description 

Strategic Theme 1: Increasing Growth and Diversification 

P126923 City Transport Strategy for St. 
Petersburg (Part 3) 

St. 
Petersburg 

2012 

# 

1 

2 

P119527 

St. Petersburg Infrastructure 
Development Program  

St. 
Petersburg 

3 

P125395 

Sub-national Doing Business 
Review 

30 regions 
of the RF 

2012 

2012 

4 

P126648 

Investment Climate 

Federal 

2012 

Provision of technical assistance to the St 
Petersburg Transport Planning Center in the 
process of refining the Draft Transport Strategy 
by reviewing, editing and providing possible 
inputs and arguments before it is sent for 
approval by the City Government. 
Advisory Services to St. Petersburg Government 
on financing of the Western High-Speed 
Diameter highway 
A second round of WBG Doing Business 
assessments of 30 regions of the RF, measuring 
the ease of doing business through the life cycle 
of a small or medium enterprise (business 
entry/registration, business operation and 
business closure). 
Provision of advisory support to improve the 
business environment in key areas such as 
construction permits and trading across borders 
as well as recommendations on how to improve 

 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex 11: IBRD Reimbursable Technical Assistance (RTA) 

November 2011 
                                Page 4 of 4 

# 

Project 

Name 

Region 

Delivery 

Description 

Strategic Theme 2: Expanding Human Potential 

other investment climate areas captured by the 
Global Doing Business report.  

5 

P125406 Higher School of Economics 
(HSE) II 

Moscow 

2014 

6 

P123357 

E-education Program  

Kazan 

2013 

7 

P126650 

Stavropol Krai Local Initiatives 
Support Project (LISP) 

Stavropol 

2012 

8 

P125083 Yakutia ECD Development 

2012 

Republic 
Sakha 
(Yakutia) 

9 

P125969 

Technical Vocational Education 
and Training Program 

Krasno-
yarsk 

2013 

10 

P126797 RANEPA 

Federal 

2014 

11 

P126548 Kirov Local Initiatives Support 
Project (LISP)  

Kirov 

2012 

Support of the HSE in Strategic Development 
Plan implementation by providing independent 
evaluation and advisory services. 
Supporting the client in improving the quality of 
teaching and learning in Tatarstan through 
introduction of modern educational technologies 
enhanced by ICT. 
Support to the local initiatives in small 
settlements by providing training to the 
representatives and municipal administrations on 
relevant topics 
Provision of technical assistance in improving 
the quality of and access to early childhood 
services for children and families, and in 
preparing a concept for the region's ECD system 
development, including the development of ECD 
infrastructure. 
Advisory Services to assist in preparation of a 
concept for long-term development of the 
professional education system in the regions, 
producing a comprehensive program for 
professional education development for 
Krasnoyarsk Krai, and monitoring professional 
education development.  
Advisory Services for the Federal State 
Government-Financed Educational Institution of 
Higher Education "Russian Presidential 
Academy of National Economy and Public 
Administration" (RANEPA) to assist RANEPA 
in building the necessary foundation for 
becoming a nationally and internationally 
recognized modern institution that leads 
education, training, research and policy 
development in the areas of public policy, public 
and business administration in the Russian 
Federation, as well as in building its institutional 
capacity for long-term development.  
Support to the local initiatives in small 
settlements by providing training to the 
representatives and municipal administrations on 
relevant topics 

Strategic Theme 3: Deepening Russia’s Global and Regional Role 

12 

13 

P115468 Russia Education Aid for 
Development (READ) Program 
Eurasian Center for Food 
Security (ECFS) 

P127300 

Moscow/
Global 
Moscow/
Regional 

2013 

2015 

Assistance to selected countries to strengthen the 
system of educational quality evaluation 
Supporting the improvement of food security in 
the Eurasian region and globally, at enhancing 
environmental sustainability of agricultural 
production also and in particular in response to 
climate change, and at building the capacity of 
the Russian Federation to provide agricultural 
advisory services in international initiatives 

 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  

November 2011   
   Page 1 of 1 

Annex 12 

IBRD Country Financing Parameters for the Russian Federation 

Date: April 2005 

The country financing parameters for Russia set out below have been approved by the Regional Vice 
President, Europe and Central Asia, and are being posted on the Bank‘s internal website. 

Explanations/Remarks 

The Government is generally seeking to increase 
its financing share of projects. The greater 
flexibility would allow cost sharing arrangements 
to be appropriately adapted to project 
circumstances, e.g. higher Bank financing share on 
projects in Russia‘s poorest regions, social sector 
projects and lower Bank financing share on 
projects executed by revenue generating entities. 

The Bank would selectively finance recurrent 
costs, only when (i) there is clear evidence of the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the government 
institution that would receive the funding; and (ii) 
financial support for the government agency will 
assist in the implementation of reform. 
Additionally, recurrent cost financing would be 
provided only if there is a clear demonstration of 
the sustainability of the activities in question. 

The two criteria are met. Therefore Bank may 
finance local costs in the proportion required in 
individual projects. 

Item 

Cost Sharing. Limit on the proportion 
of individual project costs that the 
Bank may finance 

Parameter 
100 percent 

No country 
level 
limit 
on recurrent 
cost 
financing 

Yes 

Recurrent cost financing. Any limits 
that would apply to the overall amount 
of recurrent expenditures that the Bank 
may finance. No country level limit on 
recurrent cost financing 

Local cost financing. Are the 
requirements for the Bank financing of 
local expenditures met, namely that: (i) 
financing requirements for the 
country‘s development program would 
exceed the public sector‘s own 
resources (e.g., from taxation and other 
revenues) and expected domestic 
borrowing; and (ii) the financing of 
foreign expenditures alone would not 
enable the bank to assist in the 
financing of individual projects 

Taxes and duties. Are there any taxes 
and duties that the Bank would not 
finance? 

None 

There are no taxes and duties that have been 
identified as unreasonable or discriminatory. At 
the project-level, the Bank would consider whether 
taxes and duties constitute an excessively high 
share of project costs. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex A2 

November 2011   
   Page 1 of 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex A2 

November 2011   
   Page 2 of 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex A2 

November 2011   
   Page 3 of 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B2 

                    November 2011 
       Page 1 of 1   

Russian Federation 
Selected Indicators* of IBRD Portfolio Performance and Management 

As of August 15, 2011 

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment 
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management 
CPPR during the year (yes/no) f 
Supervision Resources (total US$000) 
Average Supervision (US$000/project) 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

14 

6.5 

35.7 

23.9 

35.7 

23.9 

15.4 

yes 
2,123 
118 

12 

7.1 

16.7 

8.8 

16.7 

8.8 

15.1 

yes 
1,755 
125 

10 

5.0 

30.0 

11.1 

30.0 

11.1 

23.1 

yes 
1,549 
111 

10 

5.3 

30.0 

11.1 

30.0 

11.1 

5.2 

yes 
1,400 
110 

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY80 
55 
9,096.42 
35.8 
53.6 

Last Five FYs 
9 
562.4 
11.1 
7.0 

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). 
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio. 
c.  Percent of projects rated Unsatisfactory (U) or highly unsatisfactory (HU) on development objectives (DO) or 
implementation progress (IP). 
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program. 
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the  beginning of the 
year: Investment projects only. 
f.  The project portfolio is reviewed on a monthly basis and periodically discussed with counterparts. 

*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, 
    which includes all active projects as well as projects that exited during the fiscal year. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B3 - IBRD  

                               November 2011 
                           Page 1 of 2 

Russian Federation 
IBRD Indicative Financing Program, 2012-2016* 

Strategic 
Themes 

Project Title 

2012-2013 Projects 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

ST1/ST3 

Forest Fire Response Project 

ST1 

Microfinance Development Project 

ST1/ST3 

Energy Efficiency Financial Intermediary 
Project 

ST1 

ST2 

ST1 

VEB Infrastructure Financial Intermediary 
Project 

North Caucasus South Okrug Local Initiatives 
Support Project 

Financial Sector Development 

ST1/ST3/ST4 

Fiscal and Public Finance Modernization 
Project 

ST2 

ST2 

Preschool Education Project for Yakutia 

Social Inclusion Through Sport 

ST1/ST3 

Hydromet Modernization Project 2 

ST1/ST3 

Environmental Monitoring Project 

2014-2016 Projects 

Indicative 
Amount 
(US$M) 

Strategic 
Rewards 
(H/M/L)** 

Implemen-
tation 
risks 
(H/M/L)** 

40 

21 

300 

500 

20 

40 

27 

118 

70 

70 

70  

H 

H 

H 

H 

M 

H 

M 

H 

H 

M 

H 

H 

M 

M 

H 

H 

M 

M 

H 

M 

L 

M 

The lending program for the outer years of the CPS will be determined jointly with the Government 
and will be presented for Board discussion in the CPS Progress Report.  It is expected that the program 
will 
include operations 
in 
infrastructure, human development, regional development, and 
environmental management, as well as possible follow-on operations in land registration and customs 
management. 

Notes: 
* Lending volumes will depend on the country‘s performance and priorities, IBRD lending capacity, demand from other borrowers, 
and global economic developments. 
** H - high, M – moderate, L - low  

ST1 - Strategic Theme 1: Increasing Growth and Diversification 
ST2 - Strategic Theme 2: Expanding Human Potential 
ST3 - Strategic Theme 3: Deepening Russia‘s Global and Regional Role 
ST4 - Strategic Theme 4 (cross-cutting): Improving Governance and Transparency  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B3 - IFC  

                         November 2011 
          Page 2 of 2 

Russian Federation 
IFC Investment Operations Program 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012* 

2013* 

2014-16* 

Original Commitments (US$m) 

IFC and Participants 

1,082.54 1,041.35 1,223.98 

1,200.00 

1,200.00 

1,200.00 

IFC's Own Accounts only 

537.54 

784.58 

839.10 

760-960 

760-960 

760-960 

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only 

  AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY 

5.58 

2.98 

8.00 

9.00 

10.00 

  CHEMICALS 
COLLECTIVE INVESTMENT 
VEHICLES 

13.20 

18.60 

  CONSTRUCTION AND REAL ESTATE 

7.44 

4.26 

2.00 

2.00 

2.00 

  FINANCE & INSURANCE 

40.46 

46.60 

78.81 

55.00 

50.00 

46.00 

  HEALTHCARE SERVICES 

2.00 

2.75 

3.50 

INFORMATION 

0.00 

3.00 

4.00 

4.00 

  OIL, GAS AND MINING 
OTHER (FOR NON-INVESTMENT 
PROJECTS) 

6.37 

2.00 

2.92 

0.63 

  PRIMARY METALS 
PROFESSIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND 
TECHNICAL SERVICES 
TRANSPORTATION AND 
WAREHOUSING 

8.92 

3.72 

0.32 

3.00 

3.25 

2.50 

2.50 

26.61 

11.62 

12.00 

14.00 

16.00 

  UTILITIES 

2.19 

5.00 

5.00 

6.00 

  Total 

100.00 

100.00 

100.00 

100.00 

100.00 

100.00 

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only 

  Equity 

36.06 

3.89 

22.85 

25.00 

26.00 

27.00 

  Guarantee 

18.10 

32.20 

47.88 

35.00 

30.00 

25.00 

  Loan 

44.91 

50.61 

20.33 

30.00 

32.00 

34.00 

  Quasi loan 

0.93 

12.41 

8.94 

10.00 

12.00 

14.00 

  Risk product 

0.89 

  Total 

100.00 

100.00 

100.00 

100.00 

100.00 

100.00 

*Projected totals for Fiscal Years 2012-2016.  The projections for Fiscal Years 2014-16 are on an annual basis. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B4 

                         November 2011 
          Page 1 of 2 

Russian Federation 
IBRD/IFC Indicative Knowledge Services Program, 2012-2013* 

Project Title 

2012 

2013 

Strategic Theme 1: Increasing Growth and Diversification 

Area of Engagement 1.1: Effective Management of Public Finances 
ESW Russian Economic Reports 
TA Public Expenditure Performance Review  
RTA E-Budget Systems  

Area of Engagement 1.2.: Investment Climate/Innovation 
ESW Policy notes on growth, jobs and productivity 
TA Investment Climate/Doing Business 
TA Economic Diversification 
TA Diversification and Innovation 
RTA Sub-national Doing Business 
RTA Investment Climate 
RTA Tatarstan Innovation Support 
RTA Tomsk Innovation Strategy 
RTA Regional Innovation Action Plan 
Area of Engagement 1.3: Financial Sector Development 
TA Financial Sector Development 
RTA Development of Moscow as International Financial Center  
IFC: Russia Financial Markets Crisis Management Project 

Area of Engagement 1.4: Sustainable Development and Effective Protection of the 
Environment 
ESW Urban Transport Sector Overview 
ESW Environmental Performance Overview 
TA Intelligent Transport System for St. Petersburg 
RTA St. Petersburg Urban Transport 
RTA Improving Public Transport (in cooperation with the Ministry of Transport) 
RTA Strengthening the Institutional and Management Capacity of Avtodor 
RTA Improvement of Urban Transport in Russia 
RTA Support to Institutional Strengthening and PPP Project Preparation 
IFC: Russia Sustainable Energy Finance Program 
IFC: Russia Residential Energy Efficiency Program 
IFC: Russia Renewable Energy 
IFC: Russia Cleaner Production 

Strategic Theme 2: Expanding Human Potential  

Area of Engagement 2.1: Education, Health, and Social Protection 
TA Health Financing 
TA Regional Human Development 
ESW Health Provider Survey 
RTA E-Education Project 
RTA Russian Academy of National Economy and Public Administration Program 
(RANEPA) 
RTA Krasnoyarsk Technical Vocational Education and Training Program 
RTA READ 
RTA Higher School of Economics II 
RTA READ II 

x 
x 
x 

x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 

x 

x 

x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 

x 
x 
x 
x 

x 
x 
x 
x 
x 

x 
x 
x 

x 
x 
x 

x 

x  

x 

x 
x 

x 
x 

x 
x 
x 
x 

x 
x 

x 
x 
x 
x 

x 
x 
x 
x 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B4 

                         November 2011 
          Page 2 of 2 

Project Title 

2012 

2013 

RTA Yakutia Early Childhood Development Program 
RTA Provider Payment Reforms in Regions 
RTA Primary Health Care Provider Payment Reform in Kirov Region 
RTA Tatarstan Social Protection 
RTA Local Initiatives Support in Kirov 
RTA Local Initiatives Support in Stavropol 

Area of Engagement 2.2: Skills for Economic Development 
ESW Professional Education and Skills 
ESW Poverty, Opportunity and Social Mobility 

Area of Engagement 2.3: Socially Inclusive Development 
Support for Migration and Remittances Peer-Assisted Learning (MIRPAL) Network 
Initiative 
RTA Cultural Heritage and Cultural Tourism Development in Tatarstan 

Strategic Theme 3: Deepening Russia’s Global and Regional Role 

Area of Engagement 3.1: Global Public Goods 
TA Support to Strategy 2020 
TA Support to Russia 2012 APEC Presidency 
TA WTO Monitoring and Analysis and Trade in Services 
RTA Eurasian Center for Food Security 
RTA International Water Academy 

Area of Engagement 3.2: Russia as a Donor 
TA Development Aid Program 

Strategic Theme 4 (cross-cutting): Improving Governance and Transparency 

Area of Engagement 4.1: Public Administration, Procurement, and Financial 
Management 
TA Program Budgeting and Expenditure Efficiency 
TA Procurement System Development 

x 
x 
x 

x 
x 

x 
x 

x 

x 

x 
x 
x 
x 

x 

x 
x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 
x 
x 

x 

x 
x 

* The knowledge services program for the outer years of the CPS will be determined in the CPS Progress Report.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B5 

     November 2011 
         Page 1 of 2 

Russian Federation Social Indicators 

Latest single year 

Same region/income group 

1980-85 

1990-95 

2003-09 

Europe & 
Central 
Asia 

Upper- 
middle- 
income 

POPULATION   
Total population, mid-year (millions) 
    Growth rate (% annual average for period) 
Urban population (% of population) 
Total fertility rate (births per woman) 

143.9 
0.7 
72.0 
2.1 

POVERTY 
(% of population) 
National headcount index 
    Urban headcount index 
    Rural headcount index 

INCOME 
GNI per capita (US$) 
Consumer price index (2000=100) 
Food price index (2000=100) 

INCOME/CONSUMPTION 
DISTRIBUTION 
Gini index 
Lowest quintile (% of income or 
consumption)* 
Highest quintile (% of income or 
consumption)* 

SOCIAL INDICATORS 

Public expenditure 

    Health (% of GDP) 
    Education (% of GDP) 

Net primary school enrollment rate 
(% of age group) 
    Total 
        Male 
        Female 

Access to an improved water source 
(% of population) 
    Total 
        Urban 
        Rural 

Immunization rate 
(% of children ages 12-23 months) 
    Measles 
    DPT 
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

148.1 
0.0 
73.4 
1.3 

24.8 
.. 
.. 

2,650 
10 
22 

48.3 

6.1 

46.3 

141.9 
-0.3 
72.8 
1.6 

13.2 
.. 
.. 

9,260 
152 
151 

42.3 

5.1 

47.8 

3.9 
.. 

3.5 
3.9 

92 
92 
92 

94 
98 
83 

85 
78 
.. 

.. 
.. 
.. 

96 
98 
89 

98 
98 
.. 

404.2 
0.2 
64.0 
1.8 

.. 
.. 
.. 

6,793 
141 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

3.9 
4.1 

92 
93 
92 

95 
98 
89 

96 
95 
.. 

1,001.7 
0.9 
74.9 
2.0 

.. 
.. 
.. 

7,502 
127 
.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

3.8 
4.3 

93 
93 
92 

95 
98 
86 

93 
93 
.. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B5 

     November 2011 
         Page 2 of 2 

Latest single year 

Same region/income group 

1980-85 

1990-95 

2003-09 

Europe & 
Central 
Asia 

Upper- 
middle- 
income 

68 
63 
73 

25 
30 

332 
127 

.. 
.. 

65 
58 
73 

23 
27 

466 
169 

72 
.. 

69 
63 
75 

11 
12 

396 
147 

39 
100 

70 
66 
75 

19 
21 

286 
123 

32 
97 

72 
69 
75 

19 
22 

201 
122 

82 
96 

Life expectancy at birth 
(years) 
    Total 
        Male 
        Female 

Mortality 
    Infant (per 1,000 live births) 
    Under 5 (per 1,000) 
    Adult (15-59) 
        Male (per 1,000 population) 
        Female (per 1,000 population) 
    Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live 
births) 
Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to 
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12 -23 months who received vaccinations before one 
year of age or at any time before the survey. 

World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 15 April 2011. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B6 

                     November 2011 
Page 1 of 2 

Russian Federation – Key Economic Indicators 

                                        Actual 

                                          Estimate 

Projected 

Indicator 

2005 

2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015 

2016 

National accounts (as % of GDP) 
Gross domestic producta 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

   Agriculture 

5 

5 

4 

4 

5 

4 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

   Industry 

38 

37 

36 

36 

34 

37 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

   Services 

57 

58 

59 

59 

62 

59 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

Total Consumption 

66 

66 

67 

65 

73 

69 

67 

69 

71 

72 

73 

73 

Gross domestic fixed investment 

18 

19 

21 

22 

22 

22 

24 

25 

25 

25 

26 

26 

   Government investment 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

   Private investment 
Exports (GNFS)b 

15 

16 

18 

19 

19 

19 

19 

20 

20 

20 

21 

21 

35 

34 

30 

31 

28 

30 

31 

27 

26 

25 

25 

25 

Gross domestic savings 
Gross national savingsc 

34 

34 

33 

35 

27 

31 

33 

31 

29 

28 

27 

27 

31 

31 

30 

32 

23 

28 

30 

28 

27 

26 

25 

25 

Memorandum items 

Gross domestic product  

764,016 

989,932 

1,299,703 

1,660,848 

1,221,989 

1,479,823 

1,756,479 

1,929,702 

2,072,937 

2,162,654 

2,256,253 

2,353,904 

(US$ million at current prices) 

GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method) 

4,460 

5,820 

7,590 

9,710 

9,260 

9,960 

10,610 

12,480 

14,060 

14,950 

15,690 

16,410 

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 00 prices) 

   Gross domestic product at market prices 

6.4 

8.2 

8.5 

5.2 

-7.8 

4.0 

4.0 

3.8 

3.5 

3.5 

3.5 

3.5 

   Gross Domestic Income 

15.2 

14.8 

10.3 

13.6 

-24.1 

15.0 

12.0 

2.2 

2.3 

2.5 

2.6 

2.6 

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 2000 prices) 

   Gross domestic product at market prices 

6.9 

8.6 

8.8 

5.4 

-7.7 

4.1 

4.2 

3.9 

3.7 

3.7 

3.7 

3.7 

   Total consumption 

11.6 

14.1 

17.2 

13.1 

-14.0 

8.7 

14.1 

10.7 

8.3 

5.6 

5.4 

5.4 

Balance of Payments (US$ millions) 
  Exports (GNFS)b 

268,768 

334,652 

393,658 

522,781 

344,982 

444,762 

540,815 

524,821 

534,109 

547,891 

564,246 

581,654 

      Merchandise FOB 
   Imports (GNFS)b 

243,798 

303,550 

354,401 

471,603 

303,388 

400,419 

491,973 

476,124 

483,299 

494,785 

508,740 

523,638 

164,299 

209,120 

281,631 

367,329 

253,232 

322,278 

401,425 

438,003 

484,862 

520,465 

558,681 

599,704 

      Merchandise FOB 

125,434 

164,281 

223,486 

291,861 

191,803 

248,738 

308,569 

336,686 

372,705 

400,072 

429,448 

460,982 

  Resource balance 

104,469 

125,532 

112,027 

155,452 

91,750 

122,484 

139,389 

86,817 

49,246 

27,426 

5,565 

-18,050 

  Net current transfers 

-1,038 

-1,538 

-3,506 

-2,765 

-2,421 

-3,186 

3,223 

3,416 

3,624 

3,733 

3,895 

4,063 

  Current account balance 

84,482 

94,562 

77,769 

117,886 

49,790 

70,599 

89,856 

45,165 

16,224 

-929 

-22,192 

-45,669 

  Net private foreign direct investment 

118 

6,550 

9,158 

19,409 

-7,165 

-9,607 

-7,026 

-7,719 

-8,292 

-6,488 

-4,513 

0 

  Long-term loans (net) 

10,541 

-30,454 

80,670 

-16,630 

43,310 

12,846 

10,818 

7,556 

16,547 

13,740 

11,494 

9,697 

    Official 

-20,089 

-25,474 

-2,968 

-1,302 

-1,183 

-1,091 

-1,650 

-560 

-150 

-390 

-220 

-170 

    Private 

30,630 

-4,980 

83,638 

-15,328 

44,494 

13,938 

12,468 

8,116 

16,697 

14,130 

11,714 

9,867 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B6 

                     November 2011 
Page 2 of 2 

                                        Actual 

                                          Estimate 

Projected 

Indicator 

2005 

2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015 

2016 

  Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions) 
  Change in reservesd 

-33,935 

50,834 

7,433 

-173,146 

-72,766 

-33,909 

-63,400 

-33,401 

-21,329 

-4,077 

17,239 

33,660 

-61,206 

-121,492 

-175,030 

52,481 

-13,169 

-39,929 

-30,248 

-11,602 

-3,150 

-2,246 

-2,028 

2,312 

Memorandum items 

Resource balance (% of GDP) 

13.7 

12.7 

8.6 

9.4 

7.5 

8.3 

7.9 

4.5 

2.4 

1.3 

0.2 

-0.8 

Real annual growth rates ( 2000 prices) 

  Merchandise exports (FOB) 

0.5 

1.4 

1.6 

-2.2 

-1.1 

2.8 

3.5 

2.3 

3.3 

3.9 

4.3 

4.3 

    Primary 

-0.3 

1.3 

1.7 

-0.7 

-1.8 

2.1 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

    Manufactures 

12.1 

1.9 

-0.1 

-22.5 

11.5 

13.4 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

  Merchandise imports (CIF) 

29.0 

28.9 

29.9 

21.3 

-31.2 

29.8 

20.4 

12.7 

10.3 

6.8 

6.8 

6.8 

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e 

  Current revenues 

39.6 

39.2 

39.9 

38.5 

34.4 

35.4 

37.5 

36.3 

36.3 

36.2 

36.2 

36.1 

  Current expenditures 

29.0 

28.4 

31.0 

30.6 

37.6 

36.4 

33.5 

33.3 

33.1 

33.1 

33.2 

33.0 

  Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 

10.6 

10.7 

8.9 

7.8 

-3.3 

-1.0 

4.0 

3.1 

3.2 

3.1 

3.0 

3.1 

  Capital expenditure 

2.6 

2.7 

3.2 

3.2 

3.2 

2.8 

4.5 

5.0 

5.0 

5.0 

5.0 

5.0 

  Foreign financing 

-3.6 

-2.7 

-0.5 

-0.3 

-0.2 

0.2 

0.3 

0.1 

0.1 

0.1 

0.1 

0.1 

Monetary indicators 

  M2/GDP 

33.4 

37.6 

42.8 

39.4 

49.2 

52.9 

57.3 

63.8 

70.3 

76.8 

83.3 

89.8 

  Growth of M2 (%) 

36.4 

40.4 

40.6 

14.3 

17.3 

24.6 

27.1 

24.8 

22.0 

18.7 

17.9 

17.2 

  Private sector credit growth / 

1,131.1 

210.1 

196.3 

215.9 

13.0 

53.8 

101.3 

100.0 

110.4 

110.8 

110.4 

109.9 

  total credit growth (%) 

Price indices (2000 =100) 

  Merchandise export price index 

185.3 

227.5 

261.6 

356.1 

231.6 

297.3 

352.9 

333.9 

328.2 

323.4 

318.9 

314.8 

  Merchandise import price index 

110.1 

111.9 

117.2 

125.0 

119.8 

120.6 

126.5 

122.5 

122.9 

123.5 

124.1 

124.7 

  Merchandise terms of trade index 
  Real exchange rate (US$/LCU) f 

168.2 

203.4 

223.3 

284.9 

193.4 

246.6 

279.0 

272.7 

267.2 

261.9 

257.0 

252.4 

149.3 

163.4 

172.7 

184.5 

171.6 

187.6 

214.1 

224.9 

231.7 

228.9 

226.0 

223.2 

  Consumer price index  (% change) 

12.7 

9.8 

9.1 

14.1 

11.8 

6.9 

7.5 

6.5 

5.0 

5.0 

4.5 

4.5 

  GDP deflator (% change) 
a.   GDP at factor cost 
b.  "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services." 
c.  Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants. 
d.  Includes use of IMF resources. 
e.   General government. 
f.  "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation. 
Note:  Component percentages may not add up to 100 due to rounding 

19.3 

15.2 

13.8 

18.0 

1.9 

11.4 

13.0 

8.0 

7.0 

5.0 

5.0 

5.0 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B7 

                     November 2011 
Page 1 of 1 

Russian Federation - Key Exposure Indicators 

Actual      

Estimated 

Projected 

Indicator 

2005 

2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015 

2016 

Total debt outstanding and  
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a 
Net disbursements (US$m)a 
Total debt service (TDS) (US$m)a 

216,396 

251,600 

387,155 

402,500 

381,500 

395,862 

409,879 

427,986 

455,434 

484,825 

512,020 

537,418 

13,559 

-11,794 

94,889 

-25,969 

23,787 

24,934 

21,018 

23,106 

32,447 

34,390 

32,194 

30,398 

59,725 

83,551 

86,691 

107,043 

88,769 

95,156 

92,885 

91,965 

94,027 

98,552 

102,471 

105,808 

Debt and debt service indicators (%) 
   TDO/XGSb 

75.4 

68.9 

87.6 

69.2 

100.5 

82 

71.4 

76.5 

79 

82 

84.2 

85.9 

   TDO/GDP 

28.3 

25.4 

29.8 

24.2 

31.2 

26.8 

23.3 

22.2 

22 

22.4 

22.7 

22.8 

   TDS/XGS 

20.8 

22.9 

19.6 

18.4 

23.4 

19.7 

16.2 

16.4 

16.3 

16.7 

16.9 

16.9 

   Concessional/TDO 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

IBRD exposure indicators (%) 

   IBRD DS/public DS 

2.9 

2.9 

9.3 

11.9 

15.2 

12.6 

14.2 

15.7 

15.3 

14.8 

14.8 

14.8 

   Preferred creditor DS/public 
   DS (%)c 

13.6 

3.2 

10.5 

13.5 

16.9 

13.8 

14.5 

16.7 

16.9 

16.9 

17.4 

17.6 

   IBRD DS/XGS 
   IBRD TDO (US$m)d 

0.3 

0.3 

0.2 

0.2 

0.2 

0.2 

0.1 

0.1 

0.1 

0.1 

0.1 

0.1 

5,091 

4,800 

4,300 

3,800 

3,200 

2,600 

2,110 

1,970 

2,130 

1,990 

1,850 

1,710 

      Of which present value of guarantees (US$m) 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

.. 

   Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
   IDA TDO (US$m)d 

4 

4 

4 

3 

3 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

IFC (US$m) 

   Loans 

766 

1,247 

1,796 

1,923 

1,411 

1,359 

1,430 

1,500 

1,500 

1,500 

1,500 

1,500 

   Equity and quasi-equity  /c 

75 

121 

133 

498 

428 

405 

582 

600 

600 

600 

600 

600 

MIGA 

   MIGA guarantees (US$m) 
271.0 
563.3 
845.7 
880.4 
10,440.0 
977.3 
a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short -term capital. 
b. "XGS" denotes "exports of goods and services," including workers' remittances. 
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank of Intern ational Settlements. 
d. Includes present value of guarantees. 
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments. 

938.6 

. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B8 - IBRD 

                          November 2011 
     Page 1 of 1 

Russian Federation 
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 

As of October 24, 2011 

Closed 
Projects 

59 

IBRD/IDA  

Total Disbursed (Active) 

          of which has been repaid 

Total Disbursed (Closed) 

          of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
          of which has been repaid 

Total Undisbursed (Active) 

Total Undisbursed (Closed) 

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 

 471.35 

 145.91 

1 ,358.24 

6,523.1 
1,829.27 
 6,669.73 

 512.21 

 0.00 

 512.21 

Active Projects 

Project ID 

Project Name 

P064508 
P072960 
P069063 
P082239 
P093050 
P089733 
P092429 
P079032 
P120219 
P120338 

Treasury Development Project 
Customs Development Project 
St. Petersburg Economic Development Project 
Hydrometerological System Modernization Project 
Registration Project 
Judicial Reform Support Project 
Second State Statistical System 
Housing and Communal Services Project 
Cultural Heritage 2 Project 
Financial Education & Financial Literacy Project 

Overall Result 

Last PSR  

Difference 
Between 
Expected and 
Actual 

Supervision Rating 

Original Amount in US$ Millions 

Disbursements a/ 

Development 
Objectives 

Implementation 
Progress 

Fiscal 
Year 

IBRD 

IDA Grant Cancel. 

Undisb. Orig. 

S 
S 
S 
S 
MS 
U 
MS 
MS 
S 
S 

S 
S 
S 
S 
MU 
U 
MU 
MS 
S 
S 

2002 
2003 
2003 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2007 
2008 
2011 
2011 

231.0 
140.0 
161.1 
80.0 
50.0 
50.0 
10.0 
200.0 
100.0 
25.0 

60.0 
0.1 

54.7 
24.7 
13.7 
4.4 
48.7 
40.6 
7.3 
195.4 
98.0 
24.7 

54.7 
24.7 
73.3 
4.5 
41.0 
39.8 
5.4 
105.7 

-0.3 

Frm 
Rev'd 

54.7 
24.7 
1.4 
4.2 
6.7 

14.4 

1,047.1 

60.1 

512.2 

348.8 

106.1 

a/ Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B8 - IFC 

                                            November 2011 
                                    Page 1 of 3 

Russian Federation 
IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio 

As of June 30, 2011 (In US$ Millions) 

Committed 

Disbursed Outstanding 

FY Commitment Company 

Loan 

Equity 

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM 

Partici
pant 

Loan 

Equity 

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM 

Partici  
pant 

2006 

ALD Automotive Russia 

         5.57  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

         5.57  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2009/ 2010/ 2011 

Asian Pacific Bank (ATB) 

       13.56  

       10.87  

             -    

       14.13  

             -      

       13.56  

         7.73  

             -    

       13.95  

             -    

2006 

Air Transport Systems (ATS) 

             -    

             -             1.23  

             -    

             -      

             -    

             -             1.23  

             -    

             -    

2006/ 2007/ 2008 

Absolut Bank 

         6.74  

         4.27  

             -    

             -    

             -      

         6.74  

         4.27  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2009/ 2010/ 2011 

Asteros 

       20.00  

         2.50  

             -    

             -    

             -      

       10.00  

         2.50  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2008 

Ava Peter 

       12.50  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

         4.50  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010 

Avtokran 

       13.94  

             -           10.00  

             -    

             -      

       13.94  

             -           10.00  

             -    

             -    

2010/ 2011 

Brunswick Leasing (BLL) 

             -           54.88  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -           54.88  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2001 

Baring Vostok Fund (BVF) 

             -             0.13  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -             0.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2005 

Baring Vostok Private Equity Fund III (BVPEF III) 

             -             6.07  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -             5.29  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2011 

Brunswick Wagon Leasing (BWL) 

       49.64  

             -    

             -    

             -    

49.24  

       15.14  

             -    

             -    

             -           14.74  

2011 

Bank St. Petersburg (Bank SP) 

             -    

             -    

             -    

       25.52  

             -      

             -    

             -    

             -    

       25.52  

             -    

2008/ 2009 

Belgrankorm 

       21.00  

       46.21  

             -    

             -    

             -      

       21.00  

       46.21  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010 

Borets 

       50.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       30.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2006/ 2008 

Brunswick Cptl 

       52.80  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       52.80  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2011 

Commerce Bank Otkritie 

             -         106.95  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -         106.95  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2007/ 2008 
2002/ 2005/ 2010/ 
2011 

CapMan Russia 

             -           15.78  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -           10.72  

             -    

             -    

             -    

Center-Invest 

       32.27  

             -    

             -    

         0.64  

             -      

       23.31  

             -    

             -    

         0.64  

             -    

2006/ 2009 

Chuvash Republic 

         4.78  

             -    

             -    

         8.25  

             -      

         4.78  

             -    

             -    

         8.25  

             -    

2007 

Chuvashavtador 

       31.07  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       31.07  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2006 

Cinema Park 

       12.31  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       12.31  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2007/ 2008 

Concordia Ltd. 

       28.08  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       28.08  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2008 

Daido Metal Rus 

         2.98  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

         2.98  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2002/ 2003/ 2006 

Delta Credit 

       37.89  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       13.89  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010/ 2011 

FactorRus 

         5.00  

         5.00  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -             1.88  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2006 

Fora Bank 

         0.65  

             -    

             -    

         1.57  

             -      

         0.65  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
       
  
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B8 - IFC 

                               November 2011 
                       Page 2 of 3 

Committed 

Disbursed Outstanding 

FY Commitment Company 

Loan 

Equity 

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM 

Partici
pant 

Loan 

Equity 

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM 

Partici  
pant 

2005 

GrandHotelEurope 

         7.31  

             -    

             -    

             -    

17.57  

         5.59  

             -    

             -    

             -           11.79  

2008 

Home Center RUS 

             -    

             -           10.00  

             -    

             -      

             -    

             -           10.00  

             -    

             -    

2011 

Idavang A/S 

             -           24.32  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2006 

Kinross 

             -           29.70  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -           29.70  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2004/ 2005 

Kronospan Russia 

       47.68  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       47.68  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2004/ 2005/ 2009 

Kronostar 

       38.87  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       38.87  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2005/ 2008/ 2009 

Kuibyshevazot Open Joint Stock Company (KuAz) 

       17.50  

       19.50  

             -    

             -    

             -      

       17.50  

       19.50  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010 
2006/ 2007/ 2008/ 
2009/ 2010/ 2011 

Kulon Yugros 

         6.95  

             -             7.31  

             -    

             -      

             -    

             -             7.14  

             -    

             -    

Locko 

       33.85  

       19.26  

             -    

       37.26  

30.00  

       33.85  

       19.26  

             -    

       37.26  

       30.00  

2009 

Logopark Ob 

       14.34  

             -             6.52  

             -    

4.78  

       14.34  

             -             6.52  

             -             4.78  

2010 
2007/ 2008/ 2009/ 
2010/ 2011 

Logopark Rostov 

       20.00  

             -           10.66  

             -    

12.34  

       20.00  

             -           10.66  

             -           12.34  

MDM Bank 

             -    

             -    

             -    

       18.00  

             -      

             -    

             -    

             -    

       18.00  

             -    

2009 

Macquaire Rennaissance Infrast. Fund (MRIF) 

             -           70.23  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -           23.14  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2009/ 2011 

MUP UZ ZhKKh 

       16.13  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       10.76  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2008 

Medicina 

         8.96  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

         8.96  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010/ 2011 
2005/ 2006/ 2007/ 
2008/ 2009/ 2010/ 
2011 
2002/ 2003/ 2004/ 
2006/ 2008/ 2010 

Monocrystal OAO 

       40.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       10.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

Moscow Credit Bk 

       41.67  

             -    

             -    

     128.77  

130.00  

       32.97  

             -    

             -    

     128.50  

     130.00  

NBD 

         5.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

         5.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010/ 2011 

Northern Capital Gateway (NCG) 

     101.33  

             -    

             -    

             -    

144.76  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2001 

NMC 

         0.16  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

         0.16  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2009 

Nitol Solar 

             -           25.81  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -           25.81  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010 

OJSC MDM Bank 

       88.93  

       73.37  

       10.00  

             -    

             -      

       88.93  

       73.37  

       10.00  

             -    

             -    

2011 

Orient Express 

             -           81.93  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -           81.93  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2005/ 2006 

Petropavlovsk 

             -           13.98  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -           13.90  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2008 

Petropavlovsk K 

       16.73  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       16.73  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2004 

Pilkington Rus 

       35.37  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       35.37  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2007 

Promek 

     153.50  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

     153.50  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

Committed 

Disbursed Outstanding 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
       
  
       
  
         
  
       
  
     
  
     
  
  
  
  
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: 2012-2016 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)  
Annex B8 - IFC 

                               November 2011 
                       Page 3 of 3 

FY Commitment Company 

Loan 

Equity 

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM 

Partici
pant 

Loan 

Equity 

**Quasi 
Equity *GT/RM 

Partici  
pant 

2010/ 2011 

Promsvyaz 

             -    

             -    

             -    

       12.98  

             -      

             -    

             -    

             -    

       12.98  

             -    

2005/ 2007 

Quadriga Capital 

             -           19.99  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -           18.16  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010 

Russia Hotel Investments (RHI) BV 

             -             1.60  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010 

RHI Kaliningrad 

         3.62  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010 

RHI Krasnoyarsk 

         4.85  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010 

RHI Samara 

         4.56  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010 

RHI Yaroslavl 

         3.33  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2003/ 2011 

Raiffeisenbank Austria (RZB) Russia 

       56.73  

             -    

             -    

       13.27  

             -      

       56.73  

             -    

             -    

       13.27  

             -    

2007 

RZB Rus 2007-1 

             -    

             -           11.58  

             -    

             -      

             -    

             -           11.58  

             -    

             -    

2009/ 2010/ 2011 

Rep. Mariy El 

       54.50  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       54.50  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010/ 2011 

RosEvroBank 

             -    

             -    

             -    

         4.61  

             -      

             -    

             -    

             -    

         4.61  

             -    

2003 

Ru-Net 

             -             0.00  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -             0.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

1996 

Russ Tech Fnd 

             -             0.00  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -             0.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2004/ 2005 

Russkiy Mir 

         7.50  

             -    

             -    

             -    

0.00  

         7.50  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2005 

RussiaPartnersII 

             -             8.89  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -             8.89  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2007 

Rus MBS 2006-1 

             -    

             -             4.67  

         8.77  

             -      

             -    

             -             4.67  

             -    

             -    

2004/ 2010 

Sevtekhnotrans 

       30.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       30.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2009/ 2010/ 2011 

TransCapitalBank 

       48.20  

       41.80  

             -    

       23.78  

52.00  

       30.00  

             -    

             -    

       19.68  

       52.00  

2006 

Trio 

       13.33  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       13.33  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2010 

Ufavodokanal 

       17.93  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

       17.93  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2003/ 2010/ 2011 

UralTransBank 

             -    

             -    

             -    

       (0.00) 

             -      

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2005 

Volga Shipping 

         9.38  

             -    

             -    

             -    

5.92  

         9.38  

             -    

             -    

             -             5.92  

2008 

Vostok 

             -           16.11  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -           16.11  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2006/ 2010 

Vyksa 

       25.71  

             -           70.00  

             -    

             -      

       25.71  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

2005 

Yandex 

             -             4.00  

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -             4.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

2011 

ZAO Energomera 

       20.00  

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -      

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

             -    

Total Portfolio: 

1,394.73  

703.16  

141.96  

297.53  

446.60  

1,075.63  

574.21  

71.79  

282.65  

261.57  

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products. 
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
         
  
       
  
         
  
     
     
     
   
  
  
     
       
     
     
 
Petropavlovsk-
Petropavlovsk-
Petropavlovsk-
Kamchatskiy
Kamchatskiy
Kamchatskiy

Magadan
Magadan
Magadan

Okhotsk
Okhotsk
Okhotsk

Anadyr
Anadyr
Anadyr

Khabarovsk
Khabarovsk
Khabarovsk

Yuzhno-
Yuzhno-
Yuzhno-
Sakhalinsk
Sakhalinsk
Sakhalinsk

Vladivostok
Vladivostok
Vladivostok

Birobidzhan
Birobidzhan
Birobidzhan

Blagoveshchensk
Blagoveshchensk
Blagoveshchensk

Yakutsk
Yakutsk
Yakutsk

ChitaChita
Chita
Aginskoye
Aginskoye
Aginskoye

Ulan Ude
Ulan Ude
Ulan Ude

Ust' Ordynskiy
Ust' Ordynskiy
Ust' Ordynskiy
Irkutsk
Irkutsk
Irkutsk

Kyzyl
Kyzyl
Kyzyl

Abakan
Abakan
Abakan

Krasnoyarsk
Krasnoyarsk
Krasnoyarsk

Gorno-
Gorno-
Gorno-
Altaysk
Altaysk
Altaysk

Novokuznetsk
Novokuznetsk
Novokuznetsk

Kemerovo
Kemerovo
Kemerovo

Tomsk
Tomsk
Tomsk

Barnaul
Barnaul
Barnaul

Novosibirsk
Novosibirsk
Novosibirsk

OmskOmsk
Omsk

Chelyabinsk
Chelyabinsk
Chelyabinsk
To b ol
Kurgan
Kurgan
Kurgan

Yekaterinburg
Yekaterinburg
Yekaterinburg
Tyumen
Tyumen
Tyumen

UfaUfa
Ufa

Khanty-
Khanty-
Khanty-
Mansiysk
Mansiysk
Mansiysk

Salekhard
Salekhard
Salekhard

Vorkuta
Vorkuta
Vorkuta

Nar'yan Mar
Nar'yan Mar
Nar'yan Mar

Murmansk
Murmansk
Murmansk

Arkhangel'sk
Arkhangel'sk
Arkhangel'sk

Karelia
Karelia
Karelia
St. Petersburg
St. Petersburg
St. Petersburg
Petrozavodsk
Petrozavodsk
Petrozavodsk

Novgorod
Novgorod
Novgorod

Pskov
Pskov
Pskov

Kaliningrad
Kaliningrad
Kaliningrad

Perm'
Perm'
Perm'

Syktyvkar
Syktyvkar
Syktyvkar

Kotlas
Kotlas
Kotlas

Orenburg
Orenburg
Orenburg

Samara
Samara
Samara

Krasnodar
Krasnodar
Krasnodar
Maykop
Maykop
Maykop

Cherkessk
Cherkessk
Cherkessk
Nal'chik
Nal'chik
Nal'chik
Nazran
Nazran
Nazran
Groznyy
Groznyy
Groznyy
Makhachkala
Makhachkala
Makhachkala

Vladikavkaz
Vladikavkaz
Vladikavkaz

Astrakhan
Astrakhan
Astrakhan

ElistaElista
Elista

Stavropol
Stavropol
Stavropol

Rostov-
Rostov-
Rostov-
on-Don
on-Don
on-Don

R .
Saratov
Saratov
Saratov
Volgograd
Volgograd
Volgograd

OrelOrel
Orel
Kursk
Kursk
Kursk
Belgorod
Belgorod
Belgorod
Voronezh
Voronezh
Voronezh

Tambov
Tambov
Tambov
Penza
Penza
Penza
Ul'yanovsk
Ul'yanovsk
Ul'yanovsk

Cheboksary
Cheboksary
Cheboksary
Saransk
Saransk
Saransk

Lipetsk
Lipetsk
Lipetsk

Bryansk
Bryansk
Bryansk

TulaTula
Tula

Kaluga
Kaluga
Kaluga

Smolensk
Smolensk Tver
Smolensk Tver
Tver

Yaroslavl
Yaroslavl
Yaroslavl
Kostroma
Kostroma
Kostroma
Ivanovo
Ivanovo
Ivanovo
Vladimir
Vladimir
Vladimir
Ryazan
Ryazan
Ryazan
Nizhny Novgorod
Nizhny Novgorod
Nizhny Novgorod
KirovKirov
Kirov
Yoshkar-Ola
Yoshkar-Ola
Yoshkar-Ola
Kazan' Izhevsk
Kazan'
Kazan' Izhevsk
Izhevsk

Vologda
Vologda
Vologda

MOSCOW
MOSCOW
MOSCOW

Ural Mts. 
Ural Mts. 

C e n t r a l
C e n t r a l
C e n t r a l

S i b e r i a n
S i b e r i a n
S i b e r i a n

P l a t e a u
P l a t e a u
P l a t e a u

We s t
We s tWe s t
S i b e r i a n
S i b e r i a n
S i b e r i a n
P l a i n
P l a i n
P l a i n

o
o
K
K

l
l

m
m

g
g
n
n
a
a
R
R
a
a
y
y

e
e

D
D

u
u
h
h
z
z
d
d
g
g
u
u
h
h
z
z

r
r

g
g
n
n
a
a
R
R

e
e

e
e
ot
ot
h
h
Sik
Sik

-
-

A
A

i
i
l
l

n
n

A
A

n d
n d

a y r    R
a y r    R

a
a

n
n

g
g

e
e

Cherskiy  Range 
Cherskiy  Range 

T
T

a
a

y
y

m
m

y r  P
y r  P

e
e

n i n
n i n

s
s

u l a
u l a

 Novaya
 Novaya
 Novaya
Zem lya
Zem lya
Zem lya

 Severnaya
 Severnaya
 Severnaya
Zem lya
Zem lya
Zem lya

 New Siberia
 New Siberia
 New Siberia
Is lands
Is lands
Is lands

Franz Josef
Franz Josef
Franz Josef
Land
Land
Land

Ko la
Ko laKo la
Pen.
Pen.
Pen.

Yama l
Yama l
Yama l
Pen.
Pen.
Pen.

Gyda
GydaGyda
Pen.
Pen.
Pen.

 S i b e r i a n 
 S i b e r i a n 

 L o w l a n d 
 L o w l a n d 

Gora El'brus
Gora El'brus
Gora El'brus
(5,633 m) 
(5,633 m) 
(5,633 m) 

K A Z A K H S T A N

J A P A N

C H I N A

M O N G O L I A

U K R A I N E

B E L A R U S

SW E D E N

NO RWAY

F I N L A N D

PO L A N D

U N I T E D S TAT E S O F AM E R I C A

  D .P.R .
OF
KOREA     
REP.
OF
KOREA  

UZBEK ISTAN

AZERBA IJAN

E S TO N I A

D E NM A R K

N E T H .

G E RM A N Y

L

A

T

V

I

A

L

I

T

H

.

R U S S I A N
F E D .

GEORG IA

O b

O

b

Y

e

n

i

s

e

y

m
A

u

r

In
di

g

i
r

k

a

L
e

n

a

K
o

l

y

m

a

K

h

atan g a 

L

e

n

a 

Alden 

An g a r

a 

U r al 

A R C T I C 

O C E A N

L a k e
B a i k a l

B a r e n t s
S e a

K a r a   S e a

L a p t e v
S e a

N o r w e g i a n S e a

B l a c k
S e a

E a s t S i b e r i a n
S e a

S e a o f
O k h o t s k

S e a o f
J a p a n

C

a 
e
n S
aspia

   B e r ing Strait 

70°N

80°N

80°N

130°E

120°E

110°E

100°E

90°E

50°N

40°N

3 0° N

0
6

°

N

RUSSIAN
FEDERATION

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.  
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

0

200 400

0

200

400

600 Miles

600 Kilometers

I

B
R

D

3
3
4
7
0
R
2

M

A

Y

2
0
0
9

R U S S I A N
F E D E R AT I O N

OBLAST CENTERS
FEDERAL CITIES
NATIONAL CAPITAL
RIVERS
MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS
OBLAST, KRAI, REPUBLIC, AUTONOMOUS
OBLAST, OR AUTONOMOUS OKRUG
BOUNDARIES
INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
