d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  
The World Ba nk 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 57989-CL 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

AND 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY PARTNERSH IP STRATEGY 

FOR 

THE REPUBLIC OF CH ILE 

FOR THE PERIOD FY11-FY16 

January 11, 2011 

Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela Country Managem ent Unit 
Latin Am erica and the Caribbean Region 

The International Finance Corporation 
Latin Am erica and the Caribbean Region 

Th is document is be in g made p ubl icl y ava il abl e pr io r to Bo ard d iscu ssion. This do es not impl y a p resumed outcome. 
Th is document may b e upd ated followin g Boa rd co n side rat ion and th e upd ated document will be mad e publ icl y  
ava il able unless ot he rwise dec id ed b y th e Bo ard . 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The date of the last Count ry Pa rtnership Strategy was Apri l 24, 2007 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 

(as of Janu ary 5, 2011) 
486.82 Pesos = US $ 1 

FISCAL YEAR 

January 1 – December 31 

Vice Pres ident:  
Directo r: 
Task Team Lead er:  

IBRD 
Pamel a Cox 
C . Felipe Jaram illo 
L ivia Ben avides 

Vice Pres id ent: 
Director: 
Task M an ager: 

IFC  
Thierry Tanoh 
Paolo M artelli 
John Barh am and 
Gon zalo Arauz 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATION S AND ACRONYMS 

AAA 

AFP 

APL 

ATI 
AUGE 

CAE 

CAS 
CASEN 

CCC 
CG 
CGE 

Anal yt ic an d Ad viso ry Act ivit ies 

Admi ni stradora de Pen si ones (Pen sio n Fund 
Admin istrator) 
Adapt able P ro gram Lend in g 

Access to In forma tion 
Acceso Uni versal con Garantías Explí ci tas (Un ive rsal 
Access with E xpl ict Gu arant ees) 
Cr édi to con A val d el Esta do (St ate–Gua ranteed 
Stud ent Lo an Pro gram) 
Count ry Assist an ce Strate gy 
Encu esta d e Cara cteri zaci ón Soci oeco nómi ca 
Na ci onal (Nat io nal So cioeconomic Ch aract er izat ion 
Sur vey) 
Chi le Cr ece Conti go (Ch ile Growth wit h Yo u) 
Central Go ve rn ment 
Central Go ve rn ment Entit ies 

CNE 

Comi si ón Naci onal de En ergía (Nat io nal E ne rgy 
Commission ) 
CONAM A Comi si ón Naci onal del Medi o Ambi ente (Nat io nal 
Commission for the En viro nment ) 
Con sume r P r ice Index 
Count ry Pa rtne rsh ip Strategy 
Count ry Pa rtne rsh ip Strategy Complet ion Repo rt 

CP I 
CPS 
CPSCR 

CPSPR 

Count ry Pa rtne rsh ip Strategy P ro gress Repo rt 

DIPRE S 

Di recci ón de Presu puestos (Bud ge t Directorate ) 

Deve lopment Policy Loan 

Europ ean Un io n 
Fee-Based-Se rvice 
Forest Ca rbon Partn ersh ip Facil it y 
Fore ign Direct In vestment 

DPL 

EU 
FBS 
FCPF 
FDI 

FEE S 

Fo ndo d e Estabi li zaci ón Económi ca y Soci al (Soc ial 
and E conomic Stab il izat ion Fun d) 

SEGPRES 

FONASA 

Fo ndo Na ci onal de Salud (Nat ion al Health Fun d) 

SFLAC 

FRP 

FSAP 

FY 

GDP 
GE F 
GOC 
HOI 

Fo ndo d e R eser va d e Pensi ones (Pen sion Rese rve 
Fund ) 

F inancial Sector Assessmen t Program 

F iscal Yea r 

Gro ss Domest ic Prod uct 
Gl obal En viro nment Fac il it y 
Go ve rnment o f Chil e 
Human Oppo rtun it y Index 

S IAF 

S ICEX 

S IGFE 

SME 
TAL 
TOR 
WBG 

IBRD 

ICR 

ICT 

IDF 
IFC 

IMF 

JSP  
LAC 

Internat ion al Ban k fo r Recon st ruct ion and 
Deve lopment 
Imp lementat ion Complet ion and Result s 
Report 
In fo rmat ion and Commun icat ion 
Technolo gy 
In stitut io nal Deve lopment Fund 
Internat ion al F inan ce Corp oratio n 

Internat ion al Mon eta ry Fund 

Jo int Stud ies Pro gram 
Lat in Ame r ica and the Car ibb ean 

M&E 
Mo nito r in g and E valu at ion 
M IC 
M iddl e- Income Co untry 
M IDE PLAN Mi ni steri o de Pla ni fi caci ón (M in ist ry o f 
Plan nin g) 
Mer cado de Capi tales d el Bi cent enari o 
(B icentenn ial Cap it al Ma rket s Agend a) 
M in istry o f Pu blic Works 

MPW 

MKB 

MSME s 
MW 
OECD 

P IRDT 

P ISA 

PMDT 

PMG 
QER 
R&D 
RGES 

M icro, Sma ll an d Medium Ent erp r ises 
Megawatt 
Organ izat ion for E con omic Co -Op erat ion 
and Deve lopment 
Pr ogram a de Infra estructur a Rural para el 
Desarrollo Terri tori al (Rural 
In frasctru cture Pro gram fo r Terr ito r ial 
Deve lopment) 
Pro gramme for Inte rn ational Stud ent 
Assessment 
Plan Ma rco de Desar rollo Ter r itor ial 
(Te rr ito rial Deve lopment F ramework) 
(Enh ancement Management Pro gram) 
Qual it y E nhan cement Review 
Research and Deve lopment 
Régimen d e Garantías E xplíci tas de Salud 
(Regime o f E xpl ic it Health Gu rantees) 
Mi ni steri o de la Secr etaría Gen eral d e la 
Pr esi denci a (M in istry Gene ral Sec ret ar iat 
o f the P resid en cy) 
Sp an ish Tru st Fund for Lat in Ame r ica and 
the Ca ribbean Region 
Si stema de Inno vaci ón Agro alimentari o y 
Fo restal (Su b-syst em o f Agro-Foo d an d 
Forestry Inno vat ion ) 
Si stema Integ rado d e Com er ci o Exteri or 
 ( Int egrated Syst em o f Fore ign Trad e) 
Si stema de Informa ci ón para la G esti ón 
Fi nanci era d el Estado ( Integrat ed F inan c ial 
Man agement System) 
Small and Med ium Ente rpr ise 
Techn ical Assist ance Loan 
Terms o f Re ference 
World Ban k Gro up 

 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 
CHILE 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY …………………………………………………………… .……………… ..……… . 

I. 

INTRODUCTION .……………………………………………………… .……… ..…… ... ................. ... 

i 

1 

II. 
COUNTRY CONTEXT …………………………………………………… .……… .………………… 
1 
A. Pol itical Context … .………………………………………………… ..……… . ..…..…………. .…………… .. 1 
B. Recent E conomic Devel opments ……………………… ...……………………………………………… .….. 
2 
C. Po ve rt y Pro file and Trend s ………………………………… ...…………………………………………… .... 
4 
D. Economic Pro spect s ……………………………………………… ...……………………………………… . .. 
6 
E. Deve lopment Chall en ges and Op portun it ies …………………………… . .…….. ............ ..... ................. .......... 
9 
F. Go ve rnment Pr ior it ies an d Med ium-Te rm St rat egy …………………… ..……………… .… ............. ............ . 
14 

III. 
BANK GROUP PARTNER SHIP STRATEGY ………………………………… ..... ...... ................. ... 
17 
A. Lesson s Learn ed from previou s CPS an d St akehold er Feedb ack ……………………… ..…… ......... ............ .. 17 
B. Pro po sed Wo rld Ban k Group Partn ersh ip St rat egy ………………………………… .……………………… . 
18 
C. Expected Result s and Pro gram o f Len d in g and Non-Lend in g Act ivit ies …………… ...…………………… . 
20 
• Result Area 1 : Publ ic Secto r Mod ernizatio n ………………………………… .… ..…………………… .. 
20 
• Result Area 2 : Job C reation and Imp ro vin g Equ it y ……………………… . .……… .…………………… 22 
• Result Area 3 : Promot in g Su st a in able In vestment s ……………………………………… . .…………… . 24 
D. Imp lement in g th e Country Pa rtne rsh ip Strategy ……………………………………………………… ..…… . 26 

IV. 
MANAGING R ISKS 
A. Count ry R isks ……………………………………………………………………… .……………………… . . 
B. Ext ernal Sho cks ………………………………………………………………… ..………………………… . . 
C.    R isk to the Wo rld Ban k Group ……………………………………… ...…………………………………… .. 

27 
27 
28 
28 

Tables 
Tabl e 1 : Key E conomic Ind icators ……………………………………………………………………………… ... 3 
Tabl e 2 : E conomic P ro sp ect s ………………………………………………… ...………………………………… 
8 
Tabl e 3 : Ch ile ’s Devel opment A gend a’s Tar get s for 2 010-2014 ………………………………………………… 
14 
Tabl e 4 : In dicative Work P ro gram ……………………………………………………………………………… ... 19 

Bo xes 
Bo x 1 : Chil e’s respon se to the fin anc ial glob al c r isis …………………………………………………… .……… . 
Bo x 2 : Go ve rnment ’s plan to fin ance th e earth quake recon st ruct ion ………………………………………… .…. 

4 
5 

Annexes 
Annex 1 : Ch ile Cou ntry Partn ersh ip Strate gy FY11 -FY16 - Result s F rame work: On go in g and Con firmed 
Pro gram …………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
Annex 2 : Ch ile CPS Complet io n Repo rt ………………………………………………………………………… . 
32 
Annex 3 : Ch ile at a gl an ce ……………………………………………………………………………………… ... 
65 
Annex 4 : Ch ile Selected in dicators o f b an k po rt fol io p er fo rman ce and man agement …………………………… 
68 
Annex 5 : Ch ile So c ial Ind icators ………………………………………………………………………………… . 
69 
Annex 6 : Ch ile : Key Eco nomic Ind icato rs ……………………………………………………………………… .. 
70 
Annex 7 : Ch ile – Key E xp o sure Ind icators ……………………………………………………………………… .. 72 
Annex 8 : Op erat ion s Po rt fol io ( IBRD/ IDA and Grant s) ………………………………………………………… . 
73 
Annex 9 : Ch ile Committ ed and Disb ursed Outst and in g In vestment Po rt fol io …………………………………… 74 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Chile is an upper middle incom e country with one of the most politically stable system s in 
Latin Am erica, strong institutions and a solid record of econom ic grow th during the last 
two and a half decades.  President Sebastián Piñera took office on M arch 11, 2010, ending 20 
years of continuous governments led by the Concertación, a coalition of center-left parties.  
Despite the differences in political stance, President Piñera is committed to the continued support 
of the core policy framework established by previous governments, while also promoting 
reform s to boost grow th and tackle poverty and inequality. 

The success of Chile’s economy can be attributed to continuity in sound macro policies, an 
open trade regim e, and a business-friendly environm ent.  Successful macro policies include 
the adoption of an inflation targeting regime and countercyclical fiscal policies.  Fiscal policy 
sustainability has been en forced by a fiscal rule that insulates public spending from fluctuations 
in the price of copper and the business cycle. This policy framework allowed for a vigorous 
countercyclical response to the 2008/09 global financial crisis, which cushioned the blow from 
the sharp reduction in trade volumes and export prices.  As a result of the continued reduction of 
barriers to trade, the establishment of free trade agreements w ith many of its main trading 
partners, and a strong business climate environment, Chile has managed to make trade and 
investment key engines of grow th. 

Chile faces two key challenges going forward: declining grow th performance and high 
inequality.  Chile's grow th has slowed down from an average of 7.6 percent during the period of 
1986-1997 to 3.5 percent in the period of 2000-2009.  Productivity grow th has been trending 
downward through much of the last decade and overall investment levels have also declined 
since the late 1990s.  The second challenge relates to the need to tackle inequality.  While Chile 
has made substantial progress in reducing poverty (15 percent in 2009), the average income of 
the richest 20 percent of Chileans was 12 times that of the poorest 20 percent in 2009. 

The new Governm ent of Chile has launched an ambitious developm ent agenda which sets 
the basis for the country's ultimate goal of achieving high-incom e developed status by 2018. 
The three strategic areas that the Government of Chile plans to emphasize during 2010-14 a re: i) 
achieving greater competitiveness, including the modernization of the state; ii) improving job 
creation and job quality; and iii) promoting investment. In addition, the government is comm itted 
to other important reform s aimed at strengthening social policies and protect ing the environment. 

This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) builds on the successful experience of the prior 
World Bank Group strategy in Chile.  The strong institutional framework, a stable economy, 
and the relatively advanced development level facilitate an engagement in which the Bank’s 
value added lies mainly in the know ledge agenda.  In a context of low financing needs and 
abundant access to capital markets at low spreads, Chile’s demand for Bank services 
concentrated on the provision of technical assistance and other knowledge products in areas in 
which the Bank has a comparative advantage and can support the country’s drive to achieve its 
development goals.  Moreover, for the Bank, this is an important two-way investment, as Chile’s 
development experiences of the past decades are highly valued among other clients and 

i 

 
 
 
 
 
 
continued engagement should allow for important spillovers into World Bank work in other 
countries, as well as deepening South-South exchanges. 

This CPS aim s to support the Governm ent of Chile's vision of eradicating extrem e poverty 
by 2014 and becom ing a developed country by 2018.  This support w ill be carried out through 
focused intervention in specific themes that have been distributed into three results area s that 
broadly coincide with the government 's development agenda:  (i) Public Sector Modernization, 
(ii) Job Creation and Equity Improvement , and (iii) Promoting Sustainable Investments. 

The Strategy includes a flexible program to be carried out mainly through demand-driven 
studies and a small lending and grant portfolio.  The CPS would span 6 years, subject to 
continued stable macroeconom ic environment and Chile’s continued status as a client country.  
The bulk of the know ledge work w ill be delivered through studies structured around a Joint 
Studies Program funded jointly by the Bank (US$400,000 per year) and the Government of Chile 
(up to US$800,000 per year), with the possibility of additional just-in-time assistance through 
fee-for-service.  In addition, the Bank will continue providing some lim ited financing for 
projects where the Bank’s support adds value in the implementation of policies in selected areas. 

The International Finance Corporation (IFC ) w ill continue to seek investm ents in Chile in 
order to support investm ents in those area s where the Corporation can provide value 
added.  The main objective w ill be to foster greater entrepreneurship in advanced fields or in 
developing innovative business models in a narrow range of sectors.  Investments w ill be 
focused initially on tertiary education, vocational training, infrastructure and ene rgy, and 
financial services. 

ii 

 
 
 
 
I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
This docum ent describes the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) w ith Chile for 
FY11 to FY16.1
  The CPS has been designed to respond to the demand from the new 
Government of Chile (GOC) in tackling its main goals through strategic know ledge activities 
(analytical work and technical assistance) in areas in which the Bank can provide value to a 
sophisticated middle-income country (M IC), and a small lending program for implementation 
support in selected areas.  Fo r the Bank, this is an important two-way investment, as Chile’s 
development experiences of the past decades are highly valued among other clients and many of 
its current challenges should allow for important spillovers into World Bank work elsewhere.  
This CPS provides a summary of the country context and current challenges, the GOC’s 
proposed plan, lessons learned from the p revious CPS and the p roposed strategy for the Wo rld 
Bank G roup in Chile. 

II. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT 

A . Political Context 

2. 
The Governm ent of President Sebastián Piñera took office on March 11, 2010, after 
twenty years o f differen t governm ents held by the Concertación, a coalition of center-left 
parties.  President Piñera campaigned on a platform that reflects the challenges of an upper M IC 
like Chile which has enjoyed nearly three decades of uninterrupted growth and rising levels of 
welfare for the majority of its citizens, putting it at the top of the Latin America and the 
Caribbean (LAC) rankings and into the exclusive list of O rganization for Econom ic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD ) members.  His platform focused on carrying out substantial public 
sector refo rm s in order to reduce unemployment, poverty and inequalities, and to boost 
investment levels. 

3. 
President Piñera was elected in a second round run-o ff in January, 2010, although 
his center-right coalition (Coalición por el Cambio) did not obtain a Congressional majority 
in the legislative elections held in December 2009.  Chile has a presidential political system 
w ith a bicameral legislature.  The constitutional presidential term is four years and immediate re-
election is not allowed.  The Coalición obtained 16 of the 38 seats in the Senate (the upper 
house), compared w ith 19 for the Concertación, and 57 seats in the 129 seats of the Chamber of 
Deputies (the lower house).  The next Presidential and legislative elections will be held in 
December 2013. 

4. 
Chile has built strong democratic institutions during the past two decades based on 
an efficient civil service and good governance.  This solid institutional platform has allowed 
Chile to successfully w ithstand two large adverse sho cks since 2008— the global financial crisis 
and the devastating earthquake of February 2010.  Chile’s re silience has been underpinned by its 
strong policy framework and public management.  President Piñera, a highly successful 
businessman, has committed to continue with most aspects of the core policy framework 

1 Th e pr ior CPS, which co ve red FY0 7 to FY11 , was d iscu ssed at the Bo ard in Jun e 2007.  Th e CPS Pro gress Repo rt 
was su bmitt ed to th e Bo ard in Octo be r 2009. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                               
sustained by the center-left coalition during its two-decades in power.  Despite changes in the 
governing coalition, tensions between the new government and the parties of the Concertación 
are unlikely to affect political and social stability due to Chile’s strong institutions. 

B . Recent Economic Developm ents 

5. 
Chile has been among the best perform ing economies in LAC since 1985.  As a result 
of this accomplishment, income per capita was US$9,809 in 2009, the highest among the larger 
econom ies of the region. A vibrant private sector, substantial job creation and strong social 
program s have also led to rising welfare levels and declining poverty rates.  Only 15 percent of 
Chileans were under the poverty line in 2009, one of the lowest rates in the region. 

6. 
The long term success of the Chilean economy is explained by the continuity of 
strong macroeconom ic policies, an open trade regim e and a business-friendly environm ent.  
On the macro front, the policy framework has been based on an inflation targeting framework 
and countercyclical fiscal policies. Fiscal policy sustainability has been enforced by a fiscal rule 
that insulates public spending from fluctuations in the price of copper and the business cycle. 
Chile comm itted to a Central Government (CG ) structural balance target of 1 percent o f GDP 
since 2000.  This comm itment was complemented by the 2006 Fiscal Responsibility Law , which 
channels fiscal surpluses into two investment funds, the Pension Reserve Fund (FRP) to meet 
rising pension comm itments from 2016 onwards; and a Social and Econom ic Stabilization Fund 
(FEES). 2  Econom ic grow th has been sustained in great part by grow ing exports, a result of a 
sustained trade policy framework of low tariffs and trade barriers, the approval of free trade 
agreements w ith partners such as the U .S., European Union (EU ), China, and M exico, and a 
strong business climate environment. 3
  A pending challenge is the diversification of the 
composition of exports, as copper continues to dominate Chilean shipments, accounting in 2009 
for over 50 percent of the total value of exports. 

7. 
There have been concerns about som e loss in grow th dynam ism over the pa st 
decade.  While the Chilean economy has grown at a dynam ic average pace of 5.4 percent since 
1985, there has been a noticeable slowdown in the past decade, with grow th averaging only 3.5 
percent in the 2000-09 pe riod.  This deceleration has occurred despite global econom ic 
developments exceptionally favorable for Chile since the early 2000’s such as the rapid grow th 
in international trade and higher prices for copper and other key exports.  Observers attribute this 
decline in grow th levels to a decline in productivity and to some reduction in overall investment 
levels. 

8. 
The global financial crisis affected the Chilean economy strongly starting in the 
second half of 2008, but the economy’s re silience was demonstrated w ith the vigorous 
rebound that took place in 2010.  In the second half of 2008, the economy slowed down, as 
global demand for Chilean exports declined and the term s of trade deteriorated (see Table 1).  

2 The FEES rep laces the Copper Stab ilizat ion Fund. Du ring periods o f ad ve rse terms o f t rade shocks, the resources of the FEES 
w ill be ava ilab le to ma inta in fis ca l spend ing. 

3 Chile’s business en vironment is among the friendliest in LAC , rankin g consistent ly among the top countries regu larly in the 
Doin g Bus iness ind icators as we ll as in seve ra l other bus iness en vironment and compet it iveness ran kings . 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
                                               
 
Real GDP grow th slowed to 3.7 percent in 2008 while econom ic activity contracted by 1.5 
percent in 2009. The vigorous fiscal stimulus financed by the savings accumulated in previous 
years of high copper p rices (see Box 1), along w ith substantial monetary easing, supported an 
early recovery of econom ic activity starting in the last quarter of 2009.  However, disruptions 
related to the devastating February 2010 earthquake (see Box 2) led to a decline in grow th by 1.5 
percent in the first quarter of 2010.  However, econom ic recovery re sumed forcefully in the 
second quarter o f 2010, when GDP registered a 6.5 percent quarterly expansion.  D riven by 
reconstruction-related expenditures and investment, Chile’s economy is expected to grow by 
about 5 percent in 2010 and to recover further in 2011. 

Table 1:  Key Econom ic Indicators. 

Chile: Key Economic Indicators

in percen t , un less o therwise sta ted

National Accounts
GDP g rowth
Domes t ic demand g rowth
Population (millions )
Balance of payments
Cu rren t accoun t (% o f GDP)
Trade balance (% o f GDP)
Expo rts o f goods (% o f GDP)
Impo rts o f goods  (% o f GDP)
Net in ternat ional res erves (US$ bn )
Net in ternat ional res erves (% o f Sho rt term external deb t)
Terms o f trade (deterio rat ion -)
External indicators
To tal external deb t (% o f GDP)
Inflation 
Annual change in CPI (eop )
Fis cal (Central government)
Overall balance (% o f GDP) 
Structu ral balance (% o f GDP) 
Pub lic deb t (% o f GDP)
Copper reference p rice ( US¢/ lb )
No te: (Es t .) Es t imat ions .

2004

6.0
7.5
16.1

2.2
10.0
34.0
24.0
16.0
214.9
22.1

45.8

2.4

2.1
1.0
36.1
130

2005

5.6
10.4
16.3

1.2
9.1
34.9
25.8
17.0
239.2
11.1

38.4

3.7

4.6
0.9
34.9
167

2006

4.6
6.8
16.5

4.9
15.5
40.0
24.5
19.4
208.5
32.2

32.7

2.6

7.7
0.7
25.7
305

2007

4.6
7.6
16.6

4.6
14.6
41.4
26.8
16.9
152.9
3.7

34.4

7.8

8.2
1.0
28.8
323

2008

3.7
7.6
16.8

-2.1
5.2
38.9
33.7
23.2
155.3
-14.0

37.6

7.1

4.3
-0.4
27.3
316

2009

-1.5
-5.9
17.0

2.6
8.6
33.2
24.6
25.4
145.1
2.9

45.8

-1.4

-4.4
-3.3
27.7
234

Source: Banco Cent ral de Chile, DIPRES, World Bank and IM F s t aff es t imat ions .

Es t .

2010

5.0
13.4
17.1

-0.7
7.3
34.4
27.1
25.4
145.1
12.6

38.6

3.7

-1.7
-4.1
26.2
315

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Box 1 . Chile’s response to the financial global crisis 

Fisca l Po licy 
November 2008 F iscal stimu lus package of $1.15 b illion and January 2009 F isc al stimu lus package of 
US$4 b illion included : 
• 
Increase in pub lic spending by 1 percen t of GDP, mostly for infrastructure, human cap ital 
investmen t, and a lump sum transfer to poor families; 
• Temporary tax rebates in the amoun t of 1 percent of GDP to ease f irm f inancing con strain ts; 
• Re-cap italization of the state-owned copper company, Codelco, for US$1.0 b illio n; 
• Labor and social po lic ies included in th is package target: 
• Extension of the coverage per iod for unemp loymen t insurance and increases in subsidy leve l 
• 
In troduction of a subsidy on you th emp loymen t 
• 
Increased coverage under Chile Solidar io 
• One- time $60 subsidy per dependen t ch ild for vulnerab le families 

Monetary Po licy 
Fast-paced monetary easing: Cen tral Bank cu t in terest rates by 775 bp f rom 8.25 percent in January 
2009 to 0.50 percent in Ju ly 2009. 

Complementary Po licies (Inicia tiva Pro Créd ito): 
In March 2009 au thor ities proposed admin istrative measures aimed at boosting cred it and competition 
in the f inanc ia l system; these measures were pro jected to expand cred it to the private sector by some 
US$3.6 b illion at lim ited f iscal cost.  Measur es included : 
• Prov ision of add itional room for insurance compan ies to par ticipate in domestic loan markets; 
• Boosting f inancial options to people and businesses by expand ing the size and operations elig ib le 
for governmen t-sponsored cred it programs and guarantees; 
• Elimination of cap ital gains taxes on new bond issuances. 

Source: Wor ld Bank staf f. 

C . Poverty Profile and Trends 

9. 
Throughout the last twenty years, extrem e and moderate poverty have been falling 
in Chile. Indeed, Chile led the LAC region in poverty reduction in the 1990-06 period. Moderate 
poverty decreased from 19 percent in 2003 to 14 percent in 2006 at the national level whereas 
extreme poverty dim inished from 5 to 3 percent . While poverty within indigenous groups 
(estimated population of 700,000) has also had a downward trend, still, about 30 percent of the 
households represented by these groups were living below the poverty line in 2008.4

10. 
The 2009 information from the household survey suggests a small increase in 
poverty.  The most recent household survey (CASEN, 2009) reveals a small increase of the 
poverty rate to 15.1 percent and that for extreme poverty to 3.7 percent .  Results indicate a more 
rapid rise in urban area s than in ru ral area s.  There has been a grow ing d ebate about the quality 
of these statistics and the government is review ing the methodologies used to estimate the 
number of poor in Chile. 

4 Pove rty and Inequality among Ethn ic Groups in Ch ile ,  C laud io A . Agost in i, Ph ilip H . Brown, and Andre i Roman, 
http:www.economia.uahurtado.c l/pdf/publicac iones/ in v205.pdf . 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                               
Box 2 .  Government’s plan to finance the earthquake reconstruction 

Ch ile was h it by a massive 8 .8 magnitude ear thquake in the ear ly hours on 27 February 2010 , wh ich 
claimed abou t 300 lives, d isp laced about 2 million and caused signif ican t damage to pr ivate proper ty and 
pub lic infrastructure. The ep icen ter was located in waters off the sou thern coastline, close to the city of 
Concepcion and 200 miles sou th of the cap ital San tiago.  Coastal areas were also impacted by a tsunami 
and several strong af tershocks (up to 5.9 on the R ich ter scale).  The coastal regions of Mau le and B iob ío 
were the hardest h it. 

Estimates of R econstruction Costs 
Reconstruction costs have been estimated at around US$29 .7 b illion . Infrastructure costs are estimated at 
US$21.0 b illion, wh ile damages to the industry and retail sectors are pro jected at US$5.3 b illion. The 
estimated GDP loss is about US$7 .6 b illion . The au thorities estimated that the governmen t’s share of the 
reconstruction costs wou ld be around US$8.4 b illion (4 percent of GDP ) over 2010-2013. 

Government’s plan to finance the reconstruction 
On March 19, 2010, the f inance min ister, Felipe Larraín, ind icated that the reconstruction wou ld be 
f inanced through a comb ination of sources in order to mitigate adverse ef fects on the exchange rate and 
in terest rates.  The “Reconstruction Fund” is being f inanced f rom the fo llowing sources: 
• 
Insurance reimbursemen ts; 
• 
Improved eff iciency and reallocation of spending . T he Governmen t p lans budget reallocations worth 
US$700 million ; 
• Bond issuance.  In Ju ly 2010 Ch ile issued two 10 year global bonds for about US$1.5 b illion. 
• FEES: T he governmen t wou ld also use savings (sovereign wealth fund) to pay for reconstruction cost 
and f inance the f iscal shor tfall. 5
• Temporary tax increases:  In order to raise revenue for reconstruction, the government estab lished a 
tax on cigarettes. T emporary tax increases wou ld help avo id an undue compression of spend ing in the 
near term, and would be comb ined with a productiv ity- enhancing reduction in the stamp tax on 
f inancial transactions and some tax breaks for small and med ium size en terpr ises .  In th is regards, the 
Congress recen tly approved a governmen t proposal to raise taxes to min ing compan ies, wh ich wou ld 
raise about US$1 b illion over three years to help fund ear thquake reconstruction and the GOC’s 
education and health programs. 

Source: Wor ld Bank staf f. 

11. 
Incom e inequality is still high, though social expenditure plays an important role in 
reducing disparities.  In spite of sound econom ic grow th and targeted policies like the Chile 
Solidario Program , no significant changes in income inequality have occurred since the 1990s. 
The average income of the richest 20 percent of Chileans was 12 times that of the poorest 20 
percent in 2009, a small change from the ratio of 13 times recorded in 1990.  However, a number 
of government program s (such as direct transfe rs, health and education subsidies) continue to 
supplement the income of poor fam ilies.  The ratio falls from 12 times to 7 times in 2009, once 
these interventions are taken into account. 

5 As of the first qua rte r of 2010, the Economic and Soc ia l Stabilizat ion Fund (FEES ) had an a llocat ion of US$ 11.3 b illion. 

5 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                                               
12. 
Chile is a LAC leader but lags behind OECD standards regarding the Human 
Opportunity Index (HO I). 6
  Chile leads the ranking of HO I among 19 LAC countries regarding 
a common set of five very basic services: sixth grade completion on time; school attendance of 
children aged 10-14; access to sanitation; access to water, and access to electricity. In some of 
these areas, the level attained by Chile in 2006 was below the level more developed OECD 
countries achieved decades ago.  For example, the HO I for completing sixth grade on time for 
Chile in 2006 was below the HO I for the US in 1960, prior to the civil rights movement in this 
country. Similarly, the HO I for access to sanitation in Chile in 2006 was below the HO I for the 
US in 1970.  Regarding more demanding opportunities Chile’s HO Is in educational achievement 
are well below all 10 European and North-American OECD countries included in a comparative 
exercise. 

13. 
Studies show that Chile has made substantive progress on gender equity in term s of 
opportunities, the law and voice, but it lags in access to employm ent, incom e, and 
participation in political decision processes.  Thus, even though women and men have the 
same number of years of schooling (11.7 for the age group 25-39), women make up only 37 
percent of the labor force and their average wage is only 67 percent that of men.  Only 26 percent 
of women in the lowest income quintile in Chile participate in the job market as compared to 57 
percent in the highest quintile.  In 2009, women occupied only an average of 12.6 percent of all 
the seats in the legislative as compared to 21.5 percent average in the LAC Region.  During the 
tenure of President M ichelle Bachelet, a gender parity policy led to a substantial increase in 
female staff, especially in higher level positions in the Government .  More recently, the Chile 
Crece Contigo program provides access to childcare for the women in the bottom two quintiles 
who are currently working, searching for work or studying. 

D . Economic Prospects 

14. 
Chile’s economy has proven to be more re silient than other em erging market 
econom ies in LAC and elsewhere and is recovering rapidly from the effects of the global 
crisis.  This greater resilience is linked to Chile’s robust macroeconom ic framework, which rests 
on three, mutually re-enforcing, pillars:  (i) a responsible and predictable fiscal policy based on a 
transparent fiscal rule; (ii) a monetary policy conducted by an independent central bank which 
uses an inflation targeting regime (CPI target of 3.0 percent w ith a tolerance of +/- 1 percent), 
complemented by a floating exchange rate; and (iii) a solid financial system .  In the short-term, 
grow th and domestic demand is likely to be boosted by consumer and investment confidence and 
the reconstruction program , as well as the recovery in copper prices and export volumes. 

15. 
But Chile is not immune to econom ic shocks and som e vulnerabilities persist.  Even 
though many new export products have emerged in recent years and the destination of shipments 
has been diversified, copper revenues still account for a large share of merchandise exports (over 
50 percent in 2008-09 due to high international prices) and more than 30 percent of its imports 
are oil, fuels and food. Econom ic perfo rmance therefore continues to be affected by relative 

6 The HO I measures the percentage of ava ilab le opportunit ies needed to ensure children’s univers a l access to basic services and 
their a llocat ion based on the equality of opportun ity princ ip le. The HOI ran ges from 0 (absolute depriva t ion) to 100 
(unive rsa lity) . Mo linas, Paes de Barros, Saavedra, and G iuga le (2010) . "Do Our Ch ildren Have a Chance?  Th e 2010 Human 
Opportunity Report fo r Lat in America and the Ca ribbean" . Confe rence Edit ion. Wash in gton, DC : World Bank. 

6 

 
 
 
 
                                               
changes in commodity prices.  In addition, as an attractive investment destination and given the 
large liquidity in international money markets, Chile, like other leading emerging markets, may 
suffer from ex cessive capital inflows in the short term that could put pressure on the exchange 
rate and affect the competitiveness of some tradable sectors.  Furthermore, even if the fiscal 
position of the government remains strong due to a low public debt profile and a cushion of over 
US$15 billion worth of copper boom savings, a chang e of financing constraints could affect 
private sector ability to repay its external debts. 

16. 
The scenario described below focuses on the short and m edium -term outlook.  It 
incorporates the impact of the 2008-09 crisis as well as the effects of the February 2010 
earthquake, the econom ic recovery from 2010 and prospects for the glob al economy as well as 
recent Central Bank foreign exchange position policy measures (see Table 2).  The CPS baseline 
macro projections are summarized as follows: 

• Grow th and inflation.  G iven the strong economic recovery underway, real GDP is 
expected to expand by 5 percent in 2010, reach 6 pe rcent in 2011 and converge to 4.5 
percent in the long-run.  Private consumption and private and public investment, are 
expected to sustain domestic demand grow th in the short-run.  A fter a sharp contraction 
in industrial production in M arch 2010 (-17.4 percent annually) reflecting the impact of 
the earthquake, manufacturing activity has shown signs of recovery since M ay 2010 
(w ith an average annual rate of 4.3 percent during M ay-August).  The rapid recovery of 
domestic demand has boosted imports and contributed to some domestic inflation.  With 
diminishing spare capacity in the economy, inflat ion is expected to rise to about 3.7 
percent by the end of 2010, and to return to the 3 percent medium -term target in 2011 and 
beyond. 

• Fiscal accounts.  A fter posting primary fiscal surpluses between 2003 and 2008, the 
Central Government overall fiscal deficit reached 4.4 percent of GDP in 2009, mainly 
due to increased spending associated w ith the countercyclical fiscal stimulus and falling 
copper and non-copper revenues.  With the rebound in grow th and higher copper prices, 
public finances recovered slightly in 2010. The deficit is expected to narrow to 1.7 
percent of GDP, reflecting a recovery in tax revenues from both the mining and non-
m ining sectors and lower current expenditure due to the end o f sev eral temporary 
stimulus measures adopted in 2009.  The central Government deficit is expected to 
decline to 0.6 percent of GDP in 2011 and return to almost a balance by 2014.  The 
structural deficit is targeted to converge to 1 percent of GDP in 2014. 

• External accounts.  The external current account is projected to shift from a surplus of 
2.6 percent of GDP in 2009 to a deficit of 0.7 percent of GDP in 2010 and 2.0 percent of 
GDP in 2011, as net import growth strengthens.  In the long-term the current account 
deficit is expected to stabilize at around 2.5 percent of GDP.  Foreign D irect Investment 
(FD I) is expected to increase in the short and medium -term.  G ross international reserves 
reached US$25.4 billion in 2009, 9.5 percent higher than in 2008 and are expected to 
increase by US$ 12 billion during 2011 as a result of the recently announced program to 
strengthen foreign exchange  liquidity, and remain stable during the remaining projection 
period, as the Central Bank maintains its flexible exchange rate regime. 

7 

 
 
 
 
• Monetary accounts.  Monetary policy has moved to a tightening stance since June 2010, 
as financial conditions eased and credit grow th resumed.  In October 2010, Chilean 
policy makers raised the benchmark rate (from 2.5 percent to 2.75 percent) for the fifth 
straight month as the economy’s recovery fueled concern that consumer price inflation 
this year may exceed Central Bank targets. Further monetary tightening may involve 
tradeoffs in an environment of high international liquidity and strong appreciation 
pressure s on the Chilean peso. A fter depreciating by 17.6 percent in 2008, Chile’s real 
exchange rate appreciated during 2009 by 15.6 percent and by another 3 p ercent in 2010. 
Moreover, the nominal exchange rate has appreciated by 27 percent during 2009-2010 
(17 percent since the end of June) reaching $466.05 pesos per dollar in January 4, 
prompting the Central Bank to launch a massive program of dollar purchases aimed at 
strengthening its foreign exchange liquidity and reducing appreciation pressure s on the 
peso. Starting January 5 and until December 2011 the Central Bank w ill gradually buy an 
additional U$12 billion, follow ing a sim ilar policy used two years ago when the peso 
reached $465.8 against the dollar.  The Central Bank w ill sell bonds to drain the 
equivalent amount of cash from the economy. The Central Bank announced that it will 
purchase US$50 million a day from Jan. 5 to Feb. 9 and w ill announce further plans later. 

Table 2: Economic Prospects 

Chile: Economic Prospects

in percen t , un less o therwise sta ted
Es t .

National Accounts
GDP g rowth
Domes t ic demand g rowth
Population (millions )
Balance of payments
Cu rren t accoun t (% o f GDP)
Trade balance (% o f GDP)
Expo rts o f goods (% o f GDP)
Impo rts o f goods  (% o f GDP)
Net in ternat ional res erves (US$ bn )
Net in ternat ional res erves (% o f Sho rt term external deb t)
Terms o f trade (deterio rat ion -)
External indicators
To tal external deb t (% o f GDP)
Inflation 
Annual change in CPI (eop )
Fis cal (Central government)
Overall balance (% o f GDP) 
Structu ral balance (% o f GDP) 
Pub lic deb t (% o f GDP)
Copper reference p rice ( US¢/ lb )
No te: (Es t .) Es t imat ions .  (Pro j.) Pro ject ions .

Source: Banco Cent ral de Chile, DIPRES, World Bank and IM F s t aff p roject ions .

8 

2009

2010

-1.5
-5.9
17.0

2.6
8.6
33.2
24.6
25.4
145.1
2.9

45.8

-1.4

-4.4
-3.3
27.7
234

5.0
13.4
17.1

-0.7
7.3
34.4
27.1
25.4
145.1
12.6

38.6

3.7

-1.7
-4.1
26.2
315

2011

6.0
6.9
17.3

-2.0
8.3
35.2
26.9
37.4
214.0
4.6

35.1

3.0

-0.6
-3.0
25.4
327

Pro j.

2012

4.6
5.9
17.5

-2.1
7.8
36.1
28.3
37.4
214.0
-2.4

32.6

3.0

-0.5
-2.5
24.0
330

2013

4.5
5.0
17.6

-2.3
6.3
35.0
28.7
37.4
214.0
-4.1

30.9

3.0

-0.4
-1.8
22.6
299

2014

4.5
4.7
17.8

-2.3
5.0
33.4
28.4
37.4
214.0
-4.2

29.1

3.0

-0.2
-1.0
21.3
270

 
 
 
 
 
 
17. 
The recovery under way is likely to extend into the m edium term , but Chile is not 
immune to econom ic shocks and the economy remains vulnerable. Current projections 
suggest that over the long-term the economy w ill settle on a growth rate of 4.5 percent per year.  
However, relative changes in commodity prices and the pace of the global recovery exert a 
strong effect on econom ic activity.  Excessive capital inflows can also ex ert strong appreciation 
pressure s on the Chilean currency that could affect export incentives. Chile’s track record of 
timely and well structure economic policy suggest that the country w ill be able to tackle these 
issues successfully. However, in order for the economy to grow at a higher rate, 6 percent as 
expected by the incoming government, the authorities face several challenges that are discussed 
next . 

E . Developm ent Challenges and Opportunities 

18. 
Chile's substantial developm ent achievem ents have led to new challenges that the 
country is currently facing in order to boost econom ic grow th and elim inate extrem e 
poverty.  Primary challenges to achieve this vision are related to increasing competitiveness and 
opportunities for all through public sector reform s, creating new employment opportunities and 
improving the quality of jobs, and increasing investment, particularly in infrastructure by 
promoting private sector financing as well as direct investments.  In addition, the Government is 
committed to strengthening social policies that target the poor and protecting the environment. 

Public Sector Modernization 

19. 
Chile faces two fundam ental challenges in the public sector.  The first set of 
challenges arises from public sector rules and performance that constrain greater competitiveness 
and productivity in the private sector.  The second refers to the need to improve the quality and, 
to a lesser extent , the coverage of public services.  Given that Chile has already made progress 
on both fronts, the country faces the challenge of introducing reform s that are of a higher 
complexity than those implemented in prior generations.  In addition, the public sector reform s 
w ill be subject to tighter transparency criteria under the country's Access to Information legal 
and institutional framework. 

20. 
Despite strong macroeconomic 
fundam entals, 
fairly efficient public sector 
managem ent, and sophisticated business sector, a sustained 6 percent grow th in the long-
term calls for conditions that foster productivity grow th.  Chile remains the most competitive 
country in LAC (top 30th most competitive economies in the world, according to the G lobal 
Competitiveness Report)7
, but the country lags, according to this Report, with respect to the most 
advanced nations in several areas that include innovation potential , availability of skilled 
workforce, dynam ism of competitive markets, and efficiency of public management . Educational 
attainment rates have increased significantly, but quality remains weak (Chile ranked 101st for 
primary education and 45th for higher education and training at the Global Competitiveness 
Report).  The delivery of public services are relatively good compared w ith other LAC 
econom ies, but challenges still persist in the areas of accountability of public institutions, 

7 G loba l Compet it iveness R eport 2010-12. 

9 

 
 
 
                                               
efficiency of perfo rmance management system s, and decentralization.  On the financial sector, 
Chile faces challenges to broaden and deepen its domestic capital market in order to facilitate 
investment, while preserving sound financial regulation. 

21. 
Chile enjoys relatively good public services, when compared to neighboring 
countries, but there is a perception that better services could be del ivered w ith the sam e 
resources.  In order to improve the provision of public services the following challenges need to 
be addressed:  (i) the need for strengthening accountability of public institutions, in particular 
public services, through improved and publicly available monitoring and evaluation system s; (ii) 
the review of the overall existing performance management system; and (iii) the need to 
decentralize to lower levels of government and the division of responsibilities in the service-
delivery chain.  While the Government aim s to work on the various public services, it has 
identified the health sector as the first one to be addressed.  A first take in this sector shows that 
while there is adequate financial protection, there seem to be some systemic problem s in the 
health sector.  These include:  (i) quality and readiness of the health information system; (ii) the 
need to make the Health Superintendency more independent ; (iii) design and implementation of 
an adequate monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system and, (iv) improvement of the National 
Health Fund (Fondo Nacional de Salud, FONASA) in carrying out its main objective of financing 
health services. 

Job Creation and Equity Improvement 

22. 
Despite significant improvem ents in poverty reduction through social policy, high 
inequality and low social mobility remain a challenge. The current adm inistration approach to 
this challenge is to increase the country’s attention on the quality of education from early 
childhood to tertiary education and job skills training as a basis to raise competitiveness. To do 
so, it will build on the reform s introduced by previous administrations. These efforts are already 
show ing results as Chile improved its ranking between 2006 and 2010 in mathematics, reading, 
and science in basic education according to the Programme for International Student Assessment 
(PISA ). Further efforts will help Chile close the gap w ith the bulk of OECD countries. 

23. 
Chile has embarked on a number of bold reform s aim ed at improving the quality 
and increasing the relevance of the education system .  At the pre-school, primary and 
secondary levels, the new General Education Law and the Proposal on the National Education 
Quality Assurance system include:  i) major institutional reform s to establish system -wide 
quality assurance and to provide additional public funds to schools serving low -income students; 
ii) the establishment of a teacher performance evaluation system , mandatory for municipal 
school 
teachers, and 
improvements 
to teacher preparation and 
in-service pro fessional 
development; and iii) the launch of an information and communication technology (ICT) core 
strategy to improve the quality of education through the application of digital technologies.  
Moving ahead, the challenge is to implement the new organizational framework set out in the 
General Education Law , assuring key functions and their distribution across public agencies.  In 
particular, the Law calls for the creation of two institutions that still remain to be launched:  The 
Agency of Education Quality, 
to evaluate student and school performance, and 
the 
Superintendency of Education, to ensure school compliance w ith statutory regulations. 

10 

 
 
 
 
24. 
A t the tertiary level, Chile has expanded student finance, refined its accreditation 
system and expanded 
its use o f performance-based financing, but efficacy and 
sustainability still remain a challenge.  The country has an innovative loan program (the Law 
of the Preferential School Subsidy) aimed at improving learning of low -income students by 
providing additional resources to the schools that serve them and holding those schools 
accountable for learning outcomes.  However, a substantial portion of resources continue to be 
allocated based on historical arrangements, rather than performance-based criteria.  Finally, the 
Chilecalifica program has developed the basis for a national system of certification of labor 
competencies and established a foundation for a Lifelong Learning System with the objective of 
raising the skill level of the labor force and aligning the provision of training to changing labor 
market demands.  In all these program s, an evaluation of the experience so far in light of the 
lessons from international experience can help improve the efficacy and sustainability of these 
initiatives. 

25. 
Pioneering public policy reform s have resulted in the gradual establishm ent a 
System of Social Protection.  The limited improvement in poverty and stagnation of inequality 
during the 1990’s motivated reform s that included the launching of Chile Solidario in 2002, laws 
relating to Pension Reform , the institutionalization of the Integrated System of Social Protection 
and Chile Crece Contigo, improvements in unemployment insurance and the creation of an 
employment subsidy scheme.  An important additional institutional innovation has been the 
Integrated System of Social Information, a national computerized technological platform that 
registers stores and processes information on socioeconomic conditions of the priority target 
population of social program s, services and transfers at the local level.  The new government 
envisions bringing to scale a broader approach to social protection which will focus on risk 
m itigation for the most vulnerable. 

Promoting Sustainable Investment 

26. 
Substantial investm ents in infrastructure are foreseen to support the higher rate of 
econom ic grow th.  The challenge for Chile is to maintain the quality of infrastructure, one of the 
most developed in Latin America.  The estimate is that over the coming year the investment in 
infrastructure w ill amount to around US$20 billion in all sectors critical to econom ic growth: 
transport, energy, water and sanitation, and agriculture. Most of these investments w ill be 
undertaken by the private sector through concessions.  In addition, public investment of around 
US$6 billion will go to those areas where concessions are not viable, particularly in rural areas. 

27. 
Adequately linking areas of production and processing w ith export gateways 
remains a major challenge ow ing to Chile’s geography (6,500 km length and approximately 
175 km w idth).  To enhance its multimodal transport system , Chile plans to modernize its 
logistics system and remove existing bottlenecks.  This modernization process w ill probably 
involve substantial private sector participation through the current concess ions model , which has 
shown to be successful. 

28. 
Chile has begun to address the challenges of urban congestion, traffic safety, and 
transport related air quality problem s.  In 2007, the GOC initiated the Transantiago project to 
transform Santiago's public transport system from a relatively informal and fragmented service 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
provision sector to a professionally operated integrated city-w ide network, w ith the ultimate 
purpose of reducing traffic congestion and providing greater access to public transportation.  
Implementation of the project met serious start-up problem s and today efforts continue to reduce 
the system ’s deficit in the city through measures that improve efficiency and include reducing 
costs, curbing fare evasion, continuing w ith fare increases or finding other financing sources, 
such as revenues from a possible congestion charge or other pricing instruments.  Aside from 
large cities, such as Santiago, challenges range from marginally regulated public transport 
service provision, fragmented and informal sector, lack of adequate services in off-peak and 
night periods, to a very old and polluting public transport fleet. 

29. 
Chile’s well functioning energy sector has supported the rapid grow th of the 
economy, but the sector remains a source of vulnerability for the economy.  The 
privatization and liberalization of its electricity sector in the 1980s set the foundation for a 
competitive energy sector, which is often used as a model for other countries.  However, the 
Chilean energy sector’s heavy dependence on imported fossil fuels (oil, natural gas and coal) 
raises concern about energy security and the vulnerability of the economy. Investments in 
hydropower can help reduce vulnerability and meet grow ing demand, given the considerable 
potential of the country. According to projections made by the Com isión Nacional de Energía 
(CNE), more than one-third of the capacity expansion by 2020 can be delivered by conventional 
hydroelectricity projects.  Still, one of the main challenges in the development of hydroelectric 
power plants will be the increased competing demands for scarce water resources. 

30. While the Governm ent can continue to rely on the private sector for major 
infrastructure investm ents, the public investm ent planning agenda is expected to focus 
more on rural regions w ith high poverty levels.  Some of these regions were heavily affected 
by the earthquake and the tsunam i in February 2009 where reconstruction continues.  However, 
the highest obstacle to reach these rural communities is the traditional econom ic evaluation of 
individual infrastructure projects.  Furthermore, the prioritization of these investments remains 
weak as most of the investment in infrastructure is allocated through sectoral agencies that often 
do not respond to local and regional priorities.  There has been some progress in this regard 
through the territorial developing planning approach under the devel opment of Territorial 
Development Planning Frameworks (PMDTs).  The government has implemented five 
Frameworks to date, covering investments in roads, water and sanitation, and energy. 

31. 
Chile is highly exposed to extrem e natural events as earthquakes, tsunam is and 
floods.  To manage this disaster risk is one of the most important issues that Chile faces in term s 
of sustainable development. The impact of the 8.8 magnitude earthquake on February 27, 2010 
induced important changes and adjustments for the Government’s agenda.  In this context, the 
GOC is developing an agenda based on the lessons learned from the last earthquake to cover 
disaster risk management issues, which include: hazard and risk asse ssment projects, early 
warning system s, risk reduction policies integrated in land use planning, and development of 
regional and local capacity. 

32. 
Chile seeks to regain its foo thold as an important player in global agro-food 
markets.  A fter a propitious insertion into the global markets, the initial dynam ism of the agro-
food sector fizzled during the last decade contributing to the decline in productivity grow th of 

12 

 
 
 
 
the overall economy.  To reverse the trend and gene rate a p roductive transformation in the 
Chilean economy, the Government has launched a growth strategy, which assigns a central role 
to innovation.  As part of that strategy, priority is given to realizing the potential of the sector 
through the Sub-system of Agro-food and Forestry Innovation (Sistema de Innovación 
Agroalimentario y Forestal - SIAF).  In the long term , Chile expects that the proposed measures 
w ill lead to increased private sector investment in research and development in the agro-food 
sector. 

33. Managem ent of natural resources in Chile faces difficult trade-offs that are being 
accentuated by climate change.  Efforts at conciliating economic growth w ith environmental 
criteria and the sustainable management of natural resources has proven difficult in Chile and 
today the country is facing critical challenges in water resources management, grow ing pollution, 
land degradation and erosion combined w ith uncertainties of climate change.  In addition, the 
country lacks legislative instruments to regulate environmental protection and preservation thus 
leading to potential conflicts between different interest groups. 

34. 
The current legal and institutional fram ework for environm ental issues is based on 
the Environm ental Impact Assessm ent System established in 1997.  Most of the sector 
agencies have relied on the National Commission for the Environment’s (CONAMA) instruments 
such as Environmental Impact Studies 8
 which are needed to design appropriate mitigation 
measures to reduce the adverse environmental impacts of projects.  In addition, in January 2009, 
CONAMA presented the National C limate Change Action Plan, for 2008-2012, as a re ference 
framework for climate change impact analysis, vulnerability, adaptation and m itigation.  The 
Action Plan envisions construction of local climate change scenarios by Chile’s M eteorological 
Center, in collaboration with universities and research centers in the country.  An important 
objective of the Action Plan is to establish the level of vulnerability of water resources, and to 
define the options for their effective use. 

35. However, as the claim s on water grow , institutional changes in water resources 
managem ent and overall environm ental issues are foreseen.  The pressure placed by energy 
and agriculture as well  are urban areas w ill require revisiting the national water resources policy 
and strategy, possibly implementing new approaches based on ba sin management that  
effectively address the multipurpose uses of water.  A lready, the concept of hydrographical basin 
management has been adopted and, as noted above, climate change will be factored in when 
developing alternative scenarios to evaluate the impact of policies on sustainability. 

36. 
Chile has made recent progress in improving air quality in rapidly grow ing urban 
sectors, but challenges remain on health and air pollution issues, particularly in the 
Santiago Metropolitan Region.  Recent policy changes regarding the use of quality of fuels 
have contributed to reduce the quantity of em itted sulfur from mobile and fixed sources. National 
laws on environment and air quality have become stricter.  Furthermore, air contam inants and 
new laws for vehicles have been enacted, thus placing Chile close to developed countries such as 

8 A fu ll En vironmenta l Impact Study is required for projects wh ich pose potent ia l adverse impacts on health, natura l resources, 
enta il res ett lement o f populat ion, a re located nea r protected areas or have a h igh potent ia l o f a ffect ing the scen ic va lue of an a rea 
or cou ld potent ia lly a lter a reas of h igh cu ltura l or h istorica l va lue. 

13 

 
 
 
 
                                               
the United States and the EU.  Air pollution prevention and control in the M etropolitan Region 
has resulted on selected contaminant em issions and the number of health emergencies due to air 
pollution exposure.  Still , general em ission laws for industrial processes and for toxic air 
contam inant sources (except arsenic in coppe r smelting) are still m issing.  In addition, 
monitoring efforts on air quality and em ission inventories are only applied for the main cities and 
in the zones near the copper smelting plants. 

F. Governm ent Priorities and Medium -Term Strategy 

37. 
Upon taking office in March 2010, the new Governm ent’s foremost priority was 
focused on the em ergency and reconstruction response to the massive February 27 th, 2010 
earthquake.  The Government’s immediate response was to restore ord er and security in the 
area, distribute food among the victim s and establish field hospitals.  Through the w inter 
response stage, 70,000 temporary houses were constructed and 23,000 cash grants were 
distributed for repairing and reconstructing urban housing units.  Another 60,000 cash grants 
were allocated for employment creation.  The earthquake had devastat ing effects on public and 
private infrastructure.  The Chilean authorities estimated that the government’s share of the 
estimated total reconstruction costs of about US$30 billion would be in the order of US$8.4 
billion (4 percent of GDP) over 2010-13. 9
  Under the current stage of the reconstruction plan 
called Levantemos Chile, the government w ill finance the reconstruction of about 200,000 
homes, continue with the cash grant program fo r repairing and rebuilding, and finance the 
reconstruction of public infrastructure works, such as water and sanitation system s, port 
facilities, airports, and public buildings. 

38. On November 2010, the governm ent launched an ambitious development agenda for 
Chile, called Chile País Desarrollado 10
, which sets the goal of ach ieving high-incom e 
developed country status by 2018.  The government has set clear targets for the period 2010-14 
(Table 3), in order to place the country on a higher level of long-term development path. In 
addition, the government has established as a long-term goal to eradicate extreme poverty by 
2014. 

Tab le 3:  Ch ile’s Development Agenda’s Targets for 2010-2014 

Ta rge ts 

Growth 

Emplo ymen t 

• A ve rage GDP growth o f 6 p ercent fo r the pe r iod 201 0-13 
• 
Inc rease in vestment from 21 .4  p ercent to 28  p ercent o f GDP b y 2014 
• 
Inc rease research and d evelop ment (R&D) in vestment from 0.4 pe rcent to 0.6 pe rcent o f 
GDP b y 2 013 and to 0.8 pe rcent b y 2018 
• Creat e 10 0,000 n ew ent erp r ises for t he p er io d 2010 -13 

• Create 200,000 new jobs on ave rage annually be tween 2010-14 
• Labor training for 5 mi llion worke rs between 2010-13 

Source : Government of Ch ile, Chi le País Desarrollado: Más oportunidades y mejores emp leos (No vember 2010) 

9 IMF A rt ic le IV, Septembe r 2010 
10 Agenda Chi le País Desarrollado:  Más Oportunidades y Mejores Emp leos 
http://www .hac ienda .c l/documentos/doc/agenda_chile_pa is_desarro llado.pdf 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                               
39. 
According to the GOC 's agenda, the three strategic areas that the Governm ent of 
Chile plans to emphasize during 2010-14 are: i) achieving greater competitiveness, 
including the modernization of the state; ii) improving job creation and job quality; and iii) 
promoting investm ent.  In addition, the government is comm itted to other important reform s 
aimed at strengthening social policies and protecting the environment. 

40. 
In the area of boosting competitiveness for productivity grow th, the governm ent’s 
agenda makes a strong emphasis on state modernization as a cross-cutting commitm ent 
focused on building a public adm inistration that would better support a high-level 
economy.  Chile’s current main challenge in this area is to improve competitiveness and 
efficiency in the provision of public services towards better services to citizens and investment 
facilitation.  The government has established a series of actions to remove bottlenecks at the 
public administration and strengthen accountability of public institutions.  As part of this, the 
GOC has proposed better control system s, a stronger civil service, efficient procurement 
processes, e ffective corporate gove rnance, and re formed state-owned en terprises.  The public 
sector reform would also encompass a decentralization process that would devolve management 
of public services to the sub-national levels while ensuring clear definition of responsibilities and 
accountability mechanism s. 

41. 
In addition to state modernization, the GOC seeks to improve the country’s 
competitiveness through capital market reform , trade facilitation, innovation, better 
business environm ent, and market competition.  On capital markets, the government has 
announced a comprehen sive refo rm aimed at strengthening the financial sector’s institutional 
framework— improving market access for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and developing 
new markets and financial products to reduce financing costs. 11
  On trade facilitation, the 
government plans to implement the Integrated System of Foreign Trade (SICEX ) –which will 
allow simplifying the import and export procedure s— ,conduct market assessments to take full 
advantage of its free trade agreements, and introduce measures to increase the country’s export 
capacity and efficiency to compete in new markets.  The GOC has also announced incentives to 
promote R&D investment, several measures to ease businesses, and n ew regulations for the 
fisheries and agricultural sectors. 

42. 
In the area of job creation and job quality, the governm ent’s efforts w ill be focused 
on fostering job opportunities and enhancing labor skills and productivity through 
improvem ents in the quality of education and a strong labor training program .  The Piñera 
adm inistration announced a new wave of re form s aimed at refocusing the curriculum on basic 
math and communication skills, strengthening evaluation and improving incentives for teacher 
and student performance.  Special attention is given to reducing disparities in quality and access 
to education services and in improving the social protection policy for children. In particular, in 
the area of early child development , the government will continue to enhance early childhood 
development through the Chile Crece Contigo program , expanded child care services, and an 
improved nursery education system.  At the tertiary education level, the GOC w ill emphasize 
incentive schemes for students, educators, and institutions to improve management and results 

11 All the reforms a re inc luded in the Bicentenn ia l C ap ita l Ma rkets Re form (MKB). For more info rmat ion vis it : 
http://www .gob ie rnodechile.c l/ informa /2010/05/06/agenda -mercado-de-cap ita les-de l-b icenten ario.h tm 

15 

 
 
 
                                               
based on standards, and w ill foster equity in the provision of scholarships and grants. The overall 
program also includes training program s for educators and better information system s for 
graduate students to access to relevant labor market data.  On labor, the government aim s at 
reform ing the labor capacity building program through voucher program s and improved labor 
intermediation system s to improve the quality and relevance of the training program s.  The GOC 
w ill also promote better coordination, negotiation processes, and dialogue between employers 
and employees and will conduct a study to elaborate a methodology for m inimum wage 
adjustments. 

43. 
In the area of investm ent promotion, the governm ent w ill seek to improve the 
business climate to attrac t higher levels of private sector investm ent, including FDI, in 
strategic sectors.  The program w ill include tax incentives (e.g. reinvestments of earnings), tax 
cuts to reduce financial costs to SMEs, elim ination of bureaucratic obstacles to accelerate private 
investment, and review of regulation to promote FD I and concessions in strategic industries, 
such as energy.  In the long-term it is expected that about US$50 billion would be invested in the 
m ining sector, particularly in exploration.  On the public investment side, the government has 
committed to promote investment in infrastructure (e.g. roads, irrigation, ports and airports) of 
about US$14 billion between 2010 and 2014, which includes US$8 billion in concessions and 
US$6 billion in public investment by the M inistry of Public Works. 

44. 
In addition to the developm ent agenda launched in October 2010, the governm ent’s 
strategy also emphasizes social and environm ental policies.  In order to help eradicate poverty 
and reduce excessive inequalities by 2018 the government proposes to create a national 
m inimum income transfer program (Ingreso Etico Fam iliar) that rationalizes existing transfers, 
and a new law to redesign the M inistry of Planning (M IDEPLAN) into a Social Development 
M inistry, reinforcing its role in the adm inistration, coordination, supervision, and evaluation of 
the system of integrated social protection policies. Finally, to ensure the long-term environmental 
sustainability of grow th, the government’s effo rts w ill be focused on ensuring a successful 
implementation of the new institutional framework as well as key policies and regulations to 
address key environmental challenges.  The new ly created M inistry of Environment will play an 
important role in developing policies and environmental assessments for investment projects, and 
in strengthening the Superintendence for the Environment.  The government plans to issue new 
regulations to protect natural areas and biodiversity, modernize the management of natural 
resources, p romote renewable energy, ensure standards on quality of air and water, control 
transport em issions, and effectively manage solid waste.  In addition, the government will 
conduct assessments to find options to adaptation to cl imate change and propose m itigation 
strategies specifically in energy, agriculture, transport, mining, and industry. Some of these 
actions respond to commitments that Chile has taken to address climate change as a new member 
of the OECD . 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. BANK GROUP PARTNERSH IP STRATEGY 

A . Lessons Learned from previous CPS and Stakeholder Feedback 

45. 
A key lesson from the previous CPS was tha t a results fram ework fo r a CPS must 
allow the partners to m easure the direct contribution of the program . Linking the impact 
and contribution of the program to progress towards long-term development goals makes it very 
difficult to assess the World Bank G roup contribution in Chile, particularly as this contribution is 
financially small and covers only selected areas.  Thus, the results framework should focus on 
outcomes at a lower level than broad development goals. 

46. 
The CPS design should be consistent w ith a flexible approach. The flexible character 
of the previous CPS program worked well. The success of the Joint Studies Program, w ith 
annual programm ing responding to emerging priorities is perhaps the best example of flexibility, 
contributing timely inputs to government policy decisions. Fee based services a re another 
example of demand driven cooperation that has worked well. The challenge for the design o f the 
CPS is to embed flexibility w ithin a structured partnership framework. A continuous dialogue on 
the areas of engagement is necessary, and should include periodic updating of the program to 
reflect new activities and their expected contribution. In addition, mechanism s are needed to 
assure the quality of the services provided and products delivered as well as an accurate 
recording of the results achieved. 

47. 
The Bank should continue making headway in the use of country sys tem s when the 
risk associated with governance and public finance managem ent in countries are low like 
they are in Chile.  The Bank has relied on country system s for budget preparation and 
execution, as well as accounting through the country's integrated financial management system 
(SIGFE); and external audit through the Supreme Audit Institution (Contraloria General de la 
Respública).  Financial management performance in active projects has been satisfactory.  A t the 
same time, incompatibilities between procurement requirements under World Bank guidelines 
and national procurement regulations may have impacted implementation of some project 
components.  Thus, the Bank should use the limited number of projects during the CPS to work 
closely w ith the client to build better understanding of the Bank's policies and guidelines.  While 
Chile is not included in the use of country system s pilot in procurement, the Bank w ill continue 
to work w ith Chile on continuous improvement of national system (including reliance on 
components of the system , such as use of framework ag reements in CH ILECOMPRA instead of 
shopping). 

48. 
Find a way to share Chile’s developm ent experience and lessons. Future WBG 
engagement in Chile should focus on creating mechanism that help channel successful 
experiences in the transformation that has gone into turning the country into a high m iddle 
income country as well as the current efforts to meet the challenges to move to developed 
income status. In this regard, continued Bank G roup involvement w ith Chile is a two-way 
investment that has allowed important spillovers into WBG work in other countries in areas such 
as results-based budgeting, social protection and tertiary education reform . 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
49. 
The stakeholder consultation also offered som e important inputs for the preparation 
of this CPS (see Annex 3).  There is a generalized vision that the country needs to improve 
competitiveness and achieve su stainable grow th, while reducing inequities and poverty.  
Stakeholders identified that a key factor to achieve this vision was the quality of education and 
the development of adequate labor skills.  There was also great concern in term s of protecting the 
environment, particularly the country's scarce water resources, seeking a balance between the 
expansion of the m ining sector and energy industry and sustainable development.  Stakeholders 
also identified that, even though the GOC has done much in term s of re form s, a new stage of 
state modernization and decentralization is needed in order to achieve more efficient use of 
resources and ensure voice and accountability at the various levels of government. 

50. 
The client survey, carried out between June and July 2010, also produced similar 
results.  Overall, they identified quality of education as a priority, followed by the need to foster 
innovation and knowledge.  In term s of perception, clients value most the Bank's technical 
advice and know ledge, asking for greater engagement in the country in this area. Respondents 
were mainly from government agencies (39 percent) followed by private sector (20 percent) and 
academ ia (19 percent). 

B . Proposed World Bank Group Partnership Strategy 

51. 
The CPS aim s at supporting the Governm ent of Chile's ambitious vision of 
eradicating extrem e poverty by 2014 and becom ing a developed country by 2018.  Given 
that both IBRD and IFC interventions under this CPS will be lim ited in scope and focused in 
those areas where they can p rovide value added to the Country, the contributions will be very 
specific.  The bulk of IBRD assistance w ill be provided through know ledge activities funded 
both through the yearly JSP and Fee-Based-Se rvices.  A small portfolio of new lending 
operations is planned where GOC is requesting implementation support in selected areas. 

52. 
IFC will continue working in Chile with the objective of fostering greater 
entrepreneurship.  The Corporation w ill seek investments in companies that are operating in 
advanced fields or developing innovative business models in a narrow range of sectors, such a s, 
tertiary education, vocational training, infrastructure and energy, and financial services.  IFC also 
hopes to support cross-border investments by Chilean companies in neighboring countries or in 
other developing countries, given the difficulties many face in sourcing ri sk-m itigation products 
and in raising local financing. 

53. 
The Bank Group will carry out activities for which the governm ent or the private 
sector have expressed explicit demand either through know ledge work or lending.  These 
activities are grouped und er three results areas add ressing Public Sector Modernization, Creation 
of Jobs and Improving Equity, and Promoting Sustainable Investments.  The first re sults area, 
Promoting Public Sector Modernization, covers a share of the Government 's Competitiveness 
strategic area, and concentrates in those aspects where the Bank can provide value added.  The 
second results area, Creation of Jobs and Improving Equity, contributes activities under the 
Government 's strategic area of improving job creation and job quality, but adds the vision on 
social protection.  Finally, the third Results area, Promoting Sustainable Investments, contributes 
to the Government 's strategy on promoting investment, and includes support on environment, in 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
order to contribute inputs to the country's vision on environmental protection.   The actions under 
these three results areas reflect the current dialogue w ith the country and, in those cases where 
activities are know ledge based, deliverables are those planned for FY 2011.  New activities will 
be planned for each fiscal year, in agreement with the GOC. In other cases, tim ing of 
deliverables and results will depend on the life of the project.  Table 4 provides a summary of 
ongoing loans and grants, as well as the initial proposed package of activities under this CPS. 

Table 4: Indicative Work Program 

A reas of 
Intervention 

Public Sec tor 
Moderni za tion 

Current Portfo lio 

• Publ ic E xp end iture 
Man agement II S IL, 
US$24.8 mill ion 
• Stren gth en in g Ch ile ’s 
Coun c il fo r 
Tran spa ren cy IDF 
• Stren gth en in g th e 
Tran spa ren cy and 
Account ab ilit y o f th e 
Jud ic ia ry IDF 

Job Creatio n a nd 
Improving Equity 

• In frastructu re for 
Ter r itor ial Develo pment 
S IL, US$50 .3 millio n 
• So cial Prot ect ion TAL 
Add itional F in anc in g, 
US$3.0 million 

Promoting 
Sustaina ble 
Inv estment 

Proposed Lending ** 

• So cial Sectors and 
Publ ic Pol ic ies TAL, 
US$20 million (FY12) 

• 

• Tert iary Edu cat ion 
F inanc in g for Result s 
APL II , US$10 0 
mill ion  (FY12) 
So cial Sectors and 
Publ ic Pol ic ies TAL, 
US$20 million (FY12) 
• In frastructu re Pro ject, 
US$80 million (FY12) 

Jo int Studies Program 
(FY11) and FBS* 

• Assessment o f the 
Pe r fo rmance Mana gement 
Incent ives 
• Assessment and 
Recommend at ion s on th e 
Decent ral izat ion Law 
• In suran ce Secto r Review 
• Imp ro vement in th e 
Health Sector F inanc in g  
• Stren gth en in g o f the 
Mo nito r in g and 
E valu ation System for 
So cial Pro grams FBS 
• Stat e-Gua ranteed Student 
Lo an P ro gram 

• Wat er Resou rces 
Assessment 
• F inanc in g In strument s to 
F inance Urban Tran sp ort 
Pro ject s FBS 
• Re view o f Ch allen ges and 
Respon se o f th e A gr i- food 
and Forestry Inno vat ion 
Systems FBS 

• M in istry o f Pu blic 
Works TAL, US$1 1.7 
mill ion 
• Santiago Urb an 
Tran sport TAL, US$4.8 
mill ion 
• Urb an Tran sport Syst em 
red esign for a mod el c it y 
in Ch il e SFLAC 
• In stitut io nal 
Stren gth en in g o f M in in g 
Sector fo r Ind igeno u s 
Peoples Inclu sion IDF 

19 

* Part ia l list fo r FY11, more studies a re like ly to be commiss ioned on the second ha lf of th e FY. 
** Amounts are tentat ive 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C . Expected Results and Program of Lending and Non-Lending Activities 

Result Area 1: Public Sector Modernization 

54. 
The CPS program aim s to support the Governm ent’s vision of a modern, more 
efficient, effective and accountable public sector capable of facilitating increased 
competitiveness and poverty reduction.  The Bank expects to provide value added,  mainly 
through studies and grant financing, in five areas:  (i) improving performance and public 
financial management; (ii) increasing transparency; (iii) strengthening M&E system s; (iv) 
strengthening of the financial system and capital markets regulation and (v) boosting the 
efficiency of resources in the public sector, especially in the health sector.  O ther priority areas in 
the government’s state modernization agenda may be included in the future, where the Bank has 
strong expertise, such as public sector investment . 

1.1 

Performance and Public Financial Managem ent 

55. 
The GOC intends to further develop its performance managem ent system s by 
providing adequate instrum ents and incentives that should lead to more effective and 
transparent regulations and managem ent of public resources.  The existing performance 
management system is a complex initiative, involving different instruments, system s and 
institutions.  These instruments include those directly linked to human resources management, 
such as the Enhancement M anagement Program (PMG ) and the collective agreements, which 
define a relevant portion of personnel expenditures through variable pay.  O ther instruments 
focus on improving effective management of public budget funds, such as monitoring and 
evaluation, ex-ante and ex-post evaluation of investments and of public policies, comprehensive 
expenditure and impact evaluations, institutional balance scorecards, strategic definitions linked 
to the Presidential priorities, the performance agreements of the Sistema de Alta Dirección, and 
the work being started by the Delivery Unit at SEGPRES. 

56. 
The GOC has requested the Bank to continue assisting through the Joint Studies 
Program (JSP), in this area with a focus on:  (i) the development of an updated financial 
management system that can rapidly aggregate and consolidate financial and accounting 
information, aligning monitoring and financial indicators, so that budget formulation and 
execution can be evaluated and monitored; (ii) an assessment of cu rrent incentives schemes 
linked to results in the public adm inistration and recommendations on incentives and 
mechanism s to improve management and accountability; (iii) an evaluation on current 
decentralization processes and recommendations to improve management, accountability and 
results at the municipal level; and, (iv) assessment of institutional and individuals incentives for 
the provision of health and education services and recommendations on improving efficiency in 
both sectors. 

1.2 

Transparency 

57. 
The GOC continues to place great emphasis on transparency a s part o f the 
modernization of the public sector, and the adoption of the Access to Info rmation Law 
(August 2008) is a significant step in this direction.  The Bank w ill continue to support the 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improvement of transparency and accountability of Chilean public institutions, through two 
Institutional Development Fund (IDF) G rants, by strengthening the recently established Council 
for Transparen cy, supporting the implementation of the Access to Information (ATI) legislation, 
and strengthening the transparency and accountability of the Judiciary. In particular, World Bank 
engagement w ill focus on fou r area s: (i) strengthening the Council for Transparency’s oversight 
role through facilitating access to peer know ledge and good p ractices from ATI oversight bodies 
of OECD countries; (ii) developing ICT platform s in order to respond to information requests at 
the municipal level; (iii) improving records management practices in the Chilean public 
adm inistration; and (iv) strengthening the capacity of the Supreme Court, in particular its 
communications office, to design and implement a change management and communications 
program built on transparency and integrity. 

1.3 

Strengthening M&E system s 

58. 
The current governm ent has assigned M IDEPLAN greater responsibility in 
monitoring and evaluating public sector performance w ith the creation of a specialized 
Monitoring and Evaluation Unit.  M IDEPLAN has initiated the work program by identifying 
program objectives, target population, functions, progress, and outcomes.  Based on this 
information, a specific agenda for the Ministry w ill be developed that could also provide input to 
other central government units such as the Presidency or Dirección de Presupuestos (D IPRES).  
The World Bank will provide advice, through a proposed fee-based-service (FBS) in this process 
and potentially support in the development of methodologies that would lead to making 
program s more efficient and responsive to the mandate of M IDEPLAN .  Finally, the FBS intends 
to develop the scorecard for the program s as well as other evaluation methodologies that the 
M inistry would identify as needed. 

1.4 

Strengthening of the financial system and capital markets regulation 

59. 
The current administration has set the deepening of the capital markets as a 
priority supported by a broad s trategy articulated in the "Agenda M ercado de Capitales del 
B icentenario", (B icentennial Capital Markets Agenda, MKB) The World Bank w ill provide 
support to the authorities, initially, on advice in the areas of risk-based supervision in the 
insurance sector.  In addition a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) w ill be delivered 
jointly with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in FY11. The FSAP results and 
recommendations will identify potential areas of further cooperation.  

60. 
Chile’s strong and well-managed banks tend to compete fo r business among blue 
chip corporations and middle- upper-incom e retail clients. They have largely neglected the 
needs of small and medium enterprises.  In order to address this gap, IFC w ill continue exploring 
partnerships w ith banks and non-banks to provide lines of credit for small companies or low -
income groups.  IFC may also provide innovative solutions for this market segment , such as 
short-term financing products to overcome working capital limitations.  

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.5 

Efficient use of resources in public services 

61. 
The GOC aim s to achieve greater efficiency in the provision of public services.  The 
Government has requested the Bank to focus in the health sector in the initial phase of the CPS.  
Chile has reached almost universal coverage of prioritized health services and its health 
indicators are equal or superior to countries w ith sim ilar or larger levels of health spending.  The 
major health sector reform s during recent years focused on reducing barriers to access through 
the increase in the number of health problem s protected under the guaranteed insurance benefit 
plan (in Spanish, Acceso Universal con Garantías Explícitas, AUGE, also called the Regimen de 
Garantias Explicitas de Salud, RGES), from an initial 14 health problems in 2005 to 56 for the 
period 2007 -2009.  The goal was to reach 80 health problem s guaranteed during 2010. Thus, the 
health sector is subject to new demands which are posing a challenge to the efficient use of 
resources in the provision of the multitude of services which are characteristic of this sector.  The 
Bank, through the JSP, will assist the Government in analyzing the incentives structure in the 
Chilean Health System and evaluating whether policy objectives are adequately financed.  
Specifically, an assessment w ill be carried out of the management tools that are available for the 
purchasing of health services in the National Health Fund (FONASA) and the accompanying 
information system s that support the purchases made by this institution. Support to implement 
the required reform s may be provided through a new Technical Assistance Loan. 

Result Area 2: Job Creation and Improving Equity 

62. 
This result area would support the GOC's objective of reducing econom ic and social 
inequality in Chile through enabling the em ergence of econom ic opportunities in high value 
added activities and promoting human capital developm ent.  To this end, the Bank would 
initially address the following requests from the Government through lending and studies:  (i) 
improving quality, financing, and equitable access to tertiary education services; (ii) improving 
the social protection system for the poor; and (iii) increasing the access of rural population to 
markets for their products. 

2.1 

Improving Access and Quality Education 

63. 
Chile has embarked on an ambitious path of reform of its educa tion system at all 
levels.  The Bank w ill support the efforts to implement the recent reform s to improve quality 
assurance and efficiency of education and promote the articulation from secondary to tertiary and 
onward to the economy. The proposed Technical Assistance Loan for strengthening the Social 
Sectors and Public Policies would finance implementation of the existing policies on education.  

64. 
The GOC is placing greater emphasis in finding efficient and innovative ways to 
finance an equitable access to tertiary education.   The Bank w ill support these efforts, 
through the JSP, by evaluating the State-Guaranteed Student Loan Program (CAE, Crédito con 
Aval del Estado), which has been operating since 2006.  The CAE aim s at increasing equity in 
enrollment, supporting qualified students from lower income brackets to increase their likelihood 
to access tertiary education.  In addition, CAE aim s at increasing quality of tertiary education 
services.  The Budget O ffice (D IPRES) at the M inistry of Finance has requested Bank support in 
evaluating the program to formulate recommendations for its improvement going forward.  The 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Bank assistance w ill focus on evaluating the effects of the CAE program on improved tertiary 
education’s coverage and equity and accessing its financial sustainability. 

65. 
A new lending operation w ill further focus on increasing quality through further 
improvem ents to the accreditation system and through greater reliance on performance-
based financing.  The objective is that accreditation “reaches down” to influence teaching and 
learning practices in the classroom.  The intended institutional changes would seek to empower 
institutions in defining its m ission and goals to then be held accountable for reaching them, while 
encouraging diversity in institutional m issions among institutions. 

66. 
IFC pioneered investm ents in private education in Chile and has replicated this 
approach elsewhere in Latin Am erica, particularly in Colombia and Brazil .  IFC has 
detected continued demand for investments in Chilean institutions that focus on adult education 
and technical training.  IFC’s approach is either to provide direct financing to support these 
colleges’ expansion projects; or to support student loan program s focused on low -income and 
m iddle class students by funding financial institutions or universities that offer these loans. 

2.2 

Improved Social Protection System for the Poor 

67. 
Chile has undertaken a substantial reform in its social protection system through 
the Chile Solidario and the Chile Crece Contigo (CCC) program s, which targets delivery of 
basic social services to the poor.  The Bank w ill continue supporting the effective 
implementation and monitoring of the results of these and other key social protection policies 
and program s, as well as the management of the system as a whole.  This support w ill be 
provided through the recently approved additional financing for the Social Protection Technical 
Assistance Project, and the new Technical Assistance Loan.  A reas for support include:  the 
development, including pilot evaluation, of the new minimum income program proposal (ingreso 
ético familiar); the transformation of M IDEPLAN into a Social Development M inistry; capacity-
building for municipalities to support the strengthening of their management in areas related to 
the social protection system and an assessment of this activity plus other technical assistance 
being provided by M IDEPLAN to local governments; follow -up of the results of the changes 
being introduced to the psychosocial support provided by the Puente program to families (group 
sessions and differentiated strategy based on family characteristics; continued support and 
assessment of the results of the implementation of the local employment service for Chile 
Solidario participants and the new program s for the elderly, homeless, and fam ilies with 
incarcerated members; evaluation of the implementation of CCC and its integrated intervention 
strategy.  One of the interventions within CCC is expanding childcare facilities (meeting age-
appropriate standards) so as to guarantee these services for any mother who is either studying or 
working.  Initial results show that this intervention is having a positive impact on providing poor 
women access to the labor market.  In a related initiative, the World Bank is collaborating with 
the Government on an impact evaluation of the parental education intervention within CCC, for 
which access to additional grant financing has been secured. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3 

Increased Access of Rural Population to Public Services and Markets 

68. 
The Governm ent of Chile remains comm itted to the expansion of infrastructure 
services to rural areas to address pover ty and incom e inequality.   The previous Government 
of Chile sought the Bank as a source of strategic advice in designing new approaches to ru ral 
infrastructure and territorial development.  The Bank responded w ith the Infrastructure for 
Territorial Development Project that is working on the effective and productive use of 
sustainable infrastructure services by poo r rural communities in selected territories and in 
strengthening the capacity of participating agencies to implement territorially-based, demand-
responsive and multi-sectoral approach to rural infrastructure. Among the 31 territorial 
development framework plans (PMDT) that have been prepared under the PIRDT, 10 of these 
plans include indigenous communities as beneficiaries.  The infrastructure services include water 
supply, sanitation, roads, ICT and electricity.  Based on the positive results thus far, discussing 
between the authorities and the Bank are underway on a possible follow -up operation in this 
area. 

Result Area 3: Promoting Sustainable Investm ents 

69. 
The CPS would support the GOC ’s objective of facilitating investm ents in the 
productive sectors and improving regulations in the use of natural resources, particularly 
water.  The Bank w ill continue or initiate activities, in response to requ ests for support in:  (i) 
improving the design of the regulatory framework and of the overall investment planning system 
in the infrastructure and productive sectors to identify the most  productive projects, (ii) 
financing private sector investments, and (iii) developing recommendations on options for 
regulating  the sustainable use of natural resource s, w ith a particular focus on water, which is 
becom ing a  major limiting factor to productivity in various sectors. 

3.1 

Strengthening Regulations and Further Developm ent of Productive Infrastructure 

70. 
Chile has in place one of the most advanced system s for concessions to build and 
manage infrastructure (encompassing roads ports, railroads, bridges, tunnels, reservoirs), 
but the regulatory fram ework needs to be revised in order to provide incentives for further 
investm ents.  At the regional level, the Bank w ill continue to assist the GOC in putting in place  
a sustainable and integrated approach to the planning of infrastructure, establishing service 
standards as well as model contracts and procedures that promote competition and assign risks 
appropriately, developing integrated project management processes, developing a regulatory 
framework that increases consumer confidence in service provision, and the legal and 
organizational separation of the areas of planning, contracting, execution and regulation in 
infrastructure provision.  At the urban level, the Bank w ill continue and initiate activities related 
to the development and implementation of transport modeling tools, and identifying new urban 
transport financing mechanism s involving the private sector. 

71. 
In response to the country’s exposure to extrem e natural events, the GOC is 
developing an agenda to strengthen disaster risk managem ent institutions.  The Bank has 
secured a grant to support the government in the development of a remote damage assessment 
system which would assist government agencies in responding fast to a natural disaster. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
72. While the agro-food industry has evolved substantially during the last decades, 
private sector investm ent in re search and developm ent has been very limited.  The Bank is 
currently supporting 
the Ministry of Agriculture, 
through a FBS, 
in developing an 
implementation framework for the 2030 Rural Chile strategy in the Agro-food and Forestry 
sectors, as well as in the context of core p rinciples, which w ill be valuable during the design and 
implementation of the institutional, operational, instruments and governance changes n eeded in 
order to increase private sector participation in research and development in this area. 

3.2 

Support to Private Sector Investm ents 

73. 
IFC will remain closely engaged in Chile’s renewable energy sector, but w ill take a 
more selective approach to investing.   Increasingly, the Corporation expects to focus on run-
of-the-river hydro units 
that m inimize 
impacts on surrounding communities and 
the 
environment; in developing innovative financing structures for energy projects; supporting 
energy efficiency projects either directly with major clients or by partnering w ith financial 
institutions to channel financing to smaller companies; and developing and expanding new 
energy sources such as solar and geothermal sources by draw ing on its experience elsewhere in 
the LAC region and globally. 

74. 
IFC will continue to seek investm ent opportunities in Chile, particularly in 
companies that operate in advanced fields or are developing innovative business models.  
IFC has developed new short-term facilities designed to meet the needs of often undercapitalized 
small and mid-market firm s, by improving their cash flows and by introducing them to more 
sophisticated financial products. In addition, the Corporation plans on supporting cross-border 
investments by Chilean companies in neighboring countries or in other developing countries, by 
helping address the difficulties many companies face in sourcing risk-mitigation products and in 
raising local financing. 

3.3 

Sustainable use of Natural Resources 

75. 
The Bank would assist the GOC in addressing the challenges in water resource s 
managem ent.  As the demand for water increases from various sources, the government foresees 
a review of its institutions for water allocation and water markets. D iscussions are underway for 
the Bank to help revisit the national water resources policy and strategy and develop options for 
new approaches based on basin management to effectively address the multipurpose uses of 
water. 

76. 
In addition, the Bank w ill continue providing assistance in support of GOC 's efforts 
in ensuring sustainable grow th. Through grant financing mechanism s the Bank will support the 
GOC in the follow ing activities: (i) an IDF grant that will contribute to the M inistry of Mining's 
efforts to strengthen the dialogue between the private sector and the indigenous communities in 
order to promote sustainable mining investments; (ii) provision of technical assistance to develop 
Chile's Readiness Preparation Proposal under the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF); (iii) 
a GEF grant for the development of a national incentive program for mainstream ing sustainable 
land management planning and practices; and, (iv) two Emission Reduction Purchase 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Agreements linked to afforestation and reforestation of degraded land and to a hydropower 
project. 

D . Implem enting the Country Partnership Strategy 

77. 
This CPS spans a six year period, w ith a possible extension, subject to a stable 
country environm ent and the continued m embership of Chile as a client country.  The 
significant continuity both in the structure and areas o f engagement of the Bank in Chile 
throughout the years justify the longer time-span.  As mentioned before, the engagement would 
be mainly through the JSP, w ith the GOC initially funding two thirds and the Bank one third of 
the activities. Bank financing is justified due to the important learning by staff and the potential 
spillovers into other client countries that work in Chile is likely to continue to yield.  The JSP 
w ill be negotiated on a yearly basis, w ith the possibility of additional studies being agreed to 
m id-way through the year.  The Bank expects to continue to fund approximately US$400,000 per 
fiscal year, w ith the Government contributing intially up to US$ 800,000 in order to ensure that 
the demand for studies are fully met.  Fee-Based-Services would be used for additional studies 
that the GOC requests outside of the JSP framework, for shorter term GOC priorities which may 
not have as high spillover effects. In term s o f lending, an indicative envelope of US$600 m illion 
for the six year period would be expected, w ith a current proposed pipeline of US$200 m illion 
approximately for fiscal years 2012-2013.  Three loans have been identified in areas in which the 
Government deem s the Bank can add value through medium term involvement in design and 
implementation of key program s.  

78. 
The CPS program is flexible in order to enable the Bank's response to a 
sophisticated client that demands jus t-in-tim e assistance, mostly in know ledge intensive 
areas.   Thus, the results framework includes Bank activities which are mainly studies (under the 
FY10 Joint Studies Program s and Fee-Based-Services), in addition to six ongoing projects and 
three proposed technical assistance operations. Indicators are relatively low -level, under the three 
results areas, and reflect measurable deliverables. The results framework w ill be used as a 
monitoring tool and will be updated on a yearly basis, based on a joint program review w ith the 
GOC.  In addition, a Progress Report w ill be prepared and subm itted mid-way through this CPS 
period. 

79. 
In order to ensure adequate quality and compliance w ith Bank policies, studies to be 
carried out under the JSP or under FBS schem es will have an internal review system .  The 
internal review will include the same cycle as Analytic and Advisory Activities (AAAs), i.e. 
approval of Term s of Refe rence (TOR), Quality Enhancement Review (QER), and Decision 
meetings, including peer reviews, prior to final submission to the client. 

80. 
Investm ent lending will continue on a lim ited basis and upon demand by the 
Governm ent.  In general, no major changes are expected in term s of implementation processes, 
given the satisfactory performance of the portfolio during the previous CPS.  Overall, Chile 
scores high on public financial management, which is supported by strong adherence to clear set 
of rules, dedicated and qualified staff and strong management , which ensures not only 
compliance w ith rules and procedure s, but also accountability. Therefore, the Bank w ill continue 
to rely on country system s for budget preparation and execution, as well as accounting through 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
SIGFE and external audit through the Supreme Audit Institution (Contraloria General de la 
República).  Additionally, the Bank expects to continue using Bank and IDB financial reports 
directly issued from SIGFE .  In the area of procurement , the Bank-financed projects 
progressively rely on the parts of the sy stem (see para 47 ).  The Bank w ill continue to work with 
counterparts to help strengthen the national procurement processes. 

81. 
Finally, the Bank w ill continue supporting know ledge sharing activities between 
client governm ents and Chile.  While Chile is not formally part of the South-South Knowledge 
Exchange Platform , several experiences have proven useful for other Bank clients.  For example, 
Chile’s world class experts in partial credit risk guarantees have helped to design Bank lending 
operations in two IDA countries in LAC – Nicaragua and Haiti.  The Bank has facilitated 
numerous study tours and know ledge exchanges under the previous CPS in areas such a s results-
based budgeting, social protection and tertiary education reform .  The Bank team expects to 
continue facilitating this knowledge exchange during this CPS period. 

IV . MANAG ING RISKS 

82. G iven the strong econom ic and institutional fram ework in Chile, risks are low to 
moderate for the implem entation of the proposed CPS.  Foreseen potential risks are due 
mainly to financial and natural causes.  The following sections discuss each of the main risks 
including the risk to the Bank G roup. 

A . Country Risks 

83. 
The political and social contexts in Chile are very stable, as evidenced by the smooth 
governm ental transition, and the success ful social program s implemented in the country.  
Still, there are some risks of political and social upheaval due to continued levels of inequality 
observed in Chile and the discontent of the small but significant indigenous population in the 
country.  These risks could increase if the country’s en ergy prog ram , focusing on water and 
aeolic energy, does not consider the needs and demands from indigenous and environmental 
groups.  President Piñera, in his statement to Parliament (M ay, 2010), included a plan to address 
these challenges. 

84. 
The 2010 fiscal pressure s due to th e February ea rthquake may continue during 
2011. 12
  However, the government is not expected to have problem s in closing fiscal gaps as 
savings in sovereign wealth funds accumulated during the copper price boom remain substantial 
and there is room for additional issues of public debt in both local and international markets.  
The authorities’ goal to return to structural fiscal balance by 2014 w ill be challenging, implying 
significant expenditure restraint over a number of years. 

85. 
Chile is prone to natural disasters, particularly earthquakes and tsunam is, as it is 
located in a highly seism ic area.  Floods and extreme temperature exposure are also common 
threats, though often less damaging.  The experience from the Februa ry 2010 earthquake shows 

12 The authorit ies est im ated that the public share of the reconstruct ion cost would be in the orde r of US$8.4 b illion (4pe rcent of 
GDP ) over 2010-2013. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                               
that the country can emerge from these shocks relatively well thanks to strong institutions and 
financial resources.  Furthermore, the recent experience has left a number of lessons on the 
logistics of rapid response that are being currently being incorporated in the Government’s 
contingency strategy to respond fast  to the needs of affected and vulnerable populations. 

B . External shocks 

86. While financial market turbulences in September 2008 were felt acro ss all em erging 
market economies, Chile’s economy proved more resilient than others.  This greater 
resilience is linked to Chile’s solid macroeconom ic policies and a solid financial system . 

87. 
Chile w ill continue to be vulnerable to external shocks a s it is heavily dependent on 
copper exports and oil imports.  Commodity exports are currently approximately 65 percent of 
the share of total merchandise exports.  The national agenda to increase competitiveness and 
promote increased productivity and diversification addresses this risk. 

C . 

R isk to the World Bank Group 

88. 
The delivery of a flexible, focused and tim ely support to a MIC country such as 
Chile is a challenge to the Bank.  In order to meet demands, the Bank's technical expertise and 
advisory services w ill have to continue to be cutting-edge, and responsive to the fast changing 
needs of a sophisticated client. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 1:  Chile Country Partnership Strategy FY11-FY16 
Results Framework: Ongoing and Confirmed Program 

GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGIC PILLAR: ACHIEVING GREATER COMPETITIVENESS 
RESULT AREA I – PUBLIC SECTOR MODERNIZATION 

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS program 

Instruments and Partners 

Institutional Outcomes in 
the Government’s Action 
Plan that the CPS will 
support 

 

 

Improving performance 
and public financial 
management 

Inform policy debate on a new model of performance management incentives, including an 
assessment of management tools to improve institutional performance accountability mechanisms to 
align incentives to staff at all levels. 
 Upgraded Financial Administration System (SIGFE) used by most (90 percent) of the Central 
Government Entities (CGE) that currently use SIGFE. 
 Financial and public expenditures information from CGE updated online and consolidated in SIGFE 
on a timely manner. 
 Aggregated municipal financial and public expenditures information available at the central level 
within 30 days. 
 Financial and expenditure information of 100 municipalities available through the system. 
 
Inform policy debate on proposals to improve management and accountability mechanisms in 
education and health sectors. 
 Strengthen the design and implementation of health, education, and social protection policies and 
programs. 
Increasing transparency   
Implementation of the Access to Information legislation. 
 Strengthened oversight role of the Council for Transparency. 
 
Improved record management practices in the public administration. 
 Strengthened capacity of the Supreme Court to design and implement a change management and 
communications program built on transparency and integrity. 

 

 Strengthening monitoring 
and evaluation systems 

 Strengthening financial 
system and capital markets 
regulation   

 Boosting the efficiency of 
resources in the public 
sector 

 Design of scorecard methodology and pilot test of scorecard methodology for selected social 
programs. 
 Methodologies for evaluation of social programs developed. 
 Assessment of the draft bill to enhance the regulatory framework and supervision of the insurance 
sector. 
 Inform policy debate on legislative reform to advance effective risk based supervision in the insurance 
sector in Chile. 
 Assessment of the financial sector and regulatory development since 2004. 
 Inform policy discussions on pension funds incentive structure, SME financing, and bank and 
insurance regulation and supervision. 
 Potential hybrid financing and innovative financial instruments by IFC. 
 
Inform policy debate on individual and institutional incentives scheme in the provision of health 
services and review of procurement management and information systems in the health sector. 

29 

Assessment of the Performance 
Management Incentives (JSP, FY11) 
DIPRES 
Public Expenditure Management II (SIL, 
FY08-FY13) 
DIPRES – SIGFE 

Chile's Decentralization Agenda (JSP, 
FY11) 
SUBDERE 

Social Sector and Public Policies (TAL, 
FY12-FY15) 
DIPRES  
Strengthening Chile’s Council for 
Transparency (IDF, FY10-FY13) 
Council of Transparency 
Strengthening the Transparency and 
Accountability of the Judiciary (IDF, FY11-
FY14) - Supreme Court 
Strengthening of the Monitoring and 
Evaluation System for Social Programs 
(FBS, FY11) - MIDEPLAN 
Insurance Sector Review (JSP, FY11) 
Ministry of Finance 

FSAP (joint assessment with IMF, FY11) 
Ministry of Finance & Central Bank 

Potential IFC financing support  
Improvement in the Health Sector Financing 
(JSP, FY11) 
DIPRES - Ministry of Health 

 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGIC PILLAR:  IMPROVING JOB CREATION AND JOB QUALITY 
RESULT AREA II – JOB CREATION AND IMPROVING EQUITY 

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS program 

Instruments and Partners 

Institutional Outcomes in the 
Government’s Action Plan 
that the CPS will support 
Improving quality, 
financing, and equitable 
access to tertiary education 
services 

 

Tertiary Education Financing for Results 
Project (APL 2nd phase, FY12 – FY16) 
MECESUP 

Potential IFC financing support to tertiary 
education institutions 

State-Guaranteed Student Loan Program 
(CAE) (JSP, FY11) 
Ministry of Finance 

Potential IFC financing support to student 
loan programs for low-income population 
Social Protection (TAL additional 
Financing, FY11 – FY12) 
MIDEPLAN 

Social Sector and Public Policies (TAL, 
FY12-FY15) 
DIPRES  
Infrastructure for Territorial Development 
(SIL, FY05-FY12) 
SUBDERE 

 

 Extension of Performance Contracts to all subcategories of tertiary education institutions (both public 
and private universities, professional institutes, and centers for technical education). 
Increased accountability for quality through broadening of performance-based funding model linked 
to targeted indicators. 
 Enhanced equity and improved access through more options for students from low-income 
backgrounds and through improved remediation of skills in tertiary education. 
Impact assessment of the state-guaranteed student loan program on improved tertiary education’s 
coverage and equity. 
Inform policy debate on the future public financial obligation and potential cost-effectiveness of the 
intervention, and provide recommendations for improvements going forward. 

 

 

 Improving the social 
protection system for the 
poor 

 Implementation of the new minimum income proposal (Ingreso Etico Familiar). 
 Improved targeting system for social programs and enhanced monitoring and evaluation capacities at 
MIDEPLAN. 
 Assessment of Chile Solidario and Chile Crece Contigo programs’ results. 
 Strengthen the design and implementation of social protection policies and programs. 

 Increasing the access of 
rural population to basic 
public services and markets  

 Increase the effective and productive use of sustainable infrastructure services by poor rural 
communities as evidence in: 
  Rural infrastructure projects approved through the new integrated economic evaluation of 
MIDEPLAN 
  Increased use of transportation services along rehabilitated road infrastructure in the area of 
influence of the Bank financed project 
  Increased use of electricity and sustained access and effective use of water and sanitation services 
for economic activities in the area of influence of the Bank financed project 
  Economic activities promoted through the use of the financed infrastructure and pre-investment for 
productive activities. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Institutional Outcomes in the 
Government’s Action Plan 
that the CPS will support 
 Strengthening regulations 
and further development of 
productive infrastructure 

 Support to private sector 
investment 

 Sustainable use of natural 
resources 

GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGIC PILLAR:  PROMOTING INVESTMENT 
RESULT AREA III – PROMOTING SUSTAINABLE INVESTMENT 

Milestones and Outputs of the CPS program 

Instruments and Partners 

 

 

 

 
Increased share of projects administered with an integrated project management approach. 
 Enhanced competition in bidding processes for concession contracts. 
 
Inform policy decisions on the best strategy for sustainable and integrated approach to infrastructure 
planning. 
 
Improvement measures for the public transport system for Metropolitan Santiago implemented. 
 
Information on payment obligation to public transport operators available in real time. 
 Assessment of a model city (Talca) for the reconstruction of urban transport systems of other cities in 
the area hit by the earthquake. 
Inform policy debate on recommendations on publ ic transport service organization, transport 
infrastructure, technological solutions, and management of transport operations in Talca. 
Inform policy debate on feasible options of financial instruments for the Chilean urban transport 
projects. 
 
Improve regulatory and institutional framework for concessions. 
 Strengthen public investment planning to facilitate foreign trade. 
 
Improve foreign trade logistics and competitiveness. 
 Remote damage assessment contributes to the Government’s reconstruction plan for the areas affected 
by the earthquake and tsunami of February 27 th, 2010.  
 Assessment of long-term challenges and responses of the agri-food and forestry innovation sub-
systems (AFFIS). 
Inform policy debate on building a vision for Chile’s rural, agri-food and forestry sectors towards 
2030. 
 
Increased innovative renewable energy investment and energy efficiency projects. 
 Support to Chilean companies, particularly those operating in advanced fields or developing 
innovative business models. 
 Analytical review of property rights administration and water market structure. 
 
Impact assessment of economic incentives and subsidies on water resources sustainability. 
 
Inform policy debate on best strategy to address short-term and medium-term challenges on water 
resources management. 
 Strengthened dialogue mechanisms between the private sector and the indigenous communities on 
sustainable mining investment. 
 Strengthened capacity of the Ministry of Mining’s staff on managing consultations. 
 Technical assistance to develop Chile’s Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP), including preparing 
the national REDD strategy. 
 Development of a national incentive program for mainstreaming sustainable land management 
planning and practices in order to combat land degradation, conserve biodiversity of global importance 
and protect vital carbon assets. 
 Purchase of carbon emission reductions linked to renewable energy-based electricity production and 
afforestation and reforestation of degraded land. 

Ministry of Public Works Institutional 
Strengthening (TAL, FY08-FY14) 
Ministry of Public Works  
Santiago Urban Transport (TAL, FY06-
FY12) - Transantiago 
Urban Transport System redesign for a 
model city in Chile (SFLAC, FY11-FY12) 
Ministry of Transport  
Financial Instruments to Finance Urban 
Transport Projects (FBS, FY11) 
Ministry of Planning 
Infrastructure 
(Investment Operation, 
FY12-FY16) - Ministry of Public Works 
Remote Sensing Damage Assessment 
(SFLAC, FY10-FY11) 
Ministry of National Assets 
Review of challenges and response of the 
agri-food and forestry innovation systems 
(FBS, FY10-11) 
Ministry of Agriculture – Foundation for 
Agriculture Innovation (FIA) 
Potential IFC financing support  

Water Resources Assessment (JSP, FY11)  
Ministry of Public Works 
Institutional Strengthening of Mining 
Sector for Indigenous Peoples Inclusion 
(IDF, FY10-FY13) - Ministry of Mining 
Chile FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant 
(FCPF, FY10-FY12) - Ministry of 
Agriculture 
Sustainable Land Management 
(GEF, 
FY11-FY18) - Ministry of Agriculture 
Quilleco Hydroelectric Project  
(PCF, FY11-FY13) - COLBÚN, S.A. 
Chile Securitization and Carbon Sinks 
Project (BioCarbon Fund, FY11-FY13) - 
Fundación Chile 

31 

Annex 2: CH ILE CPS COMPLETION REPORT 

1. 
This Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report (CPSCR) provides an evaluation 
of Bank G roup assistance to Chile for FY07-FY10.  The Joint IBRD and IFC Country 
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Chile (Report No. 38691-CL) was presented to the Board on June 
14, 2007.  A Joint IBRD and IFC CPS Progress Report was subm itted to the Board in September 
2009 (Report No. 50878-CL). 

2. 
This CPSCR was prepared using as background info rmation the CPS, the CPS Progress 
Report, the latest Implementation Status Reports (ISR) fo r ongoing projects in the Bank’s Chile 
portfolio, Implementation Completion and Results Reports (ICR) for loans that closed during the 
CPS period, Aide-M emoires of annual meetings w ith the Government to evaluate and prioritize 
assistance under the Joint Studies Program (JSP), and selected studies carried out during the CPS 
period.  Since the CPS Progress Report was prepared about one year prior to this completion 
report, this CPSCR draws heavily on the information in the Progress Report. 

I. 

Background 

Overview 

3. 
The FY07-FY10 CPS was developed to meet the changing needs of a highly successful , 
globally integrated M IC comm itted to both growth and social equity, and to help the country 
realize its goal of convergence w ith OECD income levels and living standards through faster 
grow th and greater equality of opportunities.  As such, it presented the Bank G roup w ith a 
complex set of challenges that confront, and will continue to confront, many of its M IC clients. 

4. 
Economic.  Chile consolidated a stable and successful economy since the late 1980's.    
Follow ing an econom ic slowdown in response to the econom ic and financial crises of the late 
1990s, Chile’s grow th accelerated to around 6 percent in each of 2004 and 2005, and then fell 
back to 4 percent in 2006, attributable in part to higher oil prices, one-off shock in the copper 
m ining sector and the effects of an appreciating peso.  By the time the CPS was prepared, Chile 
was the fastest growing economy in the LAC region, w ith an annual per capita growth rate of 4.1 
percent over the fifteen years following the return of democracy. At the time of the CPS, external 
financing conditions were highly advantageous for emerging markets in general and Chile in 
particular, as reflected in its investment grade bond rating. 

5. 
Social.  Since 1990, poverty in Chile had been cut by more than half, from 40 percent to 
an estimated 15-18 percent in 2006.  Thanks to the Government’s soci al expenditures, which 
were designed to tackle inequality, the ratio of total income of the richest 20 percent to the 
poorest 20 percent fell from 14 to 7.6.  Still, about 2.5 m illion Chileans remained poor and the 
country continued to struggle with high inequality. 

6. 
Political. In M arch 1990, following 17 years of m ilitary rule, Chile reestablished 
democratic governance w ith the inauguration of President Patricio Aylw in, the first of four 
successive presidents of the center-left coalition of parties known as Concertación, that included 
President Michelle Bachelet who was inaugurated as Chile’s first woman president in M arch 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2006.  The Concertación played a crucial role in Chile’s transition to democracy through its 
effective handling of sensitive political and human rights issues and its highly consensual 
approach to econom ic management.  In early 2005, a constitutional reform was approved, 
shortening the presidential term from six years to four, and prohibiting the immediate re-election 
of a pre sident.  As a result, President Bachelet came to office w ith a smaller w indow of 
opportunity than her predecesso rs.  During he r first yea r in o ffice, the Government had launched 
several Presidential and other high-level commissions on a range of issues, including pension 
reform , innovation, childhood development and education (and had a sked the Bank to contribute 
to a number of these). 

7. 
Governance.  Chile’s strong macroeconom ic fundamentals and outward looking trade 
policies had been accompanied by reform s in govern ance that have p rogressively increased 
efficiency and transparency, and given Chile a well-deserved reputation for “clean” and effective 
government.   

8. 
Outlook/Challenges.  A t the time the CPS was prepared, Chile’s macroeconom ic 
prospects were considered strong, w ith the Government projecting that real GDP grow th would 
stabilize at about 5.3 percent per annum .  Public savings had grown to a point where Chile was a 
net creditor, and the Government’s credibility as a debt issuer in international markets was high.  
The Government’s track record with pursuing counter-cyclical fiscal policies allowed it to 
counterbalance adverse shocks, and thereby reduce macroeconom ic instability and ensure the 
sustainability of social expenditures.  Chile’s grow th was seen as having the potential to be 
higher than projected if the Government were to continue fostering policies that encouraged 
innovation, enhancing educational quality and attainment for all Chileans, and providing 
adequate physical infrastructure for grow th and improved competitiveness.  Additional steps to 
improve the functioning of labor and capital markets, and strengthen the competition framework, 
areas in which the Bank had been working with the Government, would support investments in 
know ledge, human capital and infrastructure.  

9. 
In its first year in office, President Bachelet’s administration had faced several domestic 
challenges.  These included calls for greater investment of the copper w indfall in social services, 
protests by secondary school students demanding better education, demands for wage increase s 
by m iners, threats of strikes by teachers and health workers demanding pay hikes, and protests 
and threats of a strike by transit workers upon the roll-out of the Transantiago urban transport 
system . 

The Governm ent’s Longer Term Strategic Goals 

10. 
President Bachelet’s Programa de Gobierno defining theme was that of making Chile 
more competitive and equitable by reducing barriers to opportunity— the goal of G rowth with 
Equality of Opportunity.  The Program aimed to accelerate growth, expand global commercial 
linkages, improve education, safeguard natural re sources, and strengthen competitiveness while 
addressing acute and longstanding social problem s. 

11. 
The Program ’s five core themes relating  to grow th and equality of opportunity included:  
(i) Social Policy, including issues of equity of acce ss to education and education quality, health 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
coverage to strengthen social protection, and reform of social security to broaden coverage and 
provide a minimum pension to all; (ii) A Developm ent Leap:  Promoting Innovation, 
including innovation to enhance productivity and environment and environmental management 
for sustainable growth and health concerns; (iii) Quality of L ife: Infrastructure, including 
increasing access to public services especially housing, providing safe, efficient and clean 
transport and boosting competitiveness and job creation; (iv) New Citizen Compact, including 
transparency and modernization of government w ithin the context of regional development; and 
(v) Ending D iscrim ination, not only for ethical reasons, but for the econom ic and social 
development of the country. 

Strategic Objective of the CPS, FY2007-2010 

12. 
The strategic objective of the CPS was to support Chile’s efforts to converge w ith OECD 
income levels and living standards by: (i) accelerating sustainable growth, and (ii) increasing 
equality of opportunity.  The CPS program focused on core area s of the Government agenda and 
where the World Bank G roup was well positioned to assist innovation, infrastructure and public 
services, public sector management , sustainable development and the environment, improving 
education, and social protection. 

13. 
The IFC program supported the Government’s development vision and complemented 
the Bank’s interventions by filling the gaps in access to long-term financing by SMEs and micro-
enterprises and for low -income housing and education and infrastructure.  The IFC was 
particularly interested in addressing high impact areas by leveraging its structured finance 
products, providing technical assistance and advisory services, and through i ts traditional product 
lines, both with direct investments and through wholesaling.  The IFC identified infrastructure, 
and more specifically, energy as the main area of increased Bank G roup coordination. 

14. 
The CPS described the rationale for continued World Bank support to the country.  First, 
addressing poverty and inequality, which remained acute, was critical for Chile to join the ranks 
of OECD countries. Second, the Government continued to value World Bank engagement 
through a flexible mix of financial and advisory services.  Third, responding to the Government’s 
request for continued engagement would test the Bank’s ability to deliver just-in-time know ledge 
services and facilitate global experience and know -how within the framework of a project or 
through non-lending services.  Finally, Chile’s record o f econom ic re form provided valuable 
lessons to share with other Bank member countries. 

15. 
The proposed program included a m ix of lending and technical assistance.  An indicative 
lending program of up to US$250 million consisted of investment and development policy loans.  
Technical assistance was to be delivered mainly through a fee-for-service joint studies 
framework arrangement that would move beyond the case-by-case, ad-hoc approach toward an 
arrangement that would allow greater certainty in planning and financing, be cost effective to the 
client, and adm inistratively flexible. The studies program would be agreed upon annually, 
including the products and services to be provided, and a time-line for their delivery. 

16. 
The CPS built on intensive consultations that took place through Policy Notes, a 
Development Policy Review and discussions in preparation for the CPS.  In many cases, the 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Bank’s dialogue was developed as part of its participation in high-level Presidential 
Commissions that involved substantial citizen involvement.  The Bank also carried out a C lient 
Survey, and planned to follow up on its findings in order to strengthen its interventions in Chile. 

Identified Risks 

17. 
The CPS pointed out that Chile’s objective of converging to OECD income levels was 
ambitious and subject to risks that included domes, external and implementation.  Three 
dom estic risks were considered.  First, political tensions, including the weakening of the 
cohesion w ithin the Concertación could lead to a slow ing of the reform process and reduce trend 
grow th.  Second, there were high expectations that the Government would use part o f the copper 
w indfall to fund new social program s, possibly threatening the fiscal sustainability of the reform 
process.  Finally, the CPS considered that Chile’s grow th prospects could be held back by 
relatively slow productivity growth since it lagged substantially behind OECD economies with 
respect to innovation capacity, human capital and labor force participation, and the challenges its 
geography presented for infrastructure development. 

18. 
The main risk factors for the economy were seen as being external, including a possible 
slowdown in global markets combined with weak copper prices, increased global risk aversion 
and/or an escalation of regional instability, and possible disruptions in the energy supply and 
high oil prices.  As a small open economy, Chile was seen as sensitive to regional and global 
developments and shifts in demand from its major trading partners.  While Chile had been 
successful in reducing exposure to financial contagion and diversifying its export base, its 
economy remained vulnerable to commodity price shocks and in particular to copper prices.  The 
country’s strong reco rd of pe rformance and coherent development strategy were seen as 
m itigating factors.  Successive governments had implemented policies to strengthen social 
cohesion, reduce Chile’s macroeconom ic vulnerability and improve the policy instruments 
available to respond to shocks.  As a result , most of the risks were evaluated to be low or 
moderate.   

19. 
The CPS identified two risks to the World Bank Group.  First, delivering on a strategy 
of flexible, focused and fast support to a sophisticated M IC like Chile would put the Bank’s M IC 
strategy to the test .  The Bank would need to provide cutting-edge technical expertise and 
advisory services, establish new financing arrangements that would facilitate timely negotiations 
and rapid response, and manage the complex incentives emanating from the tw in objectives of 
maintaining client demand for its know ledge services while ensuring the highest standards in its 
analytical work with respect to quality standards and objectivity.  A challenge to the IFC’s ability 
to deliver on strategic focus areas was identified as the high levels of liquidity, at times 
generating m ispricing of risks and preventing the materialization of innovative structures, 
especially in structured finance. 

Lessons 

20. 
Lessons from the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) Completion Report for the FY02-
FY06 CAS were considered in formulating the Bank G roup’s FY07-FY10 CPS.  These included:  
(i) a flexible CPS is an appropriate way to structure the Bank’s program in Chile; (ii) the Bank 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
should acknow ledge that country strategy outcomes primarily reflect the efforts of the 
Government and the country given the difficulty of identifying w ith specificity the contribution 
of Bank interventions to overall country outcomes; (iii) the high value of the Bank’s analytical 
engagement, illustrated by the extent of the Government’s demand that resulted in a program of 
AAA that exceeded by far original plans; (iv) the Bank should focus on stream lining its 
contracting and procurement requirements and should incorporate country system s to the extent 
possible; and (v) the Bank should continue to work closely w ith other international agencies in 
its program of assistance to Chile.  

Results Fram ework Proposed in CPS 

21. 
The CPS acknowledged the expected difficulty of developing a results framework that 
specified expected 
linkages between 
the Bank’s 
interventions and Chile’s 
long-term 
development goals, especially in view of the flexible program of support that was being 
proposed, the relatively small scale of the Bank’s financial support, and the nature of the Bank’s 
evolving role as a knowledge partner.  The “real-time” basis of the support the Government was 
requesting, often as direct input to it policy process, was seen as making ex-ante identification of 
inputs and results difficult. 

22. 
As a result, the CPS sought to meet the core objective of a results-based CPS by 
presenting a results framework that would evaluate progress according to three distinct 
dimensions.  First, since the CPS was driven by the Government’s Program , its evaluation would 
be based on how effective the Government was in achieving its development vision, as 
determ ined by a select set of country development goals.  These development goals were 
specified as:  (i) accelerating convergence w ith OECD income levels; (ii) improving quality of 
education; (iii) providing effective protection against poverty; and (iv) transform ing Chile into a 
know ledge economy.  Second, the know ledge products— the core of the CPS that were expected 
to contribute to the policy process—would not be linked to country outcomes, but rather be 
judged on criteria of their quality, relevance and sustainability.  Finally, the results framework 
would evaluate the CPS’ limited investment projects supported by the Bank by their specific 
project indicators and the overall portfolio performance.   

23. 
The program was relevant to the challenges of the country. The selective approach 
towards supporting the country’s development strategy, concentrating in those areas in which the 
Government sought external know ledge and experience, and in which the Bank G roup was 
positioned to provide assistance, responded to the Government’s request for flexibility in 
approach.  Sim ilarly, the CPS’ strong focus on the provision of client-prioritized knowledge 
services, a limited program of financial assistance through new lending in selected areas, coupled 
w ith an expansion of IFC’s investment activity in targeted areas was tailored to the 
Government’s needs for Bank assistance, that place strong emphasis on know ledge.  The risks 
that eventually materialized during the CPS implementation period were mostly identified in 
advance, i.e., the risk of an econom ic slowdown and a possible political risk.  Chile also suffered 
an additional risk that had not been identified in the CPS, the risk of a natural disaster in the form 
of a massive earthquake that struck the country on February 28, 2010. 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
24. 
On the other hand, the results framework was inadequate as country indicators were quite 
broad and the Bank prog ram itself was not accompanied by output/outcome indicators that 
would allow for an objective evaluation of the CPS contribution.  Furthermore, the fact that the 
Bank program was ve ry small, precluded the team of any possible attribution with respect to 
country achievements. 

II. 

Achievem ent of Country Developm ent Goals 

25. 
This section describes effo rts by the Government to achieve each o f the Country 
Development Goals. Chile made solid, sustained progress towards its Country Development 
Goals as described in the CPS.  However, it is difficult to evaluate and appreciate the extent of 
the country’s performance towards achieving these goals on the basis of the specific Government 
targets selected in the CPS to measure progress, either because of the manner in which they were 
formulated, the periodicity of the data collection, or lack of specificity in the indicators to be 
used. 

Country Developm ent Goal 1:  Accelerate Convergence with OECD Incom e Levels 
Government target:  GDP grow th above 5 percent 

26. 
Chile made progress towards accelerating convergence w ith OECD income levels, but 
did not meet the 5 percent grow th target.  Chile’s real GDP increased 4.6 percent p.a. in 2006 
and in 2007.  In the second half of 2008, grow th started to deteriorate as the global financial 
crisis deepened and copper prices declined. Despite a substantial stimulus program that included 
monetary easing, increased public spending, targeted labor and social policies, temporary tax 
rebates and adm inistrative measures aimed at boosting credit and competition in the financial 
system , among other measures, real GDP growth slowed to 3.7 percent in 2008 and econom ic 
activity contracted by 1.5 percent in 2009.  Economic recovery was further disrupted, but not 
derailed, by a massive earthquake in February 2010.  G rowth declined by 1.5 percent in the first 
quarter of 2010, but econom ic recovery resumed fo rcefully in the second quarter of 2010, when 
GDP registered a 6.5 percent quarterly expansion.  D riven by reconstruction and investment, 
Chile’s economy is expected to grow by about 5 percent in 2010 and to recover further in 2011. 

27. While Chile did not meet the stated goal of 5 percent grow th, the average grow th attained 
(approximately 3.3 percent) is a good re sult considering the two significant external factors that 
hit the country, that is, the financial crisis and the earthquake.  The earthquake led to a 
substantial demand of fiscal funds (the estimated cost being approximate US$29.7 billion), 
which thanks to strong institutions and fiscal capacity, the country was able to meet.  A lso, 
achieving the 5 percent goal would have involved significant growth in total factor productivity, 
including substantial interventions in innovation.  As discussed in Section I, the Government was 
not able to fully implement an innovation system that would allow for the economy to converge 
w ith OECD income levels. 

Country Developm ent Goal 2:  Improve Quality of Education 

Government Target:  Align international test scores (PISA) with Chile’s per capita GDP 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Governm ent Progress towards Country Developm ent Goal 2 

28. 
The CPS established a target to measure Chile’s progress toward education outcomes in 
term s of aligning test scores (PISA ) w ith Chile’s per capita GDP.  The latest 2009 results 
presented in the graphs below reflect substantial progress.  Chile’s mean PISA performance in 
2009 is slightly below what would be predicted based on its GDP per capita (PPP).  Importantly, 
among countries where between 40 percent and 60 percent of students performed below Level 2 
in 2000, Chile reduced that proportion by the largest amount: between 2000 and 2009 the 
percentage of low performers in Chile dropped by more than 17 percentage points. 

Average Pisa vs. GDP per capita 
at PPP

90,000
80,000
70,000
60,000
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
0

300

350

400

450

500

550

600

29. 
The Government has launched seve ral refo rm s to addre ss the Government’s priority 
objective of raising education quality and equity, with the goal of enabling the education system 
to replace socioeconom ic origins as the key factor in children’s futures.  The Preferential School 
Subsidy, approved by Congress in February 2008, introduces and extra per-student subsidy for 
students from disadvantaged backgrounds.  A new General Law of Education that redefines the 
rights and duties of education sector participants, and establishes the State’s responsibility to 
assure that all schools provide quality education was approved by Congress in 2009.  Two 
proposals were embedded in that Law .  The first would establish an education quality assurance 
system by introducing two new agencies to oversee the quality of schools (the Agency for 
Education Quality), their financial management and budgetary practices, and their compliance 
w ith the rules that apply to them (the Superintendency of Education).  The second proposal 
reform s the institutional framework for the administration of public schools and proposes to 
introduce the National Education Service, a central government agency that would implement 
education policies and program s, and provide technical-pedagogical support to publicly financed 
schools (which can be managed by the public or private sector). 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country Developm ent Goal 3:  Provide Effective Protection against Poverty for Chileans 
across the Income Spectrum 

Government Target
:  Chile Solidario:  extend social assistance to a broader class of poor; Plan 
Auge:  increase access to health services; increase illnesses covered; Pension:  provide universal 
m inimum pension 

30. 
The Government has made substantial progress in its goal of increasing equality of 
opportunity and reducing the vulnerability of the poor, in part by developing further its social 
protection system through:  (i) the continued operations and improvements in Chile Solidario, 
designed to support extremely poor fam ilies and other vulnerable individuals (including older 
adults living alone, the homeless, and children of prisoners); and (ii) the recent extension of the 
system to cover young children through a new program , Chile Crece Contigo (Sistema de 
Protección Integral a la Infancia – Integrated System of Protection for Young Children). 

31. 
The primary and largest target group fo r Chile Solidario is indigent fam ilies w ith the aim 
of incorporating roughly 40,000 fam ilies a year, although this target can be adjusted upwards or 
downwards depending on econom ic conditions in the country.  As of December 2009, 370,000 
fam ilies participated in the program .  The expected outcomes from Chile Solidario are a decline 
in the share of households below the extreme poverty line, higher coverage of existing social 
protection policies and program s among the extreme poor, and improvements in the design and 
operation of public services to better address the needs of this group.  The program and its 
management have also been refo rmed, including the targeting instrument.  As a result, a 
substantial share of the population was re-registered by April 2007 

32. 
The primary target group for Chile Crece Contigo is children under 4 years of age, w ith a 
set of services ranging from those w ith universal access, others for children born in the public 
health system , others for children of fam ilies in the bottom 40 percent of the welfare distribution, 
and yet others available for those at risk.  Chile Crece Contigo represents an important expansion 
of social protection, including access to improved pre-natal care and delivery for use rs of public 
health services and the provision of a child allowance for the bottom 40 percent of households. 
As of the end of 2008, 473,000 children under the age of 2 had been incorporated into Chile 
Crece Contigo.  During 2009, children up to the age of 4 were being incorporated.  In the case of 
Chile Crece Contigo, the expected outcome would be better developmental outcomes of young 
children, particularly those from poor fam ilies, thereby helping to improve the equality of 
opportunity in the country. 

33. 
Plan Auge, a regime of explicit health guarantees, was introduced in 2005, as an 
important vehicle for strengthening social protection. The Government has gradually increased 
the number of illnesses covered by Plan Auge from 26 when the prog ram was created, to 56 by 
2007 and to 66 by July 2010, and recently announced measures to improve the quality of the 
services provided and service delivery. 

34. 
Follow ing the recommendations made by the Pension Reform Advisory Council 
established in M arch 2006, Chile’s Congress in 2008 approved a law containing far-reaching 
reform s to Chile’s pension system .  Building on Chile’s system of private pension funds, the 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
reform s broaden cove rage and provide a m inimum pension to all Chileans, including those that 
cannot contribute to a private pension account.  Key features include a basic universal old-age 
and disability pension and a minimum pension to all Chileans aged 65 or more; credits to women 
in their individual accounts to compensate for childbearing years, sub sidies to young, poor 
workers, mechanism s to support and protect customers of the pension fund adm inistrators regime 
(AFP), and the institutional changes needed to put into effect the new ben efits and requirements, 
which are being phased in gradually. 

Country Developm ent Goal 4:  Transform Chile into a Know ledge Economy 

Government Target
:  C lose gap with OECD on innovation indicators 

35. 
In an effort to establish the conditions favorable to transform Chile into a know ledge 
economy, in January 2008, the National Innovation Council for Competitiveness presented the 
National Innovation Strategy, which provides a comprehensive plan to foster innovation in Chile 
over the following 12 years.  The three pillars of the strategy focus on (a) increasing substantially 
the number of individuals that w ill have completed tertiary education by 2021, (b) developing a 
strong and sustainable science and technology platform by supporting increased and competitive 
funding, greater collaboration of research institutions w ith the productive sector, and an 
increased number of high quality researchers, (c) fostering resea rch and d evelopment by private 
enterprises.   

36. 
Implementation of the strategy began with increased budgetary allocations innovation, 
including expenditures in undergraduate tertiary education.  Today Chile fares ve ry well when 
compared to other countries in the Region, but lags severely OECD countries.  According to the 
G lobal Competitiveness Report 2010-2011, Chile has substantial availability of scientists and 
engineers (rank 24/139), but the quality of scientific research institutions still remains relatively 
low (55/139) and the capacity for innovation is still a challenge (59/139).  Furthermore, Chile 
has not moved significantly in these rankings when compared to the repo rt for 2007 -2008.  The 
most worrisome trend, however, is the slowdown in the growth in total factor productivity. 

III. Assessm ent of Bank Assistance 

37.  
This section evaluates Bank assistance to Chile under the framework of the four Country 
Development Goals.  G iven that there were no outputs or outcomes against which the program 
could be measured, and under the advice of OPCS, the team prepared a Results matrix that 
focuses on outputs, thus allowing for an ex -post assessment of the Bank's contribution (see 
Appendix 1). 

Goal 1: Accelerate Convergence with OECD Incom e Levels 

38. 
The various Bank G roup activities supporting econom ic grow th included work on 
infrastructure and public services, public sector strengthening, and sustainable development and 
environment.  The variety of instruments included investment and development policy loans, 
financial and technical support from G lobal Program s, grants under the IDF, studies and 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
advisory services under the fee-for-service and Joint Studies Program (JSP), and IFC 
investments. 

39. 
The support for infrastructure and public services included 
four loans and a GEF G rant. 
Key results included the institutional overhaul of the M inistry of Public Works (MPW ) DPL 
(closed) and accompanying TAL (ongoing)) to improve the efficiency in the use of public 
resources and increased transparency, competition and citizen participation in the contracting and 
concession of public works. Specifically, the Bank program provided advice on (a) the drafting 
of a new Concessions Law , now in place, (b) the development of performance standards for high 
and low volume roads; and (c) improving competitiveness and monitoring concession services.  

40. 
In the area of u rban transpo rt , the Bank supported the implementation of the urban 
transport reform program through technical assistance and financing provided through the 
Santiago U rban Transport TAL (ongoing) and the Sustainable Transport and A ir Quality for 
Santiago GEF (closed FY10).  The TAL has completed a study on organizational improvements, 
an Action Plan to mitigate negative effects on street vendo rs, a study to develop a methodology 
to analyze the economic and financial standing of bus operators, and a ser ies of pilot projects to 
improve the quality and efficiency of the system .  The results of these studies are assisting the 
GOC in resolving critical issues that are still being faced by Transantiago, linked to management 
of the system and its finances.  In formation on the impact of Transantiago on air quality is 
available:  greenhouse gas em issions were reduced by an estimated 98,975 tons between 2006 
and 2009, a decline of 10.5 percent. 

41. 
Follow ing the Regional Development Study in FY08, the Bank has supported Chile’s 
territorial development initiatives through the ongoing Infrastructure for T erritorial Development 
Project .  This project has contributed to the prioritization of infrastructure investments based on 
the econom ic development potential of a territory and through an innovative participatory 
planning process.  So far, 29 territorial development plans, or PMDTs, have been p repared, and 
works are unde r implementation.  The Government will use this tested approach to include new 
Regions, particularly those affected by the earthquake. 

42. 
IFC’s support in energy contributed to the government’s sustainable development and 
environmental aim s through the financing of innovative renewable and thermal energy projects. 
IFC invested $213.8 m illion for its own account in four energy projects since 2007 and 
mobilized an additional $382.8 m illion from third party investors for a total $596.5 million. 
These investments have increased renewable generating capacity by 220 M egawatt (MW), as 
well as pioneering new technologies and financing tools for the industry. 

43. 
Bank assistance for public sector strengthening continued through the now completed 
Integrated Financial M anagement Project (or Sistema Integrado de Gestion Financiera del 
Estado, SIGFE), and a follow -on project, Integrated Financial M anagement System Project II 
(SIGFE II) approved in FY08.  Under the first project, SIGFE was implemented in 159 out of 
190 government agencies w ithin 
the central government. 
 With Bank assistance, a 
comprehensive monitoring and evaluation system was developed by the Budget O ffice 
(D irección de Presupuestos, D IPRES) to assess the expenditure management efficiency of 178 
government agencies, where 91 government program s were assessed between 2002 and 2006.  

41 

 
 
 
 
 
SIGFE allowed for the multi-year budget scenarios and available real-time budget information 
online to decision makers.  The follow -up Project (SIGFE II), under implementation, is currently 
implementing the municipal financial management module in 120 municipalities. In addition, an 
important program of technical assistance was delivered under the fee-fo r-service and the Joint 
Studies Program .  A Study of Public Policy Evaluation Agencies was carried out to review 
international experience w ith evaluation of public policies, as input to the next steps for 
consolidating the Chilean system of results-based financing and monitoring and evaluating 
public expenditures.  A series of joint studies reviewed and evaluated Chile’s experience w ith its 
M anagement Improvement Program s, PMG .  This study was welcomed by the GOC who 
requested a follow -up study recommending implementation mechanism s for the proposed 
restructuring (to be delivered under the new CPS). 

44. 
Bank G roup assistance for sustainable development and environment
 was integrated into 
the design of the projects and investments financed by both the Bank and the IFC and described 
above.  Additional assistance was provided by channeling resources from global program s, 
including GEF, and the Prototype Carbon Fund.  These included the Sustainable Transport and 
A ir Quality Project for Santiago (GEF), and Quilleco Hydropower Project (PCF).  An 
Environmental Compliance Strategy, carried out under the framework of the Joint Studies 
Program (FY09), developed a methodology to optim ize the use of re sources allocated to review 
compliance w ith environmental regulations and develop indicators on the efficacy and efficiency 
of policies and actions to guarantee compliance with those regulations.  Chile’s goal of becoming 
an important global actor in agricultural markets was supported first w ith a joint study that 
analyzed public agricultural agencies (research, forestry, natural resou rces), complementing 
another that is developing a strategy for agricultural innovation.   

Goal 2:  Improve Quality of Education 

45. 
Extensive Bank support in the Education sector included eight studies, two IBRD loans, 
and two IFC loans.  Under the Joint Studies Program, the Bank provided and continues to 
country reform initiatives described in Section II. 

46. 
The analytical work on the Design of Education Institutions informed key policy 
decisions on institutional change, most notably the establishment of the Superintendency of 
Education and the Quality Evaluation Agency, whose responsibility is to oversee a quality 
assurance system .  The Bank also carried out stand-alone Sector Work on Education Quality 
Assurance and on tertiary education system s in a specific region of the country (B io B io).  CPS 
analytical work assisted in developing the baseline for the monitoring and evaluation of the 
Preferential School Subsidy.  The Joint Studies Program gave priority support to education 
through studies that covered: Higher Education, Foreign Scholarships, Early Childhood 
Education Institutions, Information and Communications Technology in Schools, and follow -ups 
to the first phase of both the School Preferential Subsidy and Design of Education Institutions 
studies.  Analytical work on education has been carried out jointly w ith OECD, thus inform ing 
Chile of the gaps w ith regard to the OECD community. 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47. 
Additional CPS results include assisting the GOC in laying the foundation for an 
articulated, and extended learning, and training system , with the part icipation of the private 
sector.  The now completed Lifelong Learning and Training Project (or Chile Califica) supported 
(a) the establishment of Contigo Aprendo, a literacy program targeting young adults and illiterate 
adults that benefited about 100,000 adults between 2003 and 2009 and (b) the design of the 
National Labor Competency Certification System , established by law in 2008, that aligns 
training w ith labor demands of key sectors and benefits about 100,000 individuals w ith certified 
training. 

48. 
The CPS assisted Chile in improving the accountability of the tertiary education system 
as a foundation for greater effectiveness of public funds.  With the support of the Tertiary 
Education Finance for Results Project already five universities are operating under performance 
agreements resulting in an increase of 60 percent in the number of students enrolled in national 
PhD program s between 2005 and 2009.  In addition, the percentage of undergraduate students 
studying under accredited program s, or in the process of being accredited, increased from 25 
percent in 2006 to 45 percent in 2009, and e fforts to dec rease d ropout rates surpassed 
expectations. 

49. 
Lastly, the CPS, through the IFC , financed two tertiary education providers. The IFC 
invested 6.9 million to support refurbishment of facilities in Universidad D iego Portales, a for-
profit college, and provided two loans (for a total of $ 49.3 m illion) to Duoc, a foundation which 
offers technical training.  Most of Duoc’s students are from m iddle- and lower-income fam ilies. 
The two clients together enrolled 61,800 students in calendar year 2009, of whom 41 percent 
were women. 

Goal 3:  Provide Effective Protection against Poverty for Chileans across the Income 
Spectrum 

50. 
Bank’s support to increase equality of opportunity and reduce the vulnerability of the 
poor contributed to the scaling-up of the social protection system and first efforts to evaluate its 
impact.  A fter supporting under the Social Protection Technical Assistance Project the 
implementation of Chile Solidario since it was first established in 2003, under this CPS the Bank 
contributed to the work of the Presidential Commission that outlined Chile Crece Contigo, a 
program that is now in place and has b een rolled out at the municipal level, under the recently 
approved Additional Financing for the Social Protection Technical Assistance Project.  Through 
both of these instruments and related support, the Bank has assisted w ith the impact evaluation of 
ongoing Chile Solidario. 

51. 
Under the CPS the Bank assisted the government in the development of a conceptual 
framework to analyze its policy on specialized health human resources.  The ongoing multi -
phase Health Human Resources Study, under the Joint Studies Program , has presented a gap 
analysis of supply and demand for medical specialists in the public health sector for the 2009-
2012, and has identified a set of alternative policy options for reducing or elim inating those gaps.  
The third phase of the Study is undertaking an analysis of the explicit and implicit incentive 
system in the health system, and their consistency w ith desired policies.  On pensions, the Bank 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
provided non-lending technical assistance for supervision of p ension funds through the FIRST 
Initiative (Financial Sector Reform Strengthening Initiative). 

52. 
IFC is supporting protection against poverty through its role in financing SMEs.  IFC 
made one investment in a financial services company during the CAS period, achieving a 
substantial increase in financing for a sector that traditionally struggled to obtain loans from 
conventional banks.  Factorline, a factoring provider focused on the SME sector, made 4,800 
SME loans totaling $430 m illion in 2007-2009.  It also financed m icro, small and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs) w ith $11 million in loans in 3,800 transactions.  IFC has supported 
Factorline w ith two projects during the CAS period for a total $30 million.  IFC made a $15 
m illion equity investment in 2007, followed by a$15 million A Loan in 2009. 

Goal 4:  Transform Chile into a Knowledge Economy 

53. 
The CPS program contributed to the development of an effective innovation system and 
improvement in the stock of human capital through the Science for the Know ledge Economy 
Project. Efforts under this project jointly with parallel efforts by the government and the private 
sector have contributed to increase the number of PhD graduates and of PhD scholarships 
awarded, the private share of total research and development expenditures, and the number of 
patent applications, of researchers inserted in industry and of research consortia. 

54. 
The CPS program helped develop the gove rnance framework for the National Innovation 
Council for Competitiveness and make available international experience through several stand-
alone Fee-for-Se rvice technical studies. An on-going fee-based service is assisting the Ministry 
of Agriculture foster innovation through performance contracts for Public Sector Technological 
Institutes of the M inistry of Agriculture to facilitate their access to public funding. 

55. 
Continued Bank assistance through lending came to a halt when the incoming 
government (2010) cancelled the Innovation for Competitiveness Project approved in FY08. 
Reportedly, in this decision the government weighted high the cumbersome Bank procedures 
that slow down project implementation.  

Overall Evaluation of Bank Outcom es  

56. 
The CPS Completion Report rates the contribution of the World Bank Program to the 
achievement of outcomes as satisfactory.  The Bank G roup was supportive of Chile’s efforts in 
several of the priority areas the Government had identified for assistance and, in general, 
delivered the proposed program .  The assistance was of particular significance in contributing to 
an improvement in the quality of education and in expanding the quality and coverage of social 
assistance. The assistance in public sector development also contributed substantially to reform s 
that led to improving effectiveness in public sector management. 

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV . Results Assessm ent:  World Bank Group Performance 

57. 
The overall evaluation of the World Bank G roup Performance is rated as satisfactory.  As 
described in greater detail below, the Bank performed very well in the know ledge and advisory 
services, while performance was weaker in the area of lending. 

Evaluating the Bank’s Knowledge and Advisory Services 

58. 
A central feature of the FY07-10 CPS was the provision of just-in-time knowledge 
services in priority areas selected by the Government as needed to support its development 
strategy.  For Chile, this meant not only greater access to the Bank’s expertise in priority areas, 
and a larger and more responsive prog ram of advisory se rvices, but also facilitation of access to 
global experience, especially from OECD countries.  The Bank’s know ledge and advisory 
services were to be provided through three vehicles: the Bank’s traditional program of econom ic 
and sector work, a fee-for-service program responding to short, just-in-time products requested 
by sector m inistries, and through a new mechanism that was to be established, the Joint Studies 
Program (JSP).  The JSP was to be established and formalized through an annual work program 
agreement, detailing the products and services to be provided, and a time-line for their delivery, 
while including flexibility to add and modify deliverables during the year.  The services under 
the JSP could include non-lending technical assistance and studies, and the Government and the 
Bank would agree on the p ricing of products and details on the financing to be provided by each 
party. 

59. 
An agreement between Chile and the Bank establishing the JSP was formalized in mid-
2008.  Since its establishment, a total of 21 studies have been prepared in priority areas selected 
by the Government, through its National Budget O ffice (D IPRES) that was designated as the 
official interlocutor for purposes of prioritizing and agreeing to specific studies.  Appendix II 
presents a summary of the studies that have been carried out or are being carried out in FY11 
under the JSP.  The CPS proposed that knowledge products, although not linked to country 
outcomes, per se, would rather be judged on criteria of their quality, relevance and sustainability. 

60. Quality.  A joint evaluation of the JSP was carried out with the Government in M arch 
2009.  The Government’s overall conclusion of this evaluation, which reviewed the performance 
of the Program since its inception was that the program was effective and that all of the agreed 
tasks had been ca rried out satisfactorily, achieving the objectives that had been set fo rth in each 
case.  The evaluation sought to define more precisely the strategic objectives that the 
Government and the Bank aimed for under the JSP.  The follow ing general principles were 
agreed for studies to be included under the JSP in the future:  (i) the studies should concentrate 
on topics that focus on institutional development and reform in the medium term ; (ii) the topics 
should have an important knowledge focus; (iii) they should reflect public policies at a broader 
level than purely sectoral ones; and (iv) they should concentrate in areas where the Bank has a 
comparative advantage in know ledge.  In all , the studies that had been carried out at the time of 
the evaluation met these general principles, even though the JSP’s strategic objectives had not 
been precisely defined when it was established.  To ensure this strategic approach, D IPRES 
strengthened its role in coordinating, prioritizing and selecting study proposals since the first two 
studies under the JSP had not bene fitted from this coordination.  In all, this evaluation highlights 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
the high degree of commitment on the part of the Government , both through D IPRES and at the 
sectoral level, the good response on the part of the Bank’s technical team s, combined w ith 
flexibility and good quality, and the relationship that developed among all of them , which in the 
end led to developing strong technical collaboration that went way beyond the specific, 
individual studies.  The evaluation confirm s that all of the studies met their objectives, and were 
of high quality.  At the same time, it highlights the importance of flexibility as a feature of the 
JSP, allow ing m inor adjustments to reflect changes in priorities.  The evaluation confirm s that 
the JSP has allowed the Bank to increase considerably the amount of resources available for 
studies and advisory services, and has reduced the transaction costs related to carrying them out.  
Finally, the JSP has provided a coordinated framework of the Bank’s know ledge and advisory 
services carried out jointly with the Government, and as a result has led to greater efficiency in 
the use of resources and a more important contribution to the country’s development objectives. 

61. 
Relevance.  The topics upon which the Government requested Bank know ledge services 
are all directly related to its development goals, and have provided an important input to policy 
formulation and institutional reform efforts, as described in Section II of this CPSPR . 

62. 
Sustainability.  The Government’s demand for know ledge services remains strong. 
Currently, six new studies are programmed, and it is expected that demand w ill continue. 

63. 
Evaluation of Know ledge and Advisory Services
.  The Bank’s Joint Services Program , 
and other vehicles of knowledge and non-lending technical assistance have provided an 
important vehicle for providing Chile w ith access to the know ledge and access to global 
experience that it requires as an input to priority policies and institutional reform s that it has 
adopted.  The quality and relevance of the JSP and other vehicles, as judged by the Government, 
is very high.  The joint nature of the studies carried out has had an important institutional 
strengthening impact that goes well beyond the individual studies that are prepared.  Demand for 
the Bank’s know ledge services remains high.  The evaluation of the CPS in this aspect of the 
Bank’s assistance rates performance in the area of know ledge and advisory services as H ighly 
Satisfactory as the studies have had a substantial contribution on the policy decision-making 
process in Chile.  

Project Results 

64. 
New Lending.  The CPS proposed a very limited program of new lending from FY07 to 
FY09, consisting of four loans for a total of US$85.5 m illion, of which three were investment 
loans and one a DPL, and the possibility of additional lending in the amount of US$85 m illion 
for a then unidentified project.  The four identified projects were approved during the CPS period 
(Appendix III).  The CPS Progress Report further identified new lending for FY10 in the amount 
of US$13 million for two projects:  an Additional Financing Loan for the Social Protection 
Technical Assistance Project (US$3 million) and a Tertiary Education Project (US$10 m illion).  
O f these, only the Additional Financing was approved in FY10; processing of the Tertiary 
Education Project was delayed to FY11.  The US$30 m illion loan for the Promoting Innovation 
and Competitiveness Project, approved in FY08, was subsequently cancelled in FY10 when the 
new Adm inistration reconsidered its priority of external borrowing for the Project. 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
65. 
IFC’s investments in Chile doubled during the period covered by this CAS. Investments 
totaled $776.6 million in 15 projects, of which 80 percent was channeled to four power projects.  
The Corporation mobilized $392.8 million in additional financing for clients through its B Loan 
program , alongside $383.9 m illion in loans and equity investments for its own account. IFC 
financed 13 projects during the previous four-year period for a total $370.7 million. 

66. 
The CPS called for IFC investments in four strategic areas: energy, tertiary education, 
specialized financial mechanism s to support SMEs, and low -income housing finance. IFC was 
able to deliver in three of these areas. It was unable to enter the low -income housing market. 
Nonetheless, it was able to support the government’s energy and environmental policies w ith a 
substantial infrastructure program that focused on renewable energy projects. IFC also completed 
two transactions supporting a private, not-for-profit higher education provider. The Corporation 
was also able to enter the highly competitive Chilean financial industry to support a pioneering 
non-bank focused on SMEs that often lack financing on competitive term s. 

67. 
Portfolio Level.  The Bank’s lending portfolio in Chile was and continues to be small, 
but generally well perform ing, and focused exclusively in those areas where the Government felt 
that the Bank’s support through a lending instrument was desirable.  The investment portfolio at 
present consists of five operations with a total comm itment of US$105.3 million net of 
cancellations and an amount of US$44.3 million remaining undisbursed.  Table 3 below presents 
a summary of the main portfolio indicators over the CPS period. 

Table 3:  Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Managem ent 

Indica tor 
Portfolio Ass essment 

Numbe r o f P ro ject s un de r Impl ementat ion 

A ve rage Implementat ion Per io d 

 percent o f Problem P ro ject s b y Numb er 
 percent o f Problem P ro ject s b y Amount 
 percent o f Project s at R isk b y Numb e r 
 percent o f Project s at R isk b y Amo unt 
Disbursement Rat io ( pe rcent) 

Portfolio Ma nag ement 

CPPR dur in g t he Year (yes/no) 
Sup ervision Resou rces (t otal US$) 
A ve rage Sup ervision (US$/p ro ject) 

CP S P eriod 

FY0 6 

FY0 7 

FY0 8 

FY0 9 

FY1 0 

9 

3.5 

0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
21.1 

Yes 
679 
75 

7 

2.2 

14.3 
24.1 
14.3 
24.1 
10.9 

8 

2.9 

12.5 
2.1 
25.0 
14.9 
18.1 

7 

3.5 

14.3 
2.5 
14.3 
2.5 
20.8 

6 

4.2 

33.3 
30.8 
33.3 
30.8 
16.0 

Yes 
730.9 
104.4 

Yes 
857.2 
107.2 

Yes 
1,127.7 
161.1 

No * 
976.1 
162.7 

* Th e CPPR for FY10 was po stpon ed to Au gu st 2010 in respon se to th e GOC 's request gi ven th at sta ff w as not 
ava il able becau se o f the earthq uake and th e ch an ge in go ve rnment admin ist rat ion. 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68. 
Two issues stand out as affecting more than one project in the portfolio:  procurement 
and slow disbursements.  Several projects faced problem s w ith the use of the central purchasing 
system of Chile, ChileCompra, and some stringent requirements of Bank procurement rules.  The 
Bank worked w ith Chile to agree on procurement arrang ements that made possible, to some 
extent , the use of ChileCompra in Bank-financed projects. The adoption by the Bank of revised 
procurement guidelines in FY2011 is expected to greater facilitate the use of ChileCompra.  The 
other issue that affected several loans was that of low disbursements, due mostly to Chile’s 
strong fiscal position and ability to finance projects w ithout the use of th e corre sponding Bank 
loans. 

69. 
A ll of the projects that exited the portfolio during the CPS period were evaluated as either 
Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory by IEG (Appendix IV ). 

70. 
Individual Project Level .  Individual project progress towards the accomplishment of 
their development objectives is presented, by project, in Appendix V .  By and large, project 
implementation proceeded well and all of the projects are making progress towards the 
accomplishment of their objectives.  

71. 
Evaluation of Project Results and Portfolio Performance
.  Despite solid progress towards 
expected project outcomes, portfolio performance in general was affected by several factors, 
especially toward the end of the CPS period.  First , the focus on system ic reform s, especially in 
infrastructure, turned out to be more p roblematic (e.g., Transantiago) and subject to factors 
beyond the control of the executive (e.g., the M inistry of Public Works’ Organic Law ).  Second, 
the earthquake in Chile in early 2010 resulted in a redirection of the Government’s priorities 
towards addressing critical infrastructure rehabilitation and other issues.  Finally, the government 
transition, also in early 2010, led to a reprioritization of the Government’s requests for external 
financing, with the result that financing for the follow -on to a highly successful Innovation 
project was canceled before implementation started.  Still, while affected by transient issues, by 
most comparisons, project implementation and portfolio performance in Chile has traditionally 
been exceptionally good, and the project results generally satisfactory or highly satisfactory.  
Perhaps what this means is that there is a need to search for a better indicator by which to 
measure the overall impact of Bank lending and portfolio supervision that reflects the results 
achieved through ending assistance.  The evaluation of the CPS in this aspect of the Bank’s 
assistance rates performance in the area of project results and portfolio performance as 
Moderately Satisfactory overall, although there are specific projects for which a much higher 
rating would be justified. 

V . Lessons and Recomm endations 

72. 
The results framework for a CPS must allow the partners to measure the impact and 
the contribution of the program .  The emphasis that the CPS under review placed on linking the 
impact and contribution of the program to progress towards long-term development proved 
m isplaced because the World Bank G roup in Chile is financially small and covers only selected 
areas. In these circum stances, the contribution of the program to development outcomes is 
lim ited, difficult to determ ine and highly conditional on events or decisions that the program 
does not control or influence. The Completion Report effort to retrofit the results framework 
shows that the focus should be on outcomes lower level than development goals. Hence, the 

48 

 
 
 
 
results framework for the next CPS should focus on lower level impact indicators that best 
capture the contribution of the program , which is likely to become even more focused on 
know ledge products. 

73. Make the CPS design consistent with a flexible approach. Flexible aspects of the CPS 
program worked well . The success of the Joint Studies Program , w ith annual programming 
responding to emerging priorities is perhaps the best example of flexibility contributing timely 
inputs to government policy decisions. Fee for services are another example of demand driven 
cooperation that has worked well.  The implementation of CPS under review shows that a 
know ledge intensive program can help the authorities advance institutional reform initiatives, 
like was the case in transportation, social assistance, education, public financial management and 
innovation. As these aspects become dominant, the challenge for the design of the CPS will be to 
embed flexibility within a structured partnership framework. M eeting these challenges w ill 
require a continuous dialogue on the areas of engagement w ith a periodic updating of the 
program to reflect new activities and their expected contribution. In addition, mechanism s are 
needed to assure the quality of the services provided and products de livered as well as an 
accurate recording of the results achieved. 

74. 
The Bank should make greater headway in the use of country system s when the risk 
associated with governance and public finance management in countries are low like they are 
in Chile. The lim ited headway in the use of countries in higher m iddle income countries 
artificially lim its the capacity of the Bank to establish closer country partnerships through 
lending. It is advisable therefore that the Bank uses  the lim ited number of com ing projects 
during the next CPS to work closely w ith the client to better reflect the situation of a country like 
Chile fixing procurement and other financial management arrangements. Effective solutions that 
enable an effective implementation of projects with due consideration for Bank procurement 
policy will not only increase the effectiveness of Bank interventions but w ill serve to open 
options for future engagement. 

75. 
F ind a way to share Chile’s development experience and lessons. Future WBG 
engagement in Chile should focus on creating mechanism that help channel the Chilean 
successful experiences in the transformation that has gone into turning Chile into a high m iddle 
income country as well as the current efforts to meet the challenges to move to developed 
income status. In this regard, continued Bank G roup involvement w ith Chile is a win-win 
proposition as the transfer of Chile’s experience in results-based budgeting, social protection and 
tertiary education reform shows. 

49 

 
Appendix 1a:  Chile Country Partnership Strategy FY07-FY10 
Results Matrix as of June, 2010 

GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT GOAL I: ACCELERATE CONVERGENCE WITH OECD INCOME LEVELS 
RESULT AREA I –  INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC SERVICES 

Institutional Outcomes in the Government’s 
Action Plan that the CPS supported 
 Efficient use of public resources and 
increased transparency, competition and 
citizen participation in the contract ing and 
concession of public works 

 Efficient and sustainable urban transport 
system for Metropolitan Santiago 

 Increased effectiveness and product ive use 
of sustainable infrastructure services   

 Promotion of innovative renewable and 
thermal energy projects 

Outputs of the CPS program 

Instruments and Partners 

 Support to the Ministry of Public Works (MPW)’s Reform and the 
elaboration of Competitiveness Plans for all regions in Chile  
 Support to draft the new Concessions Law, approved by Congress in 
January 2010 
 Web-based system to monitor 21 road concessions according to quality 
indicators is operating. 
 A draft law to create a Metropolitan Transport Authority was 
submitted to Congress 
 Transantiago improved the air quality in Santiago city: greenhouse gas 
emission were reduced by 10.5 percent between 2006 and 2009  
 A study to design an Act ion Plan to mitigate Transantiago’s negative 
effects on street vendors is close to complet ion and a study on 
organizational improvements for Transantiago is ongoing 
 A study to develop a methodology to analyze the economic and 
financial standing of bus operators was completed.  
 Pilot projects developed to improve the quality and efficiency of the 
transport system  
 Regional development study supported territoria l development 
initiatives 
 29 territorial development plans (PMDTs) have been prepared and 
works are under implementation. 
 IFC investments have increased renewab le generating capacity by 220 
MW, as well as pioneering new technologies and financing tools for the 
industry  

 

Ministry of Public Works (DPL, FY07-
FY08) 
Ministry of Public Works (TAL, FY08-
FY14) 
Ministry of Public Works 

Santiago Urban Transport (TAL, FY06-
FY12)  
Sustainable Transport and Air Quality for 
Santiago (GEF, FY04 – FY10)  
Transantiago  

Infrastructure for Territorial Development 
(SIL, FY05 – FY12)  
SUBDERE. 

IFC invested and mobilize from third party 
investors a total of US$596.5 million in 
energy projects since 2007. 

50 

 
 
 
 
Institutional Outcomes in the Government’s 
Action Plan that the CPS supported 

 Strengthened public financial management, 
budget formulat ion and execut ion,  
transparency, and accountability  

RESULT AREA II –  PUBLIC SECTOR STRENGTHENING 

Outputs of the CPS program 

Instruments and Partners 

 SIGFE was implemented in 159 out of 190 government agencies 
within the central government 
 178 agencies and 91 government programs were evaluated between 
2002 and 2006 on their expenditure management efficiency using 
monitoring and evaluation tools developed by DIPRES 

 A study on Pub lic Policy Evaluat ion Agencies as input to consolidate 
Chile’s system of results-based financing, monitoring, and evaluation of 
public expenditures. 
 A programmatic studies on public sector management delivered to 
inform policy debate  
 Assessment of Chile’s social security reform management  

(SIL, 

Public Expenditure Management 
FY03-FY07) 
Public Expenditure Management II (SIL, 
FY08-FY13) 
DIPRES - SIGFE 
Public Policy Evaluation Agencies Phases I 
& II (JSP, FY09-FY10) 
Improvement of Public Sector Services 
Phases I & II (JSP, FY09-FY10) 
Management of Chile’s Social Security 
Reform (JSP, FY10) 
DIPRES 

RESULT AREA III –  SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND ENVIRONMENT 

Institutional Outcomes in the Government’s 
Action Plan that the CPS supported 

 Sustainable management of natural 
resources 

Outputs of the CPS program 

Instruments and Partners 

 Ongoing project aimed at providing financial support through a 
market-based mechanism for private investment in the power sector 
that reduce global greenhouse gas emission. 
 Transantiago improved the air quality in Santiago city: greenhouse gas 
emission were reduced by 10.5 percent between 2006 and 2009  
 A methodology to optimize the use of resources allocated to review 
compliance with environmenta l regulations  
 Indicators on the efficiency of policies and actions to guarantee 
compliance with regulations developed. 

Quilleco Hydropower Project (PCF, FY11-
FY13) 
COLBÚN, S.A. 
Sustainable Transport and Air Quality for 
Santiago (GEF, FY04 – FY10)  
Environmental Compliance Strategy (JSP, 
FY09) 
 CONAMA 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT GOAL II: IMPROVE QUALITY OF EDUCATION 
RESULT AREA IV – IMPROVE QUALITY OF EDUCATION 

Institutional Outcomes in the Government’s 
Action Plan that the CPS supported 
 Strengthened education quality assurance 
system 

Outputs of the CPS program 

Instruments and Partners 

 Analytical support to contribute to education reform aimed at creat ing 
a new institutional education system, including the establishment of 
the new agencies for education quality assurance the Superintendence 
of Education and the Quality Evaluation Agency  
 Joint Bank–OECD assessment of the tertiary education system in the 
Bio Bio Region to inform policy discussions on potential 
contributions of the tertiary education to the regional private sector 
development and innovation capacity. 

 Technical assistance to implement the education quality assurance 
institutional reform 

 Analytical support to inform key policy decisions on institutional 
change related to tertiary education systems (e.g.  unequal access, 
marked segmentat ion, inflexible curr icula, financing practices, and 
governance and management systems) and recommendations to 
improve it .   
 Joint Bank–OECD assessment of the foreign scholarship program 
Becas Chile and recommendations to going forward delivered. 

 Assessment of the global evidence and Chile’s current service delivery, 
institutional arrangements, quality assurance, financing, and sector 
coordination in Early Ch ild Development (ECD) policies 
 Analytical support to provide recommendations on policy options 
regarding the use of Information and Communications Technologies 
(ICT) in primary and secondary education. 

Management Models and Development of 
New Educat ion Institutions in Chile (JSP, 
FY09-FY10) 
Tertiary 
Education 
and 
Regional 
Development Strategy for the Bio Bio 
Region (Joint Study with OECD, FY10) 
Government of the Region of Bío Bio; Innova Bío 
Bío; The Regional Council for Science and 
Technology (CORECYT) 
Technical 
Collaboration 
for 
the 
Implementation and Evaluation of the 
School Preferentia l Subsidy (JSP, FY09-
FY10) 
Review of Tertiary Education System in 
Chile (Joint OECD Study, FY09) 

A Review of Chile’s Higher Education 
Scholarships Program (Joint Study with 
OECD, FY10) 
Institutional Framework for Early Child 
Development in Chile (JSP, FY10) 
ICT Policy 
in Chilean Primary and 
Secondary Education (JSP, FY10) 

 Life-long learning policies and training 
systems launched 

 Technical assistance to establish the foundation for an articulated, 
extended lifelong learning and train ing system to benefit illiterate 
adults 
 Support to the Contigo Aprendo, a literacy program targeting young 

Lifelong Learning and Training – Chile 
Califica (SIL, FY02 – FY10)  
Ministry of Education, National Employment 
and Training Agency, Fundacion Chile 

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Improved accountability of tertiary 
education system to enhance effectiveness 
of public funds 

adults and illiterate adults which benefited 100,000 adults between 
2003 and 2009.  
 Support to the design of the National Labor Competency Certification 
System, which benefited about 100,000 individuals with certified 
training 
 Five universities are operating under performance agreements aimed 
at stimulating institutional effectiveness in cr itical areas 
 Students enrolled in national PhD programs increased by 60 percent 
between 2005 and 2009 
 Undergraduate students in accredited programs or in the process of 
being accredited increased from 25 percent to 45 percent between 
2006 and 2009.  
 Support to refurbish the Universidad Diego Portales’ facilities. 
 Increased enrolment rates of students from middle- and lower-income 
families through student loan programs.  

Tertiary Educat ion Finance for Results 
Project (1st Phase APL, FY06 – FY10)  
Mecesup  

IFC invested US$6.9 million in a tertiary 
education institution and provided US$49.3 
million for a student loan program  
Universidad Diego Portales & Duoc 

GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT GOAL III: PROVIDE EFFECTIVE PROTECTION AGAINST POVERTY FOR CHILEAN ACROSS THE 
INCOME SPECTRUM 

RESULT AREA V – ENHANCING SOCIAL PROTECTION POLICIES 

Institutional Outcomes in the Government’s 
Action Plan that the CPS supported 

 Increased access to safety nets and to 
social services for the poor  

Outputs of the CPS program 

Instruments and Partners 

 Support for expanding Chile Solidario, designed to support extremely 
poor families and other vulnerable individuals, and Chile Cre ce Contigo, 
the Integrated System of Protection for Young Children. 

 Multi-phase Health Human Resources Study provided conceptual 
framework to identify and remove gaps in the delivery of the health 
services. 
 Technical Assistance on reforming the regulatory and supervisory 
framework for pension funds that emphasizes efficient risk 
management 
 Assessment of the equality of opportunity conditions at national and 
sub-national level in Chile 

Social Protection (TAL, FY04-FY10) 
MIDEPLAN 
Health Human Resources Study Phases I-
III (JSP, FY09-FY10) 

FIRST Chile Risk-based regulation of 
pension funds (TA, FY07-FY10) 

Index of Equality of Opportunity (ESW, 
FY09) 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT GOAL IV: TRANSFORM CHILE INTO A KNOWLEDGE ECONOMY 
RESULT AREA VI – FOSTERING INNOVATION  

Institutional Outcomes in the Government’s 
Action Plan that the CPS supported 
 Effective innovation systems and qualif ied 
human capital in the science and 
technology sector  

Outputs of the CPS program 

Instruments and Partners 

 Increased number of PHD graduates from 144 to 222, private share 
of total R&D expenditures from 34.4 percent to 48.1 percent, research 
consortia from 5 to 8, and PHD scholarships to 575. 

 Technical assistance to NICC provided strategic proposals to improve 
mechanism for facilitating technology commercialization and 
technology transfer to enterprises in Chile. 

 Ongoing study on policy strategy to incentive agri-food and forestry 
innovation systems to be delivered in FY11. 

and 

Science for the Knowledge Economy (SIL, 
FY03-FY07)  
National Commission for Science and 
Technology (CONICYT) 
Fostering Technology Transfer 
Commercializat ion (JSP, FY10) 
National Innovation Council for Competitiveness 
(NICC) 
Review of challenges and response of the 
agri-food and forestry innovation systems 
(FBS, FY10-FY11)  
MINAGRI 
Promoting 
Innovation 
and 
Competitiveness Pro ject (SIL, FY09-FY10) 
– Project was CANCELED  1/ 
Ministry of Finance 

1/ This project was canceled in July 2010 by Government’s request. 

54 

 
 
 
 
Appendix II: Chile – CPS Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries 
(FY2007-FY2010) 

CPS Plan (April 24, 2007) 

Project 
Ministry of Public Works Strengthening DPL 

IBRD (US$m) 
30.0 

Status in CPS Progress Report  
(September 29, 2009) 
Status13
IBRD (US$m) 
Actual 
30.0 

Ministry of Public Works Strengthening TAL 
Integrated Financial Management System (SIGFE) II 

Innovation and Competitiveness APLII (follow up to 
Science and Knowledge Economy) 

To be Determined 

CPS Progress Report Plan 
(September 29, 2009) 
Social Protection TA Additional Financing 

Tertiary Education Financing APL2 

5.5 
20.0 

25.0 

85.0 

165.5 15

3.0 

10.0 

13.0 

Actual 
Actual 

Actual14

No lending  in FY2009 

June 30, 2010 

Actual 

11.7 
24.8 

30.0 
0.0 

96.5 

3.0 

3.0 

99.5 

FY 

2007 

2008 

2009 
Subtotal 
FY2007-2009 

2010 

Subtotal 
FY2010 

Total 
FY2007-FY2010 

13 Actual, Dropped or Forwarded to a different FY. 
14 Name of the Project was changed to Promoting Innovation and Competitiveness  
15 The CPS also proposed an amount of US$85 in lending to be determined for FY2010. 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
Appendix III:  Chile – Planned Nonlending Services and Actual Deliveries 
Joint Annual Studies Program 

A reas of Bank 
Support 

Innovat ion 

FY2009 

FY2010 

Eva luat ion 

Public 
Po licy 
Agencies, Phase 2 
A cont inuat ion of Ph ase 1, w ith 
recommendat ions regard ing 
applicat ion of internat iona l 
experience to the Chilean 
context. 

Gest ion de La Calidad PMG, 
Phase 2 
An Executive Summary for 
dissem inat in g the PMG and a 
report conta inin g and ana lys is of 
quality management, to gethe r 
w ith recommendat ions for the 
design of a next phase. 

Moderni zacion de La Gest ion 
Pú bica 
An ana lys is of management o f 
info rmat ion technology in the 
refo rm of pens ion 
admin istrat ion. 
MI NI AGRI Review 
A 
review 
of 
the Pub lic 
Techno logica l Inst itutes attached 
to the M in ist ry of Agricu lture . 

Infrastructure 
Services 

and Pub lic 

Public Secto r Management 

Sustainab le 
Deve lopment 
and Environment 

Educat ion 

Eva luation 

Po licy 

Public 
Agencies 
A comparat ive study on the 
inte rnat iona l experience in 
agenc ies responsib le for 
eva lu at ing public polic ies 

Gest ion de La Calidad PMG 
An eva luat ion of the 
Gove rnment’s Programas de 
Mejoramiento de La Gestion en 
los Servicios Públicos (PMG ), 
and an interna t iona l sem ina r to 
present resu lts. 

Compliance 

Envi ronmental 
St rategy 
Th e design of a strategy that 
combines pos it ive 
incent ives 
and enforcement mech anisms to 
ensure an adequate adherence 
of key product ive secto rs to 
environmenta l priorit ies and 
regulat ions. 
Higher 
Education 
w/OECD 
A c rit ica l input in de finin g th e 
médium-te rm st rategy for 
higher educat ion in Ch ile. 

Report 

Preferent ial School Su bsidy 
Th e deve lopment of a 

Planned 
FY2011 

Institutionali zing 
Agroindust rial I nnovation 

An ana lys is of public sec tor 
agenc ies responsib le for 
agroindustria l innova t ion 
(res earch, forest ry and natu ra l 
resources ), and the des ign o f 
an institut iona l strategy to 
promote innovat ion. 

Gest ion de La Calidad PMG , 
Phase 3 

Insurance Sector Review 

Water Resources Study 

International 
I nstitutional 
Models 
for Ear ly Chi ldhood 
Education 
An internat iona l comparison of 
the institutiona l framework for 
early ch ildhood education in 
Chile and in Méx ico, New 
Zea land and Sweden. 

International Best -Pract ice 

in 

System Analysi s of Tertiary 
Education Student Financial 
Support 
Ana lysis of ex ist in g student 
aid grant and loan p rograms 
and 
the ir 
effic iency 
and 
efficacy 
in 
promotin g 
equitab le access 
to 
tert ia ry 
educat ion.  Recommendations 
w ill he lp consolidate and 

56 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
monitoring and eva lua t ion 
system that w ill support impact  
eva lu at ion for the new ly 
established pre fe rent ia l school 
subsidy int roduced fo r students 
from soc ioeconom ica lly 
disad vantaged backgrounds. 

Design of Education 
Institutions 
Th e des ign of a new 
inst itut iona l st ructure fo r the 
educat iona l sec tor that w ill 
address cha llenges such as 
impro ving qua lity and ensurin g 
an effic ient use of the inc reased 
funding for prima ry and 
secondary educat ion 

Socia l P rotect ion 

Índex of Equity of Opportunity 
A d iagnostic of the equa lity of 
opportunity condit ions at the 
nationa l and sub-nat iona l leve l 
in Ch ile . 

Hea lth Human Resources Study 
A gap ana lys is of the various 
medica l spec ia llt ies to ensure a 
proper supply of specia lists in 
the public hea lth system . 

stream line 
programs. 

student 

a id 

Improvement s 
Financing 

in Health 

Programs to Increase Access to 
Computers 
A 
survey 
of 
internat iona l 
experience w ith programs 
to 
inc reas e access to computers. 

Design of Educat ion Institutions, 
Phase 2 
A cont inuat ion of Ph ase 1, 
provid ing an in-depth ana lys is at 
the des ign and implementat ion 
of qua lity assurance systems in 
selected OECD systems, and 
draw in g lessons for Ch ile 

Preferent ial School Subsidy, 
Phase 2 
Refinement of methodolo gy to 
eva lu ate 
the 
impact o f 
the 
Preferent ia l School Subs idy 
Program and apply it to observe 
first -year e ffects of the p rogram. 

Foreign Scholarship Review 
w/OECD 

Resources, 

Bio Bio Tertiary Education 
Review w/OECD 
Hea lth Human 
Phases 2 and 3 
A cont inuat ion of Phas e 1.  
Phase 2 cons ists of an ana lysis 
of gaps between supply and 
demand for med ica l spec ia lists 
in Ch ile.  Phase 3 cons ists of  an 
analys is of imp lic it and exp lic it 
incent ive in the hea lth system, 
their coherence and consistency 
w ith the policy object ives, and 
their susta inab ility in light o f the 
market cond it ions in the short 
and lon g te rm. 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix IV : Ratings for Projects that Exited the Portfolio during CPS Period 

Project 

Outcome Rating 

R isk to DO 
Rating 

Bank 
Performance 

Borrower 
Performance 

MPW DPL 

Satisfactory 

Moderate 

Satisfactory 

Satisfactory 

IEG 

Mode rately 
Satisfactory 

Significant 

Mode rately 
Satisfactory 

Mode rately 
Satisfactory 

Pub lic 
Expend iture 
Management I 

Satisfactory 

Moderate 

Satisfactory 

Satisfactory 

IEG 

Satisfactory 

Mode rate 

Satisfactory 

Satisfactory 

Lifelong Learn ing 
and Train ing 

Satisfactory 

Moderate 

Satisfactory 

Satisfactory 

IEG 

NA 

NA 

NA 

NA 

Santiago Urban 
Transport DPL 

Moderately 
Satisfactory 

Moderate 

Moderately 
Satisfactory 

Moderately 
Satisfactory 

IEG 

NA 

NA 

NA 

NA 

Sustainab le 
Transport A ir 
Quality for 
Santiago 

Moderately 
Satisfactory 

Moderate 

Moderately 
Satisfactory 

Moderately 
Satisfactory 

IEG 

NA 

NA 

NA 

NA 

Science 
for 
Know ledge 
Economy 

the 

Satisfactory 

Low or 
Negligib le 

Satisfactory 

Satisfactory 

IEG 

Mode rately 
Satisfactory 

Negligible to Low 

Satisfactory 

Satisfactory 

58 

Appendix V: Areas of Engagement:  Ongoing, Agreed and under Consideration 
At the time of the CPS Consideration, and actual during period (FY2007-2010) 

Proposed Áreas of 
Cooperation 

Country Development 
Goals 

Portfolio and Lending  

AAA/non-lending 
technical advice  

Portfolio and Lending  

AAA/non-lending technical 
advice  

Proposed in CPS 

Actual during CPS Period 
FY2007-2010 

Innovation and 
Business Climate 

Transform Chile into a 
knowledge economy. 
Follow 
lead of other 
resource rich and open 
countries, Finland, New 
Zealand and Australia. 
Diversify beyond exports 
of copper, and other 
commodities to software 
and knowledge. 

Ongoing 
Science for the 
Knowledge Economy 
(APL I) 

Agreed w/Government 
Innovation and 
Competitiveness 

Agreed w/Government 
Institutionalizing 
Agroi ndustrial Innovation 

Ongoing 
Science for the Knowledge 
Economy (APL I) – Clos ed 
on March 31, 2007 

New Lending 
Promoting Innovation and 
Competitveness (FY2008) 

Infrastructure and 
Public Services 

Agreed w/Government 
Contingent Liabilities and 
Transport Concessions 
(FFS) 

Increase access of all 
Chileans to public 
services and boost 
competitveness. 
Housing:
 By 2014 
ensure adequate housing 
for all families. 

Transport:
  Build a 
system that is more 
accessible, efficient and 
clean. 

Ongoing 
Infrastructure for 
Territorial Development 
Transantiago Urban 
Transport TA 
Sustainable Transport and 
Air Quality (GEF) 
Quilleco Hydropower 
(GEF) 

Horni tos (GEF) 
Chacabuquito 

Energy:  Establish 
greater energy 

The IFC is financing 
renewable energy with 

Ongoing 
Infrastructure for 
Territorial Development 
Transantiago Urban 
Transport TA 
Quilleco Hydropower 
(GEF) 
Horni tos (GEF) 
Chacabuquito Hydropower 
(GEF) 

New Lending 
Ministry of Public Works 
Strengthening DPL 
(FY2007) 

59 

ESW 

FFS 
Governance 
of 
National 
Innovation System (FY2008) 
Credit 
Reporting 
System 
(FY2008) 
Fostering Technology Transfer 
(FY2009) 
CORFO Evaluation of Foreign 
Investment Program (FY2010) 

JSP 

Other NLTA 

ESW 
Regional Development Study 
(FY2008) 

FFS 
Advisory Services for Study of 
Railroad (FY2008) 

JSP 

Other NLTA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposed Áreas of 
Cooperation 

Country Development 
Goals 

Portfolio and Lending  

AAA/non-lending 
technical advice  

Portfolio and Lending  

AAA/non-lending technical 
advice  

Proposed in CPS 

Actual during CPS Period 
FY2007-2010 

independence, by 
reducing barriers to 
investment and through 
the use of alternative fuel 
sources. 

two projects already in 
portfolio and a solid 
pipeline of conventional 
and non-conventional 
renewable energy projects 

Ministry of Public Works 
Strengthening TA 
(FY2007) 

Agreed w/Government 
Institutional 
Strengthening:  Ministry 
of Public Works (DPL) 
Institutional 
Strengthening:  Ministry 
of Public Works (TA) 
Ongoing 
Integrated F inancial 
Management System 
Project (SIGFE) 
Juvenile Justice (IDF) 

Agreed w/Government 
Integrated F inancial 
Management System 
Project (SIGFE) II 

Public Sector 
Strengthening 

Continue 
modernization of the 
state for better service 
to the citizen. 
Reduce the 
concentration of Power 
in Santiago, give 
greater voice and 
participation to 
citizens, and empower 
local governments to 
respond to local 
challenges. 

Ongoing 
Integrated F inancial 
Management System 
project (SIGFE) – Closed 
on June 30, 2007 
Juvenile Justice (IDF) – 
Closed on February 9 2010 

New Lending 
Integrated F inancial 
Management System 
Project (SIGFE) II 
(FY2008) 
Strengthening Chile’s 
Council for Transparency 
for Improved Transparency 
and Accountability  (IDF) 
(FY2010) 

ESW 

FFS 
Management of Financial Assets 
(FY2008) 
Evaluation of Management 
Enhancement Programs 
(FY2008) 

JSP  
Public Policy Evaluation 
Agencies (FY2009) 

Gestión de la C alidad PMG 
(FY2009) 

Public Policy Evaluation 
Agencies, Phase 2 (FY2010) 

Gestión de la Calidad, Phase 2 
(FY2010) 

Ongoing 
Risk Based Financial 
Sector Oversight 
Framework (FFS, FIRST) 
(i) Implementing Risk- 
Based Supervision in the 
Securities Industry 
(ii) Roadmap for 
Strengthening Solvency 
Control in the Insurance 
Industry 
(iii) Risk-Based 
Regulatory and 
Supervisory Framework 
for P ension Funds 
Managing Financial 
Assets of the State (FFS) 

Agreed w/Government 
Regional Development 
Strategy for the Tarapaca 
(I) and Arica-Parinacota 

60 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposed Áreas of 
Cooperation 

Country Development 
Goals 

Portfolio and Lending  

AAA/non-lending 
technical advice  

Portfolio and Lending  

AAA/non-lending technical 
advice  

Proposed in CPS 

Actual during CPS Period 
FY2007-2010 

Sustainable 
Development and the 
Environment 

Develop a policy 
framework that is 
compatible to economic 
growth, protection of 
natural resources, and 
greater social equity. 
Agriculture: Support the 
Government’s dual 
objective of becoming 
the tenth largest 
agricultural exporter 
while achieving 
inclusion of médium and 
small farmers. 
Environment: Impl ement 
a concept of sustainable 
development. 

Education 

Improve quality 
education. 

of 

Ongoing 
Sustainable Land 
Management Project 
(GEF) 
Sustainable Transport and 
Air Quality for Santiago 
(GEF) 
Reduction of Ozone (MP) 

Under Consideration 
National Biodiversity 
Cluster (GEF) 
Development of 
Ecological Services 
Market (GEF) 
Climate Change 
Adaptation in Water 
Resource Management 
(GEF) 

Biodiversity in 
Infrastructure Planning:  
Biodiversity Cluster 
(GEF) 
Ongoing 
Tertiary Education 

(XV) regions (ESW) 
Impact Evaluation of 
Chile’s Management 
Enhancement Program 
TA (FFS) 

Under Consideration 
Credit Reporting S ystem 
(JSP) 
Under Consideration 
Capacity Building for 
Civil Society 
Organizations to 
Contribute to 
Development Planning 

Modernización de la Gestión 
Pública (FY2010) 

Other NLTA 
Global Cat Mutual Bond Risk 
Model (FY2009) 

Risk-based Insurance Supervision 
(FY2009) 
ESW 

FFS 

JSP 
Environmental Compliance 
Strategy (FY2009) 
MINIAGR I Review (FY2010) 

Other NLTA 
Remote Sensing Damage 
Assessment (FY2010) 

PCB Decommissioning and 
Disposal Plan (FY2010) 

Ongoing 
Sustainable Land 
Management Project (GEF) 
– Closed on December 31, 
2007 
Sustainable Transport and 
Air Quality for Santiago 
(GEF) – Closed September 
30, 2009 
Reduction of Ozone (MP) – 
Closed on June 30, 2007 

New Lending 
Quilleco Hydropower 
Project (PCF) 

Under Consideration 
Review of higher 

Ongoing 
Tertiary Education Finance 

ESW 
Education Quality Assurance 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposed Áreas of 
Cooperation 

Country Development 
Goals 

Portfolio and Lending  

AAA/non-lending 
technical advice  

Portfolio and Lending  

AAA/non-lending technical 
advice  

Proposed in CPS 

Actual during CPS Period 
FY2007-2010 

Enable the education 
system to replace 
socioeconomic origins as 
the key factor in the 
future of children. 

Finance for Results  
(APL I) 
Lifelong Learning and 
Training Project 

education w/ OECD (JSP) 
Non-lending technical 
advice on Reform of 
Ministry of Education and 
Superintendency (JSP) 

for Results  

(APL I) 

(FY2007) 

FFS 

Lifelong Learning and 
Training Project – Closed 
on December 31, 2009 

JSP 
Higher Education Report 
w/OECD (FY2009) 
Preferential School Subsidy 
(FY2009) 
Design of Education Institutions 
(FY2009) 
International Institutional Models 
for Early Childhood Education 
(FY2009) 
International Best-Practice 
Programs to Increase Access to 
Computers (FY2010) 
Design of Education Institutions, 
Phase 2 (FY2010) 
Preferential School Subsidy, 
Phase 2 (FY2010) 
Foreign S cholarship Review 
w/OECD (fy2010) 
Bio Bio Tertiary Education 
(FY2010) 
Other NLTA 

Social Protection 

Provide effective 
protection against 
poverty for Chileans 
across the income 
spectrum. 

Ongoing 
Social Protection TA 
Capacity Development for 
Legal P racticioners in 
Gender Equality (IDF) 

Chile Solidário:  extend 
social assistance to a 

Under Consideration 
Non-lending TA on 
evaluation of Chile Crece 
Cont igo (JSP) 
Continued Impact 
Evaluation of Chile 
Solidário (JSP) 

Ongoing 
Social Protection TA – 
Closed on December 31, 
2009 
Capacity Development for 
Legal P racticioners in 
Gender Equality (IDF) – 
Closed on July 18, 2007 

ESW 

FFS 

JSP 
Índex of Equity of Opportunity 
(FY2009) 
Health Human Resources Study 

62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposed Áreas of 
Cooperation 

Country Development 
Goals 

Portfolio and Lending  

AAA/non-lending 
technical advice  

Portfolio and Lending  

AAA/non-lending technical 
advice  

Proposed in CPS 

Actual during CPS Period 
FY2007-2010 

broader class of the poor. 

Plan Auge:
 ubcrease 
access to health services; 
increase illnesses 
covered. 

Pension System:
 provide 
universal minimum 
pension. 

New Lending 
Social Protection TA 
Additional Financing 
(FY2010) 
Institutional Strengthening 
of Mining Sector for 
Indigenous Peoples 
Inclusion  (IDF) (FY2010) 

(FY2009) 
Health Human Resources Study, 
Phases 2 and 3 (FY2010) 

Other NLTA 
Gender Equity in Private Sector 
(FY2009) 

Pension Fund Supervision TA 
(FY2010) 

“Under Consideration”
 signifies that there were ongoing discussions with the relevant ministries at the time the CPS was prepared. 

ESW – Formal ESW 
FFS – Fee for Service 
JSP – Joint Studies Program 
NLTA – Non-lending Technical Assistance 

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix VI: Reference Docum ents 

Country Partnership Strategy for Chile, 2007-2010, Report No. 38691-CL 

Implementation Completion and Results Report: 

 Institutional Strengthening of the M inistry of Public Works Development Policy 
Loan, Report No. ICR00001064 dated June 29, 2009 
 Sustainable Transport and A ir Quality for Santiago (GEF), Report No. ICR00001317 
dated M arch 24, 2010 
 Lifelong Learning and Training Project , Report No. ICR1390 dated September 3, 
2010 
 First Public Expenditure M anagement Project, Report No. 0000629 dated December 
7, 2007 
 Santiago U rban Transport Programmatic Development Policy Loan, Report No. 
ICR0000631 dated August 11, 2009 
 Science for the Knowledge Economy, Report No. ICR0000491 dated September 26, 
2007 

Project Appraisal Documents for ongoing projects 

Implementation Status Reports for ongoing projects 

Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report for the Republic of Chile, Report No. 50878-
CL dated September 29, 2009 

A ide M emoires/Letters to the Government dated July 16, 2008 (w ith reference to portfolio 
review ), December 15, 2008 (w ith reference to JSP), undated (w ith reference to 2008 review 
of JSP), June 4, 2009 (w ith reference to 2008 JSP) and undated (with reference to 2009 
review of JSP). 

64 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 

Annex 3 

Chile at a glance

1/11/11

Latin
America
& Carib.

Upper
middle
income

Key Development Indicators

Chile

(2009)

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

17.0
756
1.0
89

566
20,422
1.1
79

993
48,659
0.9
75

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

160.6
9,470
13,430

3,865
6,826
10,496

7,352
7,405
12,763

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

-1.5
-2.5

4.3
3.1

4.1
3.2

(most recent estimate, 2003–2009)

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

<2
2
79
7
1

8
17
73
20
4

..
..
71
20
..

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

99
99
108
103

92
90
118
114

95
92
111
110

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

96
96

93
79

95
84

Net Aid Flows

1980

1990

2000

2009 a

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2008):
   Germany
   France
   Spain

-11

104

49

73

-6
-5
0

20
6
6

22
9
-2

20
9
7

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

0.0
-1

0.3
8

0.1
3

0.0
4

Long-Term Economic Trends

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

35.1
28.8

40.9
22.3

4.5
4.6

-1.4
4.2

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

39.0
..

304.9
..

539.5
100

559.6
172

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–09
      (average annual growth %)
1.7
1.6
1.1
8.1
6.6
4.1

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

11.2
27,572

13.2
15.4
31,982
75,404
  (% of GDP)
8.7
41.5
19.6
49.8

17.0
163,669

Agriculture
Industry
   Manufacturing
Services

7.3
37.4
21.5
55.3

5.9
37.0
18.7
57.1

3.3
42.1
12.7
54.6

5.9
3.5
3.4
2.9

2.2
4.4
-0.6
8.8

6.2
6.3
7.3
9.0

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation 

70.7
12.5
21.0

63.4
9.9
23.4

64.5
12.2
21.4

59.8
13.4
19.0

-3.3
-0.7
8.0

..
..
9.5

5.5
4.8
7.7

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

22.8
27.0
13.5

33.5
30.1
22.0

31.5
29.7
19.9

38.1
30.4
21.6

12.3
5.6

9.4
11.7

5.6
10.5

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary.  .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2008.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

6

4

2

0

2

4

6

0-4

15-19

30-34

45-49

60-64

75-79

percent of total population

Ag e d istr ibu tion , 2008

Male

Female

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

1990

1995

2000

2007

Chile

Lat in America & the Caribbean

Und er -5 mo r tal i ty rate (p er 1,000)

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4

95

05

GDP

GDP per capita

Growth o f GDP and GDP p er cap i ta (%)

 
 
 
66 

Ch ile

Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2009

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

19,210
18,466
1,400

53,736
42,428
12,907

Current account balance
   as a % of GDP

-897
-1.2

4,218
2.6

Workers' remittances and
   compensation of employees (receipts)

13

4

Reserves, including gold

15,110

25,371

Central Government Finance

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
   Tax revenue
Current expenditure

21.3
16.3
18.6

20.1
14.6
19.8

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

2008

Overall surplus/deficit

-0.7

-4.4

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
   subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
   (% of manufactured exports)

18.4

..

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
   Individual
   Corporate

..
15

40
17

43

109

3.4

6.2

External Debt and Resource Flows

Environment

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

37,261
6,173
–

71,646
15,283
–

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)

20
21.3
..

21
21.8
18.8

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

49.4
24.6

43.8
20.1

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

56,020 52,607
12.6
..

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

4,860
-427

12,702
316

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

3.9

4.3

GDP per unit of energy use
   (2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

6.2

7.0

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

1,700 1,851

 World Bank Group portfolio

2000

2009

 (US$ millions)

 IBRD
   Total debt outstanding and disbursed
   Disbursements
   Principal repayments
   Interest payments

808
48
115
70

215
29
14
6

 IDA
   Total debt outstanding and disbursed
   Disbursements
   Total debt service

7
0
1

1
0
1

Private Sector Development

2000

2009

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)

–
–
–

27
6.9
31

 IFC (fiscal year)
   Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
      of which IFC own account
   Disbursements for IFC own account
   Portfolio sales, prepayments and
      repayments for IFC own account

139
123
5

559
240
149

Ranked as a major constraint to business
   (% of managers surveyed who agreed)
      Access to/cost of financing
      Labor regulations

2000

2009

37

13

..
..

27.1
25.4

 MIGA
   Gross exposure
   New guarantees

57
0

10
0

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

80.1
7.5

128.0
6.9

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  2009 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available.  – indicates observation is not applicable.

1/11/11

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

0

25

50

75

100

Control of cor ruption

Rule of law

Reg ulatory q ual i ty

Pol i tical s tabi l i ty

Voice and acco untabi l i ty

Country' s percenti le rank (0-100)

hi gher v al ues impl y better ratings

2009

2000

Go vern an ce ind icato rs, 2000 and 2009

Sourc e: Kaufmann-K raay -Mas truzzi , W orl d Bank

IBRD, 200

IDA , 2

IMF, 0

Other mul ti -
l ateral , 591

B i l ateral , 211

P ri v ate, 48,383

Short-term, 
14,910

Compo si tion o f to tal extern al d eb t, 2008

US$ m i l l ions

 
Mi l lennium Deve lopment Goals

Ch ile

Wi th selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and  2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)  

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
   Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)   
   Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)   
   Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)  
   Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)   

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
   Primary school enrollment (net, %)
   Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)   
   Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)   
   Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
   Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)   
   Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)   
   Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)   

Goal 4: 
reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
   Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)   
   Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   
   Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

Goal 5: 
reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
   Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)   
   Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)   
   Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)   

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
   Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)   
   Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)   
   Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
   Access to an improved water source (% of population)
   Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
   Forest area (% of total land area)   
   Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)
   CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)   
   GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)   

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development   
   Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)   
   Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
   Internet users (per 100 people)   
   Personal computers (per 100 people)   

Chile

1995
<2
19.9
3.5
..

2000
<2
17.0
3.5
..

2008
<2
..
4.1
0.5

..
..
77
..

101
35
8

16
13
97

40
100
..

0.2
27
110

92
88
20.9
..
3.0
7.0

12.6
1.4
0.3
3.3

..
98
83
99

100
36
11

11
9
97

29
100
..

0.3
19
100

94
92
21.3
..
3.9
6.2

21.4
22.1
16.6
9.2

94
95
91
99

99
37
15

9
7
92

26
100
58

0.3
11
130

96
96
21.8
18.8
4.3
7.0

21.0
88.1
32.5
14.1

1990
4.4
..
3.4
..

..
..
78
..

101
35
..

22
18
97

56
..
56

0.1
38
120

90
84
20.5
..
2.6
6.3

6.6
0.1
0.0
0.9

Edu cation ind icato rs (%)

M easles immun i z ation (% o f 1-year 
o ld s)

ICT ind icato rs (p er 100 p eop le)

125

100

75

50

25

0

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment rat io

Rat io of girls to boys in primary & secondary educat ion

100

75

50

25

0

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Chile

Lat in America & the Caribbean

F ixed + mobile subscr ibers

Internet users

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  .. indicates data are not available.

1/11/11

01 /1 1/11 

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

67 

 
 
Annex 4 

Chile
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

As Of Date 11/25/2010

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item

Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2008

9
3.1
11.1
2.0
22.2
14.5
17.8

2009

8
3.8
12.5
2.4
12.5
2.4
21.4

2010

6
4.2
33.3
30.8
33.3
30.8
24.3

2011

5
5.0
20.0
11.1
20.0
11.1
22.5

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs

46
3,176.4
8.7
9.6

4
48.6
0.0
0.0

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the 
     beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 5 

Chile Social Indicators

Latest single year

Same region/income group

POPULATION  
Total population, mid-year (millions)
    Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
    Urban headcount index
    Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
    Health (% of GDP)
    Education (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
    Total
        Male
        Female
Access to an improved water source
(% of population)
    Total
        Urban
        Rural
Immunization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
    Measles
    DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
    Total
        Male
        Female
Mortality
    Infant (per 1,000 live births)
    Under 5 (per 1,000)
    Adult (15-59)
        Male (per 1,000 population)
        Female (per 1,000 population)
    Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

1980-85

1990-95

2002-08

12.1
1.6
82.6
2.7

..
..
..

1,420
15
16

..
..
..

..
3.8

..
..
..

..
..
..

92
99
..

72
69
75

23
27

218
120
..
..

14.4
1.8
84.4
2.4

..
..
..

4,330
68
83

55.2
3.5
59.4

..
2.7

89
90
88

92
99
57

97
94
..

75
72
78

13
16

169
85
..
100

16.8
1.0
88.4
1.9

..
..
..

9,370
117
106

52.0
4.1
56.8

3.7
3.4

94
95
94

95
98
72

92
96
1

79
76
82

7
9

129
64
16
100

Latin
America
& Carib.

566.1
1.2
78.6
2.2

..
..
..

6,768
123
..

Upper-
middle-
income

949.3
0.8
74.8
2.0

..
..
..

7,852
121
..

..
..
..

3.4
3.6

94
93
93

91
97
73

93
91
4

73
70
77

20
23

192
104
130
90

..
..
..

3.5
4.6

94
94
93

94
98
82

93
92
4

71
68
75

19
23

210
127
110
95

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months who received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 23 April 2010.

69 

 
 
Annex 6 

Chile - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
   Agriculture
   Industry
   Services

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
   Government investment
   Private investment

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savingsc
Memorandum items
Gross domestic product 
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 03 prices)
   Gross domestic product at market prices
   Gross Domestic Income

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 03 prices)
   Gross domestic product at market prices
   Total consumption
   Private consumption
Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
  Exports (GNFS)b
      Merchandise FOB
   Imports (GNFS)b
      Merchandise FOB
  Resource balance
  Net current transfers
  Current account balance

  Net private foreign direct investment
  Long-term loans (net)
    Official
    Private

  Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

  Change in reservesd
Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR03 prices)
  Merchandise exports (FOB)
    Primary
    Manufactures
  Merchandise imports (CIF)

2004

Actual     
2005
2006

2007

2008

Estimate
2009

100.0
4.6
39.9
55.6

70.8
19.3
2.3
17.0

40.8
31.6

29.2
22.2

100.0
4.4
42.0
53.5

69.3
21.2
1.8
19.3

41.3
32.8

30.7
23.4

100.0
4.0
47.1
48.9

64.9
19.0
2.0
17.1

45.8
30.7

35.1
24.9

100.0
3.8
47.3
48.9

65.5
19.8
2.3
17.4

47.2
33.2

34.5
25.1

100.0
3.5
43.9
52.6

71.0
24.4
..
..

44.8
40.9

29.0
23.2

100.0
3.3
42.1
54.6

73.2
21.4
..
..

38.1
30.4

26.8
21.6

95,653

118,250

146,773

164,315

170,850

163,669

4,970

5,940

6,890

8,160

9,400

9,380

5.6
9.8

4.4
6.0
6.2

48,401
41,267
38,248
30,492
10,153
1,783
1,449

4,801
15,836
-196
16,032
-20,370
-1,716

8.6

4.7
32.6
10.7
21.3

4.6
16.3

3.5
5.9
6.0

66,511
58,680
44,362
35,900
22,149
3,406
7,154

5,127
24,390
51
24,339
-34,674
-1,997

15.1

2.2
54.7
5.1
11.5

4.6
6.0

3.6
5.9
5.9

76,934
67,972
53,980
44,031
22,953
3,123
7,488

9,961
21,520
6
21,514
-42,183
3,214

14.0

6.9
16.9
5.3
17.5

3.7
-5.1

2.7
2.9
3.6

77,249
66,464
69,273
57,617
7,976
2,924
-3,653

7,194
29,811
-129
29,940
-26,907
-6,444

4.7

-0.5
-9.0
2.8
15.0

-1.5
-0.2

-2.5
0.8
-0.1

62,242
53,735
49,335
39,754
12,907
1,616
4,218

4,719
29,654
..
..
-36,943
-1,648

7.9

-4.6
-18.4
-10.0
-17.9

6.0
14.2

4.9
5.9
6.1

38,554
32,520
29,715
22,935
8,839
1,072
2,074

5,610
13,547
-105
13,652
-21,422
191

9.2

14.9
74.4
15.0
20.0

70 

 
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
     
       
       
       
       
       
Chile - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

2004

Actual     
2005
2006

2007

Estimate
2008

Projected
2009

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
  Current revenues
  Current expenditures
  Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
  Capital expenditure

Monetary indicators
  M2/GDP
  Growth of M2 (%)
  Private sector credit growth /
  total credit growth (%)

Price indices( YR03 =100)
  Merchandise export price index
  Merchandise import price index
  Merchandise terms of trade index
  Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

  Real interest rates
  Consumer price index  (% change)
  GDP deflator (% change)

22.1
16.8
5.3
5.3

72.4
8.2
119.3

149.8
164.9
90.9
86.9

2.4
7.5

23.9
16.1
7.8
7.7

69.9
9.6
138.1

181.6
179.5
101.2
91.9

3.7
7.6

25.9
15.1
10.8
10.7

66.3
11.5
209.4

252.6
188.8
133.7
96.7

2.6
12.4

27.0
15.4
11.7
11.6

68.5
14.1
111.4

273.7
197.4
138.7
95.2

7.8
5.5

25.7
17.1
8.6
8.6

77.5
17.6
188.9

268.8
225.3
119.3
97.3

7.1
0.3

20.1
19.8
0.3
0.3

75.7
0.2
-236.1

227.8
188.0
121.2
95.2

-1.4
4.2

a.   GDP at factor cost
b.  "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c.  Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d.  Includes use of IMF resources.
e.   Consolidated central government.
f.  "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 7 

Chile - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

2005

2006

Actual     
2007

2008

2009

Estimated
2010

2011

Projected
2012

2013

45,446

48,052

56,443

64,297

71,646

58,105

52,579

46,135

40,501

2979

347

3830

0

0

0

0

0

0

7,688

13,793

11,552

2,023

1,672

1,676

1,467

1,337

1,004

84.7
38.4
14.3
0.6

..
..

0.4
289

0.2
3.8

63.4
32.7
18.2
0.5

..
..

0.0
346

0.3
3.1

62.2
34.4
12.7
0.4

..
..

0.0
354

0.3
2.4

71.1
37.6
2.2
0.3

..
..

0.2
200

0.2
1.7

94.2
43.8
2.2
0.3

..
..

0.0
215

0.2
1.0

..
..
..
0.2

..
..

..
170

0.2
0.6

..
..
..
0.2

..
..

..
121

0.1
0.0

..
..
..
0.3

..
..

..

0.3

..
..

..
115

#DIV/0!
108

0.1
0.0

0.1
0.0

Total debt outstanding and 
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a

Net disbursements (US$m)a

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)a

Debt and debt service indicators 
(%)
   TDO/XGSb
   TDO/GDP
   TDS/XGS
   Concessional/TDO

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
   IBRD DS/public DS
   Preferred creditor DS/public
   DS (%)c
   IBRD DS/XGS
   IBRD TDO (US$m)d
      Of which present value of
      guarantees (US$m)
   Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
   IDA TDO (US$m)d

IFC (US$m)
   Loans
   Equity and quasi-equity  /c

MIGA
   MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a.  Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short-
     term capital.
b.  "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
    Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e.  Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

72 

 
 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
      
    
    
      
      
      
      
      
      
Annex 8 

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

As Of Date 11/25/2010

Closed Projects

70

IBRD/IDA *

Total Disbursed (Active)
          of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
          of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
          of which has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

 74.66
 9.67
 479.92
 1,036.97
 554.58
 1,046.64
 30.61
 0.00
 30.61

Active Projects

Project ID

P103441
P076807
P086689
P082037
P102931
Overall Result

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating
Development 
Implementation 
Objectives
Progress

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/

Fiscal Year

IBRD

IDA

GRANT Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig. Frm Rev'd

Project Name

2008
2005
2006
2004
2007

24.8
50.26
4.8
13.71
11.7
105.27

6.283289 0.5099559
7.549276 7.5492762 -4.89413
3.310638 3.3106379 1.289305
2.9925
-0.0075
10.47645 9.3097856 9.443119
30.61216 20.672156 5.838295

CL Public Expenditure Mana
S
CL-Infrastructure for Territor
 S
CL-Santiago Urban Transpo MS
CL-Social Protection TA LoaS
CL-TAL Min of Public W orksMU

S
S
MS
MS
MU

73 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Comm itment
Fisca l Ye a r
2010/ 2011
2009/ 2010

Institution
Short Name
Bc Internac ional
CTA
Chilempack
2007/ 2010
Duoc
2005/ 2008/ 2009/ 2011 Fac torline
2007/ 2009
Hidromaule
2006
La Higuera
2008
La Confluenc ia
2006
Lignum
2009
Norvind
2005
Proa II
2004
San V icente
TFSA
U.Diego Portales

2003
Tota l Portfol io

Annex 9 

International Finance Corporation - CHILE
Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio

Amounts in US Dollar Millions as of December 31, 2010

LN
ET
QL + QE
GT
RM
ALL
ALL
LN
ET
QL + QE
GT
RM
ALL
ALL
Cm td - IFC Cm td - IFC Cm td - IFC Cm td - IFC Cm td - IFC Cm td - IFC Cm td - Pa rt Out - IFC Out - IFC Out - IFC Out - IFC Out - IFC Out - IFC Out - Pa rt
-
-
-
47.3
-
47.3
-
-
-
-
47.3
-
47.3
-
100.0
-
-
-
-
100.0
225.0
73.5
-
-
-
-
73.5
165.3
-
-
-
-
0.2
0.2
-
-
-
-
-
0.1
0.1
-
29.3
-
-
21.5
-
50.8
-
7.8
-
-
2.8
-
10.6
-
15.0
13.8
-
-
-
28.8
-
15.0
13.7
-
-
-
28.7
-
5.3
-
3.5
-
-
8.8
9.8
5.3
-
3.5
-
-
8.8
9.8
31.8
-
10.0
-
-
41.8
102.1
31.8
-
10.0
-
-
41.8
102.1
83.0
-
-
-
-
83.0
125.0
83.0
-
-
-
-
83.0
125.0
-
2.7
-
-
-
2.7
-
-
2.7
-
-
-
2.7
-
29.9
-
-
-
-
29.9
29.9
29.9
-
-
-
-
29.9
29.9
-
1.6
-
-
-
1.6
-
-
0.2
-
-
-
0.2
-
3.8
-
-
-
-
3.8
-
3.8
-
-
-
-
3.8
-
-
1.6
-
-
-
1.6
-
-
1.6
-
-
-
1.6
-
-
-
-
1.6
-
1.6
-
-
-
-
1.5
-
1.5
-
298.0
19.6
13.5
70.4
0.2
401.6
250.0
18.2
13.5
51.6
0.1
333.4
432.0

4 9 1 . 7

74 

 
 
            
              
              
            
           
         
            
        
        
          
       
        
       
          
        
              
              
              
           
        
         
       
        
          
        
        
       
      
            
              
              
              
           
           
            
        
        
          
        
        
        
          
          
              
              
            
           
         
            
        
        
          
        
        
       
          
          
            
              
              
           
         
            
       
       
          
        
        
       
          
            
              
              
              
           
           
            
        
        
          
        
        
        
          
          
              
            
              
           
         
         
       
        
        
        
        
       
      
          
              
              
              
           
         
         
       
        
          
        
        
       
      
            
              
              
              
           
           
            
        
        
          
        
        
        
          
          
              
              
              
           
         
           
       
        
          
        
        
       
        
            
              
              
              
           
           
            
        
        
          
        
        
        
          
            
              
              
              
           
           
            
        
        
          
        
        
        
          
            
              
              
              
           
           
            
        
        
          
        
        
        
          
            
              
              
              
           
           
            
        
        
          
        
        
        
          
        
            
            
            
           
        
      
     
       
        
       
        
     
      
A
A

t
t

t
t

a
a

c
c

a
a

m
m

a
a

D
D

e
e

s
s

e
e

r
r

t
t

A
A

n
n

d
d

e
e

s
s

M
M

o
o

u
u

n
n

t
t

a
a

i
i

n
n

s
s

A
A

n
n

e
e
d
d

s
s

M
M

n
n
u
u
o
o

t
t

a
a

i
i

n
n

s
s

Nevado Ojos
Nevado Ojos
Nevado Ojos
del Salado
del Salado
del Salado
(6,880 m)
(6,880 m)
(6,880 m)

Vallenar
Vallenar
Vallenar

OvalleOvalle
Ovalle

Chillán
Chillán
Chillán

Victoria
Victoria
Victoria

Osorno
Osorno
Osorno

Puerto
Puerto
Puerto
Quellión
Quellión
Quellión

Puerto Aisén
Puerto Aisén
Puerto Aisén

Manatiales
Manatiales
Manatiales

Puerto
Puerto
Puerto
Yungay
Yungay
Yungay

Calama
Calama
Calama

SANTIAGO
SANTIAGO
SANTIAGO

XIIXII
XII

XIXI
XI

X
X

IXIX
IX

XIVXIV
XIV

VIIIVIII
VIII

VII
VIIVII

RMRM
RM
VIVI
VI

V
V

IVIV
IV

IIIIII
III

IIII
II

I
I

XV
XVXV

Tocopilla

Iquique

Antofagasta

Copiapo

La Serena

Valparaíso

Concepcíon

Temuco

Puerto Montt

Valvidia

Coihaique

Punta
Arenas

Talca

Rancagua

Arica

A R G E N T I N A

B O L I V I A

PA R A G U AY

P E R U

U

R

U

G

U

A

Y 

Cape Horn
65°W

Strait of
Magellan

PA C I F I C O C E A N

AT L A N T I C
O C E A N

To 
San Sebastián

To 
Río Gallegos

To 
Paso
Río Mayo

To 
Nahuel Huapí

To 
Bardas
Blancas

To 
Villa Nueva

To 
Rodeo

To 
Fiambalá

To 
Salta

To 
Uyuni

To 
La Paz
To 
Corque

To 
Tacna

To 
Tolar
Grande

To 
Las Lajas

85°W

80°W

75°W

70°W

65°W

60°W

4 0 ° S

3 5 ° S

3 0 ° S

2 5 ° S

50°S

45°S

40°S

35°S

30°S

25°S

20°S

80°W

75°W

70°W

60°W

55°W

50°W

CHILE

TARAPACÁ
ANTOFAGASTA
ATACAMA
COQUIMBO
VALPARAÍSO
REGIÓN METROPOLITANA
DE SANTIAGO
LIBERTADOR GENERAL
BERNADO O’HIGGINS 
MAULE
BIO BÍO
LA ARAUCANÍA
LOS LAGOS
AISÉN DEL GENERAL CARLOS
IBÁÑEZ DEL CAMPO
MAGALLANES Y DE LA
ANTÁRTICA CHILENA
LOS RÌOS*
ARICA-PARINACOTA*

I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
RM.

VI.

VII.
VIII.
IX.
X.
XI.

XII.

XIV.
XV.

REGIONS OF CHILE

* Regions approved by cabinet and
   parliament, will become effective
   on October, 2007. 

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.  
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

0

200

400

0

200

400 Miles

600 Kilometers

IBRD 33386R

JUNE 2007

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

REGION CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

RAILROADS

REGION BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

FA LK LAND IS LANDS ( IS LAS MA LV INAS )

A D IS PU TE CONCERN ING SOVERE IGN TY OVER THE
IS LANDS EX IS TS BE TWEEN ARGEN T INA WH ICH C LA IMS
TH IS SOVERE IGN TY AND THE U .K . WH ICH ADM IN IS TERS
THE IS LANDS .

C H I L E

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
