d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  
The World Bank 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 64555-BW 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

FOR THE  

REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA 

FOR THE PERIOD FY09 – FY13 

October 5, 2011 

Southern Africa Country Department 1 
Africa Region 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BOTSWANA 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 
PROGRESS REPORT 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
Currency Unit = Botswana Pula (BWP) 
US$1 = BWP 6.54 (at July 31, 2011) 
BWP 1 = US$ 0.15285 

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
Metric System 

FISCAL YEAR 
April 1 – March 31 

Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Country Manager 
Task Team: 

Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili 
Ruth Kagia 
Constantine Chikosi 
Tom Buckley, Tim Gilbo, Zeinab Partow 

This CPS Progress Report benefited from contributions from the Botswana Country Team, including Varadan 
Atur, Jean-Christophe Caret, Sheila Dutta, Tazeen Fasih, Juan Gaviria, Tim Gilbo, Marcus Wishart, Riham 
Shendy, Supee Teravaninthorn, Fang Xu and Chunlin Zhang under the overall guidance of the Country 
Director, Ruth Kagia.  Valuable peer review comments from institutional reviewers are also gratefully 
acknowledged. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

AAA 
ART 
BAIS 
BDP 
BIDPA 
BMC 
BNAPS 
BPC 
BTC 
BWP 
CCS 

CBM 
CPS 
DWNP 
DWR 

Analytic and Advisory Activities 
Anti-Retroviral Therapy 
Botswana AIDS Impact Survey 
Botswana Democratic Party 
Botswana Institute for Development Policy Analysis 
Botswana Meat Commission 
Botswana National AIDS Program Support Project 
Botswana Power Corporation 
Botswana Telecommunications Corporation 
Botswana Pula 
Carbon Capture and Storage 

Coal Bed Methane 
Country Partnership Strategy 
Department of Wildlife and National Parks 
Department of Water Resources 

CWIS 

Core Welfare Indicators Survey 

CSP 
Concentrated Solar Power 
EU 
European Union 
ESKOM 
Electricity Supply Commission (South Africa) 
ESW 
Economic and Sector Work 
FIRST 
Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Trust Fund 
FSAP 
Financial Sector Investment Program 
FSDS 
Financial Sector Development Strategy 
GCM 
Global Climate Models 
GDP 
 Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environment Facility 
GIA 
Government Investment Account 
GICO 
Government Implementation and Coordination Office 
HIV/AIDS Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune 
Deficiency Syndrome 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
Investment Climate Assessment 
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China 
Institutional Development Fund 
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 
Government of the Botswana  

IBRD 
ICA 
ICBC 
IDF 
IFC 
IMF 
GoB 

NBFI 
NDP 
OFID 
OPRC 

PEFA 

ITP 
Integrated Transport Project 
kW 
Kilowatt 
MAP 
Multi-country HIV/AIDS Program 
M&E 
Monitoring and evaluation 
MIC 
Middle Income Country 
MIGA 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
MTEF 
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework 
MSME 
Micro, Small, Medium Enterprises 
MW 
Megawatt 
NACA 
National AIDS Coordinating Agency 
NBFIRA Non-Bank Financial Institutions Regulatory 
Authority 
Non-Bank Financial Institutions 
National Development Plan 
OPEC Fund for International Development 
Output and Performance-Based Road 
Contracting 
Public Expenditure and Financial 
Accountability 
Performance-Based Budgeting 
Public Expenditure Review 
Public Financial Management 
Progress Report 
Regional Environmental and Social Assessment 
Southern African Development Community 
Statistics Botswana 
Southern African Power Pool 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Sexually Transmitted Infections 
Technical Assistance 
Tuberculosis 
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building 

PBB 
PER 
PFM 
PR 
RESA 
SADC 
SB 
SAPP 
SSA 
STI 
TA 
TB 
TFSCB 

UN 
United Nations 
UNAIDS United Nations Joint Program on HIV/AIDS 
UNDP 
United Nations Development Program 
WRM 
Water Resources Management 
WUC 
Water Utilities Corporation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. 
II. 
III. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION.......................................................................................................... 1 
COUNTRY CONTEXT................................................................................................. 2 
PROGRESS THROUGH FY11 .................................................................................... 5 
Pillar One:  Enhancing Public Sector Effectiveness ........................................................ 5 
Pillar Two: Fighting HIV/AIDS and Improving Education Outcomes ........................... 6 
Pillar Three:  Increased Competitiveness – Infrastructure and the Climate for 
Investment and Growth .................................................................................................... 8 
Pillar Four:  The Environment ....................................................................................... 11 
Program Delivery and Portfolio Performance ............................................................... 12 
Lessons Learned ............................................................................................................. 13 
CPS Relevance ............................................................................................................... 14 
IV.  GOING FORWARD .................................................................................................... 14 
V. 
RISKS AND CREDITWORTHINESS ...................................................................... 16 

Tables and boxes 
Table 1: Selected Economic Indicators ........................................................................................... 3 
Table 2: Planned vs. Actual IBRD Financial Support .................................................................. 12 

Box 1: Morupule B Generation and Transmission Project – Summary of Progress .................... 10 

Annexes 
Annex 1: CPS Results Matrix ....................................................................................................... 17 
Annex 2: Botswana at a Glance .................................................................................................... 24 
Annex 3: Selected indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ......................... 27 
Annex 4: IFC Investment Operations Program ............................................................................ 28 
Annex 5: Summary of Nonlending Services ................................................................................ 29 
Annex 6: Key Economic Indicators .............................................................................................. 30 
Annex 7: Key Exposure Indicators ............................................................................................... 32 
Annex 8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) .............................................................. 33 
Annex 9:  Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio (IFC) ........................... 34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Botswana was considered by the Board on May 
21, 2009.  At that time Botswana was dealing with the immediate impacts of the global financial crisis, 
which from late 2008 had begun to have profound macroeconomic impacts on Botswana. Through 
prudent economic management and sound governance Botswana had sustained high levels of growth for 
many years, largely based on the export of rough diamonds, and built foreign reserves of some 80 percent 
of GDP at end 2008, representing over two years of imports.  However, the crisis saw diamond retail sales 
plummet globally, and Botswana’s diamond exports fell by about 40 percent between October 2008 and 
May 2009, with the contribution of diamonds to revenues falling from 44 percent to 31 percent between 
the 2007/08 and 2009/10 financial years. 

2. 
The onset of the crisis coincided with the preparation of the tenth National Development Plan 
(NDP10) by the Government of the Botswana (GoB).  The seven year NDP10, within the framework of 
Botswana’s long-term development strategy, Vision 2016, outlined a significant program of investment 
focused on identified growth opportunities in tourism, energy, agriculture, financial services and 
manufacturing.  The advent of the crisis however highlighted Botswana’s vulnerability to reduced 
diamond exports.  With revenues reduced in the short-term, and against the backdrop of a secular decline 
in diamond exports and eventual exhaustion of the resource1, the NDP10 program added urgency to the 
long recognized need for Botswana to diversify its economy and establish new drivers of economic 
growth.  The NDP10 program implied substantial fiscal deficits in the short term, and thus new sources of 
finance have been actively sought.  These have included running down of reserves, borrowing from 
international financial institutions, and accessing the domestic credit market. 

3. 
The CPS outlined a substantial program of World Bank re-engagement in Botswana. While the 
first IDA operation to Botswana was approved in 1964, in the fifteen years to 2009 there had been little 
demand for Bank financing, and the Bank’s engagement had been limited to small pieces of analytic 
work.  However, the GoB sought the Bank’s expertise in the design of the National HIV/AIDS prevention 
strategy in 2007, which spurred a substantial increase in both lending and AAA activity.  An 
unprecedented energy crisis in Southern Africa developing at the same time, with substantial implications 
for Botswana, also opened a window for dialogue in the infrastructure sectors.  In response to this 
growing interest in Bank support and consistent with Botswana’s vision and development strategy, the 
CPS outlined a program of support focusing on four elements of the Government’s development agenda:  
(i) enhancing public sector effectiveness; (ii) fighting HIV/AIDS and improving education outcomes; (iii) 
increasing competitiveness – through infrastructure development and improving the climate for 
investment and growth; and (iv) the environment.   

4. 
The strategy outlined in the CPS is aligned with the new Africa Strategy and its emphasis on 
improving competitiveness and employment while addressing vulnerabilities and resilience, as well as 
the Regional Integration Assistance Strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa2.  In particular, the CPS 
emphasizes infrastructure investment and AAA to support the policy reforms needed to help Botswana 
diversify its economy, making it more competitive and less reliant on diamond exports.  In line with the 

1 Establishing the likely remaining lifetime of Botswana’s diamonds is highly uncertain. The productive capacity of the largest 
mines is being extended through additional “cuts”, although this will come at a cost to profitability. So while production is likely 
to continue at roughly current rates for another 10 to 15 years, revenues will fall as the costs of production rise. Given the luxury 
good and cartel-like nature of the international diamond industry, it is also difficult to predict trends in international prices and 
demand. 
2 Africa’s Future and the World Bank’s Support to it, SecM2011-0116; IDA/SecM2011-0121. Partnering for Africa’s Regional 
Integration: Progress Report on the Regional Integration Assistance Strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa, SecM2011-0181 ; 
IDA/SecM2011-0217 

1 

 
                                                 
Africa Strategy’s emphasis on increasing resilience, the strategy features support for the Government 
programs aimed at coping with the HIV/AIDS pandemic and stubbornly high rates of HIV infection in 
Botswana.  In keeping with the Africa Strategy’s cross-cutting focus on governance and public sector 
capacity the strategy seeks to enhance government effectiveness with a particular focus on strengthening 
public expenditure management. Given Botswana’s small population and economy, landlocked 
geography and interdependence with its neighbors, the strategy also emphasized the importance of 
regional approaches.   

5. 
This Progress Report (PR) describes implementation experience through the first three years of 
the CPS (FY09- FY11).  During this period the Bank’s partnership with Botswana has grown 
substantially with new financing and guarantees totaling US$620 million and a significant deepening of 
the policy dialogue based on an expanded program of analytical and advisory activities.  This experience 
has underscored both the value added that can be provided by the Bank to an African Middle Income 
Country (MIC) like Botswana, but has also brought to light some implementation difficulties driven by 
the lack of recent partnership experience between the Bank and Botswana’s institutions.  This report 
concludes that the CPS program and outcomes remain appropriate and relevant, as does the NDP10 on 
which it is based, and that strong progress has been recorded against most of the milestones outlined in 
the Results Matrix of the CPS.  The flexibility built in to the CPS, befitting Botswana’s MIC status, is 
sufficient to allow for the planned activities in the remaining two years of the CPS to substantially 
achieve their intended outcomes. 

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

6. 
Botswana continues to benefit from a robust democracy built on sound institutions of 
governance.  Parliamentary elections were held in Botswana on October 16, 2009, with the Botswana 
Democratic Party of President Seretse Khama Ian Khama increasing its majority by one seat to hold forty-
five of the fifty-seven seats in the National Assembly.  As with the previous nine elections since 
Botswana’s independence in 1966, polling went smoothly and the elections were internationally regarded 
as free and fair.  The next general election is scheduled to take place in October 2014.  Opposition parties 
have moved to form a united front in a bid to challenge the long-dominant ruling party. Economic issues, 
including the need to diversify the economy and reduce government spending in the face of continued 
global economic uncertainty could emerge as important issues and may increase challenges to the 
dominance of the ruling party. 

7. 
Botswana is emerging relatively strongly from the effects of the global crisis which had a severe 
negative impact on the country’s economic growth and exports.  Government was able to rely on large 
accumulated savings in the Government Investment Account (GIA, also known as the Pula Fund) to 
maintain high public spending levels, which limited the contraction in GDP to 4.9 percent in 2009, 
despite a decline in diamond exports of over 30 percent (in US dollar terms).  Economic growth estimates 
for 2010 indicate that the economy returned to strong GDP growth of 7.2 percent, as diamond production 
and exports rebounded from their low levels during the previous year, with exports growing by 33 percent 
in value terms.  For 2011, GDP growth of around 7 percent is projected, and a return to pre-crisis 
diamond production and exports is forecast for 2012/13.   

8. 
The decision to protect public spending levels during the crisis meant that large fiscal, and 
external, deficits were – and continue to be – accumulated.  While government revenues fell from 40 
percent of GDP prior to the crisis to 35 percent in FY2009/10, public spending actually rose from 
pre-crisis levels of around 30 percent of GDP to near 45 percent in 2009/10.  Fiscal deficits of 10.9 and 
9.7 percent of GDP were recorded in the 2009/10 and 2010/11 financial years. The deficits are being 
financed largely by drawing upon the GIA, which has dwindled from close to 40 percent of GDP in 2008 
to about 16 percent currently.  A budget support loan of some 15 percent of GDP from the African 

2 

 
Development Bank has completed the government’s financing requirement. In tandem, external debt3 has 
grown from under 3 percent of GDP pre-2008 to 19 percent today, virtually depleting the government’s 
external borrowing capacity, which is legally limited to a maximum of 20 percent of GDP.  The external 
accounts have also shifted from surplus to deficit as a result of the decline in diamond exports, with 
estimated current account deficits of 5.8 percent of GDP in 2009 and 4.9 percent in 2010.  

Table 1: Selected Economic Indicators 

(percent of GDP unless otherwise noted) 

GDP growth (annual %)  
Inflation, CPI (annual %, period average) 
Overall Fiscal Balance 1 
Total Central Government Debt 1 
External Public Debt1 

Central Government Revenue & Grants 
Export Growth (% yoy) 
Import Growth (% yoy) 
Current account balance  

2008 

2.9 
12.6 
-5.2 
6.4 
2.1 

34.0 
-2.9 
18.2 
6.9 

2009 

-4.9 
8.2 
-10.9 
16.1 
14.2 

34.6 
-35.7 
-3.5 
-5.8 

2010 (p) 

2011 
Forecast 

2012 
Forecast 

7.2 
6.9 
-9.7 
19.3 
19.7 

28.8 
33.6 
18.1 
-4.9 

6.8 
7.8 
-5.7 
20.6 
20.4 

30.5  
11.1 
10.0 
-4.6 

7.1 
6.0 
0.0 
20.0 
18.9 

31.2 
6.0 
5.7 
-2.5 

(p) Indicates preliminary data, 
1  Fiscal year data (April 1 – March 31) 
Source: Ministry of Finance, Bank of Botswana, IMF, Bureau of Statistics 

9. 
On the positive side, the enclave nature of the mining sector has helped to contain the effects of 
the global crisis from spreading to the rest of the economy.  As only about three percent of the labor 
force is directly employed in mining, unemployment rates are not thought to have risen substantially 
above pre-crisis levels, although information on the labor market is limited.  By maintaining public 
spending levels and expanding the public work-fare program, Ipelegeng, the government further helped to 
reduce the impact of the crisis on wage earners generally and on the poor in particular.  The non-mining 
private sector, which is highly dependent on government spending, also weathered the crisis fairly well, 
growing at an estimated 5 percent during 2009 and at over 6 percent in 2010 (but down from peak levels 
of 10 percent in 2007). And, as has been true for other countries in the region, the small and insulated 
nature of the financial sector in Botswana protected it from the worst effects of the global crisis.  Banks 
remain liquid and well capitalized, and although household debt rose to worrisome levels in 2009, this 
trend was reversed in 2010. 

10. 
Botswana’s past prudent macroeconomic and fiscal policies have largely paid off, but 
significant challenges remain, and some risks may have increased with the global crisis.  Downside 
risks to growth come from weaker than expected global growth, which would have a significant impact 
on Botswana’s revenues given the elasticity of diamond export to the economic performance of trading 
partners such as the US, EU and Japan.  And although these threats appear to be broadly balanced by a 
potentially faster recovery in domestic private investment in the energy and non-diamond mineral sectors, 
significant global uncertainty, combined with high food and fuel price pressures, little legal scope for 
increased external indebtedness and a diminished Pula Fund, points to considerable potential risks to a 
sustained recovery, particularly in the event of shocks. So while accumulated fiscal savings and large 
international reserves have served their intended role as a cushion to enable a gradual adjustment to 
adverse circumstances, emphasis on re-building these fiscal buffers as soon as possible would be prudent, 

3 This includes publically guaranteed debt. 

3 

 
  
  
  
  
   
  
                                                 
particularly while diamond prices are high.  Any revenue over-performance, such as higher-than-
projected SACU income, should therefore be saved.  In the event of multiple shocks, Botswana still holds 
international reserves that cover nearly 17 months of imports, but cushioning the economy to the same 
extent as in the crisis would be difficult with a diminished Pula Fund (now at just under 20 percent of 
GDP, half its level pre-crisis, although still substantial) and very limited access to external debt given that 
the country is very close to the 20 percent of GDP eternal debt limit – although significant space remains 
to take on domestic debt.   

11. 
In the near term, over the next two to three years, the government’s priority will be to return 
the fiscal accounts to equilibrium. Deficits are projected to remain high this year as major investment 
projects are completed.  The 2011 Budget Speech set an objective of closing the 2011/12 financial year 
with a deficit of 6.3 percent of GDP (from an estimated 9.7 percent of GDP 2010/11 ), which would be 
reduced to zero in 2012/13.  Public spending would decline from 39.9 percent of GDP in 2010/11 to 37.5 
percent in 2011/12, and to 31.1 percent a year later.  This path implies a virtual halt to new capital 
spending beyond the completion of ongoing projects, a focus on maintenance of existing infrastructure, 
and a real reduction in recurrent spending, including in the wage bill. But holding the line on spending is 
proving difficult, particularly in the case of public sector wages which this year will constitute nearly 30 
percent of total central government outlays.  Facing a third year without a pay increase as a result of the 
impact of the crisis on public finances, public sector unions in Botswana went on strike in April.  The 
confrontation led to the closure of public schools and some medical facilities.  The crisis underscored the 
fact that reaching a consensus on the spending cuts that are needed to reduce the size of the public sector 
to levels more consistent with the long term revenue outlook will be a significant challenge in the years 
ahead.  And while the economic consolidation program is largely expenditure-based, there is scope over 
time for a greater focus on revenue measures, including broadening the tax base and improving tax 
administration.  

12. 
Social protection programs have probably helped to contain the impact of fiscal austerity 
measures.  The government’s policy of providing a stable food basket to a number of vulnerable and 
needy groups, a broad school-feeding program reaching all public primary school students, as well as an 
expanded public work-fare program – Ipelegeng – help to shield large segments of the population from 
the impact of expenditure reduction and inflation related to food and fuel prices.4  It is, unfortunately, 
virtually impossible to assess the impact of these social protection programs as data on poverty and 
unemployment is outdated and irregularly published, and there are no systematic evaluations of the 
incidence of social protection programs or their impacts. 

13. 
Looking ahead to the medium- and longer- terms, clarity and vision in three broad areas of 
economic policy-making will be required: these are (i) public spending reforms; (ii) economic 
diversification, and; (iii) tackling poverty and inequality.  Quite apart from the impact of the global crisis, 
Botswana’s economy is beginning to slow down and the dramatic economic growth rates of the 1970s 
and 1980s will be hard, if not impossible, to match. While this may be natural for a maturing economy 
whose basic building blocks are in place, it also reflects low productivity associated with a large public 
sector and a fledgling, largely uncompetitive and inward-looking private sector that is heavily reliant on 
government spending and contracts.  There is today an acceptance by policymakers that public spending 
will need to fall from about 40 percent of GDP today to 25-30 percent in the medium-term, more in line 
with long-term revenue potential. Improvements in the effectiveness and efficiency of public spending 
will be indispensable for managing this transition.    

4 At this stage, however, there appear to be no firm evidence of generalized price pressures in the economy, largely due to some 
slack in the non-mining economy.   

4 

 
 
 
                                                 
14. 
The diversification agenda has been a central pillar of policy making in Botswana for over two 
decades.  Although some successes have been achieved, the country is still heavily reliant on diamonds 
and on the public sector revenues they provide, as became painfully clear in 2008 and 2009.  Regional 
and international competitiveness are challenges which have not always been clearly targeted by policy. 
Signals and incentives to domestic and international businesses are mixed and at times at cross purposes.  
While overall tax rates are low, the increasing demand for exemptions – that are rarely evaluated for their 
economic merits – risks undermining the broad policy over time. Subsidies to certain sectors are rarely 
evaluated for their impact and serve as disincentives to investment in what may perhaps be more 
productive areas with greater long-term potential.     

15. 
Botswana’s poverty and inequality rates remain too high for a middle income country. 
Improving the quality of growth and tackling the causes of structural unemployment are critical for 
poverty reduction.  Here the diversification agenda is crucial to developing Botswana’s labor market and 
increasing employment opportunities, as the capital intensive nature of mining is partly behind 
Botswana’s high rates of unemployment and poverty.  While the country achieved gender parity in both 
primary and secondary education at least a decade ago, important gender disparities persist, particularly in 
terms of economic empowerment. Public sector reforms will also need to address spending on social 
protection and insurance, and how it can be more cohesive and better targeted.  The 2010 Public 
Expenditure Review (PER) found that public spending on social protection was significant, but its impact 
was diluted by fragmentation of programs, poor targeting, and lack of monitoring and evaluation.  The 
lack of up-to-date information on the poor and their characteristics, and on the incidence of poverty-
reduction programs, makes policy-making all the more challenging. 5 

III. 

PROGRESS THROUGH FY11 

Pillar One:  Enhancing Public Sector Effectiveness 

16. Milestones.  The CPS results matrix outlined six Outcomes under Pillar One, and a total of nine 
milestones/progress indicators against which progress would be evaluated. (Annex 1: CPS Results Matrix 
– Progress Report).  A summary of progress against these milestones is included in Annex 1, with the 
main elements described in the paragraphs below. 

17. 
The Household Income and Expenditure Survey in Botswana is known as the Core Welfare 
Indicators Survey (CWIS), which was conducted in 2009 and 2010 by the Central Statistics Office (CSO, 
now Statistics Botswana (SB)).  Data cleaning and processing is currently in the final stages, and the 
survey data is expected to be made public in October 2011.  The Bank, at the request of government, is 
providing assistance to SB in the calculation of the poverty line and in the preparation of associated 
documentation; this assistance includes training to SB staff and other researchers in building a new 
poverty datum line consistent with international standards.  Government has also expressed interest in 
enhanced technical assistance from the Bank to support the ongoing transformation of SB into an 
autonomous and technically excellent institution to increase the quality and credibility of official 
statistics.   

18. 
The Bank has developed a substantive dialogue on public expenditure reform and public 
financial management with government.  This process has enjoyed the leadership and commitment of 
government, and has contributed to strengthening the momentum for reform.  The on-going engagement 
began with the Public Expenditure Review (PER) which was delivered to government in FY10.  The PER 
identifies the challenges in the public spending arena, including the projected decline of mining revenues, 

5 New data on poverty will become available later this year as the results of the Core Welfare Indicators Survey become 
available.  The most recent Household Income and Expenditure Survey was conducted a decade ago. 

5 

 
                                                 
significant outstanding development needs, and the need to ensure long-term fiscal sustainability in the 
aftermath of the global crisis during which large fiscal deficits were accumulated and savings depleted.  
The PER suggests a re-examination of resource allocation and budgeting, with a greater emphasis on 
fiscal discipline, policy priorities and efficient resource management.  A shift by government to a role less 
focused on channeling mineral revenues towards the provision of basic infrastructure and social services 
and more concerned with supporting a dynamic and competitive private sector will be needed.  The 
ensuing dialogue with government has supported a reform program that includes a move toward a 
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and Performance-Based Budgeting (PBB) in order to 
improve the quality of spending and to enable policy makers to better respond to more constrained and 
volatile resources in the future.  The PER also takes a closer look at public investment management and 
social protection as examples of areas where reforms are needed.  A successful PER dissemination 
workshop in August 2010 added significant detail to the PFM reform agenda, and included South-South 
exchange and the sharing of experiences from Mauritius and South Africa.  A related activity was the 
assistance provided by the Bank to the Office of the Accountant General in the Ministry of Finance and 
development Planning (MFDP) outlining the merits and costs of moving from cash-based to accrual 
accounting. 

19. 
The Government’s recently-developed PFM Action Plan reflects recommendations from the 
PER, and those of other partners including the IMF and the EU, and highlights the GoB’s 
commitment to budget and financial management reform.  Motivated by the imperative of confronting 
the prospect of dwindling revenues and thus a smaller government, coupled with important unmet social 
and economic needs, the Government is seeking to reform its planning and budget system in view of 
emerging requirements to do more with less, paying greater attention to the quality of expenditures and 
improvements in the effectiveness and efficiency of public spending. The Action Plan, prepared by the 
Ministry of Finance and Development Planning (MFDP) foresees a gradual effort to improve financial 
controls and reform the budget process.  A number of measures have been already been undertaken, 
including the inclusion of 3-year fiscal projections in the budget speech, a review of project appraisal 
methodology and practice, and greater public consultations during the budget process.  Nevertheless, 
given the seriousness of the challenges, more rapid implementation of reforms than now envisioned is 
warranted.   

20. 
Extending the dialogue on PEM/PFM to implementation and sequencing issues, a Public 
Sector Performance Global Expert Team from the Bank provided advice to government in March 2011.   
The mission concluded that Botswana has some elements of both a MTEF and PBB in place which would 
facilitate more substantial reforms at a more rapid pace.  The Bank views this agenda as a programmatic 
engagement that is critical to Botswana’s continued economic success, and will continue its support to the 
government in this area in accordance with the GoB’s PFM Action Plan. 

Pillar Two: Fighting HIV/AIDS and Improving Education Outcomes 

21. 
Pillar Two of the CPS seeks to achieve two outcomes: (i) increasing effectiveness of HIV/AIDS 
prevention efforts and (ii) identifying the skills mismatches between education outcomes and labor 
market needs. 

22. 
Botswana continues to experience the second most severe HIV/AIDS epidemic in the world, 
despite very high investments in the national HIV/AIDS program over the past two decades.  National 
adult (15-49 years) HIV prevalence is estimated at approximately 24 percent.6 Incidence data, which 

6 Government documents reflect a 17.6 percent national prevalence rate versus the UNAIDS/WHO estimate of 24 percent 
prevalence.  The difference derives from the Government use of a denominator of “number of individuals tested between 18 
months to 64 years,” whereas UNAIDS/WHO utilize the global standard of “number of individuals tested between 15-49 years”. 

6 

 
                                                 
monitor new infections over the past year, are perhaps even more alarming, as these figures dramatically 
highlight the need for a more effective prevention program and strategy.  Incidence of new infections is 
8.7 percent for young women (aged 25-29) and incidence for adult males (aged 45-49) is 8.1 percent, 
indicating that over 8 percent of all Batswana in these age groups became newly infected with HIV.   

23. 
Recent analysis of the major drivers of the Botswana epidemic implicates the role of multiple 
concurrent partnerships (including age-discordant relationships), limited practice of male 
circumcision, and inconsistent condom use in high-risk sexual relationships.  Botswana was the first 
African country to provide no-cost, antiretroviral therapy to its citizens.  It has achieved notable successes 
in HIV treatment, including development of the medical infrastructure to deliver specialized services.  
Acceptance of HIV testing also is widespread.  It is estimated that 90 percent of individuals with 
advanced HIV infection are receiving anti-retroviral therapy in Botswana.  However, the traditionally 
treatment-oriented national program has resulted in a lesser focus on prevention priorities and outcomes.   

24. 
Prevention is acknowledged by Government to be the weakest element of its national response to 
HIV/AIDS.  As noted above, data from recent serosurveys indicates that national infection rates continue 
to remain remarkably high (e.g. over 40 percent of all pregnant women are seropositive in a number of 
districts).  In general, awareness of HIV/AIDS is widespread, but in large part this awareness has not 
translated into sustained behavior change at the population-level.  Although its impact has not been 
quantified, it appears that the success of the no-cost national treatment program may have inadvertently 
created a sense of false security at the individual level among those who are both seronegative and 
seropostive (thereby yielding a possibly widespread “moral hazard”).  

25. 
Botswana is at the epicenter of tuberculosis and HIV infection in southern Africa; it is 2nd in the 
world with respect to the magnitude of its HIV epidemic and 6th in the world in terms of tuberculosis 
burden per capita.  It also has among the lowest TB treatment success rate in the world – 65 percent in 
2008 against a global target of 85 percent – and one the highest rates of HIV/TB co-infection.   The 
human dimensions and economic implications of the Botswana epidemic remain unacceptably high – 
particularly given that both are expected to increase in coming years due to an increasing population 
requiring treatment, in addition to drug-resistant cases of both HIV and TB infection.  The high-cost of 
sustaining  the no-cost public anti-retroviral therapy program for a growing HIV positive population (for 
the lifetime of each patient) poses an increasing challenge to Government, particularly as key donor 
partners look to scale down their financial support in this area over the next several years.     

26. 
Given the above epidemic context, the Botswana National Aids Program Support Project 
(BNAPS) was designed to enhance overall program efficiency while emphasizing HIV prevention.  The 
US$50 million BNAPS was approved in July 2008 and became effective in June 2009.  The project 
includes an innovative “buy down” mechanism whereby European Union resources are being used – 
subject to satisfactory project performance—to lower the cost to Botswana of the IBRD loan.  The 
National Strategic Framework to combat HIV/AIDS was finalized in July 2010, triggering the first 
tranche of the European Union's US$20 million Buy-Down grant (co-financing the BNAPS project).  
However, the Project has experienced a slow start-up and low disbursements as a result of design and 
implementation challenges, including challenges in country-level program coordination and management.  
The project is now undergoing restructuring and it is anticipated that the next phase of the operation will 
intensify focus on the delivery of behavior change interventions, specifically to reduce multiple 
concurrent partnerships, support advocacy and delivery of safe male circumcision, and delivery of 
interventions more strongly focused on the prevention needs of women aged 15-34 years.   

27. 
To address a major technical gap in the design of the prevention program, a Social Assessment 
was carried out under the BNAPS project to improve understanding of the socio-economic and socio-
cultural factors that affect HIV/AIDS risk and prevention efforts.  The assessment highlights the socio-

7 

 
cultural factors underlying high-risk behaviors.  Chief among these are gender norms that create an 
imbalance of power between women and men, suggesting that greater empowerment of women could 
bolster HIV prevention efforts.  The assessment was completed in early FY11, and the study findings will 
be used to help strengthen service delivery and focus on changing risky behavior. Looking ahead, there is 
a realization that the chronic nature of the HIV challenge will require a broader approach with 
implications for the overall health care system, financing, and social insurance programs. Hence, a major 
focus of the project is to enable a transition from an emergency response to a broader, more strategic and 
sustainable approach toward the epidemic. Addressing the capacity needs of the National AIDS 
Coordinating Agency (NACA) is central to this effort.   

Pillar Three:  Increased Competitiveness – Infrastructure and the Climate for Investment and 
Growth 

28. 
Pillar Three of the CPS seeks to attain Outcomes in five separate areas, with ten 
Milestones/Progress Indicators being identified (Annex 1).   

29. 
The global crisis has brought into sharp focus the need to foster an increasingly dynamic and 
diverse private sector in Botswana to progressively substitute for Government spending as a driver of 
growth.  While Botswana has a well articulated diversification strategy, progress in implementing the 
reforms and initiatives it identifies has been limited.7  The Bank’s support in this area has focused on 
identifying and developing options to address the key constraints to competitiveness through analytical 
and advisory services.  Botswana fell two places in the 2011 Ease of Doing Business ranking compared to 
2010, from 50 to 52 overall. The Bank presented the Doing Business findings at the biennial Botswana 
National Business Council meeting in September 2010, and subsequently IFC presented the work to the 
Botswana Economic Advisory Council (BEAC).8 In this way, the Bank Group has helped to focus greater 
attention on business environment issues and assisted Government in reinvigorating reforms.  Following 
these presentations IFC’s advisory arm is in discussions with GoB for an ongoing role in advising as to 
how Botswana can move to rapidly improve its Doing Business ranking.  For its part, the Government has 
launched an inter-ministerial, committee, led by the Ministry of Trade and Investment, to coordinate and 
catalyze business environment reforms with a view to making rapid improvements.   

30. 
The preparation of a Development Policy Review on Competitiveness and Diversification in 
Botswana began in FY11, for delivery in FY12.  By taking a close look at relevant government policies, 
the DPR aims to provide fresh analysis regarding the causes of the limited success of Botswana’s 
diversification efforts to date and to identify measures to spur the private sector in achieving greater 
regional and global competitiveness. The DPR will focus on the overall incentive framework provided by 
government (taxes, subsidies, credit schemes, etc.), labor-market related issues, the potential for services 
to emerge as a growth sector, trade and export competitiveness, and the potential and constraints 
represented by Botswana’s regional affiliations (SACU and SADC).  The report also focuses on existing 
sectors in which Botswana has already demonstrated a comparative advantage, but which may benefit 
from more focused policy attention.   

31. 
Analytic work on Skills for Economic Diversification is progressing.  A survey of employer and 
employees has been completed to identify the specific skill needs and skills mismatch in the labor market 
in Botswana. A series of background papers drawing on the knowledge of international and Batswana 
experts was completed and discussed at a workshop in December 2010 co-hosted by the Ministry of 
Education and Skills Development and the World Bank.  Stakeholders acknowledged this as core piece of 
work for the successful implementation of NDP10, and have requested the Bank to come up with new and 

7 Government of Botswana, Botswana Excellence: A Strategy for Economic Diversification and Growth, November 2008. 
8 BEAC is a group of key advisors organized by the National Strategy Office to advise The President on economic matters.   

8 

 
                                                 
innovative policy recommendations, including experiences from similar successful case studies.  
Preliminary results highlight gender disparities finding that women generally face high unemployment 
rates, are more likely to be poor and a majority of them are found in the informal sector and subsistence 
agriculture where wages are generally lower. There is therefore a need to come up with labour market 
policies that can empower women The AAA is expected to be finalized  December 2011. 

32. 
The policy dialogue on competitiveness and diversification has been supported by additional 
AAA, including work focusing on regional trade and growth as well as microenterprise.   
 A report on Harnessing Regional Integration for Trade and Growth in Southern Africa was 
completed in FY11. The report argues that non-tariff barriers continue to hamper the growth of 
the trade in goods in the region, while domestic regulatory obstacles make regional integration in 
services more difficult.  It provides examples of obstacles encountered by some of the largest 
firms that trade regionally as well as small ones for which the impact of trade barriers is more 
severe.  
 A regional Investment Climate Assessment entitled "The Business Environment in Southern 
Africa: Issues in Trade and Market Integration" was completed in December 2010. 

33. 
As a follow up to the FY07 Investment Climate Assessment, the Bank, working with the Ministry 
of Trade and Industry, completed a survey of micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and 
accompanying analysis in identifying constraints in the microenterprise sector.  Nevertheless, important 
gaps in the government’s and Bank’s knowledge persist with respect to diversification and improving 
the quality of growth.  Much analytical work remains to be done to understand the linkages between 
diversification, growth and employment, and how to promote competitiveness while ensuring a pattern of 
growth that addresses structural unemployment and promotes the creation of private sector jobs in the 
country.  The latest unemployment data, several years out of date, suggest that the unemployed represent 
about 17 percent of the population, and that youth are over-represented among the ranks of the 
unemployed.  Unemployment has historically been persistently high, and the rate would be substantially 
higher were discouraged workers also counted.  There is no information regarding the impact of the 
global crisis on unemployment (or, for that matter, poverty) levels. Competitiveness indicators do not 
identify major policy-induced obstacles in terms of labor market rigidity; the high unemployment rate 
seems to largely reflect both the capital intensity of the mining sector, skills mismatches in the labor 
market for the non-mining sectors, and also perhaps low productivity and relatively high unit costs of 
labor. Data in this area is of generally poor quality, however (in addition to the paucity of employment 
statistics, there is no reliable information on productivity, for instance).  Understanding the relationships 
at work and identifying the key policy variables to manipulate are challenges for future work.  Clearly, 
addressing the unemployment problem is also important for the long-term sustainability of growth.   

34. 
The infrastructure goals of the CPS are closely aligned with the goals of NDP10.  In general 
Botswana faces significant infrastructure challenges given the large size of the country and the widely 
dispersed population.  Currently the main challenges include increasing electricity generation capacity 
and securing supply in the energy sector, addressing water supply and sanitation deficits while 
implementing the water sector institutional reform, and balancing new development and asset 
maintenance in the transport sector.  During CPS implementation regional broadband connectivity has 
also emerged as a key constraint to competitiveness.  As other countries in Africa accelerate the 
development of their broadband networks and services, Botswana is at risk of falling behind. This is 
particularly important given the country's landlocked position and the significant role of the service sector 
in the government's long-term economic development plans.   

35. 
Transport capacity. The US$186 million IBRD loan for Botswana Integrated Transport Project 
(ITP) was approved by the Board in June 2009, co-financed by a US$40 million loan from the OPEC 

9 

 
Fund for International Development (OFID), and US$159 million from the government budget.  The 
project seeks to enhance the efficiency of the transport system by building modern business management 
capacity, and improving the strategic planning aspects of inter-regional transport and critical transport 
infrastructure.  It also includes an urban traffic improvement program in Greater Gaborone.  
Implementation of the three critical activities under the project (road asset preservation, urban traffic 
improvement, and regional transport integration study) has been slow for three main reasons: (i) a need to 
build capacity in Bank procurement and disbursement procedures resulting in delayed initial 
disbursements; (ii) the international consultants hired for the design of the Output and Performance Based 
Road Contracting (OPRC) component performed poorly and the contract had to be terminated and re-
tendered; and (iii) project management arrangements within the Ministry of Transport and 
Communication have not functioned efficiently.  Issue (i) has been addressed by intensive supervision 
and concerted portfolio-wide training efforts by the Bank and implementation performance and 
disbursement are expected to improve in the months ahead.  Issues (ii) and (iii) have also been resolved 
with the appointment of a qualified OPRC consultant and agreement on revised project implementation 
and oversight mechanisms for the project.   

36. 
The Morupule B Generation and Transmission Project is a pillar of the Bank’s engagement in 
Botswana.  In October 2009 the Board approved a partial credit guarantee of US$242.7 million and an 
IBRD loan of US$136.4 million for the project, which is co-financed by AfDB (US$202.5 million), the 
Government and the Botswana Power Corporation (BPC) (US$498.4 million) and the Industrial and 
Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), (US$582.3 million) at a total cost of US$1,662 million. The project 
is a key element of GoB’s plans to ensure energy supply security for Botswana as import availability from 
South Africa ends, and to further integrate Botswana’s power market into the Southern African Power 
Pool (SAPP).  The project includes support for a portfolio of measures intended not only to ensure 
Botswana’s available coal resources are used as efficiently as possible, but also to kick start development 
of alternative greener sources of energy to feed into the SAPP (see Box 1 for a summary of progress). 

Box 1: Morupule B Generation and Transmission Project – Summary of Progress 

 Progress is satisfactory under all project components. The power station is on track to be completed in 
October 2012, about two months ahead of schedule. Periodic safeguards reviews have found that the 
project is on track with all environmental and social safeguards undertakings.  
 Work is underway to establish a new Energy-Water regulatory agency and a new electricity tariff policy. 
Consistent with its commitment to get the sector on a sustainable financial footing, the government 
implemented a 32 percent tariff increase effective May 1, 2010 and another 30 percent adjustment 
effective June 1, 2011.  As part of this process, BPC is also developing alternatives for a lifeline tariff to 
protect poorer consumers. 
 BPC has installed 800,000 compact fluorescent lights and about 29,000 smart meters by end-2010 and 
aims to install 80,000 by May-2011, which is expected to save about 30 MW (5 percent of peak load) 
demand. The government has selected a firm to help implement a communications strategy over a 
15-month duration, including capacity building in BPC and the government.  
 The government is committed to supporting international efforts to combat climate change and intends to 
promote initiatives in this regard. At government’s request, the Bank facilitated a workshop in Dec. 2010 
on PPP for coal bed methane (CBM) development, drawing participation from industry and officials, 
including from South Africa. There is active interest and progress by private sector (4-5 firms) for 
exploring and producing CBM for both domestic and export market (mainly to RSA). The government 
will be hiring a CBM Advisor to fill the knowledge and capacity gap on CBM issues. 
 A feasibility study for a 200 MW concentrated solar power (CSP) plant is to start imminently (jointly 
financed with the AfDB). In parallel, a grant of US$1.4 million from the Carbon Capture and Storage 
Trust Fund (CCS TF) has been approved for awareness and capacity building on CCS in Botswana, 
which would complement the Government’s interest to undertake a pilot CCS project by end-2013 (using 
project funds).  

10 

 
 
37. 
The CPS also envisioned support for a second power investment: a private sector coal-to-power 
project at Mmamabula.   The project was driven in 2009 mainly by the prospect of export sales to 
ESKOM, South Africa’s power utility.  However, despite lengthy negotiations, CIC Energy Corporation, 
the sponsor of the Project, and ESKOM have not entered into a power sales contract, and the project is 
now reportedly being restructured, and its future is uncertain.  

Pillar Four:  The Environment 

38. 
A US$5 million GEF grant was approved to support the Northern Botswana Human-Wildlife 
Coexistence Project in December 2009.  The project supports activities in three project areas (including 
13 villages) to pilot and disseminate best international practice in reducing human-wildlife conflict, a 
source of major tension in affected areas in Northern Botswana.  While start up of the project has been 
slow due to delays in getting staff on board in the Department of Wildlife and National Parks (DWNP), 
problems retaining staff, and a lack of familiarity with Bank procurement and safeguard review processes, 
pilot project activities are underway. Techniques that draw on global experience with human-wildlife 
coexistence are being introduced in the project areas.  A key challenge is the design of a revised policy 
framework which builds on the unique experience in Botswana wherein public financing supports 
compensation for wildlife-related losses to subsistence farmers.  The benefits and costs of this system 
have been reviewed and will be complemented with household and village level pilot activities which 
focus on ex-ante prevention of human-wildlife conflict. 

39. 
Botswana is considering how to make climate change adaptation central to its development.  
Under the CPS and in response to a request from the GoB, the Bank prepared two analytical pieces to 
build the knowledge base regarding (i) the environmental implications of implementing NDP10, and (ii) 
the likely impacts of Climate Change in Botswana.  The Climate Change work developed a first-ever 
analysis using Global Climate Models (GCM) to predict how climate variability might impact Botswana 
over the next 50 years.  The results suggest that Botswana faces a wide range of direct and indirect 
economic impacts due to increased climate variability, including in agriculture and tourism which could 
be adversely affected by drought.  This work gathered further momentum over the past year.  Building on 
the Climate Change Policy Note, policy dialogue supported by the Bank‘s Global Expert Team (GET) on 
Climate Change Adaption is helping the GoB consider how it could make adaptation to climate 
change/variability central to Botswana’s development.   Planned technical assistance will focus on ways 
that Botswana could address the climate threat and make the country more resilient and less vulnerable. 
This would likely require economy-wide work in: sustainable water management; increasing the climate 
resilience of the key ecosystem on which the country’s world-class nature-based tourism is based; work 
on agriculture, food security and livestock; and work on health information because of the spatial changes 
in disease patterns, especially malaria.  

40. Water supply in Botswana will increasingly rely on sources beyond national boundaries, 
making essential the development of a sound domestic and regional institutional framework and solid 
analytical capacity.  This is especially the case considering Botswana’s reliance on water-intense sectors 
such as mining, energy, tourism and agriculture.  Botswana’s water resources are characterized by high 
dependence on internationally shared and trans-boundary waters, wide spatial variability, and extreme 
scarcity. The dependency ratio, reflecting that, at 80 percent, the proportion of the total renewable water 
resources originating outside the country is the highest in southern Africa; all of the country’s five major 
drainage basins are shared with other SADC Member States. Bank support to the GEF SADC 
Groundwater and Drought Management Project, hosted by the SADC Water Division in Botswana, is 
helping to develop consensus among the SADC Member States for a regional strategic approach to 
defining drought management policies.  A Multi-Sector Investment Opportunity Analysis (MSIOA) for 
the Zambezi River basin engaged all eight riparian countries in a consultative process to illustrate the 

11 

 
benefits of cooperation through a multi-sectoral economic evaluation of water resources development, 
management options and scenarios.  

41. 
Botswana’s domestic water sector reform effort is proceeding well with Bank support via a 
fee-based services arrangement.  A new Water and Wastewater Sector Policy has been drafted and is in 
the public consultation phase.  It will be submitted to Parliament in its July 2011 session.  The reform 
program will eventually transfer all responsibility for the provision of retail water and wastewater to the 
Water Users Corporation (WUC), as opposed to current provision by local governments and the 
Department of Water Affairs (DWA).  To date, management of 150 of the country’s over 200 water 
systems has been transferred to the WUC.  The program also seeks to enhance the capacity and focus of 
DWA for strategic Water Resources Management (WRM).  Government subsidies to the sector have been 
substantially reduced; subsidies which amounted to P364 million (US$56 million) in FY07/08 are 
expected to be reduced to zero by FY14/15. Recognizing the value of the Bank’s advisory support for the 
reform process, the Government has requested an extension of the fee-based services arrangement 
through 2014.   

Program Delivery and Portfolio Performance 

42. 
All of the projects identified in the CPS have been delivered with the exception of one (the 
Mmamabula IPP Power Project) which has been put on hold in light of developments since the CPS 
was prepared.  As a result, the project portfolio has grown from one project at the time of the CPS to four 
(including one GEF project).  Net commitments stand at US$378 million, reflecting the Bank’s growing 
lending engagement with Botswana in energy, transport, environment and HIV/AIDS. In addition a 
US$242.7 million IBRD Partial Credit Guarantee for the Morupule B project has been instrumental in 
allowing rapid project implementation progress by unlocking financing for power station construction 
from commercial sources.   

Table 2: Planned vs. Actual IBRD Financial Support 

Indicative CPS IBRD 
lending (US$ million) 

Actual Lending to 
date (US$ million) 

FY09 
HIV/AIDS Project 
Morupule B Generation and Transmission 
Project 
Integrated Transport Project 
FY10 
Mmamabula IPP Project 
Northern Botswana Human-Wildlife 
Conflict Prevention 
Total 

*Includes GEF, and guarantees 

50.0 
450.0 

180.5 

100.0 
- 

780.5m 

50.0 

136.4  IBRD Loan 

242.7  IBRD PCG 
186.0 

0.0 
5.0  GEF grant 

377.4 Loan/grant 
242.7 Guarantee 
coverage

43. 
Reflecting a lack of recent experience with investment lending in Botswana, several projects 
have experienced a slow start-up highlighting the need for more intensive implementation support.  
With a young portfolio that is heavily weighted towards infrastructure, IBRD disbursements in Botswana 
through FY09-FY11 were projected to be modest.  With the exception of the Morupule B project, 

12 

 
 
disbursements have tended to lag behind initial projections due to slow administrative processes in 
Government, a lack of recent experience in implementing Bank-financed projects and, in some cases, 
capacity constraints and rapid turnover among counterpart Government agencies.  Both the Bank and 
GoB are learning from the challenges that have emerged and implementation is expected to accelerate in 
the months ahead.  Nevertheless, implementation of key projects such as the BNAPS and the Integrated 
Transport Project will require stepped up implementation support to accelerate implementation and ensure 
successful outcomes.   The portfolio has currently one problem project, the GEF-financed Northern-
Botswana Human Wildlife Coexistence Project.  

44. 
Progress towards CPS outcomes has generally been good (Annex 1).   While progress in some 
areas, such as developing M&E and Transport Management capacity, have proven disappointing, 
significant milestones have been achieved in most areas of the Results Matrix.  To improve the quality 
and realism of the CPS results matrix, this Progress Report proposes several revisions to the Results 
Matrix Outcomes and Indicators.  The suggested changes (a) remove the Outcome related to the proposed 
Mmamabula energy project, which has foundered for reasons outside the control of GoB or the Bank, (b) 
include an Outcome related to Financial Sector strengthening, where the Bank’s engagement has been 
increasingly demanded, and (c) includes a new Outcome related to Climate Change work, in which the 
Bank’s AAA during FY09/FY10 has resulted in significant demand for follow-up analytic support.  In 
addition, the revised Results Matrix is strengthened by adding baselines and targets for outcomes, where 
these were unavailable at the time of the CPS.  Finally, to align the matrix more closely with the Bank’s 
Africa Region strategy and the Government’s economic diversification agenda, the CPS outcome related 
to skills development is now included under the Competitiveness Pillar of the CPS.   

Lessons Learned 

45. 
Despite Botswana’s MIC status, close implementation support has been required.  Several 
projects such as the BNAPS, Integrated Transport Project, and the Northern Botswana Human-Wildlife 
conflict GEF have experienced substantial delays in start up.  While these were foreshadowed as 
implementation risks in the CPS, readiness for implementation of projects such as the BNAPS, Integrated 
Transport, and Northern Botswana Human-Wildlife conflict Prevention GEF was likely to have been 
somewhat overestimated.  Concerted efforts through FY10 in delivering procurement, disbursement and 
financial management training to both implementing agencies and central ministries have helped to 
overcome some delays.  Task teams are also working with Government to strengthen project management 
arrangements, add implementation capacity, and restructure projects where necessary.  Intensive 
supervision, supported by the opening of a Bank office in Gaborone in FY10, providing videoconference 
access to experts based in Washington and the region in real time, has greatly enhanced the effectiveness 
of implementation support and the Bank’s ability to monitor high corporate risk projects such as 
Morupule B.   

46. 
The Bank program is strengthened by deeper cooperation with a ranger of partners.  For 
example, in HIV/AIDS working with other donors has helped to harmonize overall program efforts while 
solidifying a stronger focus on prevention, in particular by working with the EU to utilize grant resources 
to lower the cost of IBRD financing contingent on satisfactory project performance.  Similarly, work on 
public expenditure management has benefitted from close coordination with the EU and IMF as well as 
South-South exchanges with Mauritius and South Africa.  The Moropule B project is bringing together 
multiple financiers and marks the Bank’s first co-guarantee operation with a bilateral agency, namely, 
China Export & Credit Insurance Corporation, helping to mobilize a substantial amount of long-term debt 
despite the financial crisis.  A planned knowledge exchange event on the diamond industry will bring 
together government and private sector representatives from Lesotho, Armenia, Botswana and Namibia.   

13 

 
CPS Relevance 

47. 
The FY09-13 CPS remains appropriate and relevant for Botswana.  Botswana has managed to 
navigate the immediate impacts of the global crisis, but has emerged in a weaker position with reduced 
savings.  With the international economic outlook presenting significant uncertainties for Botswana, a 
critical policy challenge will be to contain the fiscal expansion employed through the crisis and push 
forward with far reaching institutional reforms to improve spending efficiency, service delivery, and 
reduce the size of the public sector over time.  Concurrent investments in critical infrastructure 
(particularly in energy, transport, and water), and aggressive action to improve the effectiveness of 
HIV/AIDS prevention efforts are also needed, and, together with intensifying efforts to diversify the 
economic base and strengthen public expenditure management, these form the critical agenda for 
progress.  The Government of Botswana has confirmed that the four pillars of the current CPS thus 
remain highly relevant and appropriate for Botswana for the balance of the CPS period.  

IV. GOING FORWARD 

48. 
In line with the Africa Strategy, the Bank will increasingly focus on mobilizing knowledge in 
support of CPS objectives.  The first two years of re-engagement under the CPS have deepened our 
understanding of Botswana’s development challenges and positioned the Bank to increasingly focus its 
AAA in support of policy reform implementation.  Going forward during the remainder of the CPS period 
the strategy is being adjusted with addition of new and expanded activities that reflect Government 
priorities for enhanced Bank support in economic diversification, public expenditure management reform, 
and climate change.  Working in partnership with the government and others, the Bank will mobilize 
global expertise and technical assistance with the aim of bringing the knowledge and experience of 
countries that have faced similar challenges in other parts of the world. Specific areas of focus will 
include: 
 Economic Diversification and Competitiveness.  Recognizing the growing urgency of this 
agenda, the Government is focused on accelerating implementation of its Economic 
Diversification Drive.  During the balance of the CPS period the Bank Group will seek to support 
the development and implementation of a reform roadmap focusing on the concrete actions in 
business environment reforms, infrastructure, access to finance, and skills, technology and 
productivity.  This will build on recent and ongoing analytical work, including the ICA, Doing 
Business Surveys, regional trade and market integration, and economic diversification.   
 Public Expenditure Management. With the preparation of the PER and the finalization of the 
GoB’s PFM reform strategy, continued technical assistance will be provided during the balance 
of the CPS period in support of its implementation.  Complementary AAA will focus on 
increased value for money in public spending by helping identify opportunities for greater 
economy and efficiency in, inter alia, social protection and public procurement.   
 Financial Sector. Additional work planned during the balance of the CPS will support the GoB 
in finalizing and implementing a Financial Sector Development Strategy now under preparation.  
An early draft of the strategy has identified various constraints in the financial sector relating to, 
inter alia, access to financial services; housing finance; banking and financial system 
infrastructure; non-bank financial institutions; capital markets; and regional integration of 
commitments under the SADC Protocols.  
Information and Communication Technology. The Government has expressed interest in Bank 
technical assistance in broadband connectivity where changes to the market structure and the 
regulatory strategy could deliver major improvements in the sector with positive spillover 
benefits to the rest of the economy.  In addition, there is potential for supporting development of 
the strategy for utilizing the ICT infrastructure to enhance public service delivery (e.g. 

 

14 

 
e-government systems, management of decentralized services via mobile phones, government 
grant payments via mobile phone networks, public consultation and participatory decision-
making using ICT networks, community monitoring of service delivery at clinics, schools etc.)  
 Climate Change.  A fee-based technical assistance engagement is planned to help Government to 
develop a climate resilient development strategy.  
 Poverty and social protection. The release of the results of a new Core Welfare Indicators Survey 
later this year, after a ten-year hiatus, presents an opportunity for the Bank to respond to 
government demand for analytical assistance in this area.  Linking new information on poverty 
and on the incidence of social protection programs would also help in developing policy 
recommendations for strengthening public sector management and encouraging greater emphasis 
on service delivery and on focusing on the effectiveness and efficiency of government programs.  
Gender-disaggregated data will also facilitate Bank AAA that would seek to develop a greater 
understanding of the gender dimensions of development in Botswana and support mainstreaming 
of gender concerns in the policy dialogue with Government.  

49. 
Important data issues constrain analytical work, the formulation of robust policies, and 
program evaluation.  As noted above, despite high levels of poverty and inequality, household income 
and expenditure data is a decade old in Botswana.  Information on unemployment is not regularly 
produced.  There are no reliable indices of productivity. Evaluations of public programs are rarely 
undertaken. The quality of national accounts data has been questioned.  For an upper middle income 
country, this lack of quality data is an important constraint to implementing evidence-based policy, and is 
an area that deserves urgent attention.  The Central Statistics Office, which has been hampered by lack of 
staff, high staff turnover and limited budgets, was recently made autonomous, and it is hoped that this 
will assist it in beginning to address some of these problems. 

50. 
Additional lending during the balance of the CPS period is possible, but will depend on 
Government demand within the context of its overall financing needs and strategy.  Emerging from the 
global crisis with foreign debt levels reaching statutory limits, GoB is seeking to use liquidity in domestic 
capital markets and any available concessional resources to meet its immediate financing needs.  The 
IBRD Treasury team has provided advice to GoB regarding how the Bank might assist in mobilizing 
domestic financing using available Bank instruments, and will continue to provide support on an 
as-needed basis.  Nonetheless, in FY12 and FY13 the Bank will remain ready to respond to any GoB 
requests for tailored financial support, as borrowing capacity allows, through the annual business 
planning process.  Possible areas of further financial support include: 
 DPL financing to support the ongoing reform program and close the short-term fiscal gap; 
 Facilitating local currency financing either via a local currency guarantee or a World Bank 
loan funded by a local bond issue in Pula; 
 Possible investment/TA lending in support of the PFM reform program as well as 
competitiveness-enhancing reforms; 
Investment support to the water reform program. 

 

51. 
Improving the pace of project implementation will be a critical focus during the remaining two 
years of the CPS.  As a first step, implementation support to projects experiencing delays has been 
increased.  Agreement has been reached on the need for project restructuring in the case of the BNAPS in 
order to strengthen implementation capacity while streamlining the project to allow for a greater focus on 
delivery of prioritized interventions.  In the case of the Integrated Transport Project, project oversight 
structures are being modified with a view to strengthening project management and accelerating 
implementation.  Finally, staffing in the Bank’s office is being increased with placement of a senior 

15 

 
economist and the possible addition of an operations analyst which should further increase the 
responsiveness of the Bank in addressing implementation issues.  

V. RISKS AND CREDITWORTHINESS 

52. 
The major risks identified in the CPS remain valid. With respect to credit risk, although 
diamond exports have recovered and are expected to return to pre-crisis levels by 2012/13, Botswana’s 
creditworthiness will remain constrained by its narrow economic base.  Nevertheless, Botswana’s S&P 
credit risk rating of A- remains the strongest in Africa, on a par with Malaysia and Poland, although the 
outlook is less favorable now reflecting the weakening of the fiscal stance as a result of the response to 
the impact of the financial crisis.   

53. 
Reputational risk, as identified in the CPS, remains in particular due to the Bank’s engagement in 
financing the Morupule B coal-fired power generation project.  However, substantial communication and 
outreach effort in the lead up to the approval of the project, close implementation support and attention to 
safeguards through implementation, the growing Bank engagement in promoting renewable and lower 
carbon options for Botswana, and concurrent Bank efforts to help Botswana participate in the global 
climate change debate have all contributed to mitigating this risk.  These efforts notwithstanding, the 
Bank’s work in the energy sector in Botswana and the region will continue to generate reputational risk 
which will require close management at the country, regional and corporate level. 

54. 
The implementation risks outlined in the CPS did materialize and were a source of delay during 
the first two years of implementation.  As discussed above, the result was lower than expected 
disbursements, particularly in the HIV/AIDS and Transport Projects.  However mitigation measures, 
including portfolio-wide procurement, disbursement and financial management training for counterparts 
and more intensive implementation support by task teams, have helped bring about the beginnings of a 
turnaround.  Fiduciary training will continue during the balance of the CPS period as this is recognized as 
an ongoing need.  The opening of a Bank office in Gaborone has facilitated these efforts.  

16 

 
World Bank 
Strategic 
Element 

Major Issues and 
Constraints to 
achieving 
Government’s 
objectives 

Enhancing Public 
Sector 
Effectiveness 

Need for greater public 
sector effectiveness in the 
implementation of policies 
and programs 

Public financial 
management needs 
strengthening 

Annex 1: CPS Results Matrix   

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones/Intermediate 
Indicators 

Progress to Date 

Bank Program/Projects and 
Other Partner Interventions 

Improved capacity to compile, analyze and 
disseminate poverty-related statistical 
information 
 Poverty related household survey data 
documented and archived by 2010. 
 At least 5 statisticians and researchers trained 
in poverty analysis of household survey data 
by 2010. 

Improved public expenditure management. 
Public financial management reform 
 
Improved capacity to analyze and forecast 
fiscal variables; macroeconomic model in use 
at MFDP. 
 Strengthened budget process: greater 
coordination between the various elements of 
budgeting – recurrent and capital budgets and 
personnel management. 
 PFM system further strengthened in key 
dimensions, including openness and 
accountability in public procurement. 

17 

Household Income and 
Expenditure Surveys (HIES) 
completed. 
Training of statisticians and 
researchers completed. 

Core Welfare 
Indicators Survey 
conducted in 
2009/2010.   

Public expenditure Review 
(PER) carried out. 

PFM reform strategy 
formulated and initiated. 

Issues Note on Accrual 
Accounting completed. 

The PER was 
delivered in FY10, and 
a successful PER 
dissemination 
workshop in August 
2010 added significant 
detail to the PFM 
reform agenda.   

A PFM action plan has 
been finalized by the 
MoFDP. 

Accrual accounting 
issues note has been 
delivered to 
complement TA being 
provided by the IMF. 

TFSCB Grant for Capacity 
Building and Poverty Analysis 
(FY09) 

PER (FY10) 

Macro-modeling (FY10) 

PFM Reform TA (FY10-12)  

Issues Note on Accrual 
Accounting (FY11) 

Public Sector Management 
Justice and Law TA (FY 12) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
World Bank 
Strategic 
Element 

Fighting 
HIV/AIDS and 
Improving 
Education 
Outcomes 

Major Issues and 
Constraints to 
achieving 
Government’s 
objectives 

Most ministries and 
agencies lack the 
institutional capacity to 
monitor and evaluate 
Government policies, 
programs and projects 

Weak institutional capacity 
for data tracking, collation, 
analysis and dissemination 

Success in good 
governance and 
macroeconomic and fiscal 
management has not been 
accompanied by a 
reduction of inequality, 
poverty and improved HD 
outcomes. 

HIV/AIDS is a huge drain 
on the economy and 
society with the youth 
most vulnerable. 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones/Intermediate 
Indicators 

Progress to Date 

Bank Program/Projects and 
Other Partner Interventions 

A needs assessment of 
M&E capacity of at least 15 
ministries carried out. 

Training of CSOs initiated 
and completed. 

Little progress has 
been made on 
activities foreseen 
under IDF grant. 
GICO has been 
restructured into the 
National Strategy 
Office (NSO) 

IDF Grant to Strengthen the 
M&E Capacity of the Vision 
2016 Council and the 
Government Implementation 
coordination Office (GICO) in 
the Presidency Office (FY10) 

Report on “strengthening 
national statistical capacity 
and policy analysis” 
completed and 
disseminated. 

HIV/AIDS interventions 
adequately implemented. 

National Strategic 
Framework to combat 
HIV/AIDS was finalized in 
July 2010 

A total of $6.6 million of 
grants for prevention 
activities has been awarded 
under the project’s Civil 
Society grant component  

HIV/AIDS Prevention Support 
Project (FY09) 

Southern Africa Regional 
HIV/AIDS Strategy (FY10) 

Poverty and Social Impact 
Analysis (FY 11) 

Approximately 90 % 
of individuals with 
advanced HIV 
infection are receiving 
ART 

Proportion of youth 
(15-24 years reporting 
condom use increased 
from 19.2 % in 2004 
(DHS Survey) to 
42.8% (BIAS III 
Survey) 

Enhanced capacity of Government to adopt 
evidence-based management through increased 
application of monitoring and evaluation 
information 
 At least 15 ministries have functional results-
based M&E systems in place by 2011. 
 At least 60 percent of trained CSO (Civil 
Society Organizations) are using scorecards to 
assess the effectiveness of service delivery by 
2011. 
Improved National Statistical Capacity 

Increased effectiveness of HIV/AIDS prevention 
efforts 
 
Increased proportion of youth reporting no 
sexual activity. (Age 15-19: from 78.4% to 
85% by 2013; age 20-24:  from 30.8% to 50% 
by 2013) 

 Proportion of youth aged 15-19 and 20-24 
reporting condom use during the last sexual 
encounter with a non-regular partner in the 
past 12 months. (Age 15-19: from 89% to 
95% by 2013; age 20-24:  from 85% to 95% 
by 2013) 

 Number (cumulative) of male circumcision 
procedures performed in selected facilities 
increases from  52,000  (2008) to 262,000 by 
2013 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
World Bank 
Strategic 
Element 

Increased 
Competitiveness – 
Infrastructure 
and the Climate 
for Investment 
and Growth 

Major Issues and 
Constraints to 
achieving 
Government’s 
objectives 

Efforts to diversify the 
economy have yet to 
generate significant results. 
Diamond production is 
predicted to fall by 40%; 
Revenue from diamonds 
are projected to decline by 
50%. 
Economic growth has not 
generated enough jobs. 
There is a skills mismatch 
between education 
outcomes and labor market 
needs. 
Inadequate access to 
financial services due to 
need for stronger 
banking/financial system 
infrastructure and legal and 
regulatory frameworks for, 
inter alia, NBFI, pensions, 
insurance, and capital 
markets 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones/Intermediate 
Indicators 

Progress to Date 

Bank Program/Projects and 
Other Partner Interventions 

Improved Investment Climate 
 
Identify key bottlenecks to greater domestic 
and international foreign investment. 

Follow-up to the FY07 
Investment Climate 
Assessment done. 

Strategic Issues in 
Competitiveness Study 
completed. 

Botswana fell two 
places in the 2011 
Ease of Doing 
Business ranking 
compared to 2010, 
from 50 to 52 overall 

Skills mismatch is identified and policy options 
agreed to reduce the gap 

Skills gap/labor market 
study completed. 

Study underway 

Follow-up to FY07 Investment 
Climate Assessment (ICA) 
(FY09) 
Development Policy Review 
(FY12) 
Strategic Issues in 
Competitiveness Study (FY10) 
Competitiveness Dialogue/TA 
(FY12) 
Skills Gap/Labor Markets Study 
(FY12) 

Government Financial Sector Development 
strategy adopted with action plan to address 
identified constraints. 

New pension and insurance 
regulations developed. 

Financial Sector 
Development Strategy 
Finalized 

Investment and Securities 
regulatory regime Revised 

Collective Investment 
Undertakings (CIU) Act 
revised. 

Revised  pension and 
insurance laws have 
been finalized and are 
pending approval;  

Financial Sector Reform and 
Strengthening (FIRST) Initiative 
support to the Pension and 
Insurance is under preparation.   

Revised pension and 
insurance regulations 
have been approved  

Revised securities 
markets regulations 
and CIU Act have 
been prepared and are 
undergoing final 
review. 

FIRST-funded technical 
assistance to develop Financial 
Sector Development Strategy 
(FSDS). 

FIRST-funded technical 
assistance to the Non-Bank 
Financial Institutions Regulatory 
Authority (NBFIRA). 

Compliance gaps in both 
corporate accounting and 
auditing practices 
undermine investor 
confidence and reduce 
investment 

Strengthened accountancy profession to 
enhance corporate finance and reporting 

1. Increased capacity of the Botswana Institute 
of Accountants (BIA) to carry out its 
functions as a professional accountancy body 

19 

IDF Grant utilized and 
activities fully implemented 

National qualification 
launched in April 
2011 

IDF Grant For Strengthening the 
Institute of Accountants (FY10) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
World Bank 
Strategic 
Element 

Major Issues and 
Constraints to 
achieving 
Government’s 
objectives 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones/Intermediate 
Indicators 

Progress to Date 

Bank Program/Projects and 
Other Partner Interventions 

Development of 
Accountancy Profession 
Legislation 

Road asset management 
protocols completed 

Contract awarded in June 
2011for  Regional Transport 
Integration Study 

Regional Investment 
Climate Assessment 
completed** 

The Accountancy Act 
and the Financial 
Reporting Act enacted 
in 2010 and effective 1 
April 2011 

Conceptual design for 
the 800 of OPRC 
component has started 

Regional Transport 
Integration Study 
contract awarded in 
June 2011. 

Southern Africa Regional 
Trade and Integration Study 
completed** 

Regional Trade Study 
completed 

FIRST Initiative supported 
project, “Updating Accounting 
and Auditing Legislation 
Transport Sector Project 

AAAs: 
Regional Investment Climate 
Assessment** 

Southern Africa Regional Trade 
and Integration Study** 

 National qualifications developed and at least 
50 nationals have passed Part-1 (intermediate 
level ) examinations by June 2011 
 At least 5 Continuing Professional 
Development (CPD) courses are developed 

2. Improved compliance with the International 
Federation of Accountants (IFAC) 

 

Enactment of Accountancy Profession 
Legislation 

Infrastructure capacity and 
quality has not kept pace 
with growth. 
There are transport 
bottlenecks. 

Regional trade has more 
potential 

Improved national capacity in transport 
management 
 At least 250 km of roads under long-term 
output and performance-based road contracts 
(OPRC) for rehabilitation and maintenance by 
2014. 
 Average vehicle operating costs per vehicle-
km on OPRC roads falls by 8% by 2014. 

Improved Regional Trade** 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
World Bank 
Strategic 
Element 

Major Issues and 
Constraints to 
achieving 
Government’s 
objectives 

Major shortfall in 
electricity production 

Uncertainty of reliance on 
South Africa for electricity 
needs as Eskom faces 
electricity shortfall 

Regional broadband 
connectivity is held back 
by high cost 
Agriculture and nature-
based tourism potential not 
fully utilized 

The Environment Weak environmental 
management 

High incidence of human-
wildlife conflicts 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones/Intermediate 
Indicators 

Progress to Date 

Bank Program/Projects and 
Other Partner Interventions 

Improved energy security 
 Domestic generation capacity as % of peak 
demand increases from 18% to 102% by FY13 
 measures to address social issues and demand 
management implemented 

Government adoption of 
electricity tariff policy 

Testing of new generation 
unit: 1 unit completed 

New Regulatory Agency: 
Contract awarded for TA 

Broadband Strategy Developed and Adopted 

Selected strategic challenges in agriculture and 
nature-based tourism identified and policy 
options presented to government 

Reduced human-wildlife conflict (HWC) 
incidence in targeted hotspot areas in northern 
Botswana 
 Numbers of wildlife conflict incidents in 
targeted hotspot areas reduced by 33%. 
 Number of people employed in eco-tourism 
increases by 75 

Policy notes completed 

Interventions to prevent 
wildlife conflict incidents in 
hot spot areas fully 
implemented 

Training programs for 
tourism-related programs 
implemented. 

Morupule B Project (FY09/10) 

South Africa/Botswana Regional 
Broadband TA (with PPIAF) 
(FY12) 
SDN Policy Notes on Agriculture 
and NBT (FY10) 

Wild Life and Conflict 
Management Project in Northern 
Botswana (GEF) (FY10) 

SDN Policy Notes on nature-
based tourism (FY10) 

The Government 
implemented a 32 % 
tariff increase 
effective May 1, 2010, 
which is consistent 
with the commitment 
to make the energy 
sector financially 
sustainable 
BPC installed 800,000 
compact fluorescent 
lights and about 
29,000 smart meters 
by end of 2010 

Wildlife and human 
conflict incidents in 
targeted hotspots areas 
have yet to be 
drastically reduced. 
From November 2009 
to 17 January 2011 
conflict incidents for 
elephants increased 
from 99 to 145 and for 
lions from 84 to 134 
respectively. The 
increase in incidents is 
attributed to the lack 
of separation between 
the  two project 
villages and the 
Makagadikgadi NP 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
World Bank 
Strategic 
Element 

Major Issues and 
Constraints to 
achieving 
Government’s 
objectives 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones/Intermediate 
Indicators 

Progress to Date 

Bank Program/Projects and 
Other Partner Interventions 

Low capacity to capture 
Carbon Finance potential 

Low carbon growth strategy under 
implementation 

 At least one low-carbon (CBM) reserve or no-
carbon (CSP) energy alternative has been 
identified, or a CCS pilot project has been 
identified.  

Government policy on 
carbon finance defined 

Feasibility study for 
up to 200 MW 
concentrated solar 
power (CSP) plant is 
underway 

Carbon Finance Assistance 
Program 

Climate Change Policy Note 
(FY 10) 

Carbon Capture and Storage 
(CCS) Trust Fund grant  

Frequent drought and 
frequent threats to water 
resources 

Enhanced capacity to participate in the global 
carbon market 
 Number of new carbon programs identified 

Improved ground water management (regional 
project)** 
 Number of key technical officers and policy 
makers aware of groundwater management 
and its importance over total number 
questioned (relates to SADC countries of 
which Botswana is a participating member 
state) 

Regional environmental and 
social assessment study 
completed** 

Groundwater and Drought 
Management Project** 

Advisory Services for Water 
Sector  Reform Phase II (FY 11) 

Regional environmental and 
social assessment study** 

A Multi Sector 
Investment 
Opportunity Analysis 
(MSIOA) for the 
Zambezi River basin 
engaged all eight 
riparian countries in a 
consultative process to 
illustrate the benefits 
of cooperation through 
a multi sectoral 
economic evaluation 
of water resources 
development, 
management option 
scenarios. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
World Bank 
Strategic 
Element 

Major Issues and 
Constraints to 
achieving 
Government’s 
objectives 

CPS Outcomes 

Milestones/Intermediate 
Indicators 

Progress to Date 

Bank Program/Projects and 
Other Partner Interventions 

High vulnerability to 
drought and flood 
exacerbated by climate 
change. 

Increased understanding of implications of 
increased climate variability for Botswana with 
appropriate policy options for adaptation 
developed 

Climate impacts modeled by 
end 2010.   

Policy options for climate 
adaptation developed and 
adopted by end 2012 
Water and Wastewater 
Sector Reform FBSA Phase 
1 completed 

Improved water conservation and management. 
Water and Wastewater Sector Reform Option 
Implemented 
 WUC assumes water delivery nationwide 
 Water Resources Council and Regulator 
established 

Water and Wastewater 
Sector Reform FBSA Phase 
2 completed 

The climate change 
work developed a 
first-ever analysis 
based on a Botswana 
data set using Global 
Climate Models 
(GCM) to predict how 
climate variability 
might impact on 
Botswana over the 
next 50 years 

To date, management 
of  150 of the 
country’s over 200 
water systems has 
been transferred to the 
Water Users 
Corporation (WUC) 

Climate Change  Policy Note 
(FY11) 

Environment Policy Note (FY10) 

Climate Adaptation FBSA 
(FY12) 

Water and Wastewater Sector 
Reform FBSA Phase 1 (FY09) 

Water and Wastewater Sector 
Reform FBSA Phase 2 (FY10) 

Water and Wastewater Sector 
Reform FBSA Phase 3 (FY13) 

** Achievement of regional outcomes cannot be measured within the timeframe of the CPS and can only be assessed against regional objectives 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 

Botswana at a glance

2/25/11

Sub-
Saharan
A f rica

Upper
m iddle
inco me

K e y D e v e lo pm e n t Ind ic a t o r s

B o t swana

( 2 0 0 9 )

P o pulat io n, m id-year (m illio ns )
Surface area (tho usand sq. km )
P o pulat io n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulat io n (% o f to tal po pulat io n)

1.9
582
1.5
60

819
24,242
2.5
36

993
48,659
0.9
75

GN I (A t las metho d, US$ billio ns )
GN I per capita (A t las metho d, US$ )
GN I per capita (P P P , internat io nal $ )

12.2
6,260
12,840

897
1,095
1,981

7,363
7,415
12,800

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

-3.7
-5.1

5.2
2.7

4.1
3.2

( m o s t r e c e n t e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 8 )

P o vert y headco unt rat io at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o vert y headco unt rat io at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expec t ancy at birth (years )
Infant mo rtalit y (per 1,000 live births )
C hild malnut rit io n (% o f children under 5)

31 a
49 a
54
43
..

51
73
52
83
25

..
..
71
20
..

A dult literac y, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literac y, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment , male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment , female (% o f age gro up)

83
84
111
109

72
54
105
95

95
92
111
110

A c ces s to an im pro ved water so urce (% o f po pulat io n)
A c ces s to impro ved sanitat io n fac ilit ies (% o f po pulat io n)

95
60

60
31

95
84

N e t A id F lo ws

19 8 0

19 9 0

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 9 b

(US$ m illio ns )
N et ODA and o f f ic ial aid
T o p 3 do no rs (in 2007):
   Germ any
   United States
   Euro pean C o mm is s io n

105

145

31

716

15
12
6

19
15
8

7
1
4

439
232
27

A id (% o f GN I)
A id per capita (US$ )

10.2
107

3.9
107

0.6
18

5.6
373

Lo ng - T e rm E c o no m ic T r e nd s

C o nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implic it def lat o r (annual % change)

13.6
10.2

11.4
6.3

8.7
0.0

8.4
-5.7

Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
T erm s o f t rade index (2000 = 100)

0.8
..

1.9
119

5.1
100

7.0
15

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 – 0 9
      (average annual gro wth %)
3.2
2.4
11.0
5.7

P o pulat io n, m id-year (m illio ns )
GDP (US$ m illio ns )

1.0
1,061

1.4
3,792
  (% o f GDP )
4.9
61.0
5.1
34.1

1.7
5,632

1.9
11,823

1.4
4.4

A griculture
Indus t ry
   M anufac turing
Serv ices

14.7
50.7
5.1
34.6

2.7
52.6
4.5
44.7

3.1
39.6
4.2
57.3

2.5
11.3
11.5
15.1

-0.7
5.4
3.5
7.5

1.2
2.5
4.8
5.6

H o useho ld f inal co nsumpt io n expenditure
General go v ' t f inal co nsum pt io n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rm at io n 

52.0
21.3
40.1

33.2
24.1
37.4

30.8
25.4
31.8

62.8
24.2
24.0

6.2
14.9
7.6

5.9
6.1
4.6

6.6
4.9
3.0

Expo rt s o f go o ds and serv ices
Impo rt s o f go o ds and serv ices
Gro ss sav ings

53.1
66.4
28.7

55.1
49.8
41.6

53.3
41.2
41.4

33.6
44.6
18.7

12.5
9.2

4.4
4.3

2.8
4.8

N o t e: F igures in it alic s are fo r years o ther than tho se spec if ied. 2009 data are prelim inary.  .. indicat es dat a are no t available.
a. C o unt ry po vert y es t im ate is fo r earlier perio d.  b. A id data are fo r 2008.

D evelo pment Eco no m ic s , Develo pm ent D ata Gro up (DECDG).

10

5

0

5

10

0-4

15-19

30-34

45-49

60-64

75-79

percent of total population

Age d i str ib u ti on , 2009

Male

Female

0

50

100

150

200

1990

1995

2000

2008

Botswana

Sub-Saharan A fri c a

Un der -5 mo r tal i ty r ate (per 1, 000)

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

95

05

GDP

GDP per c api ta

Growth o f GDP an d GDP per cap i ta (%)

Annex 2: Botswana at a Glance 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 

Botswana

Bal an ce of P aymen ts and T rad e

2000

2009

(US$ mi l l ions)
T otal merchand ise exports (f ob )
T otal merchand ise imports (cif )
Net trade in goods and services

2,682
2,005
681

3,462
4,734
-1,624

Cu rrent account balance
   as a % of GDP

547
9.7

-966
-8.2

W orkers' remittances and
   compensation of emp loyees (receipts)

26

88

Reserves, includ ing gold

6,300

12,438

Cen tral Governmen t F in an ce

(% of GDP)
Cu rrent revenue (includ ing grants)
   T ax revenue
Cu rrent expend itu re

47.0
40.2
28.0

32.5
20.4
30.7

T echnolog y and In f rastru ctu re

2000

2008

Overal l surp lus/def icit

7.8

-14.7

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed l ine and mob i le phone
   subscribers (per 100 peop le)
High technology exports
   (% of manuf actured exports)

35.3

32.6

Highest marg inal tax rate (%)
   Ind ividual
   Corporate

25
25

25
25

21

85

0.5

0.6

E xtern al Deb t and Resou rce F lows

E n vi ronmen t

(US$ mi l l ions)
T otal debt outstand ing and d isbursed
T otal debt service
Debt rel ief (HIPC, MDRI)

453
69
–

1,617
47
–

Agricu l tural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
T errestrial protected areas (% of surf ace area)

46
22.1
..

46
20.7
30.1

T otal debt (% of GDP)
T otal debt service (% of exports)

8.0
2.0

13.7
0.7

Freshwater resources per cap ita (cu . meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (b i l l ion cub ic meters)

1,354
0.2

1,249
..

Foreign d irect investment (net inf lows)
Portf ol io equ ity (net in f lows)

57
-6

234
18

CO2 emissions per cap ita (mt)

2.5

2.6

GDP per un it of energy use
   (2005 PPP $ per kg of oi l equ ivalent)

9.1

11.8

Energy use per cap ita (kg of oi l equ ivalent)

1,066

1,068

 W orld Ban k G roup portf ol io

2000

2009

 (US$ mi l l ions)

 IBRD
   T otal deb t outstand ing and d isbursed
   Disbursements
   Principal repayments
   Interest payments

16
0
7
1

0
0
0
0

 IDA
   T otal deb t outstand ing and d isbursed
   Disbursements
   T otal deb t service

9
0
1

5
0
1

P r i vate S ec tor Developmen t

2000

2009

T ime requ ired to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per cap i ta)
T ime requ ired to reg ister p roperty (days)

–
–
–

61
2.1
16

IFC (f iscal year)
   T otal d isbursed and ou tstand ing portf ol io
      of wh ich IFC own account
   Disbursements f or IFC own account
   Portf ol io sales, prepayments and
      repaymen ts f or IFC own account

2
2
1

27
27
1

Ranked as a major constraint to business
   (% of managers surveyed who ag reed)
      Access to/cost of f inancing
      Anticompetitive or inf ormal practices

2000

2009

0

0

..
..

24.3
11.6

 MIGA
   Gross exposure
   New guarantees

–
–

–
–

Stock market cap ital ization (% of GDP)
Bank cap ital to asset ratio (%)

17.4
10.3

33.8
..

Note: Figures in ital ics are f or years other than those specif ied.  2009 data are prel iminary.
.. ind icates data are not avai lab le.  – ind icates observation is not app l icab le.

2/25/11

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

0

25

50

75

100

Con tro l o f co rrup tion

Ru le o f law

Regu la to ry qua lity

Po litica l stab ility

Vo ice and accoun tability

Coun try's pe rcen tile rank (0 -100 )

higher values imply better ratings

2009
2000

Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

Sourc e: Kaufm ann-Kraay -M as t ruzzi, W orld Bank

IBRD , 0

IDA, 5

IMF, 0

Other mul ti -
lateral , 1,246

Bilateral , 135

Pr ivate, 2

Shor t- term , 229

Composition of total external debt, 2009

US$ millions

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Millennium Development Goals

Botswana

W ith selec ted targets to achieve between 1990 and  2015

(estimate closest to date shown , +/- 2 years)  

Goa l 1: ha lve the rates f or extreme p overty and maln u tr i tion
   Poverty headcoun t ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of popu lation)   
   Poverty headcoun t ratio at national poverty l ine (% of popu lation)   
   Share of income or consumption to the poorest qun iti le (%)  
   Prevalence of malnu trition (% of ch i ldren under 5)   

Goa l 2: en su re that ch i ld ren are ab le to comp l ete p rimary school ing
   Primary school enrol lmen t (net, %)
   Primary comp letion rate (% of relevant age group)   
   Secondary school enrol lmen t (gross, %)   

Goa l 3: el imi nate gender d i sp ar i ty i n education and empower women
   Ratio of g irls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)   
   Women emp loyed in the nonagricu ltural sector (% of nonagricu ltural emp loymen t)   
   Proportion of seats held by women in national parl iamen t (%)   

Goa l 4: red uce u nd er- 5 morta l i ty b y two- th i rd s
   Under-5 mortal ity rate (per 1,000)   
   In fant mortal i ty rate (per 1,000 l ive b irths)   
   Measles immun ization (proportion of one-year olds immun ized , %)

Goa l 5: red uce maternal morta l i ty b y th ree- f ou rth s
   Maternal mortal i ty ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 l ive b irths)   
   Births attended by ski l led heal th staf f (% of total )   
   Contracep tive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)   

Goa l 6: ha l t and beg in to reverse th e sp read of HIV /AIDS an d other maj or d iseases
   Prevalence of HIV (% of popu lation ages 15-49)   
   Incidence of tubercu losis (per 100,000 peop le)   
   Tubercu losis case detection rate (%, al l forms)

Goa l 7: ha lve th e p roportion of peop le wi th ou t sustain ab le access to b as ic needs
   Access to an improved water source (% of popu lation)
   Access to improved san i tation faci l i ties (% of popu lation)
   Forest area (% of total land area)   
   Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)
   CO2 emissions (metric tons per cap i ta)   
   GDP per un it of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oi l equ ivalen t)   

Goa l 8: deve lop a g l ob al p artnersh ip f or developmen t   
   Telephone main l ines (per 100 peop le)   
   Mob i le phone subscribers (per 100 peop le)
   In ternet users (per 100 peop le)   
   Personal computers (per 100 peop le)   

Botswana

1995
31.2
..
3.1
..

2000
..
..
..
10.7

79
92
58

104
38
9

78
57
89

130
87
..

19.0
444
70

94
42
23
..
2.2
7.8

3.9
0.0
0.1
1.0

83
91
76

102
39
11

99
66
91

310
94
48

26.5
595
73

96
45
22
..
2.5
9.1

7.9
12.9
2.9
3.5

2008
..
..
..
4.3

87
86
80

101
41
11

76
57
94

198
95
53

23.9
536
63

96
84
21
19.0
2.5
11.8

7.4
77.3
6.2
6.2

1990
..
..
..
..

87
90
40

108
34
5

60
46
87

83
77
33

4.7
307
71

93
38
24
..
1.6
7.6

2.0
0.0
0.0
..

Education indicators (%)

Meas les immunization (% of 1-year olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125

100

75

50

25

0

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Prim ary net enrollm ent rat io

Rat io of girls to boy s in primary & s ec ondary 
educ at ion

100

75

50

25

0

100

80

60

40

20

0

1990

1995

2000

2008

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Bot sw ana

Sub-Saharan Af ric a

F ix ed + mobile s ubs c ribers

Internet us ers

Note: Figures in i tal ics are for years other than those specif ied .  .. ind icates data are not avai lab le.

2/25/11

Development Economics, Developmen t Data Group (DECDG).

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 3: Selected indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 

As Of 7/5/2011 

2009 

2010 

2 
0.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

4 
1.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
1.0 

2011 

4 
1.8 
25.0 
1.5 
25.0 
1.5 
13.3 

Indicator 
Portfolio Assessment 
Number of Projects Under Implementation a 
Average Implementation Period (years) b 
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c 
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d 
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d 
Disbursement Ratio (%) e 
Portfolio Management 
CPPR during the year (yes/no) 
Supervision Resources (total US$) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

Memorandum Item 
Proj Eval by OED by Number 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions) 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number 
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

Since FY 80 
20 
195.0 
20.0 
11.4 

Last Five FYs 
0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 

a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY). 
b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio. 
c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP). 
d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program. 
e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the  
     beginning of the year: Investment projects only. 
*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio, 
    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year. 

27 

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
Annex 4: IFC Investment Operations Program 

Original Commitments (US$ millions) 

 2009 2010 2011 

IFC and Participants 
IFC's Own Accounts 
only 

4.76 

4.76 

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only

OIL, GAS AND 
MINING 

Total 

100 
100 

0

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only 

Equity 

Total 

100 
100 

0

* Data as of July 01, 2011 

0 

0 

28 

 
 
 
 
  
Annex 5: Summary of Nonlending Services 

As of July 2011 

Completion FY Cost (US$000) 

Audiencea Objectiveb 

Product 
Recent Completions 
Public Expenditure Review 
ICA follow up; Informality survey and TA 
Agriculture and Environment Policy Notes 
FBSA Water Sector Reform (Phase 2) 
Climate Change Policy Note 
Accrual Accounting Guide 
Underway 
Skills and Competitiveness 
Public Sector Management Justice & Law TA 
Financial Sector Development Strategy 
Strengthening Accounting Oversight Board 
Enhancing Supervision of Capital Markets 
Programmatic DPR (Policy Notes) 
Public Expenditure Management TA 
Planned 
Competitiveness and Diversification TA 
Social Safety Net Review 
TA to Public Private Partnerships 
Climate Change Adaptation FBSA 
Poverty Assessment 
Health Public Expenditure Review  
FBSA Water Sector Reform (Phase 3) 
a. Government, Donor, Bank, Public Dissemination 
b. Knowledge Generation, Public Debate, Problem-solving 

FY10 
FY10 
FY10 
FY11 
FY11 
FY11 

FY12 
FY12 
FY12 
FY12 
FY12 
FY12 
FY12 

FY12 
FY12 
FY13 
FY13 
FY13 
FY13 
FY13 

471 
71 
70 
463 
58 
45 

G, B 
G, B, P 
G, B 
G, B 
G, B 
G, B 

KG, PS 
KG, PS 
KG, PS 
KG, PS 
KG 
PS 

212 
G, B 
KG, PS 
75 
G, B 
PS 
200 G, B, D, P 
KG, PS 
34 
G 
KG, PS 
191 
G, B 
KG, PS 
200 G, B, D, P KG, PS, PD 
100 
G, B 
KG, PS 

50 G, B, P, D 
PD PS 
50 G, B, D, P 
KG, PS 
50 
G, B 
PS 
400 
G, B, P 
PD, PS 
250 G, B, D, P KG, PS, PD 
100 
G, B 
KG, PS 
250 
G, B 
KG, PS 

29 

 
 
  
 
Annex 6: Key Economic Indicators 

Botswana - Key Economic Indicators

2005

A ctual     
2006
2007

Es t imate
2009

2008

2010

Pro jected
2011
2012

2013

Ind icato r
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gro s s domes t ic p roducta
   A gricu ltu re
   Indus try
   Serv ices

To tal Cons ump t ion
Gro s s domes t ic fixed inves tmen t
   Governmen t inves tmen t
   Private inves tmen t

100
2
51
48

11
25
7
17

100
2
54
44

10
22
6
16

10255

11255

51
34
89
87

47
31
90
91

Exports (GNFS)b
Impo rts (GNFS)
Gro s s domes t ic s av ing s
Gro s s nat ional s av ings c
Memo randum i tems
Gro s s domes t ic p roduct 
(US$ million at curren t p rices )
GNI per cap ita (US$, A t las method )
5180
Real annual growth rates (%, calcu lated from 94 p rices )
   Gros s domes t ic p roduct at market p rices
1.6
5.1
   Gros s Domes t ic Income
2.3
5.0
Real annual per cap ita growth rates (%, calcu lated from 94 p rices )
   Gros s domes t ic p roduct at market p rices
0.5
3.9
   To tal con s ump t ion
2.5
1.2
   Private con s ump t ion
-2.2
3.9
Balance of Payments (US $ mi l l ions )
  Exports (GNFS)b
      Merchand is e FOB
   Imports (GNFS)b
      Merchand is e FOB
  Res ou rce balance
  Net cu rren t tran s fers
  Cu rren t accoun t balance
  Net p rivate fo reign d irect inves tmen t
  Long-term loans (net)
    Official
    Private

5277
4444
3550
2686
1727
672
1564
223
..
-26
..
..
-1377

5730

5292
4521
3451
2617
1841
871
1939
437
..
-40
..
..
-1757

  Other cap ital (net , incl. erro rs & omm ission s)

  Change in res erves d
Memo randum i tems
Res ource balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR94 p rices )
  Merchand is e exports (FOB)
    Primary
    Manu factu res
  Merchand is e impo rts (CIF)

16.8

1.5
3.1
38.5
-9.1

16.4

15.4
21.5
-43.8
-11.0

100
2
53
45

10
24
9
15

48
36
90
93

100
2
53
45

10
23
12
11

42
38
90
93

100
2
40
57

11
28
15
13

32
43
89
94

100
2
45
52

12
26
13
13

33
40
88
91

100
3
45
51

0
26
11
15

31
32
100
102

100
3
47
58

0
26
10
16

29
30
100
103

100
3
47
58

0
22
9
13

27
27
100
103

12376

13473

11474

14857

14508

16362

18459

6100

6620

6450

7020

7290

8180

8750

2.9
-0.2

1.6
5.0
3.3

5707
4789
5580
4458
127
1010
473
617
..
-12
..
..
-1092

0.9

-5.7
-5.4
-20.8
-84.0

-4.9
-8.0

-6.1
9.2
14.3

3477
3462
4121
4121
-644
1067
-244
0
..
957
..
..
-13

-5.6

-35.7
-46.9
-28.3
102.5

7.2
7.9

5.9
5.6
8.7

4112
4112
4599
4595
-487
1119
-33
347
..
264
..
..
231

-3.3

13.9
3.8
17.6
28.9

4.8
9.5

3.5
3.1
3.5

4479
4437
4682
4682
-203
1137
94
372
..
183
..
..
-268

-1.4

12.9
27.1
6.8
12.3

7.2
6.1

5.9
6.0
6.9

4686
4640
4836
4836
-150
1362
350
376
..
23
..
..
7

7.4
8.2

6.1
7.3
8.4

4963
4915
4988
4988
-25
1362
542
403
..
16
..
..
-202

-0.9

-0.1

-100.0
-100.0
-100.0
-100.0

..
..
..
..

4.8
5.5

3.5
3.4
2.7

5902
5053
4471
3443
1430
1105
1798
444
..
-27
..
..
-1742

11.6

3.1
-1.3
96.9
18.9

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Botswana- Key Economic Indicators (Continued) 

Indicator 
Indicator 

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e 
Current revenues 
Current expenditures 

Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-) 
Capital expenditure 
Foreign financing 
Monetary indicators 
M2/GDP 
Growth of M2 (%) 
Private sector credit growth / 
total credit growth (%) 

Price indices( YR94 =100) 
Merchandise export price index 
Merchandise import price index 
Merchandise terms of trade index 

Consumer price index  (% change) 
GDP deflator (% change) 

Actual      
2006 
2007 

Estimate 
2009 

2008 

2010 

Projected 
2011 
2012 2013 

2005 

40.5 
26.6 

13.9 
6.7 
0.0 

28.0 
10.6 

39.8 
24.0 

15.8 
5.6 
0.1 

37.4 
67.4 

37.7 
24.5 

13.2 
8.2 
-0.1 

42.4 
31.2 

33.1 
26.0 

7.1 
12.2 
-0.2 

42.4 
21.1 

32.9 
31.2 

1.7 
16.7 
7.8 

46.7 
-1.8 

32.8 
26.9 

5.9 
11.9 
1.3 

44.1 
16.1 

34.8 
28.8 

6.0 
10.7 
0.1 

47.9 
9.5 

37.8 
27.4 

10.4 
10.0 
0.1 

37.6 
25.9 

11.7 
9.5 
-0.1 

-27 

-32 

-79 

202 

21 

44 

42 

86.1 
75.9 
82.2 
82.7 
140.9 152.1 167.7 653.9 
61.1 
49.9 
49.0 
12.6 

93.0 
96.9 
92.7 
604.3 523.4 474.9 
15.4 
18.5 
19.5 

8.6 
9.3 

11.6 
19.2 

7.0 
10.4 

12.7 
17.7 

8.1 
-6.1 

6.7 
14.7 

6.3 
-3.9 

5.6 
5.2 

5.4 
5.0 

a.   GDP at  
b.  "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services." 
c.  Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants. 
d.  Includes use of IMF resources. 
e.   Consolidated central government. 
f.  "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation. 

31 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Indicator 
Total debt outstanding and  
disbursed (TDO) (US$m)a 
Net disbursements (US$m)a 
Total debt service (TDS) (US$m) 

Debt and debt service indicators (%) 

   TDO/XGSb 
   TDO/GDP 
   TDS/XGS 
   Concessional/TDO 

IBRD exposure indicators (%) 
   IBRD DS/public DS 
   Preferred creditor DS/public DS 
(%)c 
   IBRD DS/XGS 
   IBRD TDO (US$m)d 
      Of which present value of 
      guarantees (US$m) 
   Share of IBRD portfolio (%) 
   IDA TDO (US$m)d 

IFC (US$m) 
   Loans 
   Equity and quasi-equity  /c 

MIGA 
   MIGA guarantees (US$m) 

7.0 
6.4 
1.1 
57.4 

0.0 

44.7 
0.0 
0 
0 

0 
5 

17 
13 

43.5 
16.1 
1.9 
70.9 

0.0 

59.6 
0.0 
0 
0 

0 
5 

18 
10 

46.2 
19.3 
2.0 
51.7 

1.3 

74.7 
0.0 
141 
121 

0 
4 

7 
14 

39.2 
20.6 
2.1 
61.3 

2.6 

43.6 
0.0 
173 
121 

0 
4 

20 
11 

48.9 
20.0 
2.3 
68.1 

3.9 

64.1 
0.0 
231 
121 

0 
3 

20 
11 

7.8 
4.4 
0.9 
65.4 

2.3 

69.2 
0.0 
2 
0 

0 
7 

2 
8 

0 

6.5 
3.4 
1.0 
64.2 

2.1 

67.5 
0.0 
1 
0 

0 
6 

0 
7 

0 

7.1 
3.7 
0.8 
52.5 

2.4 

66.0 
0.0 
0 
0 

0 
6 

0 
6 

0 

Annex 7: Key Exposure Indicators 

2005 
447 

2006 
382 

Actual      
2007 
458 

2008 
431 

2009 
1767 

Estimated 
2010  
2363 

Projected 
2012 
2642 

2011  
2483 

-1 
51 

-65 
58 

-15 
52 

-26 
69 

905 
78 

188 
101 

121 
130 

15 
125 

2013 
2760 

-11 

48.8 
12.9 
0.0 
8.5 

.. 

.. 
0.1 
295 
121 

0 
3 

20 
11 

0 

0 

0 

12 

12 

12 

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short- term capital. 

b.  "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances 

c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for International 
Settlements 
d. Includes present value of guarantees. 

e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments. 

32 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
Annex 8: Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 

As of 7/15/2011 

Closed Projects 

IBRD/IDA* 
Total Disbursed (Active) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 
of which has been repaid 
Total Undisbursed (Active) 
Total Undisbursed (Closed) 
Total Undisbursed (Active +Closed 

Active Projects 

25 

56.2
0.0 
0.0 
14.1 
56.2 
14.1 
316.2 
0.0 
316.2 

Project 
ID 

Project name 

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating 
Dev. 
Imp. 
Obj. 
Progress 

Fiscal 
Year 

Original Amount in US$ 
Millions 
IDA Grant Cancel Undisb. 

IBRD 

Difference 
Between 
Expected and 
Actual 
Disbursements 
Org 
Frm 
rev’d 

P102299 

BW-HIV/AIDS Project SIL 
(FY09) 

P102368 

BW-Integrated Transport 
SIL (FY09) 

P112516 

BW:Morupule Generation 
and Transmission 

S 

S 

S 

S 

S 

S 

2009 

50.0 

40.5 

16.5 

3.5 

2009 

186.0 

182.6 

30.6 

2010 

136.4 

93.1 

-43.3 

P095617 

NB Human Wildlife 
Coexistence Project 

MS 

MU 

2010 

Overall Result 

372.4 

5.5 

5.5 

3.4 

-0.9 

319.6 

2.9 

3.5 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 9:  Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio (IFC) 

As of July 2011 
(In USD Millions) 

FY 
Approval Company 

Loan Equity 

Committed 
**Quasi 
Equity 

*GT/RM 

Partici  
pant 

Disbursed Outstanding 
**Quasi 
Equity 

*GT/RM 

Loan Equity 

Partici  
pant 

2001/08 
2005/08 

    2003 
    2010 

Afrbnkcorp 
Letshego 
Petra 
diamonds 
Tsodilo 

0 
6.84 

0 
0 

4.68 
3.9 

0.54 
3.4 

13.55 
0 

0 
0 

Total Portfolio: 

6.84 

12.52 

13.55 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 

0 
6.84 

0 
0 

4.68 
3.9 

0.54 
3.4 

13.55 
0 

0 
0 

6.84 

12.52 

13.55 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 

0 
0 

0 
0 

0 

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management 
Products. 
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types. 

34 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
