d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of  
The World Ba nk  

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY  

Report No. 59355 - KI 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

FOR THE 

REPUBLIC OF K IRIBATI 

FY 2011 - 2014 

January 31, 2011 

T imor Leste, Papua New Guinea, and Pacific Islands Country Managem ent Unit 
East Asia and Pacific Region 

The International Finance Corporation 

Th is document h as a restr icted dist r ibut ion and may b e u sed b y rec ip ients onl y in th e p er forman ce o f th e ir o ffic ial d uties. 
It s cont ent s may not oth erwise be d isclo sed witho ut Wo rld Ban k author izat ion. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF KIR IBATI 

CURRENCY EQU IVALENT 
1 Australian Do llar (AUD ) = 0.99 US Do llar (USD) 
(Exchange rate effective as of January 2011) 

ABBREV IATIONS AND ACRONYMS  

AAA 
ADB 
AusAID 
CAS 
CEDAW 

CPAR 
CPPR 
DGF 
DPO 
DRR 
DWFNs 
EC 
EDF 
EEZ 
E IT I 
FIAS 
FT I  
FSM 
GDP 
GEF 
GFDRR 

GFRP 
GN I 
HDI 
IBRD 
ICAO 
IDA 
IEG 
IFC 
ILF 
IMF 
IUU 
JICA 

Analyt ic and Adv isory Act iv ities 
Asian Development Bank 
Australian Agency for Internat ional Developmen t 
Country Assistance Strategy  
Conven tion on the Elimination of All Form s o f 
D iscrim inat ion Against Women 

Country Procu remen t Assessmen t Report 
Country Pro ject Portfo lio Rev iew 
Development Grant Facility 
Development Po licy Operat ion 
D isaster Risk Reduct ion 
D istant Water Fish ing Nat ions 
Eu ropean Comm ission 
Eu ropean Developmen t Fund 
Exclusive Econom ic Zone 
Extract ive Industries Transparency In it iat ive 
Investmen t C limate Adv isory Serv ice  
Educat ion for All Fast Track In itiat ive 
Federated States o f M icronesia 
Gross Domest ic Product 
Global Env ironmen t Facility 
Global Facility for D isaster Reduct ion and Recovery 

Global Food Crisis Response Program 
Gross Nat ional Income 
Human Development Ind icators 
Internat ional Bank for Reconstruct ion and 
Internat ional C ivil Av iat ion Organ ization 
Internat ional Developmen t Associat ion 
Independent Evaluat ion Group 
Internat ional Finance Corporat ion 
Import Levy Fund 
Internat ional Monetary Fund 
I llegal, Un regu lated , Un reported fish ing act iv ity 
Japan In ternat ional Cooperat ion Agency 

KAP 
KDP 
 M&E 
 MDGs 
 MDTF 

 MOF 
 NGO 
 NZ 
PALM 
PASAI 
PEFA 
PFM 
PFTAC 
PF3 
PIC 
PNA 
PPCR 
PRIF 
PSD 
RMI 
 QER 
RERF 
RSE 
SDR 
SPREP 
TA 
 UNDP 
 UNICEF 
 USAID 
 WCPFC 
 WFP 

K iribat i C limate Adap tation p ro ject 
K iribat i Developmen t Plan 
Mon itoring and Evaluat ion 
M illenn ium Developmen t Goals 
Mu lti-Donor Trust Fund  

M in istry o f Finance 
Non -Governmental Organ izat ions 
New Zealand 
Japan – Pacific Alliance Leaders’ Meet ing 
Pacific Associat ion of Nat ional Audit Inst itut ions 
Pub lic Expenditu re and Financial Accoun tab ility 
Pub lic Financial Managemen t 
IMF Pacific Technical Assistance Facility 
Pacific Facility II I 
Pacific Island Coun try 
Part ies to the Nau ru Agreement 
Pilot Program for C limate Resilience 
Pacific Regional In frastructure Facility 
Private Sector Developmen t 
Repub lic o f the Marshall islands 
Quality Enhancemen t Review 

Revenue Equalizat ion Reserve Fund 
NZ Recogn ised Seasonal Employment Scheme 
Special Draw ing Righ ts   
South Pacific Regional Env ironmen t Programme 
Techn ical Assistance  
Un ited Nat ions Developmen t Programme 
Un ited Nat ions Ch ild ren's Fund 
Un ited States Agency for In ternat ional 
Western Cen tral Pacific Fisheries Comm ission 
World Food Programme 

V ice Pres ident :  
Country Director: 
Tas k Team Leader:  

IDA 
James W. Adams 
Ferid Be lhaj 
Robert Jauncey  

IFC 
Rashad Ka ldany 
Karin F inke lston 
Gavin Mu rray 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF KIR IBATI 

WORLD BANK GROUP 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY 

Contents  

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY............................................................................................................  i 

I.  RATIONALE FOR A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY ......................................... 1 

II.  COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES ..................................... 1 

Economic G eography ........................................................................................................................................ 1 
Recen t Economic D evelopments ....................................................................................................................... 3 
Governmen t D evelopmen t Strategy: 2009-13 .................................................................................................... 5 
Donor Engagemen t ............................................................................................................................................ 5 

III.  WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT WITH K IRIBATI ................................................ 6 

Transforming Wor ld Bank Group Engagemen t in the Pacif ic ............................................................................ 6 
Translating Pacif ic T hemes to K ir ibati............................................................................................................... 7 
Bu ild ing Resilience Against C limate Change and Ex ternal Shocks ................................................................... 7 
Generating Opportun ities from G reater G lobal and Reg ional In tegration .......................................................... 8 
In ternal F inance Corporation ........................................................................................................................... 10 
Mainstreaming G ender ..................................................................................................................................... 10 
Imp lemen tation: Par tnersh ips, Selectiv ity , N ew Ways of Do ing Business, and Accoun tab ility ....................... 10 
F inancing Terms and Sources .......................................................................................................................... 11 

IV .  RISK..................................................................................................................................................... 12 

A ttachments 

Attachment 1: K ir ibati and Pacif ic Island Countr ies MDG Progr ess ................................................................ 13 
Attachment 2: K ir ibati Resu lts Matr ix ............................................................................................................. 15 
Attachment 3: K ir ibati: Coun try at a G lance .................................................................................................... 17 
Attachment 4: Selected Ind icators of IDA Por tfo lio Per formance and Managemen t ........................................ 19 
Attachment 5: IDA Program Summary ............................................................................................................ 20 
Attachment 6: Operations Por tfo lio ................................................................................................................. 21 
Attachment 7: Map of the Repub lic of K ir ibati ................................................................................................ 22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF KIR IBATI 

WORLD BANK GROUP 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY   FY2011 – FY2014 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

i. 
This is the first Country Assistance Stra tegy (CAS) for K iriba ti and reflects a deepening of the 
World Bank G roup’s engagement.  The World Bank Group has been scaling up its assistance throughou t the 
Pacif ic and decided to move from the prev ious umbrella approach afforded by a reg ional strategy to indiv idual 
country strateg ies better ab le to ref lect specif ic country development challenges.  Th is CAS aims to assist 
K ir ibati in : ( i) addr essing the existen tial thr eat posed by climate change ; and, ( ii) mitiga ting the ef fects of 
geograph ic iso lation .  The CAS accompan ies K ir ibati’s f irst IDA investmen t and heralds an expanded program 
of Wor ld Bank G roup suppor t. 
ii. 
K iribati is one of the most remote and geographica lly d ispersed countries in the world , con sist ing of 
33 is lands spread over 3.5 million square kilometers of ocean – an area larger than Ind ia.  None of the 
inhab ited ato lls in K ir ibati lie more than a few meters above sea leve l, and the effects of r is ing sea- leve ls and 
associated so il salination are beg inn ing to threaten already lim ited water supp lies. In June 2008 , Presiden t 
Tong h igh ligh ted the po ssib ility for K ir ibati citizens to consider fu ture resettlement to larger metropo litan 
cen ters in the region no ting that “to p lan for the day when you no longer have a country is indeed painfu l bu t I 
th ink we have to do that. ” 
iii. 
Reflecting K iribati’s vulnerab ility to the ex istentia l threat of clima te change, the core of the Bank 
G roup’s stra tegy will be to help with clima te adap ta tion measures.  A key focus w ill be to expand current 
p ilo t approaches to coastal pro tection and water managemen t. T hese effor ts will provide a basis for a 
coord inated mu lti-donor, mu lti-sectoral engagemen t to help K ir ibati addr ess the mu ltip le and comp lex 
d imensions of climate adaptation as well as the pressin g water-supply issues faced by the main population 
cen ter of Sou th T arawa. G iven the Bank Group’s lim ited engagemen t with K ir ibati to date, preparation of a 
more comprehensive approach to climate change adap tation will also be accompan ied by a ser ies of 
comp lemen tary bu t less comp lex investmen ts.   
iv. 
Beyond climate change, Kiribati rema ins geographica lly iso la ted and highly exposed to ex terna l 
shocks, resulting in vola tile economic performance.  Revenues from f ish ing lic enses, remittances, aid, and a 
trust fund f rom now dep leted phosphate reserves, compr ise almost half of all economic activ ity .  G iven its 
heavy reliance on imports, K ir ibati was impacted severely by the recent food and fuel pr ice sp ikes.   
v. 
In this contex t, the World Bank G roup will a lso seek to sca le-up efforts to help overcome the 
tyranny of distance and to genera te opportunities from closer reg iona l and g loba l integra tion and priva te 
sector led growth.  The impor tance of greater in tegration for small and remo te island states is h igh ligh ted in 
the 2009 World D evelopmen t Report, Reshaping Econom ic G eography.  The Bank will con tinue to work with 
the K ir ibati au thor ities, as well as the Australian and New Zealand Governmen ts, to mitigate geograph ic 
iso lation and expand economic opportun ities, includ ing core infrastructure – air ports and telecoms – to help 
connect K ir ibati to the wor ld.  S imilar ly, suppo rt for regional measur es to improve the sustainab le 
management and returns to is land coun tr ies from the tuna f ishery offer considerab le po ten tial benef its.   
vi. 
World Bank G roup support to Kiribati w ill require a new way of doing business, consistent w ith the 
recommenda tions of the Post Crisis D irections (PCD ) paper.  The challenge of app ly ing the Par is 
Declara tion pr incip les is thrown in to starkest relief in small states such as K ir ibati.  The 2009 Ca irns Compact 
comm itted Pacif ic countr ies and development partners to coord inating their resources more effective ly and to 
accelerating progress towards the MDG s.  These objectives are echoed strongly in the PCD where they are 
ident if ied as essen tial to deve lopmen t ef fectiveness.  Accord ingly, Bank activ itie s in K ir ibati will be selective 
and will focus on promo ting growth and reg ional in tegration . T he program will be informed by successfu l 
exper ience in K ir ibati and elsewhere in the Pacif ic w ith all in terven tions designed with capacity con siderations 
uppermost. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF KIRIBAT I 

WORLD BANK GROUP 
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY  
FY11 – FY14 

I. 

RATIONALE FOR A COUNTRY STRATEGY FOR KIR IBATI 

1. 
The World Bank G roup is significantly scaling up analytical and financial support to help Kiribati 
reduce the constra ints of economic geography and make the most of economic opportunities.  The Bank w ill 
be provid ing IDA f inance to K ir ibati for the f irst time in FY11, with Boa rd app rova l being sough t in pa rallel to 
th is CAS for a road main tenance investmen t to be under taken jo in tly w ith the Asian D evelopmen t Bank, w ith 
add itional f inancial support f rom Australia and N ew Zealand.  Over the next few years, it is an ticipated that 
Bank Group support for K ir ibati cou ld grow sign if ican tly, dr awing on bo th IDA and generous donor trust 
funds resources.   

2. 
Reflecting increased World Bank G roup engagement across the Pacific islands, ind ividua l country 
stra tegies w ill be prepared for each client country.  G iven the impor tance of greater regional in tegr ation, such 
bespoke strategies w ill draw from key elemen ts of a common reg ional approach.  N ever theless, ind iv idual 
coun try strateg ies w ill allow for a greater acknowledgemen t of the d if feren t h istories, developmen t situations, 
and challenges of the Pacif ic island coun tr ies, as well as a more nuanced d iscussion of how common reg ional 
themes in the Bank Group’s engagemen t are translated in to specif ic coun try con tex ts.  S trategies for each of 
the Pacif ic islands will inev itab ly need to be appropr iately streamlined and focused, and will not necessar ily be 
ar ticu lated with the same level of detail as they are for the Bank G roup’s larger clien ts.  Ref lecting a 
comm itmen t to work co llaboratively with o ther donors, strateg ies such as th is one for K ir ibati, draw heav ily 
from analytical work under taken by other par tners, par ticu lar ly the ADB, IMF, and the Pacif ic Islands Forum 
Secretar iat.  T he Governmen t of K ir ibati strongly suppor ts bo th the preparation of ind ividual country strategies 
and the program outlined in th is CAS. 

II. 

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES 

Econom ic Geography 

3. 
K iribati is a M icronesian island country w ith a history of human settlement extend ing back 2-3000 
years when the first Austronesian speaking voyagers reached the islands.  K ir ibati cu lture has been 
inf luenced by in teraction with both Po lynesian and Melanesian societies.   

4. 
Since independence from the UK in 1979 , K iriba ti has been a Parliamentary democracy.  Under the 
Constitution, executive power rests w ith a Presiden t elected by a unicameral le gis lature.  The next elections are 
schedu led for O ctober 2011.  Representation in the leg is lature is heavily weighted toward the outer is lands.  In 
add ition , 23 elected local councils are substantively involved in serv ice delivery and responsib le for business 
licensin g and for urban land use p lann ing.  In th is env ironmen t, a h igh degree of polit ical consensus tends to be 
requ ired if reform measures are to be successfu lly imp lemen ted. 

5. 
K iribati is one of the most remote and geographica lly dispersed countries in the world .  The coun try 
is composed of 33 islands spread over 3.5 million square kilometers – an area larger than Ind ia.  T he 
population of about 100,000 peop le lives on 20 coral ato lls and a sing le vo lcan ic island, with a total land area 
of less than 800 square kilometers.  T he cap ital, Sou th T arawa, is abou t 4, 000 ki lometers from Australia, 
Hawaii, and N ew Zealand.  Partly because of th is remo teness, ato lls in K ir ibati were used for nuclear testing 
by the US and the UK in the 1950s and 1960s. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
6. 
K iribati is one of the most vulnerab le countries in the world to climate change, na tura l d isasters, 
and environmenta l degrada tion.  In the longer - term, climate change poses an existen tial threat for K ir ibati.  
With the excep tion of the sparsely popu lated Banaba island, the h ighest po in t above sea le ve l is on ly a few 
meters, and sea level r ises are already causing erosion that is threaten ing several ato lls.  Wh ile K ir ibati’s 
Phoen ix Is lands Protected Area is the world’s largest mar ine reserve – cover ing over 400,000 square 
kilometers and includ ing over 120 var ieties of coral and 520 f ish species – warming seas are damag ing coral 
reefs and mar ine hab itats.  Increasing so il salination is reducing the amount of arab le land availab le.  Th in 
ground water lenses are sim ilar ly fragile and there is a r isk of increased salination as a resu lt of pred icted sea 
leve l r ises.  T hese vulnerab ilities are compounded by the fact that the main island of Sou th T arawa is very 
densely popu lated.  Abou t 50,000 people live on South Tarawa wh ich has a to tal land area of 16 square 
ki lometers, wh ile the islet of Betio has over 10, 000 peop le liv ing on a to tal la nd area of just over 1 square 
kilometer – making it as densely popu lated as Man ila or Jakar ta.  Cr itically, climate change cu ts across all 
aspects of K ir ibati’s deve lopmen t; as well as techn ical responses, it w ill be vital to ensur e that the social 
d imensions of climate change – and the par ticu lar vulnerab ilit y of many poor peop le with already lim ited 
access to land and water – are addressed.  The ef fects of climate change are similar ly exacerbated by 
popu lation growth, wh ich in turn is linked to pover ty and women’s access to family p lanning measures.   

7. 
A lthough a t the marg ins of the g lobal economy, K iribati’s economic geography means tha t it is 
heavily reliant on externa l factors, w ith economic performance being highly vo latile.  In the last ten years, 
GDP growth has averaged around 1.1% per annum, bu t has ranged from -5% to 6%.  K ir ibati’s growth 
prospects are constrained by its geograph ic iso lat ion , its nar row export base, and imped imen ts to pr ivate sector 
activity. Comparative advan tages are limited because of permanen t cost wedges associated with K ir ibati’s 
small size and remo teness from markets.  Systemic volatility is exacerbated by K ir ibati’s exposure to natural 
hazard r isks, par ticu lar ly drought and the loss of groundwater.  T he coun try is h igh ly relian t on imports – 
equ iva len t to over 50% of GDP.  With exports of on ly abou t 3% of GDP, K ir ibati faces a sign if icant structura l 
trade gap.  Main sources of external income are investmen t earn ings f rom the Revenue Equalization Reserve 
Fund (RERF ) estab lished in the 1950s to invest royalties from now dep leted phosphate reserves, workers’ 
remittances, and the sale of f ish ing licenses to operate in its Exc lusive Economic Zone.  T hese external income 
sou rces are equ iva len t to abou t half of GDP or about a th ird of GN I.  In add ition, foreign aid has also 
amoun ted to about 20-25% of GDP in recent years.  

         Figure 1:  Componen ts o f Kiribati Gross Na tional Incom e: 2001 – 20010 (est) 

300

250

200

A$m

150

100

50

0

RERF Investm ent Incom e

Fishing Licens es

Remittances

GDP

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

Source: IMF Est imates, OECD-DAC Geographical Di st ribution of Financial Flows to Deve loping Count ries 

2 

 
 
 
 
8. 
K iribati’s development outcomes are mixed .   
• K ir ibati is one of the poorer coun tr ies in the Pacif ic, with GN I per cap ita of abou t $2, 000.  Wh ile abso lu te 
pover ty is rare, one f if th of the population lives below the national poverty line, par ticu lar ly in the ou ter 
islands and par ts of the main urban settlemen ts in T arawa. 
• Education cove rage is h igh and K ir ibati is close to ach iev ing un ive rsal pr imary education, although issues 
remain in regard to educational qualit y.  As well as the Government, wh ic h provides f ree pr imary 
education, churches p lay a central ro le in K ir ibati’s education system.   
• Hea lth serv ice delivery is improving, bu t ou tcomes are a source of concern.  Under f ive mor tality rates 
have improved from 88 per 1,000 live b irths in 1990 to 64 in 2008, but th is is still among the h ighest in the 
region, in large par t due to lack of clean water and san itation.  The propor tion of b irths attended by a 
skilled health physician has increased sign if ican tly, but maternal mortality has also increased from an 
average of 1-2 per year to 4-5 per year. 
• Gender ou tcomes are mixed.  K ir ibati has signed the UN Conven tion on the Elimination of All Forms of 
D iscr imination Against Women (CEDAW) and women’s r ights are pro tected under the Constitu tion .  
Un like some countr ies in the reg ion, women have fu ll r igh ts to own land.  There is little or no d if ference 
between enro llmen t rates for boys and gir ls (gir ls are sligh tly over-represen ted at secondary leve ls).  On 
the o ther hand , v io lence against women is h igh; and at the local le ve l un imwane (elder men) preside over 
village decision-making wh ile women tend to work pr imar ily in the informal economy.  Women’s 
repr esentation in Par liamen t is lim ited, although the V ice P residen t is a woman. 

9. 

K ir ibati’s progress against each of the MDG goals is set out in Attachmen t 1.   

R ecent Economic D evelopments 

10. 
Ex terna l economic shocks, particularly the food and fuel prices sp ikes of 2008, hit K iriba ti harder 
than a lmost any o ther country in the world.  K ir ibati is h igh ly relian t on imported food, especially r ice.  
Electr ic ity supp ly is also heavi ly dependent on imported petro leum products, and K ir ibati’s remo teness means 
that fuel price increases f low through to almost every sector of the economy as a resu lt of increased transpor t 
costs.  In to tal, impor ts – pr imar ily of food and fuel – are equ ivalen t to about half of K ir ibati’s GDP.  
Fo llow ing g lobal pr ice shocks, the Governmen t d id take action to open food imports to a wider range of 
pr iva te sector compan ies in K ir ibati, and the increased competition helped mitigate the impact of the sp ike in 
prices.  S till, these shocks contr ibuted to an economic contraction in K ir ibati, as well as a sign if ican t increase 
in inf lation and deter ior ation in K ir ibati’s externa l position f rom wh ich the economy is still recover ing . 

        Figure 2: Rea l GDP Growth and In fla tion: 1992 – 2010 (est) 

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

GDP

Inflation

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

Sources: 2000 – 2008: IMF Art icle I V June 2009, 2009 – 2010 (est ) ADB Paci fic Economic Moni tor July 2010 

3 

 
 
11. 
Rebuild ing the va lue of the Revenue Equa liza tion Reserve Fund (RERF), which declined as a result 
of a fa ll in g lobal asset prices as well as unsusta inable Government expenditures, is a key challenge.  The 
RERF was estab lished in 1956 to invest royalt ies from now dep leted phosphate reserves on Banaba Island .  
Earn ings from the RERF are a major source of Governmen t f inance.  The Governmen t has generally fo llowed 
conservative investmen t po licies. T he RERF reached a peak value of A$650m in 2000 , or slightly more than 
A$7,000 per cap ita.  Asset pr ice vo latilit y since 2000, however, has seen the value of investmen t assets fall.  
Th is has been compounded by Governmen t drawdowns to fund h igh f iscal def icit s wh ich have exceeded RERF 
earn ings.  The IMF estimated in its 2009 Ar ticle IV that drawdowns shou ld be lim ited to 6-7% of GDP to 
ensure sustainab ility, yet average annual drawdowns since 2003 have been abou t doub le th is.  As a resu lt of 
bo th external and domestic factors, the value of the RERF declined to abou t A$550m in 2009, recover ing 
slightly to over A$570m in 2010 .  Under curren t f iscal trends, IMF estimates suggest that the RERF could be 
dep leted by around 2030.   

      Figur e 3.  RERF C losing Balance (nomina l A$m) and Real Per Cap ita level (A$ 1996) 

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

RERF Balance (LHS)

Per Capita A$ 1996 (RHS)

1996 Real Value (A$)

Source: IMF Art icle I V and Staff Estimates 

12. 
F isca l conso lida tion w ill be important to preserve the RERF but will be a cha llenge given large 
infrastructure requirements, as well as basic needs in hea lth and educa tion.  The pub lic sector provides 
near ly two- th irds of formal emp loymen t and governmen t expend iture amounts to more than 100 percen t of 
GDP. Un less carefu lly managed, f iscal conso lidation could d isrupt service delivery and depress growth. To 
enhance revenues, the Governmen t is in troducing tax reforms includ ing a PAYE system and p lans for a broad -
based consump tion tax, but progress has been h indered by capacity constrain ts. Revenue generation will also 
be constrained if growth prospects remain weak. G iven revenue lim itations, dep letion of the RERF, and its 
h igh vu lnerab ility to economic shocks, K ir ibati will need to rely main ly on external gran ts rather than deb t to 
f inance its deve lopmen t pr ior ities. 

13. 
SOE reforms and efforts to encourage priva te sector growth w ill also be needed .  There are 24 SOEs 
in K ir ibati, engaged in electr icit y, telecommunications, domestic air services, ports, mar ine service, hardware 
retailing, inter- island f ish transpor t, ho tels, and general stores.  The eff ic iency of SOE operations is 
questionab le: for instance, telecommun ications and electr icit y costs in K ir ibati are the h ighest in the Pacif ic 
and coverage is very lim ited.  Many SOEs also represen t a sign if ican t drain on pub lic f inances, through both 
imp licit and explicit subsid ies.  G iven weaknesses in expenditure contro ls, the unknown f iscal r isk f rom SOEs 
has the po ten tial to undermine the Governmen t’s budget position .  ADB and the Australian Government have 
been supporting K ir ibati’s p lans to pr ivatize or liqu idate 15 of the 24 SOEs.  There has been progress in 
deve lop ing a legis lative f ramework and institutional capacity for reform, although no transactions have 
occur red to date.  T he author ities are moving to increase competition, and have, in ter a lia, encouraged greater 
competition in food imports in 2008 , overseen the estab lishmen t of a pr iva te air line in 2008, and stated their 
comm itmen t to movin g ahead with a second telecoms license.   
4 

 
 
 
 
 
14. 
The private sector is rela tively sma ll but growing .  The Chamber of Commerce estimates that there 
are some 2, 000 businesses, although almost all are small, with on ly two emp loying over 200 peop le.  K ir ibati 
rates 79 ou t of 183 economies in the Wor ld Bank G roup’s Doing Bus iness repor t, the f ifth in the Pacif ic af ter 
Tonga, Samoa, F iji and V anuatu.  Pr ivate investmen t remains constrained by cumbersome en try and exit 
procedures and lim ited access to f inance.  Improv ing the business env ironmen t is vital, although given 
K ir ibati’s economic geography, reform on its own may no t be suff ic ien t to attract new for eign investment. 

15. 
Addressing governance issues w ill be a priority, particularly streng thening weak public financia l 
management (PFM ) systems.  K ir ibati is ranked 111 out of 180 coun tr ies on Transparency In ternational’s 
corruption percep tions index .  Desp ite progressive improvements, a 2010 Public Expend iture and F inancial 
Accoun tab ility (PEFA) assessmen t led by ADB h igh ligh ted concerns regard ing the quality and comp letenes s 
of f inancial statemen ts of the Government’s pub lic accounts.  

Government of Kiribati’s D evelopment Strategy 

16. 
The Government of K iribati’s development vision is “a vibrant economy for the people of K iriba ti” .  
The Governmen t’s approach is set out in the K ir ibati D evelopmen t P lan (KDP) 2008–2011, wh ich was 
endorsed in Apr il 2008 and serves as a basis for the CAS.  The theme runn ing through the strategy is 
“enhancing economic growth for sustainab le developmen t”.  The KDP pr ioritizes 6 key policy areas: ( i) human 
resource development, ( ii) economic growth and pover ty reduction , ( iii) health, ( iv) env ironment, (v) 
governance, and (vi) inf rastructure.  T he strategy then sets ou t 195 ind iv idual goals and activ ities. In 
d iscussions w ith the Bank G roup and par tners, the Governmen t has con sisten tly iden tif ied the pr ior ity it p laces 
on improv ing key elemen ts of the national infrastructure network, wh ich is seen as essential to lower ing the 
cost structure of the economy, and on climate change adaptation. 

Donor Engagement 

17. 
K iribati, like many sma ll island sta tes, is heavily reliant on interna tiona l development coopera tion 
flows.  Net f lows to K ir ibati in recent years have reached sligh tly over $40m per annum, equ iva len t to about 
25% of GDP or about $400 per capita, per annum.  

• Australia
 is K ir ibati’s largest partner, prov id ing an annual program of assistance in excess of A$20m        
($20m). The framework for Australian cooperation with K ir ibati is set out in the Partnership for 
Development signed by respective Leaders in January 2009.  Australian assistance has three key themes: 
( i) strengthen ing growth and economic managemen t by supporting pub lic f inancial management refo rms, 
increasing governmen t revenues, reducing the cost of pub lic en terpr ises and imp roving delivery of pub lic 
serv ices; ( ii) improving basic education ; and ( iii) develop ing workforce skills in areas of industry demand 
to reduce you th unemp loymen t. 
• The Asian D evelopment Bank
 has had a long- term engagemen t in K ir ibati, based around an in tegrated 
program of analytica l work and investments.  ADB has ten tatively set a 5-year ADF allocation of $12m for 
K ir ibati cover ing the per iod 2008 to 2012, with add itional trust fund resources availab le to suppor t 
investmen ts and TA.  ADB, with Australia, is lead ing economic reform and im proving PFM.  ADB and 
the Wor ld Bank have prepared a co-f inanced investmen t to under take road main tenance on the main road, 
and to strengthen inf rastructure management. 
• The European Commiss ion’s coun try strategy (2008 – 2013) sets out a framework for engagemen t with 
K ir ibati under the 10 th European D evelopmen t Fund (EDF ).  The EC an ticipates making approximately 
€14m ($18m) availab le dur ing th is per iod , with a focus on the ou ter is lands, includ ing househo ld so lar 
energy supp ly, water/san itation and health serv ices. 

5 

 
 
 
• 

• 

Japan.
 Japanese assistance has averaged about $10m per annum in recen t years.   K ir ibati is also elig ib le 
for suppor t from the 6.8 b illion Yen ($66m) Pacif ic Environment Commun ity Fund (PEC Fund) wh ich will 
focus on so lar power generation and sea water desalination pro jects in the Pacif ic region. 

New Zealand
 announced in August 2010 that it wou ld doub le aid to K ir ibati to approximately NZ$8m 
($6m) per annum.  A key focus of expanded assistance will be to rehab ilitate Cassidy airpor t on K ir itimati 
island, wh ich will be essen tial to br ing th is facilit y up to ICAO standards.  NZ assistance to date has 
focused on : ( i) workfor ce ski lls deve lopmen t, par ticu lar ly the h ighly successfu l Mar itime Train ing 
Co llege; ( ii) a sustainab le towns program to address urban managemen t, p ilo ting of village water and 
san itation 
improvemen ts, and 
local business developmen t agencies; ( iii) K ir itimati Is land port 
infrastructure improvemen ts, and ( iv) improved public sector managemen t.   

• 

Taiwan, Ch ina,
 is a sign if ican t donor to K ir ibati, prov id ing approx imately A$ 11m (US$10m) per year.  
Pr ior ities are set by the Government of K ir ibati, with a focus particu lar ly on inf rastructure, includ ing 
schoo l and hosp ital build ing, and techn ical assistance with a focus on househo ld agricu lture, livestock, and 
f ish farming , as well as prov id ing scho larsh ips and med ical referrals.  Taiwan , Ch ina, will be prov id ing a 
$14m loan on par tly concessional terms to refurb ish the runway and terminal of the main Bon r ik i 
in ternational airport on South T arawa. 
• The 
Un ited N ations
 system is active, with UN ICEF and WHO prov id ing support to streng then ear ly 
ch ildhood development and health programs. 

• 

Church groups
 p lay an especially impor tan t ro le in provid ing education in K ir ibati.  Trad itionally, 
churches rather than the Governmen t have prov ided schooling , and over half of all studen ts in K ir ibati 
today attend church schoo ls. 

III. WORLD BANK GROUP ENGAGEMENT 

Transform ing World Bank Group Engagement in the Pacific R eg ion 

18. 
The Bank G roup’s engagement w ith the Pacific Island countries reflects the fact that their 
development tra jectories w ill be shaped – more than perhaps any o ther na tions in the world – by their 
economic geography.  The Bank’s Pacif ic island member countr ies
 have a popu lation of about 2 million 
peop le, spread across hundreds of islands, and scattered across an area equ ivalen t to 15 percen t of the globe’s 
surface.  G iven their fragility and geograph ic iso lat ion, sustained developmen t progress will requ ire long- term 
cooperation by in ternational par tners.  The realit y for most Pacif ic coun tr ie s is that aid will no t be a 
transit ional phenomenon .  Even where po licy environmen ts are strong, continued external assistance is like ly 
to be needed to support serv ice delivery.  More broad ly , greater economic in tegration , more equ itab le natural 
resource agreemen ts, and more open labor markets in metropolitan neighbors will also be vital for the longer -
term fu ture of the Pacif ic Islands.     

1

19. 
The World Bank G roup is in the process of sca ling up its engagement w ith the Pacific Island 
countries as part of a renewed longer-term commitment.  Both IDA and IFC are sign if ican tly increasing 
engagemen t.  As well as scalin g up in more “trad itional” clien ts, the Bank is p lacing par ticu lar emphasis on 
deepen ing engagemen t with “non- trad itional” clien ts, such as K ir ibati.  Ref le cting the sim ilar challenges 
faced by many is land coun tr ies, Wor ld Bank G roup engagemen t across the Pacif ic has been tightly focused 
around the overarch ing ob jectives of: ( i) streng then ing reg ional/g lobal in tegration; ( ii) bu ild ing resilience to 
economic shocks, natural d isasters and climate change; and ( iii) encourag ing economic reform and pr ivate 
sector developmen t.  At the same time, the way these themes are operationaliz ed will obv iously depend on 
d iffer ing country circumstances, and th is is the purpose of indiv idual CAS s now being prepared . 

1  Fij i, K iribat i, Pa lau, Ma rsha ll Is lands, M ic rones ia, Samoa , So lomon Is lands, Tonga, Tuva lu and Vanuatu.   

6 

 
 
 
                                                            
           Figur e 4: World Bank Group Comm itm ents to the Pacific Islands FY01 – FY11 (est) 

$m

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

IFC

IDA + TF

FY01 FY02 FY03 FY04 FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11

20. 
The World Bank G roup is committed to the Ca irns Compact agreed by Pacific leaders to better use 
a ll resources available for development, and w ill work closely w ith clients and partners to improve 
development effectiveness.  This will be especially important as to tal aid from all dono rs to the Pacif ic is 
increasing substan tially.  Wh ile the Bank is scaling up, the value of our engagem en t is no t principally def ined 
in terms of the size of the lend ing program, bu t rather by the extent to wh ich the Bank can “bund le” its 
exper tise and f inancing, co llaborate with o ther developmen t par tners to transfer g lobal know ledge, build 
capacity, and encourage changes that will improve the lives of Pacif ic Is land citiz ens.    

Translating Pacific Themes to Kiribati 

21. 
Ref lecting the Governmen t’s developmen t prior ities, and consisten t with the un ifyin g themes of 
Wor ld Bank Group engagemen t in the Pacif ic is lands, engagemen t with K ir ibati will be focused on : 

• 

• 

Bu ild ing resilience against external shocks, with a par ticu lar focus in K ir ib ati on climate change 
adap tation ; and 

M itiga tin g economic iso lat ion by encouragin g regional and global in tegration. 

Building R esilience Aga inst Climate Change and Externa l Shocks 

22. 
The core focus of increasing World Bank G roup invo lvement w ith K iribati w ill be to support 
adapta tion measures tha t respond to Kiribati’s ex treme vulnerability to climate change and climate rela ted 
na tura l d isasters.  The poten tial effects of climate change in K ir ibati are par ticu lar ly eviden t in r isks to 
already limited supp lies of fresh water on South T arawa.  Manag ing groundwater reserves, sustain ing 
freshwater lenses, improvin g rainwater co llection, and develop ing new sources of water (either from 
desalination, treatment of water from contaminated lenses, or p iped f rom North T arawa) will be especially 
impor tant, although all have been tr ied previously with lim ited success.   

23. 
The Bank proposes to work closely w ith partners and the Government over to help coord ina te a 
comprehensive approach to clima te change adap ta tion on the main popula tion centre of South Tarawa.  
World Bank engagemen t in K ir ibati to date has been based around the K ir ibati Adap tation Project (KAP ) 
imp lemen ted by the Bank with f inancing from the G lobal Env ironmen t Facility and the Australian and N ew 
Zealand Governmen ts.  KAP is one of the f irst Bank programs to fu lly in tegrate climate adap tation in to 
developmen t p lann ing efforts.   

7 

 
 
 
 
24. 
The Bank proposes to a llocate the bulk of the IDA-16 resources ava ilable to K iriba ti toward a 
multi-donor clima te change adap ta tion investment, informed by coord ina ted ana lytica l work .  As well as 
IDA resources, we will also exp lore op tions to work with o ther partners to mob ilize gran t f inancing for any 
such investmen t, pa r ticu lar ly w ith sign if ican t add itional f inancing for Pacif ic Island coun tr ies an ticipated for 
climate change adaptation. The comp lex ity of the sector, the scope of the under tak ing, and the Bank’s 
relatively steep learn ing curve in K ir ibati will requ ire the bu ild ing of country knowledge and to develop a 
common understand ing of r isks and pr iorities w ith the Governmen t and partners.  The Australian Government 
has expressed strong in terest in suppor ting the Bank’s engagemen t in th is area. 

25. 
As well as streng thening resilience against climate change, the Bank w ill also be help ing to reduce 
K iribati’s vulnerability to externa l economic shocks, such as the food and fuel price sp ikes.  A proposed 
500kW gr id-connected so lar pho to-vo ltaic generator for Sou th Tarawa (f inanced by GEF with suppor t from 
Australia) will help d iversify electr icity generation and reduce reliance on d iesel, imports of wh ich are 
currently equ iva len t to 15% of GDP.  The Bank’s successfu l exper ience with the Tonga Energy Roadmap 
suggests that gains cou ld also be made f rom energy sector reform, includ ing open ing of the market to new 
pr ivate generation.  The Bank will also be supporting the Governmen t of K ir ibati’s ef forts to ensure the 
availab ility and af fordab ilit y of food on the outer is lands, where the popu lation has lim ited livelihood 
opportun ities and meager agricu ltural land. People liv ing on the outer islands already spend a h igh propor tion 
of their income on impor ted food, and were especially hard h it by steep bo th in food and transport costs.  A 
$2m grant from the G lobal Food Cr is is Response P rogram (GFRP) will help f inance the sh ipp ing of food 
from South Tarawa to the ou ter islands and the freigh t of selected agr icu ltural products f rom the outer islands 
to T arawa.  Assistance will also be provided from the G lobal Facility for D isas ter Reduction and Recovery 
(GFDRR). 

Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and R eg iona l Integration 

26. 
G iven Kiribati’s remoteness, basic infrastructure tha t connects the people of Kiribati to the outside 
world w ill be essential to encouraging grea ter g lobal and reg iona l integra tion, and to supporting increased 
levels of ex ternal assistance.  High pr iority transport sector investmen ts in tegrating climate change adaptation 
p lanning will be star ted in parallel with ef forts to develop coord inated and more comprehensive mu lti-donor 
adap tation in terven tions.  IDA investmen ts in relative ly less comp lex areas will provide ba llast to the 
relationsh ip by bu ild ing Wor ld Bank coun try knowledge, as well as by increasing Governmen t familiar ity and 
understand ing of Bank systems and processes.  The Bank will co llabor ate w ith ADB to jo int ly co- f inance 
rehab ilitation of the main Sou th T arawa road, with support f rom Australia and NZ through PRIF.  Th is 
operation – the Governmen t’s immed iate prior ity – is being presen ted to the Board with th is CAS, and w ill be 
the f irst eve r IDA investment in K ir ibati.  Airpo rt rehab ilitation and safety measures will also be cr itical if air 
serv ices to the remo te K ir ibati arch ipelago – the key link w ith the ou tside wor ld – are to be main tained and 
ICAO standards met.  T he Bank proposes to work with the NZ Governmen t to co-f inance the rehab ilitation of 
K ir itimati airpo rt and road f rom the airpor t to town, as well to provide cr itical safety and navigat ion 
investmen ts at Bonrik i airport in T arawa, where Ch ina, T aiwan is f inancing runway rehab ilitation.  These 
sign if ican t “once in a generation” in frastructure investmen ts will be needed and will fu lly incorporate climate 
change adap tation measures into their design .  

27. 
Across the Pacific, the Bank G roup w ill work with clients and partners to help island states derive 
grea ter benefits from closer integration w ith the metropolitan countries in the reg ion and from stronger 
reg iona l coopera tion.  There are particu lar opportunities availab le to K ir ibati f rom reg ional cooperation in 
improv ing returns f rom sustainab le management of pelag ic f ish stocks, temporary labor migration, and 
telecommun ications reform. 

28. 
A fisheries engagement stra tegy for the Pacific is being developed, fo llowing a request for support 
from the new ly estab lished Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA ) O ffice. In the past few years, the eigh t 
Pacif ic is land members of the PNA – wh ich co llective ly accoun t for abou t 40% of the wor ld’s tuna stocks – 
have agreed on a wide range of measures to improve the management of the tuna resource and to increase 
8 

 
benef its for Pacif ic island coun tr ies.  T hese include: ( i) agreemen ts to cu t licensed f ish ing days by 30% in 
2011, ( ii) the closure of h igh seas pockets that prev iously comp licated the con tro l of f ish in g activ ities in the 
region ; improved vessel mon itor ing systems to reduce illega l, unregu lated and unrepor ted ( IUU) f ish ing, 
includ ing a goal of 100% observer coverage on all boats; and ( iii) pr eferent ia l cond itions for domestic vessels 
or those that comp ly with specif ic requ iremen ts for local crew and un load ing.  N evertheless, several tuna 
species remain under pressure and fur ther actions are likely to be requ ired.  In formu lating a f isher ies strategy, 
the Bank will work closely w ith the exist ing regional arch itectur e managin g f ish er ies in the Pacif ic, includ ing 
FFA and the Western Cen tral Pacif ic F isher ies Commiss ion (WCPFC), as well as with o ther donor par tners.  
It is an ticipated that Bank support will pr imar ily revolve around techn ical assistance to the PNA O ff ice to 
imp lemen t reform measures. 

29. 
The Bank w ill continue to work closely w ith Pacific island countries and partners to help expand 
opportunities for interna tiona l emp loyment.  Labor is one of the few viab le expor ts for many small and 
remo te island coun tr ies – bu t is subject to sign if ican t po licy bar r iers. New Zealand’s Recognized Seasonal 
Emp loymen t (RSE) scheme has prov ided over 9 ,000 Pacif ic is lande rs, includ ing over 150 from K ir ibati, with 
opportun ities to work up to n ine months in the horticu ltural industry, return ing home with sk ills and 
remittances averagin g $4,400 per worker (af ter deductions and liv ing expenses).  Although the number of 
K ir ibati nationals so far emp loyed under th is scheme is relative ly low, the Bank is cur ren tly workin g with the 
Governmen t to improve the competitiveness of K ir ibati workers, wh ich is constrained by the relatively h igh 
costs of trave l from K ir ibati compared with o ther labor sourcing countr ies in the Pacif ic.  As well as the 
immed iate f inancial returns, broader benef its have also f lowed back in to Pacif ic coun tr ies includ ing new 
found skills in agr icu lture, as well as computer literacy and English language skills.  T he World Bank will 
con tinue to work w ith regulatory agencies in both Australia and N ew Zealand to reduce the cost of 
remittances, to exp lore oppo r tun ities for return ing Pacif ic is lande rs to app ly their sk ills and estab lish 
businesses, and to encourage greater oppor tun ities for skilled migration.   

30. 
There is considerab le untapped po tentia l for K iriba ti to take advantage of opportunities for closer 
g loba l integra tion made possib le by the telecommunica tions revo lution.  The Wor ld Bank Group has p layed 
a sign if ican t ro le in encourag ing telecoms reform throughout the Pacif ic in recen t years.  Increased 
competition and the en try of new pr ivate sector operators have caused pr ices for mobile telephones in 
coun tr ies across the reg ion to fall dramatically, and access to telecoms serv ices to increase in some cases by a 
factor of ten.  T he World Bank is also help in g to strengthen independen t telecoms regulators, and is 
suppor ting the estab lishmen t of a Pacif ic Reg ional Telecommun ications Regu latory Resour ce Cen ter, with 
PRIF f inancing from Australia and NZ.  S imilar ly, IFC investmen ts of around $170m over the past three 
years have p layed a key ro le in encouraging over $500m in investments by new private sector telecoms 
operators.  Fo llowin g technical assistance from the Bank, the Governmen t of K ir ibati has ind icated its 
comm itmen t to open ing the telecoms marke t to competition in pa ralle l to effor ts for the state owned operator, 
TKSL, to form a non -exc lusive jo in t ven ture that wou ld increase its competitiveness.  Competition ho lds 
particu lar relevance for K ir ibati that curren tly has among the h ighest telecoms costs in the reg ion and very 
low mob ile phone usage rates.   

31. 
Structura l economic reform w ill be vita l if Pacific island countries are to participate more fully in 
g loba l grow th and to a ttract and benefit from priva te sector investment. As the World Bank Group develops 
cred ib ility , and as investmen ts start to prov ide an anchor for the relationsh ip and examp les of the benef its of 
reform, the World Bank an ticipates work ing with par tners in a more formally coord inated policy d ialogue that 
addresses economic and structural reform prior ities more substan tively.   T he Bank w ill work closely with the 
IMF in Ar ticle IV miss ions and will sim ilar ly par ticipate in fu ture PEFA assessmen ts, led by mu ltilateral 
partners.  At the regional leve l, there will be greater Bank engagemen t with the IMF’s Pacif ic F inancial 
techn ical Ass istance Cen ter (PFTAC).  T he Wor ld Bank is also one of the par tners supporting the Pacif ic 
Association of Supreme Audit Institu tions (PASAI), and th is will be one mechan ism to streng then oversight 
institu tion s in K ir ibati and throughout the reg ion . 

9 

 
 
Internationa l Finance Corporation (IFC ) 

32. 
IFC w ill p lay a key ro le in coord ina ted World Bank G roup efforts in K iribati to encourage new 
private investment, as well as to increase competition and private sector involvement in service delivery.  
Across the Pacif ic, IFC is sign if ican tly scaling up bo th investmen t and analytic al support.  IFC engagemen t 
has been in tegrated in th is jo in t CAS.  In par ticu lar, IFC is p lay ing an importan t ro le in streng then ing 
investmen t climate in coun tr ies across the Pacif ic, and will sim ilar ly scale up TA to K ir ibati to strengthen the 
business enab ling env ironmen t and to support specif ic PPP transactions or asset sales as the government 
moves to rationalize SOEs.  IFC has scope to provide f inancing for any new telecoms market entran t, as has 
been done successfu lly elsewhere in the region, and will explore o ther investmen t opportun ities.  As has been 
illustrated by the telecoms revo lu tion around the region, encouraging competition and pr ivate sector 
involvemen t in service delivery has been crucial in overcoming capacity constrain ts.  Ref lecting th is, a key 
elemen t of the Bank Group’s approach w ill be to encourag ing local pr ivate sector involvemen t throughou t the 
program, includ ing road main tenance, airport managemen t, and energy . 

Ma instream ing Gender 

33. 
G ender issues w ill be incorpora ted throughout the Bank program.  Gender ou tcomes in K ir ibati are 
mixed , with good representation of gir ls in schoo l and a strong legis lative framework, but relative ly h igh 
maternal mortalit y and low represen tation of women in the formal economy.  Bank activ ities are expected to 
be very tigh tly focused, with o ther donors lead ing in terventions specif ically targeting gender issues.  
Never theless, gender considerations will actively inform the imp lemen tation of the Bank’s program.  A focus 
on addressin g climate change adap tation and improving water supp ly in South T arawa, for instance, is 
an ticipated to resu lt in improvements in maternal and ch ild health.  S im ilar ly, research by the Pacif ic Institute 
for Pub lic Po licy
2 in Vanuatu shows a clear link between economic productiv ity and access to mob ile phones, 
with women successfu lly mak ing use of new opportun ities, and sim ilar outcomes are an ticipated in K ir ibati.     

Implementation: Partnerships, Selectiv ity , N ew Ways of Do ing Business, and A ccountability 

34. 
In sca ling up ana lytica l and financia l support for Kiribati, the World Bank G roup will be highly 
selective.  The proposed program w ill be closely focused on scaling up activ ities that have already been 
p ilo ted in K ir ibati – par ticu lar ly climate change adap tation – or on rep lic ating successfu l exper ience 
elsewhere in the Pacif ic.  Investmen ts will be carefu lly sequenced to bu ild a track record and strengthen the 
Bank’s coun try understand ing .  N ew investmen ts will be designed with simp lic ity in mind and to ref lect the 
capacity constrain ts in K ir ibati. 

35. 
Selectivity will be accompanied by close co llaboration with development partners which have a 
more ex tensive track record in K iriba ti.   The Bank in tends to work closely wit h o ther par tners on analy tica l 
work in K ir ibati to g ive substance to the Ca irns Compact agr eed at the Pacif ic Island Forum in Augu st 2009 
that aims to strengthen coord ination and make better use of all the resources availab le for developmen t, 
avoid ing dup lication and streng then ing synerg ies among donors.   

36. 
G iven ex tremely limited capacity in K iribati, as w ith many of the smaller island countries, 
develop ing leadership and institutions needed to manage change w ill require commitment to a long-term 
capacity enhancement effort tha t places emphasis on developing fiduciary oversight and on downstream 
imp lementation support.  Governments throughou t the Pacif ic con tinue to face sign if ican t challenges in 
recru iting and retain ing domestic exper tise.  Ref lecting weak public f inancia l management arrangemen ts in 
K ir ibati, all investmen ts will include strong f iduc iary and safeguards ove rsigh t and suppor t.  The Bank w ill 
try to be more n imb le in pro ject preparation, and g ive greater atten tion to downstream imp lemen tation 
suppor t.  Withou t lower ing f iduc iary or safeguards standards, we in tend to try to streamline and accelerate 
activity preparation, and to rebalance Bank engagemen t toward greater suppor t throughou t the project cycle.   

2 “Goi ng Mobi le: So ci al and Economi c Impa ct of Intr oduci ng Tel ecommu ni cati ons Throug h Vanuatu”, Decemb e r 2009 . 

10 

 
                                                            
37. 

Anticipated outcomes from World Bank G roup engagement are set out in the results ma trix in 

A ttachment 2 .  This w ill be revised as implementation proceeds, and will be updated in the CAS 
Progress Report . 

38. 
Supporting this grow ing engagement, the Bank G roup w ill open a jo int lia ison office w ith ADB in 
2011.  Th is ref lects the model in Samoa, Tonga, and V anuatu, where local professional lia ison off icers 
represent bo th institu tions in the f irst ADB /Wor ld Bank shared (rather than simp ly co- located) off ice s 
anywhere in the wor ld.  Th is presence has been instrumen tal in improv ing the Bank’s d ialogue w ith clien ts 
and encourag ing better cooperation with the ADB.   

Financing Terms and Sources 

39. 
The financing envelope for this CAS – includ ing both IDA and generous donor trust funds and 
co-financing – w ill be flex ib le and contingent on K iribati’s commitment to undertak ing structural 
reforms.  The base case scenar io from FY11 to FY14 will foresee the fu ll use of K ir ibati’s IDA allocation 
across the IDA 15 and IDA 16 per iods.  The CAS prov ides opportun ities for som e oppor tun istic reallocations 
to K ir ibati from elsewhere in the Pacif ic, although any such reallocation will requ ire a strong per formance to 
be justif ied.  In add ition, the Bank will look at ways to leverage its resources with other donors’ so as to offer 
a comprehensive and substantive program of assistance that can underp in the presen t strategy.  All proposed 
investmen ts are an ticipated to be co-f inanced with o ther par tners or supported by trust funds and other 
programs such as the G lobal Env ironmen t Facility (GEF) and the G lobal Food Cr is is Response program 
(GFRP ). Australia and N ew Zealand have been especially generous in supporting the World Bank G roup’s 
engagemen t in the Pacif ic, both through the Pacif ic Reg ional Infrastructure Facilit y (PRIF ), wh ich is 
designed to coord inate mu ltilateral b ilateral engagemen t in infrastructure, as well as on a b ilateral basis. 
Trust fund f inancing by donors cou ld potentia lly amount to almost as much as the Bank is ab le to make 
availab le through IDA.  D etails of the sour ce of f inancing ant ic ipated for ind ividual activit ies are set ou t 
be low. 
       Kir iba ti: Proposed IDA and T rus t Fund Opera tions (FY11 – FY14) 
Y ear 

IDA 

Cofinanced/ 
Trust Fund 

IDA -15 Period 
  K ir ibati C limate Change Adap tation (KAP-3) 
  Food Pr ice Cr is is Response 
  Transport (Road Main tenance) 
IDA -16 Period 
  Airpo rt Safety and Rehab ilitation 
  Tarawa Renewab le Energy 
  Telecoms Liberalization Support 
  C limate Change Adaptation/ Water 

FY11 
FY11 
FY11 

FY12 
FY12 
FY12 
FY13 

GEF /Aust/NZ 
GFRP 
ADB/PRIF 3 

NZ 
GEF /PRIF 
PRIF 
Australia 

 

 

 
 

40. 
IDA resources w ill be provided on 100% grant terms.  Wh ile K ir ibati has ve ry limited external deb t, 
its capacity to take on new deb t – even on concessional terms – is extremely constrained.  Th is ref lects 
K ir ibati’s lim ited growth prospects, and the po ten tial for the RERF to be dep leted.  A jo in t IMF-Wor ld Bank 
deb t sustainab ilit y analysis has concluded that if the proposed Wor ld Bank program were to be prov ided as 
concessional cred its, K ir ibati wou ld be at a h igh r isk of debt d istress.  The provis ion of gran ts is 
consequently consisten t with IDA’s debt sustainab ility framework. 

3  PR IF fin an cin g is pro vided b y Au stralia and NZ. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
41. 
A selective program of World Bank G roup ana lytica l work is proposed in sectors where the Bank 
is sca ling up engagement and in co llabora tion w ith analysis being undertaken by other partners.  
Analy tical work and techn ical assistance an ticipated during the f irst par t of the CAS per iod is set out below. 

Kiriba ti: Proposed Ana lytical Work and Techn ica l Ass istance FY11 – FY14 

FY11 
     Tel ecoms: Regul atory Su pport and Tran sact ion Ad vice for Ma rket Libe ral izat ion 
     Cl ima te Ch an ge Adapt ation/ Wat er Maste rplan fo r South Tarawa 
     Part icipat ion in 2010 IMF Article IV; Debt Su st a in ab ilit y Assessment 
     (Re gional ) F ishe ries E n ga gement Strat egy : Sup port to th e PNA Secreta riat  
FY12 
     Impo rt Levy Fund Re fo rm Option s Stud y 
     IFC Bu siness En ablin g En vironment TA 
     Part icipat ion in Pu blic E xpen ditu re and F in an c ial Account ab ilit y Assessment 

IV . 

R ISKS 

42. 
R isks to the proposed sca ling up in Bank G roup engagement in Kiribati are high.  Th is ref lects the 
Bank Group’s lim ited engagemen t to date, domestic capacity constrain ts and PFM weaknesses affecting 
developmen t ou tcomes, and the d iff icu lties in secur ing po litica l consensus for reform. R isks are magn if ied 
by the Bank’s lim ited country know ledge.  Never theless, th is strategy has the strong support of the 
Governmen t of K ir ibati, and of a broad range of civ il society organ izations in K ir ibati with wh ich it has been 
d iscussed. 

43. 
M itiga ting these risks will requ ire a new way of do ing business where the Bank draws on the 
exper ience of long-stand ing developmen t par tners.  A tightly focused and sequenced program of activ ities 
will g ive pr ior ity to investmen ts tha t can be co-f inanced w ith partners w ith a longer- track record in K ir ibati.  
R isks w ill also be managed through simp lic ity of design, a greater focus on downstream imp lemen tation 
suppor t, a willingness to restructure activ ities as needed.  Ensur ing adequate procurement and f iduciary 
suppo r t will be vital.  Downstream imp lemen tation support will be fur ther streng thened by the estab lishmen t 
of a jo in t lia ison off ice in K ir ibati expected to provide a basis on wh ich to bu ild more regu lar d ialogue and a 
nuanced coun try understand ing.   

44. 
G iven the d ifficulties of susta ining reform momentum in K iriba ti, new activities w ill be 
imp lemented in a sequenced way and linked to areas where there is clear reform momentum.  D ecision s 
on new investmen ts in the second par t of the CAS per iod will be dependen t on exper ience with in itial 
in terven tions and an assessmen t of how best to support reform efforts by the Governmen t.  The 
Governmen t’s expressed strong suppor t for the program outlined in th is CAS will be cr itical in ensur ing 
ef fective imp lemen tation. 

12 

 
 
 
  
13 

Attachment 1: Kiribati and Pacific Island Countries: MDG Progress 

Ki ribati

Fi j i

PNG

Solomon Islands

Vanuatu

Samoa

Tonga

FSM

Palau

RMI

MDG 1.  Eradicate extreme 
poverty and hunger

Ha l ve between 1990 a nd 2015 the 
propor ti on of peopl e whos e i ncome i s 
l es s tha n $1 per da y.

MDG 2.  Achieve universal 
primary education
MDG 3.  Promote gender equality 
and empowerment

On tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

Off tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

On tra ck

On tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

On tra ck

Of concern

El imi na te gender di s pa r i ti es i n 
pr ima ry a nd s econda ry educa ti on

MDG 4.  Reduce child (Under 5) 
mortality by two thirds
MDG 5. Improve maternal health

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

Off tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

On tra ck

On tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

On tra ck

On tra ck

Reduce ma terna l mor ta l i ty by three 
qua r ters

MDG 6. Reverse the spread of 
HIV/AIDS, malaraia and TB
MDG 7. Ensure environmental 
sustainability

Off tra ck

Off tra ck

Off tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

On tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

On tra ck

On tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

I ntegra te pr i nc i pl es of s us ta i na bl e 
devel opment i nto country pol i c i es

Average Annual GDP Growth 2000-
2009

1.1

0.7

2.9

1.6

3.2

3.5

1.1

-0.1

0.9

1.9

World Bank IDA Country 
Performance Rating 2009

3.0

N/A

3.1

2.6

3.3

4.0

3.5

2.8

N/A

2.8

Source: 2010 MDG Tracking Report, Pacif ic Islands Forum Secretariat

On tra ck

On tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

Off tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

On tra ck educa ti on 
equa l i ty, off tra ck 
empowerment

On tra ck educa ti on 
equa l i ty, off tra ck 
empowerment

On tra ck

On tra ck

Off tra ck

On tra ck

On tra ck educa ti on 
equa l i ty, off tra ck 
empowerment

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

Off tra ck

Me lanesia

Polynesia

Micronesia

Low food pover ty, 
but off tra ck to 
ha l ve ba s i c needs 
pover ty

Low food pover ty, 
but off tra ck to 
ha l ve ba s i c needs 
pover ty

Low food pover ty, 
but off tra ck to 
ha l ve ba s i c needs 
pover ty

Low food pover ty, 
but off tra ck to 
ha l ve ba s i c needs 
pover ty

Low food pover ty, 
but off tra ck to 
ha l ve ba s i c needs 
pover ty

On tra ck educa ti on 
equa l i ty, off tra ck 
empowerment

Low food pover ty, but off 
tra ck to ha l ve ba s i c 
needs pover ty

Off tra ck

Off tra ck

Low food pover ty, 
but off tra ck to 
ha l ve ba s i c needs 
pover ty

Off tra ck

Off tra ck

Off tra ck

On tra ck

Sl i ghtl y off tra ck

Of concern

Low food pover ty, 
but off tra ck to 
ha l ve ba s i c needs 
pover ty

Off tra ck

On tra ck

On tra ck educa ti on 
equa l i ty, off tra ck 
empowerment

On tra ck

Low food pover ty, 
but off tra ck to 
ha l ve ba s i c needs 
pover ty

On tra ck educa ti on 
equa l i ty, off tra ck 
empowerment

On tra ck

Of concern

 
 
 
 
Mi l lennium Deve lopment Goals

Kiribati

Wi th selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and  2015

(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)  

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
   Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)   
   Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)   
   Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)  
   Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)   

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
   Primary school enrollment (net, %)
   Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)   
   Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)   
   Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
   Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)   
   Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)   
   Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)   

Goal 4: 
reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
   Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)   
   Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   
   Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

Goal 5: 
reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
   Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)   
   Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)   
   Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)   

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
   Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)   
   Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)   
   Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
   Access to an improved water source (% of population)
   Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
   Forest area (% of total land area)   
   Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)
   CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)   
   GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)   

Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development   
   Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)   
   Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
   Internet users (per 100 people)   
   Personal computers (per 100 people)   

Kiribati

1995
..
..
..
..

1990
..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
0

88
65
75

..
..
..

..
513
18

48
22
2.5
..
0.3
..

1.7
0.0
0.0
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
0

77
57
47

..
72
..

..
464
92

54
25
..
..
0.3
..

2.6
0.0
..
..

2000

2008

..
..
..
..

97
99
99
..

122
37
5

70
52
80

..
89
21

..
420
71

62
30
2.5
..
0.4
..

4.0
0.4
1.8
1.0

..
..
..
..

..
125
87
..

107
..
4

64
47
61

..
..
..

..
372
97

65
33
2.5
55.0
0.3
..

4.1
1.0
2.1
1.1

Edu cation ind icato rs (%)

M easles immun i z ation (% o f 1-year 
o ld s)

ICT ind icato rs (p er 100 p eop le)

150
125
100
75
50
25
0

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment rat io

Rat io of girls to boys in primary & secondary 
educat ion

100

75

50

25

0

10

0

1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Kiribat i

East Asia & Pacif ic

F ixed + mobile subscr ibers

Internet users

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  .. indicates data are not available.

1/14/11

14 

 
Medium-term 
Country Goals 

Key Issues 

CAS Outcomes 
Expected (FY11 – FY14) 

Milestones   

WBG Instruments and 
International Partners  

Attachment 2: Kiribati Results Matrix 

Strategic Area I: Building Resilience Against Climate Change and External Shocks 

Improved resilience to 
climate change and 
natural disasters 

• Kiribati highly vulnerable to 
natural disasters and climate 
change 
• Fresh water lens already 
stressed and access to water 
will become more limited 
• Limited freshwater a major 
source of disease 

• Improved coastal resilience 
• Strengthened water resources 
and management with greater 
access to clean water 
(baseline:48% of the 
population with access to clean 
water) 
• Greater integrated capacity to 
manage DRR and CCA issues 

Improved capacity to 
transport food to 
remote ou ter islands 

Reducing reliance on 
price volatile imported 
fuel and increase 
affordability of energy 

• Outer islands’ population 
heavily reliant on imported 
food with very high transport 
cos ts 
• Import Levy Fund (ILF) largely 
exhausted 
• Kiribati i s reliant on imported 
petroleum products for 75% of 
energy generation 
• Imported fuel accounts for 15% 
of GDP  
• Over 80% of the population of 
South Tarawa has access to 
grid, but prices high (peak of 
over $0.50/ kWh in 2008) 

• ILF reforms ensure more 
sustainable and efficient 
approach to subsidizing 
transport of food to outer 
islands 

• Improve petroleum supply 
chain to reduce price and 
volatility of energy supply 
• Increase renewable energy to 
5% of grid supplied power by 
2014 
• Direct reduction of GHG 
emissions of 10 ktCO2 over 20 
years 

15 

• Comprehensive strategy 
developed and under 
implementation to address 
CCA/ water issues on South 
Tarawa  
• Shoreline protection 
completed at key sites in 
South Tarawa and mangrove 
replanting on 5 outer islands 
• Rainwater harvesting systems 
in place in Banaba island and 
5 s ites in South Tarawa, 
including Tungaru hospital 
• Rainwater run-off from South 
Tarawa road replenishing 
water lens 
• Expansion of groundwater 
abstraction in Tarawa 
• Recapitalization of Import 
Levy Fund 

• 500 kW on-grid solar PV 
generation capacity to be 
introduced 

AAA/TA: Regiona l DRR/CAA 
risk analysis; South Tarawa 
climate change adaptation and 
water masterplan (2012) 
Operations:  Kiribati Adaptation 
Project 2 and 3 (2006 and 2011); 
Coordinated multi-donor, multi-
sector climate change adaptation 
investment (2013);  
Donor Partners: ADB, Australia, 
NZ, PRIF/PIAC. GFDRR 

AAA/TA:  Review of options to 
strengthen sustainability of ILF 
(FY12) 
Operations: GFRP food price 
crisis response grant (FY11) 

AAA/TA: Energy sector analysis 
(FY12) 
Operations:  South Tarawa solar 
energy (FY12) 
Donor Partners: Australia, New 
Zealand, GEF, Japan (Tarawa 
grid), EC (outer islands off-grid 
PV systems) 

 
 
 
Strategic Area II:   Overcoming Isolation and Generating Opportunities from Greater Global and Regional Integration 
Medium-term 
Key Issues 
CAS Outcomes 
Milestones   
Country Goals 
Expected (FY11 – FY14) 

Improve transport 
infrastructure for 
remote populations 
and provide 
countercyclical 
employm ent 
opportunities 

Improved access to 
telecommunications 
services to provide 
opportunities for 
growth 

Greater opportunities 
for Kiribati 
temporary labor 
migration 

• South Tarawa road has failed 
• Air transport critical for remote 
communities, but safety 
concerns risks stoppage of 
flights (as has already occurred 
At Tarawa for 2 weeks and 
Kiritimati island for 12 months 
in 2009) 
• Unemployment and 
underemployment increasing as 
a result of global economic 
slowdown 
• Telecoms services provided by 
monopoly state owned TSKL 
• Mobile penetration is less than 
10% of the population 
• High cost telecoms ($20 
monthly rental charge with 30c 
per minute mobile to mobile on 
South Tarawa up to $1.30 per 
minute from South Tarawa to 
Kiritimati island) 
• 150 Kiribati workers currently 
participate per year in NZ RSE 
scheme 
• Each worker on average returns 
with $4,000 

• Functioning road system on 
South Tarawa, with continuing 
maintenance undertaken by 
domestic private sector 
cont ractors 
• Bonriki and Cassidy airports 
moving from non-compliant to 
compliant with ICAO 
standards 
• Temporary employment of 
1,000 person months on road 
construction 
• Mobile penetration to increase 
to 40% by 2014 
• Reduced price for telecoms 
services 
• Regulatory environment that 
allows competition with equal 
access by all market players 

• 31 km of roads rehabilitated 
• Agreed plan for reform of 
road sector management and 
financing under 
implementation 
• Navigation and safety aids 
installed at Bonriki and 
Cassidy airports 
• Civil aviation masterplan 
agreed and under 
implementation 

• Second telecoms license 
granted to allow new private 
sector market participant 
(2012) 
• Transparent CSO for outer 
islands services 

WBG Instruments and 
International Partners 

Operations:  South Tarawa Road 
Rehabilitation (FY11) and 
Kiribati Aviation Infrastructure 
Investment (FY11) 
Donor Partners: ADB; Australia; 
Taiwan, China; New Zealand  

AAA/ TA: Telecoms TA (2011) 
Operations:  Telecoms reform 
investment (FY12) 
Donor Partners: IFC, Australia 

• Increase in Kiribati workers 
participating in temporary labor 
migration schemes in Australia 
and NZ, with higher returns per 
worker as efficiency increases 

• WB and Government to 
improve the competitiveness 
of Kiribati workers in RSE 
scheme 

AAA:  Trade facilitation TA 
(FY12) 

16 

 
 
 
17 

Kiribati at a glance

1/14/11

East
Asia &
Pacific

Lower
middle
income

Key Development Indicators

Kiribati

(2009)

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

0.10
0.8
1.6
44

1,930
16,299
0.7
44

3,767
31,923
1.2
40

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

0.2
1,820
3,350

5,283
2,738
5,596

7,709
2,046
4,481

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

-0.7
-2.2

8.5
7.7

7.5
6.3

(most recent estimate, 2003–2009)

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

..
..
..
47
..

17
39
72
22
12

..
..
68
44
25

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

..
..
112
114

96
90
111
112

87
73
109
105

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

65
33

88
59

86
50

Net Aid Flows

1980

1990

2000

2009 a

(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2008):
   Australia
   Japan
   European Commission

19

20

18

27

3
2
0

4
9
1

5
8
1

8
8
6

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

50.1
329

41.9
287

16.2
211

13.6
277

Long-Term Economic Trends

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

5.5
15.8

3.8
-4.7

0.4
0.3

8.8
4.6

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

0.9
..

1.3
..

1.7
..

1.3
..

1980–90 1990–2000
2000–09
      (average annual growth %)
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.5
3.9
1.3

Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

0.1
28

0.1
28
  (% of GDP)
18.6
7.6
1.2
73.8

0.1
68

0.1
128

Agriculture
Industry
   Manufacturing
Services

20.7
9.0
2.1
70.2

22.5
11.8
5.0
65.7

28.6
9.5
6.2
61.8

-2.3
-3.9
-10.7
0.1

-3.2
6.8
1.9
5.5

2.2
-2.3
4.4
2.6

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation 

94.5
59.2
33.1

89.6
52.8
93.1

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

23.4
110.2
..

11.6
147.2
..

6.9
46.8
..

9.4
76.5
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2009 data are preliminary.  .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2008.

0

0

0

1

1

1

0-4

15…

30…

45…

60…

75…

percent of total population

Ag e d istr ibu tion , 2008

Male ( ..)

Female ( ..)

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1990

1995

2000

2007

Kiribat i

East Asia & Pacif ic

Und er -5 mo r tal i ty rate (p er 1,000)

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8

95

05

GDP

GDP per capita

Growth o f GDP and GDP p er cap i ta (%)

 
 
 
 
18 

Kiribati

Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2009

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

4
40
-47

4
60
-81

Current account balance
   as a % of GDP

6
9.2

-4
-2.8

Workers' remittances and
   compensation of employees (receipts)

7

9

Reserves, including gold

0

0

Central Government Finance

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)
   Tax revenue
Current expenditure

71.0
..
48.1

98.2
..
53.9

Technology and Infrastructure

2000

2008

Overall surplus/deficit

-1.4

-12.4

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
   subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
   (% of manufactured exports)

..

..

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
   Individual
   Corporate

..
..

..
..

4

5

..

..

External Debt and Resource Flows

Environment

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

8
2
–

10
2
–

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of surface area)

46
2.5
..

46
2.5
55.0

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

11.1
3.0

7.7
2.5

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)

..
..

..
..

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

1
0

..
..

CO2 emissions per capita (mt)

0.39

0.35

GDP per unit of energy use
   (2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)

..

..

 World Bank Group portfolio

2000

2009

 (US$ millions)

 IBRD
   Total debt outstanding and disbursed
   Disbursements
   Principal repayments
   Interest payments

0
0
0
0

–
–
–
–

 IDA
   Total debt outstanding and disbursed
   Disbursements
   Total debt service

0
0
0

–
–
–

Private Sector Development

2000

2009

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)

–
–
–

21
38.0
513

 IFC (fiscal year)
   Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
      of which IFC own account
   Disbursements for IFC own account
   Portfolio sales, prepayments and
      repayments for IFC own account

–
–
–

0
0
0

Ranked as a major constraint to business
   (% of managers surveyed who agreed)
      n.a.
      n.a.

2000

2009

–

0

..
..

..
..

 MIGA
   Gross exposure
   New guarantees

–
–

–
–

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

..
..

..
..

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  2009 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are not available.  – indicates observation is not applicable.

1/14/11

0

25

50

75

100

Control of cor ruption

Rule of law

Reg ulatory q ual i ty

Pol i tical s tabi l i ty

Voice and acco untabi l i ty

Country' s percenti le rank (0-100)

hi gher v al ues impl y better ratings

2009

2000

Go vern an ce ind icato rs, 2000 and 2009

Sourc e: Kaufmann-K raay -Mas truzzi , W orl d Bank

Mul ti - l ateral, 
10

Compo si tion o f to tal extern al d eb t, 2008

US$ m i l l ions

 
 
CAS Annex 4 - K iribati 
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 

As Of Date  
12.16.2010 

Indica tor 
Portfolio Assessment 
Numbe r o f Pro jects Unde r Implementation 

Average Implementat ion Pe riod (years) b 
Pe rc ent o f Problem Pro jects by Number a , 
c 
Pe rc ent o f Problem Pro jects by Amount a, c 
Pe rc ent o f Projects at R isk by Number a , d 
Pe rc ent o f Projects at R isk by Amount a, d 
Disbu rs ement R atio (% ) e 
Portfolio Managemen t 
CPPR du ring the yea r (y es/no ) 
Supe rvis ion R esourc es (total US$ ) 
Average Supervision (US$/project) 

2008 

1 

2.1 

100.0 
100.0 
100.0 
100.0 
32.3 

2009 

2010 

2011 

1 

3.1 

0.0 
0.0 
100.0 
100.0 
37.7 

1 

4.1 

1 

4.3 

0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
72.6 100.0 

Memorandum Item 

Proj Eval by OED by Numbe r 
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ mill ions ) 
% o f OED Projects Rated U or HU by 
Numbe r 
% o f OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt 

S ince FY 80 

0 
0 

0 
0 

Las t Five 
FYs 

0 
0 

0 
0 

a. As shown in the Annua l R epo rt on Po rt folio Pe r fo rmance (exc ept fo r c urrent FY). 
b. Ave rage age o f p rojects in the Bank's count ry po rtfo lio. 
c. Perc ent o f projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO ) and/o r imp lementation progress 
(IP). 
d. As de fined unde r the Po rt folio Improvement Program. 
e.  R atio o f dis bursements during the y ear to the undisbu rsed balance o f the Bank's po rtfol io at the  
     beginn ing o f the year: Investment p ro ject s only. 
*   All indic ators are for projects active in the Po rt folio, with the exc eption o f Dis bu rsement Rat io, 
    this includes al l act ive p ro jects as we ll as projects which exited du ring the fiscal year. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex 5 - Program Summary - Kiriba ti 

As Of 1 .31.2010 

                          Indica tive Program Inc luding IDA and Poten tia l Trus t Funds 

FY 

Project ID 

 2011  
 2011  
 2011  
 2012  
 2012  
 2013  
 2014  

Ki ribat i R oad Rehabil itation Project 
GEF Ki ribati Cl imate Adaptat ion 3 
Food Pric e C ris is R es pons e 
Ki ribat i A irport R ehab ilitation 
Ta rawa Sola r Energy 
Ki ribat i Telecommun ic ations Re fo rm 
Ki ribat i Cl imate C hange Adaptat ion 

US$ (M) 

 24.0 
 5.0 
 2.0 
10.0 – 15.0 
3.0 - 4.0 
3.0 - 5.0 
10.0 - 20.0 

Strateg ic 
Rewa rds b 
(H/M/L) 
M 
H 
M 
M 
M 
H 
H 

Imp lementation b  
Risks (H/M/L ) 

M 
L 
L 
M 
L 
L 
H 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CAS Annex 5 - 

Kir ibati

Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants)

As Of Date 16 De cem be r 2010

Closed Projects

0

IBRD/IDA *

Total Commitments

GEF

Total Commitments
Total Disbursed

 0.00

 1.80
 1.50

Active Projects

Project ID

P089326

Last PSR 
Supervision Rating

Or iginal Amount in US$ Millions

Difference 
Expected a
Disburse

Project Name

KI Adaptat ion Program 2

Development 
Objectives
MS

Implementation 
Progress
MS

Fiscal Year

2006

IBRD

IDA

GRANT

1.8

Cancel.

Undisb.

Or ig.

0.3

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TARAWA

Makin

Marakei

Maiana
Abemama
Aranuka
Nonouti

Nikunau
Onotoa
Tamana

Enderbury
Rawaki

Kanton

McKean

Birnie

Nikumaroro

Teraina

Tabuaeran
(Fanning I.)

Kiritimati
(Christmas I.)

Malden

Starbuck

Millenium

Vostok

Flint

Manra

Orona

Arorae

Tabiteuea

Beru

Banaba
(Ocean Island)

Butaritari

Abaiang

Kuria

Line Islands

Phoenix
Islands

Gilbert
Islands

Palmyra Atoll
(U.S.)

Kingman Reef (U.S.)

Cook Islands
(N.Z.)

Tokelau
(N.Z.)

American
Samoa
(U.S.)

Wallis and Futuna Islands
(France)

Jarvis I.
(U.S.)

Howland I. (U.S.)
Baker I. (U.S.)

T O N G A

K I R I B A T I

F I J I

VA N U AT U

SAMOA

S O L O M O N
I S L A N D S

T U VA L U

N

U
A

R

U

M A R S H A L L
I S L A N D S

PACIFIC OCEAN

M

a
d
n
o

y

a
d
n
u
S

y

I

e
n

t

r

a
n

i
t

a
n
o

l

D

e
a

t

L

i

e
n

10°N

0°

10°S

20°S

0°

20°S

170°E

170°E

170°W

160°W

180°

170°W

160°W

150°W

180°

KIRIBATI

0

200

0

100

200

300

400 Miles

400 Kilometers

I

B
R

D

3
3
4
2
7

F
E
B
R

U
A

R
Y
2
0
0
5

K I R I B AT I

NATIONAL CAPITAL

This map was produced by 
the Map Design Unit of The 
World Bank. The boundaries, 
colors, denominations and 
any other information shown 
on this map do not imply,  on 
the part of The World Bank 
Group, any judgment on the 
legal status  of any territory,  
or any endorsement or 
acceptance of such 
boundaries.

 
 
 
