d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of 
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No: 65702-ZM 

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION 

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

FOR THE 

REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA 

FOR THE PERIOD 2008-2012 

November 15, 2011 

Country Management Unit: AFCS3 
Africa Region 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their 
official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank Authorization. 

DATE OF CURRENT COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FISCAL YEAR BUDGET 
January 1 – December 31 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
As of June 30, 2011 
Currency Unit:  Zambian Kwacha (K) 
US$ 1 =  K4793  
K 1 = US$.000209  

Regional Vice President: 
Country Director: 
Task Team Leader: 
Contributors to the Report and Task Team: 

Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili 
Kundhavi Kadiresan 
Kapil Kapoor 
Alex Mwanakasale, Barbara Mwila Kazimbaya-Senkwe,   
Bobak Rezaian, Carla Bertoncino, Cecil Nundwe, Elvis 
Mtonga, Fenwick M. Chitalu, Gael Raballand, Indira J. 
Ekanayake, Jean-Michel G. Pavy, Julio E. Revilla, Jumbe 
Jeremiah Ngoma,  Justin Runji, Jutta Ursula Kern, 
Kanyuka Mumba,  Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares, Marcus 
J. Wishart. Monica Beuran,  Monique Vledder, Musonda  
Ronald Upenyu Mutasa, Rosemary Sunkutu, Patricia 
Palale, Pazhayannur K. Subramanian,  Samuel Munzele 
Maimbo, Sofia U. Bettencourt, Wedex Ilunga, W. Marie 
Sheppard, Yisgedullish Amde, Cathleen Sosopi. 

ii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

MTENR: Ministry of Tourism, Environment and 
Natural Resources 
NRFA: 
National Road Fund Agency 
NP: 
National Park 
OAG: 
Office of the Auditor General 
OASNTC: Open Africa South North Tourism 
Corridor 
Organization for Economic Co-operation 
and Development 
Operational Procurement Review 
Committee 

OECD: 

OPRC: 

OVC: 
PAF: 
PEFA: 

DFID: 
DTIS: 
ECZ: 
EDRP: 
EITI: 

AAA:  
ABB: 
ADSP: 
CAS: 
CDT: 
CEMP: 

EMGCI: 
ESW: 
EU: 
FNDP: 
FSP: 
GDLN: 
GDP: 
GEF: 
GTZ: 
HIPC: 
HR: 
IAES: 

Analytical and Advisory Activities 
Activity Based Budgeting 
Agricultural Development Support Program 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Cotton Development Trust 
Consolidated Environmental  Management 
Plans 
CPs: 
Cooperating Partners 
DANIDA: Danish International Development Agency 
Development 
Department for International  Development 
Diagnostic Trade Integration Study 
Environmental Council of Zambia 
Emergency Drought Recovery Project 
Extractive Industries Transparency 
Initiative 
Economic Management and Growth  Credit 
Economic and Sector Work 
European Union 
Fifth National Development Plan 
Fertilizer Support Program 
Global Development Learning Network 
Growth Domestic Product 
Global Environment Facility 
German Technical Cooperation 
Highly Indebted Poor Countries 
Human Resource 
Increased Access to Electricity  
Servicies 
Investment Climate Assessment  
Implementation Completion Report 
International Development Association 
International Fund for Agricultural 
Development 
International Finance Corporation 
Integrated Financial Management Information 
Systems 
IMF: 
International Monetary Fund 
IRS: 
Indoor Residual Spraying 
ISR: 
Implementation Status Report 
JASZ:  
Joint Assistance Strategy for Zambia 
JICA: 
Japan International Cooperation Agency 
LCMS: 
Living Conditions Monitoring Survey 
LWSC : 
Lusaka Water and Sewerage Company  
MACEPA: Malaria Control and Evaluation Partnerships 
in Africa 
MDGs: 
Millennium Development Goals 
MDRI: 
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative 
MDTF: 
Multi Donor Trust Fund 
MIGA: 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
MoE: 
Ministry of Education 
MoFNP: Ministry of Finance and National  
Planning 
Memorandum of Understanding 
Medium Term Expenditure Framework 

ICA: 
ICR: 
IDA: 
IFAD:  

IFC: 
IFMIS: 

MoU: 
MTEF: 

Orphans and Vulnerable Children 

PPI AF: 

PER: 
PFM: 
PMEC: 

Performance Assessment Framework 
Public Expenditure and Financial 
Accountability Assessment 
PEMFAR: Public Expenditure Management & 
Financial Accountability Review 
Public Expenditure Review 
Public Financial Management 
Payroll Management and Establishment 
Control 
Public Private Infrastructure Advisory 
Fund  
PSPF: 
Public Service Pension Fund 
PVA: 
Poverty & Vulnerability Assessment 
RDA: 
Road Development Agency 
ROADSIP: Road Sector Investment Program 
RSZ: 
Railway Systems of Zambia  
SAG: 
Sector Advisory Groups 
SEED: 
Support for Economic Expansion and 
Diversification 
Swedish International Development 
Agency 
State owned enterprises 
SOE: 
SNDP 
Sixth National Development Plan 
SWAP: 
Sector Wide Approach 
TEVET: 
Technical Education Vocational  
TF: 
Trust Fund 
USAID: 
United States Agency for International  
WB: 
World Bank 
WSPIP:   Water Sector Performance 
Improvement Project  
WWF: 
World Wildlife Fund for Nature 
ZANACO: Zambia National Commercial Bank 
ZANARA: Zambia National Response to 
HIV/AIDS 
Zambia Wildlife Authority 
Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines 
Zambia Electricity Supply Corporation 
Zambia National Tender Board 
Zambia Privatization Agency 

SIDA: 

ZAWA: 
ZCCM: 
ZESCO: 
ZNTB: 
ZPA: 
ZPPA:  
ZRA: 
ZRL: 

Zambia Public Procurement Authority  

Zambia Revenue Authority 
Zambia Railways 

iii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

I. 
II. 

INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................. 1 
PROGRESS TOWARDS CAS OUTCOMES .................................................................... 2 
A. Block I: Macroeconomic and Expenditure Management ......................................... 2 
B. 
Block II: Institutional Capacity Enhancement .......................................................... 3 
C. 
Block III: Infrastructure Development...................................................................... 4 
D. Block IV: Social Sector Development ...................................................................... 6 
CHALLENGES GOING FORWARD ............................................................................... 7 
ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CAS PROGRAM ................................................................... 8 
IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES AND PARTNERSHIPS ................................................. 10 
A. 
Implementation Issues ............................................................................................ 10 
B. 
Partnerships ............................................................................................................. 11 
VI. 
IFC, MIGA and WBI ........................................................................................................ 12 
VII. RISKS AND MITIGATION............................................................................................. 14 

III. 
IV. 
V. 

Annexes 

Annex Table 1: Zambia: Key Macroeconomic Results during CAS Period ................................ 16 
Annex Table 2: Zambia: Social Sector Results During the CAS Period ...................................... 17 
Annex Table 3: CAS Progress Report – Results Framework ....................................................... 18 
Annex Table 4: Updated and Revised CAS Indicators ................................................................. 28 
Annex Table 5:  Comparison of Indicative and Actual Bank Program (Lending and Non 
Lending) ........................................................................................................................................ 30 
Annex Table 6: Global Programs and Bilateral Grants Under Implementation ........................... 31 
As of October 12, 2011 ................................................................................................................. 33 
As of October 2011 ....................................................................................................................... 34 
Annex Table 9B:  IFC Held and Disbursed Portfolio ................................................................... 35 
Annex Table 10: Zambia at a Glance ........................................................................................... 36 
Annex Table 11:  Map of Zambia ................................................................................................. 39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
This Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report (CASPR) assesses the implementation of 
the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Zambia1. The FY2008-11 CAS is being 
implemented through a multi-sectoral program of assistance, which is closely aligned with the 
government‟s development objectives identified in Zambia‟s Fifth National Development Plan (FNDP) , 
which covered the period 2006-10 and the Sixth National Development Plan (SNDP), which was 
launched by Government in February 2011 and covers the period 2011-15. To ensure consistency with 
Government‟s development objectives, the FY2008-11 CAS was organized around four overlapping 
areas: (i) macroeconomic and expenditure management; (ii) institutional capacity enhancement; (iii) 
infrastructure development; and (iv) social sector development. Supporting good governance is a theme 
that runs across the CAS, with extensive political economy diagnostics informing the Bank‟s dialogue 
with the authorities and governance related initiatives mainstreamed across the Bank‟s entire portfolio in 
the country. Within the broader program of support, the CAS gives special emphasis to two areas: 
improved transparency and management of fiscal resources, with particular emphasis on revenues 
mobilized from the copper sector; and increased competitiveness, both through reforms in the policy 
environment and targeted investments to bridge the infrastructure gap in order to increase employment 
opportunities for the population through improved connectivity and integration. 

2. 
This CAS Progress Report was prepared at a time when Zambia was getting ready for 
national elections, which has since taken place on September 20, 2011, with the opposition Patriotic 
Front (PF) leader, Mr Michael Sata, winning the  presidential election, after 20 years of rule by the 
Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD). Therefore, it provides an occasion to anticipate 
opportunities in the post election period to define a new path forward, that will result in a step change in 
the Bank‟s engagement with Zambia, especially since its GNI per capita has reached US$1,070 and the 
country has just joined the ranks of lower middle-income economies. With its emphasis on helping 
Zambia improve competitiveness, the mainstreaming of the governance agenda and the innovative use of 
political economy diagnostics to facilitate policy change, the FY2008-11 Zambia CAS anticipated many 
elements of the World Bank‟s new Africa Strategy, as was discussed by the Board on March, 1, 20112. 

3. 
The CAS Progress Report is also prepared at a time when the external environment 
confronting Zambia is favorable. The international price of copper, Zambia‟s main export, remains high 
and, with the right mining tax regime and tax administration, can provide the country with vital financial 
resources to address its infrastructure deficit. Moreover, the rapid global increase in food prices presents a 
unique opportunity for Zambia to take advantage of its assets, in particular the abundance of fertile land, 
vast water resources, and a long history of political stability, to significantly accelerate the pace at which 
it creates jobs and prosperity for its citizens, especially those in rural areas that have not benefited 
sufficiently from recent economic growth, as discussed below.   

4. 
This CASPR reports on progress toward CAS outcomes, identifies challenges and updates the 
risk framework. It recommends extending the current CAS period to the end of calendar year 2012, 
which should pave the way for engaging the next Government and other stakeholders in the 
preparation of a new CAS. It concludes that while the objectives of the CAS, and indeed the strategy 

1 Implementation of the Bank‟s program was impacted by the death of President Mwanawasa in FY09 and the period of national 
elections that followed, resulting in several tasks, especially lending operations, slipping into the following year and havi ng a 
cascading effect. As a result, the mid-term evaluation of the CAS was also deferred.  

2 Africa‟s Future and the World Bank‟s Support to it. World Bank, March 2011 .  

1 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
itself, remain relevant and consistent with Government‟s development priorities, policies that presently 
limit Zambia‟s competitiveness, widen the rural-urban divide, and hence the ability of the economy to 
create much needed productive employment, should take center stage in the Bank‟s dialogue with the 
authorities and become the focus of a more ambitious World Bank supported program in the future. 

II. 

PROGRESS TOWARDS CAS OUTCOMES 

5. While many challenges remain, notably the continued high rates of poverty notwithstanding 
good growth outcomes, and are discussed in Section III, progress towards CAS outcomes has 
generally been encouraging. There have been improvements in the overall macroeconomic environment 
as well as in some sectoral policies, which have contributed to Zambia‟s improved ranking in the 2011 
Doing Business indicators. The Results Matrix (Annex Table 3) provides a detailed assessment of 
progress made to date towards the achievement of CAS outcomes and milestones. The fol lowing sections 
summarize progress made across the four major CAS building blocks. 

A. 

Block I: Macroeconomic and Expenditure Management 

6. 
The CAS outcome for this component states that over the CAS per iod, the macroeconomic 
environment and expenditure management will be stable and support the growth and 
diversification of the economy.  Zambia indeed  has enjoyed a period of rapid economic growth during 
the CAS period, and has just moved from a „low income‟ country category to a 'lower middle income‟ 
country category, with a GNI per capita of US$1,070 for Calendar Year 2010 data3.   Zambia‟s economic 
growth, which averaged 5 percent annually since 2000, picked up pace and grew in excess of 6 percent 
annually during the past three years, a remarkable achievemen t especially in light of the global financial 
crisis. Revised estimates indicate that the economy grew by 7.6 percent in 2010, driven by high 
international copper prices, a bumper maize harvest, and a boom in the construction sector and is 
expected to sustain the same level in 2011.   

7. 
Inflation has fallen to single digits.  After a peak level of about 16.6 percent at the end of 2008, 
due to high food and fuel prices, inflation fell to 9.9 percent in 2009 and further to 7.9 percent in 
December 2010 (Annex Table 1). This downward trend is due in part to rapid reductions in food prices, 
following the bumper crop harvests in 2009 and 2010 (food price inflation went down to 4.4 percent in 
December 2010, from 8 percent in 2009 and 20.5 percent in 2008); and also due to the appreciation of the 
kwacha.  Inflation remained low in the 12-month period ending in August 2011 at 8.3 percent. 

8. 
Zambia’s external position has improved as the flexible exchange rate regime has allowed the 
economy to adjust to external shocks.  The flexible exchange rate has allowed currency values to 
mitigate sharp changes in copper prices, while enabling interventions in the domestic foreign -exchange 
market to address excess volatility. The current account deficit (including grants) is estimated to have 
narrowed to about 2 percent of GDP in 2010 from 3.2 percent in 2009, as a result of strong copper 
exports, thus keeping the trade balance in surplus for the last five years. International reserves increased 
from US$500 million - US$1 billion during 2005 - 2008, to more than US$2 billion in 2010, sufficient to 
finance about four months of imports. Public sector external debt remains moderate following extensive 
debt relief in 2005-2006 and stood at about 10 percent of GDP in 2010. Zambia was recently awarded a 
credit rating of B+ by Fitch and by Standard and Poor‟s on its long-term public external debt. This is four 
notches below investment-grade and similar to the ratings for Ghana, Kenya and Angola.   

3 Lower Middle Income Countries have GNI per capita of US$1,006- US$3,975 for Calendar Year 2010 data. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
9. 
Fiscal revenues, excluding grants, rose to 17.9 percent of GDP in 2010, up from 16 percent in 
2009, but down from 18.6 percent in 2008. Relative to GDP, collections of income and value added 
taxes are estimated to have increased in 2010 compared to the two previous years. Mining taxes have also 
risen to about 2.3 percent of GDP in 2010, up from only 1 percent in 2009, following the collection of tax 
arrears and an increase in tax collections from the mining sector. In order to improve macroeconomic 
management, Government has instilled greater fiscal discipline in expenditure management, adopted a 
Medium Term Expenditure Framework as the basis for forward looking and policy-based fiscal planning, 
and improved Parliamentary oversight of the budget through the establishment of the Public Accounts 
Committee, which is chaired by an opposition political party.  Audits of mining companies have started in 
order to ensure that mining companies pay what should be paid under existing legislation. The review of 
the legislation on public expenditure management is on track: the Public Procurement Act was enacted in 
2008, while the Accountants Act, the Loans Guarantees Act, and Public Finance Act are in draft form. 

10. The World Bank’s support over the CAS period has focused on helping Zambia better 
manage its financial resources in order to allow fiscal policy to support the inclusive growth 
agenda. The Bank‟s interventions have been channelled through annual budget support operations and 
have centred on harmonized policy dialogue around the Performance Assessment Framework (PAF) 
agreed with the government and cooperating partners (CPs). The interventions have focused on improving 
public sector performance, including public financial management, and supporting broad-based growth by 
improving efficiency in the energy sector and reducing cost of doing business.  In 2010, the Bank, 
working in close partnership with Government and other cooperating partners contributed to the ongoing 
macroeconomic dialogue and fiscal and financial management by preparing a comprehensive Public 
Expenditure Review (PER) covering a wide range of issues from resource mobilization, the effects of a 
growing mining sector, the budget process, public investment management, to sectoral issues dealing with 
the agriculture, roads and water sectors, and provided detailed policy recommendations to improve the 
quality and the effectiveness of public spending across sectors. 

B. 

Block II: Institutional Capacity Enhancement 

11. The CAS outcome for this component emphasizes the need for strengthened public 
management, improved business environment and agricultural productivity. There has been limited 
progress towards meeting these objectives. The World Bank is a lead donor for the multi-donor supported 
Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability (PEMFA) program. The program has had 
mixed results because the objectives of several components of the program have not been fully achieved 
and have been delivered later than envisaged. The program has facilitated the installation of the Integrated 
Financial Management Information Systems (IFMIS) in the Ministry of Finance and National Planning 
and in seven other Ministries/Departments. IFMIS coverage is intended to expand to 40 Government 
entities by 2013. The initial implementation of IFMIS was delayed significantly due to challenges which 
are now being addressed by the government such as poor implementation of a change management 
strategy, challenges in contract management with the supplier, and the constant staff changes at project 
management level. 

12. 
It is too early to determine the impact of these actions on Zambia’s PFM indicators. However, 
the results of the Public Expenditure Review show that significant weaknesses exist in budget preparation 
and execution: variances across individual budget heads continue to be significant (averaging 15 percent); 
the accessibility of budget information to the wider public remains limited; internal payroll controls need 
to be strengthened; and delays in updating personnel records and in implementing recommendations by 
the Auditor-General and PAC persist. Full implementation of IFMIS remains critical in order to process 
and produce timely financial information.               

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13. While a new Public Procurement Act was approved 
in October 2008, its actual 
implementation has been slow in taking off. There are lingering concerns about the ability of the 
Zambia Public Procurement Authority (ZPPA) to transform itself into a procurement regulator and a 
recent decision taken by Government further extends by two years the period over which such 
transformation will take place. Encouragingly, audit coverage has increased considerably and the Office 
of the Auditor General (OAG) is now present in all nine provinces and 36 (out of 72) districts and there is 
a minimum of one provincial officer per province in place. The percentage of entities covered by annual 
audit has increased significantly in recent years to about 80% in 2010. The OAG has emerged as a strong 
oversight institution, and besides the usual financial audits, the OAG has recently carried out 
performance, systems and forensic audits in the Ministry of Health and the Roads Development Agency. 

14. The World Bank is supporting a program to improve the governance and transparency of the 
natural resources.  To contribute to the conservation of biodiversity and tourism development , the Bank 
is assisting Zambia through a variety of instruments. The flagship program supports capacity building and 
infrastructure development in the Kafue National Park, which is one of the largest in the world and 
features a world-class wildlife tourism experience. While there are early indications of a recovery in 
wildlife and tourism revenues have increased, weak coordination between the Zambia Wildlife Authority 
(ZAWA) and the Ministry of Tourism, Environment, and Natural Resources (MTENR), insufficient 
budgetary allocations to the sector, and slow progress in addressing key policy constraints in the forest 
and in the wildlife sectors continue to impede progress in the sector.  

15. To improve transparency and accountability in the management of mining sector revenues, 
the Bank has supported the government with the implementation of the Extractive Industries 
Transparency Initiative (EITI). Zambia became an EITI candidate country in May 2009 and is working 
to become an EITI compliant country at the end of 2011. The Zambia EITI council comprising 15 
members drawn from government, mining companies and civil society was formed in 2009, supported by 
a secretariat. The first EITI Revenue Reconciliation Report was published in February 2011 and the EITI 
validation process is underway. The Bank has supported the development of a mining cadastre, which is 
operational, but full functionality and transparency, as well as supportive institutional arrangements, are 
still under development. The Bank is also supporting the revisions of the Mining and Minerals Act, which 
is expected to result in amendments after the elections. Both initiatives are supported by the Support to 
Economic Expansion Diversification (SEED) project. 

16. With support from both the Bank and IFC, there has been good progress towards improving 
the business environment. Zambia‟s Doing Business Rank improved from 116 in 2008 to 76 in 2011, 
with the country being recognized as among the top 10 reformers globally in 2011, reflecting improved 
business regulation in areas such as starting a business, trading across borders and enforcing contracts. In 
the financial sector, financial intermediation is on the rise, regulatory and supervisory frameworks have 
been strengthened considerably, financial sector infrastructure has improved, non-performing loans have 
fallen, and credit to private sector has increased. The Bank of Zambia, with technical support from the 
World Bank, completed the preparation of the second phase of the Financial Sector Development Plan 
(FSDP) II in early 2010. The FSDP II is both a vision statement and a comprehensive financial sector 
development strategy designed to address the current weaknesses of the financial system. FSDP II aims to 
improve the business environment by reducing the impediments of limited and costly access to finance, 
and is being supported by a consortium of donors.  

C. 

Block III: Infrastructure Development 

17. The CAS outcome for this component targeted improvements in roads, bridges, access to 
water, electricity services and irrigation systems. There has been progress in improving the transport 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure, but the road sector faces challenges with regard to governance issues.  Through the Road 
Rehabilitation and Maintenance Program (RRMP I) the Bank has financed several activities in the 
transport sector. Priority has been given to the construction/rehabilitation of all weather accessible river 
crossings following the floods in 2006-2007, which caused severe damage to river crossings throughout 
Zambia and negatively affected agricultural growth, reduced access to social services and markets by 
local communities, constrained access to National Parks, and reduced tourism. The Bank also provided 
analytical support by assisting the government in conducting a technical and financial review to address 
issues of capacity to monitor and manage the concession to Railway Systems of Zambia (RSZ). The final 
report was submitted in August 2010, with recommendations on the way forward, including a proposed 
memorandum of understanding between government and RSZ. 

18. 
Implementation of programs in the roads sector was adversely impacted when the Office of 
the Auditor General (OAG) identified numerous instances of financial irregularity and corruption 
in the roads sectors in 2009, which resulted in cooperating partners temporarily suspending the 
preparation of new projects in the sector. To address the issues raised by the OAG, Government has 
responded expeditiously and has made good progress in developing and implementing a governance 
action plan in the sector, which included changes in the Board and Management of the Road 
Development Agency (RDA) and the National Road Fund Agency (NRFA). 

19. Progress towards increasing access to safe water has been good, but challenges remain.  Under 
the World Bank supported Water Sector Performance Improvement Project (WSPIP) , Lusaka Water and 
Sewerage Company (LWSC) has constructed new water kiosks in peri-urban areas. By April 2011, 99 
kiosks were constructed or rehabilitated in 12 areas, with 56 currently supplying water. However, 
significant effort will be needed to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) target for water 
and sanitation, among others.   

20. Energy sector indicators are on track, but access to energy remains low.  According to ZESCO 
data, electricity access rate was only about 22 percent as of May 2010. The major energy tariff increases 
announced by Government over the 2008-2010 period have improved the financial position of ZESCO 
and the financial viability of the sector, resulting in significant amounts of investment from China and 
India in the sector, which will almost double total generation capacity by 2016. The implementation of the 
World Bank supported Increased Access to Electricity Services (IAES) Project has, however, been slower 
than expected due to management changes at ZESCO and long lead times needed for procurement.  

21. Over the past decade, Zambia’s agriculture sector has performed poorly as a result of the 
policies in the sector. The sector grew only at about 1 percent per annum, and is characterized by high 
cost of production resulting in low levels of competitiveness. During the CAS period there was a notable 
increase in government expenditures on the provision of a fertilizer subsidy program that is not well 
targeted4 and for resources allocated to the Food Reserve Agency for the purchase of maize at prices 
significantly higher than the market price. Buoyed mostly by good rainfall and the subsidy, maize 
production reached record levels of 2.8 million tons in 2010, and an expected 3 million tons in 2011.  

22. The World Bank is heavily engaged in the agriculture sector in Zambia. In addition to 
analytical work that addresses policy issues in the agriculture sector, the Bank has supported interventions 
that provide farmers with improved infrastructure, access to finance, and interventions aimed at 
improving productivity. The Agriculture Development and Support Project (ADSP), implemented by the 

4 Zambia: Impact Assessment of the Fertilizer Support Program. World Bank, June 9, 2010.  

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, is designed to strengthen smallholder access to markets and to 
increase competitiveness of agricultural commodities. The project focuses on several high potential 
agricultural areas and has adopted a value chain approach to improve operating efficiency and increase 
value added. Increased agricultural productivity and diversification will get a boost through the recently 
approved US$115 million Irrigation Development and Support Project, which targets an estimated 70,000 
beneficiaries and will irrigate 10,000 hectares of land held by smallholders, including emergent farmers.  

23. Climate change and variability are becoming increasingly important issues in Zambia . Over 
the last three decades, the frequency of droughts and floods has increased, costing Zambia an estimated 
loss of economic growth equivalent to 0.4 percent annually. In the absence of adaptation, rainfall 
variability alone could reduce GDP growth by 0.9 percentage points over the next decade5. Floods are 
affecting increasingly larger areas. In addition to climate variability, climate change is also expected to 
have significant impacts: average temperatures are expected to increase between 1.2 and 3.40 C by 2060. 
Changes in average precipitation may vary by region, with Northern Zambia experiencing higher rainfall, 
and central and western Zambia lower rainfall (GoZ). Overall, these impacts could bring widespread crop 
failure, outbreaks of human and animal diseases, dislocation of human populations, destruction of assets 
and infrastructure, and shorter growing seasons for key crops. Recognizing these vulnerabilities, the 
Government of Zambia has mainstreamed climate change comprehensively into the Sixth National 
Development Plan.  Zambia qualifies for a large number of global climate funds and it will be critically 
important that these initiatives be well coordinated. The World Bank has taken a lead role in assisting 
Zambia‟s national program through the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR). In June 2010, 
Zambia became the first country worldwide to activate Phase I of the PPCR (a US$1.5 million grant), 
under the Ministry of Finance and National Planning. The government is also in the process of 
establishing the institutional framework for a new comprehensive Climate Change Program. 

D. 

Block IV: Social Sector Development 

24. The CAS outcome for this component emphasizes improved health programming and 
strengthened skills and education. There is progress towards improving health programming, although 
results in the sector have been adversely impacted by large scale misappropriation of resources that 
resulted in disciplinary action against several officials from the Ministry of Health and substantial 
remedial actions being implemented to improve governance in the sector .  The Malaria Booster Program 
(IDA credit and Russian Trust Fund) has made a significant contribution to the increased coverage of key 
malaria prevention activities that took place between 2006 and 2010: (i) the percentage of children under 
5 years of age who slept under an insecticide treated bed net increased from 24 to 70 percent; (ii) the 
percentage of pregnant women who took 2+ doses of  intermittent presumptive treatment (IPT) for 
malaria increased from 59 to 70 percent; and (iii) the percentage of households that have at least one 
insecticide treated net (ITN) increased from 38 to 64 percent. As a result of these interventions, the annual 
number of malaria deaths decreased by at least 50 percent during the period 2008-2010. Additional 
financing for the Malaria Booster Program is financing the purchase of bed nets in close collaboration 
with the UN, ALMA, and other cooperating partners. The essential drugs public pilots program, 
supported by the Bank, has led to dramatic increase in the availability of drugs in rural areas, after twelve 
months of implementation. The government has decided to scale-up the program and it is estimated that 
the improvement in the availability of ACTs will result in a 21 percent reduction in under -five child 
deaths due to malaria. The Bank has also supported the government to pilot innovative approaches to 

5 World Bank (2009).  Managing Zambia‟s Water for Sustainable Growth and Poverty Reduction. A Country Water Assistance 
Strategy for Zambia.  June 2009 and background papers and World Bank (2011).  Climate Resiliency- Adaptation to Climate 
Change in Zambia (draft report).  WB PPCR Climate Change Country Profile. 

6 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
improve safe access to drugs through the private sector in underserved areas by piloting a price subsidy of 
ACTs and RDTs to accredited private sector drug sellers in 4 districts in the country. 

25. Although not a sector that the Bank is active in Zambia, some progress has been made 
regarding education indicators. Zambia has attained gender parity in primary education and there have 
been encouraging recent increases in the budgetary allocation for the sector. However, there are serious 
quality issues that need to be addressed and the Bank has proposed analytical work and need for 
investment in post-basic education, in particular technical and vocational education and training.  

III. CHALLENGES GOING FORWARD 

26. Growth has not been accompanied by significant poverty reduction. Despite the acceleration in 
the rate of growth and improvements in the macroeconomic environment, discussed above, this has not 
resulted in a notable decline in poverty levels. The overall levels of poverty were estimated at 59 percent 
according to the 2006 Living Conditions Monitoring Survey (LCMS) and preliminary estimates of the 
2010 LCMS indicate that poverty levels have remained largely unchanged at this level, implying that the 
pattern of growth in Zambia, driven largely by the mining sector, has not been pro-poor. While analysis is 
presently underway to update poverty and inequality indicators, the income divide remains large, with the 
Gini coefficient estimated at 52.6 in 2006, the last year for which this indicator is available.  

27. Growth has not generated sufficient employment.  Preliminary numbers from the 2010 Labor 
Force Survey suggest that formal employment has shrunk, from 12% of the labor force in 2005 to 10% 
with the vast majority working in low-productive, owner-operated, informal “enterprises”.  Of the 4.1 
million Zambians who are employed, the vast majority work for informal enterprises.6 Most of these 
informal microenterprises are located in rural areas (81 percent) and operate in agriculture production (70 
percent) or wholesale and retail trade (21 percent). Increasing wealth in rural areas depends on increasing 
and sustaining the productivity of rural (mostly household-) based businesses – an outcome that has 
proved challenging.7 Low productivity, a dualistic economy, and a lack of competition limit the impact of 
macro-economic growth on poverty reduction in rural areas. While large enterprises drive the economy, 
they account for only 7 percent of employment. In addition, only few industries are competitive, even  
regionally, with poor productivity undermining their ability to generate income and jobs. Productivity is 
particularly low in rural areas, constrained by a lack of access to infrastructure (energy, transport, water & 
ICT), education and finance. Results of the 2008 Investment Climate Assessment indicate that female 
owned firms are even less productive as they tend to operate in low productivity sectors, have lower 
levels of capital per worker, are smaller in size and face additional constraints in terms of accessing credit 
and land. Meanwhile, a small number of large companies capture a disproportionate share of the market, 
relative to their productivity, and low levels of competition persist in many industries.   

28. 
Increased competitiveness and competition is essential if Zambia is to create jobs. Zambia 
needs to improve substantially on broader measures of competitiveness and the quality of its business 
enabling environment in order to enable the private sector to create jobs . On the World Economic 
Forum‟s Global Competitiveness Index 2010-11, Zambia is only ranked 115 out of 139 countries and 
progress with reforms in areas such as access to and cost of finance, competition policy, infrastructure and 
labor is much needed. Less than a third of the population has access to finance, which remains a challenge 
together with the continued high cost of borrowing. Labor regulations (e.g. high severance requirements) 

6 Labor Force Surveys from 2005 and 2010. 
7 Clarke, et al, „The Profile and Productivity of Zambian Businesses – Based on the Zambia Business Survey‟ (June 2010). 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
restrict labor market flexibility, impede formal employment and restrict the growth of the private sector 8. 
In addition there is a significant gap between the practical vocational skills demanded by the private 
sector and those produced by the educational system9. 

29. The policy environment in the agriculture sector warrants particular attention.  For Zambia to 
take advantage of recent global developments, increase food exports and reduce rural poverty, 
productivity in the agriculture sector needs to increase and costs reduced . Government‟s policy of 
encouraging purchases of maize by the Food Reserve Agency at prices that are above import parity 
imposes a significant cost on the treasury and inhibits exports, while at the same time contributing to high 
domestic maize prices for the poor, many of whom are net purchasers of maize.  The fertilizer subsidy 
imposes a significant amount of additional cost, is not effectively targeted, and diverts expenditures in the 
agriculture sector away from much needed investments in rural roads, irrigation, research and extension. 
The land tenure system, which limits individual title to land, constrains the ability of small farmers to 
access finance. This constraint is particularly acute for women, who comprise 65 percent of the rural 
population and 85 percent of the total small-holder labor force for agriculture production. The land tenure 
system, which limits individual title to land, constrains the ability of small farmers to access finance and 
adversely impacts their willingness to invest in the sector10. 

30. Along with the modest reduction in overall poverty, social indicators have improved at an 
uneven pace.  Zambia‟s rank in the UN Human Development Index is 150 out of 169 in 2010. There 
have been advancements in education indicators, including rising primary and secondary school 
enrolments (Annex Table 2) and marginal improvements in the youth literacy rate, although challenges 
remain, such as overcrowded classrooms, limited access to education in rural areas and the poor quality of 
education. The national HIV prevalence rate has remained high at about 14 percent, and is 
disproportionately high among young women. Zambia needs to do more to make progress towards 
attaining MDGs. The targets on hunger, universal primary education, gender equality, HIV/AIDS and 
malaria are likely to be achieved by 2015. However, significant effort will be needed to achieve the 
targets for maternal mortality, water and sanitation, child mortality, extreme poverty and environmental 
sustainability11. The maternal mortality ratio of 591 per 100,000 live births implies that eight women die 
each day from pregnancy related complications. The recent governance issues in the health sector has 
complicated the achievement of health-related MDGs. 

IV. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CAS PROGRAM 

31. The key objectives of the FY08-11 CAS remain broadly relevant for Zambia and are closely 
aligned with Zambia’s Sixth National Development Plan (SNDP, 2011-15). The SNDP restates the 
government‟s commitment to eradicate poverty and pays particular emphasis for the need to address rural 
poverty by improving competitiveness and focusing on job creation. As illustrated in Annex Table 5, the 
emphasis on competitiveness, job creation and improved governance are central to the Bank‟s program in 
Zambia and, as mentioned earlier, fully consistent with the Bank‟s new Africa strategy. 

32. Although growth and macroeconomic results have been commendable there has been slow 

8 Severance pay for redundancy dismissal (weeks of Salary) in Zambia is 46.2 weeks compared to Rwanda‟s  8.7; Senegal‟s 
10.5, South Africa‟s 5.3, Mauritius‟ 6.3: Source: Doing Business 2011:101-104 
9 For a fuller discussion of these issues see „More Jobs and Prosperity in Zambia: What would it Take?‟ World Bank, April 2011.  
10 This constraint is particularly acute for women, who comprise 65 percent of the rural population and 85 percent of 
smallholders.  
11 For a comprehensive analysis of the status of MDGs in Zambia see „Zambia: Millennium Development Goals Progress Report 
2011‟ Ministry of Finance and National Planning and UNDP, 2011.  

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
progress in translating economic growth into job creation and poverty reduction; thus a step 
change in the Bank’s program might be necessary and will be the focus of the new Country 
Assistance Strategy for Zambia that will be prepared. The following section discusses how the Bank‟s 
program will be adjusted and re-prioritized to pave the way for the change.    

33. Going forward, the Bank will deepen its AAA program with a focus on poverty. As discussed 
above and as the preliminary results of the 2010 LCMS demonstrate, the pattern of mining sector led 
growth in Zambia has not generated sufficient employment and has therefore had limited impact in 
making a dent in poverty levels. When benchmarked against other countries, labor productivity of 
Zambian firms is substantially lower, whereas unit labor costs are often higher, rendering Zambian firms 
uncompetitive in regional and global markets, and limiting their ability to generate much needed jobs. 
Additional, high levels of under nutrition are symptomatic of widespread poverty in the country. The 
nutrition status of children in Zambia has continued to deteriorate, with the latest Demographic and 
Health survey indicating chronic malnutrition at 43 percent; underweight children at 14 percent and 
wasting at 5 percent – all contributing to lower levels of productivity and livelihood. It is proposed that 
these issues take center stage in the Bank‟s dialogue with Government. The analytical foundations for this 
dialogue have been established through the recently completed diagnostic work on the Jobs and 
Prosperity initiative. This analysis will be further deepened and developed through the preparation of a 
comprehensive Poverty Assessment, which will analyze shifts in poverty and inequality in Zambia in 
recent years and include background papers exploring the relationship between economic growth, poverty 
and inequality; labor market, employment and productivity; gender dimensions of poverty; and the impact 
of public policy, including social protection programs, on poverty. This analysis and the subsequent 
dialogue with the new Government will identify key policies and investments that the Bank will support 
through the new CAS. 

34. 
In recent years, the Bank has actively sought to engage with various stakeholders in the 
preparation and dissemination of the economic and sector work that it conducts. The recent 
experience of the Jobs and Prosperity Report and the Public Expenditure Review shows that early 
engagement of different stakeholders in the design of the issues to be tackled, as well as in the 
development of the economic work, increases significantly the policy impact by producing “champions” 
in the government or in the private sector, or, better yet, in both.  The Bank intends to build on this 
experience and deepen this engagement (see additional discussion on Partnerships below) especially since 
the impact of analytical work is increased when more efforts are put into an adequate dissemination 
strategy including not only intensive discussions with government, but also incorporating civil society, 
and the private sector.  Clear and well focused policy messages, following a well managed process of 
discussions, have shown to have a higher effect, when they are assumed by other stakeholders, beyond the 
World Bank and other Cooperating Partners. 

35. Greater emphasis will be placed to support and partner with Government to engage its 
citizens by supporting the demand side for good governance. Supporting good governance for 
increased development effectiveness is a central theme that is mainstreamed across the CAS. Significant 
support has been provided for supply side interventions at the macro level, such as implementing IFMIS, 
PEMFA, and procurement reform, and for sector specific initiatives like the Extractive Industries 
Transparency Initiative (EITI) and the Construction Sector Transparency Initiative (COST). While this 
support will continue, the CAS also recognized the need to respond, on a demand driven basis, to requests 
from civil society organizations seeking support for their capacity building efforts to hold Government 
accountable for the provision of service delivery. Such initiatives have not really taken off so far. It is 
therefore proposed that greater emphasis be placed on supporting demand for good governance through a 
series of pilot initiatives whose objective would be to strengthen the links that Government has with its 
citizens and improve public accountability in selected districts/sectors, complementing ongoing supply 
side initiatives such as the ongoing support for Freedom of Information legislation, decentralization and 

9 

 
 
 
 
the technical assistance for public sector reform and selected PEMFA components. 

36. 
Informed by political economy diagnostics, these “demand for good governance” pilots will 
encompass various activities.  These include supporting the development of informed journalism; 
supporting information dissemination using cellular technology and community radio with the 
involvement of local MPs and service providers; strengthening consumer voice in the water and sanitation 
sector by assisting in the development of scorecards by water watch groups which already exist in major 
towns; and mainstreaming demand side interventions across the entire World Bank Zambia portfolio 
through the preparation of independent feedback reports which would be linked to the preparation of the 
Implementation Status Reports as well as a comprehensive review of World Bank supported interventions 
related to the demand for good governance. Sector specific interventions will include support for third 
party monitoring in the roads sector and the transfer of knowledge on mining taxation issues to interested 
civil society groups, which could establish a “mining watch” forum. Actively engaging in a dialogue with 
rural communities and women‟s groups in Zambia will be increasingly sought through these pilots. 

37. The Bank will continue to leverage its engagement to augment financial support. Zambia‟s 
financing requirements are significant and can only partially be met by the country‟s annual IDA 
allocation. The Bank, together with other cooperating partners, is helping build capacity within 
organizations like the Zambia Revenue Authority so that an increasing share of development finance can 
be generated from the country‟s own resources, especially from the mining sector , and the prospects for 
this look encouraging. The Bank has been successful in leveraging scarce IDA resources and attracting 
complementary financing from other cooperating partners, especially to support interventions in the roads 
and energy sectors. This will continue and the Bank will explore opportunities to leverage IDA resources 
including IDA regional financing, as was the case for the recently appraised Kafue -Livingstone 
Transmission line project. In addition, investment lending reforms within the Bank are expected to further 
energize the results focus of the Bank‟s interventions in the country. Upgrading the Bank‟s country office 
in Lusaka via the placement of a Country Director will provide additional opportunity to develop 
partnerships and push the broader sub-regional development agenda, which is crucial given Zambia‟s 
strategic location in the region.  

38. 
In line with the Sixth National Development Plan, adaptation to climate change will be 
mainstreamed across the Bank’s portfolio. The second phase of the Pilot Program for Climate 
Resilience, called Strategic Program for Climate Resilience, expected to be approved in FY13, would 
amount to US$110 million, with US$60 million in grant and US$50 million in concessionary credit.  The 
Program involves the World Bank as well as AfDB, IFC, and a large number of cooperating partners and 
NGOs. It will provide overall assistance to the government‟s Climate Change Program; invest in highly 
visible climate-proof infrastructure; and pilot participatory adaptation in two sub-basins on the Zambezi 
River. It builds upon the SNDP principles of decentralized planning, climate-resilient infrastructure, 
sustainable agriculture, and promotion of ICT technologies as ways to provide better climate information 
to end-users, in turn strengthening early warning systems in highly vulnerable areas. 

V. 

IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES AND PARTNERSHIPS 

A. 

Implementation Issues 

39. Total external assistance to Zambia annually averages at about 25 percent of the budget or 
about 6 percent of GDP. The World Bank accounts for about 10 percent of the assistance and thus the 
financial support provided to Zambia is relatively small. As of October 2011, IDA‟s net commitments to 
Zambia totaled about US$520 million for nine active projects and two Global Environment Facilities 
(GEFs), in addition to a budget support series. These projects support programs in infrastructure, 
environment, agriculture, finance and private sector development, public sector, and human development . 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Bank‟s lending program is dominated by infrastructure which accounts for about half of the portfolio, 
compared to slightly less than 40 percent at the commencement of the CAS period. The Bank‟s FY11 
lending program was about US$210 million, which is the highest it has been in the post HIPC/MDRI 
period and significantly above the country‟s annual IDA allocation. The additional financing has been 
made possible by accessing resources under the Crisis Response Window and the special malaria facility. 
The IDA 15 indicative allocation for Zambia was SDR174 million (about US $264 million). 

40. Portfolio quality has been impacted by fiduciary issues. Steady improvements in auditing 
uncovered major misappropriation of resources in the health and roads sector, thanks to a proficient 
Office of the Auditor General. These findings, supplemented by the in-depth reviews conducted by the 
Bank‟s teams resulted in Government having to reimburse ineligible expenditures in both sectors. Good 
progress has been made in developing governance action plans in these sectors and these are being closely 
monitored, in close coordination with cooperation partners. Disbursement rates which were adversely 
impacted by the governance issues in the roads and health sectors , are presently estimated at about 10 
percent; they remain low but are expected to pick up due to the implementation of the governance action 
plans in these sectors. Implementation remains a challenge and the performance of most of the projects in 
the portfolio is rated as marginally satisfactory (Annex Tables 7 and 8). Based on implementation 
progress and available data, the CAS indicators have been updated (Annex Table 4)12. At a recent review 
of portfolio performance, Government counterparts identified the need to increase their familiarity with 
Bank supported projects and Bank procedures for procurement, financial management and disbursement 
in order to improve project implementation. Government agencies find it difficult to provide adequate 
supporting documents and have problems of non-compliance with stipulated rules and regulations. Delays 
are also encountered as project staff are often unfamiliar with eligibility provisions of project 
expenditures, resulting in protracted delays in their interactions with the Bank. There are also concerns 
about the high turnover of project staff as well as multiple layers for reviewing and decision making and 
the consequent delays, both within Government and the Bank. 

41. Annex Table 5 summarizes the planned and actual lending and AAA program to Zambia over 
the CAS period. As shown, the Bank‟s program was impacted by the death of President Mwanawasa in 
FY09 and the period of national elections that followed, resulting in some tasks, especially lending 
operations, slipping into the following year and having a cascading effect.   

B. 

Partnerships 

42. Partnerships are central for the effective implementation of the World Bank’s strategy in 
Zambia – partnerships with the Zambian government, other cooperating partners and with private 
sector and civil society. The World Bank has developed an excellent working relationship with 
Government and has played a central role in defining Government‟s engagement with its cooperating 
partners. The Bank is a signatory to the Joint Assistance Strategy for Zambia (JASZ), which was prepared 
in April 2007 and signed by 16 cooperating partners, including 12 bilateral and 4 multilateral agencies. 
An evaluation of the JASZ, conducted by the cooperating partners in 2010, determined that the JASZ had 
contributed to improvements in the alignment of programs supported by cooperating partners with 
Government strategies, institutions and systems. It also found that the cooperating partners had made 
considerable progress on harmonization through improved division of labor at the sector level and 
increased use of joint arrangements and procedures. It observed that Zambia‟s cooperating partners had 
progressed further than most other countries in the region in implementing a Division of Labor matrix, 
which had helped to decongest and consolidate support in several sectors. There have also been 

12 Targets were not revised at this point but are expected to progress according to implementation schedule. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
improvements in the use of shared analysis, joint evaluations, reviews and monitoring. Areas where the 
Bank has worked in very close partnership with other cooperating partners over the CAS period include 
the preparation of the Public Expenditure Review, the Jobs and Prosperity Initiative , the preparation of 
the Poverty Reduction Support Credit through participation in the Poverty Reduction Budget Support 
(PRBS) Group and the development of the Governance Actions Plans in the health and roads sectors. 

43. The JASZ review however determined that there had been insufficient progress among the 
cooperating partners in the use of joint missions and pointed to several uncoordinated missions 
involving especially the Ministry of Finance and National Planning. It noted that further progress 
could be achieved in the division of labor through greater clarity on the distinction between lead, active 
and background donors. Several “popular” sectors such as health and education were congested while 
others such as housing and vocational training remained undersubscribed, often having more to do with 
donor preferences rather than Zambian priorities. More progress needed to be made to ensure mutual 
accountability and although a Mutual Accountability Group to monitor Government and cooperating 
partner performance had been established in 2007, the general consensus among both Government and 
CPs was that mutual accountability remained weak. It is intended that these challenges be addressed 
during the implementation of JASZ II, which is presently under preparation and is expected to be 
finalized based on the SNDP. 

44. There has been increased emphasis during the CAS period to engage local media, civil society 
organizations and citizens in rural areas in Zambia, which will be reinforced further . In particular, 
efforts are being made to support NGOs that will implement citizen oversight/monitoring of service 
delivery. NGO attempts to do so have so far not yielded significant results due to insufficient incentives 
on the part of the service providers to heed them and with low overall accountability for service delivery. 
The accountability mechanisms that do exist tend to be informal and inconsistently applied across sectors. 
The demand-side interventions that do exist, although often well-implemented, have struggled to secure 
necessary linkages with the supply-side. However, it is worth mentioning the role of the Parliament and of 
a few MPs, who increasingly strive to improve public spending efficiency and find ways to increase 
public accountability at the local level13. There is also active discussion underway among cooperating 
partners about strategies for mainstreaming the gender agenda including increased dialogue and 
coordination with a revamped Gender Forum, convened under the Gender in Development Division, and 
for strengthening the women‟s movement with a view to influence the legal and policy framework and the 
development of a revised national gender policy14. 

VI. 

IFC, MIGA and WBI 

45. 
IFC is increasing its investments and advisory programs in Zambia. IFC‟s five part strategy 
in Zambia provides finance and technical assistance to support growth through: (1) helping improve the 
investment climate; (2) infrastructure development (3) investment in power and telecommunications; (4) 
diversification of the economy by increasing the competitiveness of agricultural and services sector; and 
(5) increasing access to finance to underserved market segments, including MSMEs and low-income 
individuals.  Reflecting Zambia‟s increasing regional importance, IFC placed an investment officer in 
Lusaka in 2010, collocated with the Bank.  As of June 30, 2011, IFC‟s committed portfolio in Zambia 
was US$51.2 million, with 2 active advisory services programs (Emergent Farmer Finance and Support 
Program and SME development).  Having concluded its first Zambia Investment Climate Program in 

13 In this regard, Itezhi-Tezhi district in Zambia (Southern province) has been awarded several international awards for 
innovative and pragmatic initiatives to improve service delivery in the health/justice and agriculture sectors. 
14 Gender Sector Analysis and Mapping of Civil Society and Cooperating Partners Initiatives.  UKAID and Irish Aid, April 2011.  

12 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
December 2010, which focused on business licensing reform and Doing Business reform, IFC is 
developing a successor program with an expanded focus at the request of the Zambian government. 

46. 
IFC launched the Zambia Emergent Farmers Program in June 2008 in partnership with 
Zambia National Commercial Bank (ZANACO), Rabobank and Zambia National Farmers Union. 
An example of IFC‟s programmatic approach to improving competitiveness and expanding access to 
finance, this initiative is now followed up with an expansion phase.  The expanded project will involve 
the development of an advisory services implementation unit that will act as a platform for the provision 
of advisory services to IFC agricultural investments in Zambia with the objective of enabling access to 
finance and support provision to small-holder farmers. The platform will also coordinate efforts by both 
private and public sectors and the donor community. US$25 million loan facility was committed in June 
2010 by IFC to support ZANACO‟s increased financing for its agribusiness portfolio clients, SMEs, and 
other sectors including telecom, tourism and manufacturing. IFC is working with local banks to expand 
financing options and is pioneering a program to support small-holders emerging farmers to improve their 
productivity and access to market. This is intended to help develop a class of farmers who would then 
scale up their operations to large commercial farming in Zambia. Other recent commitments include: in 
FY10, a US$9 million equity investment in a mining company to assist with further exploration work and 
initiate feasibility studies; and in FY11, a $0.7 million equity investment in a greenfield microfinance 
institution that will provide financial services to urban and semi-urban MSMEs and individuals. 

47. 
Looking forward, IFC expects to expand significantly investments and advisory programs 
with the private sector in Zambia. The government has requested IFC support for the investment 
climate reform agenda, especially to assist in (i) implementing the e-registry and one-stop shop; (ii) 
improving the country's competitiveness in livestock, tourism and mining; and (iii) improving cross 
border trade by strengthening customs policies and procedures. Scaling up agribusiness in Zambia by 
establishing long-term partnerships with key agribusiness companies and financial institutions remains a 
priority and IFC will continue to engage in this sector through wholesaling operations with bank and 
other intermediaries who can better address the needs of cooperatives and subsidence farmers. Related 
initiatives include promoting sustainable development while stimulating increased and productive 
utilization of land; supporting south-south investments through strong agribusiness players to establish 
operations that could potentially stimulate other investments in the region; and supporting the food supply 
and value chain.  

48. MIGA (Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency) for the first time issued guarantees for 
$18.64 million in support of investments in the manufacturing and agribusiness sectors in Zambia 
during FY11.  

49. WBI continued to be active in Zambia the CAS Period. Following the Africa Regional 
Development Debate in April 2010 on “How to Achieve Competitiveness”, WBI's Growth and 
Competitiveness (WBIGC) Practice has been working with Government and the Bank‟s Zambia team to 
develop a series of initiatives aimed at enhancing competitiveness and diversifying the economy in the 
areas of light manufacturing, agro-processing, dairy and meat processing. In November 2010, WBI 
facilitated the participation of a high level delegation from Zambia to the WBI-organized Conference on 
Strengthening Responsible Business & Good Governance in Africa in Brussels, where the Zambian 
delegation were able to exchange their experience with other participants as well as network and establish 
links with large multinational corporations. WBI also initiated a series of South-South Knowledge 
exchanges by identifying relevant international experiences and distilling lessons that may be applicable 
to the Zambian case. In December 2010, for instance, a former Minister of Public Works discussed the 
Chilean experience with their copper industry. During the session, participants explored how the copper 
sector fits within the broader development strategy, how it could be leveraged to promote diversification 
and competitiveness in the rest of the economy, and the prospects for value-addition in the copper sector.   

13 

 
 
 
 
 
VII. RISKS AND MITIGATION 

50. The risks highlighted in the FY2008-2011 CAS remain valid, and mitigation efforts continue 
to be  supported by the Bank’s program: 

 Political Risk. There is uncertainty about how the newly elected Government will address issues 
such as the significant subsidies in the agriculture sector; mobilizing additional revenues from 
the mining sector; land administration reform; reform of the labor market; and continued reforms 
in the telecommunications and energy sectors. Reforms in these sectors are critical as structural 
constraints in these areas are contributing to the continued high cost of doing business and are 
adversely impacting the productivity and competitiveness of the economy. The Bank is ramping 
up its ongoing dialogue with the new Government and it has been providing technical assistance 
to Government, together with other cooperating partners, in these areas. 

 

Implementation Capacity Risk.  One of the most significant risks confronting the sustainability 
and deepening of the reform process in Zambia is that of limited implementation capacity, which 
adversely impacts Government programs across the board. Large capacity gaps are particularly 
noticeable in the area of public sector reform, as evidenced by significant delays in implementing 
the new pay policy, weak public finance management, delays in implementing the Integrated 
Financial Management System (IFMIS) and the broader PEMFA program. At the same time, 
sustained technical assistance support provided by cooperating partners has seen the emergence 
of some centers of excellence, such as the Office of the Auditor General, which has done a 
commendable job in identifying poor financial management and corruption, especially in the 
health and roads sectors. To mitigate this risk the Bank, in collaboration with other CPs, will 
continue to support capacity building within Government through the Public Sector Reform 
Program and PEMFA, which aims at improving the analytical and implementation capacity 
within the government. The Bank will also provide hand holding support to project teams, 
especially where country financial management systems are being used. 

 Governance risk.  The instances of corruption uncovered by the Office of the Auditor General 
(OAG) in the health and roads sectors and the findings of the in-depth reviews conducted by the 
Bank have highlighted the need for improved procurement, financial management, internal audit 
and generally improved governance. Government has responded to the finding of the OAG by 
disciplining the officials in the health and roads sectors and by developing governance action 
plans in the impacted sectors, which are being regularly monitored by the Bank and other 
cooperating partners. The Bank is also following up on the findings of the in-depth reviews to 
address generic issues across the portfolio. More generally, Government has developed a new 
anti-corruption policy, passed a new procurement law, increased the budget for the OAG, and 
established a Financial Intelligence Unit and a Serious Fraud Unit. The Bank, together with other 
CPs, has provided support for these actions and intends to continue doing so under the next 
phase of the public sector reform program. Cooperating Partners are also working with the 
Parliamentary Public Accounts Committee and other oversight institutions to strengthen the 
oversight role played by them. In addition, rent generation in the absence of strong transparency 
and accountability presents a risk of rent diversion and capture. The Bank undertook an 
extractive industries value chain assessment to examine governance risks and is supporting the 
implementation of the EITI initiative and modernization of the mining cadastre. 

 External Shock Risk.  Zambia‟s high dependence on copper (especially now when international 
price of copper exceeds US$9,000 per ton) makes it vulnerable to fluctuations in the 
international price of the commodity, which can then negatively affect the economy by 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compressing exports and government revenues and result in lower growth and employment. In 
addition, Zambia is also at risk from rising fuel prices, which can affect macroeconomic stability 
resulting in higher inflation, lower growth, and external balance deterioration. There is also the 
risk of climate shocks such as heavy rains causing extensive flooding, reduced harvest, and 
destroying roads and bridges. To mitigate these risks the Bank has assisted authorities in 
promoting more effective use of public resources leading to increase diversification and 
competitiveness, including the ability to better adapt to external shocks. In addition the 
government, through the ongoing IMF program, is committed to ensuring that its monetary and 
fiscal programs maintain macroeconomic stability and keep inflation in check.  

 Health Risk. HIV/AIDS remains a significant health threat to Zambia‟s population and the 
prevalence rate remains high at about 14 percent for adults between the ages of 15-49 years. The 
fall in productivity and rising economic costs associated with loss of labor from deaths due to 
AIDS is estimated to account for a 3 percent reduction in GDP. Similarly, although there have 
been significant improvements, Malaria continues to be the number one cause of high morbidity 
and mortality in Zambia, contributing to a reduction in GDP by 1.5 percent. In addition, 
widespread under nutrition adversely impacts cognitive development, resulting in a 5 to 18 point 
loss in IQ, with related effects on productivity and adult wages. At the aggregate level, 
widespread under nutrition can knock about 2-3 percentage points off national GDP. On account 
of the governance issues in the sector, there is increasing fragmentation and lack of reliability of 
donor funding to the health sector. This has caused a dramatic decline in district allocations 
which is severely compromising the district‟s ability to deliver services. With the recent success 
that has been achieved under the National Malaria Control Program, the government and partners 
are now focusing on eliminating malaria in Zambia. There is a lot of interest from both 
Government and partners to address under nutrition as a major hindrance to economic 
development. A National Food Security and Nutrition Strategy is being developed and efforts are 
being made to strengthen the institutional capacity of the National Food and Nutrition 
Commission to coordinate and monitor the multi-sectoral response to malnutrition in Zambia. 

15 

 
 
 
 
16 

Annex Table 1: Zambia: Key Macroeconomic Results during CAS Period 

Source: Bank of Zambia, Central Statistical Office and IMF. 

 2006 

2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

Output and Prices 
Real GDP growth (% changes) 

6.2 

6.2 

5.7 

6.3 

7.1 

CPI (end of period, %) 

8.2 

8.9 

16.6 

9.9 

7.9 

Central Government Accounts 

Percent of GDP 

Total Revenue  

17.2 

18.4 

18.6 

16.0 

17.9 

     Tax 

16.4 

17.9 

17.5 

15.0 

16.9 

          Mining Taxes 
Grants 

1.4 
4.6 

1.4 
3.8 

1.0 
4.0 

2.3 
2.8 

Total Expenditures 

23.5 

24.5 

23.8 

23.2 

23.9 

     Current  

19.8 

19.1 

18.5 

19.4 

     Capital 

4.0 

3.6 

4.3 

4.2 

Overall Balance incl. grants (cash basis) 
External Sector 

-0.2 
-2.2 
-2.7 
US$ million, unless otherwise indicated 

-3.3 

Trade Balance 
Exports  

899 
4,510 

404 
4,959 

906 
4,319 

1,313 
5,982 

 3,929 

       of which Copper Exports 

 3,029 

3,407 

3,684 

3,179 

4,612 

Imports 

-
3,611 
-2.5 

-4,554 

-3,413 

-4,668 

Current account balance incl. grants (% of GDP) 

3.0 

-7.1 

-3.2 

-2.0 

International Reserves (months of imports) 

2.2 

2.5 

2.1 

3.8 

3.4 

Public Debt 

Percent of GDP 

Total public debt  

27.2 

25.8 

26.5 

24.9 

24.6 

     External  

11.0 

9.4 

11.5 

10.6 

10.2 

     Domestic  

16.2 

16.4 

15.0 

14.3 

14.4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex Table 2: Zambia: Social Sector Results During the CAS Period 

Latest single year 

1998-2001 

2002-2005 

2006-2009 

Primary school enrollment (% net) 

Secondary school enrollment (% gross) 

Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24) 

Life expectancy at birth (years) 

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 

Maternal mortality rate (per 100,000 live births) 

Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49) 

Headcount Poverty ratio (% of population) 

68.2 

25.6 

69.5 

41.7 

165.7 

600.0 

15.4 

66.8 

92.3 

33.5 

69.1 

42.8 

155.3 

560.0 

15.0 

58.4 

95.2 

45.6 

74.8 

45.4 

141.3 

470.0 

15.2 

59.3 

Source: World Bank World Development Indicators and Central Statistics Office (CSO) . 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex Table 3: CAS Progress Report – Results Framework 

CAS Progress Report 

Status 

Progress to date 

Instruments & Partners 

Pillar I 

Macroeconomic and Expenditure Management 

Macroeconomic stability and support the growth and diversification of the economy  

Ongoing lending:    
 P082452 ZM – Public Sector Management 
Program Support 
 Proposed lending:   
 EMCG II 
 PRSC 
 Proposed AAA:   
 PER 
 TA Commodity Risk Management         
 Development Policy Review 
 EITI++ Implementation 
 NLTA Energy Sector 
 Main Development Partners:  
DFID, EU, IMF, Denmark, Netherlands/Ireland, 
Finland, Sweden, Norway, UNDP, GTZ 

Achieved Budget allocation (constant 2008 billion ZKW) for 
Agriculture, Tourism and Roads: 
2009: 2,292.39 
2010: 2,235.09 
2011: 3,352.7 
The increase is reflected in agriculture and roads 
sectors, while tourism is stagnant. 
Source: Own calculation based on MoFNP data 
On track Mining revenues (% of GDP): 2008: 1.4%; 2009: 
1%; 2010 (est.): 2.3% 
Audit of mining companies has commenced.  
Reconciliation of mining taxes paid and mining 
taxes received underway.  
EITI++ Value Chain diagnostic done.  
Mining & Minerals Act is being revised. 
Source: MoFNP 
Reporting on donor funding initiated; loans and 
grants are reported. The Development Cooperation 
Report (the first report completed in 2009) and the 
Zambia Development Aid Data base (which is being 
improved) are likely to facilitate reporting on donors 
funding. 
Source: Development Cooperation Report 
On track Audit program undertaken by ZRA. Fiscal models 
delivered and in use by ZRA. 
Source: MoFNP 

On track 

Achieved Government carried out a mid-term review of the 
FNDP and presented the report to various 
stakeholders. Government held annual consultations 
through the life of the FNDP such as SAGs, PRSC 
annual reviews with donors. 
Source: MoFNP 

18 

Outcome 
1.1 

Indicator 1.1.1 

Public expenditure allocation to pro-poor sectors (e.g. 
agriculture, tourism, rural infrastructure) shows real 
increase. Budget 2008 allocation (ZKW billion) for 
Agriculture, Tourism and Roads: 1,964.2 

Indicator 1.1.2 

Clear GRZ guidelines for allocation of additional 
resource flows from mining 

Indicator 1.1.3 

Budget presentation includes reporting on donor 
funding and revenues and expenditures of quasi-fiscal 
institutions (Bank of Zambia, the Public Service 
Pension Fund and state owned enterprises (SOEs), 
especially ZESCO) 

Milestone 1.1.1 

ZRA submits reports for MTEF and annual budget 
based on corporate fiscal models to (a) audit mining 
returns and (b) to predict and collect taxes from mining 

Milestone 1.1.2 MoFNP consults stakeholders annually on the 
performance of the country‟s development programs 
under the FNDP 

 
  
  
  
CAS Progress Report 

Status 

Progress to date 

Instruments & Partners 

Milestone 1.1.3 MTEF Framework and ABB rolled out to Bank of 
Zambia, the Public Service Pension Fund and SOEs, 
especially ZESCO 

Milestone 1.1.4 

Development of a centralized data base of domestic 
and external debt in MoFNP 

Milestone 1.1.5 

GRZ agrees on instruments for managing the 
uncertainty and volatility of revenue flows from 
mining and puts in place an appropriate mechanism to 
harness the flows (such as a sovereign wealth fund) 

Milestone 1.1.6 

Enactment of public expenditure management 
legislation: Public Procurement Act, Accountants Act, 
Loans & Guarantees Act, Public Finance Act 
(Amendment) 

Pillar II 

Institutional Capacity 

On track 

Achieved All Ministries and Provinces utilize MTEF and ABB 
Training manuals for MTEF and ABB are being 
finalized by Budget office and the Ministry of Local 
Government and Housing. GRZ has included 
provision for SOEs to adopt MTEF and ABB in the 
draft Planning & Budget Bill.  
Source: SNDP, Budget 2010/2011 
Individual data bases for domestic and external debt 
established. In the process of implementing DMFAS 
6.0 which will centrally record both data bases. 
Source: MoFNP 
On track A Mining Resource Account (MRA) created in 
2008. Staff from MoFNP have undertaken field visit 
to multiple countries to study sovereign wealth 
funds; a paper is presently under consideration. 
Source: MoFNP  
Public Procurement Act enacted in October 2008; 
Procurement regulations which should enable to 
operationalize the new Procurement Law were 
delayed. Accountants Act, Loans & Guarantees Act 
and Public Finance Act in draft form.  
Source: Public Procurement Act No 12 of December 
2008; Discussions with Government 

On track 

Outcome 
2.1 

Indicator 2.1.1 

Strengthened public financial management, procurement and oversight capacity 

Time for production of financial statements after the 
end of financial year for institutions where IFMIS is 
operational decreases from 9 months (2007) to 6 
months by 2010 

On track 

IFMIS is currently operational in MoFNP (since 
2010) and 7 other Ministries, Provinces, and 
Spending Agencies (since January 2011). 
For the 8 sites where IFMIS the information is 
available on a real time basis. The time for the 
preparation of financial statements can improve only 
if IFMIS is rolled out to all sites. 
Source: ISR - P082452 

Ongoing Lending: 
 P082452 ZM – Public Sector Management 
Program Support 
Proposed AAA: 
 PER 
Main development partners: 
UK, Denmark, Netherlands/Ireland, Finland, 
Sweden, Norway, EC, UNDP, Germany  

19 

 
  
  
Indicator 2.1.2 

Procurement processing time for national competitive 
bidding is maintained at 8 weeks and for international 
competitive bidding at 12 weeks (2007 levels) in 90% 
of PSUs 

Indicator 2.1.3 

Milestone 2.1.1 

Percentage of entities (48 entities: 22 ministries, 9 
provinces and 17 spending agencies) covered by 
annual audit increases from 50% in 2006 to 60% by 
2010 
National Appeals Tribunal established and operational 
by 2010 

Milestone 2.1.2 

New payroll system in place; no discrepancies between 
clean payroll and staff establishment 

Milestone 2.1.3 

IFMIS fully implemented and integrated with PMEC in 
at least 5 key ministries and piloted in at least 2 
provinces (North Western, Eastern) by 2010 

Milestone 2.1.4 

By 2010, Zambia National Tender Board (ZNTB) 
established as regulatory authority 

Milestone 2.1.5 

PSUs established in all MPSAs and 500 staff trained 

Milestone 2.1.6 

All provincial offices to be handed over to Auditor 
General by September 2008 

CAS Progress Report 

Status 

Progress to date 

Instruments & Partners 

Off track  Decentralization of procurement of PE‟s done but 
procurement processing efficiency negatively 
affected by the Circular No. 1 of January 2011 
which requires procurement above 50 million 
kwacha to be approved by Zambia Public 
Procurement Authority (ZPPA). 
Source: Circular No. 1 of January 2011. 
Achieved By December 2010 the percentage of entities 
covered by annual audit was 79%. 

Off track 

Achieved 

Source: Office of Auditor General 
Public Procurement Act does not include the 
establishment of National Appeals Tribunal. It only 
includes provision under Part VIII for Dispute 
Resolution by Arbitration.  
Source: Public Procurement Act No 12 of December 
2008 
Achieved  Payroll system in place and decentralized to all nine 
provinces. Payroll audits instituted and cleaning of 
payroll ongoing based on the audits. 
Source: ISR - P082452 
IFMIS implemented in MoFNP (2010 Budget 
prepared using IFMIS) and expanded to 7 other sites 
January 2011, to other 7 by July 2011, and 40 by 
2013.  
Source: Status Report as at 27th January 2011 
ZNTB transformed into the Zambia Public 
Procurement Authority (ZPPA). 
Source: Public Procurement Act No 12 of December 
2008 
PSUs have been established, certified and 
operational in all public spending units and 500 staff 
training is ongoing. 
Source: ZPPA Procurement Reforms Progress 
Report 
Achieved All nine provincial offices constructed for OAG 
handed over and in operation (by the end of 2009) 
Source: ISR - P082452 

Achieved 

Achieved 

20 

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Milestone 2.1.7 

At least 18 professional audit staff based in provincial 
audit offices with minimum of one auditor per 
provincial office 

Status 

On track 

Progress to date 

Instruments & Partners 

There is a minimum of one provincial officer per 
province in place. 
Source: ISR - P082452 

CAS Progress Report 

Improved public management and transparency of the mining sector and natural resources sector 

Outcome 
2.2 

Indicator 2.2.1 

Indicator 2.2.2 

On track 

EITI report published (making all financial flows of 
mining operations to GRZ transparent and available to 
the public) 

Percentage of mining companies in compliance with 
Environmental Management Plans for the identified 
priority environmental liabilities increases to 85% by 
2010 (from 35% in 2005) 

Indicator 2.2.3 

WB/WWF management effectiveness score for 3 
National Parks increases from 2007 by end of 2011 for:  
-  Kafue NP from 41 to 64; - Kasanka NP from 61 to 
76; -  Lavushi Manda NP from 9 to 55 

Milestone 2.2.1 

Consolidated environmental management plans 
(CEMP) submitted to EMF Steering Committee 

Milestone 2.2.2 

Zambia EITI Council formed as multi-stakeholder 
group of government, civil society, and companies 

Milestone 2.2.3 Multi-Stakeholder EITI Council has agreed on auditing 
templates 

Partially 
achieved 

EITI Secretariat established. 
EITI Revenue Reconciliation Report published. 
Validation in progre 
Source: BTOR - P102422 
All the major mines namely Konkola Copper Mines, 
Mopani Copper Mines, Chambeshi and Kansanshi 
submitted their EMPs.  The audit to these Mines 
carried out in 2007, a follow-up in  2009 and  2010  
reviewed that compliance levels to EMPs had  
increased on  average to 60% in 2010. 
Source: Mr Solomon Phiri, Manager, Environmental 
Management Facility 
On track Actual: for Kafue NP 2010: 58.5 
Delays for Kasanka NP and Lavushi Manda NP: 
approved in 2010, should end by 2013. Revised 
2013 targets: Kasanka: 66; Lavushi: 39.   
Source: ISR, GEF project endorsement document 
 CEMP 2 completed. 
Source: ISR - P070962 

Achieved 

Achieved 

EITI Council formed - 15 members from 
government, companies and civil society (5 each) 
and supported by EITI Secretariat. 
Source: BTOR - P102422 
On track Auditing template approved in 2010.  
Source: BTOR - P102422 

Ongoing Lending: 
 P070962 ZM - Copperbelt Environment 
Project  
 P071407 ZM - SEED  
 P074258 ZM - GEF SEED Biodiversity 
 GEF MSP OASNTC (regional with Namibia) 
 GEF FSP: "Sustainable Management of Nyika 
Trans-frontier Conservation Area" TFCA 
(regional with Malawi) 
 GEF MSP Extension of Kasanka Management 
System to Lavushi Manda National Park 
Ongoing AAA: 
 Zambia Country Water Resources Assistance 
Strategy  
 EITI++ scoping study  
 Zambia Business Survey15 (Delivered in 2010) 
 Competitiveness NL TA 
 Jobs and Prosperity: Building Zambia‟s 
Competitiveness (JPC)16 (ESW delivered in 
2010; pilot underway) 
Proposed AAA/ TF: 
 EITI++ Implementation 
Proposed Lending: 
 PRSC 
 Follow up Copperbelt Environment Project 
Main Development Partners: 

21 

15 Zambia Business Survey is the old Rural Competitiveness Survey (which was broadened in scope). 
16 Jobs and Prosperity: Building Zambia‟s Competitiveness is the old Micro Foundations of Growth. 

 
  
  
                                                 
 
CAS Progress Report 

Status 

Progress to date 

Instruments & Partners 

MDTF, AU, IMF, EU, Norway, DFID  

Milestone 2.2.4 Monitoring system for CEMPs migrated to 
Environmental Management Information System and 
made available to the public 

Milestone 2.2.5 

Gemstone mining license application processing time 
reduced by 50% (from 30 days to 15 for small scale 
and from 60 days to 30 days for large scale mining 
licenses 

Milestone 2.2.6 

2 air strips and 200 km all season accessible roads built 
in Kafue NP 

Milestone 2.2.7 

Percentage of lodges accessible all year in Kafue 
National Park increases from 10% to 60% by 2011 

Delayed 

Delayed 

Achieved Monitoring system for CEMPs migrated to 
Environmental Management Information System 
and made available to the public, ECZ did not 
complete the LIS, and such statutory Returns could 
not be digitalized. However, all new EIS and EMPs 
commitments were made public through the use of 
ECZ websites. 
Source: Mr Solomon Phiri, Manager, Environmental 
Management Facility 
The award of licenses has been delayed since the 
Mines & Mineral Act is being revised to include the 
current provision (Mining Advisory Committee). 
The Cadastre is functioning, but concerns with 
regard to its efficiency and transparency have been 
studied (independent diagnostic) and raised with the 
GRZ. 
Source: Ministry of Mines 
One air strip completed by November 2010, the 
other expected to be completed by second half of 
2011 
Construction of the 200 km of all season accessible 
roads cancelled, the funds will be used for the 
rehabilitation of 112 all weather river crossings in 
Kafue National Park (6 finished) which will increase 
seasonal access to tourism area of the park. 
Source: ISR - P074258 and Kafue NP Quarterly 
Report 
 Actual 2009: 42.8%; 2010: 57% 
Source: ISR - P074258 and Kafue NP Quarterly 
Report 

On track 

Outcome 
2.3 

Indicator 2.3.1 

Improved business environment, especially for micro-, small- and medium-size enterprises (MSMEs) 

Average number of total days to process MTENR 
tourism licenses issued at Livingstone‟s new “one stop 
shop” decreases to 60 days in 2010 (from 90 days in 
2004) 

Delayed 

Establishment of the “one stop shop” postponed due 
to limitations in the legal/regulatory environment, 
which are currently being addressed in the proposed 
Tourism & Hospitality Act. The Act (if approved in 
its current version) will dramatically reduces 
licensing requirements. 
Source: MTENR 

Ongoing Lending: 
 P071407 ZM - SEED  
Ongoing AAA: 
 Licensing & Regulatory Reform (IFC) 
 Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) - ESW 
delivered in 2009 
 Zambia Business Survey 

22 

 
  
  
CAS Progress Report 

Status 

Progress to date 

Instruments & Partners 

Indicator 2.3.2 

Proportion of adult population with access to 
affordable financial services increases from 37.7% in 
2007 to 45% by 2011 

Off track Actual 2008: 38%; 2009: 34%  
Source: Operations portal 

Milestone 2.3.1 

Implementation of Phase II of the Financial Sector 
Development Plan (FSDP) leads to the introduction of  
new financial products  

Milestone 2.3.2 

Milestone 2.3.3 

Statutory Instruments (such as license fees) for tourism 
and gemstone sectors are submitted for legislative 
action 
Livingstone‟s one-stop-shop is established and 
operating 

Milestone 2.3.4 

Licensing audit completed 

Milestone 2.3.5 

Completed consultations with private sector and GRZ 
to generate competitiveness program 

Delayed 

On track 

On track 

FSDP II completed and approved by Government in 
January 2010. The financial sector contingency 
planning work completed in 2010. 
Source: Bank of Zambia 
Tourism & Hospitality Act has been revised and is 
expected to be enacted  in 2011. 
Source: MTENR 
Construction of Livingstone‟s “one stop shop” has 
been approved since the proposed Tourism & 
Hospitality Act would allow decentralized licensing.  
Procurement on the contractor has begun. 
Source: MTENR, ISR - P071407 
Licensing audit delivered and Cabinet approved 
licensing reform program (2010). 
Source: MCTI 
Achieved Business/Government consultations on industry 
competitiveness completed. 
Source: MoFNP 

Achieved 

Outcome 
2.4 

Indicator 2.4.1 

Milestone 2.4.1 

Milestone 2.4.2 

Improved agricultural productivity and marketing schemes for smallholders 

Value of agricultural exports for target value chains 
(cotton lint) from US$43.4 million in 2006 to US$ 65 
million by 2011 
Value of agricultural exports for target value chains 
(cotton lint) is US$ 57 mill in 2009 

Off track Actual: 2008: US$62.4 million; 2009: US$33.6 
million, 2010: US$45.7 million 
Source: ISR - P070063 
Off track Actual: 2009: US$33.6 million 
Source: ISR - P070063 

Volume of commodities produced by out-grower 
schemes for cotton increases from 170,000 tons in 
2006  to 180,000 tons in 2009 to 205,000 tons by 2011 

Off track 

Cotton production by out-grower schemes has decreased 
during the period.  
Actual: 2008: 71,820 tons; 2009:  87,018 tons; 2010: 
72,482 tons  
Cotton Development Trust small dam/weir and on farm 
irrigation system has been constructed and in use for 
supplemental irrigation of 80ha for improved cotton seed 
production (the irrigation system became operational in 
the season 2009/2010). 
Source: ISR - P070063 

 Competitiveness NL TA 
 Jobs and Prosperity: Building Zambia‟s 
Competitiveness  
Proposed Lending: 
 PRSC  
 Regional Communications Infrastructure 
Program 
 Competitiveness DPL 
Proposed AAA: 
 Financial Sector Assessment Program 
Main Development Partners: 
IFC, GEF, Norway & Nordic Fund, FSDP: 
Sweden and SIDA (partners under Phase I), 
Finland, Netherlands  

Ongoing Lending: 
 P070063 ZM - Agricultural Development  
Support Program 
Ongoing AAA: 
 Agriculture P. Value Chain Analysis 
(Completed) 
Proposed Lending: 
 PRSC 
 Irrigation Development and Support Project 
Proposed AAA: 
 TA Commodity Risk Mgmt 
 Impact Evaluation Fertilizer SP (Completed) 
Main Development Partners 
GEF, IFAD, AfDB, SIDA, USAID 

23 

 
  
  
CAS Progress Report 

Status 

Progress to date 

Instruments & Partners 

Pillar III 

Infrastructure Development 

Outcome 
3.1 

Indicator 3.1.1 

Improved transport infrastructure 

Percentage of rural population with access to an (re-
instated) all weather river crossing in target provinces 
(Luapula, Northern, Copperbelt provinces) increases 
from 40% in 2007 to 80% in 2010 

Achieved By 2010 80% of rural population has access to all 
weather river crossing.  
Source: RDA Report 

Indicator 3.1.2 

Improved links between producers and agricultural 
markets in target project areas to be added after 
assessment in august 2008 

Milestone 3.1.1 

By 2010, all weather river crossings built/rehabilitated 
in 3 provinces: Luapula: 33, Northern: 31, Copperbelt: 
40, and four national parks: 39 

Milestone 3.1.2 

636 km rural roads rehabilitated and OPRC contracts 
under implementation in targeted areas 

Partially 
achieved 

Achieved Baseline data has been collected for relevant 
indicators: average vehicle traffic in improved roads, 
kilometers of rural roads rehabilitated. First impact 
survey started in mid- 2011. 
Source: ISR - P070063 
Weather river crossings built/rehabilitated in Luapula, 
Northern provinces and the four national parks by the 
end of 2009. The construction of structures in 
Copperbelt was cancelled; these funds (together with 
others) were reallocated to the construction of the 
Chiawa bridge over Kafue river ( 2011). 
Source: RDA Progress Report  
5 OPRC contracts work on 583 km rural roads (both 
district and feeder roads). Rehabilitation and 
maintenance are ongoing in Choma, Chipata, Katete, 
Chongwe, and Lundazi. About 20% increase in 
vehicle traffic is expected and progress is being 
monitored. 
Source: ISR - P070063 

On track 

 Ongoing Lending: 
 P106596 ZM - RRMP-APL I 
 P070063 ZM - Agricultural Development 
Support Project 
Proposed Lending:  
 RRMP-APL II 
 E & S Africa TA (Regional) 
 Nacala Development Corridor (Regional) 
Ongoing AAA:  
 International Review Study 
 Review of the RoadSIP II 
Main Development Partners: 
EU, KFW, DANIDA, Japan, AfDB, BADEA, 
GEF, PPIAF  

Outcome 
3.2 

Indicator 3.2.1 

Indicator 3.2.2 

Improved access to water, energy services and irrigation systems 

Water storage and regulation established in 20 target 
rural communities by 2011 (final determination by 
project effectiveness) 

Off track 

Project preparation delayed 

25,000 additional people have access to safe water in 
Lusaka peri-urban area (250/new installed water kiosk) 
by 2011 

On track 

3,700 people have access to clean water (current rate 
of utilization approximately 50 people/kiosks) 
1,300 additional people expected to have access 
when the rest of constructed kiosks will be 
functioning. 

Ongoing Lending: 
 P071259 ZM - Water Sector Performance 
Improvement Project 
 P077452 ZM - Increased Access to Electricity  
Proposed Lending: 
 Water Resources Dev. Project 
 Small Towns WSS Dev. Project 
 Energy Efficiency & Access Project 

24 

 
  
  
Indicator 3.2.3 

 Number of people provided with access to electricity 
under the project by household connections  

Indicator 3.2.4 

6200 ha of newly irrigated land under PPP 
management 

Milestone 3.2.1 

Sites for 3 medium and 30 small dams identified and 
construction designs completed by end of 2009 

Milestone 3.2.2 

60% of total new water kiosks installed and operational 
by end of 2009 

Milestone 3.2.3 

Number of projects implemented by REA is 7 by end 
of 2009 

Milestone 3.2.4 

PPPs of smallholders and commercial farmers/agro-
entrepreneurs for use of irrigation systems are 
established in selected project areas 

Pillar IV Human Capital Development 

Outcome 
4.1 

Indicator 4.1.1 

Improved health programming 

Percentage of institutional deliveries increases from 
43% in 2006 to 50% in 2011 

CAS Progress Report 

Status 

Progress to date 

Instruments & Partners 

 Irrigation Development Project 
 Hydro Energy Generation Project  
 S-A Africa Power Market Program 
Ongoing AAA:  
 Country Water Resources Strategy 
 Zambezi Multi-Sector Investment Opportunity 
Analysis 
Proposed AAA: 
 NL TA Energy Sector  
 Water Pollution & Supply Solutions Study 
Main Development Partners: 
GEF, EU, SIDA, JBIC/JICA, USAID  

Source: ISR - P071259 

On track 

On track 

By end 2012: (i) in urban areas 90,000, (ii) in rural 
areas 22,800 
Source: ISR - P077452  
Completed: 80ha at Magoye; 220ha of sugar cane at 
Kaleya; 259 ha at Chayanya 
ID funding: expected in the next two years: 2,770 
ha, and 1,600 ha in subsequent years at Mwombashi, 
Lusitu, Musakashi 
In collaboration with IFC: expected in the next two 
years 280 ha at Megoba, and 543 ha at Chikupi 
Source: Ministry of Agriculture Report 
The sites for 3 medium and 30 small dams have 
been identified. The construction designs are under 
preparation. 
Source: Department of Water Affaires Report 
Achieved By April 2011, 99 kiosks constructed or 
rehabilitated in 12 areas, with 56 currently supplying 
water. The rest expected to be connected to the 
distribution system in 2011. 
Source: ISR - P071259 
2 projects implemented by REA with WB funding.  
6 projects under preparation. 
Source:  REA Annual Work Plan 
3 PPPs established by 2010. The number of PPPs is 
expected to increase by 2012. 
Source:  Mission Aide-memoire 

On track 

Delayed 

Delayed 

On track Actual 2007: 43%, 2008: 45%, 2009: N/A; 2010: 
N/A 
Source: HMIS 

 Ongoing Lending: 
 P096131 ZM - Malaria Health Booster + 

25 

 
  
  
CAS Progress Report 

Status 

Progress to date 

Instruments & Partners 

Indicator 4.1.2 

Indicator 4.1.3 

Percentage of children under 5 years of age who sleep 
under a treated bed net increases from 30% in 2006 to 
60% by 2011 

Percentage of people in indoor residual spraying (IRS) 
eligible districts areas who sleep in appropriately 
sprayed structures from 40% in 2006 to 80% by 2011 

On track Actual: 2008: 45.9%; 2010: 52.3% 
Source: MIS17 

Achieved Actual: 2008: 85%; 2010: 93% 
Source: MIS 

Milestone 4.1.1 

Results-based financing implemented (based on 8 
indicators) in 9 districts (yr 1) 18 districts (yr 2) after 
TF effectiveness 

Delayed 

Milestone 4.1.2 

Scale up of IRS campaign from 15 districts in 2007 to 
36 districts in 2010 

Achieved 

The TF Grant for RBF became effective on February 
22, 2011 after issues in the broader health portfolio 
were rectified. The MOH has been working with the 
Bank on preparations for roll-out to the pilot districts 
which will begin second half of  2011 
Source: Aide-memoire P096131 
 Actual: 2008: 15; 2010: 36 
Source: MIS 

Milestone 4.1.3 

HR retention scheme implemented 

Achieved HR implementation scheme is being implemented 
and has been successful to improve access to skilled 
attendants. 
By 2010, 858 health workers have been retained 
under the scheme in rural areas as follows: 137 
medical officers, 6 medical consultants, 44 medical 
licentiates, 40 clinical officers, 203 nurses and other 
health tutors, 3309 nurses and midwives and 119 
environmental health technologists. 
Source: HR Information System 

Russian TF  
 ZANARA (Completed) 
Ongoing AAA: 
 Country Sector Health Report  (Completed) 
Proposed Lending: 
 Southern Africa Transport Corridors 
HIV/AIDS Program (regional) 
Proposed TFs and other grants: 
 Norwegian TF Maternal Mortality 
 Russian Debt swap 
Main Development Partners: 
Health SWAp incl. Roll Back Malaria (RBM), 
HIV/AIDS and Partnerships: UN Family, 
MACEPA. DFID, Global Fund, USG/PEPFAR, 
NORAD, USAID, JICA, RNE, EU, SIDA, 
DANIDA, JICA, CIDA, Ireland Aid  

Outcome 
4.2 

Indicator 4.2.1 

Strengthened skills and education for the formal and informal sectors 

> 90% of the 2004 and 2005 TEVET graduates find 
employment within 12 months and > 70% within 6 
months of graduation (intermediary result in 2005: 
89% within 12 months and 72% within 6 months) 

Achieved Actual 2008: 90% of the TEVET graduates found 
employment within 12 months of graduation, and 
55.1% within 6 months. 
Source: MoE's Annual Report (2009) 

Indicator 4.2.2 

Increased primary completion rate towards reaching 
MDG  

On track No quantitative target specified 
Completion rate at Grade 7 steadily increasing 

Ongoing Lending: 
 P057167 ZM - TEVET (Closed) 
Ongoing AAA: 
 PETS basic education 
Proposed Lending & TF: 
 “Education for All” Catalytic TF  

17 The Malaria indicator survey (MIS) is only done every two years. The reports are only available for 2008 for data collected in 2007 and 2010 for data collected in 2009. 

26 

 
  
  
                                                 
 
CAS Progress Report 

Status 

Progress to date 

Instruments & Partners 

Milestone 4.2.1 

Percentage of national training courses whose curricula 
are reviewed per annum in response to market demands 
increases from 4 % in 2002 

Achieved 

Milestone 4.2.2 

National education sector plan endorsed by GRZ and 
donors 

Achieved 

Milestone 4.2.3 

Policy for expanded access to post-basic education 
formulated 

Achieved 

Proposed AAA: 
 Strategy post-basic education 
 PVU 
Main Development Partners: 
GTZ, DANIDA, NL; Multi-donor (FTI) Catalytic 
Trust Fund, READ  

Actual 2009: 93.2%. It surpassed its target, 90%18, 
but delays for the other Grades. 
Source: MoE's Annual Report (2009) 
80 national courses were reviewed during the life of 
TEVET project (2002-2008). 
Source: ICR - P057167 

 The National Implementation Framework (NIF II) 
was endorsed by donors to support GRZ application 
for the FTI funds. NIF II is extended to June 2011 to 
allow for the finalization of the next phase under 
NIF III; this is under development and there was a 
joint donor appraisal of the NIF III. GRZ is in the 
processing of revising the draft NIF III on the basis 
of the joint appraisal recommendations after which 
the CPs will reassess the document before 
endorsement decision can be undertaken. 
Source: Netherlands Embassy 
The NIF II was about increasing access especially at 
basic education level and under the NIF III there is a 
shift to increasing access to post-basic education 
levels. The policy for expanding access to post-basic 
education is included in the SNDP and the new NIF 
III (under development). There are also other 
policies in support of post-basic education: abolition 
of grade 10 cut-off points; abolition of the APU 
(Afternoon Production Units) system and integration 
of these into the regular school system; provision of 
bursaries to Orphans and Vulnerable Children 
(OVCs), especially girls. 
Source: Netherlands Embassy 

18 Government education sector target. 

27 

 
  
  
 
                                                 
 
Annex Table 4: Updated and Revised CAS Indicators 

Original CAS Indicators 

Updated and Revised Indicators 

CAS Outcome 2.2 Improved public management and transparency of the mining sector 
and natural resources sector 

Indicator 2.2.3: WB/WWF management effectiveness score 
for 3 National Parks increases from 2007 by end of 2011 for:  -  
Kafue NP from 41 to 64; - Kasanka NP from 61 to 76; -  
Lavushi Manda NP from 9 to 55 

Revised: WB/WWF management effectiveness score for 3 
National Parks increases from 2007 by end of 2011 for:  -  
Kafue NP from 41 to 64; by the end of 2013 for Kasanka NP 
from 61 to 66; -  Lavushi Manda NP from 9 to 39                                     

Milestone 2.2.5: Gemstone mining 
license application 
processing time reduced by 50% (from 30 days to 15 for small 
scale and from 60 days to 30 days for large scale mining 
licenses) 
Milestone 2.2.6: 2 air strips and 200 km all season accessible 
roads built in Kafue NP 

Dropped 

Revised: 3 air strips and 112 all weather river crossings 
rehabilitated in Kafue National Park. 

CAS Outcome 2.3 Improved business environment, especially for micro-, small- and 
medium-size enterprises  

Indicator 2.3.3: Proportion of adult population with access to 
affordable financial services increases from 37.7% in 2007 to 
45% by 2011 

Dropped 

CAS Outcome 2.4. Improved agricultural productivity and marketing schemes for 
smallholders 

Indicator 2.4.1: Value of agricultural exports for target value 
chains (cotton lint) from US$43.4 million in 2006 to US$ 65 
million by 2011 

Milestone 2.4.1: Value of agricultural exports for target value 
chains (cotton lint) is US$ 57 mill in 2009  
Milestone 2.4.2: Volume of commodities produced by out-
grower schemes for cotton increases from 170,000 tons in 
2006  to 180,000 tons in 2009 to 205,000 tons by 2011 

Revised: Volume of agricultural exports for target value 
chains (t/year) [from 50,000 in 2010 to 51,900 by 2012] 
- 
cotton from 30,000 in 2010 to 35,000 t/ha   
- 
sunflower 65 to 75 
- 
groundnuts 440 to 835 
- 
paprika/chilli 2 to 3 
soybean 2,050 to 16,000 
Dropped 

- 

Revised: Volume of commodities produced by out-grower 
schemes increases from 2006 to 2011 for: 
- cotton from 30,000 tons to 71,000 tons 
- maize from 1,424,439 tons to 2,008,455 tons 
- paprika from 775 tons to 1300 tons 
- chili from 2 tons to 11 tons 
- soya beans from 89,600 to 120,000 tons 

CAS Outcome 3.1. Improved transport infrastructure 

Indicator 3.1.1: Percentage of rural population with access to 
an (re-instated) all weather river crossing in target provinces 
(Luapula, Northern, Copperbelt provinces) increases from 40% 
in 2007 to 80% in 2010 
Indicator 3.1.2: Improved links between producers and 
agricultural markets in target project areas to be added after 
assessment in august 2008 
Milestone 3.1.1: By 2010, all weather river crossings 
built/rehabilitated in 3 provinces: Luapula: 33, Northern: 31, 
Copperbelt: 40, and four national parks: 39 

Replaced: Number of rural population with access to re-
instated river crossings increases from 0 in 2007 to 502,000 in 
2012 

Replaced: Average vehicle traffic in improved roads from 
3,480 in 2009 to 4,176 in 2010 to 5,046 in 2011. 

Revised: By 2012, all weather river crossings 
built/rehabilitated in 2 provinces: Luapula: 33, Northern: 31, 
and four national parks: 39; and construction of the Chiawa 
Bridge over Kafue river 

CAS Outcome 3.2. Improved access to water, energy services and irrigation systems 

Milestone 3.2.3: Number of projects implemented by REA is 
7 by end of 2009 

Revised: Number of projects implemented by REA is 7 by end 
of 2011. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
Original CAS Indicators 

Updated and Revised Indicators 

CAS Outcome 4.2. Strengthened skills and education for the formal and informal sectors 

Milestone 4.2.1: Percentage of national training courses whose 
curricula are reviewed per annum in response to market 
demands increases from 4 % in 2002 
Milestone 4.2.2: National education sector plan endorsed by 
GRZ and donors 
Milestone 4.2.3: Policy for expanded access to post-basic 
education formulated 

Dropped 

Dropped 

Dropped 

29 

 
 
 
Annex Table 5:  Comparison of Indicative and Actual Bank Program (Lending 
and Non Lending) 

FY08 

FY08 

Indicative 

Actual 

Lending 
Economic Management and Growth Credit II 
Energy Efficiency Improvement and Access Project 
AAA 
Economic Impact of Tourism Study 
Investment Climate Assessment 
Citizens Empowerment Policy Note 
Public-Private partnership Policy Note 
Education Expenditure tracking Survey 

FY09 

Lending 
Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project II 
Competitiveness DPL 
Poverty Reduction Support Credit I 
AAA 
Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy 
Financial Sector Assessment 
Agriculture Value Chain Analysis 
Rural Competitiveness Study 
Growth – Value Chain Analysis  

Lending 
Economic Management and Growth Credit II - $10m 
Increased Access to Electricity Services SIL - $33m 
Increased Access to Electricity (GEF Funded) - $4.5m 
AAA 

Economic Impact of Tourism Study 
Investment Climate Assessment 
Citizens Empowerment Policy Note 
Public-Private Partnership Policy Note 

Improvement Project – 

Education Public Expenditure Tracking  
FY09 (Bank program impacted by the death of President 
Mwanawasa and national elections that followed) 
Lending 
Water Sector Performance 
Additional Financing - $10m 
AAA 
Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy 
Financial Sector Assessment 
Agriculture Value Chain Analysis 
Policy Notes for New Government 
Investment Climate Assessment  
Financial Sector Assessment Update 
Constraints to Inclusive Growth 

FY10 

FY10 

Lending 
Water Resources Development Project 
Irrigation Development Project 
Poverty Reduction Support Credit II 
AAA 
Public Expenditure Review 
Transport Cost Analysis 
Impact Evaluation of the Fertilizer Support Program 
Health Sector Report 
Strategy for Post Basic Education 

Lending 
Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project II - $75m 
Poverty Reduction Support Credit I - $20m 
AAA 
Public Expenditure Review  
Jobs and Prosperity Initiative 
Impact Assessment of Fertilizer Program 
Country Status Report on Health  
EITI++ Scoping Study 

FY11                            

FY11                          

Lending 
Hydro Energy Generation Project 
Small Towns Water and Sanitation Project 
Poverty Reduction Support Credit III 
AAA 
Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment 
Investment Climate Assessment 
Commodity Risk Assessment 
Development Policy Review 
Water Pollution and Supply Solutions Study 

FY12 

 Lending 
Livestock Development Project 
Water Resources Management Project 
Poverty Reduction Support Credit III 
AAA 
Poverty Assessment 

Lending 
RRMP II – Additional Financing - $15m 
IAES – Additional Financing - $20m 
Malaria Booster Program – Additional Financing - $30m 
Irrigation Development and Support Project - $115m 
Poverty Reduction Support Credit II - $30m 
Kafue-Livingstone Transmission Upgrade Project - $30m 
AAA 
Zambia Business Survey 
Investment Climate Assessment 
ESW – Improving Access to ACT 

FY12                           Actual 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex Table 6: Global Programs and Bilateral Grants Under Implementation 

FY08  

Russian Trust Fund for Malaria Control -$6.8 m 

Actual 

FY09 

Results Based Financing Pilot Activities and Impact Evaluation - $ 1.2m 
Extension of Kasanka Management System to Lavushi Manda National Park - $0.9 m 
Avian Influenza Prevention and Control FY09 -$ 1.0m 
GER Sustainable Land Management Nuimvi Wiidkabd Ecosystem - $0.75m 
Regional COMESA: TA, Africa Agricultural Market Program - $2.7m 

FY10 

Governance Partnership Facility - $2.0 m 
Co-financing of  IDA financed Increased Access to Electricity Services Project - $2.38 m 
Pilot Program for Climate Resilience Phase I - $1.5 m 
TA: Investing in Women Producers to Respond to Food Price Crisis – Operationalizing Gender in Agriculture  
Sourcebook - $0.02m 

FY11 

Catalytic Fund  Grant Education For All – Fast Track Initiative - $60.2 m 
READ Zambia  II - $2.1 m 
Regional COMESA: Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) Multi -Donor Trust Fund 
Grant - $4.5m 
TA Gender in Irrigation GENTF Project - $0.05m 
TA Statistical capacity building of the livestock sector TF Project - $0.35m 

31 

 
 
 
 
Annex Table 7: Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 

As of October 2011 

32 

Indicator2009201020112012Portfolio AssessmentNumber of Projects Under Implementation a81099Average Implementation Period (years) b4.64.85.65.9Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c12.50.011.111.1Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c9.80.05.45.4Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d25.020.022.222.2Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d20.429.822.722.7Disbursement Ratio (%) e24.519.018.31.1Portfolio ManagementCPPR during the year (yes/no)Supervision Resources (total US$)Average Supervision (US$/project)Memorandum ItemSince FY 80Last Five FYsProj Eval by OED by Number673Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)2,946.373.7% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number46.30.0% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt39.10.0a.  As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).b.  Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.c.  Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).d.  As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.e.  Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the      beginning of the year: Investment projects only.*   All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,    which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year. 
 
Annex Table 8:  IDA and Grants Operations Portfolio, Regional Projects and Trust Funds 

As of October 12, 2011  

33 

Closed Projects84IBRD/IDA *Total Disbursed (Active) 192.19          of which has been repaid 0.00Total Disbursed (Closed) 517.24          of which has been repaid 117.19Total Disbursed (Active + Closed) 709.43          of which has been repaid 117.19Total Undisbursed (Active) 337.25Total Undisbursed (Closed) 0.00Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed) 337.25Active ProjectsProject IDProject NameDevelopment ObjectivesImplementation ProgressFiscal YearIDAGRANTCancel.Undisb.Orig.Frm Rev'dP102459ZM- Irrigation Development Project(FY10)MSMS2011115117.9647460.00000016P070063ZM-Agr Dev Support Program (FY06)SS200637.219.531455216.3410943-20.858881P076320ZM-GEF Increased Access to Elec (FY08)MSMS20084.5P074258ZM-GEF SEED Biodiversity SIL (FY05)SMS200540.279624690.27962469P077452ZM-Incr.Eff.&Access to Elec SIL (FY08)MSMS20085350.381744521.45535534.3886886P096131ZM-Malaria Health Booster SIL (FY06)SS20065024.6984754-6.30811932.8041603P082452ZM-Pub Service Mgmnt Prog - Support ProjMSMS2006304.843860992.64740597P071985ZM-Road Rehab Maintenance Prj (FY04)MSMS20049033.0431287-10.3794014.6666667P106596ZM-RRMP PHASE II APLSMS20107565.6691070.42476191P071407ZM-SEED (FY05)MUMS200528.153.767173442.438566462.4385664P071259ZM-Water Sector Performance Improv (FY07MSMS20073317.35099335.444529243.8157403Overall Result511.358.5337.53030932.3438174-2.7450589Regional ProjectsP0692583A- Southern Afr Power Mrkt APL 1 (FY04)MSMS2004359.20.4288.7P0705473A- GEF Grndwtr & Drght Mgmt TAL (FY05)MSMS200570.95Overall Result366.20.4289.65Trust FundsTF NameGrant AmountUndisb.TF010148Zambia Strengthening Climate Resilience (PPCR Phase II)0.50.5TF010166Zambia: 10084 Risk Based Supervision0.40.4TF010435Zambia # 10107 Regulatory and Supervisory Framework for Microinsurance and Insurance Intermediaries0.30.3TF053349GEF3 FSP-ZAMBIA:SUPPORT TO ECONOMIC EXPANSION AND DIVERSIFICATION PROJECT4.00.3TF071194Co-financing of IDA-financed Increased Access to Electricity Services Project in Zambia0.00.0TF080917INCREASED ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY SERVICES0.00.0TF091376ZAMBIA BOOSTER PROGRAM FOR MALARIA CONTROL6.92.2TF092134ZAMBIA SUPERVISION: RUSSIAN FEDERATION  GRANT TO THE BOOSTER PROGRAM FOR MALARIA CONTROL IN AF0.10.1TF092281ZAMBIA HRBF DESIGN - BANK EXECUTED0.50.1TF092315GEF FSP - REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA: INCREASED ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY SERVICES PROJECT4.54.3TF092762ZAMBIA HRBF IMPACT EVALUATION - BANK EXECUTED1.00.6TF094352GAVI PROPOSAL FOR AFRICA HSS WORK IN ZAMBIA0.30.0TF094423ZM:RESULTS ORIENTED MONITORING & EVALUATION0.50.3TF094524READ-ZAMBIA0.30.1TF095228IDF:  Zambia-Capacity Buiding for Public Expenditure Tracking(PET) through HIV/AIDS PET Survey0.50.1TF095772Zambia HRBF Results Based Financing Project16.87.5TF096208Support to EITI Implementation0.10.0TF096360Technical Assistance to Support the Efficiency of Mineral Revenues Collection and Investment in Zambia0.40.1TF096361Support to increased accountability0.30.1TF096485Zambia: Institutionalizing Livestock Data Collection and Analysis in Zambia0.30.1TF096931Sustainable Intensification of Agricultural Production and Marketing: The Role of Gender in Irrigation Development0.10.0TF096943Zambia: Pilot Program for Climate Resilience - Phase I1.51.1TF097260EC Grant for the Co-financing of Increased Access to Electricity Services Project13.02.5TF097552Extension of Kasanka Management System to Lavushi Manda National Park0.80.6TF097817Zambia PPCR0.20.0TF097982READ Zambia II2.11.3TF099158Support to Increase Demand for Good Governance in Zambia0.50.1TF099384Zambia HRBF-Supervision and Monitoring0.20.1Overall Result55.922.8Supervision RatingLast PSR Disbursements a/Difference BetweenExpected and Actual 
 
Annex Table 9A:  IFC Held and Disbursed Portfolio 

As of October 2011 

34 

2009201020112012*Original Commitments (US$m)IFC and Participants6.0041.051.700.02IFC's Own Accounts only6.0041.051.700.02Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts onlyAGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY17.05FINANCE & INSURANCE61.02100100OIL, GAS AND MINING10021.92Total10099.99100100Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts onlyEquity10021.9243.18Guarantee0.1256.82100Loan77.95Total10099.99100100* Data as of October 01,2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex Table 9B:  IFC Held and Disbursed Portfolio 

As of 10/12/11 (Amounts in US$ millions) 

35 

CommittedDisbursed OutstandingFY ApprovalCompanyLoanEquity**Quasi Equity*GT/RMPartici  pantLoanEquity**Quasi Equity*GT/RMPartici  pant2010Access zambia00.7700000.390002007Aef protea hotel0.8300000.830000Letshego zambia1.2500001.2500002008Madison group2.7920002.792000Stanbic bank0011000011002010Zambeef70000700002010Zanaco250000250000Total Portfolio:36.872.77110036.872.391100* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types. 
 
 
 
Annex Table 10: Zambia at a Glance 

36 

Zambia at a glance10/26/11 Sub-Key Development Indicators SaharanLowZambiaAfricaincome(2010)Population, mid-year (millions)12.9840846Surface area (thousand sq. km)75324,24217,838Population growth (%)1.62.52.2Urban population (% of total population)363729GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)13.5944431GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)1,0701,125509GNI per capita (PPP, international $)1,2802,0511,220GDP growth (%)7.61.74.6GDP per capita growth (%)5.9-0.72.4(most recent estimate, 2004–2010)Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)6451..Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)8273..Life expectancy at birth (years)485357Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)698176Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)152528Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)817169Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)615455Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)113105107Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)11295100Access to an improved water source (% of population)606064Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)493135Net Aid Flows1980199020002010a(US$ millions)Net ODA and official aid3174757951,269Top 3 donors (in 2008):   United States411246232   European Union Institutions202626152   United Kingdom434311174Aid (% of GNI)8.815.825.811.1Aid per capita (US$)556078100Long-Term Economic TrendsConsumer prices (annual % change)..137.026.08.5GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)11.8106.430.011.7Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)0.834.53,110.84,797.1Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)..1471002191980–901990–20002000–10Population, mid-year (millions)5.87.910.212.93.12.62.4GDP (US$ millions)3,8843,2883,23816,1931.00.55.6Agriculture15.120.622.39.23.64.21.1Industry42.151.325.337.21.0-4.29.4   Manufacturing18.336.111.49.24.10.85.1Services42.828.152.453.6-0.22.55.5Household final consumption expenditure55.264.487.455.23.67.64.3General gov't final consumption expenditure25.519.09.513.3-3.4-8.124.9Gross capital formation 23.317.317.422.4-4.33.96.6Exports of goods and services41.435.927.144.1-3.36.721.9Imports of goods and services45.436.641.535.0-2.015.515.6Gross savings7.36.7-1.320.8Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2010 data are preliminary. Group data are for 2009.  .. indicates data are not available.a. Aid data are for 2009.Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).      (average annual growth %)  (% of GDP)10505100-415-1930-3445-4960-6475-79percent of total populationAge distribution, 2009MaleFemale0204060801001201401601802001990199520002009ZambiaSub-Saharan AfricaUnder-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)-15-10-505109505GDPGDP per capitaGrowth of GDP and GDP per capita (%) 
 
37 

ZambiaBalance of Payments and Trade20002010(US$ millions)Total merchandise exports (fob)7574,564Total merchandise imports (cif)9784,105Net trade in goods and services-4461,470Current account balance-588-258   as a % of GDP-18.2-1.6Workers' remittances and   compensation of employees (receipts)3641Reserves, including gold1141,886Central Government Finance(% of GDP)Current revenue (including grants)19.420.1   Tax revenue17.316.5Current expenditure20.919.3Technology and Infrastructure20002009Overall surplus/deficit-11.6-3.3Paved roads (% of total)22.0..Highest marginal tax rate (%)Fixed line and mobile phone   Individual30..   subscribers (per 100 people)235   Corporate3535High technology exports   (% of manufactured exports)0.31.6External Debt and Resource FlowsEnvironment(US$ millions)Total debt outstanding and disbursed5,7223,689Agricultural land (% of land area)2930Total debt service185147Forest area (% of land area)68.866.5Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)3,6721,962Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)....Total debt (% of GDP)176.722.8Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)7,3096,513Total debt service (% of exports)20.72.1Freshwater withdrawal (billion cubic meters)1.7..Foreign direct investment (net inflows)122699CO2 emissions per capita (mt)0.170.22Portfolio equity (net inflows)6-13GDP per unit of energy use   (2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)1.72.1Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)595583 World Bank Group portfolio20002009 (US$ millions) IBRD   Total debt outstanding and disbursed250   Disbursements0–   Principal repayments8–   Interest payments3– IDA   Total debt outstanding and disbursed1,823407   Disbursements21033Private Sector Development20002010   Total debt service174Time required to start a business (days)–18 IFC (fiscal year)Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)–27.9   Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio2218Time required to register property (days)–40      of which IFC own account2218   Disbursements for IFC own account165Ranked as a major constraint to business20002010   Portfolio sales, prepayments and   (% of managers surveyed who agreed)      repayments for IFC own account10      Access to/cost of financing84.5..      Tax rates57.5.. MIGA   Gross exposure310Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)7.317.4   New guarantees300Bank capital to asset ratio (%)....Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  2010 data are preliminary.10/18/11.. indicates data are not available.  – indicates observation is not applicable.Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).0255075100Control of corruptionRule of lawRegulatory qualityPolitical stabilityVoice and accountabilityCountry's percentile rank (0-100)higher values imply better ratings20092000Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World BankIBRD, 0IDA, 407IMF, 345Other multi-lateral, 464Bilateral, 287Private, 1,062Short-term, 474Composition of total external debt, 2009US$ millions 
 
38 

Millennium Development GoalsZambiaWith selected targets to achieve between 1990 and  2015(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)  Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition1990199520002009   Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)   62.862.155.4..   Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)   69.768.166.859.3   Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)  0.74.23.4..   Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)   21.219.619.614.9Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling   Primary school enrollment (net, %)84756991   Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)   ....6187   Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)   21212449   Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)66..6975Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women   Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)   87..9196   Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)   17..22..   Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)   7101014Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds   Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)   183177157111   Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)   1091059469   Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)90868585Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths   Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)   390490600470   Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)   51474747   Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)   15262241Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases   Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)   12.715.014.413.5   Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)   297536602433   Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)72747980Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs   Access to an improved water source (% of population)49515460   Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)46474749   Forest area (% of land area)   71.0..68.866.5   Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)........   CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)   0.30.20.20.2   GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)   1.81.61.72.1Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development      Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)   0.80.80.80.7   Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)0.00.00.934.1   Internet users (per 100 people)   0.00.00.26.3   Personal computers (per 100 people)   ....0.71.1Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.  .. indicates data are not available.10/18/11Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).Zambia0255075100125200020052009Primary net enrollment ratioRatio of girls to boys in primary & secondary educationEducation indicators (%)010203040200020052009Fixed + mobile subscribersInternet usersICT indicators (per 100 people)02550751001990199520002009ZambiaSub-Saharan AfricaMeasles immunization (% of 1-year olds) 
 
 
Mafinga Hills
Mafinga Hills
Mafinga Hills
(2301 m)
(2301 m)
(2301 m)

Kaulishishi
Kaulishishi
Kaulishishi
(1420 m)
(1420 m)
(1420 m)

Machechete
Machechete
Machechete
(1488 m)
(1488 m)
(1488 m)
Rufunsa
Rufunsa
Rufunsa

MMuulloonnggaa
Mulonga
PPllaaiinn
Plain

BBuussaannggaa
Busanga
SSwwaammpp
Swamp

LLuukkaannggaa
Lukanga
SSwwaammpp
Swamp

MM uu cc hhiinn gg aa
M u c hin g a

MMttss..
Mts.

Mumbwa
Mumbwa
Mumbwa

Mutanda
Mutanda
Mutanda

Mwinilunga
Mwinilunga
Mwinilunga

Namwala
Namwala
Namwala

Kafue
Kafue
Kafue

Mazabuka
Mazabuka
Mazabuka

Kaema
Kaema
Kaema

Pokuma
Pokuma
Pokuma

Senkobo
Senkobo
Senkobo

Kalomo
Kalomo
Kalomo

Choma
Choma
Choma

Bowwood
Bowwood
Bowwood

Pemba
Pemba
Pemba

Chirundu
Chirundu
Chirundu

Kariba
Kariba
Kariba

Shangombo
Shangombo
Shangombo

Kasempa
Kasempa
Kasempa

Chisasa
Chisasa
Chisasa

Chingola
Chingola
Chingola

Kapiri Mposhi
Kapiri Mposhi
Kapiri Mposhi

Old Mkushi
Old Mkushi
Old Mkushi

Mkushi
Mkushi
Mkushi

Nyimba
Nyimba
Nyimba

Petauke
Petauke
Petauke

MfuweMfuwe
Mfuwe

MpikaMpika
Mpika

Chambeshi
Chambeshi
Chambeshi

KopeKope
Kope

Chembe
Chembe
Chembe

Samfya
Samfya
Samfya

Luwingu
Luwingu
Luwingu

Mpulungu
Mpulungu
Mpulungu
MbalaMbala
Mbala

Sumbu
Sumbu
Sumbu

Mwenzo
Mwenzo
Mwenzo

Nchelenge
Nchelenge
Nchelenge

Kaputa
Kaputa
Kaputa

Kawambwa
Kawambwa
Kawambwa

Mporokoso
Mporokoso
Mporokoso

Mufulira
Mufulira
Mufulira

Mwanya
Mwanya
Mwanya

Chisomo
Chisomo
Chisomo

Katete
Katete
Katete

Serenje
Serenje
Serenje

Lubungu
Lubungu
Lubungu

Kawana
Kawana
Kawana

MavuaMavua
Mavua

Luampa
Luampa
Luampa

Kalabo
Kalabo
Kalabo

Senanga
Senanga
Senanga

Kabompo
Kabompo
Kabompo

Manyinga
Manyinga
Manyinga

Lukulu
Lukulu
Lukulu

Zambezi
Zambezi
Zambezi

Chavuma
Chavuma
Chavuma

Mulobezi
Mulobezi
Mulobezi

Kataba
Kataba
Kataba

Malundano
Malundano
Malundano

Sesheke
Sesheke
Sesheke

Sitoti
Sitoti
Sitoti

SO U T H E R N
SO U T H E R N
SO U T H E R N

CENTRAL
CENTRAL
CENTRAL

NO RNO R T H E R N
NO R T H E R N
T H E R N

EASTERN
EASTERN
EASTERN

W E S T E R N
W E S T E R N
W E S T E R N

NORNORTH-TH-
NORTH-
WESTERN
WESTERN
WESTERN

COPPER-
COPPER-
COPPER-
BELT
BELBELTT

LLUU
LU

AAPP UU LL AA
AP U L A

LL UU SS AA KK AA
L U S A K A

Kabwe
Kabwe
Kabwe

Livingstone
Livingstone
Livingstone

MonguMongu
Mongu

Solwezi
Solwezi
Solwezi

NdolaNdola
Ndola

Chipata
Chipata
Chipata

MansaMansa
Mansa

Kasama
Kasama
Kasama

LUSAKA
LUSAKA
LUSAKA

A N G O L A
A N G O L A

D E M O C R AT I C R E P U B L I C
D E M O C R AT I C R E P U B L I C
O F C O N G O
O F C O N G O

TA N Z A N I A
TA N Z A N I A

M A L AW I
M A L AW I

Z I M B A BW E
Z I M B A BW E

N A M I B I A
N A M I B I A

B O T SWA N A
B O T SWA N A

M O Z A M B I Q U E
M O Z A M B I Q U E

O
O
M
M

Z
Z

A
A

M
M

B
B

I
I

Q
Q

U
U

E
E

To 
To 
Caianda
Caianda

To 
To 
Lumbala
Lumbala

To 
To 
Lutembo
Lutembo

To 
To 
Chiume
Chiume

To 
To 
Ngoma
Ngoma

To 
To 
Mpandamatenga
Mpandamatenga

To 
To 
Matetsi
Matetsi

To 
To 
Harare
Harare

To 
To 
Cahora Bassa
Cahora Bassa

To 
To 
Lubumbashi
Lubumbashi

To Mokambo
To Mokambo

To 
To 
Sumbawanga
Sumbawanga

To 
To 
Mbeya
Mbeya

To 
To 
Karonga
Karonga

To 
To 
Mzuzu
Mzuzu

To 
To 
Lilongwe
Lilongwe

To 
To 
Furancungo
Furancungo

Luangwa

bezi
Z
a

m

Lunga

Lunsemfwa

Luangwa

K

a f u e

C
u

a
n
d
o

Lungweb

u

n

g

u

K a f ue

Lake
Bangwelu

Lake
Mweru
Wantipa

Lake
Mweru

Lake
  Tanganyika

Lake
Kariba

Lake
Malawi

22°E

26°E

30°E

22°E

26°E

30°E

12°S

16°S

8°S

12°S

ZAMBIA

0

150

100

50

0

50

100

150 Miles

200 Kilometers

I

B
R

D

3
3
5
1
4

O

C

T

O

B
E
R
2
0
0
4

Z A M B I A

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

PROVINCE CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

RAILROADS

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

This map was produced by 
the Map Design Unit of The 
World Bank. The boundaries, 
colors, denominations and 
any other information shown 
on this map do not imply,  on 
the part of The World Bank 
Group, any judgment on the 
legal status  of any territory,  
or any endorsement or 
acceptance of such 
boundaries.

 
 
