d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

d
e

z

i

r

o
h

t

u

A

e

r

u

s

o

l

c
s

i

D

c

i
l

b
u

P

Document of 
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 66065-DO 

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

AND 

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION  

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT 

FOR THE 

THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC  

December 21, 2011 

Caribbean Country Management Unit 
Latin America and the Caribbean Region 
International Bank for the Reconstruction and Development 
Latin America and Caribbean Department 
International Finance Corporation 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the 
performance of their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without 
World Bank authorization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Country Partnership Strategy for the Dominican Republic was discussed on 17 September 2009. 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 

(Exchange Rate Effective as of November 9, 2011) 

Currency Unit       =
US$1.00

Dominican Pesos
  38.38

Fiscal Year 
January 1 – December 31 

SELECTED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

A&A 
AAA 
AF 
APL 
CARCIP 

CCT 
CMS 
CPAR 
CPI 
CPPR 

CPS 

CSO 
DPL 
EFO 
EU 

FBS 
FDI 

FY 
GAC 
GDP 
IBRD 

Accounting and Auditing 
Analytical and Advisory Services 
Additional Financing 
Adaptable Program Loan 
Caribbean Advanced Regional 
Communications Infrastructure 
Program 
Conditional Cash Transfer 
Clinic Management System 
Country Procurement Assessment 
Consumer Price Index 
Country Portfolio Performance 
Review 
Country Partnership Strategy 

Civil Society Organization 
Development Policy Loan 
Externally Financed Output  
European Union 

Fee Based Service 
Foreign Direct Investment 

Fiscal Year 
Governance and Anti-Corruption 
Gross Domestic Product 
International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development 

ICT 
IDB 
IDF 
IFC 
IMF 

Information and communication technology 
Inter American Development Bank 
Institutional Development Fund 
International Finance Corporation 
International Monetary Fund 

IPAC 
Participatory Anti-Corruption Initiative 
LCR 
Latin America and the Caribbean 
MIGA 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency 
NLTA 
Non-lending Technical Assistance 
PARSS2 Health Sector Reform Project (Proyecto de 
Apoyo a la Reforma del Sector Salud) 
Performance and Accountability of Social 
Sectors 
Public Financial Management 

PASS 

PFM 

RAMP 
ROSC 

Reserve Advisory and Management Program 
Report on the Observance of Standards and 
Codes 
SIGEF 
Financial Management Information System 
SIUBEN Single Beneficiary Selection System 
(Sistema Único de Beneficiarios) 
Technical Assistance Loan 
Trust Fund 
United Nations Development Program 
United States Agency for International 
Development 

TAL 
TF 
UNDP 
USAID 

Vice President 
Country Director 
Country Manager 
Task Manager 

IBRD 
Pamela Cox 
Françoise Clottes 
Roby Senderowitsch 
Michael Corlett 

IFC 
Thierry Tanoh 
Paolo M. Martelli 
Jun Zhang 
Ary Naïm 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report 

Table of Contents 

1. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................................... 1 
3. CPS PROGRESS, IMPLEMENTATION AND PROPOSED ADJUSMENTS .................................... 4 
A.  Assessment of CPS progress to date ........................................................................... 4 
B. 
Portfolio Performance and Implementation ................................................................ 9 
C.  Adjustments to the CPS Program ............................................................................... 10 
4. STRATEGY GOING FORWARD AND FUTURE BANK ENGAGEMENT ...................................... 12 
5. RISKS AND MITIGATION ...................................................................................................................... 13 

Annexes 

Annex 1:  Revised CPS FY10-13 Results Framework ................................................................................. 14 
Annex 2: Dominican Republic Key Economic Indicators 2004-2013 ......................................................... 22 
Annex 3 Country at a Glance ......................................................................................................................... 23 
Annex 4: Standard CPS Annexes .................................................................................................................. 26 
CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary ......................................................................................... 30 
Annex B3 Dominican Republic: IFC Investment Operations Program .................................................... 31 
CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - .................................................................................. 32 
8 (IFC) for Dominican Republic .................................................................................................................... 33 
CAS Annex B8 - Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) ................................................................ 34 
ANNEX 5:  Knowledge Services .................................................................................................................... 35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1. 
The Board of Executive Directors discussed the FY10-13 Country Partnership 
Strategy (CPS) for the Dominican Republic in September 2009 (Report No. 49620-DO).  
The CPS covers a four year period ending one year after planned elections and inauguration 
of a new President in mid 2012.  This Progress Report evaluates advances made and how the 
Bank will position itself strategically for the remainder of the CPS period.   

2. 
The CPS is aligned with the National Development Strategy, especially enhanced 
social cohesion and improved transparency while dealing with the global economic 
downturn.  President Leonel Fernandez was elected in 2004 and re-elected in 2008 for a 
second four-year term.  His Dominican Liberation Party won a landslide victory in 
congressional elections in 2010.        

3. 
The four broad objectives of the CPS remain consistent with the Government’s 
agenda where it overlaps with areas of comparative Bank Group advantage: (i) 
Strengthen Social Cohesion and Improve Access to and Quality of Social Services; (ii) 
Promote Competitiveness in a Sustainable and Resilient Economic Environment; (iii) 
Enhance Quality of Public Expenditures and Institutional Development; and (iv) Build 
Capacity and Constituencies for Reform.  Despite the breadth of the CPS, it focuses the 
bulk of new lending (US$480 million of US$500 million) on a program of reforms in social 
spending.  A series of three sequential DPLs (Public Performance and Accountability of 
Social Sectors-PASS- operations) totaling US$370 million seeks to promote and consolidate 
a major shift in government’s social sector priorities and capacity toward human capital 
formation.  Two investment operations (Additional Financing of the Social Sectors 
Investment Project-US$10 million, and Health Sector Reform Second Phase APL 
(PARSS2)-US$30 million) complement the DPLs.  A Municipal Development project 
(US$20 million) completes the CPS new lending portfolio.  New lending operations are 
complemented by lending operations and knowledge services initiated in previous years.   
Despite this apparent targeting, the CPS seeks to complement sectoral reforms in social 
protection, education, and health with improvements in public expenditure management on 
the supply side and initiatives to strengthen transparency and accountability on the demand 
side.  Regarding the existing portfolio of operations, a redoubled effort would be made to 
improve their performance.  The CPS also reflects an intensified focus on the provision of 
knowledge services, as detailed in Annex 5. 

4. 
Progress under the CPS to date has been good and has validated its targeted 
approach, which remains relevant for the remainder of the CPS period.  The Bank’s 
quick disbursing assistance has provided critical funding during the global economic crisis, 
which has allowed government to better protect spending on social sectors relative to earlier 
downturns.  In contrast to earlier episodes, both moderate and extreme poverty have declined 
through the crisis, though at a decelerated rate. At present, poverty levels fall below pre-
global economic crisis rates due to smaller relative crisis impacts, improved crisis 
management, and stronger safety net protection. Movement toward more performance 
influenced public expenditures reflected in Performance Agreements for some key ministries 
is promising, as are a variety of demand side initiatives to strengthen civil society and citizen 
beneficiary oversight of government operations.  The implementation of investment 
operations existing at the time of CPS launch remains measured with largely moderately 

1 

 
 
satisfactory project ratings.  International Finance Corporation (IFC) operations have 
continued apace, supporting the competitiveness and resilience agenda with investments in 
infrastructure, telecom, and natural gas distribution. 

5. 
Having largely completed planned lending, and with few adjustments envisioned, 
the Bank plans to focus its efforts during the remainder of the CPS period on improving 
implementation of existing projects and consolidating reform efforts during an electoral 
period.  Since 2009, the Bank has provided record support to the Dominican Republic 
amounting to US$368 million.  Only US$70 million of the original US$500 million envisaged 
lending remains to be allocated during the next two fiscal years.          

2. POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS 

Political Developments 

6. 
The Dominican Republic has enjoyed marked political stability for the last two 
decades, even with notable swings in economic growth.  Power has tended to rotate 
between two major political parties which have kept taxes and public debt low.   The 
Presidency has considerable power, the Congress plays a relatively limited policymaking role, 
and the level of transparency and budget openness is low by international standards.  
According to various international indicators and corroborated by other national surveys, the 
perception of corruption is high.  Since the mid 2000’s various reforms have aimed to 
improve economic and fiscal management through revision of the legal framework for public 
expenditures, extension of an integrated financial management system, and efforts to 
consolidate budget formulation and treasury management in the Ministry of Finance, among 
other things.  But progress has been slow and uneven and major weaknesses remain in 
auditing.  The Presidency still enjoys a high degree of discretion over spending.   

7. 
Despite slow progress on the broad governance agenda, the Government has 
recently undertaken several institutional reforms to improve the efficiency, effectiveness, 
and transparency of government operations.  It has notably sought to improve social 
cohesion through better targeting of social spending on the poor in return for enhanced “co-
responsibilities” in terms of school attendance, health screening, job training, etc.  This 
approach seems to enjoy broad public acceptance.  With the support of the Bank, the 
Government has implemented the Participatory Anti-Corruption Initiative (IPAC) that is 
already implementing 30 recommendations to reduce corruption and increase transparency.  
At this moment, more than half of the recommendations have been fully implemented.  A new 
Constitution, ratified by Congress in January 2010, grants the legislature the right to appoint 
members of the Chamber of Accounts which reviews Government accounts, removing the 
group from the Executive's control.  The Constitution establishes that annual budget proposals 
must be submitted before October 1, allowing for greater public and congressional scrutiny. 

8. 
The pace of social spending reform, direction of spending, and/or intensity of 
revenue efforts (in taxes or electricity) could be impacted by the pending electoral 
season.  Reform champions in the various ministries appear committed to advancing and 
consolidating the gains, but the post election rotation of key reform figures, the volatility of 
oil prices, and unforeseeable fiscal demands could threaten the sustainability of several CPS 
supported reforms. 

2 

 
 
 
Economic Developments 

9. 
Although the Dominican Republic registered a slowdown during the depth of the 
global economic crisis, growth has quickly recovered and the country continues to be 
one of best performers in the region.  Growth increased to 7.8 percent in 2010 from 3.5 in 
the previous year.  Growth was relatively broad based in all main sectors of the economy-
commerce, financial services, construction and light manufacturing.  External factors 
contributed too as the fall in remittances was mild since expatriate Dominican workers tend to 
be employed outside construction.  Tourist arrivals turned around by the third quarter of 2009 
and exports, in part due to reconstruction in Haiti, also resumed growing.  Economic growth 
in 2011 is projected at 5.5-6 percent.  Inflation began to accelerate in 2010, rising to 6.3 
percent, stemming largely from food and oil prices, but the CPI remained with the Central 
Bank target of 6-7 percent. 

10. With a gradual withdrawal of stimulus spending the fiscal balance improved in 
2010.  The overall fiscal deficit fell from 3.2 percent of GDP in 2009 to 2.7 percent in 2010.  
Nevertheless the 2.3 percent of GDP deficit target was missed due to weak tax performance 
and larger than expected transfers to the electricity sector due to high oil prices.  During 2007-
10 the growth in public debt was relatively modest and less than anticipated —from 33.4 
percent of GDP in 2007 to 36.8 percent in 2010, less than the previously projected level of 
39.8 percent of GDP.  The external current account deteriorated in 2010 as the increase in 
imports exceeded exports.  Foreign direct investments (FDI) and external borrowing funded 
the deficit though and foreign exchange reserves remained at historically high levels.   

11. 
The overall economic outlook for the country remains positive, although 
challenges remain.  Growth is projected at 5 percent over the medium term based on 
increasing diversification in FDI, exports, and tourism receipts.  However, inflation is 
continuing to creep upward and the Central Bank had to raise the overnight policy rate five 
times between September 2010 and May 2011 to counter inflationary pressures stemming 
from strong domestic demand.  Improved revenue performance will require continued efforts 
to improve tax administration and policy adjustments to address a high level of exemptions.  
The Government‘s financing needs for 2011 are expected to be met through a combination of 
investment and budget support loans, as well as the issuance of domestic and international 
bonds.  Total gross financing requirements are estimated to reach US$2.5 billion (equivalent 
to 4.4 percent of GDP) in 2011.  This gap is expected to be filled by the issuance of domestic 
(US$384 million), and international (US$500 million) bonds, and by borrowing from bilateral 
and multilateral creditors (US$1.7 billion).  As the fiscal balance improves and amortization 
payments decrease gradually, financing requirements are expected to fall to US$2.1 billion in 
2012 (equivalent to 3.5 percent of GDP).   

12. 
Continued structural reforms are needed to close the large electricity sector 
deficit (projected at US$690 million in 2011) and improve the reliability of service.  
Notable efforts are being made to improve sector management (introducing foreign 
managers), increase rates to long term financially justified levels, reduce non-technical (theft) 
losses, and transit from an inefficient geographically based subsidy scheme to targeted needs 
based subsidies (Bonoluz).  The Bank has continued an active dialogue and technical 
assistance in the sector, joined by the IMF and IDB, to help advance these important structural 
reforms.  Nevertheless, the high dependency on imported fossil fuels as well as the inherent 
3 

 
 
 
difficulties in overcoming legacy behavior in the sector suggests that solid financial 
performance is achievable only in the medium term assuming a continued reform effort.   

Social Developments 

13. 
Poverty rates remain high in the Dominican Republic and the levels of social 
spending are modest by regional standards, despite economic growth and a relatively 
high per capita income.  Data from April 2011 estimates poverty at 31.6 percent, showing a 
slight decline compared to April 2009 (33.5 percent); extreme poverty decreased from 10.4 
percent to 8.8 percent in the same period.  Inequality has significantly declined in the past two 
years, with Gini coefficient registering at 0.492 (April 2011), below pre-crisis levels.  Despite 
improvements, challenges remain as a broad subset of the population is still vulnerable.  
Unemployment declined to 14 percent in 2010 but massive underemployment affects a large 
portion of the population.  Women are much more likely to be underemployed than men.    
Inflation in food and oil prices is likely to affect poverty rates in the future.  Spending on 
education is well below regional averages but has remained steady at 2.3 percent of GDP 
since 2008 (down from 3.4 percent of GDP in 2002).  Schools are overcrowded, with multiple 
shifts, and the poor quality of education appears to affect most individuals regardless of 
socioeconomic conditions.  Boys are more likely than girls to drop out of school.  The country 
has the lowest performance on the regional standardized exam measuring education quality, 
and has declined relative to other countries since the 1990s.  Health spending is also low at 
1.7 percent of GDP in 2010 resulting in weaknesses in the provision of first level of care 
(essential basic health services with adequate quality) through Regional Health Services.  The 
adolescent fertility rated is extremely high at 106.8 births per 1000 girls age 15-19. After 
operating as a de facto unconditional cash transfer program, the program has now become a 
full-fledge Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) with  improvements in the definition 
andverification of co-responsibilities.    

14. 
Poverty and social indicators, however, would likely have been worse without the 
proactive decisions of Government to protect the levels of social spending and reform 
social service delivery.  In the 2003-4 crisis the poverty rate exploded by 15 percentage 
points, unemployment rose 4 percent, and education and health expenditures fell by 34 
percent and 36 percent respectively.  In contrast, social spending this time has been 
maintained by counter-cyclical measures with coordinated actions between the Ministry of 
Finance and social sector ministries to reduce supply gaps in health and education.  A 
significant reform of Solidaridad has been undertaken with the aim of expanding coverage 
and tightening enforcement so as to strengthen the impact on human capital formation.  
Electricity subsidies are being transformed from blanket geographic areas (which assisted all 
residents irrespective of their qualification under poverty level proxies) to a means tested 
approach, resulting in significant savings and greater efficiency of public spending.  Thus the 
Government has used the economic crisis to address some long standing structural issues 
affecting social outcomes.      

3. CPS PROGRESS, IMPLEMENTATION AND PROPOSED ADJUSMENTS 

A. Assessment of CPS progress to date 

15. 
Progress towards CPS outcomes has been satisfactory and advances are being 
made under each of the CPS strategic objectives.  The focus of the CPS on providing quick 
4 

 
 
disbursing funding to help maintain counter-cyclical Government spending has been critical 
in supporting the Government’s efforts to contain the economic and social repercussions of 
the global financial crisis.  It has helped maintain the climate for domestic and foreign 
investment and private sector economic activity and competitiveness.  Moreover, policy 
changes, critical institutional strengthening, and transparency and accountability advances 
supported by the CPS, if sustained, could pay dividends well beyond the crisis period.   

16. While many poverty challenges remain, the protection of the most vulnerable 
contrasts with previous economic downturns when hard won gains in poverty reduction 
were lost.  Bank’s expertise has been focused on fewer critical goals, with a variety of 
specialists mobilized to pursue core reforms in the social sectors through several interrelated 
loans, non lending technical assistance, and dialogue where it can support domestically owned 
reform initiatives.  So far the results are encouraging—the principal PASS lending is 
proceeding well, and synergies in public expenditure management and accountability may 
multiply the improvements in the performance of social sectors.   The Bank’s program of 
knowledge services continues to strengthen the analytical basis for Government policy.  
Donor coordination has intensified, especially among the multi-lateral financial institutions 
(IMF, IDB, and Bank) with positive benefits in terms of coherent policy advice, coordinated 
funding programs, and improved collaboration with Government authorities.  Further, through 
enhanced donor coordination efforts, the Bank has mobilized US$3.5 million in additional 
resources from bilateral partners to support the program, including an Externally Funded 
Operation with USAID supporting IPAC and civil society initiatives, a Trust Fund on Public 
Expenditure Management with the European Union (EU) and a new Fee Based Service (FBS) 
on competitiveness to be financed by the EU.  While there is room for improvement, 
disbursements and effectiveness delays under existing loans have improved compared to 
previous years.  IFC operations as well have played an important role in providing targeted 
support to the private sector with impacts on employment and growth.   

Strategic Objective 1. Strengthen Social Cohesion and Improve Access to and Quality of 
Social Services 

17. 
This first strategic objective of the CPS is achieving good results so far in terms 
of policy reforms and institutional changes aimed at protecting the most vulnerable and 
promoting better social outcomes.  This objective has been supported by the PASS DPL 
series, four existing investment operations (the Social Protection Investment Project and its 
new Additional Financing, Health Sector Reform Second Phase APL (PARSS2), Youth 
Development Project, two closed investment operations (Early Childhood Development 
project  and Health Sector Reform First Phase APL), one closed DPL (Public Finance and 
Social Sector DPL), non lending technical assistance (NLTA) including Programmatic Social 
Sector NLTA, as well as assistance from other donors.   

18. 
The Government has advanced reforms to realize the full potential of the 
Solidaridad program to promote investment in health, nutrition and education by the 
poorest families.  The combined effort has entailed an overhaul of the conceptual and 
organizational structure of the CCT program, including a revised relationship with the health 
and education ministries and improvements in their joint performance.  In line with regional 
practices for CCTs, the Government has consolidated a redesigned Solidaridad as the primary 
axis of the Social Protection System in the country.  Its organizational structure and staff 
profile have been strengthened, management capacity and internal procedures improved, and 
5 

 
 
coordination with Government ministries mandated and institutionalized.  Program operations 
are being decentralized to 10 regional offices designed to improve responsiveness and client 
contact.  The program has contributed to an increase in the percentage of extreme poverty 
households participating in Solidaridad from 51 percent in 2002 to 70 percent in November 
2010.  A first verification in education reached 80 percent of Solidaridad beneficiary students 
to validate enrollment, and the verification of co-responsibilities for health covered 70 percent 
of beneficiaries.  New, fully electronic management information systems to ensure continuous 
monitoring of compliance in health and education and strengthen sectoral management 
beyond the CCT, have been put in place.  The system of debit cards to access benefits, 
especially in local grocery stores, has been upgraded by expanding the number of 
participating payment institutions and mapping the flow of benefits to ensure adequate 
institutional coverage.  Solidaridad is also developing alternative mechanisms to transfer 
funds electronically to beneficiaries in addition to the existing debit card mechanism, with a 
view to promote greater financial inclusion.  The Government has made progress in 
developing a comprehensive Monitoring and Evaluation system for Solidaridad.   The 1.8 
million household socioeconomic census to update the beneficiary registry of the targeting 
system (SIUBEN) is currently under implementation to strengthen targeting accuracy and 
efficiency of social spending.   

19. 
The supply side for health and education inputs to Solidaridad beneficiaries has 
been targeted for improvement.  Recognizing that increased co-responsibility demand for 
services in health and education requires accessible provision of quality services, the 
Government with Bank support has undertaken a series of initiatives.  In health the 
Government has been improving the supply of services through investments in health 
equipment, construction or rehabilitation of new primary health facilities, and the 
establishment of a Clinic Management System (CMS) for the electronic registration of 
medical visits designed to improve the quality, accountability and management of primary 
health services.  Household co-responsibilities can be verified, medical records digitized and 
appropriate adherence by physicians to medical protocols encouraged by the CMS.  In 
education the Government is tackling the three main challenges posed by Solidaridad: (i) 
reducing the supply gap through classroom construction (160) and school rehabilitation (20); 
(ii) improving management information for the verification of education enrollment and 
attendance co-responsibilities; and (iii) initiating an assessment of possible differentiated 
transfer structures to best compensate for different opportunity costs to schooling.  The Youth 
Development Project, approved in March 2006 has surpassed the target of 25,000 at-risk 
youth trained, 45 percent of whom are women, by building their work experience and life 
skills.   

20. 
Improvements in health and education quality and efficiency extend beyond the 
Solidaridad program.  Supported by the PASS program, the Government has introduced 
results-based management agreements between the ministry and all Regional Health Services 
to improve the timeliness and quality of primary care.  Building on this, the Bank’s Health 
Sector Reform Second Phase APL (PARSS2) is piloting results-adjusted financing in two 
regions to provide incentives to health care providers to improve access to and quality of 
health service at the first level, emphasizing maternal and infant care and nutrition together 
with other essential preventive services. Due to the increasing focus on accountability in the 
country and the resulting pressure to improve the quality and efficiency of health programs 
and services, the Government is also reorganizing the Ministry of Health to separate the 

6 

 
 
functions of service provision from sector oversight/stewardship.  In education the PASS 
series has supported validation of student learning standards for the first and second cycles of 
Basic Education as well as improvements in school level management and the introduction of 
a school monitoring and supervision system.  The School Management Information System 
creates a powerful online platform to gather information for managing school administration 
at all levels.  The organic bylaws and operational manual are to be modified.  Educational 
analyses supported through Programmatic Social Sectors NLTA have identified measures to 
eliminate overlaps in roles across the system.  

Strategic Objective 2. Promote Competitiveness in a Sustainable and Resilient Economic 
Environment 

21. 
A second strategic objective is to help create the conditions for equitable 
economic growth and competitiveness.  A variety of outcomes are being sought: (i) a 
broader information base for informing policy decisions on macro-financial stability, 
competitiveness, and economic relations with Haiti; (ii) improved performance of water and 
sanitation corporations in tourist areas; (iii) increased efficiency in power distribution and 
generation to improve quality of services, and (iv) mainstreaming disaster risk management 
into the planning process and strengthened institutional capacity for risk management in 
specific sectors.  These objectives would be pursued through five existing investment 
operations, five knowledge services efforts, and IFC activities. 

22. 
Progress toward strategic objectives is moderate.  The Financial Sector Technical 
Assistance project has contributed to the complete reform and subsequent upgrade of the 
payment systems, and as a result the DR has been selected in 2010 as the “hub” for the 
Central American Payment Systems. The Water and Sanitation in Tourist Areas Project 
has supported the creation of the National Water Council.  While the Power Sector TAL 
closed in December 2010 with a Moderately Unsatisfactory rating, the Electricity 
Distribution Rehabilitation Project is progressing as bidding has been completed and 
construction has commenced.  The current management for the Dominican Corporation of 
State Electrical Enterprises is expected to have a significant impact on sector performance 
over the medium term.  As a result of slow progress to date, the Bank has redoubled 
supervision of the Emergency Recovery and Disaster Management operation.  As detailed 
in Annex 5 a variety of knowledge services are advancing, including the Dominican 
Republic-Haiti Quisqueya Growth and Poverty Report, a Treasury Service NLTA, 
Certification in Gender Equity in Firms as Means to Enrich and Promote Competitiveness, 
and an Adaption to Climate Change and Disaster Risk NLTA.    

23. 
IFC commitments over the FY10-FY11 period have reached US$85.5 million, in 
addition to US$12 million syndicated from other institutions, increasing the IFC 
portfolio in the Dominican Republic to US$214.5 million.  IFC's support to the compressed 
natural gas distributor Linea Clave, combined with a US$20 million Sustainable Energy credit 
line to Banco BHD, will help small industries in DR convert from heavy fuel oil to natural 
gas, generating both financial savings and carbon emissions reductions. With US$20 million 
support to the expansion of the Punta Cana airport and US$17.5 million support to the 
expansion of the Caucedo port, IFC has continued supporting major improvements to the 
country's competitiveness in the tourism and trade areas. In the telecommunications sector, 
IFC aims to promote increased competition with its support to the expansion of WIND 
Telecom (US$16 million subordinated debt plus US$12 million B-Loan).  Finally, IFC 
7 

 
 
supported Banco León with a US$5 million trade finance credit line.  Since FY06, MIGA has 
been guaranteeing the Santo Domingo-Samaná toll road and is exploring other potential 
transportation sector projects. 

Strategic Objective 3.  Enhance Quality of Public Expenditures and Institutional 
Development. 

24. 
The CPS proposed a strategic approach to public sector management and 
governance focused on the quality of public expenditure.  Rather than tackling a broad 
program of public administration strengthening or viewing governance as an “over-arching” 
objective, as in the previous CAS, this CPS more strategically seeks: (i) improved budget 
management; (ii) progress toward performance-informed budgeting; and (iii) increased 
management capacity in poor municipalities.  Instead of separate lending operations, these 
governance objectives would be integrated as fundamental elements of the CPS and 
mainstreamed within the PASS DPL series (multiple reforms to build a culture of results in 
the public administration), the Municipal Development Project investment operation 
(institutional development activities to strengthen capacity of local governments), and the 
second Health Sector Reform Second Phase APL (PARSS2) supporting performance based 
management in the health sector.  Three knowledge services provide additional analytical 
support, including a Quality of Public Expenditures NLTA, the Programmatic Social 
Sector NLTA and an Institutional and Governance Review.  This approach reflected in 
part lessons from the FY2006 CAS where an ambitious program of Bank support for public 
sector reform had only limited success.  A reduced focus was considered to be in line with 
Government priorities at a time of financial and fiscal stress and clearly relevant to the social 
sector emphasis of the first CPS strategic objective.  Progress has been notable.  Specific 
details of these NLTAs and additional activities aimed at strengthening capacity of 
accountability institutions and fiduciary capacity in general are described in Annex 5. 

Strategic Objective 4.  Build Capacity and Constituencies for Reform 

25. 
This strategic objective seeks to strengthen the demand for good governance, and 
efforts have expanded during CPS implementation in response to increased demands for 
Bank support from Government, civil society, and other international financial agencies.  
The Strategic Objective builds on another lesson from the previous CAS—that promoting, 
implementing, and sustaining reform requires a strong constituency with enough capacity to 
mobilize critical stakeholders and resources.  It targets: (i) strengthening congressional budget 
oversight capacity; (ii) strengthening civil society capacity for budget analysis and 
monitoring; and (iii) enhancing participatory planning at the local level.  As in Strategic 
Objective 3, no separate lending activity was anticipated but rather the incorporation in other 
operations of components related to participation of civil society organizations in monitoring 
the implementation of the programs and strengthening social accountability mechanisms.  
Two knowledge services (an IDF for congressional oversight of public financial management 
and an NLTA for strengthening civil society) are being implemented including activities to 
improve access to information and strengthen Congress’ capacity to analyze and monitor 
budget execution.  In addition, additional activities have commenced under this Strategic 
Objective, often funded by third party trust funds and led by the Bank.  These programs 
concentrate on 
initiatives 
to address corruption and 
improve social accountability 
mechanisms.  Details are provided in Annex 5.    A GAC Note has been prepared to address 

8 

 
 
 
 
governance challenges, taking stock of the World Bank engagement in the country GAC 
agenda and exploring ways to institutionalize progress to ensure sustainability of reforms.   

26. 
Progress toward this objective appears solid and will be continued during the 
remainder of the CPS period recognizing that tangible results from this somewhat 
unconventional approach will take time.  The IDF funded effort began in the Congress in 
2009, and is improving congressional capacity to analyze and monitor budget execution, 
program impact and performance.  Congress now has access to budget data online and has 
received capacity building on transparency/communication skills needed to engage more 
actively with civil society.  Supported by the PASS DPL series, the Government developed in 
close consultation with civil society and launched the Portal del Ciudadano Dominicano, a 
web-based user-friendly tool that provides public access to budget information.  The Finance 
Ministry has published easy to access budget execution reports on its website and a short note 
on the Presupuesto Ciudadano (Citizen Budget), summarizing main budget facts and figures.  
Together these two tools will significantly expand the transparency and accessibility of 
budget information.  Solidaridad is undertaking several initiatives to improve citizen 
monitoring and agency accountability.  A CCT Community Scorecard has been piloted, 
reporting on the availability of service inputs in health, education, grocery store management 
of Solidaridad benefits, and Solidaridad operations themselves.  Based on the pilot’s results, 
the CCT Intersectoral Committee approved  the expansion of the community scorecards to 
reach nation-wide scale. Particularly notable is the Anticorruption Participatory Initiative 
(IPAC), led by Government and the Bank, which has mobilized 11 other international 
development agencies and local stakeholders to establish, monitor, and report on the 
implementation a wide variety of anti-corruption initiatives.  Results so far include: (i) the 
publication of a web-based user-friendly tool that will provide public access to budget 
information fed by the Financial Management Information System (SIGEF); (ii) a web-based 
portal with monthly updates that inform citizens of the expected and actual electricity supply 
in each circuit; (iii) a new performance assessment framework for civil servants that will 
contribute to the professionalization of the public administration; and (iv) the enactment of a 
Presidential Decree for the implementation of the single treasury account.  In a promising sign 
of its broad public support, IPACs organizing committee, consisting of Government, private 
sector, and civil society, recently agreed to continue and assume leadership of the initiative 
beyond the mandate of the international community’s support in order to continue the 
implementation of the medium-term set of reforms currently under implementation. 

B. Portfolio Performance and Implementation 

27. 
Portfolio performance has shown improvement, but challenges remain.  The 
disbursement rate increased from 4.9 percent in February 2009 to 19.3 percent in February 
2010, although the rate fell to 11.2 percent in May 2011.  Similarly the average delay in 
effectiveness improved substantially for the twelve-month period ending February 2010 (8.9 
months versus 13.9 months during the previous period), but rose to 9.9 months in FY11, 
greater than the 8.7 months average for LCR but better than the 11.4 months for Central 
America.  The progress in improving disbursement rates and reducing effectiveness delays, 
though tenuous, are the result of concerted efforts by country staff and Government, including 
conducting a mapping exercise of Bank operations and Government loan approval processes, 
creation of a Bank-Government working group to follow up on portfolio issues, and enhanced 
training and technical assistance provided by financial management and procurement 

9 

 
 
specialists.  Most investment operations are extended.  Only one of the eight operations have 
Implementation Progress ratings of Satisfactory with the remainder considered Moderately 
Satisfactory.  During Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) consultations in 2011, 
the Government recognized that portfolio performance could be improved and committed, 
together with the Bank, to take action to improve performance.  The CPPR identified 
weaknesses in procurement capacity, attributed partially to high rotation of personnel and 
understaffing of the procurement function of project implementation units, and to a lesser 
extent financial management issues, as the primary contributors to weak portfolio 
performance and low disbursement rates.  To that end, the Bank and Government are 
currently undertaking an assessment of procurement and financial management issues and 
will produce an action plan to improve project implementation.    

C. Adjustments to the CPS Program 

28. While the CPS has been refined on the basis of evolving circumstances and 
continual dialogue with Government, its approach and four strategic objectives remain 
valid.  The Bank has provided timely, well targeted, and critically needed financial and policy 
support to the Government’s stabilization and growth programs during a difficult period.  
Enhancing its effectiveness as a partner with the country, Bank support is undergirding the 
fiscal effort, providing valuable policy advice and global experience in the social sectors, 
reinforcing important Government initiatives in transparency and accountability, and 
complementing resources from other institutions.  New lending has been complemented with 
selected knowledge services activities that have helped further refine a strategic 4-year 
program.  Challenges remain to increase disbursements under investment operations; 
however, the rate has improved while the bulk of Bank resources has been rechanneled 
through DPLs.   

29. 
The Bank responded to the economic crisis with a significant level in 
development policy lending.  Some US$370 million will be disbursed through three PASS 
DPLs.  The PASS DPL series will close after the third (of four originally planned) iteration 
but would view the possibility of launching a new series or a separate single tranche 
operation, pending dialogue with Government.  All three planned investment operations are 
effective and in execution.  While not envisaged in the CPS, a US$150 million Public Finance 
and Social Sector DPL was approved in November 2009 and disbursed shortly thereafter.  
The Social Protection Project Additional Financing and Health Reform projects complement 
the DPLs, and the Municipal Development operation includes a component focused on 
improved transparency and accountability. 

30. 
The Bank complemented its lending program through targeted analytical work 
and technical assistance.  As indicated above, there have been wide ranging NLTAs (funded 
by the Bank, donors, or trust funds) from the Bank providing considerable support for reforms 
in social sector performance, public sector management and demand for improved 
governance.  The Bank has also been able to expand knowledge services beyond that 
envisioned in the CPS by leveraging donor resources in areas of mutual interest as is the case 
in the USAID EFO and EU TF on public expenditure management. 

31. With the CPS largely delivered, minimal adjustments are envisioned during the 
second half of the CPS and will be guided by the need to be strategic in prioritizing 
additional support.  Remaining lending room in the CPS totals only US$70 million, planned 
10 

 
 
under the original CPS to be committed to the remaining FY13 PASS-related operation.  
During Progress Report consultations, the Government requested additional financial and 
technical assistance in several priority areas:  (i) budget support operations including a 
continuation of PASS reforms and/or a policy based lending to support reforms in governance 
and transparency; (ii) Education (the Education project closed on August 31, 2011); (iii) 
Energy/Electricity Rehabilitation (the existing project will close on December 31, 2012); (iv) 
Caribbean Advanced Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (CARCIP); (v) Youth 
and Development Additional Financing; and (vi) Technical Assistance to the Supreme Court.  
An additional financing of US$20 million of the Emergency Recovery and Rehabilitation 
project, which will cover cost over-runs due to inflation and improvements in designs to 
ensure the resilience of the rehabilitated infrastructure, was approved by the Board on 
November 17, 2011.  In addition, the Dominican Republic will participate in CARCIP (IBRD 
lending level tentatively estimated at US$27 million), a regional lending project to enhance 
ICT infrastructure, which is expected to go to the Board in the first half of 2012.  Decisions 
on the use of the remaining lending capacity will depend on the results of ongoing dialogue 
with the Government. 

Table 1 - CPS Lending and AAA Program FY10-13 
CPS Lending Program 
CPS Progress Report Lending Program 

(US$ Millions) 

FY 10 

AAA 

FY 11 

AAA 

FY12 

(US$ Millions) 

FY 10 Actual 

FY 11 Actual 

AAA 

AAA 

Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL         $150 
Social Sectors Investment Program                                   $10 
Health Sector Reform 2nd Phase APL (PARSS2)            $30 
Municipal Development                                                    $20 
                                                                Total FY 10      $210 

Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL        $150 
Social Sectors Investment Program                                  $10 
Health Sector Reform 2nd Phase APL (PARSS2)            $30 
Municipal Development                                                    $20 
                                                                Total FY 10      $210   

DR-Haiti Quisqueya Growth and Poverty Report

Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL II      $150 
                                                                 Total FY 11     $150

Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL II      $150 
                                                              Total FY 11     $150 

Influenza Prevention NLTA 
Program Institutional & Governance Review 
Adaptation to Climate Change and Disaster Risk 
Management 

Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL III      $70 
                                                          Total FY 12              $70 

Programmatic Social Sectors NLTA 
Influenza Prevention NLTA 
Program Institutional & Governance Review 
Treasury’s Country Banking Services NLTA 

FY 12 Planned  

Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL III      $70 
CARCIP                                                                             $27 
Emergency Recovery and Rehabilitation (AF)                 $20   
Total FY 12                $117 

AAA 

IDF for Strengthening Congressional Oversight 
Energy Sector and Investment NLTA 
Competitiveness NLTA 
Treasury’s Country Banking Services NLTA 

Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL IV      $70 

FY13 

AAA 

Programmatic Social Sectors NLTA 
IDF for Strengthening Congressional Oversight 
Energy Sector and Investment NLTA 
Adaptation to Climate Change and Disaster Risk 
Management NLTA 
Competitiveness NLTA 
Treasury’s Country Banking Services NLTA 
DR-Haiti Quisqueya Growth and Poverty Report 
Strengthening Civil Society NLTA 

FY13 Planned 

AAA 

11 

 Budget Support (To examine PASS related agenda 
priorities)                                                                           $70  

AAA 

 
 
 
 
CPS Lending Program 

(US$ Millions) 
Quality and Efficiency of Public Expenditure NLTA 
Social Cohesion Programmatic NLTA 
Strengthening Civil Society NLTA 

CPS Progress Report Lending Program 

(US$ Millions) 
Quality and Efficiency of Public Expenditure NLTA 
Programmatic Social Sectors NLTANLTA 
Strengthening Civil Society NLTA 

Total Lending FY10-FY13                    US$500 Total Lending FY10-FY13                 US$547  

32. 
The Results Framework (Annex 1) has been adjusted accordingly to better reflect 
expected outcomes in the four strategic areas of the CPS program.  Changes are generally 
minor and include adjustments to align targets to the CPS cycle (health), reflect changes in 
project indicators (e.g. PASS is no longer measuring completion of schooling), and extend 
targets out to reflect delays in effectiveness (Municipal Development Project).   

4. STRATEGY GOING FORWARD AND FUTURE BANK ENGAGEMENT 
33. Going forward the Dominican Republic faces significant challenges to improve 
the efficiency, effectiveness, and level of transparency across the public sector to deliver 
social services and promote growth.  Fortunately prospects for private sector led economic 
growth are good in the medium term.  This should provide some fiscal and political space for 
continued incremental improvements in Government operations.  The capacity building, 
policy adjustments, and organizational 
improvements 
in social spending, energy, 
transparency, and accountability supported by the CPS and other donors, if sustained through 
the political transition, could provide momentum for continued progress.  Certainly avoiding 
the poverty retrogression experienced in 2003-4 is a notable achievement.  To protect these 
advances the Bank will need to stay engaged with all domestic and external stakeholders, 
maintain its presence at the policy table, and reinforce the approach of the CPS to focus on 
areas of Government commitment.  The portfolio of investment operations, critical as they are 
for implementation of several policy reforms linked to DPLs and the CPS, will require 
redoubled supervision efforts to regain momentum in implementation and disbursements.   

34. 
The Bank’s engagement will remain focused on the core issues.  The Bank will 
continue to provide support under the corresponding four priority CPS areas of more efficient 
and effective social spending, competitiveness, improved public expenditures, and building 
capacities and constituencies for reform through FY13.  It will also prepare necessary 
analytical background for an engagement focused on a longer term perspective in the next 
CPS period.  This could permit the Government, supported by the Bank, to focus on efforts to 
consolidate ongoing social policy initiatives, improve competitiveness and productivity, and 
advance further in public sector reform.  The Bank and Government will continue dialogue on 
Government requests for additional support, including additional budget support should 
external financing needs arise.  Discussions will center on identifying key development areas 
where tangible results could be obtained through additional Bank support.   

35. 
IFC strategy in the Dominican Republic will be better aligned with IFC strategy 
for the Caribbean, with 4 strategic pillars: (i) Financial inclusion, through investment and 
advisory services to financial institutions to improve access to finance for MSMEs and 
households; (ii) Competitiveness, through investments that support infrastructure, trade 
logistics, education and regional integration, and advisory services in areas such as Corporate 
Governance; (iii) Climate Change, through continued support to the energy sector, direct and 

12 

 
 
 
 
through financial institutions; (iv) Resilience to crisis, through the deepening of the local 
capital markets and support to the diversification of the country's economy. 

5. RISKS AND MITIGATION 
36. 
Risks presented in the CPS have been well managed, but remain and are coupled 
with the risk of policy/institutional backsliding during the electoral or transition period.  
Implementation interruptions from poor coordination between core and spending ministries 
have not emerged.  Close Bank coordination with the ministries, their substantive 
commitment to the program (especially the reforms supported by the DPLs), and the general 
incentive to resolve issues promptly to secure needed DPL disbursements have prevented or 
overcome coordination problems.    

37. 
Economic risks have been contained as the Government has pursued sound 
macroeconomic policies and IMF stabilization program which has been closely coordinated 
with the IDB and the Bank.  Growth did not turn negative and is high by regional standards.  
No significant natural disaster has occurred during the CPS period and indeed the earthquake 
in Haiti has spurred Dominican exports.  However natural disasters must always be 
anticipated in this seismic and geographically vulnerable country.   

38. 
External risks stemming from the low reserve coverage are currently mitigated by the 
IMF program, relatively favorable access to international markets, and important FDI inflows.  
However, an external shock could lead to a foreign exchange shortage, amplified by the 
absence of a new IMF program (the current program ends in the first quarter of 2012 which 
could also stall the reform momentum on the structural front). While these external risks 
remain substantial, mitigating factors include strong macroeconomic management, including 
growth in the size and sophistication of the domestic debt market and improved financial and 
bank supervision.  

39. Operational risks identified in the CPS relate to poor multi-sectoral collaboration in 
Government and the Bank as well as counterpart capacity problems in financial management 
and procurement.  Collaboration across sectors seems to be working remarkably well on both 
sides evidenced by the variety of advances in the public sector and civil society spheres in 
association with social spending agencies.  Fiduciary problems continue to hamper several 
investment operations, despite intensified training, and will likely remain a continuing 
challenge.  The portfolio has been subjected to systematic monitoring and joint annual 
reviews. 

40. 
Political risks may be increasing with the pending elections and transition.  
Regardless of the outcome of the presidential election in May 2012, it is likely that key reform 
counterparts and champions within the social agencies will be replaced.  During the election 
period there are always risks of reversals in reforms (return to more clientelism in the 
distribution of subsidies, less aggressive pursuit of electricity theft or tax evasion, etc.).   The 
upcoming presidential elections could impact somewhat the pace and possibly focus of 
operations in the country, so the Bank will pursue an intensified program of stakeholder 
consultations, including with the opposition, with the aim of building understanding and 
support for the operations as critical and non-partisan efforts to promote social and economic 
development.   

13 

 
 
 
 
ANNEX 1:  REVISED CPS FY10-13 RESULTS FRAMEWORK 

Dominican Republic 

Original CPS Outcome/Target        Revised CPS Outcome/Target 
Planned Milestones 
Progress Towards CPS Outcomes 
(If applicable) 
Strategic Objective One: Strengthen Social Cohesion and Improve Access to and Quality of Social Services 

World Bank Assistance 

Ensuring access to quality health 
services 

 

Improved quality of mother and 
child healthcare services in the 
target population 

Indicator 1: 50% of pregnant women 
with  a risk evaluation completed 
before the 15th week of pregnancy in 
at least 2 regions  (by 2013) (baseline 
to be determined in year 1) 

Indicator 2: 60% of children under 15 
months with vaccination scheme 
completed according to national 
protocols (by 2013) – (baseline to be 
determined in year 1) 

 Enhance strategic 
procurement of medicines 
and medical inputs 
Indicator 3: Number of regions 
producing monthly reports on the 
number of poor individuals who 
were prescribed a medicine at 
the first level of care and actually 
received medication within 48 
hours  
Baseline: No monthly reports 
(2009) 

Target: Single Management 
System of Medicines and Inputs 
(SUGEMI) and  its 
corresponding information 
system   in place and training 
provided to facilitate production 
of reports by at least one region 
(2013) 

Indicator 1: 30% of pregnant 
women with  a risk evaluation 
completed before the 15th week 
of pregnancy in at least 2 
regions  (by 2013) 

Baseline: 0.43% based on 
Clinical Management System 
data from the two PARSS2 
regions 

Indicator 2: 40% of children 
under 15 months with 
vaccination scheme completed 
according to national protocols 
(by 2012) 

Baseline:  0% based on 
Clinical Management 
System Data from the two 
PARSS2 regions) 

Lending 
 Health Sector Reform II 
(FY10) - $30M 
 Health Sector Reform I 
(FY03) - $30M 
 PASS DPL Series (FY10, 
FY11, FY12) - $370M 
 Public Finance and Social 
Sector DPL (FY10) - $150M 

AAA 
 Avian and Human Influenza 
IDF (FY09) - $1M – partner 
IICA 

Indicator 1. Risk evaluation of pregnant 
women.  5.2% (October 2011); Number is 
underestimated because the Clinical 
Management system is in initial phase of 
implementation.1   

Indicator 2. Childhood vaccination: less than 
1% (October 2011);  Number is 
underestimated because the Clinical 
Management system is in initial phase of 
implementation;  records readily available 
from the Immunization Program have the data 
per type of vaccination and not per a 
complete vaccination scheme.   
Records indicate the following vaccination 
rates for children less than 1 year old:  
Measles: 
Region 6: 69.2 percent 
Region 8: 81.4 percent 

DPT3: 
Region 6: 77 percent 
Region8: 90.6 percent 

Indicator 3.  Single Management System of 
Medicines and Inputs (SUGEMI):  Process 
has advanced in terms of the development of 
common procedures for reporting including 
using reporting forms for all the Regional 
Health Services 

1 The Bank will review the health indicator targets in consultation with the Government next year, after giving some time for the newly introduced Clinical Management System 
to be implemented (it was rolled‐out in February 2011).  Assuming that the CMS continues to be underutilized, the Bank team will seek other data sources. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Original CPS Outcome/Target        Revised CPS Outcome/Target 
(If applicable) 
Providing access to a better quality 
education at all levels 
ECD, Basic and Secondary education 
 
Increased access to and quality of 
education  
Indicator 1: Increase in the share of 
children of CCT program (i) who have 
completed at least one year of ECD; 
(ii) are enrolled in, attending and 
completing basic education; (iii) are 
attending secondary education 
(Baselines and targets to be 
determined) 

Indicator 1.  CCT and 
education: Increase in the 
share of children of CCT 
program: (i) are enrolled in, and 
attending basic education; and 
(ii) are attending secondary 
education. 

Indicator 2: ECD net enrollment of 
poorest children increases to 86% by 
end of project. 

Indicator 2. ECD net 
enrollment: Target revised to 
69%  

New student evaluation standards 
validated for ECD, basic and 
secondary education 

Indicator 3: New student evaluation 
standards start being implemented 
Protection of the vulnerable 
population 
Improvement in the standards of living 
conditions of the population 
 
Improve the coverage and quality 
of social protection programs  
(CCT program) 

Indicator 1: % of households in 
extreme poverty participating in CCT 
program 
Baseline: 51% (01/2009) 
Target: 85% (6/2012) 

Indicator 1: % of households in 
extreme poverty participating 
in CCT program 

Target: 85% (12/2013) 

Indicator2: Beneficiaries assessment 
of the overall quality of attention and 
service of CCT program (1 
beneficiary perception survey at the 
end of the PASS DPL in 2013) 

No longer an indicator of the 
PASS DPL results framework 
but an initial beneficiary survey 
has taken place and another is 

Planned Milestones 
 80% of CCT beneficiaries 
comply with education co-
responsibilities by 2013 
(baseline to be determined) 

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes 
Indicator 1.  CCT and education:  Share of 
children 7 to 14 years enrolled in primary or 
middle school for the previous school year: 
August 2010: 95.2% 
July 2011: 93.4% 

World Bank Assistance 

Lending 
 PASS DPL Series (FY10, 
FY11, FY12) - $370M 
 Early Childhood Education 
(ECD) (FY03) - $42M 

Indicator 2. ECD net enrollment: 67.87% 
(2009);  

New student evaluation 
standards validated for ECD, 
basic and secondary education 

Indicator 3. New student evaluation 
standards:  Target  has been achieved as 
demonstrated by four signed Resolutions from 
the Ministry of Education between 2009 and 
2011 validating new student evaluation 
standards for: pre-primary education (ECD), 
the first cycle of Basic Education, the second 
cycle of basic education and secondary 
education. 

Indicator 1. CCT and households in extreme 
poverty: As of November 2010, 70% of 
households in extreme poverty are 
participating in the CCT Solidaridad 

Indicator 4. Medium term guidelines for 
social protection policy.  Milestone has been 
achieved: Approved Multi-Annual National 
Public Investment Plan 2010-2012 as well as 
the Multi-Annual National Public Investment 
Plan 2011-2014 

Lending: 
 Social Sectors Investment 
Program (FY08) - $19.4M 
 AF Social Sector Investment 
Program (FY10) - $10M 
 PASS DPL Series (FY10, 
FY11, FY12 ) - $370M 
 Youth Development Project 
(FY06) - $25M 

AAA: 
 Programmatic Social Sectors 
(FY10) 

 Government policies for the 
social sectors clearly 
identified in a policy paper 
and reflected in budget 
documents. 
Indicator 4: Rolling medium-
term plan and budget framework 
of 2011 set out medium-term 
guidelines for social protection 
policy with projections as to the 
coverage, estimated budget, and 
financing bases  
Baseline: Under development 
(2009) 
Target: For FY2011 

15 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original CPS Outcome/Target        Revised CPS Outcome/Target 
(If applicable) 
planned for FY12. 

Planned Milestones 

 

Improve employability of the poor 
at-risk youth 
Indicator 3: 60% of youth trained 
found a job within six months of 
program completion 

Indicator: At least 65 % of 
beneficiaries employed or self-
employed 6 months after 
graduation 

25,000 at risk youth have been 
trained 

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes 
Indicator 3. Youth training:  Number of 
beneficiaries has been already achieved 
 29,000 at-risk youth have been trained as of 
April 2011 

World Bank Assistance 

Enhancement of country 
competitiveness  

Government has access to broader 
information base (data and facts) 
for informed policy decisions in 
the areas of macro-financial 
stability, competitiveness and 
economic relations on the 
Hispaniola  island by 2013 

 Development of basic 
infrastructure to support a 
business enabling environment  

 Water: Improved performance of 
W&S Corporations in Puerto Plata 
region 
Indicator 1: Percentage of households 
connected to sanitation network 
increases from 60% to 80% in Puerto 
Plata region in 2013 
Indicator 2: Occupancy capacity of 
hotels in the Puerto Plata region that is 
connected to communal sanitation 
networks increases from 50% to 70% 
in 2013 

 Energy: Increased efficiency in 
power distribution and generation 
to improve quality of the service 
Indicator: Electricity sector average 
distribution losses reduced 
Baseline: 28.4% (April 30th, 2009) 

Strategic Objective Two: Promote Competitiveness in a Sustainable and Resilient Economic Environment 
 Completion and 
 Dominican Republic-Haiti Quisqueya 
dissemination of AAAs, and 
Growth and Poverty Report:  Decision 
policy discussion. 
meeting held in November 2011 
 Treasury activities have increased Central 
Bank’s investment capabilities for the 
management of foreign exchange reserves, 
training financial managers 

Support an enabling 
environment for improved 
management of the water and 
sanitation sector 

 Contract for the development 
of W&S Sector Strategy 
signed 

Indicator 1: Adoption of a 
National W&S strategy 

 Establishment of the Water 
Sector Council. 

Improved performance of 
W&S Corporations in Puerto 
Plata region and in two 
additional CORRA 

 The W&S corporations have 
signed performance 
agreements 
 Technical assistance is 
recruited for the three Corras, 

Indicator 2: Business Plan and 
modernization plan completed 
for the participating W&S 
corporations 

Indicator 3: The W&S 
corporations comply with the 
objectives of the operational 

16 

Indicator 1: Process for selection and 
recruitment of the consultants in charge of 
the strategy is being finalized, preparation 
and discussion workshops have started 
under the leadership of INAPA. 

Water Sector Council created in August  
2011. 

The “Mesa de Agua” is holding regular 
substantive meeting with W&S 
stakeholders.  

Indicator 2 and 3: One performance 
contract signed and two being prepared 

AAA: 
 Treasury’s Country Banking 
Services 
 Competitiveness 
 Dominican Republic-Haiti 
Quisqueya Growth and 
Poverty Report  (FY12) 

IFC investments and TA: 
 Financial and real sectors 
Doing business reform 
Lending: 
 Water and Sanitation in 
Tourist Areas Project APL1 
(FY09) - $27.5M 
 Power TA Project (FY04) – 
7.3M 
 Public Finance and Social 
Sector DPL (FY10) - $150M  
 Electricity Distribution 
Rehabilitation project 
(FY08) - $42M 

AAA: 
 Energy Sector (partner: 
IDB) 
 Competitiveness NLTA 
 Dominican Republic-Haiti 
Quisqueya Growth and 
Poverty Report  (FY12) 
 Treasury’s Country Banking 
NLTA 

IFC investments and TA: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original CPS Outcome/Target        Revised CPS Outcome/Target 
(If applicable) 
Target: 16.4% (2013) 
and business performance 
agreements 

Planned Milestones 

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes 

World Bank Assistance 

 energy 
 
transport and logistics 

Indicator 4. Cost Recovery 
Indices per company 
(EdeNorte, EdeSur, EdeEste) 
Baseline (data from Dec. 
2010):   
EdeNorte:  63% 
EdeSur:     53% 
EdeEste:    62% 

Target: 
EdeNorte:   71% 
EdeSur:      75% 
EdeEste:     75% 

Indicator 1:  Disaster Risk 
Management. aspects 
included in territorial and 
investment plans by end 
2013 

Indicator 4.  Cost Recovery Indices per 
company (EdeNorte, EdeSur, EdeEste):  
While data on progress is unavailable, targets 
are considered achievable.  

 Prioritized action Plan for 
comprehensive Risk 
Management at national level 
formulated 

 Monitoring and prevention of 
Avian and Human Influenza 
improved through early 
warning systems. 
Indicator4: Reporting time of 
poultry diseases at the local level 
reduced from 7 days to 4 days 

Indicator 1:  Disaster Risk Management. 
aspects included in territorial and 
investment plans:  NLTA launched in FY12. 

Indicator 2. Dam safety management 
framework:  After delays, studies and plans 
for strengthening the Dams Management and 
Hydrology Departments in INDRHI has been 
finalized.   

Indicator 3.  Improved access to more 
adequate and reliable weather and river 
flow data of decision-makers with 
responsibility on risk management.   The 
hydro-meteorological weather observation 
network is being upgraded. By the end of the 
project it is expected to be transmitting data 
(weather and flows) in real time. 

Indicator 3:  Improved 
access to more adequate and 
reliable weather and river 
flow data of decision-
makers with responsibility 
on risk management by 
2013. 
Strategic Objective Three: Enhance Quality of Public Expenditures and Institutional Development 

Indicator 4: Achieved.  Reporting time of 
poultry diseases at the local level reduced to 1 
day. 

Lending: 
 Emergency Recovery Loan 
(FY08) $80M 
 Emergency Recovery Loan 
Additional Financing 
(FY12) $20M 

AAA: 
 Adaptation to Climate 
Change and Disaster Risk 
Mgt. NLTA 
 Avian Flu (FY09) – partner 
IICA 

17 

Lending: 
 PASS DPL Series (FY10, 

Improvement of the capacity for 
hazard risk management 
Minimize the impact of natural 
hazards 
 Disaster risk management 
mainstreamed into Ministry of 
Economy, Planning and 
Development 
Indicator 1:  Disaster Risk 
Management. aspects included in 
territorial and investment plans 

 Strengthened institutional capacity 
for risk management in specific 
sectors (for example water 
resources, electricity) 
Indicator 2: Dam safety management 
framework updated and operational 

Indicator 3:  Improved access to more 
adequate and reliable weather and 
river flow data of decision-makers 
with responsibility on risk 
management by 2012. 

Enhancement of the quality, 
accountability and efficiency of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
World Bank Assistance 

FY11, FY12) - $370M 

AAA: 
 NLTA Quality of Public 
Expenditures (FY10) 
(partners: IDB, EU) 
Institutional and Governance 
Review 
 Safeguards Capacity 
Activities 

 

Original CPS Outcome/Target        Revised CPS Outcome/Target 
(If applicable) 
public resources utilization 
Performance informed management in 
social sectors 
 
Improve budget management 
Indicator 1: Budget allocations are 
adequate to meet entitlements under 
social programs and budget in social 
sectors is executed as programmed, as 
evidenced by PEFA indicators 1 & 2 
(Credibility of budget) 
Baseline:  
Indicator 1: D 
Indicator 2: C (2007) 
Target: Equivalent to ‘A’ score in 
identified sectors (2013) following 
assessment of entitlements 

 Significant progress in the move 
toward performance-informed 
budget management 
Indicator 2: Introduction of a credible 
multi-annual plan and budget 
framework social sectors (FY2013) 
Baseline:  Under development 
(2009) 
Target: Covers social sectors 
(FY2013)2 

Indicator 3: Accurate and timely 
performance information loosely 
linking inputs to outputs, outcomes 
and entitlements is presented in 
budget documents  
Target:    Coverage for priority 
social sectors (FY2013) 
Baseline:  None in 2008 budget 

Indicator 3: Accurate and 
timely performance 
information loosely linking 
inputs to outputs, outcomes 
and entitlements is 
presented in budget 
documents 
Target:    Coverage for 
priority health and 
education programs 
(FY2013) 

Planned Milestones 
 Narrow the gap between 
budget and actual spending 
Baseline: PEFA indicators 1 
and 2 score D & C (2007) 
Target: Bs by end-2012  

 Performance agreements 
covering the priority social 
sectors (including health and  
education) signed  
Baseline: Under development 
(2009) 
Target:    Agreed for social 
sectors (FY2012) 

 Availability of accurate 
statistics to estimate policy 
outcomes 
Indicator 4: Official and widely-
informed poverty figures 
produced at least once by 2012 

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes 
Indicator 1: Budget allocations under social 
programs:  PEFA indicator 1 improved from 
D to C in 2010 PEFA; No improvement in 
PEFA indicator 2 

Performance Agreements with the 
Ministries of Health and Education have 
been signed and established.  The 
Government approved a Decree regulating 
Article 14 of the Budget Law that mandates 
the design and implementation of performance 
agreements and signed Performance 
Agreements with the Ministries of Health and 
Education for their priority investment 
programs.   

Indicator 2. Introduction of a credible 
multi-annual plan and budget framework 
social sectors:  Government approved Multi-
Annual National Investment Plan in the Public 
Sector 2010-2013, aimed at closing gaps in the 
supply of education, health, and nutrition 
services. This is the first step to developing a 
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.  
PEFA indicators 11 & 12 improved from Ds in 
2007 to B, C+ respectively, in 2010. 

Indicator 3.  Performance information 
loosely linking inputs to outputs, outcomes 
and entitlements presented in budget: 
Achieved. Performance agreements covering 
priority health and education programs signed 
between respective sectoral ministries and the 
Ministries of Economy, Planning and 
Development; Finance; and Public 
Administration on August 31, 2011. 

2 PEFA indicators 11 & 12 (Policy‐based budgeting) improve from Ds (2007) to B scores. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Original CPS Outcome/Target        Revised CPS Outcome/Target 
(If applicable) 

Planned Milestones 

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes 

Strengthening capacity of local 
Governments  
Decentralization and territorial 
development 
 Increase rural poor municipalities’ 
management capacity 

Indicator: The 30 participating rural 
municipalities demonstrate basic 
capacity in procurement, FM and HR 
management (survey of a sample of 
the municipal population) 

 15 rural municipalities 
trained in procurement, 
financial management and 
human resources 
management by December 
2012 (revised to 2013).   

 National territorial strategy 
developed by December 2011 
(revised to 2012). 

Indicator: The 15 participating rural 
municipalities demonstrate basic capacity in 
procurement, FM and HR management:   
 
The Municipal Development Councils in 
the five pilot municipalities have been 
formed; training will conclude by the end 
of CY2011 
 Validation of the municipal diagnostics is 
underway in pilot municipalities; 
Institutional Action Plans will be 
concluded and agreed by the end of CY 
2011 
Pilot municipalities have begun to create 
the basic units required for compliance 
with legal requirements; basic training of 
these units is expected to conclude before 
the end of CY 2011. 

 

Indicator: The 15 
participating rural 
municipalities demonstrate 
basic capacity in 
procurement, FM and HR 
management (revised 
number of municipalities to 
bring in line with project 
document)  

World Bank Assistance 

Lending: 
 Municipal Development 
(FY10) $20M 

Strategic Objective Four: Build Capacity and Constituencies for Reform 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original CPS Outcome/Target        Revised CPS Outcome/Target 
(If applicable) 
Enhancement of participatory 
policy formulation  
 Strengthened congressional budget 
oversight capacities 
Indicator1: Creation of a 
Congressional Advisory Office (OPA) 
that is staffed with merit-based 
personnel and periodically releases 
budget analysis reports (FY13). 

 Strengthened civil society’s 
capacities for budget analysis and 
monitoring 

Planned Milestones 

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes 

 Web-based financial 
management information tool 
“Consulta Amigable” 
developed and accessible by 
public 
Indicator 4: Public access to 
web-based interface linked to 
Financial Management 
Information System (SIGEF) 
Baseline: SIGEF not publicly 
available (FY2009) 
Target: SIGEF web-based, 
user-friendly interface 
available to the public 
(FY13) 

Indicator 1.  Creation of a Congressional 
Advisory Office:  OPA was created and 
staffed with merit-based personnel 

Indicator 2: Active permanent observatory 
of the budget run by coalition of CSOs is in 
place:  Achieved.  The Centro Juan Montalvo 
Civil Society Public Budget Observatory 
published 3 Reports in cooperation with the 
Civil Society Commission on Poverty and 
Fiscal Policy of the Foro Ciudadano, which 
involves more than 150 CSOs; trained 9 poor 
communities groups on budget execution 
monitoring. 

World Bank Assistance 

Lending: 
 PASS DPL Series (FY10, 
FY11, FY12) - $370M  
 Municipal Development 
Project (FY10) - $20M 

AAA: 
 
Institutional Development 
Fund for Strengthening 
Congressional Oversight 
 Strengthening Civil Society 
NLTA 
 Gender Mainstreaming 
Capacity and Advocacy in 
DR CSOs Trust Fund 
(FY12) 

Indicator2: Active permanent 
observatory of the budget run by 
coalition of CSOs is in place 
Baseline: 1 CSO running Social 
Policies Observatory including 
basic public budget and social 
expenditures analysis reports 
(FY09) 

Target: Expanded Public Budget 
Observatory including budget 
process monitoring and systematic 
publication of monitoring reports 
as measured by online website and 
by number of CSOs trained in 
budget analysis and monitoring 
(FY13)  

 Enhance participatory planning at 
the local level 
Indicator:3 All 30 participating 
municipalities are using participatory 
budgeting procedures to prepare 
annual budgets (based on the criteria 
of the participatory budgeting law). 

A coalition of 15 CSOs established an 
Observatory of the Participatory Anti-
Corruption Initiative (IPAC) and published 2 
monitoring reports on the Government’s 
progress in the implementation of the 
anticorruption action plan.  
Participatory budgeting and m-surveys through 
mobile technology are piloted in 2 
municipalities 

7 poor municipalities established and staffed 
with trained personnel Access to Information 
Offices and CSOs groups established Social 
Audit Commissions for local and national 
budget execution monitoring. 

Indicator. 3:  All 15 participating 
municipalities are using participatory 
budgeting procedures to prepare annual 
budgets:   Project is being piloted in 5 
municipalities: Bayaguana, Padre las Casas, 
Las Matas de Farfán, Tamayo y Polo. With 
exception of Bayaguana, the others are using 
participatory budgeting procedures. 

Indicator 4. Public access to web-based 
interface linked to Financial Management 

Indicator 3: All 15 
participating municipalities 
are using participatory 
budgeting procedures to 
prepare annual budgets 
(based on the criteria of the 
participatory budgeting 
law). 

 15 municipalities trained in 
participatory budget 
procedures by December 
2012 (revised to 2013). 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Original CPS Outcome/Target        Revised CPS Outcome/Target 
(If applicable) 

Planned Milestones 

World Bank Assistance 

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes 
Information System (SIGEF):  Achieved. 
The SIGEF-informed budget transparency 
portal, Portal del Ciudadano Dominicano, 
launched on August 30, 2011.  Government 
has also prepared easy-to-access budget 
execution reports, ‘Presupuesto Ciudadano’ 
(Citizens’ Budget) 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 2: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS 2004-2013 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 

Act.  (Percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 

2009* 

2010** 

2011 
Proj. 

2012 

2013 

1.3 
51.5 
36.6 

14.9 

15.7 

4.8 
-9.0 
43.7 
42.2 
4.2 
10.3 

3.5 
1.5 
4.3 

7.8 
6.3 
2.4 

5.7 
8.5 
4.7 

6.0 
4.7 
4.0 

6.0 
5.1 
3.1 

9.3 
4.2 
-27.8 

16.5 

11.0 

14.1 
12.9 
14.7 
11.7 
3.0 
0.1 
1.8 
-1.8 
47.4 

Income and prices 
GDP growth (% change) 
Inflation (CPI % change) 
Exchange rate (% appreciation - or depr. +) 
Investment and savings 
Gross domestic investment (current prices) 
Gross national savings 
Gross domestic savings 
Non Financial Public sector  
Total revenues and grants 
     Total tax revenues  
Total expenditures (incl. interest) 
    Current expenditures 
    Capital expenditures 
Primary balance 
Interest 
Overall balance  
Public debt   Total debt *** 
Balance of  payments 
Current account balance 
Trade balance  
Exports of goods and services (incl FTZ) 
Imports of goods and services (incl FTZ) 
Foreign direct investment 
Remittances 
Memorandum item: 
Nominal GDP  (billions of US dollars) 
21.6 
33.5 
35.2 
Nominal GDP  (billions of DR$) 
909.0 
1020.0 
1189.8 
Source: Ministry of Finance, Central Bank, EIU and IMF and World Bank staff estimates. 
*Note: (1) Authorities are still in a process of revising some data for 2009; (2) Authorities are considering alternative ways of reaching the overall fiscal deficit for the projection years, and this table 
may thus be subject to revisions; (3) statistics consider public debt as gross debt, i.e., bonds owned by agencies within the government are not net out.  
** Estimates adjusted to preliminary data by the DR Central Bank. 
*** Consolidated public debt including DR Central Bank dent. Historical and actual debt data from official Crédito Público figures. 

15.7 
14.5 
15.8 
12.0 
3.9 
0.8 
1.3 
-0.1 
34.3 

16.2 
14.8 
16.1 
12.9 
3.3 
1.2 
1.4 
0.0 
36.1 

17.5 
7.3 
5.1 

13.8 
13.2 
15.7 
11.9 
3.7 
0.4 
2.2 
-1.8 
37.6 

17.5 
11.9 
9.3 

14.9 
14.3 
15.9 
11.8 
4.1 
1.2 
2.2 
-1.0 
37.1 

17.0 
8.7 
6.1 

13.6 
12.7 
16.3 
12.6 
3.7 
-0.7 
1.9 
-2.7 
36.8 

14.8 
9.8 
6.9 

13.7 
13.1 
16.9 
13.3 
3.6 
-1.4 
1.8 
-3.2 
36.6 

17.7 
16.0 
17.1 
12.9 
4.1 
2.2 
1.6 
0.6 
33.1 

17.5 
10.5 
8.4 

14.4 
13.7 
15.7 
11.8 
3.9 
0.9 
2.3 
-1.3 
37.2 

15.9 
14.9 
19.6 
14.5 
5.1 
-2.1 
1.7 
-3.8 
33.5 

-10.2 
-18.0 
23.3 
35.7 
3.2 
5.5 

-1.4 
-11.1 
30.0 
33.8 
3.3 
7.2 

-5.3 
-15.6 
28.9 
37.1 
3.8 
7.3 

-9.9 
-20.3 
25.6 
39.1 
6.3 
7.1 

-5.0 
-14.6 
22.2 
30.2 
4.6 
6.5 

-5.6 
-14.0 
25.0 
33.2 
3.3 
5.0 

56.2 
2163.5 

60.7 
2430.9 

-6.9 
-14.9 
24.2 
33.3 
3.3 
5.3 

-8.4 
-16.6 
22.3 
33.3 
3.1 
5.8 

39.8 
1364.2 

45.6 
1576.2 

46.8 
1678.8 

52.3 
1921.9 

-3.7 
-15.6 
31.3 
38.5 
4.3 
7.7 

66.0 
2723.6 

10.7 
7.6 
11.8 

18.4 

10.4 

8.5 
6.1 
0.0 

18.9 

9.8 

5.3 
10.6 
4.2 

18.2 

4.6 

22 

 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
ANNEX 3 COUNTRY AT A GLANCE 

23 

 
 
24 

 
 
 
 
25 

 
 
 
 
 
26 

ANNEX 4: STANDARD CPS ANNEXES 

Dominican Republic - Key Economic Indicators

Es timate
2009

Ind icato r
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gros s domes tic p roducta
   Ag ricu ltu re
   Indu s try
   Serv ices

2005

A ctual     
2006
2007

2008

2010

Pro jected
2011
2012

2013

100
7
32
60

100
7
32
61

100
7
32
62

100
6
32
62

100
6
32
61

100
6
32
62

100
6
32
62

100
6
32
62

100
6
31
63

To tal Con s ump tion
Gros s domes tic fixed inves tmen t
   Governmen t inves tmen t
   Private inves tmen t

89
16
..
..

90
18
..
..

90
19
..
..

95
18
..
..

93
15
..
..

95
16
..
..

94
16
3
14

91
17
3
13

92
16
4
13

Expo rts (GNFS)b
Impo rts (GNFS)
Gros s domes tic s av ings
Gros s national s av ing s c
Memo randum items
Gros s domes tic p roduct 
(US$ million at cu rren t p rices )
GNI per cap ita (US$, A t las method )
2900
Real annual g rowth rates (%, calcu lated from 90 p rices )
   Gro s s domes tic p roduct at market p rices
9.3
10.7
   Gro s s Domes t ic Income
6.0
10.9
Real annual per cap ita growth rates (%, calcu lated from 90 p rices )
   Gro s s domes tic p roduct at market p rices
7.7
9.1
   To tal con s ump tion
13.8
10.4
   Private con s ump t ion
14.0
10.4
Balance of Payments (US $ mill ions )
  Expo rts (GNFS)b
      Merchand is e FOB
   Impo rts (GNFS)b
      Merchand is e FOB
  Res ou rce balance
  Net cu rren t tran s fers
  Cu rren t accoun t balance
  Net p rivate foreign d irect inves tmen t
  Long -term loan s (net)
    Official
    Private

30
36
11
..

30
38
10
..

29
38
10
13

25
39
5
8

22
30
7
8

22
34
5
6

24
35
6
8

27
35
9
10

26
35
8
11

34004

35953

41315

45805

46788

51458

..

..

..

3460

4150

4470

4670

5050

..

..

..

8.5
8.3

5.3
3.0

3.5
6.7

7.8
4.9

5.3
3.5

5.5
4.4

6.0
6.2

7.0
7.4
7.4

3.8
6.3
6.3

2.1
3.6
3.9

6.3
6.1
6.3

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

10058
6145
11326
9869
-1268
2697
-473
1123
84
231
-147
-1652
918

11153
6610
13731
12174
-2579
3144
-1288
1528
344
240
104
-853
268

11958
7160
15343
13597
-3385
3402
-2166
1667
180
101
78
-307
627

11670
6748
17953
15993
-6284
3513
-4519
2870
496
729
-233
1479
-326

10295
5483
14120
12296
-3826
3216
-2331
2165
759
964
-206
45
-638

11671
6598
17436
15299
-5765
3118
-4435
1625
1340
832
507
1923
-453

13837
8367
19939
17629
-6102
3854
-4736
1952
901
66
834
2456
-572

16308
10542
21209
18980
-4901
3545
-4048
2266
277
-55
332
1934
-429

17430
11353
22862
20587
-5432
4071
-3709
2300
488
-427
914
1181
-260

  Other cap ital (n et , in cl. erro rs & omm ission s)

  Change in res erves d
Memo randum items
Res ou rce balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual g rowth rates ( YR90 p rices )
  Merchand is e expo rts (FOB)
    Primary
    Manu factu res
  Merchand is e impo rts (CIF)

-3.7

-7.2

-8.2

-13.7

-8.2

-11.2

..

..

..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

(Con tinued )

 
 
 
Dominican Republic - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Ind icato r

2005

A ctual     
2006
2007

Es t imate
2009

2008

2010

Pro jected
2011
2012

2013

Publ ic finance (as % of GDP at mark et prices )e
  Cu rren t revenues
  Cu rren t expend itu res
  Cu rren t accoun t s u rp lu s (+) o r deficit (-)
  Cap ital expend itu re
  Fo reign financing

Monetary indicators
  M2/GDP
  Growth o f M2 (%)
  Private s ecto r cred it g rowth /
  to tal cred it growth (%)

Price indices ( YR90 =100 )
  Merchand is e expo rt p rice index
  Merchand is e impo rt p rice index
  Merchand is e terms o f trade index
  Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)f

  Real in teres t rates
  Cons umer p rice index  (% change)
  GDP deflato r (% change)

15.4
12.0
3.5
3.9
-0.4

27.7
12.2
80.4

..
..
..
65.2

4.2
2.7

15.9
12.9
3.0
3.3
2.0

25.3
6.6
50.0

..
..
..
68.5

7.6
5.4

17.3
12.9
4.4
4.1
0.8

25.5
15.6
80.2

..
..
..
100.8

6.1
5.7

15.7
14.5
1.2
5.1
1.6

27.8
25.9
-21.9

..
..
..
101.7

10.6
9.8

13.5
13.3
0.2
3.6
2.2

30.0
15.0
59.4

..
..
..
100.9

1.4
3.0

13.4
12.6
0.8
3.7
2.1

30.4
14.5
162.4

..
..
..
97.2

9.4
5.1

13.8
11.9
1.9
3.4
1.9

30.0
12.5
100.0

..
..
..
95.6

10.0
7.9

14.3
11.6
2.7
3.8
1.1

30.0
10.8
100.0

..
..
..
94.4

3.3
5.0

14.8
11.7
3.2
4.4
0.3

30.0
11.3
100.0

..
..
..
94.3

4.1
5.0

a.   GDP at facto r co s t
b .  "GNFS" deno tes " goods and non facto r s erv ices ."
c.  Includes net un requ ited trans fers exclud ing o fficial cap ital g ran ts .
d .  Includes us e o f IMF res ou rces .
e.   Con s o lidated cen t ral governmen t .
f.  "LCU" deno tes " local cu rrency un its ." An increas e in US$/LCU deno tes app reciat ion .

27 

 
 
  
 
 
 
Dominican Republic - Key Exposure Indicators

Ind icato r

A ctual     
2006
2007

Es t imated
2009

2008

2005

2010

2011

Pro jected
2012

2013

To tal deb t ou ts tand ing and 
d is bu rs ed (TDO) (US$m)a

Net d is bu rs emen ts (US$m)a
In teres t paymen ts
To tal deb t s erv ice (TDS)
(US$m)a

Deb t and deb t s erv ice ind icato rs 
(%)
   TDO/XGSb
   TDO/GDP
   TDS/XGS
   Conces s ional/TDO

IBRD expo s u re ind icato rs (%)
   IBRD DS/pub lic DS
   Preferred cred ito r DS/pub lic
   DS (%)c
   IBRD DS/XGS
   IBRD TDO (US$m)d
      Of wh ich p res en t value o f
      guaran tees (US$m)
   Share o f IBRD po rtfo lio (%)
   IDA TDO (US$m)d

IFC (US$m)
   Loans
   Equ ity and quas i-equ ity  /c

M IGA
   M IGA guaran tees (US$m)

7072

8553

10142

10119

11046

13045

13152

12598

11478

132
248
1010

679
320
1342

500
453
1380

557
547
1411

883
505
1322

1775
521
1337

..
446
1739

..
403
..

..
343
..

54.8
20.8
7.8
22.2

6.0
20.5

0.5
405

0.3
10.7

58.6
23.8
9.2
22.1

4.4
25.3

0.4
438

0.4
10.1

64.1
24.5
8.7
20.4

5.2
37.0

0.4
472

0.4
9.4

64.8
22.1
9.0
25.5

5.5
40.1

0.4
449

0.4
8.7

80.1
23.6
9.6
25.1

6.6
28.7

0.5
748

0.7
8.1

75.7
23.2
10.0
24.3

4.9
34.5

0.5
845

0.8
6.7

63.1
20.5
..
25.4

5.1
27.3

0.4
831

0.8
6.1

54.0
17.3
..
26.3

3.9
38.5

0.3
817

0.8
5.4

86.0
25.4
8.8
23.8

7.7
34.4

0.6
864

0.8
7.4

122
94

79

157

128

126

100

108

a.  Includes pub lic and pub licly guaran teed deb t , p rivate nonguaran teed , u s e o f IMF cred its and net s ho rt-
     term cap ital.
b .  "XGS" deno tes expo rts o f good s and s erv ices , includ ing wo rkers ' remit tances .
c. Preferred cred ito rs are defined as IBRD, IDA , the reg ional mu lt ilateral developmen t banks , the IMF, and the
    Bank fo r In ternat ional Set t lemen ts .
d . Includes p res en t value o f guaran tees .
e.  Includes equ ity and quas i-equ ity types o f bo th loan and equ ity ins trumen ts .

28 

 
 
 
Dominican Republic Social Indicators

Latest s ingle year

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2004-10

6.5
2.2
53.9
3.9

..
..
..

1,040
..

..
..
..

..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

54
39
..

65
63
67

56
75

..
..
..
..

7.9
1.9
57.8
3.1

..
..
..

1,910
24

51.4
4.3
56.5

1.2
..

..
..
..

88
95
78

78
72
8

70
67
72

40
50

..
..
170
93

9.9
1.4
70.5
2.6

34.4
26.2
47.7

4,226
114

49.0
4.5
54.5

1.5
2.1

80
80
80

86
87
84

79
82
3

73
70
76

22
27

202
132
100
98

Lat in
Am e r ica
& Car ib .

572.5
1.2
79.0
2.2

..
..
..

Uppe r -
m idd le -
incom e

1,001.7
0.9
74.9
2.0

..
..
..

7,007
123

7,502
127

..
..
..

3.9
4.0

94
94
93

93
97
80

93
92
4

74
71
77

19
23

190
103
86
89

..
..
..

3.8
4.3

93
93
92

95
98
86

93
93
..

72
69
75

19
23

201
123
82
96

POPULAT ION  
Total population, mid-year (mi l l ions )
    Grow th rate (% annual average for per iod)
Urban population (% of population)
Total f er tility rate (b i r ths per woman)
POVERTY

(% of population)
National headcount index
    Urban headcount index
    Rural headcount index
INCOM E
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer pr ice index (2005=100)
INCOM E/CONSUM PTION DISTRIBUT ION
Gini index
Low es t quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highes t quintile (% of income or consumption)

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Pub lic e xpe nd itur e
    Health (% of GDP)
    Education (% of GNI)
Ne t pr im ar y s choo l e nr ollm e nt r ate

(% of age group)
    Total
        Male
        Female
Acce s s to an im pr ove d w ate r s our ce

(% of population)
    Total
        Urban
        Rural
Im m un izat ion r ate

(% of chi ldren ages 12-23 months )
    Meas les
    DPT
Child malnutr ition (% under 5 years )
Life e xpe ctancy at b ir th

(years )
    Total
        Male
        Female
M or tality

    Inf ant (per 1,000 l i ve b i r ths )
    Under 5 (per 1,000)
    A dult (15-59)
        Male (per 1,000 population)
        Female (per 1,000 population)
    Maternal (per 100,000 l i ve b i r ths )
Bir ths attended by skilled health s taf f (%)

CAS Annex B5. This table w as produced f rom the CMU LDB sys tem.
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in ser ies betw een 1997 and 1998 due to
change f rom ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: ref ers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vacc inations bef ore one
year of age or at any time bef ore the survey .

11/01/ 11

29 

 
 
 
CAS ANNEX B3 - IBRD/IDA PROGRAM SUMMARY 

Dominican Republic 

As Of Date 10/27/2011

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a 

Fiscal year 

Proj ID 

DO (AF-C) to Emerg. & Disaster Mgt 
DO-3rd Perform.&Accbilty of SocSctrs DPL 
Result 
DO- Budget Support (To examine PASS 
related agenda priorities)                                      
DPL 
CARCIP 
Result 

2012 

2013 

Overall 
Result 

US$(M) 

 20.0 
 70.0 
 90.0 

 70.0 

 27.0 
 97.0 

 187.0 

Strategic 
Rewards b 
(H/M/L) 

Implementation b  
Risks (H/M/L) 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX B3 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: IFC INVESTMENT OPERATIONS PROGRAM 

2009

2010

2011

2012*

Origina l Comm itments (US$m )

IFC and Part ic ipants
IFC's Own Accounts only

Origina l Comm itments by Se ctor (%)- IFC Accounts only

FINANCE & INSURANCE
INFORMATION
TRANSPORTATION AND WAREHOUS ING
UTILITIES

Tota l

Origina l Comm itments by Inve stment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only

Equity
Guarantee
Loan
Quas i loan
Risk produc t

Tota l

* Data as of Oc tober 01,2011

1.07
1.07

46.52
46.52

51.02
39.02

100

100

100

100

46.26

43
10.75
100.01

3.26
85.99
10.75

100

13.59
41.56
44.84

99.99

13.59
44.84
41
0.56
99.99

2.76
2.76

100

100

7.47
92.53

100

31 

 
 
 
 
 
CAS ANNEX B4 - SUMMARY OF NONLENDING SERVICES - 

As Of Date 
10/27/2011 

Product 

Recent completions 

Completion FY 

Cost (US$000) Audiencea 

Objectiveb 

FSAP update Dominican Republic 
FY09 
DO Informality and poverty 
FY09 
DO Improving the Perform. of Reg. Hlth S FY09 
Dominican Rep - ICR ROSC 
FY10 
DO Policy Notes 
FY10 
DR ROSC A&A - Update 
FY10 
DO Support to the National Dev. Strategy FY10 
DO Energy NLTA 
FY11 
DO Poverty Monitoring NLTA 
FY11 

Underway 

DO Prog Inst & Governnce Rev 
DO-Social Sectors NLTA (multisector) 
DO Better Quality of Public Expenditures 
Strengthening Public Media in DR 

FY12 
FY12 
FY12 
FY12 

Planned 

a.  Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination. 
b.  Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving. 

148
93
61
70
135
10
272
175
109

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
8 (IFC) FOR DOMINICAN REPUBLIC  

Dom inica n Re pub
Comm itte d and Disbursed Outsta nding Inve stme nt Portfol io
As of 9/30/2011
(In USD Mi l l ions)

FY Approva l

Compa ny

Loan

Equity

**Qua si 
Equity *GT/RM

Pa rtici 
pa nt

Loa n

Equi ty

**Qua si 
Equity *GT/RM

Pa rtici 
pa nt

Comm itte d

Disbursed Outsta nding

2012/12
0/03
2005/07
2010
2008
2002/11
0
2004/05
2004
2010
2005
2007
0/10

Adopem
Banco bhd
Bas ic energy
Cae
Centro fin bhd
Cii
Cip dominican
Domicem s .a.
Grupo m
Linea c lave
Occ idental ho
Sans souc i
W ind

0
20
20.45
20
0
28
4.87
9.25
2.86
0
0
11.2
0

1.21
0
0
0
32.89
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Tota l Portfol io:

116.63

34.1

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Produc ts .
** Quas i Equity inc ludes both loan and equity types .

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12

12

0
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
20
8
16

59

0
0
4.83
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.82

5.65

33 

0
0
20.45
20
0
22.26
4.87
9.25
2.86
0
0
11.2
0

1.21
0
0
0
32.89
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

90.89

34.1

0
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
20
8
16

59

0
0
4.83
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.78

5.61

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12

12

 
 
 
 
CAS ANNEX B8 - OPERATIONS PORTFOLIO (IBRD/IDA AND GRANTS) 
Dominican Republic 

As Of Date 10/27/2011 

Closed Projects

42

IBRD/IDA *

Total Disbursed (A c tive)
          of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
          of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (A c tive + Closed)
          of w hich has been repaid

Total Undisbursed (A c tive)
Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (A c tive + Closed)

 79.32
 1.78
 823.27
 389.70
 902.59
 391.48

 181.58
 1.07
 182.66

Active Projects

Project ID

P095863
P106619
P089866
P109932
P078838
P090010
P096605
P054221
Ove ral l  Resul t

Project Name

DO  Municipal  Deve lopmeS
DO (APL2)  Heal th Re f  II MS
DO Electrici ty Di strib RehaS
DO Eme rgency Recove ry &MS
DO Financial  Sector TechnS
DO Social  Sectors InvestmMS
DO Youth Deve lopment P MS
DO(APL1)Wate r&Sani tatioMS

Las t PSR 
Supervision Rating
Deve lopment 
Implementa tion 
Objectives
Progress
S
MS
MS
MS
MS
MS
MS
MS

Or igina l Amount in US$ Millions

Difference Be tw een
Expected and Actual
Disbursements a/

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

Or ig. Frm Rev'd

19.45
26.41
31.24
46.75
1.84
20.65
8.81
26.43
181.58

2.37
3.26
27.83
46.75
1.84
10.65
8.81
10.76
112.28

6.19
3.74

9.93

IBRD

20
30.5
42
80
12.5
29.4
25
27.5
266.9

Fiscal Year

2010
2010
2008
2008
2004
2008
2006
2009

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 5:  KNOWLEDGE SERVICES 
A notable feature of the CPS is the intensive program of knowledge services (economic and 
sector studies, non-lending technical assistance, and grant funding) provided by the Bank to 
the Dominican Republic.  This reflects the Bank’s global expertise, ability to leverage 
resources from other international financiers which value Bank capacities and leadership, as 
well as the need to target timely and well focused interventions outside of the normal pace 
and character of lending operations.   

Strategic Objective 1. Strengthen Social Cohesion and Improve Access to and Quality of 
Social Services 

The Programmatic Social Sectors NLTA is helping the Government build knowledge and 
capacity to enact the reforms supported by the programmatic PASS DPL series. The NLTA 
has also supported the Government in assessing and monitoring the social impacts of the 
PASS-supported reforms. Finally, the NLTA works to address broader knowledge and 
advisory gaps on the performance and quality of social services and the design of a social 
protection strategy that builds resiliency to crises.  

This NLTA has also leveraged support from a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) 
Trust Fund and a Spanish Fund for Latin American and the Caribbean (SFLAC) Trust 
Fund. 

Strategic Objective 2. Promote Competitiveness in a Sustainable and Resilient Economic 
Environment 

The Dominican Republic-Haiti Quisqueya Growth and Poverty Report, which is 
exploring the potential opportunities for joint growth and poverty reduction through a deeper 
economic relationship, is expected to be finalized by the end of 2011.   Preliminary 
conclusions show that the countries could benefit from a stronger economic integration, 
including strengthening trade links.   

The World Bank Treasury's Reserve Advisory and Management Program (RAMP) is 
supporting public debt management and strengthening the Central Bank’s investment 
capabilities for the management of foreign exchange reserves, training of a new generation of 
university graduates in finance, who now play a significant role in financial management at 
the Central Bank.   

A Competitiveness NLTA is supporting the design of a logistics and transport national 
strategy and support to improve the trade facilitation system in the country. The Certification 
in Gender Equity in Firms as Means to Enrich and Promote Competitiveness trust fund is 
supporting the National Competitiveness Council’s efforts to mainstream gender in the 
country’s development strategies through design and pilot implementation of a Firm 
Certification model on gender equality to further attract private sector’s agents into the 
implementation of good practices in the workplace.   

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Adaptation to Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management NLTA was launched 
in FY12 and will focus on the assessment of climate impacts on the surface hydrology of the 
country.   

The Energy Sector NLTA has supported the development of a comprehensive strategy for 
energy sector reform in collaboration with the IDB, and an action plan which is currently 
under implementation. 

Strategic Objective 3.  Enhance Quality of Public Expenditures and Institutional 
Development. 

Performance informed budgeting is being introduced in the social sectors, supported by 
the analysis and dialogue under the Quality of Public Expenditures NLTA.  As 
conditions of the PASS series, performance agreements have been signed between the 
Ministries of Finance, Economy, Planning and Development, and Public Administration with 
the Ministries of Health and Education.  The agreements would cover both institutional and 
program targets.  Performance indicators will relate to internal processes and systems such as 
planning, procurement, monitoring, personnel and organizational structure as well as priority 
public programs related to the volume and quality of goods and services delivered by the 
agency.  The agreements call for programs of self-evaluation, validation of the results, and 
dissemination to internal and external users including the public.  The Health Sector Reform 
Second Phase APL (PARSS2) has made good progress in several key areas: (i) contracts 
have been signed between National Health Insurance Authority (SENASA) and two pilot 
Regional Health Services outlining a results-based financing mechanism for the first level of 
care; (ii) Government is moving to establish an autonomous entity to administer/oversee the 
regional network of health services, retaining policy direction in the Ministry of Health; and 
(iii) the quality of spending for medicines is targeted through a consultative process among 
key stakeholders to design a better integrated supply chain for medicines.  

The Quality of Public Expenditures NLTA is supporting the strengthening of financial 
management and procurement mechanisms, and the introduction and institutionalization of 
performance information by key actors along the budget cycle. The NLTA has supported the 
ongoing efforts in the social sector, including the PASS DPL series and Social Sectors NLTA.  
The NLTA is serving as a platform for the Government and the Bank to build trust and to 
seize political windows of opportunity by providing just in time support to the long-term 
trajectory of reform implementation and working closer with development partners to 
strengthen continued PFM dialogue. This work is now being expanded with the support of a 1 
million euro TF provided by the EU. 

The Institutional and Governance Review is currently under preparation.  It will analyze 
the underlying political economy and governance issues that inhibit the country from 
addressing fundamental development challenges in key sectors like education, health, and 
energy, and identify potential drivers or opportunities to change those factors.  The team will 
seek to integrate the lessons emerging from the variety of institutional reforms being pursued 
through the CPS as well as to tap the insight of key national and external stakeholders. The 
IGR is expected to be completed by late FY12. 

Activities to strengthen fiduciary capacity.  The Bank actively participated in the 2010 
Update of the European Union led Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) 
36 

 
 
 
 
 
exercise, which has been used as an important source of information in assessing fiduciary 
risk of Public Financial Management systems.  The Bank’s leading role at IPAC has served 
as a coordination platform for PFM donors’ interventions.  The renewed interest for the 
implementation of the Single Treasury Account; the development of a tool for self-evaluation 
of governmental entities for improved accountability; and the institutional strengthening of 
the public oversight entities, are some of the recommendations that are being implemented 
with Bank support.  Following the 2009 Update Report on Observance of Standards and 
Codes on Accounting and Auditing, The Bank has provided support, in coordination with 
other donor partners, mainly with IDB and the USAD –Transparency and Anti-Corruption 
Project, to the Chamber of Accounts (DR Supreme Audit Institution), the General 
Comptroller’s Office, the General Accounting Office, the Department of Prosecution of 
Corruption (DPCA) to assist in the implementation of the 2009 ROSC A&A Update.  The 
academy, and the Institute of Certified Public Accounts, the standard setting body for the 
private sector, have also participated in training activities to broadly disseminate International 
A&A standards. 

Strategic Objective 4.  Build Capacity and Constituencies for Reform 

A Public Budget Monitoring Project (funded by a US$150,000 Global Partnership Facility 
grant) aims at strengthening capacities for analysis and budget monitoring in civil society.   

The Access to Information Project implemented in seven poor municipalities (financed by 
the Japan Social Development Fund for US$420,000) seeks to enhance the capacity of 
vulnerable groups in rural areas by making public information accessible and training them on 
how to analyze the information and participate in policy discussions and program design in 
collaboration with local governments.   

A Municipal Participatory Budgeting Project through Mobile Technology (supported by a 
Korean trust fund for about US$72,000), linked to the Municipal Development Project, is 
piloting the use of mobile technology to enhance citizens’ participation in Participatory 
Budgeting and social accountability in two municipalities.   

USAID is collaborating with the Bank (with an EFO of US$350,000) in a Capacity Building 
Program for Strengthening the Demand for Good Governance in three pilot provinces 
training about 540 representatives of small and pro-poor community based organizations in 
advocating for public administration accountability and transparency, in policy analysis and 
formulation, and in pro-poor service delivery, as well as providing technical assistance to 
about 200 grassroots and community based organization to improve their own management 
capacity.    

Through the Gender Mainstreaming Capacity and Advocacy in DR Civil Society 
Organizations’ (CSO) TF about 150 CSOs and 100 Municipalities staff have been trained to 
integrate gender equality in local municipal plans and policies by a Bank trained corps of 
local trainers. The awareness raising material produced (two videos and two practical guides 
on how to integrate gender issues at the municipal level) has been used to reach out to CSOs 
and local public administration staff in other five municipalities.  

37 

 
 
 
 
 
IPAC is a broad multi-donor and multi-stakeholder participatory mechanism involving 
representatives from civil society, Government, the private sector, and 12 international 
development agencies aiming to improve transparency, strengthen institutions and fight 
corruption in the Dominican Republic.  The Bank’s leading role in coordination and 
facilitation of civil society, donors, private sector and the Government has contributed to an 
enhanced dialogue and enabled a genuine coordination platform for donors’ interventions. 
During its year of existence IPAC has established 10 working groups, developed 30 
recommendations, set up milestones to mark implementation progress, named governmental 
focal points, and held three accountability workshops to follow up on the recommendations 
using a scorecard system.  The IPAC represents a new country approach to tackling 
corruption.   

38 

 
 
 
Pepillo
Pepillo
Pepillo
Salcedo
Salcedo
Salcedo

Villa Vásquez
Villa Vásquez
Villa Vásquez

Rincón
Rincón
Rincón

Pimental
Pimental
Pimental

Cabrera
Cabrera
Cabrera

Sánchez
Sánchez
Sánchez

Miches
Miches
Miches

Boca de Yuma
Boca de Yuma
Boca de Yuma

BocaBoca
Boca
ChicaChica
Chica

El Macao
El Macao
El Macao

Sabana de la Mar
Sabana de la Mar
Sabana de la Mar

Gaspar
Gaspar
Gaspar
Hernández
Hernández
Hernández

Luperón
Luperón
Luperón

Bonao
Bonao
Bonao

Cabral
Cabral
Cabral

Oviedo
Oviedo
Oviedo

Y a q u e del Sur 
Vicente
Vicente
Vicente
NobleNoble
Noble

Duverge
Duverge
Duverge

El Cercado
El Cercado
El Cercado

Imbert
Imbert
Imbert

Sousúa
Sousúa
Sousúa

Rio San
Rio San
Rio San
Juan
Juan
Juan

Fantino
Fantino
Fantino
Yun a

Sabana Grande
Sabana Grande
Sabana Grande
de Boya
de Boya
de Boya

Yamasa
Yamasa
Yamasa

Bayaguana
Bayaguana
Bayaguana

Nigua
NiguaNigua

VillaVilla
Villa
Altagracia
Altagracia
Altagracia

Constanza
Constanza
Constanza

PoloPolo
Polo

Punta Palenque
Punta Palenque
Punta Palenque

Restauración
Restauración
Restauración

Monte Cristi
Monte Cristi
Monte Cristi

Puerto Plata
Puerto Plata
Puerto Plata
Cordillera Septentrional 
Cordillera Septentrional 
Mao
MaoMao
Santigo
Santigo
Santigo
Sabaneta
Sabaneta
Sabaneta

Elías Piña
Elías Piña
Elías Piña

San Juan
San Juan
San Juan

Moca
MocaMoca

Salcedo
Salcedo
Salcedo

La Vega
La Vega
La Vega

Cotuí
CotuíCotuí

San Cristóbal
San Cristóbal
San Cristóbal

Baní
Baní
Baní

San Francisco
San Francisco
San Francisco
de Macorís
de Macorís
de Macorís

Nagua
Nagua
Nagua

Samaná
Samaná
Samaná

El Seibo
El Seibo
El Seibo

Higüey
Higüey
Higüey

La Romana
La Romana
La Romana

San Pedro
San Pedro
San Pedro
de Macorís
de Macorís
de Macorís

HatoHato
Hato
MayorMayor
Mayor

NeibaNeiba
Neiba

Barahona
Barahona
Barahona

Jimaní
Jimaní
Jimaní

Pedernales
Pedernales
Pedernales

AzuaAzua
Azua

Dajabón
Dajabón
Dajabón

MonteMonte
Monte
PlataPlata
Plata

San Jose
San Jose
San Jose
de las Matas
de las Matas
de las Matas

Jánico
Jánico
Jánico

San Jose
San Jose
San Jose
de Ocoa
de Ocoa
de Ocoa

SANTO
SANTO
SANTO
DOMINGO
DOMINGO
DOMINGO

S A N T I A G O
S A N T I A G O
S A N T I A G O

L A V E G A
L A V E G A
L A V E G A

HATO
HATOHATO
MAYOR
MAYOR
MAYOR

LA ROMANA
LA ROMANA
LA ROMANA

DISTRITO NACIONAL
DISTRITO NACIONAL
DISTRITO NACIONAL

LALA
LA
ALTAGRACIA
ALTAGRACIA
ALTAGRACIA

5
5

6
6

9
9

1 01 0
1 0

S A M A N Á
S A M A N Á
S A M A N Á

ESPAILLAT
ESPAILLAT
ESPAILLAT

4
4

MARÍAMARÍA
MARÍA
TRINIDAD
TRINIDAD
TRINIDAD
SÁNCHEZ
SÁNCHEZ
SÁNCHEZ

EL SEIBO
EL SEIBO
EL SEIBO

DUARTE
DUARTE
DUARTE

PUERTO PLATA
PUERTO PLATA
PUERTO PLATA

B A O R U C O
B A O R U C O
B A O R U C O

A Z U A
A Z U A
A Z U A

BARAHONA
BARAHONA
BARAHONA

1
1

MONTE
MONTE
MONTE
CRISTI
CRISTI
CRISTI

S A N J U A N
S A N J U A N
S A N J U A N

2
2

3
3

E
E

LÍAS PI Ñ
LÍAS PI Ñ

A
A

MONTE PLATA
MONTE PLATA
MONTE PLATA

PERAVIA
PERAVIA
PERAVIA

7
7

8
8

P
P

E
E

D
D

E
E

R
R

N
N

A
A

L
L
S
S

E
E

INDEPENDENC I A
INDEPENDENC I A

Cordillera Central 
Cordillera Central 

C o r d i l lera Oriental 
C o r d i l lera Oriental 

Cordillera Neiba 
Cordillera Neiba 

S
S

i
i
r
r
r
r
a d
a d

e
e

e B
e B

aoruco 
aoruco 

IslaIsla
Isla
Saona
Saona
Saona

Isla
IslaIsla
Beata
Beata
Beata

Pico Duarte
Pico Duarte
Pico Duarte
(3175 m)
(3175 m)
(3175 m)

Monte Mijo
Monte Mijo
Monte Mijo
(2266 m)
(2266 m)
(2266 m)

Monte Tina
Monte Tina
Monte Tina
(2830 m)
(2830 m)
(2830 m)

H A I T I
H A I T I
H A I T I

To To 
To 
Fort-Liberté
Fort Liberté
Fort Liberté

To To 
To 
Lascahobas
Lascahobas
Lascahobas

To To 
To 
Port-au-Prince
Port au Prince
Port au Prince

1. DAJABÓN
2. SANTIAGO RODRÍGUEZ
3. VALVERDE
4. HERMANAS MIRABAL
5. SÁNCHEZ RAMÍREZ
6. MONSEÑOR NOUEL
7. SAN JOSÉ DE OCOA 
8. SAN CRISTÓBAL
9. SANTO DOMINGO
10. SAN PEDRO DE MACORÍS

Lago
Enriquillo

Yaque d e l Norte 

Cam u 

B a h í a
d e O c o a

Bahía de 
Neiba 

O

z

a

m

a

AT L A N T I C O C E A N

C a r i b b e a n S e a

To 
Grand-Gosier

72º W

71º W

70º W

72º W

71º W

70º W

69º W

18º N

19º N

20º N

18º N

19º N

20º N

DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.  
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

0

20

0

20

40 Miles

40 Kilometers

I

B
R

D

3
3
3
9
8
R

M

A

Y

2
0
0
9

D O M I N I C A N
R E P U B L I C

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

PROVINCE CAPITALS

NATIONAL CAPITAL

RIVERS

MAIN ROADS

RAILROADS

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

 
 
 
 
