Document of  
The World Bank 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 

Report No. 55863-UY  

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT 

AND INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY 

FOR 

THE ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY 

FOR THE PERIOD 2010-2015 

August 18, 2010 

Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay 
Country Management Unit 
Latin America and the Caribbean Region 

This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not imply 
a presumed outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and the 
updated document will be made publicly available in accordance with the Bank's Policy on 
Access to Information. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The last Country Assistance Strategy for Uruguay was discussed by the Executive 
Directors on June 9, 2005, (Report No. 31804-UY), and a Progress Report on the 
implementation of that Country Strategy was noted by the Executive Directors on April 1, 
2008, (Report No. 42789-UY). 

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENT UNITS 
(As of June 30, 2010) 

Currency Unit = Uruguay Peso 
US$1 = 21.12 Uruguay Pesos 

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
Metric System 

FISCAL YEAR: 

January 1 – December 31 

IBRD 
RegionalVice President 
Country Director 
Country Representative 
Task Team Leader 

Pamela Cox 
Penelope Brook 
Peter Siegenthaler 
Andrew Follmer 

IFC 
Regional Vice President 
Regional Director 
Country Manager 
Task Manager 

Thierry Tanoh 
Vincent Gouarne 
Salem Rohana 
John Barham 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AAA 
APL 
CAF 
CAS 
CASCR 
CBU 
CC 
CEM 
CFAA 
CPAR 
CPI 
CPS 
DINAMA 
DPL 
EMBI 
ESW 
FBS 
FDI 
FA 
FMD 
FX 
GAC 
GCR 
GDP 
GEF 
GHG 
GoU 
IADB 
IBRD 
IBTAL 
ICR 
IDF 
IFC 
IFIs 
IFRS 
IMF 
LCR 
MDGs 
MEF 
MERCOSUR 
MGAP 
MIC 
MSP 
M&E 
NCD 
NGOs 
NLTA 
OECD 
OPP 
OSE 
PEFA 
PFM 
PIU 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

Analytical and Advisory Activities 
Adaptable Program Loan 
Andean Development Corporation (Corporación Andina de Fomento) 
Country Assistance Strategy 
Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report 
Central Bank of Uruguay (Banco Central de Uruguay) 
Climate Change 
Country Economic Memorandum 
Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
Country Procurement Assessment Report 
Consumer Price Index 
Country Partnership Strategy 
Dirección Nacional de Medio Ambiente 
Development Policy Loan 
Emerging Markets Bond Index 
Economic and Sector Work 
Fee-Based Service 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Frente Amplio 
Foot & Mouth Disease 
Foreign Exchange 
Government and Anticorruption 
Global Competitiveness Report 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environmental Facility 
Greenhouse Gas 
Government of Uruguay 
Inter-American Development Bank 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
Institutions Building Technical Assistance Loan 
Implementation Completion and Results Report 
Institutional Development Fund 
International Finance Corporation 
International Financial Institutions 
International Financial Reporting Standards 
International Monetary Fund 
Latin America and the Caribbean Region 
Millennium Development Goals 
Ministry of Economy and Finance 
Mercado Común del Sur 
Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and Fisheries 
Middle-Income Countries 
Ministry of Public Health 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Non-Communicable Diseases 
Non-Governmental Organizations 
Non-Lending Technical Assistance 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
Office of Planning and Budget 
Obras Sanitarias del Estado 
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
Public Financial Management 
Project Implementation Unit 

 
 
PPIAF 
PPP 
PRIDPL 
R&D 
SINARE 
SMEs 
SWAp 
UNDAF 
UNDP 
UNICEF 
UTE 
WBG 
WHO 

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 

Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility 
Public-Private Partnership 
Programmatic Reform Implementation Development Policy Loan 
Research and Development 
National System for Registering Companies 
Small and Medium Enterprises 
Sector-Wide Approach 
United Nations Development Assistance Framework 
United Nations Development Program 
United Nations Children’s Fund 
National Administration of Power Plants and Electric Transmissions 
World Bank Group 
World Health Organization 

 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The World Bank Group greatly appreciates the collaboration and contributions of the 
Government of Uruguay in the preparation of this Country Partnership Strategy (CPS).  
The leadership of President José Mujica during the policy notes discussions provided 
invaluable direction, and key participants included Mr. Danilo Astori, Vice President; 
Mr. Fernando Lorenzo, Minister of Economy and Finance; Mr. Ricardo Ehrlich, Minister 
of Education and Culture; Mr. Tabaré Aguerre, Minister of Livestock, Agriculture and 
Fishery; Mr. Roberto Kreimerman, Minister of Industry, Energy and Mining; Mr. Daniel 
Olesker, Minister of Public Health; Mr. Eduardo Brenta, Minister of Labour and Social 
Security; Mr. Enrique Pintado, Minister of Transport and Public Works; Ms. Liliam 
Kechichián, Vice Minister of Tourism and Sports; Ms. Graciela Muslera, Minister of de 
Housing, Territorial Order and the Environment; and Ms. Ana Olivera, designated 
Minister of Social Development. 

In particular, the World Bank Group thanks Mr. Fernando Lorenzo, Minister of Economy 
and Finance, and Mr. Michael Borchardt, Head of Budget Unit, Ministry of Economy and 
Finance (MEF).  In addition, we thank the following government officials for their 
contributions to the CPS:  Pedro Buonomo, Vice Minister of Economy and Finance; 
Pedro Apezteguía, General Director; Andrés Masoller, Head, Macroeconomic and 
Financial Advisory Department, and Martín Vallcorba; Azucena Arbeleche, Public Debt 
Management Unit; Mariella Maglia and Santiago Moldes, Relations with International 
Organizations; Adriana Rodríguez, Advisor (MEF); Gabriel Frugoni, Director, and Diana 
Marcos, Coordinator of Public Budgets, Office of Planning and Budget (Presidency of 
the Republic).  Further, the World Bank Group extends a special thanks to representatives 
of Government, private sector, the NGO community, and other stakeholders who 
participated in CPS consultations in July and August, 2010. 

Other contributors to the preparation of this CPS include Messes./Mmes:  Marcelo 
Acerbi, Pedro Alba, Sylvia Albela Russo, Keisgner Alfaro, Diego Ambasz, Amparo 
Ballivian, John Barham, Valeria Bolla, Paloma Años Casero, Carla Cútolo, Luis de la 
Plaza, Franz Drees-Gross, Norbert Fiess, Geraldine García, Ana Lariau, José Roberto 
López-Cálix, Maria Luisa Masutti, Milagros Mosteirin, Javier Pereira, Susana Pérez, 
Rafael Rofman, Felipe Saez, Eduardo Urdapilleta, and Eduardo Wallentin, who, together 
with the Country Director, Country Representative and CPS TTL, comprised the Core 
Team.  In addition, Yanina Budkin, Francisco Carneiro, Michael Carroll, Diego Cerdeiro, 
Bruce Courtney, Ivanna Echegoyen, Hermann von Gersdorff, B. Koshie Michel, Barbara 
Mierau-Klein, Juan Martin Moreno, Reynaldo Pastor, Luis Pérez, Andrés Pizarro, 
Tatiana Proskuryakova, Ana Carolina Saizar Renart, Verónica Salatino, Alejandro 
Solanot, and David Yuravlivker provided valuable inputs. 

 
 
 
 
 
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FOR 
THE ORIENTAL REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................... i 
I.    Introduction ............................................................................................................................ 1 
II.  Country Context ..................................................................................................................... 3 
A.  Political Developments ........................................................................................................3 
B.  Economic Performance ........................................................................................................3 
C.  Poverty .................................................................................................................................4 
III. Development Challenges & Government’s Vision .............................................................. 5 
A. Strengthening the Business Climate and Competitiveness ...................................................6 
B.  Improving Social Inclusion & Equity ..................................................................................8 
C.  Consolidating Agricultural Sector Growth and Bringing its Benefits to Family Farms ....11 
D.  Protecting the Environment and Mitigating the Effects of Climate Change .....................12 
E.  Reforming the Public Sector ..............................................................................................13 
IV. Uruguay – World Bank Partnership .................................................................................. 13 
A.  Performance under the 2005-2010 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) and Evolution 
of the Partnership ...............................................................................................................13 
B.  The Ongoing Portfolio .......................................................................................................16 
C.  The WBG’s Indicative Program (2010-2015) ....................................................................17 
Strategic Approach & CPS Pillars .................................................................................... 17 
Fiduciary Products ............................................................................................................ 25 
IFC Activities .................................................................................................................... 25 
D.  Development Partners ........................................................................................................26 
V.  Risks ....................................................................................................................................... 27 

TABLES 
Table 1: Access to Public Services ................................................................................................. 7 
Table 2: Indicative lending program for 2010-2015 ..................................................................... 18 
Table 3: AAA program for FY11 and FY12 ................................................................................ 19 
Table 4:  CPS Program Objectives and Select Activities ............................................................. 24 

BOXES 
Box 1: Uruguay’s PLAN CEIBAL – One Laptop per Child ........................................................ 10 
Box 2: CPS Consultations ............................................................................................................. 14 
Box 3: The First Programmatic Public Sector Competitiveness and Social Inclusion 
Development Policy Loan (DPL) ..................................................................................... 20 

FIGURES 
Figure 1:  Long Term Poverty Trends ............................................................................................ 5 
Figure 2: Uruguay Investment Portfolio Diversification .............................................................. 16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXES 

Annex A:  CPS Results Framework 
Annex B:  CAS Completion Report 
Annex C:  Macroeconomic Framework 
Annex D:  Debt Sustainability Analysis 
Annex E:  Banking Sector Update 
Annex F:  IBRD and GEF Program Summary 
Annex G: IFC Program Summary 
Annex H:  Proposed GEF Program 
Annex I:  CPS Consultations 

Standard CPS Annexes: 
Annex A2:  Uruguay at a Glance 
Annex B2:  Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management 
Annex B3:  IBRD Program Summary 
IFC Investment Portfolio Operations Program 
Annex B4:  Summary of Non-lending Services  
Annex B5:  Key Social Indicators 
Annex B6:  Key Economic Indicators 
Annex B7:  Key Exposure Indicators 
Annex B8:  Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) 
IFC Committed & Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio 

 
 
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Uruguay has a strong history of broad-based social welfare and solid democratic 
institutions building on a deeply ingrained preference for equality and political consensus.  
The country enjoyed the highest human development standards in the region during the last 
century, and Uruguay’s society is still among the most equitable in the region in terms of income 
distribution and social indicators.  Like many of its neighbors, recent decades were marked by 
successive domestic economic crises, the most recent accompanying the Argentina crisis of 
2001-2002.  In 2004, in the aftermath of the crisis, the Uruguayan electorate brought forth an 
important shift in the political landscape by voting into power a center left coalition (the Frente 
Amplio -FA).   

Efforts to decrease the economy’s vulnerability after the 2001-2002 crisis resulted in it 
proving more resilient to the recent global recession than many other emerging market 
economies.  This was due to a generally solid macroeconomic framework, greater exchange rate 
flexibility, rising international reserves, and improvements in the banking system. 

The first FA administration led by former President Vázquez successfully consolidated the 
restoration of macroeconomic stability, increased integration into international markets, 
and improved the investment climate. These efforts paid off with an unprecedented economic 
growth rate (6.6 percent on average from 2004 to 2008).  The focus on promoting economic 
growth was accompanied by a desire to ensure that all Uruguayans shared in the country’s 
success.  Thus, expanding social protection programs, as well as health and education services, 
was central to the policies of the Vasquez Administration.  These combined efforts resulted in 
poverty declining by nearly 35 percent; and extreme poverty by 50 percent, between 2003 and 
2008, with unemployment falling from 16.9 to 7.9 percent.  

The second FA Government took power in March 2010, and the new President, José 
Mujica, declared that he would consolidate the positive economic and social outcomes 
achieved by his predecessor.  The new Government recognizes the importance for Uruguay to 
look beyond the region when setting its reform agenda for the next years.  The country indeed 
has a unique opportunity to reach, in the medium term, living standards and quality of 
institutions that are comparable to those enjoyed by advanced economies.  

The implementation of the 2005-2010 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) was largely 
successful, and Bank-financed activities contributed significantly to the Government’s 
development objectives, with Bank support structured in three pillars:  (i) reducing 
vulnerability; (ii) sustaining growth; and (iii) improving living standards.  This period witnessed 
a marked strengthening of the Bank’s partnership with the Government of Uruguay (GoU).  The 
Bank opened an office in Montevideo in 2005, which strengthened relations with the 
Government and facilitated successful CAS implementation.  Further, the Bank was able to 
customize its financing innovatively in order to disburse a Development Policy Loan (DPL) in 
local currency.  Finally, the Bank demonstrated an ability to shift the focus of its collaboration to 
areas in which the Government was prioritizing critical reforms and initiatives which required 
important knowledge transfer to move forward with innovative approaches. 

i 

 
This Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) aims to help Uruguay take the next steps in 
consolidating economic reforms, and enhancing social outcomes.  It will build on the positive 
experience of the previous CAS period, when the Bank’s financial assistance was significantly 
increased and the policy dialogue extended to a wide array of critical components of the 
country’s development strategy.  This positive experience entailed a flexible and responsive 
stance by the Bank characterized by nimble and effective responses to evolving needs.  This 
enabled the Bank to expand its support to the Government into new areas – like promotion of 
innovation, public sector reform and health reform – and thus support emerging key government 
priorities. 

The proposed CPS includes a Bank lending program of approximately US$700 million, 
together with an active International Finance Corporation (IFC) program and a strategic 
joint Government-Bank program of Analytical and Advisory Services (AAA), structured 
around the  following four pillars:  (i)  Reducing Macroeconomic Vulnerability & 
Strengthening Public Sector Administration; (ii) Competitiveness & Infrastructure; (iii) 
Agriculture, Climate Change, and Environment; and (iv) Increasing Social Inclusion & 
Equity.  Reflecting the lessons of the CAS Completion Report, the strategy will be flexible to 
accommodate the Government’s potential need to adjust course in the event of unforeseen 
domestic or external developments, and it will buttress the administration’s efforts to achieve 
consensus on its ambitious reform agenda.  Indicative support for this strategy is proposed to 
include a series of two DPLs totaling US$200 million (late 2010 and late 2011), investment 
lending totaling approximately US$500 million, and a well-focused and demand-driven AAA 
program.  The proposed strategy places a heightened emphasis on supporting Uruguay in 
accessing international expertise and best practices, as well as sharing its own experiences with 
other countries through South-South exchanges. 

The proposed IFC activities in Uruguay for the CPS period complement the Bank’s 
strategy by focusing on the following four main areas:  (i) financial services, (ii) 
agribusiness, (iii) competiveness, and (iv) education.  In the financial sector, IFC aims to 
support banks and non-banks that focus on the mid-market corporate and low-income retail 
banking segments.  In agribusiness, the focus is likely to remain on export-oriented enterprises 
with deep linkages to small- and medium-sized farms.  All three of IFC’s active investment 
projects in Uruguay are in export-oriented agribusiness companies.  The Corporation also aims to 
reinforce the country’s competitiveness by financing infrastructure projects, especially those in 
the renewable energy, logistics, and water sectors once appropriate regulations are in place.  
Finally, IFC hopes to support private sector education institutions, particularly those that offer 
technical and vocational courses for low income students. 

While Uruguay’s resilience in the face of the recent global economic crisis demonstrates 
that it is much more strongly positioned than it was 10 years ago, significant risks remain.  
Despite declining as a source of risk since 2005, debt sustainability remains the main economic 
risk, followed dollarization and exposure to global and regional shocks.  Political risk is low, 
though significant social risk arises from the tensions between pressure to expand government 
programs and the need for a prudent fiscal stance in order to further reduce macroeconomic 
vulnerabilities.  Finally, natural disasters and climate change have already had a major impact on 
rural income, as well as important fiscal implications, in recent years.   

ii 

 
I.  INTRODUCTION 

1. 
Uruguay has a strong history of broad-based social welfare and solid democratic 
institutions building on a deeply ingrained preference for equality and political consensus, 
which is still very present today.  The country enjoyed the highest human development 
standards in the region during the last century.  While the country has faced adverse 
developments in recent decades, these standards remain high, and Uruguay’s society is still 
among the most equitable in the region in terms of income distribution and social indicators.  

2. 
This country of 3.3 million people has set its own distinct development path in a 
context of a deep economic inter-connection with its large neighbors, Brazil and Argentina.  
In Uruguay, the state is widely recognized as trustworthy and effective in the delivery of public 
goods, and the society has explicitly voiced its preference for having the state play an active and 
expanded role in most public service sectors.  This trust is a reflection of the country’s tradition 
for consensus-based policies and of the strong performance of the public sector in ensuring 
nearly universal coverage and adequate quality and transparency in the provision of services.  

3. 
Uruguay’s traditional development model combines a dynamic primary export base 
and a welfare state responsible for the distribution of economic benefits.  This model came 
under serious pressure in the latter part of the twentieth century, due to unfavorable commodity 
price developments and a weaker performance in public sector management.  This triggered a 
gradual social and economic decline, leading to high unemployment rates and chronic fiscal and 
balance of payments imbalances, and compromised opportunities for economic expansion. 

4. 
In the early nineties, the country embarked on an economic turnaround based on 
economic opportunities offered by expanding links with regional partners, facilitated by 
economic integration through the Mercado Común del Sur (Mercosur) – and with all the 
benefits and vulnerabilities thus implied.  This strategy produced encouraging early results, 
with high growth rates, progress on economic diversification, and substantial poverty reduction.  
However, the increased reliance on regional economic relations made Uruguay’s economy 
highly vulnerable to the performance of its neighbors, as was dramatically demonstrated when 
Argentina’s severe political and economic crisis broke out in 2001.  This had a devastating effect 
on all dimensions of Uruguay’s economy and society.  Unemployment and poverty rates rapidly 
increased to 20 percent and over 30 percent, respectively.  Real wages plummeted as the Peso 
was devalued and the economy went into a deep recession.  The Government faced a mounting 
fiscal deficit and an exploding external debt, placing the country on the verge of insolvency.  

5. 
Uruguay managed the crisis very well, without defaulting on its debt.  The 
Government rapidly put together a comprehensive recovery program based on respecting 
contracts and commitments, while mitigating the adverse social consequences of the crisis.  In 
particular, the authorities refused to default on the debt, and worked hard to reach agreement 
with creditors on a debt restructuring plan consistent both with the repayment capability of the 
country and with the rules of the game.  This recovery program enjoyed broad political and 
social consensus, and the authorities managed to mobilize the international community to help 
safeguard fiscal solvency and address structural issues that were critical for return to high growth 
levels.  Eventually, as the economy recovered much faster than expected, Uruguay was able to 
repay the multilaterals' emergency loans well ahead of schedule. 

1 

 
6. 
In 2004, in the aftermath of the crisis, the Uruguayan electorate brought forth an 
important shift in the political landscape by voting into power a center-left coalition (the 
Frente Amplio -FA).  In a reflection of the stability of Uruguay’s consensus-oriented 
democracy, the loss of the executive branch by the two parties that had dominated the political 
scene for 170 years did not generate significant disruptions in the post-crisis recovery agenda.  
The FA ensured remarkable institutional continuity while gradually consolidating a reform 
agenda around which it shaped an unprecedented political consensus. 

7. 
The first FA administration, led by former President Vázquez, successfully 
consolidated the restoration of macroeconomic stability and undertook determined efforts 
to increase Uruguay’s integration into international markets and improve the investment 
climate.  These efforts paid off with unprecedented economic growth (6.6 percent on average 
from 2004 to 2008).  Based on its conviction that sustained and broad-based economic growth 
require policies that go beyond stable macroeconomic conditions, the Vázquez administration 
took a proactive stance on promoting innovation, infrastructure development and institutional 
reforms for increased competition and conducive conditions for private sector development.  

8. 
Pairing these efforts in promoting economic growth with expanding social 
protection programs, as well as health and education services was central to the policies of 
the Vázquez Administration.  The Government focused on promoting universal access to key 
benefits and services by vulnerable groups.  This included the expansion of the family allowance 
program, the introduction of a pioneering program to provide every primary school student a 
personal computer (Plan Ceibal), and the launch of a major health reform aimed at gradually 
increasing coverage to ultimately reach the totality of the population.  These combined efforts in 
the economic and social fronts generated positive outcomes that went beyond recovering ground 
lost in the 2002 crisis.  Between 2003 and 2008, poverty declined by nearly 35 percent; and 
extreme poverty, by 50 percent.  Unemployment fell from 16.9 to 7.9 percent.  

9. 
The second FA Government took office in March 2010, with President José Mujica 
promising to continue the sound policies implemented in recent years, with a view toward 
consolidating the positive economic and social outcomes.  He committed his administration to 
further increase the effectiveness of public policies – such as further expanding social sector 
programs with an increased emphasis on enhancing their impact.  The new Government has 
committed itself to studying global best practices in setting its reform agenda for the coming 
years.  In the medium-term, the country has a unique opportunity to achieve living standards and 
quality of institutions comparable to those enjoyed by advanced economies.  

10. 
This proposed Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) covers the years 2010-15 and is 
aligned with the country’s development vision.  It proposes a Bank lending program of 
approximately US$700 million, together with an active International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
program and a strategic joint Government-Bank program of Analytical and Advisory Services 
(AAA). The CPS will provide for flexibility to enable the program to respond to emerging needs.  
Rather than providing a detailed blueprint of the terms and scope of the partnership between the 
Government and Bank, the CPS aims at laying out the guiding principles for shaping this 
partnership. While it specifies the programs identified for the initial years of the partnership, 
sufficient flexibility is built into the CPS to allow for responding to evolving government 
priorities and needs.  

2 

 
A.  Political Developments 

II.  COUNTRY CONTEXT 

11. With the election of Mr. José Mujica by an ample margin and the FA’s concurrent 
achievement of a majority in both houses of Parliament, the Uruguayan electorate has 
endorsed the policy framework inaugurated in 2005.  There seems to be a growing consensus 
in the country that, after overcoming the challenges resulting from the 2002-03 crisis, the country 
now needs to develop a broad national consensus on a development agenda that will put the 
country on a path of sustained growth and high standards of human development.  

12. 
President Mujica has consistently expressed the need to articulate “state policies” 
that will stand above the day-to-day political debate.  From his first days in office he has 
reached out to opposition parties in seeking consensus in critical areas such as education, 
infrastructure, environment, security and public sector reform.  In successful intra-party 
negotiations, Mr. Mujica approved having non-members of the ruling coalition invited to the 
board of directors of some of the government-controlled institutions and corporations, a strong 
departure from past political practices.  He is currently benefitting from strong approval ratings, 
leaving him well-positioned to pursue his political initiatives and legislative agenda.  
Maintaining this support will depend on his capacity to translate the populace’s strong 
expectations into a concrete development agenda that will effectively improve living conditions. 

13. 
In its first months, the Government announced a number of important new reform 
initiatives, most notably a renewed commitment to customs reform, the introduction of a public-
private partnership framework for investment in the infrastructure sector and, further 
consolidation of social protection transfer programs.  It also managed to complete some reform 
efforts initiated under its predecessor government, such as the May 2010, launch of the Empresa 
en el Día initiative, a one-stop-shop for firm creation which constitutes a significant 
improvement in Uruguay’s business environment.  The Government also changed the 
presentation of its budget from an administrative to a program-based format, which will enable 
preparing the new 5-year budget in way that better reflects policy objectives.  

B.  Economic Performance 

14. 
Efforts to decrease the Uruguayan economy’s vulnerability after its 2001-2002 crisis 
resulted in it proving more resilient to the recent global recession than most other emerging 
market economies.  This reflects a generally solid macroeconomic framework, greater exchange 
rate flexibility, rising international reserves, improvements in the banking system, and an 
improved investment climate that lessened the impact of the crisis and positioned the country 
well to benefit from a recovery. 

15. 
Prior to the global recession, Uruguay had enjoyed several years of impressive 
economic performance.  Real GDP growth averaged 6.6 percent from 2004 through 2008 and 
largely resulted from a rebound in both domestic demand and exports.  Growth reached 8.5 
percent in 2008, the highest level in the last 20 years, despite a slowdown in the last quarter of 
the year due to the crisis.  International trade expanded significantly, though Uruguay’s trade 
structure remains highly concentrated, both by product and geography.  Export growth averaged 

3 

 
13 percent per year in 2004-2008.  Unemployment declined to its lowest level in over a decade, 
falling from 13.1 percent in 2004 to 7.3 percent in 2009.  Although economic activity slowed 
with the crisis and the economy contracted in the first quarter of 2009 (-2.9 percent), growth 
resumed in the second quarter and reached 2.9 percent for the year.  Current projections 
anticipate an increase to 5.5 percent in 2010, and -- in subsequent years -- revert back to long-run 
growth of 4 percent.  Annexes C and D contain more detail on the economic context and debt 
sustainability, respectively. 

16. 
Public debt management has achieved considerable success in terms of reducing 
debt and improving its composition.  Gross public debt declined from 79.3 percent of GDP in 
2005 to 60 percent in 2009.  With the increase in foreign reserves, net public debt declined about 
20 percentage points of GDP over the same period.1  In terms of debt composition, 78.9 percent 
of total public debt is held by private creditors, compared to 55.7 percent by end-2004, reflecting 
restored access to market financing.  The foreign currency share of total public non-financial 
sector debt fell from 76.6 percent in 2004 to 56.7 percent by December 31, 2009.  Debt 
sustainability continues to pose a risk, albeit one that has been greatly reduced.  Medium-term 
government borrowing requirements are manageable, despite a concentration of maturities in 
20112.  A conservative estimate of the gross borrowing requirements for 2011 amounts to 
US$2.9 billion or 6.5 percent of GDP.  With less than a third of this amount expected from 
International Financial Institutions (IFIs) (see Section IV), Uruguay will likely need to seek 
substantial additional funding from capital markets.   

17. 
The banking system consolidation process that occurred in the aftermath of the 
2002 crisis and proactive Central Bank intervention and supervision have contributed to 
greater financial system stability.  Since the outbreak of the international financial crisis, the 
financial system has managed to navigate the storm without major difficulties.  Prudential 
requirements have been improved and banking regulation and supervision has been strengthened. 
The accumulation of foreign reserves by the central bank contributed further to the confidence in 
Uruguay’s currency, which has been floating since mid-2002.  

18. 
Despite a significant decrease over recent years, the degree of dollarization remains 
high. Since the 2002 crisis the level of dollarization in the financial system has fallen from 83 
percent to 55 percent for credits, and from 92 percent to 77 percent for deposits. However, it 
remains high, implying a substantial exposure of the banking sector to foreign currency risk from 
corporate balance sheet mismatches. 

C.  Poverty 

19. 
Uruguay’s long-standing focus on social equity makes advances in the reduction of 
poverty and inequality a central policy priority.  However, successive economic crises at the 
end of the last century weakened the social model, and today poverty, extreme poverty and 
inequality levels remain relatively high despite recent improvements.  Exacerbated by the 2001-
2002 crisis, both poverty and extreme poverty began a downward trend in 2004, and in 2008 
both neared the lows of the previous decade (20.9 percent for poverty, 1.5 percent for extreme 

1 Public debt-to-GPD ratio is calculated using end-of-the-period exchange rate 
2 A large share of the maturities are owed to local markets and are denominated in indexed local currency units 

4 

 
                                                            
poverty).  Uruguay has not suffered the degree of impact experienced by some of its neighbors – 
that of having a longer-term trend of increasing poverty as a result of successive crises. 

20. 
Improvements in equality were more modest.  The Gini coefficient declined from its 
highest level of 0.44 in 2004 to 0.42 in 2008, a slight improvement from its pre-crisis level (0.43 
in 2000).  Uruguay ranks high among Latin American and Caribbean Region (LCR) countries in 
the provision of basic opportunities for children according to an equality of opportunity principle 
across five very basic goods and services for which there were comparable data across countries 
circa 1998 and 2008 (access to water, sanitation, electricity, completing sixth grade on time, and 
school attendance for children 10-14).  As detailed later, implementation of the National Plan for 
Social Equity, as well as health and education reforms, is hoped to further improve equity in 
these areas. 

Figure 1:  Long Term Poverty Trends in Uruguay 

III.  DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES & GOVERNMENT’S VISION 

21. 
In its first months in office, the Government has conducted intensive internal and 
external consultations for defining its longer-term government program. This consultative 
process centered on the preparation of a new five-year budget, which will cover the period up to 
the end of the Government’s mandate (2010-2015), and is expected to be presented to parliament 
at the end of August 2010. In parallel, the authorities are preparing partnership programs with 
their main development partners, most of which coincide with the five-year budget period.  

22. While no formal Government program has been issued, the authorities have laid out 
at different occasions their policy priorities.  These priorities, which are still in process of 
being fine tuned and translated into concrete legal and policy initiatives, are as follows: 
 The authorities have committed to adhere to the prudent fiscal and economic policies of the 
last administration and continue expanding coverage of social program and basic services.   
 They have identified the following key priorities to deepen reform achievements: (i) 
strengthening competitiveness through increased coverage and better quality of infrastructure 
and a more conducive business environment; (ii) expanding and improving the impact of 
social service delivery, with an emphasis on education; iii) enhancing productivity and 

5 

 
 
 
income and job generation in the agriculture and food sector; (iv) protecting the environment 
and mitigating and adapting to the effects of climate change; and v) improving security of 
citizens.   
 They expressed a keen interest in getting more value for money in public programs; and the 
Government has launched a number of important cross-cutting reform initiatives.  Most 
notable in this regard are the introduction of a policy framework for public-private 
partnerships in infrastructure investments, and a renewed effort on public sector reform.  

23. 
The proposed CPS has been designed to support implementation of this agenda.  In 
intensive consultations with authorities, strong expectations emerged towards Bank support in 
facilitating transfer of knowledge and experience in specific reform areas.  As the country enters 
this new development phase, there will be a need for flexibility and innovation in the definition 
of the specific lending and non-lending support from the Bank. 

A. Strengthening the Business Climate and Competitiveness 

24. 
As Uruguay’s macroeconomic growth recovered, the authorities recognized the 
importance of improving the environment for private sector development for embarking 
on a sustained path of high growth.  In particular, they have stressed the need to upgrade 
infrastructure services -- critical for both enhancing economic productivity and meeting social 
policy objectives.  The authorities have also stated their intent to improve other aspects of the 
business environment and investment climate, such as regulation, tax policy, licensing and other 
procedures.3  The Government hopes to build on substantial progress already made, including the 
effective implementation of a new Bankruptcy Law in 2008 which eases the process and reduces 
the costs of closing a business, and the introduction of a one-stop-shop for firm creation in May 
2010 that simplified procedures for starting a business.  In this context, the new Administration 
has made enhancing the facilitation of logistics one of the top priorities of its reform agenda.  
Finally, there is a strong emphasis on supporting the deepening and extension of capital markets, 
so as to enhance access to finance by private sector firms.   

25. 
Coverage and quality of infrastructure services in Uruguay is high compared to the 
region and other middle income countries (MICs); however, to maintain these standards, 
further improve efficiency and quality, and extend coverage, there is a need for more 
investment, better regulation and enhanced corporate governance.  Uruguay has achieved an 
impressive degree of access to basic infrastructure (Table 1), and good overall quality and 
coverage of its infrastructure.  However, one weak link is the railway system, with nearly half of 
the 3,000 km national rail network abandoned and cargo volumes on the remainder that are a 
fraction of regional standards.  The railway system, as in many other countries, has suffered over 
the last thirty years due to competition from road freight transport and lack of investment, as well 
as several flawed reform attempts which further delayed key investments.  The non-functioning 
rail system threatens to lead to rapid degradation of the road network (especially given increasing 
transport of heavy forestry products) and hence high maintenance and rehabilitation costs. 

3 According to the Global Competitiveness Report 2009-2010, the five most problematic factors for doing business 
are 1) restrictive labor regulations, 2) inefficient government bureaucracy, 3) tax rates, 4) access to financing, and 5) 
inadequate supply of infrastructure.  

6 

 
                                                            
26. Growing energy challenges are also unfolding as domestic demand is expanding 
rapidly.  The Government’s energy sector strategy includes: (i) diversifying energy sources to 
reduce costs and emissions, as well as increase energy security; (ii) increasing private 
participation in new renewable power generation; (iii) increasing regional energy trade; and (vi) 
facilitating availability and acquisition of energy efficient goods and services, including efforts 
to raise public awareness regarding demand side management interventions.  Despite efforts to 
increase energy efficiency, demand has increased by over 4 percent per year since 2002. In 
addition, there have been repeated instances of drought (2006 and 2008 in particular), 
insufficient thermal back-up capacity, and difficulties in importing electricity from neighboring 
countries. This has led to high supply costs and fiscal pressure as the Government sought to 
avoid passing on cost increases to end users.  Supply challenges are compounded by weaknesses 
in several sections of the transmission and distribution network. The Government recognizes 
these challenges and has reaffirmed its commitment to (i) establishing a new 500 MW 
interconnection with Brazil and upgrading the existing transmission and distribution systems; (ii) 
increasing energy efficiency; and (iii) creating a larger role for non-traditional renewable 
energies (wind, biomass and small-scale hydro in particular) in Uruguay’s energy matrix.  

Table 1: Access to Public Services4 

Percent of 
population 
with sewerage 
service (2006) 
44 
45 
78 
74 
64 
53 

Percent of 
population with 
in-house access 
to potable water 
(2006) 
79 
79 
91 
86 
90 
98 

Electricity 
(percent of 
population 
with access 
in 2009) 
95 
97 
99 
87 
97 
100 

Fixed 
telephone 
lines per 100 
people (2008) 
24 
21 
21 
15 
19 
29 

Mobile 
telephone 
subscribers 
per 100 
people (2008) 
117 
78 
88 
89 
70 
105 

Internet 
users per 
100 people 
(2008) 
28 
35 
33 
37 
22 
40 

Road 
density (km 
per 100 
km2 in 
2009) 
15 
21 
11 
n/a 
18 
34 

GDP per 
capita, PPP, 
in 2008 

14,333 
10,296 
14,465 
8,885 
14,495 
12,734 

Country 

Argentina 
Brazil 
Chile 
Colombia 
Mexico 
Uruguay 

27. 
The Government of Uruguay (GoU) has set a target of combined public and private 
investment of 3-5 percent of GDP for the infrastructure sector, up from less than 2 percent 
for public investment over the past years. It was thereby clearly stated that given the limited 
fiscal space available, this would require mobilizing significant levels of additional resources for 
infrastructure investments outside the budget. In particular, there is a need to promote private 
sector investment in infrastructure, which is currently very low in regional comparison.  The 
Global Competitiveness Report (GCR) 2009-2010 for Latin America and the Caribbean 
identified Uruguay as the most dynamic country during 2009, with significant progress achieved 
in infrastructure, macroeconomic stability, higher education and training and technological 
readiness.   

28. Given the need for increased private investment, the Government is exploring new 
forms of public-private partnerships (PPP) and is preparing a new PPP framework law.  
PPP opportunities are being explored in areas such as freight rail transport, additional port 
terminals and access channel dredging, as well as in social sector infrastructure provision.   

29. 
The new Government has shown a strong commitment to complete the business 
environment reform agenda initiated by its predecessor.  This far-reaching reform program 

4 Data from World Development Report (2009), WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program 2006 and International 
Telecommunication Union data, 2008. 

7 

 
                                                            
(National System for Registering Companies, SINARE) was initiated several months ago to 
streamline and centralize all public procedures related to the life cycle of a private company and 
create a single registry for businesses.  The official launch in May 2010 of the initiative, 
Empresa en el Día, a key dimension of this reform program, was one of the first reform 
breakthroughs accomplished by the new Government.  It established a web-based, one-stop-shop 
for firm creation that significantly reduces the number of steps, time and costs to start a 
business.5  

30. 
The Government has recognized the logistics sector as a promising source of growth 
in itself as well as an important dimension of the country’s competitiveness. Over the last 
two decades, due to its central location, efficient port services and modern financial system, 
Uruguay has emerged as a regional hub for services and logistics. In 2008, exports of services in 
this sector have reached US$1 billion. To further exploit this potential, the new Government has 
highlighted the importance of reviving the comprehensive customs reform, which has made only 
limited progress during the last administration, and indicated a shift in emphasis of the reform to 
enhancing the trade facilitation function of customs and moving to a risk-based control system.    

31. 
Access to financing by Uruguayan firms is also a key constraint to private sector 
development, and increasing the sophistication, transparency and stability of the Uruguayan 
financial market is a key Government objective.6  Pension funds have accumulated sizeable 
assets, yet these are largely channeled to investments in government securities.  The authorities 
have taken important steps in recent years to strengthen local financial and capital markets, such 
as the adoption of a new capital market legal and regulatory framework in 2009, the 2008 
bankruptcy law, the 2009 law on payments system and securities settlement, and the 2008 
establishment of a deposit insurance institution. The challenge ahead now is to build capacity 
and promote market development to facilitate access to financing for the private sector.  

B.  Improving Social Inclusion & Equity 

32. 
The Government is committed to consolidating the progress achieved on social 
protection and to further improving public health care and education outcomes, with a 
special emphasis on providing for the basic needs those living in extreme poverty and 
further enhancing social inclusion.  In 2000, the Government introduced family allowances for 
poor families and has modified the program in the years since to expand coverage, increase 
benefits and provide an incentive structure for secondary school students.  By 2009, over 
500,000 children were receiving benefits from the expanded program.  These efforts effectively 
included the poorest households into the social protection system—the percentage of households 
in the poorest quintile not receiving any income transfer declined from 50 percent in 2003 to 
about 20 percent three years later, and more than 85 percent of children living in poverty reside 
in households that received family transfers in 2008. 

5 Uruguay ranks 114 of 183 countries in the 2010 Doing Business Report, and 132 in the “starting a business” 
category.  
6 The World Bank Investment Climate Survey (2008) indicates that, on average, enterprises’ retained earnings 
account for 82% of fixed assets and 73% of working capital financing, respectively.  The report highlights the low 
use of bank credit by Uruguayan firms -- it accounts for only 6% of working capital and even less of asset financing. 

8 

 
                                                            
33. 
The GoU has committed to continue social protection initiatives while seeking to 
increase their impact, placing special emphasis on non-contributive schemes.  The authorities 
have declared their intention to reach the remaining non-covered families and enhancing the 
effectiveness of the family allowances system.  They consider the following to be the  principal 
challenges in this regard:  (i) to better identify and incorporate potential beneficiaries not yet 
covered; (ii) to more effectively use the transfer programs to advance social policy objectives, 
such as by identifying adolescents at risk and providing incentives for them to complete 
secondary education; and (iii) to improving the capacity for monitoring and evaluation of 
transfer programs, such as by institutionalizing and broadening the scope the centralized 
beneficiaries registry (Sistema de Informacion Integrada para el Area Social).   

34. 
President Mujica has also highlighted the limited decent housing opportunities for 
low-income families as a critical social challenge.  In response the Government has launched a 
housing initiative (Plan Juntos) to expand such opportunities by facilitating access to housing 
finance and promoting self-help initiatives for housing construction and rehabilitation. 

35. 
Education is a strategic priority as part of the GoU’s objectives of raising living 
standards and better integrating into the world economy.  Uruguay has been implementing 
reforms in recent years to improve the equity and quality of the education system.  Uruguay has 
achieved universal access to early education for 5-year olds, universal primary education (grades 
1-6) and early secondary.  However, these enrollment rates hide important differences in the 
quality of education among students of different socio-economic backgrounds.  At the secondary 
level, there remain challenges in terms of coverage --net enrollment rates for the lowest quintile 
of the student population is 37 percentage points below that for the highest quintile.  In addition 
to the gaps in coverage at the secondary level, a key challenge for Uruguay is to address the 
learning deficits of its students, particularly in terms of cognitive abilities.7  Bank support to the 
sector has been focused on the expansion of the full-time school program, the main initiative of 
the Government for improving the quality of education for lower-income primary students.  
Thus, they propose to continue expanding early childhood education and full time schools, and 
enhancing the educational impact of Plan Ceibal (Box 1) at the pre-school and primary school 
levels.  With regard to education quality at the secondary level, the Government will focus on 
strengthening technical education and its linkage to labor market demands, and expanding the 
Plan Ceibal to secondary school students.  

36. 
A comprehensive health sector reform program was approved by Parliament in 
2007 – the completion and implementation of these reforms is an important legacy of the 
previous administration.  While it remains among the top-ranked LCR countries on health 
indicators, Uruguay’s relative position has slipped in recent years.8  Fifty-two percent of urban 
Uruguayans report having contributory health insurance, and 97 percent report having either 
some type of insurance or a regular source of care.  The prevalence of infectious diseases is low; 
importantly, Uruguay has experienced a transition in its demographic structure over the last 
decades, and its epidemiological profile has changed to one of a high prevalence of Non-
Communicable Diseases (NCD).  The ambitious reform program aims to provide universal 

7 In the 2006 Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) in language, mathematics and science for 15 
year-old students, Uruguay outperformed other LCR countries (excl. Chile), but was below the OECD countries 
8 In Uruguay today, life expectancy at birth is 75 years, the infant mortality rate is 10.5 per 1,000 live births, and 99 
percent of births are delivered in a hospital or clinic.   

9 

 
                                                            
health insurance coverage and to shift the prevailing heath care model from high cost treatment 
of acute illnesses to preventive care for NCDs.  As nine percent of GDP is devoted to the health 
sector, a key concern for the new administration is to contain the increasing cost of the health 
system while putting available resources to more efficient use.   

37. 
These reforms enjoy a high level of positive social acceptance, and to date insurance 
coverage has been expanded to reach an additional 300,000 inhabitants, mainly children of 
poor households.  The reforms range from regulation and policy stewardship to health 
promotion and the improvement of health care, and from effective prevention policies to 
epidemiological surveillance and monitoring. 

Box 1: Uruguay’s PLAN CEIBAL – One Laptop per Child 

Created by Presidential decree in April 2007, Plan Ceibal provides all students and teachers in public 
primary schools with a laptop computer and internet connectivity through the schools free of charge.  The 
main objective was to reduce the digital gap, not only with respect to other countries but also within the 
Uruguayan society to foster equitable access to education, information and culture.  The Plan is based in 
three pillars: (i) equity of access to computers, (ii) learning, and (iii) connectivity. The combination of 
these elements is intended to promote equal opportunities; enhance the development of new tools for 
learning and teaching; and encourage new relationships in an interconnected society.  Policies and 
strategy for the program are decided, in close collaboration with the Education Committee, by a dedicated 
committee comprised of representatives of relevant government agencies.  The Technological Laboratory 
of Uruguay (LATU) is in charge of the implementation of the program. 

This Plan was accompanied with connectivity infrastructure to primary schools (80 percent of schools 
now have at least one access point, covering 95 percent of public primary school students).  Equally 
impressive is the focus on the non-equipment aspects of the program.  These are covered in detail on the 
Plan’s webpage (www.ceibal.edu.uy), which includes educational materials for teachers and students and 
the Ceibal Channel, which connects classrooms to a TV studio that showcases student-teacher interaction 
across the country to facilitate peer learning for teachers.  There is also a virtual Campus Ceibal where 
teachers can access training on didactic topics and take virtual classes.  Finally, the Plan includes an 
online formative evaluation mechanism that enables simultaneous evaluations with immediate feedback 
on student results. 
By 2009 all 380,000 students and teachers in public primary schools had received their computers.  The 
Plan initially faced resistance from teachers. However, there are recent indicators that this resistance has 
been reduced and that the Plan is now widely accepted.  The teachers received training and machines 
before the deployment to students.  Students bring the laptops to class and use the machine during classes; 
parents are requesting to be e-trained; and in many localities the schools have become the center of the 
community activities. The Plan generated an interesting interaction between teachers, children and parents 
with plenty of potential for student learning; however, there has not yet been an evaluation of the Plan’s 
impact on student learning or household welfare.  Such studies are now underway, and the Bank has been 
asked to support the development of an evaluation of the preliminary educational and other social welfare 
impacts. 
GoU aims to expand the Plan as follows:  (i) complement connectivity with digital training for education 
personnel; (ii) gradual expansion to public secondary schools; and (iii) using connectivity to increase the 
scope and quality of other social services (e.g. remote medical consultations and nutrition checks). 

38. 
Uruguay’s societal orientation toward inclusion and equity is reflected in a largely 
positive picture on gender issues.  Education standards are among the highest in the region.  

10 

 
Female participation in labor markets is high: the ratio of female to male labor force participation 
(0.75) is higher than the average for upper middle income countries (0.69) and the LCR countries 
(0.66) for year 2008.  In Uruguay 82.5 percent of women are employed by the services sector, 
exceeding the norm for upper MICs (71.7 percent) and for the LCR region (74.6 percent).  
Women occupy 12.1 percent of seats in the parliament (2008), below the average for both upper 
middle income countries (19 percent) and the region (22 percent).  In the context of an otherwise 
positive reproductive health context – with 99.3 percent of all births being attended by skilled 
health staff and a contraceptive rate above the norm for upper MICs – Uruguay’s adolescent 
fertility rate is an outlier.  While it has shown a steady decline from 66.9 births per 1,000 women 
ages 15-19 in 1998, it is still higher (at 60.9 in 2008) than the average for upper middle income 
countries (51.5), but lower than the average for LCR countries (72.2).   

39. 
The Government has recently focused even more attention on gender equity.  In its 
economic dimension, this would mean to increase female labor force participation in non-
traditional sectors, reduce the high concentration of women in informal and domestic jobs, and 
decrease gender wage gaps. In its social dimension, key challenges are recognized as the 
reduction of gender-based violence and prevention of adolescent pregnancies. 

C.  Consolidating Agricultural Sector Growth and Bringing its Benefits to Family Farms 

40. 
The new Administration has stressed the important potential of the agricultural and 
food sector, as a source for growth, in general, and for increasing income and job opportunities 
in rural areas. This sector continues to be an important and dynamic part of the national 
economy, having grown at almost twice the rate of the overall national economy since 2001 and 
now representing almost 10 percent of total GDP9.  

41. 
The Government has recognized as a particular challenge the fact that family farms 
are lagging behind the productivity and prosperity gains associated with large-scale 
farming. These family farms are much more limited in exploiting opportunities offered by 
markets and remain strongly exposed to external price or climate shocks10.  For President 
Mujica, reversing this trend is critical to retaining more of Uruguay’s younger population in rural 
areas, as there has been a trend of young people moving away from family farming.  

42. 
There is a keen interest in developing a modern and well targeted agricultural and 
rural development policy. President Mujica used the term agro-inteligencia to describe his 
vision on this. Such a policy aims at consolidating the integrated approach practiced in recent 
years, which promoted sustainable use of natural resources while fostering comparative 
advantages of the agricultural and food sector.  For example, Uruguay distinguished itself as a 
reliable exporter of beef to standard-sensitive markets and as the only country in the region to 
achieve 100% traceability of cattle.  Such policies are critical for remaining highly responsive to 
increasingly rigorous international food safety and quality standards and thereby maintaining 

9 Agriculture and forestry account for 12% of national employment, given the prevalence of labor-intensive SMEs. 
10 There are about 19,400 larger and medium-sized farmers (~715 ha in size on average) that farm about 85 percent 
of Uruguay’s land. Production in these farms is strong linked to export markets and has proven relatively resilient to 
shocks (i.e. drought, input prices, market fluctuations). The about 32,700 family farms (~77 ha in size on average) 
have been less capable of seizing market opportunities and have been more strongly exposed to these shocks. 

11 

 
                                                            
competitiveness. In this context, the Government is interested in expanding the innovative 
tracking system, which now enables tracking all cattle in the country, to other livestock.  

D.  Protecting the Environment and Mitigating the Effects of Climate Change 

43. 
The new Administration has expressed its commitment to further strengthening 
natural resource management and sustainable use of soil and water at the farm level, as 
well as mainstreaming biodiversity conservation in production.  This is in response to rising 
concerns on environmental degradation caused by expansion of agriculture and intensification of 
livestock production.  More sustainable production is also necessary to protect the country’s 
reputation as a “green” producer (Uruguay Natural), a feature valued highly by trading partners. 

44. 
In addition, Uruguay has recently set clear targets on Climate Change and Pollution 
Management issues.  Uruguay has been seriously affected by climate change, most notably 
through a higher climate variability observed in recent years.11  Repeated and severe inundations 
and droughts have had a strong negative impact on rural livelihoods and production.  Thus, in 
2010, GoU prepared and launched a National Response to Climate Change Plan that includes 
strategic guidelines on climate change adaptation and mitigation.  Regarding cleaner production 
in the industry sector, the GoU has also presented a National Action Plan on Production and 
Sustainable Consumption. This plan seeks to identify, coordinate, integrate and potentiate a set 
of actions, programs and projects targeted to prevent and minimize environmental impacts from 
production and consumption. Both plans offer partnership opportunities to identify and prepare 
projects not only with IBRD resources but also with trust funds.   

45. 
The Government is keen to reduce Uruguay’s net emissions of green house gases 
(GHGs), which to a large extent is the result of emissions caused by agriculture and 
livestock production.  Through the new strategy, the Government intends to put in place an 
integrated approach to mitigation and adaptation.  

46. 
There is also a great need to improve environmental compliance in Uruguay’s 
industrial sector.  The GoU recently launched a Sustainable Industrial Development program to 
help small and medium enterprises improve compliance with environmental regulations through 
investments in cleaner production processes.  As in many other countries, Small and Micro 
Enterprises (SMEs) in Uruguay are typically more polluting than larger companies as they lack 
resources, knowledge or incentives to adopt newer, cleaner technologies.  

47. Water resources management in the context of a changing climate is a clear 
challenge in Uruguay.  This is a key issue in that this resource is affected by climate variability 
and change, and it relates to hydropower generation (hence impact on energy for industrial and 
other activities).  The country has a new water law which promotes the creation of a water 
council (in the Dirección Nacional de Medio Ambiente - DINAMA) and promotes integrated 
water resources management and basin planning.  Since the end of the last century, rainfall in 
Uruguay has shown an increase, together with temperature and sea level.  Current projections 
confirm this increasing tendency.  Finally, the occurrence and severity of floods has been 
increasing, with large events occurring annually. 

11 Climate change models for Uruguay point to a moderate increase in temperatures combined with greater volumes, 
intensity and variability of rainfall over the next several decades. 

12 

 
                                                            
E.  Reforming the Public Sector 

48. 
In his inauguration speech, President Mujica announced that his Government would 
undertake a far-reaching public sector reform (Reforma del Estado). Compared to other LAC 
countries, Uruguay ranks reasonably well in governance and transparency indicators. 12 However, 
there are several aspects in which its public sector management system still lags behind standards 
of practice in countries in similar stages of development. The new Government has advanced 
swiftly on several ongoing reform processes in the public sector, such as deepening the e-
government agenda, strengthening tax administration, and improving targeting and effectiveness 
of social protection programs. At the same time, consultations are beginning on how best to tackle 
those reform aspects that have not yet progressed, such as enhancing customs administration, 
modernizing public procurement to improve quality and reduce costs while strengthening 
transparency and competition13; and improving the national statistical system.  

49. 
The exact scope, content, focus and sequence of public sector reform under the new 
administration is yet to be laid out in detail. There was an initial announcement that this 
reform will contain four pillars: human resource management, administrative restructuring, 
improved management of public resources and enhanced use of technology in public sector 
management.  Two key objectives have clearly emerged:   
 As improving quality and impact of public spending is at the heart of the Government’s 
priorities, there is a strong emphasis on enhancing capacity on budget formulation and 
evaluation of results of public programs and budgetary spending. For the new 5-year budget, 
the Government has moved from an administrative to a program-based budget presentation, 
which sets the basis for linking output indicators to budgetary allocations. This should 
facilitate evaluation of public programs and allow for better informed budget decisions. 
 The Government recently tabled for discussion sweeping changes to the civil service 
legislation designed to professionalize and streamline the civil service by harmonizing civil 
service careers across different government units, simplifying and unifying the process of 
attaining positions, clarifying labor relations between civil servants and the State, and 
modifying the legal status of public servants and political appointees.14  Preliminary reactions 
indicate that the political opposition is in favor of the announced changes, but the public 
sector unions are strongly opposed.  

IV.  URUGUAY – WORLD BANK PARTNERSHIP 

A.  Performance under the 2005-2010 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS, Report No. 
31804-UY) and Evolution of the Partnership 

12 Chile and Uruguay tied as top-ranking Latin-American countries in Transparency International’s 2009 Corruption 
Perceptions Index (25th out of 180 countries).  
13 Uruguay is unique in the Latin American and Caribbean region for its absence of an agency responsible for public 
sector procurement that can issue executive norms, promote automation, monitor efficiency, train public officials in 
charge of procurement, oversee compliance, handle disputes and, in general, act as the lead government agency. 
14 Proposals are detailed in Los Ejes e Instrumentos de Fortalecimiento Institucional del Estado discussed and 
approved at the Consejo de Ministros on July 16, 2010. 

13 

 
                                                            
50. 
The Vázquez Administration ended up forming a close and productive partnership 
with the Bank in a number of key areas.  The preparation of 2005-2010 CAS through 
extensive consultations and in response to demands from the authorities laid the ground for this 
partnership.  There were several other key factors that helped strengthen relations between the 
Bank and the Government and facilitated successful CAS implementation.  First, the opening of 
a Bank office in Montevideo in 2005 enabled a more swift and effective response to local needs 
and a more effective engagement with the main segments of Uruguay’s society.  Second, the 
Bank was able to customize its financing to specific needs of the Government—the disbursement 
of a Development Policy Loan (DPL) in local currency stood out in this regard, as described 
below.  Third, the Bank showed flexibility in adapting its lending and non-lending program to 
align it with the Government’s emerging prioritization of critical reforms and initiatives, and 
provided timely and effective knowledge transfer in this regard.   

51. 
This positive evolution of the relationship in recent years provides a great 
opportunity for the World Bank Group (WBG) to contribute to Uruguay’s ambition to 
take the country to the next level of development.  It will thereby be critical to continue to 
respond timely and effectively to the country’s needs. The new Government’s keen interest in 
further enhancing its partnership with the Bank has emerged consistently during CPS 
consultation process (Box 2). 

Box 2: Country Partnership Strategy Consultations 

The consultations on the CPS (as summarized in Annex I) commenced in February 2010, before the 
inauguration of the new administration, when discussions were held on a set of Policy Notes between the 
Bank and the newly elected authorities.  These discussions were followed by presentations to the main 
opposition parties.  These discussions were attended throughout by the President-elect, Mr. José Mujica, 
the elected Vice-president, Mr. Danilo Astori, and future cabinet members.  These interactions were 
appreciated both by the Government and the opposition, and enabled the Bank to gauge the relatively 
high degree of consensus that exists today in Uruguay on the policy agenda and development challenges.  
A consultation on the CPS with broad stakeholder participation was held in August, and the Government 
is leveraging the opportunity provided by CPS preparation to plan an extended series of stakeholder 
consultations that will not end with the finalization of the CPS but rather continue into implementation. 

In April 2010, the dialog on the main priorities for the collaboration between the Bank and Uruguay over 
the next five years was deepened.  The Bank Vice President met with President Mujica, Vice-president 
Astori, the economic and social cabinet, as well as with representatives from the legislative branches, 
private sector and civil society.  These discussions generally confirmed as valid the proposed orientations 
of the DPL and, more generally, the forthcoming Country Partnership Strategy.  In May 2010, 
consultations on the DPL, specifically, and the framework of the strategy, more generally, were held.  
Another round of more detailed discussions on the results matrix and the program under the CPS was held 
July 1, 2010. 

Finally, systematic stakeholder consultations were kicked off in early August, 2010, and will continue 
through the first year of CPS implementation.  Given the multi-sectoral objectives of both the CPS and 
the Government’s own development strategy, this series of consultations is generally organized around 
the following themes rather than individual ministries or sectors:  (i) Modernization of the Public Sector; 
(ii) Strengthening Competitiveness and the Business Climate; (iii) Strengthening the Infrastructure Sector; 
(iv) Environmental Protection and Climate Change Adaptation; and (v) Social Protection and Equity.  The 
outcome of the consultations is summarized in Annex I. 

14 

 
52. 
The 2005-2010 CAS was structured around the following pillars:  (i) reducing 
vulnerability; (ii) sustaining growth; and (iii) improving living standards.  The March 2007 
CAS Progress Report (Report No. 42789-UY) confirmed the general thrust of the 2005 CAS and 
concluded that the Bank program had achieved substantial success over the previous two years.  
A central focus of the assistance was provided through a programmatic series of DPLs 
supporting the consolidation of macroeconomic reforms and the advancement of critical 
structural reforms. This was complemented by a comprehensive renovation of the investment 
project portfolio from 2005-2007. This resulted in gradual yet marked shift in the investment 
lending portfolio towards the support of more complex and reform-oriented operations, in areas 
like tax reform, financial sector and capital market development, health and education, 
innovation, infrastructure and public services, natural resources management and state 
modernization. 

53. 
The attached CAS Completion Report (CASCR) concludes that the 2005 CAS was 
broadly successful in meeting its targets.  For example, the following achievements illustrate 
how the Bank was able to respond in timely fashion to specific demands from the country:   

 The First Programmatic Reform Implementation Development Policy Loan, approved in 
May 2007 and disbursed in local currency, marked the first time the World Bank issued a 
local currency bond for the purpose of a back-to-back disbursement of a specific loan.  It was 
also innovative in that the Bank became the first foreign issuer to launch a public bond in 
Uruguayan pesos, lowering the cost of financing and increasing diversification of public debt 
and pension funds’ portfolios. 

 

In agriculture, the Bank was instrumental in supporting GoU efforts to eradicate foot-and-
mouth disease and to introduce individual traceability of cattle. This led to a major 
breakthrough in the prevention of animal diseases, and significantly enhanced Uruguay’s 
image as a regional leader and reliable exporter of beef products to standard-sensitive 
markets.  Uruguay is the only country in the region to achieve 100% traceability of cattle. 

54. 
The CASCR finds that the flexible design of the CAS and the programmatic nature 
of development policy lending allowed the Bank to react quickly during the global financial 
crisis and to adjust its support to provide Uruguay the needed contingent financing.  
Moreover, the 2008 CAS Progress Report envisaged a plan for dealing with global financial 
turbulence.  By contrast, the 2000 CAS proposed a more rigid program, strictly linked to country 
performance and, when the Argentine crisis arose in 2002, the Bank had to resort to Special 
SALs to provide short-term relief, at the expense of creating medium-term payment problems. 

55. 
Another important lesson learned was that the consensual nature of Uruguay’s 
policy making environment affects the pace of implementation of key reforms. In Uruguay 
reforms can take a long time to mature, but they tend to be sustained once implemented.  The 
programmatic structure of the program under the 2005 CAS, providing support for key reforms 
through the DPL series, was in retrospect the right one, allowing time for reforms to come to 
fruition, while focusing largely on implementation of measures for which the Government had 
already obtained approval.  The CASCR also highlights the need for the Bank to mobilize staff 
with the requisite skills.  In the Institutions Building Technical Assistance Loan (IBTAL) 

15 

 
customs component, which was not implemented for broader political reasons, the Bank’s lack 
of in-house expertise slowed implementation. 

B.  The Ongoing Portfolio 

56. 
The Bank is supporting a 
diversified portfolio of nine 
investment projects in Uruguay, 
including 
two 
Global 
Environmental Facility 
(GEF) 
grants totaling US$257.2 million.  
Institutional strengthening is a cross 
cutting dimension of the investment 
portfolio, accounting for an average 
of 30 percent of each loan.  The 
portfolio is supports a number of 
critical 
government 
reform 
initiatives, such as the following: 

Figure 2 

Uruguay Investment Portfolio Diversification

Health 
U$S 25.3M
9%

Insitutional  
Strengthening  U$S 
28.1M (*)
9%

Water
U$S 34M
11%

Education
U$S 71.9M
24%

Energy
US$ 6.87M
2%

Innovation
U$S 26M
9%

Agr iculture & 
Environment 
U$S 37M
12%

Transport
U$S 70M
24%

(* ) Inc lude s stated modernization  under  the   Institutional Strengthening  TAL  (USD12 .1M)  and mode rnization  of 
the  wate r   company  unde r  the  OSE System  Modernization  and Rehabilitation  Proje c t (US$16  M)

 Strengthening the national 
innovation system (Promoting 
Innovation to Enhance Competitiveness Project), 
 Expanding the full time school model to increase equity in the provision of preschool and 
primary education (Third Basic Education Quality Improvement Project), 
 Strengthening health delivery services and health policy framework for non communicable 
diseases (NCD), including implementation of a pilot program (Previniendo) to enhance 
NCDs control and risk factor prevention, (Non Communicable Diseases Prevention Project), 
 Promoting the adoption of economically and environmentally viable, integrated agriculture 
and 
livestock production systems 
(Integrated Natural Resource and Biodiversity 
Management Project),  
 Facilitating investments in improving energy use by creating an enabling policy and 
regulatory environment (Energy Efficiency Project), 

57. 
In general, portfolio performance remains positive, both in terms of achievement of 
development objectives as well as implementation progress.  There are currently no projects 
at risk in the portfolio.  The disbursement ratio for Uruguay in FY10 was a solid 30.2 percent.  
However, the most recent portfolio review reveals that there is some lag in disbursements which 
can be attributed to the type of operations that the portfolio is supporting (institutional 
strengthening, technical assistance) and the fact that Uruguay has not yet explored faster 
disbursement instruments and modalities in support of these types of projects such as Sector-
Wide Approaches (SWAPs), results-based disbursements components.  It is expected that under 
the Government and the Bank will explore using such instruments under the new CPS. 

16 

 
 
 
 
C.  The WBG’s Indicative Program (2010-2015) 

Strategic Approach & CPS Pillars 

58. 
The overall objective of the WBG’s lending and non-lending program for the new 
CPS period is to help Uruguay consolidate economic reforms, and enhance social outcomes. 
First of all, this means to build on the positive experience of collaboration between the country 
and the Bank during the previous CAS period. But the new CPS will be even more tailored to the 
specific needs of this advanced middle-income country, in order to contribute effectively to 
implementing Uruguay’s reform agenda.  

59. 
In this sense, the new Government has shown a keen interest in using the Bank’s 
support in a strategic way, shifting to a partnership that adds important value to the 
Government’s own program and that stresses the role of knowledge and know-how 
transfers.  In line with this, the government counterparts expressed a desire to engage in a new 
programmatic DPL series and move to investment operations that have expanded institutional 
reform content and focus increasingly on results.  It has also sought a more demand-based 
system for identifying and delivering of analytical and technical assistance.  

60. 
The main strategic orientation of the CPS is aligned with the Government’s 
priorities, as presented in the previous chapter.  The 2010-2015 CPS focuses on the following 
four pillars:  (i) Reducing Macroeconomic Vulnerability & Strengthening Public Sector 
Administration; (ii) Competitiveness & Infrastructure; (iii) Agriculture, Climate Change, and 
Environment; and (iv) Increasing Social Inclusion & Equity. 

61. 
Reflecting the lessons of the CASCR, the strategy will be flexible to accommodate 
the Government’s need to adjust course in the event of unforeseen domestic or external 
developments.  Indicative support for this strategy is proposed to include a series of two DPLs 
totaling US$200 million (late 2010 and late 2011), investment lending totaling approximately 
US$500 million subject to IBRD’s overall lending capacity, and a well-focused and demand-
driven AAA program. This lending mix might be adjusted to prepare for or respond to domestic 
or external shocks. This being said, in the likely event of a further strengthening of Uruguay’s 
economy and position in international financial markets, and if the Government maintains its 
keen interest in a more strategic and systematic orientation on knowledge services, there might 
be a gradually declining emphasis on lending in the medium-term.  

62. 
Beyond the need for continuity in existing areas of support to maintain momentum 
of reforms, the Government’s guiding principles for selecting new lending activities is 
“innovation” and focus on results.  The Government intends to use Bank resources for adding 
important value to interventions with strong expected development impact, contributing best 
practice technical know-how in the respective areas and helping build strong institutional 
capacity, in particular in reform program design and managing for results.  As a consequence, the 
Government is interested in introducing results-based and sector-wide lending instruments for 
new operations like the planned transport loan and possibly for a new loan in the social sectors. 
This is expected to consolidate the Bank’s role in most areas where it is already active, such as 
education, health or innovation, and at the same to lead to a more in-depth involvement in new 
areas like public-private partnerships in infrastructure development, public sector reforms and 

17 

 
climate change mitigation and adaption.  Another important criterion for selecting new lending 
operations is to realize synergies and avoid duplication with other externally-supported 
interventions by closely coordinating with other partners, most notably the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IADB).  Table 2 provides the agreed lending program for the first two years 
of the CPS, while providing indicative allocations for the reminder of the CPS period.  

Table 2: Indicative lending program for 2010-2015 

Loans 
Development Policy Lending (DPL) 
Investment Lending 
Improvement of Primary Education 
Integrated Agricultural Devt. & Natural 
Resources Management 
Transport Infrastructure Modernization  
Innovation and Competitiveness 
Drinking Water Systems (OSE) 
Health Sector Support  
IBTAL (additional financing) 
Output-based Loan for Social Sectors and 
Human Opportunities   
Sustainable Industrial Development 
Energy Sector Strengthening 
Energy Efficiency 
TOTAL  

Lending (US$ millions) by Calendar Year 
2012-2015 
2010 
2011 
Loan amts TBD 
100 
100 
120 
40 
40 

380 

40 

100 

220 

380 

63. 
The proposed strategy places a heightened emphasis on supporting Uruguay in 
accessing international expertise and best practices, as well as sharing its own experiences 
with other countries through South-South exchanges.  Toward this end, the Government and 
the Bank agreed to introduce an innovative modality for analytical services, knowledge transfers 
and technical assistance based on the successful approach implemented as part of the Bank’s 
partnership strategy with Chile.  This modality – a joint analytical and technical assistance 
program – aims at enabling the Bank to tailor its non-lending program to the needs expressed by 
the Government and to respond swiftly and flexibly to demands.  This joint program will be 
based on a framework agreement that clarifies the objectives, governance structure, and shared 
financing of the program.  Rooted fully in demand from the Government, an annual work 
program would be agreed between the Government and the Bank and define the main knowledge 
products and services to be elaborated in the following year, including a detailed timetable and 
cost estimates.  An indicative menu of AAA for the first two years of the CPS is included in 
Table 3. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
Pillar 1: 
 Reducing Macroeconomic Vulnerability & Strengthening Public Sector 
Administration 

64. While Uruguay’s resilience in the face of the global financial crisis demonstrates the 
progress made in mitigating macroeconomic vulnerabilities, this remains a key priority for 
the Government and an area in which continued Bank collaboration is desired.  The 
Government and Bank concur that collaboration under the first two pillars of the previous CAS – 
reducing vulnerability and sustaining growth – provide a successful basis on which to build.  The 
CPS would have a particular focus on supporting Government efforts to return to the positive 
trend on improving fiscal results from before to the 2009 crisis, and to reduce the weight of 
external debt as well as their share denominated in foreign currency. 

Table 3: AAA program for FY11 and FY12 

Activity 
Reform of housing policies 

Strengthening of Plan Ceibal by 
means of international best practices 
Social Policy Assessment 

Review of public expenditures on 
the social sectors  
Monitoring social policy results 
with the Human Opportunity Index 
Health reform 
Mitigation and adaptation to climate 
change effects in the rural sector 
Further strengthening business  and 
investment climate 

South-South exchanges 

Description 
Consider policy options to increase the supply of social housing 
(focused on creating incentives for self-initiative)  
Support exchange of experiences with similar programs in other 
countries, and study pending challenges.   
Analyze the impact of social policies, in particular family transfer 
programs on social indicators. 
Evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of public expenditure, 
particularly in the social sectors and key social programs.  
Develop an internal mechanism to monitor and evaluate the impact 
of social policies on human opportunities (NLTA)  
Complete analytic work and technical assistance (NLTA) 
Diagnosis of challenges and identification of adaptation and 
mitigation of climate change effects in the rural sector 
Assessment of reform priorities for further strengthening the legal, 
regulatory and administrative framework for business and 
investment activities.  
Exchange of experiences and knowledge with other developing 
countries, with initial focus on strengthening institutional capacity 
on economic, debt and public finance management.  

Note: The exact content of the AAA and details like method of cooperation—study, knowledge transfer or technical 
assistance—will be defined jointly in a formal agreement to be signed on this new joint AAA program modality. 

65. 
These outcomes are reflected in a series of two DPLs, the first of which will be 
presented to the Board at the same time as the CPS.  (Box 3)  The World Bank remains 
committed to providing the GoU with competitive and flexible local currency financing, subject 
to market conditions and consistent with the GoU’s own financial objectives.  In addition, as part 
of its dialogue with Bank's authorities, the Ministry of Economy and Finance has expressed 
demand for Bank support to enhance international cooperation and knowledge transfer with other 
countries’ Ministries of Finance, including those from the region. 

19 

 
66. 
Uruguay has been a leading country in LCR in utilizing the IBRD Treasury 
Department’s banking products and services in order to manage some of its balance sheet 
risks, particularly interest rate and currency risks.  This partnership will likely strengthen 
over the next CPS period as further financing in Uruguayan Pesos is expected to be executed and 
as ongoing discussions on broader hedging strategies and instruments (energy, weather, etc) are 
completed.  

67. 
Reform of the public sector with a view toward better value for public expenditures 
is a strong theme of President Mujica’s agenda and an area of key Bank support.  The Bank 
has been helping the Uruguay Government with its state modernization agenda through the 
IBTAL including by financing technical exchanges between the New Zealand and Uruguay 
authorities in various aspects of public sector management.  Through the ongoing IBTAL loan 
and a potential Additional Financing for the same, the Bank will continue to provide support for 
the adoption and implementation of a program-based budget, as well as for the monitoring and 
evaluation efforts to continually strengthen the budget process.  In addition, the Bank program 
will likely support the adoption of a new computerized system of budget management and 
improvements in the statistical system.  Since the public sector reform agenda is still to be 
defined in detail and the IADB is also involved in several reforms, other areas for Bank support 
will be defined later, but these may include: strengthening of controls in tax collection agencies, 
support for an agency responsible for regulating public sector procurement and the reforms to the 
civil service.  

Box 3: The First Programmatic Public Sector Competitiveness and Social Inclusion 
Development Policy Loan (DPL) 

The proposed DPL supports the implementation of reforms which have been identified by the new 
Government as priorities for obtaining Bank support.  The DPL series supports implementation of the 
Government’s agenda in three main areas: (i) public sector management, (ii) competitiveness, and (iii) 
social inclusion.  In particular, the main development objectives of the new loan are to strengthen the 
efficiency of 
the public administration while promoting macroeconomic stability, 
improve 
competitiveness through measures such as, facilitating trade, strengthening the business environment and 
development of financial markets.  It also seeks to improve social inclusion through measures targeted at 
enhancing the equity and efficiency of health, education and social protection systems.  

The program is expected to consist of a series of two loans, each amounting to US$100 million.  The 
approach taken by this loan series reflects the flexibility requested by the Government to best address 
evolving challenges.  The proposed loan also targets the consolidation of reforms supported by the 
Programmatic Reform Implementation Development Policy Loan (PRIDPL) series (approved May 2007), 
and bolsters Government efforts in other areas were not supported by the PRIDPL series.  Specifically, 
the loan recognizes recent achievements in public sector management, business climate and social service 
delivery (prior actions for DPL-I). The indicative triggers for DPL-II reflect broad policy areas of support, 
anchoring the new Government’s reform agenda through 2011.  

Pillar 2:  Improving Competitiveness & Infrastructure 

68. 
The Government seeks to strengthen competitiveness through increased coverage 
and better quality of infrastructure and establishment of a more conducive business 
environment.  Beyond the strong demand for Bank expertise in the area of public-private 
partnerships, with PPIAF-financed activities already launched, sector dialogue has shaped a 

20 

 
proposed infrastructure program under the CPS to achieve: (i) improvement of the condition of 
key land transport infrastructure; (ii) efficiency improvements in Obras Sanitarias del Estado 
(OSE) to free up resources for additional investment; (iii) improvements in the quality of the 
electricity supply by expanding, upgrading and rehabilitating the transmission and distribution 
networks; (iv) energy efficiency improvements to slow the growth of electricity demand; and (v) 
improved international trade logistics support.  Among the means of support are an ongoing 
Energy Efficiency GEF Grant, an ongoing OSE Modernization and Systems Rehabilitation 
project, a proposed Transport Infrastructure Modernization Loan, and possibly an Energy Sector 
Strengthening Project (see Table 2).  Infrastructure and SME financing are prime candidates not 
only for local currency financing, but also for customized financial solutions conducive to 
reducing financial vulnerabilities and providing access to competitively priced, flexible products 
with long maturities.  IBRD and IFC have a lengthy track record in such types of operations 
globally, which could be applied to the specific case and needs of Uruguay. 

69. 
The WBG’s considerable experience in providing assistance on financial markets 
and business climate-related challenges throughout the region could prove very helpful in 
further strengthening the business climate in Uruguay. The Bank has already deployed a 
series of lending and non-lending instruments in Uruguay to tackle these fronts and preliminary 
feedback from these activities is promising.  Thus, a range of WBG support is proposed to 
further strengthen the business climate in the following ways:  (i) promotion of the new one-stop 
shop for firm creation; (ii) support GoU actions to facilitate increased availability of credit to the 
private sector; (iii) support GoU efforts to increase market capitalization, and (iv) strengthen 
GoU actions to improve infrastructure.  In addition to the DPLs, the achievement of these 
outcomes will be supported through AAA on competitiveness and capital markets, an investment 
climate assessment, and support from the IFC.  Dialogue with the Government includes the 
potential for IFC to provide longer-term dollar financing to the private sector through onlending 
facilities channeled through local commercial bank partners.  

Pillar 3:  Protecting the Environment, Mitigating the Effects of Climate Change, and 
Strengthening Family Agriculture 

70. 
The WBG is well positioned -- in terms of the financing options, knowledge and 
expertise at its disposal – to support the implementation of  the National Response to 
Climate Change Plan and the National Action Plan on Production and Sustainable 
Consumption.  Uruguay's profile of carbon emissions is unique as a net greenhouse gas emitter 
where 80 percent of emissions come from the agriculture sector.  The National Response, which 
frames climate change adaptation and mitigation as an integrated agenda, seeks to integrate rural 
producers into integrated water management as an adaptation measure, and improved 
management of water resources at the farm level would be achieved as part of the proposed 
Integrated Agricultural Development and Natural Resources Management Project.  Trust fund 
resources, such as the WBI Carbon Finance Assist program, could also address potential future 
demand in the sector. In this context, a Low-Carbon Growth Study for Uruguay could also target 
other key sectors determined in partnership with the Government and in consultation with other 
stakeholders.   

71. 
In addition, the recently-completed fifth GEF replenishment offers a platform to 
identify and prepare new GEF blended operations with IBRD projects in the focal area of 

21 

 
climate change as well as in others (biodiversity, international waters, land degradation and 
persistent organic pollutants).  Finally, IFC is well suited to support the Government’s 
commitment to renewably energies, given its experience in developing renewable energy sources 
in the region, especially in wind, hydro, and bio-fuels.  IFC is also actively promoting energy 
efficiency financing packages to current and existing clients. 

72. 
Bank assistance (complemented by GEF and Climate Change (CC)-related financial 
instruments) would also support a comprehensive strategy to address climate change 
adaptation and mitigation in the agricultural sector.  In addition to broadly supporting efforts 
to achieve growth in the agriculture sector, the planned integrated and inclusive agricultural 
development project – informed by the Family Agricultural Development AAA (Report No. 
55550-UY) prepared in FY10 –is expected to support the adoption of new technologies and 
sustainable agro-environmental production practices.  With regard to agricultural risk insurance, 
the GoU has expressed interest in a risk financing instrument to reduce the vulnerability of 
farmers to shocks.  In this sense, the “Insurance to the Poor” would allow the country to transfer 
the risk of natural disasters affecting agriculture production to the insurance markets.  This 
would contribute greatly to the efforts to achieve stable growth and improved competitiveness in 
the Uruguayan agricultural sector. 

73. 
The Bank is also prepared to support Uruguay in addressing its water resource 
management challenges.  Through the DPL, Water resources management is supported at the 
farm level in rural areas.  In addition, there is an opportunity of partnership with the Government 
in the development of a National Water Resources Management Plan that would provide a 
strategic context to address some of the key issues in the sector – perhaps through a Non-
Lending Technical Assistance (NLTA).  This plan would address the institutional set up and 
strengthening for water resources management, and Bank expertise could provide substantial 
support to the implementation of the new Water Law given that the law incorporates concepts 
new to the country.  The resources management plan could also address impact mitigation from 
flooding and disaster exposure.  

74. 
Forestry is a primary subsector for development in Uruguay, thus presenting the 
challenge of ensuring sustainability biodiversity-friendly practices.  The development of a 
“landscape approach” to the management of expanding plantation forests could offer multiple 
benefits, including encouragement to mainstream biodiversity-friendly practices.  In line with 
this option, the GEF offers grant resources to finance projects focused on the conservation of 
biodiversity and environmental services in productive landscapes.  In addition to this, Trust Fund 
resources could be mobilized to finance a “Strategic Environmental Assessments” at 
departmental and national level to support the landscape approach. 

75. 
The Bank will help finance the conversion of firms (especially SMEs) in different 
industrial sectors to cleaner production processes. This support will be provided through an 
IBRD Sustainable Industrial Development Project.  This operation would also strengthen the 
institutional capacity to enforce existing regulations both at national and sector levels.  In terms 
of the current institutional capacity to enforce compliance, the GoU has implemented some 
measures, including the control of regulations compliance. However, these efforts have been 
isolated. In this context, DINAMA, together with other ministries in relevant sectors, has agreed 
to coordinate efforts and to work together in the design of new and comprehensive instruments to 

22 

 
facilitate supervision and control of cleaner production processes which would be part of the new 
IBRD operation.  

Pillar 4:  Increasing Inclusion & Social Equity 

76. 
The experience of the World Bank in Uruguay and other countries in the region 
positions it well to respond to the Government’s demand for technical assistance in the 
implementation of the National Plan for Social Equity.  Several interventions are proposed to 
support the aforementioned government objectives in the social sectors.  The proposed CPS will 
support government efforts to increase access and impact of social protection policies by 
expanding coverage of social protection programs to provide income protection for all vulnerable 
populations and linking income protection with human capital promotion effectively.  
Instruments for influencing these outcomes will include the DPL I, the proposed Social Sector 
investment loan, the additional financing for IBTAL, a public expenditure review for the social 
sectors, and a social policy assessment. 

77. 
The Bank will support the Government’s efforts to increase equity, quality and 
efficiency in the provision of preschool and primary education, as well as activities under 
the Family Allowances program to increase secondary school enrollment among that 
program’s beneficiaries.  Support will be provided through the Third Basic Education Quality 
Improvement project, the Promoting Innovation to Enhance Competitiveness Project, a proposed 
new Social Sector operation, and AAA on the One-Laptop-Per-Child initiative.  In addition, IFC 
hopes to finance private sector not-for-profit and for-profit tertiary education institutions in 
Uruguay that offer technical training and vocational courses aimed at low-income groups.  

78. 
The Bank is already strongly engaged in supporting the Government’s health sector 
reforms and will continue to support these efforts to extend health insurance universally to 
the population and strengthen preventive treatment for NCDs.   Instruments of support 
include the Non-Communicable Diseases Prevention Project, the proposed new Social Sector 
operation, and the ongoing NLTA on supporting reform implementation. 

79. 
The Bank recently approved an Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant to 
Promote Equitable Access of Society to the Legal System, the first Bank grant to be 
executed by the Uruguayan Parliament, to raise awareness among vulnerable groups of the 
benefits and rights established in select social legislation.  It will allow Parliamentarians to 
monitor the social impacts of selected laws, develop tools to incorporate a social analysis when 
reviewing draft legislation, and, in cooperation with agencies of the Executive, develop 
institutional capacity to better implement such laws.   

80. 
The Bank embraces the Government’s increased emphasis on further enhancing 
gender equity in the country.  The Government has recently given more attention to the issue 
of gender based violence, supported by an IDF grant by the Bank, and the newly approved IDF 
grant to Promote Equitable Access to the Legal System includes vulnerable women as significant 
target beneficiaries.  Efforts to reduce the adolescent fertility rate will be strengthened by support 
through the Bank’s portfolio of health activities, including a newly-launched regional study. . 

23 

 
4
2

T

a

b

l

e

4

:

C

P

S

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

O

b

j

c
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

S
d
n

e

l

c
e

t

A

c

t

i

v

i

t

i

e

s

P

l
l
i

a

r
c
a

I

:

R

c
a
c
e
e

u
d
n
b
u
u

t
t
i
l
i
i

y
o
g
n
b

M

r

o

c
e
e

o
h
n
g
o
n
n

m

i
i
i
t

c

V

l

r

&

S

t

r

t
t

e
a

g
n
n
o
n

P

i
l

S

c
e

r

A

d

m

i

i

s

r

P

l
l
i

a

r

I
I

:
I

C

o

m

p

e

i
t
i
t

v

e

n

e

s
s

&

n

r
f

a

s

t

r

u

c

t

u

r

e

P

i
l
l
l
i
,

a

r

I
I
I

:

A

g

r

i

c

u

t
l

u

r

e

C

m
m

e
e
a

t

C

h

a

g
n

e

&

E

v
n

i

r

n
o

n

t

P

l
l
l
i

a
u

r

I

V

:

S

o

c

i

a

l

I

n

c

s

i

n
o

&

E

u
q

t
i

y

O

u

t

o
c
o
u
d
p
o
h
o

m

n
a
o
n
a
e
u
b
p
o
o
n
e

s
s

t

h

B

k
n

P

r

g
o

r

o
u
b
b
n
u
a
a
x
o
n
n
n
e
a
p
a
n
o
p
o
u
d
a
a
a

m

p

c
e
e
d
y
e

t

s

t

o

i
i
f

n

s
r
f

l

u

n
e
e
y
o
c
n
n
e
e
h
o
e
v
a
o

n

C

n
u
n
a
o
o
a
n
b

t

r
r

h
o

l
t

x
e
e
e
c

p
d

e
e

d
n

t
i
i

u
o

r
r

e

o
o
n
o
g

r

w

t
f

h

t
i
f

n
a
o

e

s

u

r

e

f
l

r
s

t

e

r

a

i
t

s

c

l

.

B

s
r

t
i

b
b
u
a
p
n
g
a
n

i
l
l

e
e
v
e
c
e

d

b

.
t
l

r
s

a

i
t

o

s

o
d

w

n

t

o

m

o

r

e

s

u

i

l

F

u
u

r
r
r

t

n
h

e
e
y
c
e
e

r

r

o
n
u
d
d

e
c

i
t

a
n
h

e

s

d
a
d
h

r

e
e

o
b

f
.
f
t

o

r

e

i

n
g

c

-

m

t

e

S

t

r

e

g
n
d
u
d
b
n
g
n
h
g
a
n
u
a

i
t
t

e

e

i

s

t
i
t
t

u
a

i
t

u
a
n
o

t
l
l

c

a
p
a

c

t
i

y

i

n

v
e

l

e

r

y

r

e

s

s

.

E

a
n
a
h
o
n
n

e
c

S
n
n
o
d

I

t

y
e

g

r
s

a

t

e

S
d

F
F

i

a
p
n
n
a
n

c

i

l
l

I

f

r

m

i
t

t

e

m

(

I
I

)

i

a

e
c

.

P

b
u

i
i
l

c
e

u
d
n
o
a
p
n

r

c

r
r

e

m

e

a
n
p

t

i

s
r

m

d
a

e

m

o

r

e

e

i
f
f

c

t

t

n
a

s

e

n

.
t

O

a
n

e
e

-

s

t

p
p
o
d

s
r

f

s
r
r

m

t

s
r

i
t
i

e

s
s

r

e

l

t

-

e
c

e

i

e

.

n
a
a
b
u
S
p

s

t
t

i
t

a

i
t
l

n
o

c

r

e

a

s

e

i

n

c

r

e

d

t
i

t

o

t

h

e

r

i

v

e

s

c
e

r

H

i

h
g

e

r

m

a

r

e
k

t

c

p
a

t
i

a

i
l

z

a

i
t

n
o

D

e
e

a
o
p
p
o

s

t
i
i
t

o
a
n
a
o

r

l
i

C

e

n

t

r

a

l

d

e

V

a

l

o

r

e

s

r

I

m

n
a
o
d
p
n
a

r

e
v

m

e

n
o
p

t

n
o

f
i

t
f

a
h

e

c

u
d
n
u
o

i
t
i
t

o
n
o

f

y
e
k

l

t

r

s

r

t

r

s

t

r

c

r

e

,

E

i
f
f

c

i

e

n

y
c

i

m

p

r

o

e
v

m

e

n

t

s

i

n

O

S

E

.

C

t
i
i
i
i
i
t
t

m

d
u
p
o
d
o
o

m

t
t

s

i

n
d

e
v

t
t

e

r

r

g
n
p
n
d
d
n
a

f

t

s

a
d
n
a
a
g
p
o

r

s
s

,
,

s

s

l

r

c
e
c

i
t

r

c
e

i
t

e
c

l
f
i

e

w

t

l

i

s

d
n
a

c

c

y

i

I

m

p

l

e
e

m

e

u
a
n
o
u
n
p

t

i
t

o
o
n
a
o

f

i
t
l
t

h

e

N

a

i
t

g
n
a
a
n
h
o

l

P

l

n
n
a

f
t

o
h

r

R

s
r

r
s

e

t
l

C

m

a

t

e

C

e

i

e

g
a

i

c

t
l

s

c
e

o

r

R

e

d
h
g
u
u
d
o

e
c

l

o

s
s

o

f

p

r

u
d
o

c

i
t

v

t
i

y

u
d

e

t

o

d

r

t

s

C

n
n
a
o

e
e
v

s
r
r

i

o
u
d
n
o
o
p

i
t
f

i

o
u
d
p
n
n
o

s
r

t

r

i

a

l

i
f
.

r

m

s

t

o

c

l

e

r

c

e
c

s
s

e

s

I

o
n
p

c

r

c
e
e

a

s

e

o
a
p
n
d
o

c
e
c
c

s
s

d
n
a

i

m

a
p

c

t

o

f

s

o

c

i

a

l

r

t

i
t

i
l

i

e

s

E

x

d
n
o
d
n
a
p
o

e

a

e
c
c

s
s

t

o

a
u
q

t
i
l

y

h

e

a

t
l

h

p

r

t

c
e

i
t

.

I

d
d
a
n
u
d
n
n
a

c

r

e

s

e
e

s

o
a
h
o

r

e

p
p
o
u

f

C
N

D
m

r
s

d

i

o
n
g
a
a

s

e

d

r

f

l
l

w

-

r

i

a

y

c

r

e

I

m

o
u
d
p

r

e
v
c

a
n
a
o
d
a

e
c
c

s
s

,
i

e

n
u
q

t
t
i

y

,

d
n
a

a
u
q

t
i
l

y

i

n

e

i
t

t
t

a

n

m

e

C

u
a
o
n
n
n
u
o
o
n
o
d
n
u
o
n
u
d
u
o
n

i
t
i

t
i
l

y
e
e
y
e

o

f

F

a
n
d
a
n
a
o
g
h

m

l
i

y
y

A

l
l

n
n
o
a
a
n
d
a
a
n
o
u
n
o
d
g

w

e
c

s

e
c
e
c
c

l
i
t
f

d

s

c
e
e

r
s

e

c

i
t

s

s
r
s

r

-

i

u
n
o

t
t

r

t
i

e

s
s

i

i
f
i

c

t

m

a
b

f

t

o

c
e

r

y

e

c

i
t

s

y

s

t

m

S

c
d
e
n
a
e

l

t

e

L
d

A

c

i
(
t
I
I

e
1
1
0
v
2

i

t

i

s

i

n

s

p
p
u

o
g
r
e
d
o
o
n
n

r
t

f

t

h

e
g
e

s

a
e
c
u
c
e
u
u
o
o

b

j

t
r

i
l

v

s
e
a
e

D

P

L

I

(

0
1
0
2

)

a

d
n

D

P

L

I
I

(

1
1
0
2

)

I

B

T

A

L

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

o
g
n
o

i

g
n

)

I

B

T

A

L

(

A

F

)

(

E
L

N

)

C

F

A
A

/

P

E

F

A

(

A
A
A

)

D

P

L

I

(

0
1
0
2

)

D

P

)

A
A
A

:
t
i

S

t

n
o
y
k
d
u

C

o
o

m

p
y

e

t
i
t
i
t

v
o

e
e

n

e

s
s

;

C

a

p

a

l

M

a

r

e

t

s

P

i
l

c

N

;

I

F

C

-

F

i

n

a

n

c

i

a

l

S

o
p
p
u

r

t

T

r

a

n
d
o

s

o
n
p

r

t

I

n
o
n

r
f

a

s

t

r

u
n
u
o

c
a

t

r
(

e

M

e

r

i

a
z

i
t

L

E
L

N

)

O

S

E

M

d
o

e
a

r

p
n
n
o

i

a
z

i
t

n
o
o

a
c
e

d
n

S

y

s

t

e

m

s

R

e

h

a

b

t
i
l
i

i
t

r

j

t

(

E
L

N

)

E
L
E

n

e

r

y
g

S

c
e

t

o

r

S

t

r

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

i

p
g
n

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

N

)

E

n

e

r

y
g

E

f
f

i

c

i

e

n

c

y

G

E

F

(

n
o

-

o
g

i

g
n

)

I

t

a
a

t
t

e

d
u

A

r

i

c
e

t
l

D

v
n

e
a

l

p
o
g

m
m

e
e

n
n

t
t

a

N

r

a

l

R

s

r

s

M

e

P

r

.
j

G

E

F

B

i

d
o

i

v

e

r

s

t
i

y

C

n
o

s

e

r

v

a

i
t

n
o

I

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

A

g

r

,

D

e

v

.
t

(

E
L

N

)

A
A
A
A

u
n
o
u

C

i
l

m

a

t

e

C

h

a

g
n

e

a

d
n

g

r

i

c

t
l

r

e

S

u

s

t

a

i

n

a

b

l

e

I

u
d
n

s

t

r

i

a

l

D

e

v

t

(

E
L

N

)

O

S

E

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

E
L

N

)

C

c
a
a

r

n
y
o
b

F

i

n
o
p

a
e
c
e
a

n
n

,
i
t

C

a

r

n
o
b

P

a

r

t

n

e

r

s

h

i

p

F

t
i
l
i

(

t

l

)

D

P

L

I

(

0
1
0
2

)

a

d
n

D

P

L

I
I

(

1
1
0
2

)

O
H

I

I

d
n

e

x

M

n
o

t
i

o

r

i

g
n

A
A
A

n
o

S

o

c

i

a

l

H

u
o

s

i

g
n

P

o

i
l

c

y

S

o

c

i

a

l

S

c
e

t

o

r

s

P

E

R

(

A
A
A

)

H

a
e

t
l

h

R

e

f

o

r

m

A

s
s

e

s
s

m

e

n

t

(

A
A
A

)

N

n
v
o

C

n
o
o
n

m
m

o
n
u

j
i

c
a
e
c

b

l
t

e

D

i

s

a
e

s

e

s

P

r

e

e

i
t

P

r

(

o
g
n
o

i

g
n

)

I

D
A

F

g

r

a

n
o

t

t

o
o

P

r

o
o
y
o

m

t

e

E

u
q
h

t
i

a
a
e

b
g

l
l

e

e
c
c

s
s

f

S

c

i

e

t

t

t

e

L

S

y

s

t

e

m

I

F

C

S

o
p
p
u

r

t

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fiduciary Products 

81. 
Uruguay’s strong capacity and positive track record on governance provides a 
sound fiduciary environment for implementing the proposed Bank program.  As part of the 
continuing dialogue with the authorities and to update our own knowledge as a basis for 
technical assistance, the Bank proposes to include core fiduciary work in the CPSDuring the 
first half of the CPS period, an update of the Country Financial Accountability Assessment 
(CFAA) could be carried out using the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
(PEFA) methodology.  The last CFAA was published in June 2005 (Report No.32851-UY).  
Given the priority the administration places on its public sector reform program, this exercise 
presents an opportunity for the Bank to provide technical advice and support on Public Financial 
Management (PFM) reforms that are part of the government agenda.  The PEFA study will 
assess the status of country's Public Financial Management systems/ reforms against 28 high-
level of PFM indicators.  This study could serve as an objective baseline for the impact of the 
PFM reforms that the Government is initiating and also serve to measure their progress. 

82. 
It is also proposed to launch a new Country Procurement Assessment Report 
(CPAR) within the first year of the CPS period.  The last CPAR was conducted by the Bank 
in 1999 and the report delivered to the Government in 2000. At that time, IADB, UNDP and 
relevant government agencies provided valuable input on the local procurement environment, 
and the Bank will actively seek collaboration with other partners in the execution of the updated 
CPAR as well.  A primary objective of the dialogue will focus on the attainment of consensus for 
the conducting of an assessment of the public procurement system using the indicators-based 
OECD/DAC tool. 

IFC Activities 

83. 
Summarizing the initiatives mentioned above, IFC expects to focus on four main 
areas during the CAS period:  (i) financial services, (ii) agribusiness, (iii) competiveness, 
and (iv) education.  In the financial sector, IFC aims to support banks and non-banks that focus 
on the mid-market corporate and low-income retail banking segments.  IFC is looking at 
opportunities to support local banks with onlending facilities for agribusiness SMEs and with 
trade finance lines for exporters.  IFC has financed microfinance ventures elsewhere in Latin 
America and thereby managed to reach groups that had previously been unable to obtain credit 
on acceptable terms.  IFC is in talks with a potential client in this sector. It intends to help 
develop Uruguay’s small microfinance sector 
through 
investments with microfinance 
institutions, on a selective basis.  The Corporation also aims to support housing finance projects 
that can help expand this incipient market.  IFC has also gathered considerable experience in 
supporting the development of capital markets in other Latin American economies. 

84. 
Agribusiness is an important market for the IFC given its significance to the 
Uruguayan economy.  Here the focus is likely to remain on export-oriented enterprises with 
deep linkages to farms.  IFC will continue supporting projects that integrate SMEs into corporate 
supply chains.  IFC may also finance more projects in Uruguay’s expanding forestry industry, 
especially where they provide for participation of small businesses in their supply chains.  All 
three of IFC’s active investment projects in Uruguay are in export-oriented agribusiness 

25 

 
companies. These include a citrus producer (Milagro), a dairy cooperative (Conaprole), and a 
large paper pulp producer (UPM, formerly Botnia15).   

85. 
IFC also aims to reinforce the county’s competitiveness by financing infrastructure 
projects, especially those in the renewable energy, logistics, and water sectors once 
appropriate regulations are in place.  The ongoing legal and regulatory reforms related to 
promotion of public-private partnerships and expanded scope of investments by institutional 
investors in the local capital market could open further opportunities for IFC involvement in this 
area.  The IFC also hopes to support private sector education institutions, particularly those that 
offer technical and vocational courses for low income students to improve their employability, 
raise incomes, and improve productivity. 

D.  Development Partners 

86. 
As during the 2005-2010 CAS period, the Bank will collaborate closely with the 
Government and other development partners to ensure a synergistic complementarity with 
their programs.   Contributions of key development partners are detailed below. 

87. 
The IADB played an important role helping Uruguay to solidify its recovery after 
the 2002 crisis.  The IADB’s Country Paper (2005-2009) defined a target scenario of US$ 1.2 
billion in approvals over the five-year period, with actual credits for the period exceeding US$ 
1.6 billion to support a portfolio concentrated on Reform/Modernization of the State (38.4%), 
Sanitation (22.6%) and Transportation (19.4%).   The new Country Strategy with Uruguay 
(2010-2014) is currently under preparation and will be presented to the Board of Directors by 
October 2010.  Lending under the new program is expected to approximate US$ 1.8 billion, of 
which US$ 1.4 billion would be allocated for investment loans.  The program may also include 
additional financing for knowledge products.  A reorientation in terms of sectors is not 
anticipated, and there will be a continued emphasis on infrastructure, particularly transportation.  
Under the new strategy, the IADB will continue providing support to secondary education and 
social programs such as Infamilia, a program aimed at improving living conditions for and social 
inclusion of disadvantaged children, adolescents and their families. 

88. 
The Andean Development Corporation’s (CAF) engagement in Uruguay has 
deepened over the past five years, with total approvals increasing from US$ 70 million in 2005 
to U$S 590 million in 2009.  The majority of 2009 approvals (67.8%) corresponded to a non-
committed contingent credit line to be granted in case Uruguay were to lose access to 
international capital markets.  During 2009 CAF also approved US$ 150 million for development 
of road and electricity infrastructure.  CAF also approved a US$ 40 million loan to improve the 
environmental and sanitary conditions of the department of Maldonado.  Cooperation funds of 
USD 300,000 were also provided through the different programs developed by CAF. 

15 This project was the subject of an international waterways dispute with Argentina.  In April 2010, the 
International Court of Justice delivered its judgment finding that Uruguay had breached its procedural obligations 
under the Estatuto del Río Uruguay, but not its substantive obligations under Articles 35, 36 and 41 thereunder, 
namely: (i) to ensure that the management of the soil and woodland does not impair the regime or quality of the 
river; (ii) to coordinate measures to avoid changes in the ecological balance; and (iii) to prevent pollution and 
preserve the aquatic environment. 

26 

 
                                                            
89. 
In 2006, the country team of the United Nations in Uruguay developed the United 
Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) for the period 2007-2010.  The main 
assistance areas defined in the UNDAF were: (i) achieve sustained and sustainable growth, (ii) 
eradicate indigence and reduce poverty and (iii) promote the exercise of all Human Rights and 
strengthen the quality of democracy.  Financing for these activities totaled approximately 
US$32.8 million.  After Uruguay became one of the eight pilot countries for the “Delivering as 
One” initiative in 2007, the UN System and the Government signed the “One Programme” which 
defines more specific results to achieve the outcomes set in the UNDAF 2007-2010 and 
promotes joint initiatives to strengthen the coherence and added value of the UN system’s 
cooperation in the country. The UNDAF for the period 2011-2015 is currently under preparation. 

90. 
As of April, 2010, 412 non-refundable cooperation projects financed by bilateral 
and other partners active in Uruguay, amounting to over US$ 215 million.  The main areas of 
cooperation were Environment (US$ 90 million), Decentralization and Local Development (US$ 
45.7 million) and Industry, SMEs and Microcredit (US$ 31 million).  The European Union and 
Spain were among the main contributors, with US$ 39.2 million and US$ 39 million in active 
projects, respectively.  During the period 2004-2008, support from Spain was mainly oriented to 
Infrastructure and Social Services (65%).  The strategy for joint cooperation between Uruguay 
and Spain for the next four years will be defined in 2010.  The European Commission, in its 
2007-2013 Country Strategy Paper for Uruguay, establishes grant aid of EUR 31 million (US$ 
44.5 million) for that period, of which almost 60% would be spent in Social and Territorial 
Cohesion projects and the remaining 40% in Research and Development and Innovation projects. 

V.  RISKS 

91. 
Economic Risk.  Despite declining as a source of risk since 2005, debt sustainability 
remains the main economic risk, followed by dollarization and exposure to global and regional 
shocks. Public debt is still sizeable and largely denominated in foreign currency (57 percent). 
The financing requirements for debt service are significant, with a concentration of maturities in 
2011.  The highly dollarized economy implies substantial exposure to foreign currency risks for 
the banking sector due to corporate balance sheet mismatches. Uruguay is vulnerable to a severe 
deterioration in global and regional economic conditions. While there has been diversification in 
the destination of Uruguay’s exports, they are still highly concentrated in agricultural primaries. 
Regional conditions remain important and a crisis in neighboring countries would still have a 
strong impact on Uruguay, although less severe than in 2002. The Bank aims to help mitigate 
this risk through its DPL financing, and ongoing dialog on macroeconomic and fiscal policies, as 
well as technical assistance on various aspects of economic management.  

92. 
Political and Social Risk.  Political risk was assessed as low throughout the 2005-2010 
CAS period and continues to be so.  The 2009 Presidential and Parliamentary elections 
proceeded smoothly with no indication of increased political risk.  As has already featured 
prominently in statements from the President, a significant risk arises from the tensions between 
pressure to expand government programs and the need for a prudent fiscal stance in order to 
further reduce macroeconomic vulnerabilities.  The consensus orientation of Uruguayan society 
and President Mujica’s inclusive approach to reforms suggests minimal risk that political 
changes would adversely affect prospects for the implementation of reforms.  The CPS, in 

27 

 
particular the proposed joint AAA program, which aims at providing a menu of viable reform 
options well founded in joint analytical work, is expected to contribute positively to this 
consensus-based political processes.  

93. 
Risk related to Civil Service Reform.  The sweeping changes to the civil service 
legislation proposed by the administration, while apparently favored by the political opposition, 
are strongly opposed by the public sector unions.  This is a highly contentious and difficult issue 
that is central to public sector reform, and the outcome could have implications for the 
Government’s ability to achieve its broader public sector reform agenda.  While the Bank has not 
been involved to date, it has considerable experience with such reforms in other Latin American 
countries and is prepared to provide technical assistance and/or facilitate some south-south 
knowledge exchange on the topic. 

94. 
Climate Change and Natural Disasters Risk:  Droughts have had a major impact on 
rural income, as well as important fiscal implications, in recent years, and there is evidence that 
climate change is worsening the magnitude and intensity of droughts.  Two significant 
consequences include decreased hydro-power – and thus increased energy costs – and a loss of 
agricultural output due to a lack of drinking water for livestock.  Therefore, support under the 
Natural Resources management pillar is expected to include adaptation measures currently under 
discussion with Government.   

28 

 
   
A

x
o
1
n
n
g

e

A

P

a

e

f

6

A

n
n

e

x

A

:

U

r

u

g

u

y
a

C

P

S

R

e

s

u

l

t

s

F

r

a

m

e

w

o

r

k

0
1
0
2

-

5
1
0
2

P

I

L
L

R
A

1

-

R

E

C
U
D

I

N

G

M

R
C
A

O

E

C

O

N

O
O

M

I

U
V
C

L

N

B
E

A
R

B

I

L

I

T

Y

m
&

S

T

R

E

N

G

T

H

E

N

I

N

G

P

U

L
B

I

C

S

E

C

T

O

D
A
R

M

I

N

I

S

T

A
R

T

I

O

N

C

o
a
o

d
n
S
d
n
n
u

t

r

y

t

r

a

t

e
c

o
g
a

i

r
c

G

l

s

a

I

i

t

s

s
s
I

u

e

s

a

d
n

O

b

s

t

a

c

l

e

s

u

t

c

x
o

m

c
e
e

s

t
t

h

e

a

u
k
n
n

P

r
e
c
r
e

g
o

a

E

p

s

t

o

I

f

l

n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a

k
n

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

I

n

s

t

r

u

m

e

n

t

s

1

R

d
n
e
p
x

u
d

e
c
u

M

a

h
r
c
o

o

n
c
e
o

o

n

o

m

i

c

V

u

i
f
l

n

r
e

a

b

i
l
i

t
a

i

e
n

o
s
e
c

 C

o
a

n

r
c
e
s
r
c

o
o

i
l

d

a
o
g
a

i
t

n
n

g

a
g

t
i
i

b
n

s

o

n

m

c
e

o

m
m

i
i

c

s

g
a

t
i
l
i

y

b

y

e
r

u
n
d
u

i

b
n

e
r

a

n
n

v

l

i
t
i
l
i

s
e

S

c

p
o

e

f

o

r

c

n
u
o

t

e

r

c

y

c

i
l

a
c

l

o
p

i
l

c

i

s
e

r

e

m

a

i

n

s

i
l

m

t
i

e

d

s
a

:



F

i

e
a
s
a
a
s
e
s
e
a
c
s
e
s
e
e
a
c

l

o
h
y
p
o
o
b
n
d
y
o
b
o
n
d
o
y
k
o
n
o
p
n
o
o
u
y
o
o
h
o
p
v
p
d
u
x
u
d
n
n
o
y
b

i
i
i
t
l
t
r

s
a
c

t
i
l
i
,
i
t

s

s

h
g
g
n
h
h
h
b
x
y
u

j

c
e

t

t

o

b
n
b
o
d
d

l
i
f
t
t

w

t
i

i

e
s
c

c

a

e

r

t

e
c
a
s
a
e
e
e
s
a

r
t
r
i
t

i
t

.



M

t
l
f
t
i
i

i
l
r

i
r
t

e
e
a
s
e
c
a
e
z
s
e
s
s
e
e

r
i
l

m

t
i

d

a
e
c
s

u
x
b



L

t
i
i

m

l

f

o
g
n
n
u
o
h
d

e

r

a

e

-
f

a

s

i
r
r
l
l

r

t
.

h

h
g

l

l

a

i
t

C

n
o

r
t

o

l

e

e

t
i

r

e

g

r

w

t

t

e

s

u

r

e

o
n

f

u

t
r

h

e

r

d

e

t

e

i
r

o

r

a

i
t

o
n
o

f

i
f

a
c
s

l

b

a

l

a

n

s
e
c

.

 B

i
r

g
n

b
u
p

i
l

c

d

e

b

t

r

a

i
t

o

s

o
d

w

n

t

o

m

o

r

e

s

u

s

t

a

i

n

a

b

l

e

l

e

v

e

l

s

.

 F

u

t
r

h

e

r

r

e

u
d

e
c

t

h

e

s

h

a

r

e

o

f

f

o

r

e

i

n
g

c

u

r
r

e

n

c

y

-

d

e

o
n

m

i

n

a

t

e

d

d

e

b

.
t

T

h

e

a
c
s

l

b

a

l

f

t

h

e

c

n
o

s

o

i
l

d

a

t

e

d

b
u
p

i
l

c

c
e
s

t

o

r

r

e

m

a

i

n

s

a

v
o
b

e

t

h

e

9
0
0
2

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

o

f

-

1

.

7

%

o

f

D
G

P

.

6
1

 T

h

e

g

r

o

s
s

b
u
p

i
l

c

d

e

b

t

r

a

i
t

o

d

c
e

r

s
e
s
a
e

r
f

o

m

6
t
1
i

s

9
0
0
2

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

o

f

0
6

%

o

f

D
G

P

.

 T

h

e

f

o

r

e

i

n
g

c

u

r
r

e

n

c

y

-

d

e

o
n

m

i

n

a

t

e

d

b
u
p

i
l

c

d

e

b

t

s

h

a

r

e

d

c
e

i
l

n

e

t

o

l

s
s
e

t

h

a

n

t
i

s

9
0
0
2

b

e
s
a

i
l

n

e

o

f
6
1

7
6
5

.

%

o

f

t

h

e

t

o

t

a

l

u
o

t

s

t

a

d
n

i

d
g
n

e

b

.
t

 D

L
P

I

(

F

Y

1
1

)

a

d
n

D

L
P

I
I

(

F

Y

2
1

)

 P

e

i
r

d
o

i

c

M

c
a

r

o

-

M

n
o

t
i

o

i
r

g
n

a

d
n

F

i

n

a

n

c

i

a

l

N

o

t

s
e

.

 F

i

a
c
s

l

a

d
n

/

o

r

S

o

c

i

a

l

E

p
x

e

d
n

t
i

u

r

e

R

e

v

i

e

w

s

.

 I

B

T

A

L

(

a

d
n

I

B

T

A

L

A

F

)

(

o
g
n
o

i

g
n

)

2

P

b
u

i
l

h
p
c
p
g
e
g
d
p
n
u
b
c
h
n
u
o
o
d
n
n

S

a
a
c
e
t
a
e

o

y
y
r

M

o

d

r
5
p
e

n

i

z
p
y

a

t

i

o

n

E

i
f
f

c

i

e
s
e
e
c
e
r

n

t

a

d
n
n

e

b
b
u
p
u
q

t
i

a

l
i
l

e
c

m

g
a
o
a

u
n

m

t

o

f

s
e
r

C

n
u
u
d
g
g
n
u
o
o
o
v
p
p

r
r

c
a
a
a
e

i
t

g
o
d
u
b
v

c
e
s
e
e
a
a
s
e
e
s
c

l
r
t
t

p

r
t

n

t
,

a

i
t

n
o

o
n

t

c

a
e

f
i
t
t

g
n
n
u

i
i

r

r
l

m
m

p

d
b
n
u
p
g
n
o

a

e

a

i
t

o
n
o

r

t
l

s

f

i
l

c

r

r

m

s

 C

u
n
g
p
n
d
o
o

m

t

e
z
e
e
z
e
e

i
r

n
d
n
d

S

d
y

e
s
s
e
e

t

m

o
b

f

B

g
d
u

e

t

M

a

a
e

m

t

t

o

e

m

r

i

 L

c
a

o
o
b
n
u
p
d
p
b
g
n
u
d
n
p
n
n
g
o
n
b
n
n
n
u
p
u
n
v
o
g
o
u
u
k
d
p
o
o
o
o
p

l
f

i
l

c

a

e

s
e
c
e
s
c
c

y

r

g
n
n
o
o
g
v
p
n
o

s

i

b

l

e

f

r
r

r

e
e
c

e
e
e
a
a
z
e
e

i
t

i
r
l

i
t
t
-
t
i
l

r

r
r

e

m

t
i
t

a

m

o

m
m

i

a

c

c
e
a
s
s
c
s

i
t

i

r

m
m

t
.
t

s

i

r

p

r

c

r

S

r
t

e
a
e

u
g
n
u
d
n
n
n
h

i
t
t
i

g
g
u
d
d
h
o
u
b
n
g
p
v
n
h
g
n

e

e

t
i
r
t
r
i

n

s
s
e
a
e
a

i
t
t
l
t
i
t

u
u

a

l

a
c

t
r
r
r
i

i

n

e
s

v
p
o
o

l

a

l
t
r

e

s
a
s

f

t

m

e
s

i

t
r

s
e
a

n
u
o

t
l

s

f
f

t

e
a
e
s
e

a

n
o

i

t

e

i
t

a

l

s

.

 E

g
h
o
o
d
n
n
n
n
p

a

n

e
a
s
c
a
s
a

n
n
o
d

I

t

e

g
d
p
u
u
g
b
y
n

l
t
r

c
s
s
a
a
c
c
c
e
e
c
a
e
a
e
a
s

t

d

F
S

)
t
I
I
i
t
(
t

n

a

n

c

i
(

a

l
f
r

I

f

r

m

i
t
t

S

m

F

o
n
o

e

n
o

r
i
t

e
s

l
t

y
o

e

w

y

e

m
m
m

i
i
)
t

h

i
r
t

m

r

l
l
r

c
c
c
a
a
s

l

i
f
i
i
t

a
c

n
o

a

o

w

r

a

l

n
u
o

g
n

.

 P

b
u

l
r
i
i
l

e
c
e
e
c

o
g
n
p
n
n
o
n
n
o
u
d
u
d
n
o
n
u
o
n
p
y
n

r
t

c
a

i
r
t
t
r

a
e

m

s
e

t

f
r
r
i

e
e
e
s

m

a

d
h
p
u
g
n

e

m

g
h
o
g
y
u
u
o
o
o

r

e
e
a
e
a
e

e

i
f
r
f

a

t

t
r
r
l
t
-

h
p
d
o
n
p

r
t
f

c

i
i
t

a

r

n
n

c

y

a

t

i

c

c

r

m

.
t

-
r
l
 I

a
a
s
e
s
e
a

i
r
r
f
i

h
n
g
o
d
u
d
b

e

t

f

1
1
0
0
1
2
g
0
o
y
2
p
o

r
l
r
r

-

5
1
0
2

i

s
c

a
c
e

w

t
i

a
a
e

r

a

m
m

a

i
t

c

i
t

(

)

.

o
g
n
o
u
n
d
p
o

c

r

s
e
e
e
s
a
a
e

f
(
i
i

u
b
o
n
h
9
0
h
0
o
d
2
n
n
d

r
i
t

e

m

u
b
p
o
n
v
u
o
b
h
h

e

t
r

f

a
e
e
e
e
z

d
n
d
o
p
n
n
x

e

t
i

u

r

e

r

r

m
m

w

r
i

a
e
s
s
a
c

t

t

c
e

a
c

t

e
e

i

i
f
i
t

i
l

:

r

)

.

C

n
u
n
d
g
o
n
u
b

r
r
t

a
c
a

t

f

1
o
1
0
2
2
o
1
y
0
2

r
(

s

)
t
f

w

a
a

r

e

g
p
u
u
d
n

r
t
r
r

a

d

i
i

g
n
g
n
n

i

s

e

w

e
s

a

i

h

s
a

e

(

)

.

 R

i
t

e
e
s
a

i

d
b
u
n
n
9
0
n
d
0
2

m

o
b

e

r

o
p
n

:
f
l

G

o
d
0
2

U

p

r

o

s
a
e
c
s
s
e
c

s

t
(
r

a

e
s
c
a

m

e
e

t

e

e

l

c
e

r
t

n
o

i

l
l

y

t

o

5
2

i
l

)

 I

B
 C

T

A

L

i
(

n

c

l

d
u

i

g
n

A

F

)

(

o
g
n
o

i

g
n

)

F

A
A

/

F
E
P

A

6
1

T

h

e

s

e

m

l
i

e

s

t

n
o

e

s

a

r

e

s

e

t

i

n

r

e

f

e

r

e

n

e
c

t

o

a

b

a

s

e

i
l

n

e

w

h

i

c

o
d
h

e

s

o
n

t

t

a

k

e

i

n

t

o

c
c
a

n
u
o

t

t

h

e

s

e
c

n

a

r

i

o
o

f

a

s

b
u

s

t

a

n

i
t

a

l

d

e

t

e

r

i

o

r

a

i
t

o
n
o

f

t

h

e

e

x

t

e

r

n

a

l

e

v
n

i

r

n
o

m

e

n

.
t

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

x
o
2
n
n
g

e

A

P

a

e

f

6

P

I

L
L

R
A

x
–
o
2

C

O

M

P

T
B
E

I

T

I

V

E

N

E

S
S

&
m

I

N

F

A
R

S

T

C
U
R

T

R
U

E

C

o
a
o

d
n
S
d
n
n
u

t

r

y

t

r

a

t

e
c

o
g
a

i

r
c

G

l

s

a

I

i

t

s

s
s
I

u

e

s

a

d
n

O

b

s

t

a

c

l

e

s

O

u

t

c

m

c
e
e

s

t
t

h

e

a

u
n
k
n
n

P

r
e
c
r
e

g
o

a

E

p

s

t

o
o

g
u
r
b
p
e
o
y
I
s
o
n
a

f

l
i

n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a

k
n

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

I

n

s

t

r

u

m

e

n

t

s

1

.

F

t

g

C

o

m

p

e
d
n

t

i

t

i

v

e
u
d
e

n

n
o
s
a
s
c
e

I

m

n
p
p
u
p
n
b

c
e
s
s
e
r
r
s
e

v
o

i
i
t
l
t
t
i

h

e

c

o
o
a

d
n
n
u

t

r

y

’

e
r
s
c

s

i

m

t
f

r
e

a

a

t

e

o

o

t
t

n
n
u

s
e
s

i

v

m

e

N

s
s
a
e
a
e
s
e
e

b
d
o
n
v
g
o
o
n
y
o
x
b
o
o
n
u
n
d
n
g
u
u
b

i
t
i

e

r

c
s

o

m

s
e
s
e
e
c
a

m

a

j

o
n
d
o
o
g
n

r

r

m

t
i

l

t

i

g
n

i

a

v
n

i
t

i

U

r

:



C

m
m

p

c
e
s
s
e
e
s
a
s
e
s
a
a
e
s
e
c
s
s
c
e
a
a

i
t
i
l
t

o
o
n
o
n
o

r
f

m
m

t
,

h

e

i

f

r
r
r

y



T
L

t
i
t
r
t

,





u
n
g
o
o

l
i
f

a
a

i
t

n
o
n
o
n

s
e
c

a

d
n

A
R

o
u
n
g
u
u
b

l

s

f

r

p
o

e

n

i

g
n

a

t
i



C

m

A

r
t
i
f
-
t
l
l

m

a
s
s

r

e

e
c

n
o
u
d
p
o
h
o

r
t
r
r
f

l
l

r
t

e

i

s
s
a

i
t
t
i

s
e
s
e
e

r

d

,

a

n
o

e
a

s
e

p
p
o
d

m

s

n
o
n

r

e

l

-

r

e
c

s
e

i

e

r

.

 S

b
v
u
p

a
e
a
s

t
t

n

i
t

c
a
e
s

r
i
t
l

n
o

c

r

e
s
a
e

i

n

c

r

e

d

t
i

t

o

t

h

e

i
r

.

R

a
e
c
e
c
c
a

i
t

i
t
r
i
f

n

t
(

h

e
s
a
e

u
n

m

b
n
o

e
e

r

y
n
y
d
d
u
o
5
6
g
n

f

s
s
s
e
s
a
a
s

t

o

r

r
t

m

B

i
l

:
i

o

d

i

g
n

0
1
0
2
o

D

B

i

)

.

7
1

T

9
0
0
h
2

e

r

a

i
t

o
o
b

i
f
l

C

:
r

e
e

o
9
2
2
d

t
i

t
.

D
G
D
G

P

i

n

c

)
r

s
e
s
a
e

(

e
s
a

n

%

o

f

P

.

I

n
y
n
d

e
s
e
a
c
e
c
e
e
e
c
s
s
e
s

r
t
t

i

y
n
b
d

t
i
(
t
t

b
h
k
b
u
o
9
n
0
0
h
v
2
h

e
e
e

m
m

a
e

r

n
o
u
n
n

f

r
r
i

e
e

u
n
o
g

l
t
f

a

i
t
i
r

s
e

t

i
r
t

s

a

0
b
g

e
e

m

m

r
i
t

e

l

a
s

t

e
s
e
a

m

)
r

i

p

n
o

i
l

e

:

D

L
P
 S

I

(

F

Y

1
1

)

a

d
n

D

L
P

I
I

(

F

Y

2
1

)

t

y
d
u

n
o

C

o

m

p

e

i
t
i
t

v

e

n

s
s
e

(

o
g
n
o

i

g
n

)

 I
(
 I

n
n
v
n
p

s
e
a

t

m

e
e

n
d

/
t

B

u

s

i

n

s
s
e

C

i
l

m

a

t

e

A

s
s
e
s
s

m

e

n

t

l

)

F

C

-

F

i

n

a

n

c

i

a

l

a

d
n

A

v
d

i

s

o

r

y

S

e

r

v

i

s
e
c

s

o
p
p
u

t
r

2

.

E

h
n

a

n

c

i

n

g

t

h

e

R

e

g

u

l

a

t

o

r

y

E

n

v

i

r

o

n

m

e

n

t

P
d

e
r
e
e
r
c
c
c
r
e
e
 I
e
s

o
v

m

o
o

t

e

i
f

n
n

a

n

c

i

a

l

m

a

r

k

e

t

e

l

p

m

e

t

n

a

r
r
e
e
c
s

d

e

p

t
t

n
h
h
h

a

d
n
n

l
l
t
i
f
f

i

n
h
n

o
o
g
a
o
o
y
y

f

e

i
f

a

n

c

i

a

l

o

t

u

i

m

u
p

m

t

f
i
t

o

f

t

h
p

e
r

e
r

g

a

t

o

e
r

r

m

g
o

r

a

m

A

l
l
r
l
t
f

e
a
a
e
c

r

s
a
e
e
e

p
p

r
l

v
o

i
i

9
n
0
o
0
n
2
g
n
n

a

e

w

e
a
e
c

p

t
i

a

l

m

k

t

a
e
s
s
a
e

w
w

,
i

t

y
h
p

h
n
p
p

g
g
p
n
o

n
h
o
g
o
n
n
h
o

i
r
i

s

t

m

t
l

m

e
a

n

t

t

h

e

w

i

l

a

i
t
i

a
a

w

a
e

h

t

i
t
r
r

o

m

t
i

e

m

r

k

t

a

c

i
t

.

I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

m

a

r

k

e

t

a
c

p

t
i

a

i
l

a
z

i
t

n
o

 T

h

e

D

e

o
p

s

t
i

a

r

i

o

C

e

n

t

r

a

l

d

e

V

a

l

o

s
e
r

i

s

i

n

p
o

e

r

a

i
t

n
o

a

h
d
n

a

d
n

l

s
e

a

n

e

l

c
e

r
t

n
o

i

c

m

a

n

a

g

e

m

e

n

t

o

f

c
e
s

u

i
t
i
r

s
e

I
l

s
s
s
e
s

u
u
g
o
y
h

e
c
s
a
e
a
s
e
s

n

h
n
u
h
o
y
d
b
n
h
n
o

U
C
B

o
u
g
g
v
n
o
u
n
o
o
u

f
r
i
f

c
e
e
s

n
d
n
o

s
e
e
e
a
c
e
a
a
c
a
a

r

h
g
n
o
y

i
t

l

t
i
,
,
t

r
t
f
f

t

e
c
e

s

r
f
l
l
i

f
i
r

t

e

m

e

i
t

l

a

e
s

n

t

T

9
h
0
g
0
h
2
h

e

r

e
e

i
r

s

e
a
a
s
a

n
o
k
p

e
a
c
e
s
e

i
t
i
t

p
v
o

i
l
r
t
t
i

a
z
e
a

d
n

t
i
t

n
o
o
9
3
1
$

w

a

i
l
r
r
l
f
i

n
o
d
o

s

i

m

i
l
r

m

t
i
.

s

(

b

f

U

S

m

 T

h

e
a
c

R

e

b
u
g
u
p
p

i
r
i
t
l
t
i

e
c
e
e
z
s
c
r
e
s

o

d
n
u
d
d

l

M

c
a
s
r
e
e

a
p
0
d
7
n
o
u
d
o
a
b

e

V

r
t
l
r

o

s
e
r
e
c
c
e
e

i

s

o

m

a

i
t

n
n
o

i
t

o
o

r
f

l
l

i
t
i
r

a

r

e

e

l

c

f

m

a

t

 T

b
o
n
n
9
u
0
h
n
0
2

e
s
s
a
e
a
a
c
c
a
e
a
s
s

t

t

l

k
b
o
u
n
u
n

m

s
e
e
c
s
e
s
s

r

o
p
n
n
o
o

f

e

w

p

i
r
t

d
o
n
o
b
v

a

t

e

c
e
s
s

t

o

r

i
i
f

i
(
r
l
t

t

,
t

c
c

r
i

r
r

s
e
e
s
a
a
e

,

i

l

t

,

)

c

r
f

m

t
i

s

o

f

8

.

 S

t

d
g
n
n
b
y
h
0
0
h
2
k
6
p
$
o
o
h

c
e

e

x

c
a
e

e
s
a
a
a

e

c
e
s
c
e
a
s

i
t

9
y
d
0
n
0
v
o
2

t
i

i
l
r
r

a
s
e
e
s

r
f
l

k
o
o

r

o
b

t

h

r
t
f

i
,
t
r

m

r
r
i

a

v
y

m

e

t

s

m

i
l
i
l
l
i

n
n
o

e

f

U

S

m

.

D
 C

L
P

I

(

F

1
1
y

)

a

d
n

D

L
P

I
I

(

F

2
1
y

)

a

p

t
i

a

l

M

a

r

k

e

t

s

P

o

i
l

c

y

N

o

t

e

(

9
0
0
2

-

0
1
0
2

)

 I

F

C

S

o
p
p
u

t
r

7
1

T

c
g
a
n
o
e
h
y
e
h
h
c
e
g
n
e
e

D

i

B

a
s
s
s
a
e
n
a
s
h
u

t
i

m

i

h
g
o
c

t

e
n
s
e
b
e
c
e
h
c
a
e
p
b
n
o
o
n

t

t
r

t

U
m
w

r
s
a
e

c
a
n
a
o
y
a
u
e
g
u
u

r

f

r

r
i
t
f

a
u

l

u
u
n

m

o
y
e
a
b
u

r
l
l

f
r

n
o
y
a
y
d
e

s

i
r
t
(

u
o
p
k
e
s
h

r
f

i
f
t
o
s
e
e
-
r
s
e
a
v
h
o
c

m

a
x
e

i
t
i

n
e
c
s
a
g
n
n
o

)

t
i

i

u
b
s
e
s
s

r
f
r
t
l
i
f

o
g
e
o

l
l

w

i
r
t

e
h
n
o
g
n
a

t

a
a
c
h
c
u
o
S

i
f
f

i

l

d
o
o
v
e
a
u
d
e
c
e
c
o
c
a
p
p

r
r

r

i
f

r
i
t
f
s
r

m

u
u
d
h
e
c
o
n
o
p
d
a
a
d
s
n
g
a
e
t
r
s

i

r
r
t

i
t

;
r

t

t
r
s

e
h
e

m
w

s
h
a
c
e
h

u

s
r
e
e
o
h
d
o
e
r
s
i

e
o
s
n

t

r
l

l
f

t

t
.

f

t

t

m
m

i
t

m

s

s

l

s

i
t

i
l

o

i

s

i
t

.

i
t

e
h

i

t

w

i

t

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

x
o
3
n
n
g

e

A

P

a

e

f

6

P

I

L
L

R
A

x
–
o
2

C

O

M

P

T
B
E

I

T

I

V

E

N

E

S
S

&
m

I

N

F

A
R

S

T

C
U
R

T

R
U

E

C

o
a
o

d
n
S
d
n
n
u

t

r

y

t

r

a

t

e
c

o
g
a

i

r
c

G

l

s

a

I

i

t

s

s
s
I

u

e

s

a

d
n

O

b

s

t

a

c

l

e

s

O

u

t

c

m

c
e
e

s

t
t

h

e

a

u
u
k
n
n

P

r
e
e
r
c
r
e
c

g
o

a

E

p

s
I

f
t

a
o

s
I

f
t

l

u
n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a

k
n

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

I

n

s

t

r

u

m

e

n

t

s

3

.

n

r

r

t

S

t

e
r

n

g

t

h

e

n

i

n

g

 I
c

m

p

r
s
r
r
r
e
e
e
r
e
r

v
g
o
a
g
g
a
v
o

c
e
e
e
r

u
q

a

t
i
l

y
a
a
a
g
o
o
y
a

d
n
u

o

f
t

U

r
e
e
e
r

u

’

s

f
t
i

n

t
i
t
,

d
n
h
u
u
d
n
n
u
h
n

t

e
e
s
e
c

n

l
t

r
s
e
r
c

n
u

t
t
i
l

r

y
g
o

i
t
’
i

s
c
s
s

m

g
a

r

o

d
n

i
t

h
n
p

m

u

m

l
l
t
-

r
e
e

m

g
a

o
o

w

a

d
n

b
p

v
o
o

r
c
e
e

i
t
t

a
y
v

v

i

i
t

n

j

s
e

 L

a

r
r
r
r
r
f

g

e
s
e
e
a

i
r
t
t
t

o
u
u
q
n
u
o

c
c

r
t

e
e
a
c
s
e
s
e
a
e

i

d
d
n
v
n
o

i

o
v
g
v
o
d
n

s
e

t

m
m

s
e
e
a
a
a

n
n

t
t
;

a
s

i
i

n
n

i

o
u
n

t
i
r
l

n
y

a
c
e
e

t

i

c

n

a
c

e
e

r

p
g
g

m

l

e
s

r

 P

u
g
o
u
o

r

r

s
a
a
a
s
c
a
e

i
’
l
i

n

r
f

s
a

r
t
t
i
l
f
i
i
l

u
y

c

t
t

p
n
u
o
o

f
t
i
r
f
r
t

a
e

i
l

m

t
r
r
t
t
i

s

U

r

g
y
n

s

a

o
g
u
n
b
o
k
o
v
n
o

n
o
d

s
e
s

o
p

i

d
u
p
d
o
n
p
d

c

r

i
t

m

s
e
a
a

r

y

l
r
i

i
,
t

i
r

s

r

e
a

a

i

r

d

w

o

r

k

.

 H

i

h
n
g
n
n
o
u
d
g
v

i
i
t
i
t
l
r
r

e
c
s
s
e
a
s
a
e
e
s
e

v

l

s

o
o
d
o
n
y
y
o
h
n
o
b

f
r

p
o
p
p
d
o

e

e
e

d
n

a
e
a
a
e
a
e

d
d
n
n
y

e
c

n
o

m
m

w

r

w

a
e

h
g
d
k
n
h
o

r
t

a
e

i

s
s
a
c
s

c
a

r
t
i

y
y
d

l

t
r
l
i

i

c

t

i

n
y

s
a
e
s

l

t
i
l
i

t

s

t

e

m

f

u

r

.

 I
l

m

n
v
o
d
p
n

r
t
r

s
e
a

m

e

n
o
p

t
t
r

n
o

t
r
f
f

h

e
s
a

c

d
u
n
o
u

,
i
t
i
r

o
n
o

f

k

e

y

a

i

r
t

c

t

e

 E

i
r
f
f

e
e
s
c
e

i

y
u
n
o

s
e
e
c
c
a

i

m

g
d
n
d
v
n
o
o
p
d

r
r
r

e
a
a
e

m

e

n
n
o

t

a
s

i
l

v
n
n

O

E
S

r
f

e
e
e

-
t

o
p
u

i
r

f

.
i
t
i

i

s
e

t

m

n

r
f

m

r

t

n

i

s

 E

y
g
u
d
n

e
c
a
e

r

e
“

i
t
f
f

c
a

r
i

a
e

n

c
”

g
y

i
r

m

o
v
o
h
p

r
t

e

m

s
c
e
e
e

n

i
r
t
t

r

e
e

n
d
n

u

l

o

w

f

l

c

t
i

y

d

m

.

  A
r
 I
r
 I
i
t

m

p
o

l
r

e

m
m

e

n

t

a

i
t

o
n
o

f

r

a

l
i

w

a

y

c
e
s

t

o

r

e

f

m

v
o
o
p
p
h
n

r

e

m

e

n

t

g
n
o
o
n
n

f

i

n

s
a
c

-
t
i
t
r
r

n
o
u
o
u
y

i
t

a

l

a
c

p

c
a

t
i

y
d
o

n

t

e
s

M

T

O

P

t

t

m

u

-
i
t
l

m

a

l

a

t
r

p

l

a

i

s
s
s
s
e
e
e
c
c
c
a
e
c
a

t

o
o
o
p

e
s
s
e
s
e
s
s
c
s
a

w

e
e

r

e
e
c
a

d
v
n
b
v
u
p
d
n
g
o
u
g
d
y
d
u

a
e
s

r

i

c
e
a
s
e
c
a
s
e
c

i

n

r
i
t
l
l

e
s
a
e
e

d

;

w

r
i
t

l

r
t

;

h
b

o
o
p
n
h

f
t
f

t

h

m

t

i
l
i

s
c
e
c

t

w

e

r

a

e

e
s

r

o

m

l

e

e

d

.

 K

c
e
a
a
s
s
s
e
e

y
b
n
u

i
t

y
o
h
g
n
h
n
o
o
d
n

s

f
l
r

U

E
T

’

s
e
a
a
e

t
r
r
t
t
t
i
l
i

s
s
e
a
a
a

d
n
n

m

r
i

s
s

i

n
o

i
l

i

l
r

d
b
d
h
o

f

o

m

e

r

s

-

t

i
t

s

a

e

.

F
 T

r

a

o
p
2
1
n

s

t
r

I

n

r
f

s
a

r
t

u

c

t

u

r

e

M

d
o

e

r

n

i

a
z

i
t

n
o

L

o

a

n

(

Y
 O

)

E
S

M

d
o

e

r

2
n
1

)
i

a
z

i
t

n
o

a

d
n

S

y

s

t

e

m

s

R

e

h

a

b

t
i
l
i

a

i
t

n
o

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

F

Y

 I
t

n
h

t
r

a
e
e

g

r
t

a
s

f
i
t

n
o
o

o

f
t

P

b
o
u

i
l
i
r

c

T
P

o
n

i
r
l

s
e
s
c

t
i

d
n
n
o
u

R

i

s

k

M

g

m

.
t

f

o

r

w

a

e

r

g

i

u

F

 S
 E
T
 E

e

w

e

r

a

g

e

A

s
s
e
c
c

i

n

U

r

u
g
u

a

y

S

t

y
d
u

(

F
T

)

n

e

)
r

y
g

S

c
e

t

o

r

S

r
t

e

g
n

t

h

e

n

i

g
n

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

T

i

m

i

g
n

D
B

n

e

r

y
g

E

i
f
f

c

i

e

n

c

y

G

F
E

(

n
o

-

o
g

i

g
n

)

 R

o

a

d

S

a

f

e

t

y

T

r

u

s

t

F

d
n
u

 I

F

C

r
i
f

n
p
o
n
p
p

a

a
c

i
i
r

g
n

f
r

u
g
o

r

P
P
P

o
n
p
o

r

j

c
e

t

s

p

e

d
n

i

g
n

a

p
p

r

v
o

a

l

o

f

a

t

e

e

l

a

i
t

s

 I

F

C

i
f
r

n
y
g

a
e

n

c
c

i
i
f
f

y
o
n
g
n

f

r

o
o
p
p

j
t

c
e
e

n

i
t
t

a
s

l

r

e

n

e

w

a

b

l

e

e

n

e

r

y
g

a

d
n

e

n

e

i

e

c

r

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
A

x
o
4
n
n
g

e

A

P

a

e

f

6

P

I

L
L

R
A

3

–

A

O
G

R

I

U
C

T
L

R
U

B
E

,

C

L

I

M

A

E
T

C

H

N
A

G

E

,

D
N
A

E

V
N

I

R

O

N

M

E

N

T

C

o
a
o

d
n
S
d
n
n
u

t

r

y

t

r

a

t

e
c

o
g
a

i

r
c

G

l

s

a

I

i

t

s

s
s
I

u

e

s

a

d
n

O

b

s

t

a

c

l

e

s

u

t

c

x
o

m

c
e
e

s

t
t

h

e

a

u
k
n
n

P

r
e
c
r
e

g
o

a

m

E

p

s

t

o

I

f

l

n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a

k
n

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

I

n

s

t

r

u

m

e

n

t

s

1

r
.

m
A

g

c
e
a
a
a
r

i

b
n
n
g
n
n
o
d
n
v
u
o
u
n
b
p
y
o
d
d
c
n

u

i
t
i
l
,

t

u

e
a
e
s
r

C
d
n
a
e

i
l

m

a
E

t

n
a
h
C
e

e
g

 W

i

d

e
c

u
u
n
n
u
n

s

s
s
e
s
r
e
s
c
e
e
e
e
c
r
r
r
c
s
r
e
r

f

u
n
u
p
p
n
p
u
n
n

l

o
a
a
v
g
o
a
a

r

i

t
l
i

a
a

l

o
o
g
g
y
x

r

t

m
m

o

d
b

e
r
e

l

t
f

i

o

f

r

m

i

r

t

o

f

e
s

n
u
n
d

i
t
l

b
n
n

m

i
t

a

l
t
l
l

s
c
e

i
i

a
v
o

l

,

n

e

r

a

t

e

d

a

d
n

i

u

s
e

e

n
u

a

v

l

p

m

t

T

h
u
x
p
v

e
a

a
c
e
e

b
g
u

r
l
i
r
l

a
e
e
s
c
s
a
a
s
a
a
a
e
e

u

t
t
l
f

u

t
l
,
i
l
t
t
i
r
i
i

a

a
c
a
e
s

t
r

o

r

,

i
r

n

r
i
t
t
i
r
l
t

m

y
n
k
y
o
o
n
h
b
d
d
n
d
k
n
n

f
r

m

a
s
e
a
s
e
c
c
e
a
a
e
e

s

r

e

m

a

i

n

r

d
n
n

l

d
v
n
h

e

l

c

s

e

t
i
l

m

t
i
l
i

o
v

s

a
a

r
t

-

s

o
p
x

t
r

m

r

 T

h

e
s
a
a

a

g

i
r

c

u
n
o

t
i
t
l
r
i
t

n
u
g
d
u
b
n
n
o
o
o
o
n
n
o
o
o
b
g
p
n
d

r

a

t
i
i
t
f
i
i
i
l
t
l
,

c
e
s

t

o
h
o
d
n
o

i
r
r
i

e
s
e

u
h
o
o
h
b
n
y

t

e
a
s

m

j

o

r

c

r

t

G

G

E

m

l
i

s
a
e
s
e
s
s
s
e
c
e
a
e
e
c
e
a
a
s
a
a
c

s
c

a

h
g
v
n
u
g

i
l
r

h
p
n
h
u
d
h
v
b

i
l

r

a

m

a
c
a
a
a
c

i
t

a

a

b

t
i
l
i

y

w

i

l
i
t
t
r

t
l
l

i
t

m

n
o

f

r

a

n

a

r

s
e

u
o

r

e
c

m

y

C

p
n
d
o
g
d
u
o
o
n
o
o
u
n
d
n
h
d
o
o
n
p

i
f
t

a
s
e

t
r
f
i

m

d
n
v
o
y
p

s
a
e
e
a
c
c
s
c
a
a
e

t
r

s
s

t
t

i
r
i
f
i

a
e
a

r
l

y

a

t
i
t

s

e

r

c

i
t
l

,

w

t
   I

c
e

i

s
e

d
n

p

t
i

l
i

m

p

l

e
s
e
e
c

m

n
n
o
u
p

t

c
e
e
s
a
s
a

i
t

o
o
n
o
o

t
i
l
f
r

h

e
a

C
N

a
e

i
t

g
n
n
o
h

a

l

P

l
i

a

h
n
n

f

o
g

i
r
r

R

t

C

m

t

a

e

t

e

a

u

t
l

r

l

t

  R

e

d
h
g
u
u
d
o

s
e
c

l

o

s
s

o

f

p

r

u
d
o

c

i
t

v

t
i

y

u
d

e

t

o

d

r

t

p
x
y
p
n

c
s
a
e
s
s
a
e
a
e
c
e
s
e

d
n

o
n
v
o
d

i

f

r
i
r
l
l

m

a

l
t
i
t

n
u
h
o
o
v
g
n

a
e
e

d
v
h
n

t
r
t

c
c
a
s
e
a

g
n
k
k
o
n

i

s
s

t

m

,

e
e

r

i
l

r
i

w

s
a

a

c

i

i

t

g

i
t

n
o

 C

n
v
o
d

s
e

d
p
o
o

i
l

e
a

i
t

d
g
o
o
p
n
o
n

f
r

f
f
i
r

e
s
e

r

n

t

r

u

r

a

l

e

l

m

t

a

m

 R

e

u
o
d
n
o

e
c
a

n
d

G
H
G

e

m

i
t

c
a
s
e
s
s
e

i

n
g
k
o

a
a
c
s

u
y
d
n
u
d

w

a
a
a

t
l

e

r

e
s
c
a
e
c
s

t
t

m
m

i

a
a
e

i
t
i

n
y
o
n

i
)
i
l

v
n

h

i
r
,

t
r
l
i

r

,
i
r
l

l

t

o

,

d
n

i
r

e
c

(

b

n

:

T

D
B

 D

e

g
v
o

s
a
a
e

l

p
o

m

e

n
n
o
o
g
g
o
n
d
d
n
n

t

f

r

e
e

e
a

w

a

b
n
o
u
d
n

l
)
i
r
t

e
e
c
e
a
e
a

n

l
i
t
r
i
l
i

y
g

(
t

b
h

i

a
a

a
c

e

r
i
-

i
t

l
f

s
e
e

a

t

e

f

r

m

r

s

l

v

A
A
N
 A
 G

a

t

u

r

a

l

R

s
e

u
o

r

s
e
c

M

g

m

.
t

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

o
g
n
o

i

g
n

)

n
o

F

a

m

l
i

y

A

g

i
r

c

u

t
l

u

r

e

(

o
g
n
o

i

g
n

)

F
E

B

i

d
o

i

v

e

r

s

t
i

y

C

n
o

e
s

r

v

a

i
t

n
o

(

o
g
n
o

i

g
n

)

 I

n

t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

a

g

i
r

c

u

t
l

u

r

a

l

d

e

v

e

l

p
o

m

e

n

t

l

o

a

n

(

F

Y

2
1

)

A
A
 A

d
n
o
n
n

C

i
l

m

a

t

e

C

h

a

g
n

e

a

d
n

A

g

i
r

c

u

t
l

u

r

e

(

P

l

a

e

)

 M

o
n
g
o
n
o

t

e

d
g
v
n

i

e

o

L

a

d
n

l
l
i
f

G

s
a

R

c
e

v
o

e

r

y

T

r

u

s

t

F

d
n
u

(

i

)

 G

i
r
r

d
u

-
t

C

n
d
n
n
o
u

c
e

t

e

o
d
g
n
o

W

i

d
n
g
n

F

a

r

m

a

t

C

a

r

c
a

o

l

s
e

H

l
l
i

T

s

F

(

i

)

 I

F

C

t
f
i
f

n

a
s
a
c
e
e
z

o
o
p
x
o
p
o
p
u
g
n
d
n
n

s
c
a

i

f

r

e

-
t
r
r

o

i
r

e
a

n

t
-
l
l

a
e

g
d
n
d

a

i
r

n
u
u
d
b

s

i

s
s
e

p

r
i

d
o

j

,

s

t
r

f

s

m

m

e

i

m

-

s

r

m

.

2

.

O

t

e
h

r

E

n

v

i

r

n
o

m

n
e

t

a

l

I

s
s

e
u

s

 D

s
e

o
a
o
o
a
v

e

t
l
l
i

b
p
n

e
e
r
c

l
l

a

d
n
u
d
u
d
n
p
n
p
n

r
e
r

a

m

o

e
r

s

u

t

o

e
c
s
r
s
e
e
e
s
c
c
c

i
i
t

o

n
n

m

o

d
k
d
n
d
d
n
n

s
e
r
r
e

i
f

i

t

y

o

r
e

m
m
m

r

o
v
o
a
a

v

i
i

o

d
p
n

s
e
e
e
s
r

t

l

m

p

i
l
t

a
o
o
x

n

e
c

,

a
a
a

v
o

s

t

a

s
r
e

n

i
t
i

v

p

r

t

m

r

t

 M

a

d
n
n
u
h
g
y
h
n
y
o
u
n
d
o
p
n
p
o
o
o
p
p

t
t
i
i
t
t
t
t

a
e
e

n
n
h
n
b
g
n
n
u
y
g
o
d
n
n
o
o
n
u
g
h
d
n
n
n
n

e

i
r

s
s
e

l
i
f
l
f
i
r
l
,
t

e
s
s
s
a
e
a
a
c
c
e
e
a
e
a
e
c
a
a
s
e

i
r
r
r
t
t
t

e
e

u
o
d
h
n
u
p

s
e
s
s
e
s

a

r

i
i
i
t

e

r
r
l
l

a

a
c
c
e
s

i

i

o

f

c
e
c
a

l
l

a

i
f

i

l

a
c

,

a

w

a

w

r

.

 C

v
n
p
o
n

c
s
e
s
s
e
s
a
s
s
e
c
s
e
e
e
c
c
s
e
e
e
s

t
i
r
i
r
r
r
t
t

l
i
l

n
y
o

o

f

g

f
f
r
r
l
i
l

u
n
d
d
o
p
n
u
o

s

o

f

r
i
i
f

m
m

e
z
a
s
s

(

s

m

a

e
a

m

e

u
n
u
d
o
d
n

i
i
-
r
t

p
o
o

i
l
)

d
n
n

r
r

e

t

i
t
i

s

l

o

a
e

e

p

c

p

r

.

 I

d
p
y
v
o
n
p
p
n

e
s
a
e
c
e
a
a
c
e
a
c
c

r

t

c
e

n
o
n
n
g
o
h
n
u
o
d
v
o
n

i

a
c

l

c
s
e
s
a
a

d
n
p
n
n
n
u
o
d
n

i
f
t

a

e
c
a
a
a
a
s
e
c

l
t
r
i
i
t
l

t
r
i

a

m

S

M

E

d
k
n
n

e

l

r

c

i
t

i

v
n
n

t

m
m

e

i

m

r

e

e

r
i

m

e

t

l

o

.

F
S
 P
E
S

u

s

t

a

)
i

n
2
1

a

b

l

e

I

u
d
n

s

i
r
t

a

l

D

e

v

e

l

p
o

m

e

n

t

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

Y

r

n
g
n
n
o
o
o
v
o
n

m

i
t

C

l
t

a
e
a

o
n

e

r

P

i
l
r

u
n
d
o
p

e
c
c

i
i
t

n
n
o

&

I
I

m

v
o
u
p
d
n

r

i
i
r
t

g
n

r
r
i
t

m

e

l

C

m

a

t

h

e

s

a

l

c
e

(

F
T

)

 O
 C

E
S

p

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

a
s

n

t
i

a

i
t

n
o

s
a

p

c
e

)
t

(

F

Y

2
1

)

a

t
r

n
o
n
b
o
p

F

)
i
l

n

a

n

e
c

,

C

a

r

n
o
b

P

a

t
r

n

e

r

s

h

i

p

F

c
a

t
i
l
i

y

(

e

i
t

a

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

x
o
5
n
n
g

e

A

P

a

e

f

6

P

I
s

B
L
L

R
A

4
a

–

I

n

c

l

u

s

i

o
a

n

&

E

u
q

i

t

y

C

o
a
o

d
n
S
d
n
n
u

t

r

y

t

r

a

t

e
c

o
g
a

i

r
c

G

l

s

a

I

i

t

s

s
s
I

u

e

s

a

d
n

O

b

s

t

a

c

l

e

s

O

u

t

c

x
o

m

c
e
e

t
t

h

e

n
n
u
k
n
n

P

r
e
c
r
e

g
o

m

E

p
p
p
u
S

s

t
t

o

I

f
t

l
i

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a

k
n

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

I

n

s

t

r

u

m

e

n

t

s

1

.

o

r

N

a

o

a

l

P

l

a

n

f

o

r

S

o

c

i

a

l

E

u
q

i

t

y

e
r
e
I
r

m

p

l

c
e
r
e

m
m

e
s

d
n
n
n
d

t
t

o

n
h

o
o
g

i

n

g
a

f

o
o

i

s
e
s
e
e
s
s
e
r
s

c

i
,

t
i
l

p

t

i
t

o
a
v
o
o

y

t

m

w

h

a

v

i
i

w

t

i

n

g

(
t

b
h

e

s

l
l
i
t

h

g
0
a
2

p
h
p

r
e
e
c
r
c
e

t
t
)
t

a
y
o

l

v

e

l

s

a

v
o

e

n

d
n

i

h
n

p

r
e
r

i
t

u
u

l

a
a
y
a

r

e
r

a
a
v
o

s
c

U

u

g
x

p
n

s

t

h

t
t

l
l
i
t

i
l

v

e

i

n

t

e
r

m

e

r
e

y

 E

p
d
g
u
n
o
o
x
o
p
g

i

s

i
t
i
i
r
t

n
g
o
n

t

e
s
c
a
s
a
a
s

i
l
t
i
i
r
l
f

y
g

e

i
t

g
n
h
d
n
x
g
o
y
n
o

c
s
a
a
e
e

c

f
t
t

i

i
t

r
r

s
a

m

r

e
c

t
r

a

i

n

o

f

o

.

 D

a

t

a

b
n
o

e
s
e
a
s

p
n
d
n

i
i
i
f

c
s

i

a
e
s

i
r
r
r
t

s
e
e
s
a

o
v
d

f

s
c
a
e

o
o
n
u

a
s
s
c
s

i

l

p
d

f
f
r
i

g
o

r
r

a
e

m

i

r

e

n

t

d

m

i

i
t

t
i

 E

d
n
g
n
p
g
p
o
o
x
p

a
a
e
a

a
e
s

f
r
t
f
t

e
a
c
e
e

l
i
l
t

v

c
a
e

v
o
b
g

e
e
e
e
e

r

a

v
g
b
o
d
o
p

e
e
e
e

o
n

i
i
.
f
f

P
S

i
t
r
f
i
l

r

m

g
o
o

t

r

r
t

a
e

c

i
i

a

i
r

s
e

,

l

u
x
n

m
m

f

r

m

n

g
n

p

e

l

u
o

f

r
t

e

t
r

y

 L

i

k
n
u
h

i

n
n

a
c
c

p
o

m

a
e

o
o
p
p

r

t
r

c
e

i
t
i
t

o
p
n
o
n
o
o

f
i
f
l

s
e
c
e
c

i

w

t
l
i

h
y

m

a

t
i

l

m

e

i
t

v

e

 E

s
e

t

a
s
c
c
e
e
a

b

i
i
i
t
l
i
f

h

m

s
e
e
a

o
p
o
d
n
n

t

l
l
f
r

a
a

s

i

o
g
n

(
r
l

e
s
a
a
a
c
a
s
e

o
d

i
t
I
I

b

o

f

b
p

n
o

i
r

f

m
m

a
a

j

l

r

t

n
o

g
o

r

s

S

A

S

)

R

e

8
u
0
d
0
2

c

i
t

n
o
b

i
i
l

n
n

e

5
x
1

r
t
.

e

m

e
c
e
e

v
o
p
n

e

t
r

y

r

a

t

e

.

(

e
s
a

e

:

p

r

)
t

F

e
s
e
e
e
a
s
a
a
s

m

l
i
i
l
r
r

y
o
n

a
a

r
l
l
t
:
f

g
0
n
o
8
u
q

w

c
e
e
s
e
c
e
s
e
c
e
a
e

v
o
u
n
o
h
b
d
o
n

i
r
l
i
i
r

n

e
s
a
e
s
s
e
c

r

9
0
d
0
2
n

o
h
o
b
p

t

i
f

a

.
i

(

%

f

o
h

d

t

i

l
i
t

e

T

h
p
o
o

e

I

n
h

t

e

o
g
n
o

r

e
a
a
c
a

t
i
l

d

S

y

e
s
a
s
e

t

m

o

f
I
I

I

n

f
)

o

r
i

m

a

l
l
i
t
f

n
y
o
u

f

r
t

e
a

S

l

A

r

(

S

A

S

s

e

i
t

D

L
P
T
 S
 S

I

(

F

Y

1
1

)

a

d
n

D

L
P

I
I

(

F

Y

2
1

)

o

c

i

a

l
i

T
S

c
e

t

o

r

R
D
B

s
e

u

t
l

s

-

b

e
s
a

d

I

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

L

o

a

n

(

i

m

g
n

)

o

c

i

a

l

P

o

i
l

c

y

A

s
s
e
s
s

m

e

n

t

(

P

l

a

n
n

e

d

)

A
A
 A
 H

n
o

S

o

c

i

a

l

H

u
o

s

i

g
n

P

o

i
l

c

y

(

P

l

a

n
n

e

d

)

u

m

a

n

O

o
p
p

t
r

n
u

t
i

y

I

d
n

e

x

M

n
o

t
i

o

i
r

g
n

(

P

l

a

n
n

e

d

)

 I

B

T

A

L

(

o
g
n
o

i

g
n

)

P
 P

n
n
b
u

i
l

e
c

E

p
x
d

e

d
n

t
i

u

r

e

R

e

v

i

e

w

n
o

S

o

c

i

a

l

S

p

e

d
n

i

g
n

(
 I

l

a

)

D

F

o
n
y
g

r
t

a

t
t

t
t

o
h

L
P

r

o
g
o

m

t
l

e

E
S

u
q
y

t
i

a

o
g
n
o
b

l
(

e

A

s
s
e
c
c

o

f

S

o

c

i

e

e

e

a

s

t

e

m

i

g
n

)

i
 I
f

F

C

e
c
s

o
o
p
p
u
n

l
t
r
r

f

o
o

i
-
r

o
o
n
p

r

j

s
e
c
e

t

e

n
p
u
h
o
n
g

c
s
a

i

g
n

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

n

a

f

w

c

m

r

2

.

p
p
u
S

o

r

t

H

e

a

l

t

S
h

c
e

t

o

r

R

e

f

o

r

m

s

I

m

p
n
p
u
h
d
n
h
p

l

e
r
e

m

e
e
c
e

n

t

h

s
r
s
r
e
r
s
e
e
e
r

a
o

t
l

h

i

s
c

a
v

n
u
h
n
n

f

m

t

v
o
o

a

i

i
t
i
l

v

a
y

i
l
t

c
e

r
e

g
a
a
o
g
o

e

A

a
a
o

i
t

e

a
g
o

n
d
h
u
p

m

i
t

r
c

g

e
c

m

o
y

l

c

l

l
i
f

e

f

o

t

5
 5

%

u
o
o
h

i
t
t
f

n
h

e
s

u
p
n
o
p
u

l

c
a
e
c

i
t

n
v
o
o

r
r

e
a

m

a
e

i
.

n

s

w

t
i

r

a

e

g

 E

o
h
o
n
n
o
h
o
b
g
n
d
u
h
d
n
p
g
n
o
u
k
p
p
o
p
x
o
x
o
h

a
a

s
a
s
e
e
c
c
a

t
t
l

u
v
u
o
n
k
q

a
s

t
(
r
i
r
l

u
d
o
h
d
p
n
y

e
e
a
a
c
e
s
c
e
e
s
a
c
e
e
c

t
l

h
v
o

r

y
b

e

i
t
.
l
)
l
i

i

e
s
a
e
s

r
r
l
t
,

g

t
t

a
a

r
t

e
c
a

r
i

y

r
r

r

m

t

e

r
i
t

e

d

w

e

r

s

 I

d
n
n
u

c

r

e
s
a
s
e
s
e
e
a
e

h
o
v
o
d
o
o
y

s

a

r

e

n
o
p
y
n
h
b
g
o
p
u
p
y

f

a
s
e
s
a
c

o
n
g
y
d

i
i
r

a
e
c
a
a

e
s
s
e
e

d

a

d
n

r

f
f
t
i

l
r
l
/

w
H

i
r
i

m

r
t

t

m

e
e

t
i
r

e

s

,

D

b

a

d
n

O

b

e

r

w

t

S

b
v
o
u
h

a
e
e
s
e
s
a
a

t

6
0
0
2
d
b
n
n
n
h

i
t

a
e
e
a

l
l
t

y

i

0
n
5
n

c

r

e
s
a
e
a

y
9
d
6
g
d
o
n

e
s
a
a
s
e

h

r

o
2
g
1
0
2
o

f

w

m

w

e
e
a

r

f

a

e

m

a

m
%
m

r

a

m

y
b

.

(

B

i
l

:

5
2

)

S

i
f

n
n
n
g
o

i
f
i

a
c

y
n
b
n
n
u
o
n
d
b
n
o

r
t

i

c

r

e
s
a
e

i

n
d
y

t

b
o
n
0
p
o
o
6
0
0
2
h
b
d
n

e

p

:
i
r
t
i
t
i
l
t
i

i
i
t
r

n
g
d
o
n
n

o

e

w

s

w

t
i

h

i

e
e
a
s

s
e
c
e

a
e

m

t
i
t

r

e
e

e
s
a
a
e

l
r

r
t

a
e

m

t

t
i

s

.

(

B

i
l

%

)

S

r
i
f

n
u
d
n
p
o
n
p
n
g

i
f
i

a
c

i
i
t
t
i
l

6
n
n
0
o
0
n
2

c

r

e
s
s
a
a
a
e
e

i

n

t

h

e
s
e
e

b
o
p
o
k
p
p

r
i
r

i
i
t
r

n
g
o
n
n

o

a

t

D
C
N

a
s
e

e
e

e
e
s
e
a
c
s

e

a

t

l
:

)
t

t

h

r

d

t
r

m

t

s

(

B

i
l

e

0

%

O
 H

a
e

t
l

g
n
h
o
g
n

R

e

f
)

o

r

m

A

s
s
e
s
s

m

e

n

t

(

A
A
A

)

(

i

T
 S

o

c

i

a

l
i

T
S

c
e

t

o

r

R
D
B

s
e

u

t
l

s

-

b

e
s
a

d

I

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

L

o

a

n

(

i

m

g
n

)

 N

o
n
g
o
n
o

C

g
o
n

m
m

n
u

i

a
c

b

l

e

D

i

s
e
s
a
e
s

P

r

e

v

e

n

i
t

n
o

P

r

o

j

c
e

t

(

i

)

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
A

x
o
6
n
n
g

e

A

P

a

e

f

6

P

I
s

B
L
L

R
A

4
a

–

I

n

c

l

u

s

i

o
a

n

&

E

u
q

i

t

y

C

o
a
o

d
n
S
d
n
n
u

t

r

y

t

r

a

t

e
c

o
g
a

i

r
c

G

l

s

a

I

i

t

s

s
s
I

u

e

s

a

d
n

O

b

s

t

a

c

l

e

s

O

u

t

c

x
o

m

c
e
e

t
t

h

e

u
k
n
n

P

r
e
c
r
e

g
o

m

E

p

s

t

o

I

f

l

n

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

B

a

k
n

P

r

g
o

r

a

m

I

n

s

t

r

u

m

e

n

t

s

3

.

E

u
d

c

a

t

i

n
o

 E

h
p
n
u
q
d

o
g
a
a
y
o
a
y
a
v
a
a

n

e
c

s
c
s
e
c
c
e

i
t
t

a
o
o

d
n
n

t
i
i
l

f
l
l

u
d

a

,

c
e
s
s
e

f

r
e

i
  R

a

d

n

t

d

g

r

o

p
u

s

e
c
s
c
e
e

u
d

t

h

e
c
e
s

d
h
n
d
n
h

i

y
g
y
a
g
o

r

o

p

-

o

u

t

r
r
e

a

t

i
t
i

n

o
o
a

r

p
u
u
d

a

o
o

n

m

p

o
o

r
e
r

g

o

s

f

s

c

i

e

t

H

f
f
i
i
t

h
g

o
d
d
b
n
o
u
n
d
p
o
o
o
y
o
p
n
y
u
h
u
o
o
o
n
g
d
n
d
u
o
n
o
d
o
u
o
d

r

-

u
n
o

t

r

a
e

f
t
r
f
i

s
e

e
a
e

n
g
o
n
n
8
0
g
0
n
b
d
p
2
n
d
4
n
u
d
2
n
n
o
n
k
n
g
o
k
n
o

i
t

m
m

n
g
n
o
o
p

t
r

s
a

t
t

s
e
c
s
a
c
e
e
e
e

r

i

n
b
d

o

r
l

m

a

e
s
c
c
e
e
s
s
s

t

r
f

m
m

e
c
a
e
a
c
c

t
r
l
f

i

i

s

t
i
i
r

r

e
s
a
c
s

i
t
l

,

a
e

i

t

u
h
o
o

i
r
f
r

r

m

e
c
e
e

t

f

U

a

a
a

l

e
c
s
e

t
i

s

t

l

w

o

r

.

D

i
l
f
i
f
i

s
c
a
a
a
c
a

u
n
o
d
h
y
u
b
n
n
n
o
u
b

r
i
t
l
l
i
i
l
i
t
t
l
r
i
t
t
l
l
f

s
s
e
a
c
e
e
s
s
s
e
s
e
s
e

i

r
r
t

n

r
i
t
f

d
o
g
n
n
p
n
v
n
o
o
n

t
r

m

i

g
n

e
s
s
e
a
e
e
a
e
c

u
u
v
d

h

e
a
s

t

m

i
l

,
i
t

s

f

c
a

t
i

y
h
o
h
o

r

r

t

d
n
n

t

a
e
c
a

i

w

c

p
y
o
u
n
q
u
v
o
n
h
d

s
e
e

a
s
s
e
e

i
i
t
r

o

m

e
s
s
a
e
e
s
e
e

r
t
l

t
f

a
e

t

m

l
i

l
r
r

m

n
n

d
n
u

p

a

h

i

h
g

i

i

t
l

s

.

r
i
f
f
I

n

a
s
c
e
s
a
e
e
c
c

i
r
i

n
n
y
y

e

u
n
q
v
o
o
y
p
u
u
q
h
d

t
i

,

a
s

t
i
l
i

d
p
n
o
y
n
y
o
b

a

e
a

i
r
i

n

t

a
c
e

i
t
r

i

f

r

c
s
e

o
o
h

l

d
n

p

m

e

:



F

p
n
v
g
y
o
d
y
n
u
n
n
o
d
p
h
x
o
o
o
d
d
n
p
n
u
o
u
o
d
n
n
n
g
y
k
n
d
u
p
o
u
u
d
x
b

l
l

i
i
t

m

f
l
t

e

m

e

r
i
t

-
f
t
-
-
r
r
r

e
a
a
e
e

s
s
c
s

d
n
o
o
h
d
d
o
o
n
o

l

e
e

a
c
a

r
t

r
f

l
l

a

t
i

a
s
e
s
e
a

.



C

i
t

e
s

e

i

S
T
F

f

o

r

c
a
s

t

e

t
r

r
f

m

i

a

a

g

e

d

s

C
A

n
y
d
o
o
n
d
o
y
o
n
b
d
o
o
d
n
d
u
o
u
u
d
u
q
n

i
t
i

s
e
a
e
e
c

t
i
l

h
h
n
u
o
u
o
o
n
o
g
y
y
g
n
o
b
o
y
h
y
u
p
d
h
u
n
y
n

t
i
r
t
f

h

e

F

a

m

l
i

u
o
h
y
n
h
o
n
o
o
d
g
u
h
n
n
n
o

l
l

w

a
a

r

a

m

e
a
s
c
s
e
e
e
c
c
c
c
s

i
t

h
y
d
y
u
d
b
n
u
n

e

a
c
e
a
e
s
e
s

r
i
f
r
r
i
t

a
c

i

s

f
l
r
i
f
i
t
t

l
l

t
f
t
i
l

f
i
t
t

t
i
f
t
t
f

w

r
-
f

e
e
e
c
s

e

e

s
a
a

s
a

l

e

s
e
s

t

i
r

i
t

t

m

e
a
c

o
n
o

i

e

t

m

.

R

c
e
a
e

9
0
0
g
p
2
n
n
h

(
i
t

e
s
e
c
a
a

n

o
n
n

r
i

l

m

e

n

i
t

o

f

o
0
o
0
h
0
0
7
0
4
6
7
3

,

s

t
(

d
u

l

F

n
u

:
l
l

T

m

e

S

c

l

s

S
T
F

)

B

e
s
a

i
l

e

,

)

D

c
e

i
r
r

e
s
a
e
e
a
s
c
a
e
e
e

i

n
y

r
r
f

e

p
p
n
o
5
1

e

i
t
i
t

n
p
o
2
p
2

r
i
r
i
t
t
i
t

e
e
a
c

t

t
i
i
t
r

d
6
n
g
0
2
0
n
2
1
n
n

s

t

r

a

d

e

d
p
d
d
n
o
g

f

m

r
r
r
f

m

e

6
0
0
n
2
n
n
o

a

i

r
r

e
e
c
e
e

a

e

i
.

r

a

o

m

n

r
I
l
f

m

d
p
n
g
2
g
v
o
5
o
u
u
6
p
g
g
0
n
o
n
u
0
q
2

r

e
e

a
c
a
a
e
a
a
s
e

d
d
n

e
a
a
a
e
e

m
m

i

a
c
a
c
e

h

i
i
t

e
s
e
c
e
c
c
e
e

v

m

e

n
g
h
o
n
n
y
6
n
n
y
v

t

r
i

a

a

t

d
d
h
n
h

m

i
l
r
t
i
t

t
t
i
l

a

d

e

m

r

e
s
c

n

t
r
t

p
2
o
3

p

e
c

f

s
e

i
t

d
n
n

w

s
c
e

r
r

l

a

a

m

r

e

i

n

.

T
 T
P
 S

o
h

r
j
i

d

B

s
a

i

c

E

n
o
u
d
d
d

a
a
c

i
l
t

n
n
o

Q

u
n

a
c

t
i
l
i

y
g
n

I
(

m

g
v
n
o
o
g
p
n
o

r

e

m

e

n

t

r

c
e

t

+

A

i
t
i

F

i

a

i

)

o

c

i

a

l
i

T
S

c
e

t

o

r

S

W

A

P

(

i

m

g
n

D
B

)

O
R
A
Y
 U

/

n

e

L

a

p

t

p
o

p

e

r

C

h

l
i

d

A
A
A

(

P

l

a

n
n

e

d

)

   P

r

o
o

m
m

o
p

i
t
i
i
t
t

v
g
n

I

v
o
n
n
n

a
s
s
e

i
r
t

n
o
o

t
t

o

E

g
n
n
o
g
h
n
n
o

a

e
c

C

e

e

P

j

c
e

(

i

)

 P

o
o
o
v

t

e
a
c

n
o
o
n
n

i
t
i
t
i
-

a
a

l

I
l

F

C

i
f

n

a
e
a
c

g
n
n
n
o
n
n

c

i

r
t
i
t
f

u
o

i
t
t

c
e

n
h
n
o

i

a
c

l
t
i

a
a

o
d
n

s
e
e

d
u
u
d

i
t

i

s

s

w

h

f

c

u

s

n
o

l

w

c

m

t

t

s

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
URUGUAY: CAS COMPLETION REPORT 

Annex B 
Page 1 of 27 

June 25, 2010 

Date of CAS: 
Date of Progress Report:  

May 10, 2005 
March 3, 2008 

Summary 

Report No. 31804-UY 
Report No. 42789-UY 

This document evaluates country developments in Uruguay and the respective contributions of the Government and the 
Bank during the period of the FY05-FY10 CAS, approved on June 1, 2005. 

When the 2005 CAS was prepared, Uruguay was in the midst of a dual transition. On the one hand, Uruguay was still 
recovering from the economic and social consequences of the 2002 crisis and the Government had shifted its priorities from 
crisis response towards equitable and sustainable development. On the other hand, Uruguay was facing a political transition, 
as the victory of the Frente Amplio coalition in October 2004 ended 170 years of dominance by the two traditional parties - 
the Partido Colorado and the Partido Nacional- in Uruguayan politics.  

The CAS was aimed at supporting the Government in addressing its main challenges of:  

 Reducing Vulnerability 
 
Sustaining Growth 
 
Improving Living Standards. 

The Bank program was broadly organized around these main challenges and anchored around a series of programmatic 
development policy loans (DPLs) supporting reforms in the key areas of public sector management, financial sector reform 
and reform of social programs.  

Over the two years following the approval of the 2005 CAS, there were important and positive economic developments. Not 
only had Uruguay recovered from the 2002 crisis, but economic growth and fiscal outcomes had largely outperformed those 
projected in the 2005 CAS. In addition, the policies pursued by the new administration had a positive impact on social 
indicators, and, as of mid-2006, unemployment and poverty exhibited a declining trend.  On the political front, the Frente 
Amplio coalition had largely delivered on its economic program and enjoyed a relatively high level of support.   

Against this positive background, the CAS Progress Report prepared in March 2007, more than half-way through the CAS 
period, confirmed the general thrust of the 2005 CAS and concluded that the Bank program had achieved substantial success 
over the past two years.  During the period from 2005-2007, the Bank portfolio had also undergone a comprehensive 
renovation, with projects approved in the mid-1990s gradually exiting the portfolio and being replaced by more diversified 
operations. The Bank had also increased its presence on the ground with the opening of an office in Montevideo, which 
facilitated CAS implementation.   

About half of the original CAS envelope of $800 million (or $395 million), had been committed at the time of the CAS 
Progress Report, which included the possibility of increasing the CAS envelope by an additional $60 million to enable the 
Bank to incorporate into the program a possible DPL with a DDO feature of $300 million (to replace the PRI DPL II and 
PRIDPL III envisaged in the 2005 CAS). This amount was later increased to $400 million at the request of the Government 
and the PRI DPLII was approved (in January 2009) as precautionary financing in the midst of the global financial crisis that 
started in early 2008.  Despite the increase, lending remained within the CAS envelope, as planned investment lending for an 
equivalent amount was postponed to accommodate the increase in the PRI DPLII amount.  

This CAS Completion Report concludes that the Bank strategy as outlined in the 2005 CAS was appropriate and successful 
in assisting the Government achieve a strong recovery from the 2002 crisis and in making important strides in the 
implementation of key reforms.  The Bank decision in the 2007 CAS Progress Report to slightly increase the CAS envelope 
and postpone selected investment lending in order to provide contingent financing was also timely and appropriate, and the 
PRIDPL II provided Uruguay with a risk management tool in the event of a public sector financing shortfall and interrupted 
market borrowing.  This bolstered the Government’s confidence in times of crisis.  Finally, the substantial renovation of the 
portfolio and increased Bank presence on the ground during the CAS period resulted in greater relevance and enhanced 
impact of the Bank’s work, including both lending and analytical services. In turn, the renewed and increased Bank 
engagement helped the Government to keep sight of its long-term development goals despite its preoccupation with 
mitigating the impact of the global financial crisis.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex B 
Page 2 of 27 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
The 2005 CAS was prepared at a time when Uruguay was undergoing a political and 
economic transition. On the political front, the victory of the Frente Amplio (FA) Coalition in the 
October 2004 presidential election ended 170 years of dominance by the two traditional parties – 
the Partido Colorado and the Partido Nacional- in Uruguayan politics.  Moreover, the sharp 
recession that hit Uruguay in 1998-1999 and the crisis that followed in 2001-2002, coupled with 
rising poverty levels and limited scope for renewal within the ruling party, were determining 
factors behind the FA victory in the 2004 elections.  

2. 
On the economic front, Uruguay was undergoing a transition, away from the crisis 
management practices that characterized the period FY03-FY04, when the economic situation 
deteriorated rapidly following Argentina’s default on its public debt and the Bank deemed 
appropriate, through the 2002 CAS Progress Report, to propose adjustment lending as the 
preferred instrument to support Uruguay during the crisis period. At the time the 2005 CAS was 
prepared, Uruguay had already bounced back from the crisis and, starting in mid-2003, was 
enjoying a strong recovery, which resulted in GDP growth rates of 12.3 percent in 2004 and in a 
primary surplus to the public sector of 3.8 percent of GDP in 2004 (a major turnaround, given a 
primary fiscal deficit of 1.5 percent of GDP in 2001). The 2005 CAS was therefore developed 
with the objective of assisting the Government in sustaining the economic recovery process and 
placing the new authorities on a path of equitable and sustainable development while 
implementing an agenda of post-crisis structural reforms.  

II. 

LONG-TERM STRATEGIC GOALS 

The Government’s Program 

3. 
President Vázquez began his presidency on March 1, 2005 enjoying broad support both 
domestically and internationally. The economic environment was benign, Uruguay’s recovery 
from the crisis had been robust and the outlook for the future was favorable, despite the existence 
of important risks. The political transition was smooth, given the consensual nature of Uruguay’s 
political system and the openness of its society. Upon assuming office, the FA administration 
reached agreement with the two traditional parties and the independents on an overall framework 
for the conduct of economic and foreign policy. An “Inter-Party Agreement” was signed shortly 
before the new administration took office, committing all political parties to honor the outcome 
of the 2003 debt renegotiations, which successfully brought the country’s debt servicing 
obligations in line with its post-crisis payment capacity through a sovereign debt exchange. The 
fact that a multi-party agreement could be reached so early in the new administration was a good 
omen for future stability and political continuity.  

4. 
While the FA embraced an agenda for change, Tabaré Vázquez’s electoral document “El 
Gobierno de Cambio- La Transición Responsable”, which enunciated the new Government’s 
program, suggested broad continuity in the economic policies of the past.  It also confirmed the 
central role of the state in certain strategic economic sectors (i.e. water, petroleum and 
telecommunications) and aimed to improve the climate for private sector investment.  The 
document proposed a new national strategy articulated along six key complementary themes: 
enhancing productivity (Uruguay Productivo), fostering social development (Uruguay Social), 

 
Annex B 
Page 3 of 27 

promoting innovation (Uruguay Innovador), strengthening democracy (Uruguay Democrático), 
enhancing regional and global integration (Uruguay Integrado), and promoting policies which 
consolidate and promote Uruguayan culture (Uruguay Cultural).  

5. 
Attaining high, equitable and sustainable economic growth was a top priority of the 
Government’s agenda. Under Uruguay Productivo, growth was to be attained trough the 
implementation of both structural changes and short-term economic policies.  Structural changes 
included transforming the financial sector, developing the capital markets and de-dollarizing the 
economy. Reforms also called for improving professionalism in the civil service, enhancing 
transparency in the conduct of state functions, and decentralizing management.  

6. 
Fostering social participation and increasing inclusion was the most distinct and 
overarching goal of the new Government’s program. As such, one of the first actions of the new 
administration was the creation of a new social emergency program called PANES (Plan de 
Asistencia Nacional a la Emergencia Social), which aimed at attending to the needs of those 
below the extreme poverty line, or at high risk of falling below it, through a set of eight 
coordinated programs in the following areas:  basic food, health emergency, minimum income, 
education for critical areas, workfare, two housing programs, and homelessness. While several of 
these programs had been tried before without much success, the PANES attempted to overcome 
obstacles in the effective delivery of these programs using the structure of existing institutions 
and volunteers. The new administration also placed education high on its agenda, including a 
promise to increase funding to improve system equity and relevance to the needs of the labor 
market. In health, the objective of the new administration was to create a more harmonized 
system through the introduction of a national health insurance providing a more equitable access 
to services and improved quality of care. 

7. 
In the innovation area (Uruguay Innovador), the new administration sought to promote 
scientific and technological progress to overcome what was perceived to be a period of creative 
stagnation.  This was to be achieved, among others, through the creation of a National System of 
Innovation, the drafting of a strategic innovation plan and by reorienting the education system 
towards scientific and technological applied research with strong links to the productive sector. 
Uruguay Democrático emphasized the need to introduce greater transparency and efficiency in 
Government, while Uruguay Integrado called for strengthening relations with Mercosur and for 
a better integration of Uruguay with the rest of the world economy. Finally, Uruguay Cultural 
emphasized the need to instill a culture promoting diversity as the basis for social inclusion and 
the creation of a cultural identity.  

8. 
When the new administration took office, there appeared to be a broad consensus within 
the Frente Amplio on the above strategy and the economic team enjoyed a high degree of respect 
and broad support. The new administration had also proactively sought dialogue with the 
International Financial Institutions (IFIs) and elicited their active support in implementing its 
development agenda.  

The Bank’s Program of Support 
9. 
The Bank’s program for FY05-FY10 proposed a menu of lending and non-lending 
services in support of the Government’s program “El Gobierno de Cambio- La Transición 

 
Annex B 
Page 4 of 27 

Responsable”. In particular, the Bank aimed at assisting the Government in achieving the 
underlying objective of its program, namely the attainment of equitable and sustainable 
economic development. The Bank’s assessment was that, in order to meet this overarching 
objective, the Government needed to face important challenges in three areas: i) reducing 
vulnerabilities; ii) sustaining growth and iii) improving living standards. The Bank’s program 
was therefore organized around these three key challenges. Moreover, an overarching goal of the 
Bank’s program was to support the Government’s objective of reducing inequality and 
increasing social inclusion. 

10. 
The program included a number of interventions in areas were support was requested by 
the authorities. These areas included tax reform, financial sector and capital market development, 
health and education, innovation, infrastructure and public services, natural resources 
management and state modernization.  The proposed areas of support were carefully selected on 
the basis of the outcome of an extensive CAS consultation process, the findings of core 
analytical work undertaken in the previous years and a review of past successes and failures, as 
identified by the Completion Report of the FY00-FY05 CAS. The Bank program included 
support in each of these areas through a combination of investment lending, technical assistance 
and development policy lending.  

11. 
The Program was anchored around several development policy loans (DPLs) supporting 
reforms in the key areas of public sector management, financial sector reforms, and reform of 
social programs.  These included a first DPL in the social sectors that was presented to the Board 
together with the CAS, and three additional programmatic development policy loans in FY06-08. 
These new DPLs replaced the policy lending operations prepared during the 2002 crisis, when 
the Bank had to resort to emergency lending instruments to satisfy Uruguay’s urgent financial 
needs. Indeed, a combination of SALs and Special SALs (SSALs) were approved during the 
crisis to enable the Bank to contribute its share of a US$3.8 billion package of support from the 
IADB, the IMF and the Bank.  However, the compressed repayment schedule of the SSALs 
contributed to a hump in debt service repayments in 2006 and 2007. Hence, at the time of the 
FY05-FY10 CAS, and in order to correct and smooth the debt service profile, the Government 
agreed with the Bank to disburse the second and third tranche of SAL II after modification of 
two outstanding conditions and to cancel the outstanding second and third tranche of SSAL II, 
which paved the way to the new DPL series.  

III. COUNTRY AND CAS OUTCOMES 
12. 
The 2005 CAS was results based.  The CAS Program Matrix specified country 
development objectives and outcomes as well as specific CAS outcomes and milestones.  The 
2007 CAS Progress Report also included a CAS Results Matrix which evaluated progress in 
relation to specific CAS Outcomes.  The CAS Results Matrix provided in Attachment 1 to this 
Completion Report reproduces the country and CAS specific goals identified in the CAS and 
CAS Progress Report with additional data on outcomes.  A conclusion emerges that the 2005 
CAS was generally successful in meeting its targets.  

PILLAR 1: REDUCING VULNERABILITY 
13. 
There has been good progress over the CAS period in reducing vulnerabilities thanks to 
considerable progress in macroeconomic stability, the success of the Government’s debt and 

 
Annex B 
Page 5 of 27 

fiscal management policies, greater exchange rate flexibility, rising international reserves, and 
improvements in the banking system.  All of the above has contributed to making Uruguay less 
vulnerable to shocks than in 2002. Despite this progress, vulnerabilities remain, particularly 
linked to the high dollarization of the economy, a high concentration of exports in agricultural 
primary products, and the impact that regional conditions have on Uruguay’s small and open 
economy.  

Country Outcomes 

14. 
Country development goals identified in the 2006 CAS were largely attained. The 
Government’s debt management policies have achieved considerable success, as the Government 
has managed to re-profile its debt and refinance expensive emergency financing. The public debt 
burden, one of the major economic vulnerabilities, has fallen as a share of GDP since the crisis in 
2002. Total gross public debt fell from 101.0 percent of GDP in 2003 to 57.0 percent by mid-
2009.  The net public sector debt also declined from US$9,662 million (40.3 percent of GDP) to 
US$8,254 million in 2008 (26.5 percent of GDP), a level similar to the one prior to the 2001-
2002 financial crisis. As a consequence of the large multilateral disbursements that occurred in 
the context of the international crisis, total gross public debt grew to 69 percent of GDP and net 
public sector debt went up to 35.3 percent of GDP in 2009.  

15. 
The Government has also gradually increased the peso share of debt by issuing US dollar 
and 
inflation 
indexed peso-denominated debt 
in domestic and 
international markets. 
Nevertheless, dollarization remains as a source of vulnerability as the share of foreign currency-
denominated debt is still substantially high (65.1 percent in 2009).  

16. 
In January 2009, Moody’s increased the rating of Uruguayan government bonds from B1 
to Ba3, to reflect the improvements made by the country in terms of its debt profile.  Sovereign 
debt is now rated three steps below investment grade (Uruguay lost investment grade rating in 
2002, largely because of the high level of indebtedness resulting from the crisis).  

17. 
The primary fiscal balance improved from a position of a large deficit of -2.2 percent of 
GDP in 2004 to a peak primary fiscal surplus of 1.4 percent of GDP in 2008. The exchange rate 
is not misaligned and remains close to its real equilibrium value. A flexible exchange rate regime 
was adopted in mid-2002. Initially, the peso depreciated substantially, but then followed an 
appreciating trend through 2008. In late 2008, the peso depreciated by over 25 percent vis-à-vis 
the U.S. dollar, but after the economy started to recover, it appreciated by roughly the same 
amount.  Interestingly, those fluctuations of the exchange rate had almost no impact on the 
economy, showing that it performed its shock-absorber function as expected.  

18. 
The position of international reserves has also strengthened. International reserves 
increased sharply during 2007-2008 with booming commodity prices and favorable international 
conditions. Reserves, which by end-2009 were US$8.1 billion, are expected to keep growing in 
the future, albeit at a declining pace due to the slowdown in international capital flows. 

19. 
The banking sector has also recovered from the severe crisis of 2002, and noticeable 
improvements have been made from the prudential and profitability standpoints. The financial 
sector law adopted in 2008 includes a substantially improved bank resolution framework. The 

 
Annex B 
Page 6 of 27 

new deposit insurance agency foreseen in the law was formally established recently and a law on 
capital market reform aimed at improving the legal framework in the areas of security 
registration was passed by the Lower House. Further, the restructuring of the BHU has 
progressed and its recapitalization is about to be completed.  

CAS Outcomes 
20. 
CAS outcomes outlined both in the 2005 CAS and in the 2008 CAS Progress Report 
were also broadly achieved. Dialogue between the Bank and the authorities on debt policy was 
intense and of high quality. The Bank assisted the Government in meeting its debt service 
obligations, particularly in 2006-2007, when amortizations were heavy, through development 
policy lending supporting the Government in key policy areas. The first DPL (SPDPL) for 
US$75 million was approved by the Board together with the CAS on June 9, 2005. It supported 
reforms in social policies as well as important measures taken by the Government with respect to 
health, education and social protection. A subsequent DPL, the First Programmatic Reform 
Implementation Development Policy Loan (PRIDPL 1) in the amount of US$100 million, was 
approved in May 2007. This operation supported the Government’s reform program in taxation, 
business environment, and capital markets development, and aimed at improving the social 
protection system. The loan was disbursed in local currency in May 2008, as the World Bank 
became the first foreign issuer to launch a public bond in (inflation indexed) Uruguayan pesos. 
This was the first time ever that the World Bank issued a local currency bond for the purpose of 
a back-to-back disbursement of a specific loan. A second PRIDPL in the amount of $400 million 
was approved on 3 February 2009 and was fully disbursed. This operation continued the support 
provided under PRIDPL1 for the implementation of key reforms and built on the achievements 
of the SPDPL. The tax reform supported by PRIDPLI and II became the cornerstone of the 
Government’s tax administration and tax policy reform. Moreover, the measures identified in 
these two operations to improve the business climate and promote the capital market were 
aligned with the financial sector and capital market reform goals set out in the CAS.  In the 
financial sector, the Bank also provided support to the authorities through PRIDPLII in 
modernizing the legal framework for bankruptcy to provide for efficient and timely resolution of 
problem enterprises, thereby contributing to the CAS outcome in this area.  

PILLAR 2: SUSTAINING GROWTH 
21. 
During the CAS period, the Government focused on improving the business climate, 
promoting competitiveness, improving infrastructure and developing the capital markets as a 
means to spur and sustain economic growth. The Vázquez administration also focused on 
achieving greater integration of Uruguay into the world economy through trade expansion 
beyond Mercosur and trade diversification. Enhancing competitiveness was another important 
aspect of the Government’s strategy to sustain growth.  

Country Outcomes 
22. 
Country goals in terms of trade policies were successfully achieved. Supported by a 
sound macroeconomic framework, one of Uruguay’s most notable achievements has been the 
increase in investment levels, which have continued to recover since the 2002 crisis. Total gross 
capital formation increased by almost 10 percentage points, from 13.1 percent of GDP in 2002 to 
22.1 percent of GDP in 2008. During 2009, faced with a contraction in global demand due to the 

 
Annex B 
Page 7 of 27 

global financial crisis, Uruguay’ s new fiscal policy included raising public investment from 3.2 
percent in 2008 to 3.4 percent of GDP in 2009. Besides the increase in investment, and to cope 
with the negative impact of the international crisis, the government also implemented a series of 
measures to help exporters and facilitate access to credit, particularly for those industries hit by 
the global slowdown, such as textiles and dairy.  The country’s strong export performance has 
contributed substantially to economic growth during the CAS period. Annual export growth was 
on average 13.5 percent over 2004-2008.  Export markets also became more diversified, as the 
share of exports going to Argentina and Brazil, the two traditional and largest partners, have 
halved, giving way to substantial growth in exports to non-traditional markets, such as the 
European Union, Russia and China. The trade and investment framework agreement signed in 
2007 with the United States provides the setting for discussion of trade issues of mutual interest. 
Further, FDI increased considerably over the period, with FDI inflows reaching 5.7 percent of 
GDP in 2008, up from 2.4 percent of GDP in 2004.  Pulp mills comprised a major source of FDI 
in recent years and the completion of the Botnia plant gave a further boost to exports in 2008.   

23. 
In the infrastructure sector, results were mixed in terms of meeting country goals. In the 
water sector, good results were achieved in terms of improving the efficiency and effectiveness 
of OSE and increasing treated water pumping capacity in Montevideo. Further, the creation of 
DINASA (a policy setting directorate with the Ministry of Housing) in 2006 strengthened 
capacity to define policy in the water sector. On the negative side, progress in terms of reducing 
unaccounted for water was slower than expected. In the electricity sector, conditions in the 
regional electricity markets and supply security concerns have made it less urgent to unbundle 
UTE (the public electricity monopoly) and introduce greater private investment in generation. 
Similarly, efforts to open the water sector to greater competition suffered a reverse following a 
2004 constitutional referendum which banned private participation in the sector. In transport, 
Bank support has contributed to improvements in road maintenance to the point where Uruguay 
today has a far higher percentage of national paved roads in good condition than other countries 
of comparable income in Latin America. In agriculture and natural resource management, 
Uruguay has played a key role in enhancing regional collaboration to address food safety and 
quality. Implementation of the state modernization agenda has proceeded satisfactorily, with the 
exception of reforms in the customs area, where progress has stalled. Country goals in the 
innovation area were largely achieved, with the newly created (2007) National Innovation 
Agency already playing a key role in stimulating innovation for competitiveness and 
employment creation.  

CAS Outcomes  
24. 
The Bank has long had an active involvement in the infrastructure sector, particularly in 
the water supply and sanitation area. A major CAS outcome in this area was institutional 
improvements in OSE (the public water monopoly), where progress initially lagged behind 
expectations, mainly because of lack of support by OSE leadership for sector modernization. 
However, substantial progress has been made on the institutional side under the Frente Amplio 
administration, in the context of the implementation of APL2. Improvements in corporate 
governance of OSE were also particularly noteworthy, with the appointment of a new and 
capable OSE director and a substantial de-politicization of OSE’s Board.  Another key milestone 
in the water and electricity sectors was the introduction of yardstick competition.  This milestone 
has been achieved as a program to monitor and reduce losses for unaccounted water is underway, 

 
Annex B 
Page 8 of 27 

with the creation of a well functioning UFW (Unaccounted – for – Water) unit within OSE. The 
Bank continues to assist OSE in improving UFW under APL2.   

25. 
In agriculture, the Bank has been instrumental in assisting the Government in its fight 
against foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) (Bank assistance was provided in the form of a loan and a 
complementary grant for regional animal health issues) and overall, major strides were made in 
the prevention of animal disease, thereby enhancing Uruguay’s image as an exporter of beef 
products to standard-sensitive markets. The signing of a regional agreement on FMD, a key CAS 
outcome in the agriculture area, has been achieved. Another important milestone, the 
introduction of a structured rural extension service for small farmers, however, has not been met, 
as most support for small farmers is being provided under individual projects (including the 
Bank’s Natural Resource Management Project, which aims at supporting the adoption of sound 
environmental practices in the rural areas). The Bank is providing support to the authorities in 
meeting this CAS outcome and is currently providing support to the Ministry of Agriculture (in 
the form of a AAA) to develop a strategy to improve provision of services, including extension 
services for family farmers.  

26. 
In the innovation area, the main CAS outcome of establishing a national innovation 
policy has been achieved. Similarly, other important milestones such as an increase in the 
number of researchers in industry and an increase in the number of patents have been met.  
However, available data related to other milestones points to a deterioration of indicators in 
recent years. In the case of the milestone measuring increases in private sector R&D investments, 
available data shows that while in 2000 39% of total investments came from the private sector, 
the private sector’s share of investments in R&D shrank to 24.6% in 2008. Similarly, available 
data for the milestone related to the establishment of new business lines indicates that, while in 
2000-2003 36% of firms in the manufacturing sector carried out innovative activities, in 2004- 
2006 this percentage had dropped to 28%.  Despite these preliminary findings, available data is 
insufficient to determine with certainty the lack of achievement of the CAS outcomes.  

PILLAR 3: IMPROVING LIVING STANDARDS 

27. 
Improving living standards was the third pillar of the CAS and an area where the 
Government is likely to face challenges over the coming years. Further, reducing inequality and 
social inclusion was an overarching goal in the Government’s program. While social indicators 
have recovered considerably since the 2002 crisis, progress has been slow and much more needs 
to be done in the future.  

Country Outcomes 
28. 
The Government has been partially successful in meeting country goals in poverty 
alleviation and social protection.  Uruguay managed to reverse the increasing trend in poverty 
observed up to 2004. Since 2005, the poverty figures began to decrease mainly due to two 
factors: high GDP growth and public policies oriented to poverty alleviation (Plan de Atención 
Nacional a la Emergencia  Social -PANES; Ingreso Ciudadano; Plan de Equidad). The share of 
people living in moderate poverty decreased by 10 percentage points (using the 2002 
methodology) between 2005 and 2008 (from 30% to 20%), accounting for about 400,000 

 
Annex B 
Page 9 of 27 

Uruguayans moving out of poverty. It must be emphasized that child poverty fell substantially in 
the period, especially in the group 0-5 years, from 56% in 2005 to 38% in 2008. 

29. 
In regard to health, the only specific country development goal identified in the 2005 
CAS results matrix is the creation of an integrated and fiscally sustainable health system that 
would safeguard the health outcomes already achieved. Given that the goal was very broadly 
defined and has a long-term horizon, reasonable progress towards this long-term goal would 
indicate a positive outcome where data is available. In education, progress in being made 
towards the overarching goals of improving quality and equity in primary schools, improving 
quality at the secondary level and improving equity at the tertiary level. While the Government 
has been partially successful in meeting country goals in education as identified in the 2005 
CAS, improving students’ learning and reducing inequity in results still are challenges for the 
country, especially in comparison to OECD countries.  The educational system still faces 
difficulties in transforming available resources at the school, teacher, students and educational 
system levels into student learning. Country goals in terms of social inclusion, gender and civil 
society were equally broad and far-reaching, which makes it difficult to evaluate progress over 
the short time span of CAS implementation, especially in the absence of quantifiable outcomes.  

CAS Outcomes 
30. 
The successful implementation of the PANES Social Emergency Program and its phasing 
out and replacement by the newer Family Allowance scheme suggest that this CAS milestone 
has been overachieved. However, there is a lack of available data in other social protection 
targets, such as the increased financial sustainability of the pension system for which only BPS 
(Banco de Previsión Social) data is available.  In education, overall, students’ achievement has 
improved over the CAS period and the achievement gap between students in the lowest and 
highest income levels has been reduced (these overall trends continue even though the results for 
the 2005 assessment - and the 2009 not yet released results - cannot be compared with the earlier 
results because of important methodological changes to the assessment). Even though in PISA 
2006 Uruguay outperformed most of the other Latin American countries, Uruguayan students’ 
performance was below that of students from OECD countries (with the exception of Mexico) 
and presented one of the highest variances in the results (even above what could be expected 
given the country’s income inequality). National repetition rates remain high in grade 1 and, 
despite some improvements, have not been reduced to the target 10 percent. The Bank has had a 
long-standing involvement in the education sector, and supported the Government in its goal of 
improving educational quality through the introduction of the full-time school model. Overall,  
Bank performance in the sector has been satisfactory, as indicated in a 2006 Project Performance 
Assessment Report  PPAR for three education projects (Vocational Training and Technological 
Development, MECAEP I and II).  

31. While reforms in the health sector are complex and have important fiscal impacts, the 
CAS milestone of completing and implementing the national health insurance regulation has 
been met. In addition, fiscal transfers to BPS have been reduced. Progress against the additional 
CAS milestone of reducing the share of health sector expenditure directed at primary and large 
fiscal subsidies cannot be estimated due to lack of data. The ongoing Non-Communicable 
Disease Prevention Project continues to support the Government’s efforts to strengthen its health 
delivery services and the current health policy framework for non- communicable diseases. CAS 

 
Annex B 
Page 10 of 27 

Milestones for social inclusion, gender and civil society were broadly defined. In some cases, the 
Bank has made a limited but concrete contribution to the achievement of the CAS Milestone. For 
example, the Bank provided technical assistance on PANES evaluation and helped establish 
participatory M&E systems. This contributed to the achievement of the broad CAS Milestone of 
strengthening social impact evaluation frameworks across all Bank supported reforms. In other 
cases, CAS Milestones were not linked to Bank support (i.e. maintaining consensus on the 
economic program) or the CAS Milestone was so broadly defined that the extent of progress 
made towards the given milestone could not be assessed or was not quantifiable.  

IV. OVERALL BANK PERFORMANCE AND LESSONS LEARNED 
32. 
Bank performance over the CAS period has been strong. The planned lending 
program was largely delivered. A stronger partnership with the Government was formed and the 
quality of the dialogue improved substantially over the CAS period. The opening of the country 
office and a constant Bank presence on the ground facilitated these achievements.  

33. 
The quality of Bank lending has been high.  The renovation of the portfolio which 
occurred over the CAS period was driven by a frank and open dialogue with the authorities at 
both the central and sectoral level. Moreover, project identification was completely demand 
driven, resulting in a portfolio which is more diversified than in the past. The generally high 
quality of Bank lending during the period is evidenced by a generally good progress in portfolio 
implementation and by the achievement of the projects’ development objectives.  

34. 
The additional financing instrument was used selectively. In the case of the education 
project, it was used to cover financing gaps which arose because of price escalations in civil 
works which could have otherwise negatively impacted the achievement of the project’s physical 
objectives. Other planned additional financing operations (transport project and natural resources 
management project) did not materialize as funds were still available under the respective 
operations.  

35. 
The Bank was proactive in restructuring operations with components where 
implementation was lagging. In the case of the Institution Building Technical Assistance 
Project (IBTAL), the Bank took a proactive stance in amending the operation by deleting the 
customs component, which was plagued by issues that could not be foreseen by either the 
authorities or the Bank at the time the operation was designed (i.e. corruption scandals in a 
highly politicized setting).  

36. 
Experiences indicate that AAA was generally well prepared and relevant. It was also 
well received and extensively debated, which is partly due to Uruguay’s participative culture and 
to the institutional setting. In some cases, as for the work on PANES and on capital markets, 
policy advice under the Bank AAA translated into legislation and actual policy.  In other cases, it 
is still too early to determine whether the Bank’s advice will materialize into policy actions. As 
the challenge for the Bank in the future is that of adding value in an increasingly sophisticated 
setting, a formal evaluation of the impact and relevance of AAA completed during the CAS 
period (see Annex 3 for a complete list) would be very useful in terms of taking stock of the 
Bank’s analytical work to date and guide its future direction.  

 
 
Annex B 
Page 11 of 27 

Lessons Learned 
37. 
A number of important lessons can be derived from the Bank’s experience in Uruguay.  

38. 
The consensual nature of Uruguay’s policy making environment affects the pace of 
implementation of reforms. Hence, in Uruguay reforms take a long time to mature, but 
they tend to be sustained once implemented.  A case in point is the approval of the bankruptcy 
law, and, more generally, reforms in the financial sector.  Although at a slow pace, not only were 
reforms successfully implemented, but Uruguay is now up to international best practice in areas 
such as prudential regulation for banks. As country ownership of reforms is critical, the 
programmatic structure of the program under the 2005 CAS, providing support for key reforms 
through the DPL series, was in retrospect the right one, allowing time for reforms to come to 
fruition, while focusing largely on implementation of measures for which the GoU had already 
obtained approval or for which legislation had been submitted to Parliament.  

39. 
The flexible design of the 2005 CAS and the programmatic nature of development 
policy lending allowed the Bank to react quickly during the global financial crisis and to 
adjust its support so as to provide Uruguay with the needed contingent financing. Further, 
the 2008 CAS Progress Report envisaged a plan for dealing with the global financial turbulence, 
including the possibility of an increase in the CAS envelope. By contrast, the 2000 CAS 
proposed a more rigid program, strictly linked to country performance and, when the Argentine 
crisis arose in 2002, the Bank had to resort to Special SALs to provide short-term relief, at the 
expense of creating medium-term payment problems.  

40. 
Long-term Bank engagement in a sector is essential as it builds trust and enables a 
more fluid policy dialogue. In the water sector, considerable advances were made, particularly 
in terms of improving efficiency, transparency and effectiveness. In retrospect, the Bank’s long-
term engagement through a series of APLs was the right instrument as it enabled the Bank and 
the authorities to not only design a road map for reforms, but also to periodically revise the 
objectives and priorities that were originally set out for the sector. In addition, the experience 
with APL1 and ALP2 underscores the importance of continuity in Bank involvement in the 
sector without gaps.  

41. 
Bank presence in a sector needs to continue despite setbacks, as persistency will 
eventually pay off. Again, the experience in the water sector in Uruguay is illustrative, as the 
Bank decided to remain engaged despite the 2003 reversal in policy on private sector 
participation in the sector. The Bank was able to differentiate between the overall objective of its 
involvement in the sector, which was to create a modern and efficient water sector, and the tools 
to achieve this objective. Private sector participation was simply a tool, and in the post-
referendum period the Bank focused on achieving the same results with different tools, such as 
benchmarking and improvements in corporate governance of OSE, which in turn greatly 
improved transparency. In this regard, the Bank’s experience in an advanced MIC such as 
Uruguay would provide a useful example to other developing countries.  

42. 
Uruguay is an increasingly sophisticated borrower, which is fully aware of its needs, 
and the Bank should respect its priorities. As the economic situation continues to recover, the 
relationship between the Bank and the Government is likely to evolve towards the kind of 

 
Annex B 
Page 12 of 27 

relationship the Bank has with advanced MICs such as Chile and Mexico. Uruguay has a fairly 
well developed procurement system, and the level of corruption is relatively low, which should 
be taken into account by the Bank in the preparation of future operations.  In this sophisticated 
setting, the Bank should mobilize staff with state of the art expertise. In the case of the IBTAL 
customs component, which failed to implement for broader political issues, the Bank’s lack of 
in-house expertise in the customs area slowed down implementation. 

43. 
The design of operations entailing a high degree of coordination with other donors 
should be carefully evaluated. Again, in the case of the IBTAL, the Bank decided to support 
only one component (human resources) in a broad customs reform program of fourteen 
components, with the IDB supporting the remaining thirteen. While coordination with the IADB 
was largely successful, in the future greater care should be exercised at the time of project design 
in selecting areas to be supported out of a larger program, and in ensuring that the areas selected 
are closely interrelated.  

44. 
In the sophisticated environment described above, the Bank will have to sharpen its 
focus and concentrate on areas where it can add value.  While it is becoming increasingly 
difficult for the Bank to effectively contribute to the policy debate, the Bank should explore new 
areas where its international experience could add value. One possible area of future Bank 
involvement is the impact evaluation agenda, where the Bank could add value by providing its 
view as an independent evaluator. In addition, a closer collaboration with local institutions and 
think tanks leading to joint analytical work would add value through knowledge sharing and 
capacity building.  

 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
3
1

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

A
C

S

R

C
E
U
D

S

U

U
V
T
L
N

S

M

A

A
R
T
N

R

I

X

P

R
A

T

I

–

R
A
C

E

I

G

L

E

B

I

L

I

T

Y

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u
n

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

1

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

1

.

D

e
u
h
d

b

e
a
t

u
S

u
s
b
d

t

a

i

a

b

i
l
i

t
e

y

R
w

e

s
e
c
s

d

b
n

t

r

d

c
e
a

o
o
n

t

a
c
e

l

v
o
n
o

e

l
i

s
c
c

o

m
m

e

u
y
n

s

r

a

t

e

t
i
      A

u

t

i

e

m

r

m

t

a

b

t
i
l
i

.

c

h

i

e

v

e

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

d

s

v
o

e

r

e

i

n
g

c

r

e

d

t
i

r

a

i
t

g
n

s

.

Q

v
u
o
g

e
a

t
i
r
l

y
n

d

i

a
e

l
t

u
g
d
o
n

s
e
c
e

d
n
n
o
o

e

g
u
n
k
b

t

s

s

t

a

i

b
b
d
n
n
o

e
a

t
t
i
l
i

o
p
y
p
u
o
p
y

s

t
r

s

m

i

i

m

a

i

i
l

c

.

D

e
e

d
b

t

M

a

n
p

a

g
o

e

m

e
e

n

i
t

U
D

n
u
g
n
o

t
i

i

t

h

e

M

F
E

h

s
a

m

a
e
c

d

s
e
e

b
g

r

s
a
e

t
i
l

d
n
u
g
o
d
p
h

r

r

s
e
s
e

i
r

n

i

m

p

r

g
n
1
v
o

.
i

t

h

e

b

t

r

l
i
f

.

a

l

e

w

t
i

h

D

e

b

t

O

i
f
f

t

a

e

P

D
R

I

L
P

 P

b
u

i
l

c
a

n
b
p
9
d
0
0
d
d
0
7
2
5
b
n
d
n
d

a
e
e

t

c
e

i
l

s
e
a
c
e
e
e

n
d

f
r
t
f

o
o

m

1
0
1

.

n
9
0
o
0
2
p
n
d
2
0
9
p
y
b
0
o

e

r

e
c

t

f

D
G

P
T

s
a
e

t

t

h
h
o

e
e
e
a
a

o
o
u
4
3
0
0
n
0
0
g
2
2
n
o
o
d
b
n
o
d

f
r
i

t

a
e

y
1
5
n
n
6

e
e
s
e

i
t

m
m

i
t
t

.

r
t

l
f
l

D
G

P

m

i
.

.

h
o

l
r

f

f
t

e

i

-

c

r
r
t

c

d
p

n
o
n

t

e

h

a

e

n

r
f

m

e

r

e
c

t

f

t

t

e

.

r

e
c

i

.

 S

n
g
g
n
n
g
g
n
n
v
o

e

r

e

i
i

s
e
e
e
e
s
a
c
c
e
e
c
e
c
a
e

r

d
d

r
r
f
t
i

a

i
t

g
n

s

p
6
o
d
0
p
n
0
o
2
v
n
d
k
h
1
o
h
v

a

e

i

m

i
t
r
i
t
t
i

v
p
v
o
o

a
e
e

o
n
n
o
3
d
d
u

f
i
(
r
f

r

b
v
u
o
n
g

c
e
e
e
a

r
r
l
r

k
y
o
d
o
o
g
o
u
y
n
o
u
g
d
h
u
n
o
b
9
n
o
n
0
n
0
v
o
2
g
n
y
o

m

e

t

s
e

M

'

s

r
r
r

s
a
a
e

i
l
i
i
i
t
t

r

o

m

B

i

B

a
s
J

)

.

T

l
t
’

o

f

o
n

i

w

a
s
a
e

r
l

s
e

i

e
c
s

t

s
s

m
m

t

c
a
a

i

e

U

r
i

e
s
a
a
a

t

x

t

r

n

s

a

r

e

t

m

c

m

m

e

n

.
t

 S

7
v
0
o
p
0
2
b

r

a
e

h
n
n
u
b
o
b
d
p

s

t
i
i

e
s
a
s
e
e
s
c

r

d
u
n
9
0
0
2

s
a
e
c

l
i
t
t

n
n
o
o
h

w
w

l

h
h
o
y

r
t

r

u
o
n
d
h
g
d
u
n
p
o

t

8
b
0
o
0
v
2

,

i
r
r
l
f
l
,
r
f

o

m

a

m

i

n
3
o
6
2
g
o
n

i

m
m

x
u

m
m

4
3
n
8
n
1
o
4
1
n
u
o
o
p

f

i
f
i

M

a

y

,

t
t
r

t
i
i

s
e
s
e

a
e
e

i

O

c
a

t

a
e

s
e

t
i

t

a

s
a
s
a

i

m

s
a

i

e
s

.

S

e

,

t

r

s

h

e

n

b

i

i

t

s

N

m

e

.

2

.

F

i

a
s
c
e
n
s
v
e
e

a

a
e
s
a
a
s
l

M

a

n

g
a

e
h
p
d
h

m

e

n

t

A

c

h
b
o
d

i

u

t

i

n

e

i
r

m

a
a

r
r

y
g

e
s
e

p
d
u

l
r
r

u
d
u

s

e
c

m
m

u

r
r

i
t
t

w

t
i

t

e

t

t

e

c

i
t

n
o

i

n

/
t

D
G

P

o

.

P

i
r
r

m
m

a

r

y

s

u
h

l
t
r

h
g
u
h
p

s

i

s
e
s

u

s

t

a

i

n

e

d

a

t

t

h

e

l

e

v

e

l

o

f

4
0
0
2

o

s

o

e

w

a

i

r

.

t
       T

e
e
e
e
a
a

v
x

r

v

e
s

d
g
n
u
q
u
n

s
e
c
e
e

s
e
a

a

s

h
o

a

r

a
e
e
e

o
p
o

f
l
t

D
G

P

a

r

e
s

m

a

i
l

u
n
u
d
p
n

r
i
r
t
t

e
a
a
s

d
g
n

e
e

l
i
l

r
l

t
r

r
i
i
t

t

m

i
r

m

a
a

r
l

u
p
x
y

r

t

w

h

p

o

e
s
s
e

n

i
t

s

c

i

e

e

t
i

.

     P

e

r

s

n
o

a

l

i

n

c

o

m

e

t

a

x

i

s

i

n

r
t

u
d
o

e
c

d

.

T

o
v
o
p
p
b
u
u
1
3
g
p
p
h
1
1
u
u
o
9
o
0
o
n
y
d
h
0
n
2
1
n
n
n
0
n
u
0
u
d
n
2
q
n
h
p
8
h
v
9
n
d
o
h
9
o
n
u
1
d

e

i
r
r
-
r

m

a

t
r

i
f

a
c
s
s

l
l

e
c
a
s
e
a
e
s

l

o
o
h
g
v
p
u
o
4
o
o
3
d
p
n
n
h
o
3
n

e
c

m

e
e

d

r
f

o
n
n

m

a

o
p

s

i
l
i
i
l
t
i

n
h
u
h
o
7
d
y
d
o
0
n
o
y
b
0
g
p
2
n
o
o
p
o
4
h
o
0
o
0
g
2
n
n
o
n

f

l

a

l
t
r
r
-
i

e

e

i
f

s
s
e
c

t
i

p
u
d
u

i
l
r
r

g
n
u

r

t
f

t
f
r
-
r

r

e
c

t

h
8
0
0
o
2

f

D
G

P

.
t

T

h

s

w
G

e
e
s
a

e
e
c

t
’
t

.

t
r
f
f
r

D
G

P

i
f

,
t
.
l
t
;

i
r
t
f
i

a
s
c
e

s

f

e
e

m

s
s
e
e
c

t

a

r
r
t
l
(
f

e
s
e
s
s
e

t

e
a
c
a
s
e
e
e
e
c
e

n

t
-
t

D
G
w

P

w

s
a
c
e
e

m
m

a

t

o

t

h

e
a
a
a
s
s
a
e

h

r

p

e
e
e
e
s
c
e
c

i
l

i

t

l

t

e

o
8
0
d
0
u
2
d
n
n

e

e

f
f
i
t
f
i

y

c
c
a
e
c
s
e

a
s

(

U

E
T

i
r
)
r

e

e

)
i

T

h
h

t
l

t
i
t
i

d
h

e
e

t

e

d
h
g
u
o

r

t

f

t
r

r

i
f
i

.

r

t

f

D
G

P

,

e

t

f

t

d

a

t

a

t

a

c

i

a

c

i
r

s

i

.

 I
r

n

o
b
6
0
o
0
2
d
d
y
n
v
p
5
x
n
0
p
0
n
8
p
p
2
0
o
n
0
d
2
p
y

c
c
e
a
e
a
e
c
c
e
e
s
a
s
a
e

,

t

a

x
p

r
l
r
l
t
l

e
s
e
s
e
a
s
e
e
a
e

v
h
v
u
n
n
v
h

s
e
e
e
e

w

e
a

r
r

e
e
e

9
7
7
p
o
u
h
1
h
0
x
g
0
n
u
2
x
n
u
9
y
d
n
0
0
v
2
o
n

.

a

d
n

8
o
8
n
1

.

n
g
n
h
o
n
d
p
h

e
J
a
a
e
e
c
s
e
e
e
a
e

r

e
c

t

y
v
o
o
o
u

f
l
i
t

D
G

P

,

i
t

i
r
l
t

.

A

c

m

t
i
r
f
t

t

f

.
l
r
r
,
r
t
t

m

D
w

s
e
e
e
s
a

c
a

t
t

1

,

o
7
0
0
2

,

t
t
f

h
h

e
a

t

w

s
e

t

e
e
e
a
s
a

e
e
a
e
c

e
a

e
a
c
a
e
e

y
u
n
p
h
g
n
7
o
7
1
o
u
o
u
u
n
n
d
v
d
n
v

t

e

e

f
f

c
e

t

r
i
f

i

f
t
i
l

.
i

s

w

o
o
d

i
r
,
i

e

s
a

r
t
r

f
f

D
D
G
G

P
P

p
d
0
n
8
1
o
o
h
d

r

n

t
t
r
t

f
i
r

D
G

P

t

i
.
l

r
l
t

n
n
n

i
t

0
8
1
n
n
o
u
g
q
n

.

T

s

r
t

e

r

v
d
n

e
e

w

t
i

r

e
e

s
c
s
e

i
i

e
s
s
a
e
s
c

i

.

e
s
c
a
e
e

r
r

t

D
G

P

,

h

c
e

e

r

s

e

t

t

i
t

e

b
u

e

t

.

 T

h
o
d

e

t

a
s
e

x

r
i
t

s
e
c

f

u
o
o

r
r

m

o

f

n
o
7
0
n
0
2
o

i

r
t

u
d
o

e
c

d

a

D

u

a

l

P

e

r

s

n
o

a

l

I

n

c

o

m

e

t

a

n
o
x

a

l
l

m

s
e
c

f

i

c

m

e

I
(

R

F
P

)

.

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
4
1

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

A
C

S

R

C
E
U
D

S

U

U
V
T
L
N

S

M

A

A
R
T
N

R

I

X

P

R
A

T

I

–

R
A
C

E

I

G

L

E

B

I

L

I

T

Y

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

1

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

 N

u
o

m

b

e
e

r

p
o
x

f

t

a

x
d
n

s
e

i
r

s
e

r
r

e
e

u
o
d

s
e
c

d

.

S

c

i

a

l

e

t
i

u

f

r

m

a

r

e

i

n

r
t

u
d
o

e
c

d

  T

h
p

a
e
e
c
e

t

o
x
n
g
n

t
f
f
t
r

e

d
o
o
n

t
r

m

a
s
e

i
l
t

m

i

o
n
o

c
e
e
a

t
l
l
l

o
o
0
n
1
o
d

l

w

-
t

y
h

t
i

a
e

l

d
x

t

a
a

x
d

s
e

i
t

h
n

a
a
s

t
r
t

i
t
i

6
0
0
n
2
o
n

r

e
e
e
s

p

r

e
s
e

v
n
o

i
t

e

4
6
g
d
n

.

i
r
i

t

a
a

l
r

b
x

c
e

i
t
.
)

f

e

m

i

.

(

I

m

p

r

L

v

S

a

d

w

3

.

F

i

n

a

n

n
c
n
h

i

a

l

S

c
e

t
c
c
e
e
s
c
a

o

u
v
o
r
o
y

R

e

d
v
o
u
d
p

e
e
e
c

i
t
i
f

a
e
a

c
e

l
i
f
i
.
f

t

r

i
l
f

n
n

e
a

r

c
a

b
n

t
i
l
l
i
i

y

a

d
n

t
              D
i
i

m

r
r

i

n

f

a

n

e

m

i
t

n
o

e
c
e

y
p
o
o
n
v
o

e

l

a
c

p

t
i

a

l

m

a

r

k

e

t

s

a

d
d
n

e

-

o
d

l
l

a

i
r

e
z

t

h

e

m

R

s
e

r
t

u

c

t

u

i
r

g
n

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

f

o

r

U
H
B

i

s

c

o

m

p

l

e

t

e

d

.

                     D
      F
i

r

a
s
s

m

e
e

w

b
d
o
n
k
h
o
g
n

r
t

f

r

a

k
n

r

e

u
g

l

a

i
t

n
o

a

d
n

s

p
u

e

r

v

i

s

i

n
o

r
t

e

e

.

e

o
p

s

t
i

i

n

s

u

r

a

n

e
c

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

i

s

f

d
n
u

e

d

.

T

d
g
n
g
o
k
p
n
o
h
o

a
s
s
s
s
e
s
e
c

t

t
t

a
e

n
h
u
g
y
p
o
g
n
n
n
n
v
n
d
u
h
n
o
o
h
n
h
u

e
s
s
a

i

b

e
s
c
e
s
a
e
c
c
a
e

y
d
n
k
d
d
n
u

,

U
H
B

,

h
v
o
n
o
h
o
y
u
d
o

s
a

n
n
o
n
o
g
o
g
n
d
n
u
h
o

e

r

e
e

a

n
o

i

o
n
n
d
g
v
h
g
n
u
n
n
8
o
g
0
d
n
0
n
2
k
h
h
8
n
p
o
g
o
d
b
d
b
n
n

-

e

t
t

r
i

s
e

r
t

c
e

t

u

i
r

g
n

p
d
b

r

l
i
)
t
t
l
t

r

l

e

t
i
.

r
f

m

i
r
l
i
f
t
f

s
s
e
e
e
a
z
s
s
a
a
e

U
w
D
H
B

l

a
e
c
e

s

i
r
r

a

w

e
a

t
i
(

r

r

t
l
r
t
t
t
i
t

N

e

e

t
r
i
r

,
t

m

e
e

l
,

,

t

e
c
a
e
a
e

r
t
.

a

l

U
C
B

a

a
e
s
a

t

n
o

.
t
i
t

o

e
e

i

i

M

t
r

a
a

e

c
e

i
i
l

m

a

l
t
l
r

a
e
s
a
c
s

l
f

,

i
i
l

m

e
s

t

t

M

t

i

e

a

r

s
a
e

e

t

s

w

t
i

h

w

r

w

o

h

o

v

g
n

 T

h
u
n
d

e

i
f

b
k
d
p
u
p
p
n
v
d
n
n
u
h
n
y
n
u
o
n
d
o
n
n
h
n
n
y
o
n
n
b
h
n
o
o
k
h
u
n
g
k
n
v
b
o
o
n
o
n
o
o
o
g
n
h
n
h
o
h
k
y
n
p
g
2
n
v
h
0
d
n
n
y
v
d
o
0
b
h
g
o
g
y
d
2
h
d
o
n
n
d
n
n
b
h
d
n
o
n
n
n
y
n
h
d
h
b
ó
y
v
o
n
n
u
g
d
v
n
d
u
o
u
d
n
o
o
o
g
9
u
d
n
o
p
u
n
p
p
0
d
p
o
n
o
u
p
0
n
u
u
n
2

a

c
e
e
a
c
a

i

a

l

c
c
e
s

r
i
l
r
r
t
i
i
r
t

o

e
a
a
c
e
c
a
e
s
c
e
s
e
a
s
a
z
e
e
a
s
e
s
s
s
z
e
a
e
a
s
a
a
a
s
s
c
a
e
a
a
e
s
a
e
s
c
e
a
c
e
e
a

e

t
r
r
t

e
e
s
e
c
a
a
e
a

d
h

m

e
a
s

r
f
t

k

e

y
u
u
d
g
y
b

l

i
r
t
i
f
r
l
i
r
l

p
h
u
n
n
g
n
g
o
n
d
b
n
o
h
n
b
n
h
y
o
d
n
u
n
o
u
o
o
k
q

m

t

e
e
c
a
a
a
s
s
e
a
e
e
e
a
c
e
s
c
e
e
e
e
s
a
a
e
a
e
a

n

l
r
i
f
r
r

r

d
n
n
n
h
d
n
v
o
o
b
n
y
n
n
n
o
h
b
p
u
k
n
n
d
o
u
o
n
k
o
n
v
n
v
d
o
o
n
h
p

e
e

y
y
o
n
p
o

s

t
i

s
s

i
r
r
t
r

t

s

d
o
y
n

m

c

e
a
a

l
t

t
i
f

m

.
t

e

l
t
r
l
l
i
r
f
r
r
r

m

i

r

t

t

i
r
i
i
r
l
t
t
i
i
f
i

r

e

a

h
v
n

e
e
e
s
s
c
e
s
a
e
e
s
a
s
e

i

C

u

e
a
e
e
a
a
s

,

U

i
r
l

e
e
s
a
s
e
a
c
s
z
s

i

l

,
t

t
i
i
r
t
i

m

f

e

w

t
t
i

u
q

n
o
h
d
h
n
d
n
n
n
o
o
h
d
d
n
8
o
n
d
0
d
n
o
o
n
n
o
0
u
h
n
p
h
h
2
u
o
d
d
g
n
n
n
k
n
p
g
b
n
n
n
k
o
d
h
n
v
n

t

e
s

.

R

a
s
c
a

m

a
s
s

m

t
i

e

r

s
c

l
r
i
i
t
r
r
i
r
r
r
r
t

s
e
e
s
s
s
a
e
e
a
e
e
e
s

s

e

m

s

e
a

f
i
t
r
i
f
l
t
i
t
i
t

h

r

t
i
t
i
i
t
r
t
i
f

i

l

t
t
i
t

.

T

h

e

r

e

i

i

c
s
e
a
e
c
a

i

i

l

r
i

f

n

r

m

i
r
t
i
t

m

r

t

S

n
u
v
o

t

e

t
i
t
i
l
l
i
f

F

s
s
c
e
e

a

i
I
r

s

.

A

t
r

r
i
r

u
o

s

m

t
r
.
i
t

i

l
t

i
r
l
r
r
l
i
r

i
r
t
r
t
i

s

m

l
l

a
s
e
a
a

e
e
a
z
a

n
o

r
i
t
i
r
t

i
t
f
t
f
i

T

e
a

,
i
t
t

a

,

U
O
R
B

,

m

d
n

i
f
r

m

r

m

t

s

n

m

m

a
e

a

e

m

e
e
s

t

i
r

t

h
n
n
g
o
b
n

a

l

c
e

r
t

o

l

.

F

a
e
e
e
a

l
l
r

y

,

a
a

e

a

l

a

,

i
i
t
t

r
r
r
i
r
,
l

r

f

m

t

U
C
B

g
n
n
u
d
d
n
d
g
n
p
n
k
h
d
n
n
b
n
v

w

s
a

P

m

O

c
a
e
a
e
a

e
a

e
a
a
e
a
e
c
c
e
c
e
a
s
e
c

c
s
a
a
a
s
s
a
s
a
a
e
e
s
s
c
e

e
e

i

m

p

l
´

e
s
a
e

m

i
r

r
t
t
i
i
t
i
t
r
.
l

T

e
e

r

e

r

i

I
f
i
i
t
.
i
t
i

l

s
s
c

m

e

i
t
t
l

i

U
C
B

i

e

e
c

,

s
e
a

a

s

t

i

s

s

i
r
t
r

o
u

y

f
t

w

e
e
e
e
a
e

l
t
t
l
r

e
e
s
e
s
a

i
t

o
o
n
d
p
h
n
p
o
o
d
g
h
h
v
n
d
g

a
s
c
s
s
c
a
a
s

i
l

r

r
f

a
e

m

w
w

,
t
r
i

a

,

w

r
i
f
i
t
f
i
i
t
t
i
r

t
t

d
h
p
u
n

F

i
i

S

a
e
e
e
s
s

r

v

i

s
e
c

S

e

e

n
o

y
b

t

U
C
B

w

i

n
o
u
n
u
h
g

i
r
i

i
.

l
i

u
d
h
n
n
n
o
ó
o

r
i

s
c
e

s
s
e
c
c
e

l
t

e
e

f

r
r
l

a
a
e

a
a
s

i
r

p
o
d
n
n

e
e
c

,

a
e

A

,

t

r

e

f

o

r

m

t
l

c
e

i
t

t
r

y

m

C

r

r

i
t
i

P
 T
T

r

i

A

r
r

B

a
c

i
r

i

m

n

i

e

i

r

n

e
c

.

p
n
o
h
h
d
n

e
c
a
e
a
c
c
e
e
e
e
a

w
D

d
n
h
o
n
o
d
ó
p
o
n

s

t
r
t
i

s
e

I
r
l
f
f
t

n
h
h
d
o
u
h
o
n
o
o

s

u

r
r
t
r
t
l

a

e
c
e
e

f

h
h
d
n
u

e
e
e
s
e
e
a
a

b

n
d
o
u
o
o
p
n
n
n
o
k
h

c
c

c
e
s
c
e
a

t
t
i
t

p
d
u
u
h
n
ó
d

t

a
e
a
e
c
e
e
a
e
e
e

d

p
d
h
n
o
u
d
n
y
o
n
ó
n
u
o
u
d
n
n
o
d
o
n
n
n
d

i
t
i
t
t
i
r
i
r

s

f

l
l
f
i

e

r
t
i
l

a

i
t

n
o

a

.
l

l

t

r

m
m

U
U
C
C
B
B

a
c
c

t
r
l
l
i
t
r

r

i

l

r

a

i

e

d

C

r

l
t
r
f

i

P

e
c
c
e
s
e

s
e
a
e
a

A

o
h

r
r

o

B

i
i
r

t

e
a

A
w

p
o

e

f
r

n
o

r

m

o
h

t

s
e
s
a

h
y

S

c

i

P

r

t

B

a

a
c

.

T

e

w

-

r

t

t
i
t

i
t

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
5
1

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

A
C

S

R

C
E
U
D

S

U

U
V
T
L
N

S

M

A

A
R
T
N

R

I

X

P

R
A

T

I

–

R
A
C

E

I

G

L

E

B

I

L

I

T

Y

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

1

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

        M

s
e
e
s
e
e
c
s
a
e

v
u
d
v
d
n

r

i

n
p
o

r
t

o
u
n
d
o

e
c

o
b
p
o
o
p
d

t

r
-

m

d
o

t

e

a
a
c

n
p
n

t
i

a
a
c

l
i

m

a

r

k

e

t

s

e
a
s

l

m

e

t

f

s
e

e
s
a

i
f

l

r

i

r
i
t

s
e

d
n
d
o
p

a
e
a
s
e
e

i
i

b

t
i
l
l
i
t

o
d
h
v
y
o
y
o
p

r
f
i
i

h
o
p
o

r

t

e
e
e
s

f
r

a
s
e

o

i
t
r
l
t

n
b
o
u
o
u

k
n
h
d
n
b
n
o
n
d
n
p

r

s
s
e
c
a
c
e
e

f
r
’

o

r

r
t

g
n
p
d
d
o
n
n
n
b
u
u
o

l

e
a

b

a
a

k
k
n
h

s
e
e

s
a

i
l
i
t
t
i
l
t
i

a
c

u
y
h
n
n
p

m
m

e
e
e
a

s
e

s
s
s
s
e

o

i
i
r
l

e
s

e
s
s
a
e
c
s

l
l
i
t
r
t

s

m

i
t

m

s
e

y

e
s
a

m

e
a

n
n

t

e
s
c

h
n
h
o

t

t
i
t
r
t

.

T

d
h
o
b
h
n
o
h
p

O
C

S
P

B
A

t
i

a
e
e

o
y
y
g
n
n

f
i
.

i

t
r

d
n
o

a
e

n
u
o
p

r

e
c
s

m

.

A

i

,
t

t

e
a

h
p
u
o

e
e

s

s

e

a

i
t

l

t

S
 T

t

p
p

t

e

r

f

t

w

t
i
t

d
n
n
n
o
n
h
h
n
9
n
u
0
v
u
h
o
q
0
o
b
h
o
2
p
g

e

s
e
a
s
s
e
e
e
s
e
s
c
e
e
e

w

a
c

g
u
g
n
q
n
o
n
p
v
p
o
x
n
p
d
h
o
n

t
i

a

l

m

e
c
e
a
a
e
s
s
s
e
e

r
t

y
n
d
6
n
h
9
d
u
n
9
b
y
o
1
n
n
b
o
o
n
n
d
h
k
p
d
o
o
o

t

s

l
t
l
l
.
i
t

w

a
c
s
s
a
e
s
s
e
s
a
e
a
c
e
a

v
d
n
n
n
p
o
o
v
o
n
h
o
o
p
o
n
d
p
p
n
p
p
d
o
n
n

r

e

y
b

P

a
a
c
c
a
s
a
e
e
e
s
c
e
s
e
e
a
s
s
e
e
s
c
e
a
e
e
a

i
l
r

m

e

d
b
u
n
d
b
d
n
o
n
v
h
n
n
p
o
o
o
b
o
p
9
n
o
0
o
0
2
n
p
2

t

N

a
e
e
s
s
e
e
a

m

e
a

i
r
t
t
t
f
l
i
i

d
4
g
n
2
n
o
n
h
g

,

i
r

m

g
d
u
u

l

a
e

P

r
i
t

i

e

t
t
i

D

m

o
b

l
l
r
r
r

,

.

T

r

r

s
e
a

c
e

t
r
l

s

n
o
o

w

t
t
i
,
t
t
i
l
r

t

i
t
r

s
s
c
s
c
a

i

t

e

r
t
t

t
r
t

f

´

i

i

M

r

i

m

t
r

a

h
n

v
n

w

w

v
h
o

s
e
e
c
c
c
a
a
a

o

m

i

f
r

t
’

s
c
e
c
s
e

L

w

a
e
c
c
a

c

a

n
p
o
h

r

i

r
i

s
e
a
e
a

e

r
r
t
i

r
t
i

s
e
e

i
f

e

i

f
t
i

s
a
s

m

r
r

k
v

i
t

u
n
o

s
a

,
r
t

r

t

r

m

i
t

i
l
,

w

i

r

p
u

i

,

l

m

r

k

e

t

a

,

r

d

i

p

r

i
t

.

 T

o
d
u
p
n
o
n
n
d
d
o
u
d
n
h
n
o
d
n
h
n
b

e

U
C
B

t
r
r
i
t
t
t
l
t
i
r
r
l
t
i

s
a
s
e
c
e
e
c
s
e
a
e
e
e
a
a
a
a

d
v
h
u
o
u
o
p
g
v
d
o

r
r

e
e
e

n

l
t

n
y
p
d
o
n
o
h
n
o

r
l

s
e
s
s
e
a
a
s
c
s
e
a
e
e
s
e
c
s

g
n
o

r

a
a

g
o
v
n
n
d
o
n

i
i
t

z

i

t
l
i
f

n
o
d
p
n
g
u
n
o
p
n
n
h
o
k
o
n
n
o
o
k

r

d
n
d

e
e

r

t

o

a
a
a

d
d

r

a
c
a
s
a
e
a
s
e
s
e

o
n
n
u
n
d
o
d
v
u
o
n
k
u
n
o
p
n
p
d
o
n
p
b
n
o
g
o
k
n
h
p
d
n
o
o
o
g

t
i
i
t

a

r
i
l

m
m

a

r
r

s
s
e
e
s
s
e
a
e

t

i

a

i
l
r
f

c
a

t

r
t
i
i
t
r

m

m

e

t

s
e
e

w

L

w

r
i
.
i
t
i
f
i

R

r
r

m

f
t

i

s
a
c

a
e
e
s

,

U
C
B

e
e
e
s
a

r

e
s
a

p
k
n
o
n
p
n
u
h
d
o
g
d
n

l
i

n
o
o
n

i
t
f
t

e

s
c
e
s
e
e

i
t
r
t
l

i
t

c

i
f
i

n
u
n

,
i
i
t
r
i
i
r

l

t

i
t

m

e

t

m

i
t
t
t
r
,
i

r
i
t

e

i

t

e

f

n
o
p

f
i
t

a

m

s

r
l
.
t

r

s
e

a
a

e
s
c
a
a

m

i

i

s
s
e

i
f
i
i
t
.
r
i
r

T

U
C
B

l

w

r

t
i
i
t
t
r

a
e
c

m

m

n
d
d

i
t

f

s
s
s
a
e
e

k
u

-
r

p
h
u

i
f
t

a
c
e
s

d
n
u

m

s
s
a
e

r

e

a
s

i
l
’

a
a
z

i

t
f

e
s

A

a

l
l

m

s
e

i

l

t

a
c

n
o

p

r

o

f

i

y

m

a

e

t

a

y

r

.

 F

i

b
n
o
y
d
n
d
n
v
n
n
g
h
p
p
o
d
y
d
n
g
n
p
n
g
h
u
n
b
y
x
u
d
v
p

e
a
s
s
c
e
a
e
s

l
l

y

.
,

p

r

r

e
e
a
c
s
a
s
s
e

i

l
i

g
n

m

s
e
e
c
a
s

d

d
d
h
u
p
u
n
o
h
n
o

c
e
c
e
s
e
e
e
s
e
e
a
s
c
e
e
e
c
e
e
s

n
u

i
t
t
i
r
i
r

l

a
e
c
e

r

a

n

e
c

a

d
h
n
n
v
h

e
s
e
a
s
e

l
t
t

e

m

s
a
e

n
h

t

t
i

m

s
e

T

c
e
e
s
s
e
s
a
a
s
a
e

F

f
i

i
t
i
t
t
r
i

S

s
e
e
a
e
e

i
i
r
r

v

S

d
n

n

y
n
o
u
d

w

i
t
t
l
i

t
i
t
i
i

U
C
B

a
s
e
a
a

l
I

n
h
o

v
h
h
o

h
g

t

f

t

l
t
t

m

t

e
e
c
a

y
n
o
o

f

t

h

e

t
l
r

w

h
o
g
o
b

s
e

t

o

c

k

c
a
e

.

,

i
t
t
t
i
r

U
C
w
B

s
a
c

i

d

t

i
i
t
i
r

m

d
p

m

s
e

n
o
p

t
t
i

e

w

a

r

l

m

e

t
i
r

m

t

l
l
i

i

l

s
e

r

f

o

t

i
l

t

u

.

 I

o
n
y
p
b
o
d
n
n
n
o
n

t

e
e

r

m

s
s
e
s
e
a

f
t
i
t

i

o
n
o
g
d
h
h
u
d
o
d
n
o
d
n
n
n
y
g
o

f
i

r

m

s
e
e
s
e
a
a
c
a
e
a
e

i
t
r

r
t
f

s
e
c
s
c
c
s
s
e
a
a
a

n

n
p
u
b
n
p
o
n
u

a

t
t
i
i
t
I
l
r

e

d
y
g
n
n

c

a
a
s

d
d
d
n
d
n
u
n
o

i
r
r
l
i
i
r

s
s
a
a
c
s
a
a
a
a
s
a
s
s
a
e
e
c
a

,
l

o

s

d
n
d
n
n
n
u

t
t
r

a
e
e

,

a

d

r
i
f
i
f

c
a
s
e
s

l
r
t
f

e
e
e
a

N
w

s
e

i
r
t

a

b

i
l

s
s
a
s
s
e
e
c
e

h

i

g
n

a

w

c
c
e
e

t
t

d

E

E

m

d
d
v
n
u
o

v
o
o

m

C

t

i
i
t
-
l

A

,

w

m

P

m

e
e

r

r
r

w

.

A

r
t

a
e
c
e
e

l
t

r

u
p
o

t
r

i

t

b
d
n

l
.

a

e

i
t

p

f

o

r

h

f

t

m

t

t

F

R

S

t

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
6
1

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

C

A

S

R

S
E

U

L

S
T

M

A

T

X
R

I

P

A
C
R
A

T

I
I

-

S

U

S

T

A

I

N

I

N

G
G

R

O

W

T

H

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

1

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

1
P

.
r

T
m

r
o
k
o

a

d

o
p
e
x

P

o

i
l
s

s
d
e
d
n
c

i

t
t

e
s

e

t
r

a

i

v

e

r

s

f
i

y

e

o
p
x

t
r

m

a

r

e

.

E

u
o
n
o
p
x

r
f
t
r
r
i
t

s

e
a
s
e

p
x

a
e

n
k
d
o
v
n
d

i
r

i
l

d
n
y
n

e

w

t
i

h

t
r
t

h
u

e
c

m

e
e

u
o
d

f
i

m

t
-

e

t
r
r

m

m

c
a

m

w

a
s

t

h

e

s

t

u

r

e

o
p
x

s

c

n
o

t

o

i

e

r

f
i

.

t
i
           G

v
h
o

e

r
i

n
n

m

e
e

o
n

t

e
e
s
s

k
e
u

t
s
a
e

d
n
n

e

w

t
r
t
l
i

e
a
a

d

e
a

e
o
o
o
p
e
F
p
y
g
o
a

t
r

n
u

i
t
i

s
e

o
b

t

h

w
R
d
n

M

r

c

r

b

r

l
l

.

R

a
a
e
e
e
s
e
a

l
r

e
e
c
e
e
e

o
o
p
n
x

i
f
t
f
f
r
r
t
f
r

g
n

r

o
o
n
d

w

t
i

h

w

s
a

n
o
8
n
0
o
o
0
2

a
a

d
v
n

e

r

a
a

g

e

g
o
n
p
g
n
5
3
1
o

.

e

r

e
c

4
h
o
0
v
p
0
o
2
1
9
0
0
1
0
v
y
2
o
o
h
n
n
h
o
o

t
t

e
e

r
r

r
t
-
f
r

p
o
p
x
0
h
o
1
p
0
8
x
2
0
d
0
n
n
2
n

,
.

D

s
s
e
e
e

t
t
i
r

e
s

t

h

e
e
a
c
e
e

c

a
e

r
i
t
l
l
l
t

n
u

m

l
i

w

r
r
t
r

s
a
e
s
e
a
c
e
s
e
s
e
a

r
i

i
f
l
t
t
l

e

t

m

s

a
e
c
e
e

e

l

o
g

y
v
b
h
p
g
u
o
h
n
g

m

w

,

w

t
i

p
o
x
p
h
x

a

l

w

f

.

e

.
t

T

i
t

e

r
l
t

f

p
h
n

e

c

i
r

s

t
r
i

s

e
s
e
e
a
e
a

w

f
t

s
e

,

w

e

,
t
r

n
o

l

y

r

w

5
2

l
l
.

p
b

e
c

.
t

E

u
o
o
p
x
v

s
s

r

.
t

d

o

w

l

r

c
e

r

i

t

w

e

o

w

r

e

i

y

r

’

r

t

 U

r

u
g
p
u
5
4

e
a
c
s

n
n
o
p
d
n
h
8
o
1
h
o
d
p
n
v
x
o
o
o
d
p
p
x
x
o
n
h
u
n
n
y
u
n
h
o
n
g
o
o
n
o
g

s
a

i

e

i
f
i
t
r
r

s

e
s
a

d

r
t
t
l
i
r
-
.
l

a
s
e
e

r
t

s
a
e

o
d
y
9
h
9
d
p
9
o
7
n
1
n
2
o
d
n
o
d
o
d
n
n

e

a
e

w

a

y
o

r
f

o

m

t
i

s
s

M

e

r

c

h
8
n
0
b
h
o
0
u
h
2
p
o
n
8
h
0
o
y
u
0
o
2
y
h
u
n
p
9
o

s

r

e
a
s

t
r

e
s
a
a
e
s
s
e

r

i
r
t
:
r

i

9
9
9
1
n
o

,

e
c

r

t
r
i

f

e

w

e
a

i
t

r
t

M

e

t
r
,
t

c

y
b
g
n
u
p
v
o
g

;
r

t

f
l

M

e

r

a
s
a
e
e
s

t
t
r
r

s
s

f

i
t
i
i
t
t
t

e

s
e
a
c

n
h
k
n

i
,

i

w

a
e
e
a
c

l
t
r

a

t

n
u

a

r

w

t

t

a

l
t
r

m

r
i

s
e
e

a
a

i
t
i
r
l
l

c

l

r
t

t

E

o
p
p
o
x

a
e

n

A
U

i

,

R

r
f
i

a

C

i

e
c
a
e

N

e

w

t

f
t

t
r

s

a

e

f

t
.
i

s

e

t
r

s

t
 I

r

e

i
t

m

r

w

e

n

t

i

n

a
J

u
h
n
h

a
e

r

y

7
0
0
2

,

s
a
s
a

T

r
i

e
e
a

d
d
n
g

a

d
n

I

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

F

r

a

m

e

w

o

r

k

A

g

r

e
e

m

e

n

t

(

T

I

F

A

)

w

t
i

t

U

S

w
A

.

2

.

A

g

r

i

p
u
d
o
u
c
p
u

u

l

t

u

v
u
n
d
e
o
o
r

,

N

a

t
a
s
c

u

d
d
r

a

l

R

d
n
s
a
e
d

o

u

s
e
o
c
p
r
x

a

E

n

v

i

r
n
o

o

n

m

n

a

s
l

M

a

n

m

n

t

I

n
o

e
c
s
a
e
a
c

r

r
t
l

c

i
r
t

,

l
.

u

e

a

e

e

t
r

s

f

g

i
r

r

a

l

t

     P

r

d
o
o
o

m

o

f
t

e
e
a
s

r
t

e

d
y
o
o
u
q
n
d
o
n
g
y

i

a

l

a
c

r
t
i
l

i
.

n

a

i
t

n
o

t

o

a

d
d

r

s
s
e

f

a

      E

u
v
u
n
n
n

s
a
a

r
r

s
e
a
e

c
s
s
e
e
s

u

t

a

r
i

n
u
o

e
s
e
a
c
s
e

b

i
l

c
a

d
d
u
n

e

i
f
f
i

e
c
e
c

i

n
o

t

u
y

e
e
s
s

o

f

i
t
t

l

r

n

l

g
n

s

t

m

s

a

d
n

p

i

.

c
a
e
s
a
e
e
s

g

i

l

a

g
n
o

r
r
t

e
e

m

n

t

i

n
g

e

d

n
o

t

&

M

u
o

t

h

d

i
       R

o

.
l

e

f

o

r

m

e

d

e

x

t

e

n

s

i

n
o

e
s

r

v

i

s
e
c

f

o

r

s

m

a

l
l

f

a

r

m

e

r

s

.

R

e
e
e

g
g
y
o
h
o
n
k
p
h

r
i

p
n
x
o
o

e
s
e
s
a
e
e
s
a
a
a
s
a
e
s
s
s
e
e
“

l
.

a
a
a
a
e
s
c

o

l
l

u
o
b

r

a
s
s
e
“

r
,
i
t
t
l

n
h
d
g
g
h
y
n
y
d
o
d
u
p
n
p
u
p
n
u
n
o
u
p
h
g
o
n
o
o
o

s
c
a

t
l
i
i
(

m

r
r
l

v
o

e

s
s

b
u

s
s
a
a
a
a
e
s
s
a
e

t
r
l
i

h
n
d
o
d
n
g
n
n
n
n
k
o
h
n
b
d
n
v
n

i
t

a

l
l

y

t
i
i
i
r
i
l
t
,

w

h
n
n
o
v
n
o

D
U

r

u
p
g
u

a
a
a

y

p

l

a
e
e
e

y
n

i
t

g
o
n

a

l

A

r

A

r
i
r

e

M

i

i

t

V
B

e

e

a
a
e
c

r
)

y
h

e
e

t
r

m

s

f

t

d
n
o

d
v
d
n
d

M

c
c
c
a
e
a
a
e

s

c
e
s
a

i

B
C

h

a
s
a
e
e
e

o
y
n
o
u
g
d
d
n
n
u
v
o
v
n
p
o
v
p
o
g
n
h

m

r
r

r

t

O
w
A

r

m
m
m
m

r
r
t
i
r
t

c
a

.

i
i

s

)
t

a

w

r

i

d

i

n

t

h

e

f

m

o
h

f
i
l

T

f
j
l

e
a
e

m

c
s
e
e
a
a
s

r

a
a
a
s

t

(

n
g
d
n

i
f

r

r
t

i

a
e
a
e

l

i
i
t

m

a

l

a
e
a

t
l

u

.

r

,
l
l
r
r

u
d
o
d
p
o
o
o

r

e

e
e
e

m

a
a

e
c
e

f
r

f
’

i

m
m

a
e

d

i

,

i

m

p

v
o
o

d
b

f

t
t

t

e

m

t

U

r

a

s

i

a

g

s
a

n

o
p
x

t
r

e

f

e
e

f

r

.

 P

r

s
s
c
e
e
s
s
e
e
e

o
g
o
n
p
o
p
o
n
o
o
n
v
o
o
p
d
n
p
o
x
n
y
n
n
o
o
d
p
y
n
u
g
p
o
n
u
n
v
o
u
g
n
d
o
n
u
n
v
n
n
o

l
t

,

U

f
i
t
r
f
t
f
r
i

u
u
g
o
u

a
s

y

o
d

a
s
e

o
n

t

h

a
s

v

e
a
s
s

a

s

i
r
i
t
f
i
r

u
d
n
d
u
v
o
n
k
p
o
g
n

e
c
a
c

t

t
r

e

g
v
u
h
o
d
d
h
n
o
x
n
p
g
u
o
b
n
n
o
g
h
k
n
g
v
u
g
n
o
u
o
d
n
o
n
u
d
o
h
h

r

r

a

l

e
s

t

e
c
a
e
s
s
a
c
e
e
c
e
e

n

i
i
f
i

y
o
n
n
v
n
p
u
o
o

c
s
e
e
s

’
r
r
t
j
r
i
i
t
r

v

i
t

e
c
s

i
i
l
t
,
I

s
c
a

d
n

m

o
g
x
h
n

f
t
i
r
r
l
t

t
.
l
r

m

e
a

l
l
r

f

i
r
t
t
r
r

m

e
a

r

i

r

.

t

t
r
l
i
i

e

c
e
s

t

y
g
y
y
g
n
o
n
h
p
p
n
u

i

t

s
e
e
c

s
s
a
a

s
s
s
e
s

i
i
i
’
t
i
f
i

t

b
u
o
p
y

e

e
s
e
e
e

m

O

B

A
A
A

i

i

t

M

i
r
r
l
r

s
e
s
s
c
e

f

A

r

.
t
t
t
t

e
s

e

i
f
i
t
l
,
t

a

a
s

a

f
i
r
t
r
l
t
i

e

t
r

i

m
m

p

r

n
v
h
p
o
o
d

p

r

r
f
t

,

i

c
a

e

j
r
i

r

f

m

a

s
a
a
s
e
e
e
a

r

.

T

B

a

N

a

R

u
o

r

s
e
c

M

a

e

m
m

r

c
c
e
a

s
s
s
e
c

g
n
u

t
l

h

l
i
t

o

-
t
i

e
c

r
i

a

l

i

t

e

r

a

r

i

c

i

i

s

y

e
s

r

a

i
t

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
7
1

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

C

A

S

R

S
E

U

L

S
T

M

A

T

X
R

I

P

A
C
R
A

T

I
I

-

S

U

S

T

A

I

N

I

N

G
G

R

O

W

T

H

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

1

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

 I

m
m

p
n

l

e
a

m
m

e
e

n

t

a
e

r
f
i
t
t

o
n
o

f

a
e

n
k
o
n

r
i

.
t

e

g

r

a

t

e

d

w

a

t

e

r

r

s
e

u
o

r

s
e
c

a

g

n

a

m

w

t
t
     A
i
f

a
a

i

n
n

m

e

n

t

o

f

n

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

t

a

r

g

e

t

s

n
o

a
c

r

n
o
b

n

e
c

.

D
 A

r
l
f
t
r
l
r
r
i
r
i
t
r
t

n
h
n
o
g
u
o

t
t

P

r

e
c
e
s

v
u
o
q

e

n
n
p

i
t

b
o
n
n
n
y
o
g

P

)
r
t
t
t
r
i
f

g
h
h
o
o

r

s
s
s
e
c
s
a
a
e

m

i

n
o
n
o
v

r
r
t

u
u
k
n

f
r
l
f
i
r
t

a
c

a

r

a
e
s
s
a
s
e

o

f

l
t
l

h

e
e
s
e
e
e

d
v
d
d
n
n
n
d
u
o
k
n
y
h
o
v
o
n

t
r
r
r

e

r
t
r
i

n

a
a

a
e
e
e
s
a
a
e

t
t

r
r

n

u
d
d

s
e

p

a

m

e

i
f
i
-
r
r
t

s
e
c
e
a

c
a
s

o
v
o
o
n
o

f
i
t
r

m

a
e

r

s

w

i

u
b

i
t

m

l
j
t
(

i
l

t
t
i

.

E

r

h
d
n
y
u
b

B
w

a
a

e
e
e

t
l
r

p
h
o

R
N
N
 C

a

W

s
a
e
e
a

t

r

S

a
e
s
e
a
a
c

t

w

e
c

p

d

d

t

a

n
u
o

a

R

n
u
o
o

P

r
l
i

c
e
e

o

m

i
t

v

a

n
o

t

a

r

g

e

t

s

.

a

j
r

h
n
o
b
o

F

i

n
n
b
n
o
o
n

e
e
c
s
e
s
c
a
a
s
c
a
s
s
e
s
e
s
e

d
n
n
n
n
o
o
o
n
8
o
7
8
p
d
8
7
n
1
8
o
u
n
p
g
7
d
g
o
o
1
y
n
y
b

e

r

a

i
l
t
-
r
i
t
i
r

s
e

(
:

P

r

e

p

a

r
f
.
l
r
)

a

i
t

g
d
g
o
y
h
o
p
n
h
n
o
o
h
o
g
n
n

f
r
t
i
t

e
e
e
c
a
e
a
s
e
s
c
e
e
a

0
1

W
W
M

j
r
t
r
f
i
t

u
d
o
d
o
p
o
n
n
o
g
p
n
n
o
k

-

F

e
a
c

r

m

P

u
o
h
n
y
o
u
o
p
d
g
n
o

w

e

r

P

r

c
e
e
e
e
e
s
s
a
a
s
s
e

i
l
i
t

c

m

e
c

t

U

E
T

T

c
e

j

t

s

e

r

e
e

e
s

d
d
u
o
h
h
g
b

m
m

r
i
r
i
t
i

e
a
c
e

t

d

e
e
e
s

c
e

i
r
t

p
n
d

r
l
.

i
t

m

w

i

w

e
e

r
-
l

.

T

r
t
t
i

e

e
c
e

w

l
l
i

i
t
r

m

e
a
e

i
t
i
r
r
i
l
f

m

e

f
t
i
f
r

s
s
c
a

f
t
t
i
-
l
i
i
t
.

e

a

i
t

n
o

u
h
d

a

t
i
t

T

h
d

r

c
e
e

o
v

l

n
d
g

e
e

a
e
c
e

,

C

E

R

s

i
r

s

c

r

e

i
t
i

d
o

T

a

l

i
t

m

a
s

f
t

r

u
d
2

r
i
t

s

t
(

n
o

o

O
C

)

e

,

8
7
8

.

 W

h
p
v
d
o
g
o
n
9
o
2
o
p
0
y
h
0
2

l
t
r
r

B

a
e

k
o
h
n
o
d

I

y
n
d
o
u
b
n
o
o
p
p
o
y
h
o
d
h
o
o
n
p
h
o
o
n
y
o
p

s
a
c
c
s
e

t
i
t

u

i
t
t
l
i
t
f
t
t
r

e

C

a

l
l
t
i
f
r

F

i

n
p

e
e
c
s
a
c
a
s
a
s
e
s
s
c
a
e
s
c
c
e
e
e
e
c
e
c
a

n

A

i
i
r

s

t
t

P

l
r
f
r

x
k
g
o

r

a
e

m

:
l

U

r

n
o
d
y
n
0
h
o
0
o
y
n
0
o
n
d
o
0
n
u
h
0
h
g
v
3
u
n
n
o
o
o
o
2
n
d
d
o
n

a
a

h

s
s
a
s

i

m

t
i
t

c
a

t

a
a

i
t
i
r
r
i
r
t

’
i

p
n
o
o
o
p
h
p
p
6
g
7

t

n

h

e
e

i

v
n
o
b
3
3

e

m

c
e
e
c
s
a

i

m

o

f

t

h

e
e

K
C

T
P

r

l

e

U

e

N
D
C

F

m
m

w

o

C

i
t
i
i
t

C
B

i
l

m

a
a
s
s
s

t

a

e

.

f
r

M

i
j
t
r
j
r
j
t

t
t

p
d
u
v
n
d
d
u
o

r
i
i
i
r
t
i

a
a
a
s
c
e
s

i
f
t
t

s
e

,

M

y
o
u

,

t

e
e

A
N
D

e
a
a
e
e
a
a
a
e

d
3
v
o

e
e
e
e
e

,

i
t
r

s
e
c
e
e

g
n

l

m

,

t

f

R
O
C
C

s
e
s
e

t
r
r

h
n
y
p
g
u
n
2

a
e
a
e
e

i
r
r
t
r

.

T

t
r

w

r

r
r

e
e

s

d

t

e
a
a

m

a

i

e

d

E

i
t
.

F

m

l
.
r
r

,

p
h
p

r
r

w

e
a

o

t

v
u
d

i
l
i
t

s
a

i
t

/

r
t

r
t

e

u
q
n
o

v
o

,
l

w

t
i

s
e

m

t

r

f

l

m

s

0
0
2

,

0
0
0

O
C

e

3
E

.

u
I
b
n
u
p

n

e
s
f
e
c

r
v
s
v
n
u
r

a

s
s
a
e
s
c
c
s
a
t
a
a
s
s
e
e
c
t

u

c

u

e
r

s

r
i
l

i
i
r

r

t
l

t

n
b
o
n

l
i

r
f

s
s
a
c

.
r
t
t

u

c

t

u

r

e

a

d
n

u

t

i

a

e

o

 R

s
e
a

u
d

a
e
c
c

y
b

h

e
a
s

f
r
l

i
t

h
v

s
e
e
c

o
o
p

r

w

t
i

u
o
h

t

s
s
e
c
c
a

t

o

b

i

w

t

e

r

.

 B

e
c
e
e
e

t
t
t
l
i

r

a

i
l

n
n
g
p

m

e

n

t

b
n
o

f

w

a

t

e

,
r
i

e
a
a
c

o
n
k

s
s
e

r
r

d
p
n
d
n
y
g

a

t

n
o
h

m

a
e

i
f
t
r

n
o
o

r

m

a
a

e
e
c

i

d
h
n
n

t
r

a

i
r

s
e
c

w

i

t

e

r

l

c

m

.

I

m

p
d
n

r
l

v
o
o

e
e

d

m

o
b
o
o

t
f
i
l
i
t

y

n
o

f

t

o
o
p
o
h
p

e

r

i

u
n

r

b

a

n

e
c

n

t

e

r

s

a

w

r

c

s

r
t

a

s

.
t
r

    I

n
n

r
r
t

u
y
d
g
o

e
c

y

a

r

d

s

i
t

c

k

c

o

m

p

e

i
t
i
t

n
o

i

n

w

a

t

e

r

a

d
n

e

e

.

N

v
o
d
p
o

a

t

a
s
e
a
e
e
s
a
s
e
a

n
o
y
b
d
g
n
n
v

a
e

l
t
i

s
a
a
s
a
e

l
i

e

b
p
o
o
u
q
p
n
h
o
h
n

m

t
i
l
t
i
i
l

o
o
p
g
v
n
o
o
h
h
g
o
p
n
y
o
o
y

r
f
t

t

e
e
c
a

r
l
i
t
l
r
r
l

n
n
b
d
o
g
u
o
n

r

a
c
s
e
a
e
a
c
e

e
c

k
d
n
n
o

t
r

s
a
e

r

.

D

v
d
u
d
d
h
v
n
g
h

e
s
s
e
a
e
c
e
c
s
e
e
e
e

t

o
p
h

i
i
r

m

r
r

m

t
i
l

e
e

a
s
e
e
c
a

f

s
a
c
e
s

r

a

t
r

w

t
r
i
i

n

c
e
e

i

i
r

,

e

i
t

o
o

a
s

f
r

r

i
l

t

l

h
d

a

v

e

m

i

h
d
g
n

s

t
l
t

w

l
i

e

r

i
t

s

t

f

v

h

i

l

s
e

a

e

v

r

y

i
l

y

.

 R

e

u
h
g
d
d
o
n
n
b

t
t
l

a
a
s
a
c

i
r
t
l
t

o

r

d
o
o
h
y

e
e
e
c
c
a

n
u
u
d
o
h
p
n

,
i
t
i
l
i
i
t
t

g
n

i

m

o
p

i
r
l
t
l
l

e

m

e

n
p
d
n
d
v
g
n
y
n

t

e

i

i
f
l
i
t

h

c
c
a
e
e

W

S
S

a
e
c

d
u
u
n
d
n
g
u

c
e
s
e
e
a
a
c

;
i
l
t
i
t

r
t
t
r
i
f
r
i
r
t

c
c
e
s
e
s

y
o

s
c
e
s
c
c
e
a
s
s

t

o

r

w

t
i

h

i
t

s
e
s

w

s
e
e
a
c

f
l
l
l

o

w

i
t
i

s
a

c
e
e
e
c

y
p
o

r

o

r

p
n
n
o
o

m

d
n

i

o
b
u
p

f

r

t

W

S
S

a
c
e

c

t

m
m

l
i

o

r

i
,

l

o
o
p

e
a
s
s

d

a

e

i
r

d
o

i

y

;

d
n

e
s

r

i

u
q

t
i
l

r

e

f

o

W

S
S

t

l

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
8
1

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

C

A

S

R

S
E

U

L

S
T

M

A

T

X
R

I

P

A
C
R
A

T

I
I

-

S

U

S

T

A

I

N

I

N

G
G

R

O

W

T

H

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

1

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

    P

g
n
n
p
o
u

i
l

c
c
c
a
e
a
c
s

d
n
y
h
o
y

e
s

i
f

n
b

i
i
t
t
.
i
t
t
i

d
n
o

,

i
i
l
r
i

e
e

u
g

i
t
l
r
i
t

a
a
s
e
a
e

i
t

y
p
u
o
g
o
d
p
n
d
d
n
n
n
o
d

a

a
e
c

r

a

i
t

g
n
n
k
o

f

t
t
i
i
t

e

e

r

m

i
l

m

a
s

i

w

h
d

n

m

n

s

r

e

l

t

o

r

r
t

e

n

e

    P

r

g
o
n
u

r

a
c
c
a

m

s

i
t

m

o
p
d

l
f
-

e

m

a
e

n

t
t

e
e

d

f

o

r

r

e

u
d

c

i

g
n

l

o

s
e
s
s

a

d
n

n
u
o

e

r

w

r

.

     C

n
d
o
n

a
c
s
a
s

r
t

y
u

i
t

o
u
n
d
o
n

f

e
s

w

a

g

e

r
t

a
e

t

m

e

n

t

p

l

a

n

t

s

i

n

S

a

t
l

o

a

P

.

   S

e
e

u
p
g

a
a
a

r
l

t
i
t

e

f

d
n
n
u
n
o

c

i
t

n
p
o
o

s
e

f
r

o

r
i
t

o
n
p
o

i
l
.

c

y

d

e

i
f

n

i
t
i

n
o

,

r

a

a

s

r
i
t
         V
      S

s
e

g
n
n

i
t
r
t

h

s
e
e

n

e
a

u
o
p
d
d
n

i
t
l

c

o
y
n
o

-

m
m

a

g
n
o
k
y

i

a
c
e

p
u
g

c
a
a

r
t
i
t

y
o

w

t
i

h

i

n

i
l

n

e

m

i

a

f

r

l

s

.

e

i
t
r

a
c

l

d

i

s

i

n

t

e

g

r

a

i
t

o
n
o

f

b
u
p

i
l

c

m

o
p
o
n
o

i
l

s
e

.

e
a
c

d
n
n
o
b

c
e
c
e
e
c

i
t
l

i
r
t

c
a

t
i

y
d
g
n
n
k
g
n

o
p
y
d

i

s
s
e
s

i
t
i
r
r
t
t

n
o
o
g
u
n
b

i
t

i
t

b
u
p
p
n
h

l

e
c
a

c
a

o
p
o
d
p
n

e

r
r

a
a

i
t

n
o
n

a
e
c

.
i
l

O

E
S

c

n
o
o

r
i
f
t

u
o
n

s
e

l
l

r

t

e

i
l

e

f
r

m

d
n

i

a
c

t

r

s

m

t
i

s

h

m

a

r

i

e

m

.

.

w
 U
U

d
n

e

r

w

a

y
g
n
o
g
n
y
n

.

W

e

i
f
t
l
l
i
i
l
i
r

n
u

c
a
c
e
a
c
s
c
c

i
i
r
t
l
r
l
t
i
r
t

g
u
n
o
y
y
n
h
b
o
n
y
y
v
d
n
o
n
n
u
u
o

i

U

F

W

8
g
o
n
0
0
n
d
2
u
n
n
g
n

t
r
i

c

i
r
l
,
l

a
e

t

e

n
n
u
d
o
g
n

t
i

w
O

E
S

w

h

i
t
i

c
a

h
v

i

s
s
e

t
i
i
t
r
,
i
,
r

a
c
c
c
a

g
n
o
g
o
n
n
d
u
d
n
k
d
o
n
d
k
n

i
l
l
i

F

W

m

r

a
e
c
a
e
e
a

n
d
o
o
n
h

t
t

s
e
e
a
s
s
s
a

i
t

a

e
e
e

i
;
r

o
h
n
u
g
n
o

i
t
t
i

r
i

o
n

e

i
f

l
f
i
i
r
t

e

m

s

I
l
.

O

E
S

m

i
r
t
t
t
t

a

e

U
w

F

W

t

s

f

r

t
r
t

h

a
e

w

p
p
2
o
h
d

e
a

t
r
,
r

A

i
t
r

s
a
s

a

d
n

M

e

v
o

e

i

t

m
m

e
e

t

r
i

t

e
s

f

r

e

m

c
e
e

.
t
t

.

O

E
S

c

n
o

s
e

t

w

o

i

p

v
o

U

F

W

t

e

A

L
P

o

j

 P

e
a
s
s
e
a
a
c
a

n
o
b
y

y
u
b
d
n

:

E

g
n

i

n

e
e

i
r

h
n
h
o
g
d
n
n
o
g
o
n

e
c
e
e
e
s
e

i

p
u
d
n
g
o
n
n
p
o
n
g

s
c

m

t
i
i
t
l

e
s
c
e

e

p
b
o
o
h
d
n
o
d
n
n
o
g

.

P

t
r
f

a
s
a
s
e
e
c

t

o
n
n

b
h
b
n
o
d

t

e
e
e
a

i
i

n
o
n
n
o
v
n
v
g
n
n
n

e

r
i
i
r
f
i

m

e
e
e
z

n
d
n

t
.
t

a

l

i
l

A
N
D

I

M

A

f

r

f
i
t

r
t

i
l

t

i

a

i
l

S

t
l

t
i
:
l
i

O

E
S

g
h
b

a
e
e

n
o

t

h

e
a
c

e

i
r

a

t

e

t

m

a

l

v

i

y

f

o

r

t

l

i
t

t

l

a

.
t

 I

n

t

u
g
h
d
u
d
n
d
o
o
g
o
v
n
d
p
g
o
o
n
p
h
k
p
u
v
q

e

w

e

r
r
I

c
e
s

r
r
)
i
l
,
t
t
r
)

o

,

n
o
d
o
3
n
v
0
o
0
n
p
2
n
u
n
n
u
o
o
n
o
g
o
o
u
p
g

,
r
r
t
i
t
f
I
l
r

s
s
e

h

s
a

b

e
e

n

m

a

n
p
o
d
n
d
d
n
g
y
n

e

i

i
t
r
t
I
r
t
i
.
l

h

e

e
s

p
v
n
h
h
o

a

r

a

i
t

n
o

o

f

o
p

i
l

e
c
a
z
e

d
d
y
n

m

a

t
r
r
r
t
i
i
t
i

(

M

E

M

e

a
a

(
f
r

R
U

E
S

A

)
t

a
e

e
a

s
a

(

D
A

M

E

,

U

E
T

p
b

i
r

e
a
a
a
e
s
e
a
e
c

e

h
n

a
e
a
c
e
e

t

o

s
a

.

S

r

t
i
r

a
e

e
s

e
e

r

d
n
y
o
v
n

a
a
e

e

b

a
c
e
s
e
e

n

6
n
0
o
0
2
h
d
o
h
o
u

r
t

i
r
t

t

o

t
f
f

N

o
n
p
o
g
n

a

l
r
r

n

e

c

c
e

S

t

m

r
t
r
-

W

S
S

t

r

t
r
l

e
e

a
a
a
e
s

t

R
U

E
S

A

(
f
i
f
f

)

a
s

o
p
o
o

e
c
e
a

m

n
h
o
k
p
u

e

r
t
r

A
N
D

I
i
r

S

A

(

)
i

h

i
i
,

a
e

i
t
t
t

o
d
n
o

c

i
t
i
t
i

.

H

w

,

f

s
e

c

n
o
b

s
e
s

o

i
.
l

a

i
t

s

r
 I
i

e

i

b

e

r

e

f

r

l

s
e

s
e

i
t
i
l
i

h
o
p
d
7
n
0
d
0
y
2
g
d
n
v
n
d
o
u
u
p
n
p
n

J
c

e

,
l
l

t

e

U
O
G

a
c
a
s
a

t
i
r
r
t
r
t

a
e
s
e
e
e
e
e
e
a
e
e
s
a
e
c
e
e

t

p
o
d

N

i
l
t
r
i
t
f
i
f
r

d
n
o
n
o

a

l
i

C
C

n
u
v
o
h
q
g
y
y
n
u
y
b
o
o
o
o
n
o
d
v
o
o
p
v
n
n
o
o
n
p
p
d
o
h
y
n
g

m
m

i
r

e
a
e
e
a
a
s
a
c
s
e
s
s
a
c
e
s

i

n
6
d
0
n
0
2
o
n
n
y
o

f

r

E

e

r
t
t
r

y
g
h
o
d
n
h
o

P

o

i
l

c

y

,

i
r
t
r
l

i

a
a

i
t
i
l

a
c

l

p

t
r

r

e
s
a
z
e
e
c
a
a

I
.
t
.
i
l

,

e
s

U
O
G

a
e

e
c

R
U

E
S

A

d
o
d

n

r
i
t

i

c
e
e
s
c

s

r
t

a
e
c
e
a

f

o

r
r
r

l
f
r
(

c
e

t
i

i

s

i
r
t

d
d
o
n
o
n
d
g
n
g
n
y
o
b
h
y
h
u
n
h
b
o
g
o
n
v
p

i
t
t
t
i
r

m
m

c

r

i

A

W

B

e

o
p

t
r

n
d
6
o
n
0
u
g
0
o
2

R
U

E
S

w
A

a
a
e

e

t
r

o

u

t

m

m

p

r

n
o
d

w

t
i

I
t
t

h

e

e

i

a

l

r

s
e
s
a
a

u
g

i
l
r
r
t

a
e

t

e
e

c
a
s
e
a
c
c

i

.

t
i
I

W

S
S

c
e
s
e

r
i
l
t

,

i
t

e

r

i
t

f

A
A
A
N
D

S

)
r

h

p

t

e
a
s
s
a

r
i
t
f

c

i
l
t
r

h

w

a
e

t
t

e

r
i

a
e
c
e
s

n
o
p

.
r
t
i

W

a

t

e

L

A
w
N
D

d

e

A
N
D

I

S

w
A

s
e
e

P

a
s
e
c

m

b
n
u
d
n

d
n
n

S

a
e

m

b
g

e
e

r

n
9
h
0
0
2

i
.

I
l

S

A

s
c
a

c
a
e
a
c
s

r
t

g
n
p

i
t
t
i

h

e
s
e
e

n

d

t
i

w

a

e

r

r

r

r

a

r

t

c
e

a
c

a

d
n

i
l

y

.

 C

n
u
o

r
r

e
e
c

n
n

t
r

c
s

d
v
n
o
h

i
t
i

o
d
n
o

e
s
a

l
t
t
f
i

h

e
s
s
e
e

r

n
n
o
g
g
u

i
r

a
e

l
t

e

l

s
c
e

i
i
r
t
i

c

t
i
t

y
g

m

e
a
a

r

k

e

t

s

a

o
d
p
n

c
e
e
s

u

t
i
r

y
o

a
s

n
y
y
p
n
p
u
p

)
l

c

a

e

m

t

d
o

n

e

r

t

U

E
T

(

w

r

c

m

i

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
9
1

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

C

A

S

R

S
E

U

L

S
T

M

A

T

X
R

I

P

A
C
R
A

T

I
I

-

S

U

S

T

A

I

N

I

N

G
G

R

O

W

T

H

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

1

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

r
t
        S

e

g
n
d
n

t

h

e

n

e

d

c

o

m

p

e

i
t
i
t

n
o

a

u

t

o
h

t
i
r

y

o

f

R
U

E
S

A

a

R
U

E
S

C

.

r
t
      U
  I

n

u
d
o

c

i
t

n
o

o

f

r

e

u
g

l

a

t

o

r

y

c
c
a

n
u
o

i
t

g
n

.

R

E
S

A

n
h
o
p

e

t
f
i
r

o
o
d

i
.
r
r
)

m

s

e

i
t
i
f
f

c
e

e

y
g
o
y
o
d
n
o
h

l
t

t
i

s

r

e
a

u
d
g
n

t
l

a
a

r
t

y
g
o

r

t

s
a
s

k
o

s

(

a
e
s
e
s
e
a

p

r
t

m

g
n

m

l

e

t

t

b

b

i
l

s

e

     F

u

t
r

h

e

r

d

e

-

o
p

i
t
i
l

c

i

a
z

i
t

o
n
o

f

B

o

a

r

d

o

f

D

r
i

c
e

t

o

r

s

.

 P

e
e
e

l
r
t

o

l

c
a
e
s
c
e
e

d
o
n
u

m

p

i
f
r
l

a
c
s
e
e
s
c
c
e

r
t
i
i

e

m

a
a
s
e
c
a

i
i
r

n

t

r
i

n

e
e

d

a
a

i
i
t

m

o
n
p

t
r

o
p
d

a

t
i
r

y

l
r

v

e
s

r
i
r
t

y

p

m

n

t

a

i

e

t

l
f

t

t

o

v

e
c

.

 U

E
T

o
d
4
0
0
2

i

s

i
r
t

u
b
5
1

i
i
t

9
o
0
0
n
2
o
n

l

s
e
s
s

d

c
e

r

e
s
a
e

r
f

o

m

2
2

%

i

n

t

%

.

t

d
y
g
o
o
n
v
u
u
o
o
n
h
o
p

e

a
s
e
e
c
s

o
h

t
r

l
t
l
i
i
i
(
i
i

e

r

m

i
.
i
t
i
t

U
C

h
4
n
u
n
0
o
g
g
v
0
n
n
2
n
d
u
h
o
d
v
n
n
n
g
n
p

r
r

e

n

t
r
i
r
f
t
f
t

s

r
t

e
e
c
s
e
a
s
s
a
e
c
c
s
e

t

n
b
n
y
p
o
o
u
o
g

o

t
t
i
f
t
r
r

o
n
y
y
o
n
u
p
o
b
b
p
o
n
u
o
n
d
o
p
d
n
n
o
p
n
u
o
p
d
h
k
h

e
e
c
a
a
e

U
O
G

i

s

t

d
y
n
o
n
h
p
o
v
o
n
n
u
d
o

i
i

e

r

s
e

f
i

o
p
o
h
n
y
o

w

a
e
e
e
e
a
e
e
s
e
e

r
l

g

e
e
a
e

n

r
r

e
a

i
t
t

n
o
o

s

i
r
r
t
l
l

w

E
T

b
v
o
o
p

m

e
a

m

a

i

c
e

r
i
t
r

l
r
t

w

l
r
r
i

m

k

t

r

e
s
e
c
c

s
e
e

f

o

r

t
f
i
t
t
t
r

i

a

i
t

,

a
c
c
e

l

a

n
v
h
n
n

w

b

l

e
c
e
e
s

m

.
t
t

.

E

i
l

m

i
l
)

e
s
e

t
r

W

S
S

r

l
t
l

e

s

n
d
u
o
v

l

M

l

a
e

s
s
e
c

i

w

e

r
t

e
s
e

d
d
n

f

w

e
e

C

t
)
i
t

u

a

t
l

A

m
m

m

.
t
l

O

E
S

c
e
s
a
e

I
t

M
M

I
(

e

n

c

i

a

M

i

c

a

M

t

e

i

o

e

a

i

h

e

i

n

t

h

o

r

.

R
 U

E
S

A

i

s

b

c
e
e
s

o
v

m

i

u
g
q
n

a
a

y
y
k

e

y
u
g
p

l

a

e
a

i
i
t
r

n
n
o

t

h

e
a

o
d
p
n

w

e

r
r

m

e
a

r
r

o
k

e

t
f

s
a
a
s

r
f

e
e

u
g
y

t
l

a
a
s

t

d
o
n

r

,

e
e

n

f

o

i
r
r
t

e
e
c
c

r

u
o
q

f

r

i

e
c
e

t
i
l

r

e

l

s

a

p
p

v
o

t

a

r

d

s

f

o

r

l

c
e

i

p

m

n

.
t

 R

e

u
h
g
o
h
b

t
t
t
l

a
c
a
a
c
e
c
s
e

o

r

o
y

e
c
c
a

o
u
h
o
o
p
n
o
h
n
d
o
n
d
n
u
k
u
d
o
n
o
n
n
k
u

i
i
t
t
i
l
i
i
i
t
t

g
n

m

l
l
t
l
t
t

e

m

e

n
p
d
g
n
g
p
n

t

e

i

.
i
i
r
t
f
i
t
t
t

h

c
e

W

S
S

a
e
c

h
u
d
u
g
n
d

c
e
s
a
s
a
e
e

.
l

i
r
t

c

t
i

y

c
c
e
e
s

t

p
g
n
h
o
o
n
d
u
o

r

s

w

t
i
t

h
d

t

a
c
e

w
w

s
e
e

f

w

i
l

c
c
e
e
e
s
s
s
e
a

p

r

o

r

R
U

E
S

A

m

l

e

e

  P
t
t
t

e
c
e
e

t

n
h

i
l

r
l

r

a

i
r
.

a

o
n

R
U

E
S

C

c

y
o
o

m

p

l

e
c
c
a

t

i
t
t

e

n
h

i
l

w

o

e
a
e
c

e

f

r

e

m

l

m

a

n
o

o

f

r

e

l

t

r

i

n

h

t

e

o

m
m

i

i
t

c
e
s

r

c
e
a
e
s
a

r
r
i
f
t
l
r
r
t
i
r
r

o
o

m

e
c
c
s
a

o
b
d
d
u
n
p
v
o
d
o
n
p
p
d
d
n
o
h
g
n
n
n
p
d
o

i

i

a
c
a

t

r

s

f

r
i
l

t

h
h
d
n

e
e

W

S
S

,
i
r

c
a
e
c
e

i
t
l
i

i
r
l
t
l

c

t
i

y
y
n
b
h
y

a

d
n

t

e

l

e
a
a
c
e

d
d
o
n
o
o

m
m

n
u

i

a
c

.
i
t

n
o

s

s
a

i

l

a
e
s
s
a

s
a

p
d
h

e

v
u
g
u
q
d
o
x
o
u

R
U

E
S

A

R
w
U

E
S

C

P

m

e
z
s
e
e
c
a

t

r

c
e
e
a
e

t

e

E

c
e
a
e

e
s
s
e
a

s
a

p
o

r
r

o

m
m

g
n
u
o
d
n

l

t
r
f

t
l

a

s
e

o
h
v
v
u
p

i
r
t
i

i

R
U

E
S

A

R
U

E
S

C

t
t

r
r

t
,

i

f

a
a

t
i
t

m
m
m

b
u
p
n
u
h

i
l
i
t

c

a
s

d
n

e

r

a

t

o

r

s

o

f

l

i
r
t

c

t
i

y

,

n

a

l

W

S
S

e

l

c
e

i

a
c

n
o

e
s

l
t
t
i
  N
  U
  L

e

u
q

a

n

i
f
i
t

a

b

l

e

p

r

g
o

r

s
s
e

a

t

t

h

i

s

i
t

m

e

.

o

p

r

g
o

r

s
s
e

t

o

r

e

o
p

t
r

a

t

t

h

i

s

i
t

m

e

.

E
T

h
h
6
0
h
0
2

e
e
a
c
c
a
s
e
a

m

g
1
o
y
7
p
1
n
d
d
h
u

r

r

s
s
e

t

g
n
n
9
u
7
u
1
d
o
d
n
n
u
d
o
6
0
0
o
2
d
n
n

w

a

r

s

f
r

e

c

i

e
e

l
l
.

c
e

i
r
t
t

c
e

i
t
i

d
n
y
y

i
r

e
s
a
s
e

i
r
t

u
d
b

i
t

n
o
g

l
i

o
n

s
e
e
s
a
s

,

w

i

c

r

.
l
t

%

i

.

U

,
t
r

a

t

y

,

h

c

a

a

t
f

r

a

d
n

r
r

e

s

t

a

a

t

a

r

%

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
0
2

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

C

A

S

R

S
E

U

L

S
T

M

A

T

X
R

I

P

A
C
R
A

T

I
I

-

S

U

S

T

A

I

N

I

N

G
G

R

O

W

T

H

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

1

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

 A

t

l

s
c
a
c
e
a
z
a

t
t
i

d
n
u
0
0
2
n
o
y
o

W
M

u
d
d
d
n
o
p
o
o

f

c
e
e
s
s
a
s
e
a

t
t
i
i
i
t
i
t
i

g
n
n
o
o
d
n
d
n
n
n
n
9
o
0
n
0
g
2
g
d
n
y
n
b
h
y
n
n
o
o

a

l

i

t

e

r

c

c
e
a
a

i
l
t

a
e
c

p

r
i
t
r

c
a
s
s

e
a

r
r
l

c
e

r
t

c

-

t

r
r

m

t

s

w

A

r

s
a
e

.
i
t

a

B

l
i

f

p
p
u

y

f

l

i
r
t

c

a

 F

u

t
r

h

e

r

d

e
e

p

e

n

i

g
n

o

f

w

o
h

l

a
s
e

l

e

m

a

r

k

e

t

y
b

9
0
0
2

.

    N

a

t

u

r

a

l

g

s
a

l

a

w

i

s

e

n

c
a

t

e

d

.

U
w

E
T

p
h
b

a
a
s
a
e

r
l
t
r

a
a
e

0
0
y
5
d

a
c

l
l

e

d

f

b
n
o

r
i

r
i

n
o
n
o
d

s
c

f

r

t

h

e

s

y
h
p
p
u
n
o

l
t
i

o

f
r

c
z
a
a

v
n
o

e

t
r

e

r

s

t

a

i
t

n
o

t

h

a

t

l
l
i
   G

o

f

W
M

t

e

c
e

i
t

w

B

.
l
i

P

U

i

c
e
a
e
s
z
s
e
c

g
d
n
o
d
v
n
d
d
u
n
n
o
o
v
h
u
n

c
e
a

i

g
n

p

l

a

n

s

l
f

o
u

r

D
A

M

E

t

o
p
d
n
n
h
v
y
o

c

n
n
n
o
n
v
o
g

t
t
r
i
t
t
f
r
t
t

c
a
a
c
e
e
e

U

E
T

t

p
o
v

r
r
i
l
t
i
l
i

u
o
d
h
b
y
d
o
d
b
v
o

i

e

i

s
e
e
e
s

p
n

a

t

c

h

i

g
n

e
s
a

r
t
t

i

r

D
A

M

E

l
r

s
e
c
e

i
t
.
r
t

E

f
t
l
i

e

e
e
a

i
r

a

m

s
e

h

e
e
c
a
a

a

a
s
a
e
e

i
r

t
t

e

y
n

e
e
a
s
e

t
r

t

e

c
s

c

h

r
i
r
f

f

l
t

t

N

s
e
a
c

.
i
t

n
o

a

l

I

e

r

c

e

S

m

.

M

o

t

m

e

r

e

o

m

r

n

e

w

e

r

 S

f
r
t

y
o
d
u
u
g

h
y
n
b
n
o

t

c
e
e
c

r

e

u
n
g
n
o
o

t
t
l

a
c
a
a

r
i
t

o
g
n
o
u

f

t

n
p
h
o

a
a
e
e

t
t

u
o

r
r

a
s

l

n
o
g

e
c
e
s
c
s
a

t

d
o
d
u

r

i
.

s

c

n
o

c

l

d
u

e
c

n
d
o

i
t
.

A

d
u
u
n

t
t
i

n
o
o

p

e
e

t
r
l

m

a
e

r
t
f

a
s

l

s
a

r

c

l

R
U

E
S

A

s
e

r

a

.

4

.

E
m

n

a

b

i
i
l
r
f
r

n

g

E

n

v

r
r
f
i
f
i

r
o
n
k
d
o
n

o

n

m

p
u
e

n

t
a
e

f

o

n
r
n
o

t

h

e

P

r

i

a
v

t

p
o
p
p
e
o
p
o

S

c
e
v
o

t
a

o

h
y
h
r
b
y
o
b
d
u

I

p
b
u
p

i
r
l

v
o

e
e
s

e
s
e
c
a

m

w

r

p

a
s
a

i
t
r
r
t

c
c

i
t

i
t
.

i

c

v

a

u

r

i
t
i
          S
 I
r

h
g
n

c

t
r

e
s
a
s
e

p

r

o

t

c
e

i
t

n
o

f

o

r

c

n
o

r
t

c
a

t

a

d
n

p

r

p
o

e

t
r

y

.

m
m

u

l

a

i
l
t

g
y
n
o
p

i

v
o
n
n
n

a
e
a
c

i
t
r

o
n
o
n
o

f

r

c

o

m

p

e

i
t
i
t

v

e

n

s
s
e

a

d
n

e

m

e

t

i
t

.

A

r

l

A
D
A

M

E

o
g
o
n
g
o

f

a
e
e

)
t
t
r
i
f

s
s
e

e
a
e
s

t

o
y
d
g
n

r
f

P
P

A

c
s
s
a
e

(

P

w

e
s
c
a
a
s
e

r

P

r
f

c

e
e
e
s
a

r

m

e

n
g
n

e
c

u
n
q
o

t

p
5
p
p
b
 1

r

l

r

t

r

i

n

r

r
t

t

s

t

o

e

r

e

l

P
P

A

s

.

%

l
r

s
e
a
e

u
o
d

c
c

i
t

n
n
o
o

i
r
t

n

s
s
e
s
a
c
a
c
a

d

m

i

n

.
i

r
t

a

i
t

v

e

a

d
n

j

d
u

i

c

i

a

l

a

f

t

 E

n
0
5

c
a

t

m

s
e
s
a
e
c

n

t

o

f

n

s
e
e

w

b
v

a
e

p
d
u
n
k
u
n
d

r

r
t

c
e

n
y

l

e
e

g

l
i

a
s
a

l

i
.
t

n
o

a

d
n

%

o

f

r

o

l

w

w

    N

a

i
t

n
o

a

l

I

v
o
n
n

a

i
t

n
o

P

o

i
l

c

y

s
e

t

a

b

i
l

s

h

e

d

.

T

n
n
d
o
h
h
o
d
h

e

U
O
G

o
h
d

s
a

s
e
s
a

p
p
h

r

n
n
p
v
g
o
n
d
n
h
o
u
v
d
o
o

e

e
s
a
e
c

c
e
e
e
e

n
o
h
n
b
v
n
o
p

i
r

e
e
c
e
e
e
a

t

r
i
f
t

m

s

t

o
y
n
y
g
o
h

b

c
e

g
b
h
k
o
n
o

m

c
e
s
e
e
e
e

o
o
n
h
o

e

r
t
t
r
r

a

n
n
u
g
o

r

s

a

d
n

b

e

c
a

c
e

t

a
e
e

r
i
t
t
r
i
r
t
f

N

a

i
t

l

r
t
r
r
I

r

d
n
o

S

s

t

e

m

.
l
t
l
t
i

l
I

t

,

i
t
i

n
d
n
g
n
o

l

m

p

r

i

u
u
d
n
o

w

c
a
c

l

e

r
t

w

s
a
a

m

e

e

e

r
t

a

t
r

h
g
u
o
o

r

s

.

T

a
e
s
e

a
e
e

u
o
d

e
e
s

r
l
l
t

t

r
i

i
t
r

t

e

s

o
p

m

r

t

r

t

o

U

E
T

h

s

t
r

m

m

m

P

w

e

P

e
s
a

C

r
t

c
a

s

.

 N

o

p

r

g
o

r

s
s
e

r

e

o
p

t
r

e

d

a

t

t

h

i

s

i
t

m

e

.

 T

h

e
c
a

d
b
b
o
n

a
a
e
e

d
n
p
y
u
o
8
p
0
u
0
d
o
2
n
o
k
p
n

r

t

a
c

l

a

w

(

L

a
e
a
e
c
s
e
s
a

w

8
1

.

k
o
v
n
h
7
8
3

)
i
t

a
e

p
h
d
n
u
n
n

t
i

s

l
i
r
r

e

n
o
9
h
0
0
u
2
g

l

a

i
t

s
e
J
a
s
a
e

w

a
a
e
a
e
e
s
e
e
e
e

r

n
n
n
d
d
o
v
b
p
n
o
p
o
p
v
u
p
q
h

r

e
e
e
e

i

O

t
i

r

b

m

e
s
e

e

f
f
t

a
c
e

i
r
r

A

p
y

.

g
n
d
b
u

e

r
t
I

s
e
c
s
c
e
a
c

r
r
t
r

s

i

d
n
d
g
v
d
o
v
o

b
o
o
p
d
p
n
d
u
u

t

s
e
s
c
a
a
c
a
e
s
c
e
e

v

n
b
o

i
i
t

.
.

T

h

e

B

T

A

L

f
r

j

t

l
i

f
t
t
r
r

t

i
i
t

o
n
v

t
i
t
i

.

f
l
i
I

l
r

m

u
n

m

b

e

r

s
e

e

e

w

l

w

s

v

a

a

.

 T

b
d
n
n
n
u
u
d
g
n
o
d
n
n
n
d
o
h
d
n
n
g
v
u
o
7
b
p
n
o
p
0
n
h
p
0
n
o
2
d
b

e

N

e
a

i
t
t

a

l

r
r
i
r
f
I
r
r

v
o
n
n
n
h
o
n
n
g
d
d
g
o
8
n
n
v
7
n
o
o
7
n
g
y
h
0
n
n
0
u
v
h
o
d
2
g
o
o
n
o
u
n
d
d
u
n

a

i
t

A

c
e
e

y

n
h

e
e
a
s
e
e
a

b

n

e
s
c
a
e
a
s
a
e
a
a
s
c

t

b
g

i
t
l
r
i

s

h

a
e
a
e
s
s
e
a
a
a
a
s
e
e
s
a

d

,

.

B

p
b
n
o
o
p
h
y
p
o
d
o
p
n
d
p
o
o

e
a
e
e
e

r
t
r
i

o
n
u
n
o
o
o
o
n
d
d
v
p

O
w

c
s
a

a

i
.

i

m
m

-

a

i
r
t
t
i
t
i

G

a
e
e
s
e
c
a
e
s
a

r

j
r
r
t
i
r
i
r
f
l
l

M

n
g
g
o

w

i

t

b
o

e

r

A

e
e
e

f
t
t

r
t
i
i

r

t
r
I
l

p
n
p
b
d
u
h
n
p
o
o
n
o

r

m

h

r
r
t

w

r
f
i
r
r
l

e

i
r
i
r
t

s
s
s
e
c

l

y

i

a
s
e
s
e

e

i
i
r
t
t
i
r
l

s
e
a
e
s
s
a

e

m

i

y
h
o
n
n

t

o

I
I
f

i
t

f

e

e

A

y

.
i
t
i
l

r
t

e

t

t

w

r

a

,

N
A

0
3
n

m

s
a
e

i
t
,

i

s

u
o

m

e
s

t

,

i

n

e
a
e

r

t

m

t
l

c
e
e

i
f

i
.

U

a

.

i

c
e

t

v

e

a

e
e

e
s

t

e

d

r

f

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
1
2

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

C

A

S

R

S
E

U

L

S
T

M

A

T

X
R

I

P

A
C
R
A

T

I
I

-

S

U

S

T

A

I

N

I

N

G
G

R

O

W

T

H

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

1

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

 I

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

p
d

i
r

v

a

t

e

c
e
s

t

o

r

R

&

D

i

v
n

s
e

t

m

e

n

t

s

.

      M
    N
  I

o

r

e

r

a
e
s
e

r

c

h

e

r

s

i

n

i

u
d
n

s

r
t

y

a

d
n

a

g

i
r

u
b

s

i

n

s
s
e

.

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

u
n
d

m

b

e

r

o

f

p

a

t

e

n

t

s

.

e

w

u
b

s

i

n

s
s
e

i
l

n

s
e

s
e

t

a

b

i
l

s

h

e

d

.

 A

v
o

a

i
t
l
i

a

k
n
y
g
8
o
b
n
h
2
h
o
0
n
1
h
$

l

e
a
a
e
s
a
a
e
a
e
c
e

v
d
p

t

i
t

d
n

i

a
c
c
e
s

r
t

s
e

t
I

d
v
n
n
8
0
n
0
o
0
2
0
b
0
u
d
o
n
2
p
n
n
v
9
o
3
0
3
0
h
0
n
0
2
2
u
8
n
0
o
0
o
2
b
b
h
n

a

t

i

%

f

t

t

a

i
’
l
t

h
h
v
n

e
s
e
e
a
s
e

t
r

m

e

n
v
n
n
v
o
n
p

t
i

i

R

&
m

D

a
c

m

e

r
f

m
&

i
r

t

2
o
0
6
6
o
4
2
o
d
o

.

,

t

e

G

e

r

m

e

s

s

t
f
i
r

c
e
e
s
c
s
e
s
e

t

e

n
o
n

t
’
r

i

n

R

D

r
r

t

.

%
%

r
f
(

m

t
.

m
%

i

)
i
l

a
c

t

a

t
i

t

a
s
e
c

a
c
e
s

h

r

e

s

t
l

i
r
t
.
t

I
l
.

n
d

s
e
a

l

t

e
e
e

e

r

a
s

,

i

t

m
m

e

6
n
3
$

i

o
d
n
n
o

t

l

a

m

s

p

e

t

w

5
0
0
2

,

r
f

o

U

S

.

6

m

i
l
l
i

t

U

S

.

.

8
 2

%

h
o

f

r

a
e
e
s
s
e
e

r

c

h
p

e

r

e
e
s

m

d
u
d
y
n
o
p
n

i
l

e

r
t
i

4
y
0
0
u
2
d
n
n
y
n

i
i

s

r
t

i
.

d
6
0
0
2
n

,

s
a
a
a

s
c

y
p
o
n
o

m

a

r

e
e

d

t

b
5
1
o
v

%

o

f

r

a
e
s
e

r

c

r

m

l

y
o

d

i

s

L

a

t

e

r

t

i

t

t

a

a

l
i

a

l

e

.

  T

o
8
0
h
0
2

e

.
t

t

a

l

u
n

m

b

e

r

o

f

p

a

t

e

n

t

s

a

w

a

r

d

e

d

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

d

r
f

o

m

7
2

i

n

5
0
0
2

t

o

2
7

i

n

   I
i
t

3
p
0
p
0
6
3
2
0
0
v
v
o
0
o
h
0
1
2
2
0
n
0
v
v
4
1
2
o
o
u
0
0
n
n
d
n
0
0
n
h
n
h
n
2
2

-
i
t
t

g
8
u
u
2
d
q
q
n
n
o
v
y
v
o
o

i
l
t
i

y

h
o
p
h
o
h
h
o
v
o
n
o
p
u
o
o
v
y
d
3
6
o
0
0
n
0
2
0
3
o
n
2
2
6
9
v
n
n
h
o
o
o
o
n
6
3

%

f

r
i
f

m

s

i
t
t
t
t
t
t
i
r
t
t
f
t
f
i

n

t
i

g
u
n
g
v
g
h
n

a
a
e
e
s
s
s
a
e
a
e
e

m
m

n
u
n

t
f

c
a

t
i

o
u
u
v
v
6
g
o
o
0
n
n
n
0
n
n
u
g
n
u
2
u
n
n
n
n
n
4
h
0
b
0
o
2
n
g

i
r
i

c
e
a
s

i
t
t
i
i
i
r
i
i
r
r
t
t

g
o
v
n

r

e
z
c
e
c
e
s
c
e
a
e
a
a
c
c
s
e
c
a
a
a
e
c

t
I
i
.
t
i
i
r
i
r
l
t

e

d

o
u
o

t
f

a
c
e
s

e

s
c
a
a

i
t

s
a
e

I
t
.
l

,

a
e
e
a

l

t

e
c
e
e
a
e
a
a

e

n
u
o
v
u
d
v
u
p
h
o
g
n
h
n
v
n
o

s
e

r

e

r

w

e

r
i
.
f

%
m

r

t

m

a

f

a
c
c
a
e
s

t
t

v

e

-

n
o

l
i
t

%

f

s

m

f

t
t

u
n

i
r
i

i
l
t
i
r
r

i
t
f

a
c
e
s

i
t
t
t

e

e
e
s
c
e
c
a
c
e
a
e
s

i
t
i

e
s
s
e
a
a

I
t
.
l

,

e
e
a

l

i

g
v
g
n

t

m

i

t
(
i
t
t
.
i

s
e

f

h
o
h
x
h
o
o
n
o

r

e
a

r

w

r
.
i

%

a

r

t

m

a

f

c
a

t

v

T

e
e
e

l
l

i
r
t
-
i

e

r

t

f

a

f
i
r
t
i
r
f
t

m

l
i

i
-

w

t
r

t
f

r
i
r
t

i

i
i

e

e
s
s
a

l

o
v
n
o

t
r

l
t

e
e

e
c
s
e
a
e
c
c
a

r
r

i

)
t
t

i

s

a

l

,

w

h

c

w

e

e

a

m

o

m

i

t

e

.

5

.

M

o

d

n
z
b
u
p
r
e

n

i

a

t
c
c

a
c
e
s
i

o

n

o

f

t

h

e
n
n
u
p

S

s
a
t

a

t

e
o
d
n

R

e

n
g
n
u
o
o
h
n

r

e
z
e
a
e
a
c

n

i

i
l

t

o
n

r

f

c
c
e

i
t

n
o
y

t

a
c
c
e
a

t
i
i
f
l
f
i

c

.
i

e

y

,

r
t

s

a

r

t

b

y

 F

h
o

s

t

c
e

i
r

c

i
t
l
i
i

c
e
z
s

n
o

y
p

a
e

i
t
.
r

c

i

p

a

i
t

n
o

i

n

c

o

l
l

a

o
b

r

a

i
t

n
o

w

t
i

v

i

t

 E

h
v
n

e
e
e
c
e
c
a

n

d
d

-
i
l

e
e
c

n
y

r
t
.

a

i
l

a
z

i
t

n
o

a

d
n

i

m

p

r

v
o

e

l

o

a
c

l

e
s

r

i

v

r

y
n
o
d
o
d
n
u
o
b
n
p
n
p
o
n
0
o
d
o
0
d
d
1

%
m
m
m

a
a
e
s
s
s
a
s

o
x
n
y
o
b

e

c
e

u

i
t
I
)

v

e

n
u

t
t
t
i
i

e
e
s
s

i

n

t

n
b
h
u
p

e

e
e
c
c

n
g

r
t
r

a
a

l

a

i

i
l
i
i
r
i
i
t

r
t

t
f
i
i
t
t

f
l

S

C
w

E

i
(

S

m

a

I

t
i
l

d
o
d

e

C

E

s

a

.
t

a

s
e

t
i

h

n

h

a

i

r
t

A
C

T

A
C
A
O

F

i
(

T

c
a
e
s

x

t

d
n
ó
o

O

r

e

n
n

a
a

o
d
n

d

a
e
e

t

a

a

d

m

i

n

r
t

i

F

i

c

i

r

)

.

E
E
S
S
S

I

C
A

d
h
u

a
e
e
s

y
h
b

e
a
s

r
l
l

s
c
e
e
c
e

x
v

u

i
t
)

n
h
u
d
n
v

e

t
i

s
e

i
r

n

i
t

h
d

e
c
c
e
e

n
y

r
t
.

a

l

a

d

m

i

n

i

s

r
t

a

i
t

n
o

,

e

x

e
c

p

t

f

o

r

(

t
l

i

a

t

P

s
e

n

  T
t

w
A
C
O

F

w

s
e
a
c
a

r
i
.
i
i
i
f
r

s

t

a
e
s
s
e
a
a
e
a
s
e
a
e
a
a

p
o
d

t
r
t

d

i

n
d
1
n
b
d
9
n
9
u
d
1
y
h
h
n
n
k
n
o

,

a

1
0
h
u
d
n
h
0
2
k
d
n
n

t

e

r

e

w
H

e

r

e
e
e
e
s
e
e
z
e
s

5
0
0
2
n
h
d
n
h
n
o
g
o
n
u
d
u
d
h
d
o
g
p
n
h
g
v
d
d
v

t
r
r
r

a

l

a
e
e
c

m

e

d
n

m

e

t

s
s
a

t

o

o
n
0
n
u
1
o
0
o
h
b
d
2
d

e
c
e
e

l

e
a
a

,

i

n
p
n
o
d

l

g
o
o
n
h
p
p
p
g
o
u
g
d
n
o
n
d
n
d
u
o
u
d
p
n

l

m

m

e
a
s
a

i
l
t

.

u
o
n
o
h
o
n
n
o
n
o

w

r

,

T

A
C
O

F

i
t
t
t

a

l
r

w

,

c
a
e
e
e

a
e
s
s

a
e

i
r
i
i
t
t
t
t
i
t

m

i
i

r
i
r

s
e

e
a

m

N

r

n
n
d
p

m

t

i
t
i
l
r
i
f

a

t

-

A
C

S

e
c

.

T

e

B

f
-
t

I
l

B

T
S

C
A

L
E

a

I
(

A
A
C
B
O

T

L
F

)

s
e

t

i

l

e

s

t
r

f

r

e

i

m

e

m

a

e

e

r

I

r

T

.

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
2
2

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

C

A

S

R

S
E

U

L

S
T

M

A

T

X
R

I

P

A
C
R
A

T

I
I

-

S

U

S

T

A

I

N

I

N

G
G

R

O

W

T

H

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

1

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

  E

d
n
o
g
n
d
n
g
d
d
u
d
b
n
d
p
x
b

a
e
s
a

e

e
a

m

r

e

e

r
i
t
f
r
f
f

c
e
e

v
o

a
e

n
u

e
e
c
s

d
u
o

f

r

s
s
e

u

t
l
.

s

-

i
t

a

p

m

a

t
i

     2

v
v
o
5
o
o
n
g
d
d

%
m
m

c

u
o
p
p

c
s

i
t
r
t
i
t

r

c
e
s
e
a
e
e

u
d

f
i
t

d
o
o
o
n
g
o
n
o
n
o
d

f

r

s
e
a
c
s

n

l
r
r
t

a
s
e
a
a

d
u

m

i
f
i

n
o

s

r
t

a

i
t

n
o

r
f

h
p
n
v
d

t
l

c

s
e
a
e
s
e
a
e
e
e
c

b

i
r

s
e
e
c

r
t
.
f
r
i

I

r

a

g

a
e
e
c

y
b
o
n
d

f

u

e
e
s
a
e
c

r

s

a
s

i
r
f
i
l
l
i
t

s

e
s
s
e
c
a

d

y
v
v
b

r

y
n

m

t

p
v

m

d
n
h

b
u
u
g
p

r
r

i

e
c
e

e
a

i
l
t

r

e

d

e

t

r

e

u

y

a

.

E

d
n
b
y
h
o
p
x
v
u

e
a
e
a
s
e
e
a

n
d
o
u
h
g
d
g
u
u
n
b
d
n

e
e
e
s

r
i
f
t

e
e
e
s
a
e
s

p
h
g
n
g
y
d
b
d
u
n
d
g
b
u
d
n
u
d
o
b
p
d
p
p
u
b
b
p
k
o
g
n
n
n
u
b
h

t
i
l
l
i
r

s

-

e
e
e
a
e
s
e
e
s
a

e

i
t

s
a

b
g
o
o

e
a
a
e
c
a

n

e
c
a
a
c
s
a

h

i
i
t

d
o
n
v
d
o
n
n

e

.

T

h

e

h
x
h
n

c
e

t

i
f
f

e

-
l
f
i
t
r
r

r
r
t

r

r

e

r

a
e

l
r
l

r

m
m

r
r
f
i

m

a

,
t
t
l
r

w

i

w

l
l
i

r
r

e
c
e

t

t
t
i

t

w

t
t

a
e

i
t

d
n
n
o
k
n

s
e

u
o

a
s

i
t
.

P

a
e
a

m

a

s

t

t
r

e

h

B

a

f

m

n
o

i

s

v

a

l

.

  C

o

s
a

t
r

e
s

o

f

m

e

n
d

r
i
f
i

c

n
o

a
s
e

o
h
n
o
u
p

r

c

e
s
a

u
p
y
d
b
o
d
o

A
C
U

s
e
e
a
s
a

r

5
3

%

l

o

w

e

r

t

h

a

n

c

o

s

t

s

i

n

r

e

t

a

l
i

m

k

.
t

N

o

i

m

i
t

f

r

f

r

c

h

.

 N

p
v
o
o
g

r
r

g
o
n

r

s
s
e
e

r

e
e

o
o
p

t
r
r

e

n
d

e
c
a
a

t

t

o
n
h

i

s

i
t
t

m

e

.

T
P

e

r

e
c

n

t
-

s
e
a
e
a

g

o
u

r
f

d
u

a
s
s
e
e
s
e

r
r

.
i
t
t
l

s

i
f

e

d

y
b

e

m

n

t

p

f
r

m

a

n

I

B

A

L

m

u

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
3
2

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

P

R
A

T

I
I
I

-

I

M

P

R

O

V

I

N

G

L

I

V

I

N

G

S

T

D
R
A
D
N
A

S

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

A
C

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

1

.

S

o

y
c
e
v
n
o
v
o
r
p
o
9
n
p
0
u
0
b
d
2
u
u
c
y

r
r
i
(
r
r

a

l

P

o

e
t

t

r
f
i
t
i
i
l
l
i
t
t
l
r

o

n

a

d
n

P

v
o

4
0
r
g
b
3
e
n
0
u
0
2

t

y

A

l
l

v
S
e

i

a

a
e
t
c

i

o

n

R

e

u
0
u
d
2
v
d
o
o
p

e
c

a

t
r

d
n
9
o
0
b
0
n
2

m

1
n
3

m
%

i
t
(
i

,
/

)

t
r

%

)

.

A

b
y

e

e
e
s
a
a

i
l

e

s
s

i

e

e
c
e

a
e

l

e

t

m

w

h

r

a

n

t
r

c

i
t

.

     I

n
g
p

c
e
e

i
(
r
f
r

e
s
a
e

n
o
n
0
o
0
p
0
n
7
n
2
8
o
p
g
g
v
n
o
d
n

e

s

i

c
a
s

v
o

c
e
a
s
a
e
e
s

r

o
n
0
b
9
g

e

f

d
h
o
3
y
b
n
8
9
1
0
0
7
p
2
o
1
o
y
b
p

e

l

e

i

l

a
s

m

%

t

l

l

t

%

w

l
i

e

e

i
-

d
3
0
n
0
o
2

i
l

s
e
e

r
f

%
m

.

%

o

f

D
G

P

a

.

)

t

o

l

o

w

9
0
0
2

.

6
p
0
o
0
2

i
l

l

e
e
a

m
m

s
e
e

r
i
t

g
d

e

n

c
e
a
c
e

p
h
y
y

r

0
u
0
o
0
d
0
0
2
g
h
o
p

r

a

m

(

P

N
A

S
E

i
)
f

i

m

n
d
n

,
l

r
r

s
e

,

9
0
0
2
n
y
b
b

e

e

c

i

a

i
r

s
e

y
b

,

a

g

l

e
s
a

t

.

  F

a
e

m

l
i

y
n

a

l
f
l

o

w

e
a

p
p
u
n

e
c

r

g
n
g
o
o

r

a

m

h
h

s
a
e

a

l
r
t

s
a
e

t

9
0
0
0
6
2

p

r

e
c

t

o

t

a

k

-

a

m

t

o
o
p

y
b

.

  P
i
f

c
e
s
a
e

n
y
o
b
n
k
n
o
n

i

s
a
s

y
y

s

t

e

m
m

b
n
o
h

c
e

o
p
o

m

s
e
e

m

o
o
n
b
g
x
n

t
t
i
r
l
i

e

s

n
n
x
o
u
o
y

s

i
t

a

i

e
a
c
e
c

7
1
d
b
d
u

l

e
e

i
r

l
l
.

w

i
t
.
i

r

e
e

i
l
f

i

t

l

D
w
G

r

P

e

9
n
0
0
2

s

s

d
n

t

e

%

o

f

P

  M
     P
t

s
a
e

n
o

l
i
t

n
o

c
s
a
e

0
v
9
o

e

r

a

g

e

o

f

p

e

p
o

l

e

i

o
n

l

d

a

g

e

i

n

c

r

s
e
s
a
e

t

%

.

o

r

e

r

e

u
g

l

a

r

v
o
p

e

t
r

y

m

n
o

t
i

o

i
r

g
n

i

n

p

l

e
c
a

.

P

N
A

S
E

i
r

e
c
c
s
a
e
e

h
g
n
u
g
u
b

d
9
0
d
o
0
2

e
a
s

m

a
a

0
p
u
0
0
d
5
x
n
7
3

i

m

m

o

f

0
h
0
n
0
y
5
b
d
8
d
h

,

u
o
n
h

e
s

o
h

l

d

s

(

n
y
g
n

a
e

l
r
l
l

y
n
o

0
b
5
n
3

,

p
h
0
0
0

e
e

p
o

l
.

e

)

b

s
e

f

o
o

r
f

e

l

r

e

l

e
c
c
a

t

e
e

e
e

w

F

a
e
c
e

m

l
i
i

A

w
w

a
e

s
e
e
c

c
s
e

m

e

A

A

t

,

,

l
i

r

e

w

r

r

i

v

t

h

e

n

.
t
i
f

7
 8

%

h
g
n
o
v

f
i

t

a
e

t
l
i
r
i
f

s

u
q
y

i
l
l

n
o

l
i
t

e
a

s
e
c
c

h

l
i

6
7
d
8
n
0
0
n
2
n
d

r
i

e

a

%

o

f

c
e
s

d
n
o

u
q

i

n

l
i
t

e

c

h

l
i

d

r

e

n

w

e

r

e

r

e
c
e

i

f

m

a

w

n

.

  P

s
c
e
e

n

i
i
l

p
p
x
b
x
n
u
u
g
u
p
n
n
n
d
o
o
n
n
8
6
0
g
0
p
n
0
0
x
d
2
p
2

a
a
e
c
e
s
s
a
e
a
e

d
p
n

i
r
l
.
r
t
i

u

r

c
a
e
a
e
a
a
s
e
e
e
c

r
t

o
h
o

e

d

a

r

d
n
n
u
o

n
8
n
0
o
0
b
2
y
d
v
d
n
b
n
h
n
6
o
y
6
o
0
0
0
v
0
2
2
5
u
1
n
n
o

%

f

D
G
A

P

i

6
n
d
0
d
d
u
d
0
2
h
g
n
u
o
h

,
t

a
e
a
c
c
e
c
a
e
e

n
d
n
b
7
v
0
0
h
2
n
d
o
n
n

a

e

e
e
a

i
i

e
a

o
d
n
n
o
8

g

f
r
f

w
B
w
D
G

P

s

i

e
s
c
e
a
e
c
e

i
.

t
i
l

f
i
l

i
r

s

u
b
0
n
y
d
p
b
n
v

l
i

,

f
t

m

e
a
e
a

S
P

r

e

a
c

t

s
e

a

e

e
a
e

s
e
e
s

t
i

i
l
r

%

D
G

P

b

t

a
a
a

l
.

S

i

B

S
P

r
i

e
a
c
s
e
s

l
l
t

h

e

l

r

t

e

e
s

c
a
s
s
a

p
h

e
e

m

e
e
c

,

r
f

s
a
e

l

c
e
e
c

t
i
l

n
v
o
g
n
h
n

a

t

.
i

e

t
i

r

n

t

g

D
G

P

e

i

i

r
i
  P

o
v
n
6
o
o
0
0
2
o
p
n
o
n
u
q

i
t
r

r
f
t
i
(

t

h

e
s
e
a
e

l

5
d
8

e

l
r

y
v
o
3

c

5
8
o
d
n
y
b
6
d
0
0
2
0
v
7
n
o

e

r

e

s

c

i

a

l

c
e
s

8
y
0
0
u
2
n

t
i
r

r
)

e

m

a

i

n
h
u
d
8
0
n
0
2
n

e

e
c

g
o
n
o
p
h

a

s
e
e

d

s

e
c

w

.

%

i
r

a

%

i

.

I

,

t

r

t

i

l
i
t

e

c

e

a

g

w

s
a

e

%

.

 A

p
d
n

a

i
i
t
r
t
i

c
s

i

p
p
u

a
a

t

y
d
n
o

r

M

&

E

s

y
g
n

s

t

e

m

o

f

s

o

c

i

a

l

o
p

i
l

c

y

w

s
a

s
e

t

a

b

i
l

s

h

e

d

i

n

M

I

D

S
E

a

r

n
n
u

i

.

2

r
.

H

e

a

l

e
a
e
t
s
s
e
s
e

h

C

a
c
e
a
e

t
t
l
t

i

n
y

t
t

g

r

a

t
t

a
c
s
a
a
a
e

y
d
h
d

d
n

i
f

a
a
c
e
s

l
l
r

y
d
d
u
v
g

s

u
h

s
e

t

a
a
e
a

i

n

h
b

l

e

u
h
o

h
o

m

t

i
f

e
e

s

t

h

t
l

m

r
l

a
e

h

.

N

a

i
i
t

p
n
o

a

l
l

H

a
e
e

t
t
l

n
d
h
n

.
i

s

u

r

a

n

e
c

r

e

u
g

l

a

i
t

n
o

c

o

m

p

l

e

t

e

d

a

d
n

m

e

m

e

T

h
h
h

e
e
e

h
n

a
e
s

(
t
l
r

n
h

r

c
e
e
a
c

f

o
d
v
d
v
o
n
n
n
o
o
p
p
o
n
n
u
o
o
o
h
g
g
n
n
y
g
d
d
p
v
o
o
d
v
n
o

r
r

m
m

o
u
p

r
i

s
s
s
s
e
c

d
b
6
n
p
u
p
h
ó
d
p
n
u
o
d
p
y
v
n
n
o
o
o
b
o
g
g
p
y
y
h

r

c
a
s
s
e
e

i
r

b

e
a
e
a
c

d
o

y
b

l
l
l
r
-

a
s
c

w

n
h
n
n
o
o
n
d
d
o

s
s
a
a
e
a
z

n
d
n
o
b

e
e
a

i
i
t
l
i

m

y
n
p
u
g
n
b
n
g
k
o
d
n
n
d
p
n
d
n
o
u
n
y
g
h
o
n
x
h
u
p
o
n
h
n
o
h
y
k
h
8
o
1
y
p
d
b
n
n
0
u
o
q
n
u
g
d
n
h
o

l

e
c
a
s

m

e
c
e

n

t

e
e

h
u
d
d
p
n
d
h
d
h
h
y
b

.
t

N

h
g
u
o
o

w

,

t
t

i

u

a

e

m

i
i
i

t
i

m

-
f
l
l
i

r

a
e
a

i
t
i
i
i
i
t

l
)
)
l

t

r

A
A
B
N
N
O
U

S
S
S
P

B
A
A

e

P

r

c
e
a
c
e
s
a
e
a
c
a
a

S

o

P

v

l
l

S

c
a
e
a
e
a
e

i
t
l

a

B

t

s
e
s
a
e
e
e

F

-
(
(
r
t
f

F

N
N

e
a

l

a
c
e
a

S

d
u
d
n
n
u
o
o

N
N

H
H
H

F

.

T

e
c
c
e
c
c
J
s
a
a
a
c

J

t
i
t
t
i
i
i
r
r
r
t

a

i

a

l

S

I
l

-
t

e
a
c
c
a
e
e
a
e
s
a
a

t
t
i
t
t

a

l

(
t
I
l

B

a
a
a
a

r

)

s
s
s
e
e
s
c
a
a
a
e
s
e

t
l
i
r

h

r

i

s
s
e
a
c

m

t

a

i
t
i
l
t
i
i
t
(
.
)
l

e
e
s
e
e
e
a

t
r
j

i
t
t
f
t
i
t
l
r
i

e
s
s

r

s
e
e
a
s
e
e
c

t
)
r
r
i

r

,

e

e
a
a
s
s
s
e

a
a
s
s
c
a
a

s
a

r
r
r

i
i

t
t
r

r
r

l
l

%

f

t

l

m

t

j

t
t
,
.

e

d
h

A

s

c
e
a

a
e
e

i

o

e

a

e

a

t

f

e

b
n
o

t

w

r

s

s
a

i

c

d

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
4
2

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

P

R
A

T

I
I
I

-

I

M

P

R

O

V

I

N

G

L

I

V

I

N

G

S

T

D
R
A
D
N
A

S

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

A
C

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

      S
t

h
o

e
a
a

r
r

y
v
h
4
p
o
h
h
3
p
0
o
0
d
h
2
n

f

a
e

t
l

c
a
e
e
s

t

o
d
n
n
n

l
r
i
t

e
e
a

p
g
x

e
a
e
c

d
n

t
i

u

r
r
l

s
e
e
c
e
s
e
s
s
a
e
e
s
c
a
c
s
e

b
d
u

i
r
i

r
t
f
i

d

w
B

a
s
e

i
r
t
l

m

e
a

r

r

i
r
f

d

f

4
0
o

r

S
P

r

t

a

9
0
v
0
2

i

n

o

m

.

%

i

t

%

i

.

i
  F

a
c
s
e

l
i

t
-
r
t

s
e
a

n

f
r

e

r

s

t

o

B

S
P

r

e
e
a

u
d

e
c

k
d
o

i
.

n

i
l

n

e

w

t
i

h

m

d

u

m

m
m

c
a

r

o

r
f

m

w

r

A

E
S
S
S

(

A
A

d
o
o
g
d
n
o

m
m
m

i

p
n
g
n
n

i
i

s

r
t
r
r
t
i

s
e
s
s
e
a
c
c
a
s

i
t
i

d
n
n
o
ó

e

l
)
t

o
d
o

e
e
a
c
s
e
a

S

i
i
l
t
i
i
r
r
t
t

v

s
a
z
c
s
a

o

h
n
n
o
d
g

e

S

a
a
a
z

l

d
n
b
d
o
u
d

e
e
e

l

E

s
c

t

a

u
o
g
d
p

-
l
t
-

S

t
,
i
t

a

t

e

H

a
e
e
e

t
l

h

e
e

r
t
l
i

y
n
v

i
l
r

s
e
a
c

)

n
p

i
t
r

n
o

o
h

m

l

e

a
e

d

u
n
b
o

t

t
r

h

o
n

l

r

e

f

r
i

o

d

o

a

i

i
t

t

t

e

r

e

a

s

w

.

 N
H

o

h
h
d
9
0
0
h
2

a

’
t

a
s
a
a
c

b
g
d
d
n
u
v

a

l
i

e
a

l
t

e

f

o
n

r

a
c

v
n
u
n
o
o
g
n
o
p
n
n
o
o

m

a

,
i
i
r
t

s
s

.

T

h

a
a
c
e
”
c
s
e
a
a
e

l
l

o

i
t

h
o
8
o
n
1
o
n
0
o
d
n

t
r
f
t

e

M

i

6
0
n
u
0
q
2
n
o

i

s
a

t
r
i
t
l

o
d
o
n
y
y

f
f

a
a
e
e

.
t
t
l
l

B

i

“

P

l

i

r

e
c
a

i
t
i
l
l
i
i
t

n

c
s
a

l

f

r

e

a

h

a
e

t
l

h

p

r

m

v

w

.

%

i

a

3

.

6

%

i

n

 T

h

e
s
s
a

G

9
n
0
o
o
9
0
0
2
v
d
0
o
2
n
g
5
0
n
0
2

e

r
t

m

e
a

n
n
o

f
t

o
g
d
u
b

e

t
t

l

a
e

D
w
B
G

a
c
s
e
a

t

5
o
0
0
2
8
d
b
n
1
o

i
l

s
e

h

s
a
e
e

5
0
0
2
o
o
n
u
d
n
2
ó
1
g
o
v
d

.
r
i

a

c
a

l

r
i
f

e
a

u
d

c

i
t

n
o

i
f

1
h
n
h
9
0
h
o
n
0
2

.
.
t
t
r

c
e
e

r

e
e
c

d
o
o
d
u

t
i
i
r
t

i

e

r
r
f
t
,

s

e

r

s

t

d
h
o

n

P

r

i

S

l

(

B
D
G

S
P
P

)

p

i
-
f

m

2
d

.

2

%

f

P

i

t
f

%

l
i

n

A

a

l
f

r
t

a

s

e

r

s

t

B

S
P

c
e

r

e
s
a
e

r
f

o

m

.

%

D
G

P

i

t

o

s
s
e

t

a

%

D
G

P

n

.

3

.

E
m

u
d

u
g
q
n
0
c
d
u
2
n

a

a
t

i

o

n

I

v
o
o
h
o
p
h

r

e

t
i
l

d
n
p
y

a

e
a

u
y
q

t
i

n
n
d
p
d
u
o
n
u
o
h
y

i

i
r

m
m

e
a

l
r

y

s
e
e
s
e
c
a
c
e
e
s

:
l

f

i
t
-
l
l

m
%

a
e

l
l
i
r
f
i
r
l
l

m
m

r

s
c
s

l

d
o

r
r

0
o
4

f

p
o

a

r

o
y
o
p

t
r

s
e
e

t

,
t

v
u
o
o
9
p
p
0
o
p
0
2

r

i
t

%

a

s

t

s

y
b

.

I

m

r

e

d

u
q

a
s
e

t
i
l

y

i
r

n

c
e
e
s
s
a
e

5
d
3
n
o
o

a

r
-

0
y
4

c
s

9
0
0
2
o
y
o
b
h

:
l

d

r

t

r

a

t

d

c
e

t

%

.

F

u

i
t
t
l
l
l
l

m

e
e

p
n

r
i
r
,

m

a
e

r
r

y
p

c
e
s
s
e

d
o
0
4
g
o
n
o
h
n

l

%
m

e

r
f
l

c
a
e

h
o
o
p

s
s
e

0
d
2
u

%

o
n

f

a

s

d
u

t

s

i
t

o

r

t

e

t

s

.

 S

s
a
c
e

5
o
9
o
h

l

e

y
o
b
n

r

l
l

m

e

n
n
u

t

r

a

t

e

o
0
1
0
2

f

y
4

a
e

r

o

l

d

s

r

c
a
e

h

s
e

a

t

l

t

%

J

e

.

 F

r
i

s
J

t

g
n
u

r

a
e

p
0
1
0
d
2

e

r

e

e

i
t
i
t

n
o

r

a

t

s
e

f

a

l
l

t

o

l

s
s
e

t

h

a

n

0
1

%

y
b

.

  P
l

e
e
e

r

s
e
e
c
e
c

g
g
n
n
n

t
t
i

a

a
e
e

u
n
u
g
n
n
y
b
d
d
u
n
n
h
o
o
p

f
t

a
s

t

a
e

t

s

e
c
a
a

p
g
n
0
n
1
v
0
2
h
g

i

e
e

i

r

o

i
f

c

i

e

y
5
1
n
y
b

c

v
p

l

m

l

i

c

r

s
e
s
a
e

r

a

i

t

s

J

.

 A

c

h
v
g
h
h
d
n

i

e

e

m

c
e

g
o
n
n

t

e
a

b
b
p

e
c
a

t

w

e
e

d
u
d
n
n
u
o

s

t

e
s

n

t
r

s
e

r
f

o
u
d

m

l
.

o

w

a

i

i

m

g
k

r

s

i

e
c

d

   P

e

f
r

o
6
0
0
2

r
i

m

a

h
g
n
h

e
e
c

o

f
t
r

n
y
n
5
1
h

a
e

I
r

o

l

d

s

t

n
3
d
0
u
0
2

e

t

s

i

n

P

I

S

A

s

i

a

i

P

S

A

.

o
d
9
0
o
0
0
1
2

%

f

s
a
c
s
e
a
e
s
e
a
s
s

t

d
v
u
d
h

d
n
o
o
g
h
n
n

t

i

b
u
p

i
r
r
r
t
i
l
r
r

a
c
e
e

d
g
p
y

m

a
a
e
s
e

r

o
o
g
o
o
h
p
n
o
v
y
d
d

c
s

l
r

s
s
e

a

r

a
e
c
e
a

.
t
t
t

a
e
s

u
5
g
7
n
d
d
n
d
n
u
n
o

i

f

l
l

i
f
t

m

c
s
e
e

o
o
o
h

l

e
s

i

n

.

T

l

s

a

t
i

t

t

d
b
u
d

g
n
k

%

o

t

h

m

c

m

r
f

m

i

t

e

o

v

a

t

a

r

s

.

 B

n
8
0
0
2
o
y
n

c
s
e

o
o
h

l

e

y
o
4
n
o

r

l
l

m

s
e
a
e

d
o
o
n

t

i
f

5
y
7
5

a
e

r

s

o
n

l

8
0
0
d
2

i

s

a

l
.

m

o

s

t

n
u

i

v

e

r

a
s

,
l

a

d
n

c
s

o
o
h

l

e

r

l
l

m

t

r

a

t

e

f

r

l

s

%

i

 R

e

7
p
3
1

e

i
i
t
i
t

8
0
0
o
2
o
n
h
o
n

r

a

t

e

i
.

n

b
p
u

r

a
e

o
o
h
0
n
1
o
n

c
s

l

s
e

n
h
n

a

8
0
0
u
v
2

e

n
o
g

e
e

o
d

w

o
o
o
n
h

l
r
f

m

4
2
1
0
2

.

%
%

i

2
u
0
0
n
2
n

l
t
l

o

.
i

%
m

R

e

i
t
i
t

r

a

t

i
i

F

l
l

T

i
.

m

S

c

s

w

s
a

.

4

i

F

T
 T

e

S

c

l

s

a

d
n

t
i

w

s
a

.

1

%

o
n
n
n
n
o
u
o
n
n
v
o
5
0
p
0
2
p
h
h
o
n

e

a

i
t

a
a

i
t
t
l

s
s
e
e
e
s
s
a
s
a
s
e
a
s
e
s
a

m

n

t

m
m

e
e

t
t

9
d
9
9
1
y
g
6
o
9
9
o
1
d
o
h
n

l

i

s

f
f
i

e
a

r

e

o
2
0
0
2
n
d
n

t

r
f

m

t

d
h
n

a

t
t

e

m

y
o
h
p
u
h

l
t

e
s

d

i

t

a
e

r
i
r

e
s

i

s
a
c

n
b
o

l

s

(

,

)

,

a

s

i

c

m

m

d

.

 T

h
b
d
b

e
a
c
c
a
e
e

c
a

n
n
h
d
v
n
n
b
u
o
d
h

i

e

e

m

e

5
0
0
1
0
0
b
2
2
p
n
6
o
g
9
9
p
1
n
n

i
t
t

a

s
e
e
s
e
e
s
s
a
e

t

w

n

e
s

t

d
u
n
d
o

e
s

n
o
h

f
t

s

i
r
r
f

o

m
m

t
r
i

u
o
d
d
n
u
h
y

e
e

l

w

s
e
a
c
e

i
t
i
t

a

d
h
n
u
d
q
n
g
n
n
o
o
g

r
t
i
i
l

h
y
g

a
s
e
s
s
e
s
e

t
l
t
t

i

y
o
d
n

c

m

e

g
n
v
k

r

i
i
t

a

a

l

m

t
.

9
0
0
p
2

s
a

a
a

l
l
i
l
i

i
l

e
a

i

e

-
l
i
r

p

i
r

T

e

r

u

w

l
i

a

l

e

A

.

 U

r

u
g
u

a

y

a

n

s

t

d
u

e

n

t

s

’

a

v

e

r

a

g

e

p

e

f
r

o

r

m

a

n

e
c

i

n

P

I

S

A

v

a

i
r

e

y
b
d

s

b
u

j

c
e

.
t

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A

7
2
x
o
n
n
5
2

e

B

P

a

g

e

f

P

R
A

T

I
I
I

-

I

M

P

R

O

V

I

N

G

L

I

V

I

N

G

S

T

D
R
A
D
N
A

S

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n
u

t
t

O

b

j

c
e
e

t

i

v

e

s

a

d
n

O

c

o

m

s

A
C

S
d
n

O

u

t

c

o

m

e

s

a

M

l
i

e

s

t

o

n

e

s

P

r

g
o

e
r

s
s

t

o

d

a

t

e

    I

m

v
o
p
o
o
o
n

l
l
r

e
e

o
d
n

e

u
h
d
g
o
o
n
n
h
3
g
o
0
y
0
h
2
u
n
q

i
t
i

i

h

i

e
a
c
e
e

r

u
n
n
5
d
o
2
u
q
u
o
b

a
c

r
i
t

n
h
9
d
0
u
0
n
n
2
o
o

:
t

e
s
e
s
a
a
e
e
s

r
t

o

f

e

r

m
m
m

t

i

e
c
e

r

i
i
t

f
l
i
t

s

r
r
f
f

o
7
b
1

t
t

m
%

t

w

i

m

s
e

i

c

r

d

i

n

t

a

t

%

i

n

.

   S

J
c
e

d
n
n
u
o

a
e

r

o
o
h
0
1
y
0
2

c
s

l

d

r

u
o
p
o

t

r

a

t

s
e

d

c
e

r

e
s
a
e

t

o

5
2

%

y
b

.

 I

m

v
o
p
o
c
v
o
o
n

l
l
r

e
e

o
d
n

s
e

o
h
o
h
n
n
g
3
y
h
o
0
0
n
2
u
q

t
i
t
i

i
i
i

r
i

n
o
u
n
5
d
2
u
q
u
u
d
o
h
b
g

e
e
e

r

a
e
c

a
c

i
f
t

d
n
9
h
u
0
0
2
n
h
o
o
n

t
;

s
s
s
a

e
e
c
a

r

o

f

e

r

m

t

e
c

l
i
t
i
t
i

r

n

t
r

e
s
s
a
e

r
r
f
f

m
m

o
7
o
b
1
e

t
t

m
%

w

m

s
e

i

d

i

n

t

a

t

%

i

.

S

i
t

n
n
9
d
0
u
0
2

s
e
c
e

,
t

h
d
o
x
h
d
u
h
b

a

l

w

e

r
i

e
a
c
s
a
a
e
e
a
a
a
e
e
e
a

v
h
g

r
r

v
g
v

o
g

r

s
c
e
e
s

r
i
i

n
n
o

6
0
n
0
2

t

n
h
b
h

e
e
a

i

n

3
0
0
2

i

n

l

a
s
e

g
o
u
g
n
u

a

e

a

d
n
h

c
s

e

t

a
a

r

s
e

i

m
m

a

t

m

a

i
t

s
c

.
.

R

t
l

s

r
f

m

t

e

P

I

S

A

e

m

w

l
l
i

b

l
i

b

l

D

e
c
e

r

0
1
0
2

 B

y

h
o
6
y
0
0
2
o

,

f
t

e

c
e
e
s

y
u
o
d
p
n
o
o
d

a

r

c
s
s

d
g
n
o
o
o
h
b

l

t
r

u
h
o
p
o
o

r
l
t

a

t

e
s
e
e

t
r

m

c
a

i

n
o

h

i

u
h
q
g

(
i

0
5
n

%

)

a

d
n

t

h

e

m

a

j

t
i
r

t

h

r

-

t

e

l

t

e

o

w

i

n

m

e

l
i
t

s
e

.

w
w
 B

5
h
n
0
0
2
o
y
o

,

m

u
o
q
o

i
r

e

l
i
i
t
t

h

s
a
e

n

d
0
n
6

%

o

f

t
t

h
h

a
e

5
h
1
g
n
h

i

e

r

e

h
u
d
o

e
a
c

i
t

d
n
u
o

e
s

t

d
u
n

c
e
s

o
n

t

s

e
c

o

m

e

t
r
f

h
o

m

t
t

h

e

t
l

i
r
r

c

s
e
c

u
n
q

l
,
i
t

s
a
e

l

s
s
e

%

f

t

s

t

t

m

r
f

o

m

e

w

o

e

i

m

e

n

.

4
E

.

S

o

c
n
o
p
o
n

l
r
i

a

v
I
d
o
c
n
d

n

d
d
n
o
o
c

l
s

u

e
c
c
e
s
e
e
s
c

i

o

n

i
,
-
-

G

d
u
e
n
n
o
d
n
n
o

d
n

u
o
y
o
r
p
g
e
o
p
n
o

a

d
n

C

i

v

l
i

S
C

o

i

c
t
s

y

m
m

w

s
a
e
e
s
e
a
e

i

l
r
l
f
i
i

i

t

y

c
a

i
l
t

t
i
-
-

t

h

,

w

,

a
a
c

-

c
s

s
s
e
c
c
a

i
 I

c

r

a

m

t
r

n
u

i
t
i

s
e

.

m

n
n
n
u
h
n
g
o
n
v
p
p
p

l

e

m

e

i
t
i
i
t
t
i

s
e
a

o
d
n
n
o

f

t

d
h
n
g
h

e

E

u
q

a
a

t
i
l
t
l
r

h
g
u
p
o
h
o
h
y
n
n

i
f
r

O

t
t
r

a

R
A

i

t

s

P

r
t

e
s

r
l
t
r

e
e

c
e
s
e

g
o
n

I
r

W

,

a

p

a

e

s

w

t
i

h

a

t

t

s

.

 G

e

d
n
o
n
p

a
s
a
e
s
e
e
c
a

r

m

i

n
d
n

a
s

r
t

c
a
e

m

i
i

g
g
n
n

i

n
n

G

v
o
d

e
c
s

i
r
r

n

m
m

a
e

n
n

t
t

i
i
l
t
i

i
i
t

l

n
u

h

a

-
i
t

i

i

o

r

y

i

v

.

 F

v
u
o
d

l
l

i

m
m

p

l

e
c

m

e
e

n
n
o

t

e
c
a

i
t

n
o

o

f

n
n

a
a

l
i
t
r
t

p
d
n
n
o

a
a

l

l
r

a
e

g
n
o
n
g

a

a
a

i
l

n

s

t

s
s
e
e

i
t
.

v

i

l

a

t

e
c

i

l

e

l

i

l
i

i

e

t

y

u
o

r
t

c
a
e

h

e

f
f

o

t
r

s

i

n

c

r

e
s
a
e

.

 F

r
r
t

e
a

m

e

w

o
d
k
n
o
h

r

f

r

s
c
a

o
o

a
a
s
c
s

i

i
l
l
l

m

k
n
p

c
a
a

-
t

e
s

o
u
p
p
v
u

a

l

a

i
t
t
r

n
d
o

i
r

s
e

s

g
n

t

e

e

r

B

e

f

o

r

m

s

.

 S

o

c
a

i
i

c
a
a

l
t

d
n
o
n

e
s

n

s

u

s

n
o

c
e

o
n
o

m

i

c

p

r

g
o

r

a

m

i

s

m

n

i

e

.

 D

c
e

r

c
e
s
s
a
e

y
n
u
d
o

e

m

d
y
u
o
p
x

l

m

e
e

g
n
d

t

a

v
o
p
p
d
u
n
o

e

t
r

y

r

a

t

s
e

a

m

g
n
o

i

a

l
l

e

c

l

r

s

.

 R

e

u
d

e
c

d

l

e

v

e

l

s

o

f

o
d

m

s
e

i
t

c

v

i

o

l

e

n

e
c

.

I

n

-
I

c

n
u
o

r
t
.

y

a
c
a
c
s
s
s
s
a
e
c
a
e
c
c
a
a
c
e
a
c
c
e
s
e

v
n
p
o
h
d
d

i
l
r
t
i

y

t

o

u
d
n
n
o

c
e
c
c
e

t

s

o
o
n
o
o
p
y

c

i

a

l

i

m

p

e
s
a
a
c
e
s
a

t

v
u

a
a
e

i
i
i
l
t

n
n
o
n
u

a

i
t

g
n
n
o
u

s

r
t

e
a

g
v
n

i
r
t
i
t
l

h

e
e
e
a

o
h
d
y
y
n
b
v

e

w

t
i

h

M

D

S
E

T

i
i
l

i

i
i
t
r
t

P

N
A

E
S
E

y
v
u
q

t
i
t
l
l

s

i
I
r

a
s
e
e

i
l
t
r

f

a

g
o
n
p
p
p

r

c
a
c
a
e
a

o
n
h
y
h

d
v

l
.
i

P

i
t

a

t
t

r

n
o
y

M

&

m

M

D

S
E

s

e

d

.

C

t
i
t

f

.
l

l

o

m

t
i

o

r

y

e
s

v

i

e
c

d

s

r
t

e

e

 P

r

s
e

i
(
i

n
h
n
n
v
o
d
o
o
o
d
0
n
6
p

e

t

V
N

s
e
z
e
á

b
d
u
n
q

z
e
s
e
e

e

u
h
p
q
d
9
n
0
o
d
0
n
2
n

e

i
,

s
e
e
s
c
z
s
a
e
e

p

r
r
’
i
r

t
t
i
r
t
i
i

d

e

o
g
o
n
h
4
6
g
n
d
o
v
h
g
o
v
n
o
d
p
n
y
p
d
h
n
y
d
u
2
h
p
2
o
p
y
n
y
o
h
n
n
o
h
o

c

w

t
i
t

a
a
e

a
a

i
l
r

a

l

i
t
t
f
r

a

f

h
o
v
n
o
o

e

r

%

v
o

m

r

)

d
p
d
o

l
i

s
a

s

e

s
a
c
e

m

y

.

M

r

e

e
a
c
e
a
e

r

,

P

r

i
i

t
r
t

V

z
á

e

s

l

a

i
t
i
r

r

c
a
e
a
s

e

%

’

t

t

e

e
e

f
r

t

d

m

i

a

i
t

(

w

l

%

p
p

r

i

f

h

i

f
r

m

)

.

 U

n
d
d
v
n
5
u
p
h
n
1
y
k
d
n
p
n
o
n
5
v
o
5
7
p
y
0
g
d
o
2
n
p
o
v
7
4
0
x
0
0
n
0
2
u
d
2
u
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
y
9
o
d
3
v
d
o
o
n
p
p
1
y
9
o
9
p
o
o
4
n
d
0
o
o
n
o
0
2

e

m

l

m

e
e

n

t
r

(

a
e
c

a

l

a

a
a
e

r

e

)

c

i
r
t

s
e
e
c
e

c
e

r

s
a
e

i
.

n
g
p
n
3
p
d
7
1
n
n
o
3
g
8
1
h
9
0
0
0
d
0
2
2
o
n
g
n

r
t
f

o

m

.
t
t
i

e

r
i
.
i
f
i

e
c

h
n

t

i

n

t

.

t

i

.

e

t
t

i

g
n
8
v
d
0
0
o
2

N

w

t
i

s

a

r
l
t
t

e
e
c

c
e

m

i
t
.

c
e

s

l

w

w

,

e

m
m

l

m

e
e
a

t
t
r

s
a
c
e
s
e
c
a
s
e
e
e

r
l

i

i
r
l

e

n

.
t

M

e

r

a

e

t
.
r

a

e

t
r
t

e

e

a

c
e
e

e
s
a
e

s

a
c

y

r
f

m

1
3

a

i

.

.

r

p

i
t

y

i

n

.

 A

s

n
p
u
o
o

s
a
a
c
e
e
c
s
e
a
s
e
s
a
c
a
a
e
a
c
s
e
e
e
e
e
c
e
s
s
a
a
a
s
e
s
a
c

r

n

i
t

n
o

l

p

l
i
t
r

n

,

r
i
f

s
e
c
e

-
t

e

v
n
d
o
o
n
d
n
p
h
u
n
o
h
d
d
u
d
d
o
n
n
d
b
d
u
o
y
n
o
n
u
v
o
n
n
g
n
u
n
n
o
d
o
h
n
o
n
d
o
g
u
v
n
o

e

-
r

a
c

r

a
e
e
e
c

f

m

u
p

i
i
t
l

d

i
l
l
i

e
z
c
s
a
c
a
c
a

i

n
d
n
p
u
u

i
r
f
i
i
t
l

a
c
e
a
e
s
a
e
e

r

y

i
r
t

m

s
s
e
e
a
e
c
e
e
a
a
e
c
e
s
e
e
e
s
e
e
a
s
s
c
a
a
c
c
e
a
e
a
c

t

n
d
n
d
g
n
d
n
d
d
g
h
d
v
h
n
o
o
h
o
p
g
g
p
n
o
o
n
y

a

l

e

v

i

l

t

e

r
t

w

i

c
e
e
a
s

g
h
o
b
k
v
d
u
p
n
o

r

r

i

a
c

o
n

f
r
i

o
d
g
n

m

i

l

e
c

c

t

.

N

i
t

n
o

r
l

i

t
t

w
D

m
m

a
a
e

r
t
i
i
i
t
t
f
i

s

r
t

d
o
y
n
n
n
h
o
o

f
f
i

i
i
t
i

r

e

r

t

r
r
r

i

g
u
n
n
h
d
d

r

a

e

m

i
r
f

i
i
t
r

.

i
r

f

i

r
t
t
l

m

e
s
s
s
a
s

r

c

e
a
s
e
a
s
e
s
e
c
a

w

t
i

P

N
A

S
E

g

t

r

w

e

s
e
s
s
e
a
e

i

e

e
a
e

i

m

h
b
h

e
s
e
a

r

f

r

.

A

n

d
o
d
y

l

r

r
t

m

i
t
i

r
t

m

i

,

t

n
p

r
t
t
i

t
t
f

p

t
i

W

o

m

e

'

s

I

t
i
t

w

i

M

I

D

S
E

b

e

n

e

d

.

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attachment 2 
Comparison of Programmed and Actual Lending FY05-FY10 
Loan Amounts (US$ Millions) 
Operations Proposed and/or Approved 
2005 CAS Base 
2007 Progress 
Case Program 
Report Base Case 
Program 

Annex B 
Page 26 of 27 

Actual Lending 

Transport Infrastructure Maintenance and 
Rural Access 
Int. Nat. Resources and Biodiversity 
Management 
DPL I18 

Nat. Health Insurance and Soc. Sec. Support 
DPLII 
Infrastructure (Energy) 

Innovation/Science & Technology19 
DPLIII20 
Water Sector APL II 
Institutions Bldg. 
Suppl.  Financing for Foot & Mouth 
Disease21 

Education 
Coastal and Marine Resources 
DPLIV 
Non -Communicable Disease Prevention22 

Social, Institutional & Infrastr. Investments 
PRIIDPL II23 

Social, Institutional & Infrastr. Investments 
Third Basic Education Additional Financing 
Transport Infrastr. Maintenance and Rural 
Access - Additional Financing 
Natural Resources Mgmt. – Additional Fin. 
Railways Rehabilitation 
IBTAL Additional Financing 
Environmental Project 

FY05 

FY06 

FY07 

… 

FY08 

FY09 

FY10 

70.00

30.00

75.00

20.00 … 
75.00 … 
70.00 … 

35.00 … 
75.00 … 
30.00 … 
15.00 … 
… 

25.00
30.00
50.00
…

100.00
…

100.00

… 

… 

…  

Not Done 
Not Done 
Not Done 

70.00

30.00

75.38

26.00
100.00
50.00
12.10
6.50

… Not Done 
… Not Done 
 Not Done 
25.30 

25.30

… Not Done 
300.00 

400.00

29.90

… Not Done 
15.00 
50.00 Not Done 

30.00 Not Done 
50.00 Not Done 
10.00 Not Done 
10.00 Not Done 

18 Social Program Support Loan DPL 
19 Promoting Innovation to Enhance Technology 
20 PRI DPL I 
21 Not in the original CAS, but approved prior to the CAS Progress Report 
22 Instead of National Health Insurance Project originally planned for FY06.  
23 The CAS PR indicates that PRIDPLII and PRIDPLIII could be replaced by a $300 DDO. This operation, called PRIDPLII, was later 
on increased to $400 million.  

 
 
 
 
                                                            
Fiscal 
Year 

FY05 

FY06 

-Policy Notes 
-Sources of Growth 
-Public Expenditure Review 
-Health Strategy 

-CPAR 
-ROSC (Insolvency) 
-ROSC (Governance) 
-Investment Climate 
Assessment 
-Equity and Quality of 
Education 
-Country Gender Assessment 
 Labor Opportunities 
Study  
IDF on Legal Status 
of Women 
- Financial Sector Assessment 

 

FY07 

-DPR Infrastructure 
-Programmatic DPR Social 
Sectors 

FY08 

-Programmatic DPR 
Agriculture & Environment 

Annex B 
Page 27 of 27 

Attachment 3 
Comparison of Programmed and Actual AAA 
FY05-FY10 

2005 CAS 

2007 Progress Report 

Actual Delivered 

-January 2005 
-March 2004 
-June 2005 
- December 2005 

-December 2005 
-August 2006 
-June 2006 
-November 2007 

-February 2007 

-November 2008 
-December 2008 

-May 2006 

-ROSC (Accounting and Auditing) 

-May 2006 

Income Transfer Policy Study 

-Strengthening Energy Security 
NLTA 
-Opportunities and Informality24 
-Strengthening M&E of Social Policy 
NLTA 
-Programmatic DPR Infrastructure  
-Investment Climate Assessment 
(ICA) 
-Programmatic PSIA Tax Reform 
- Railways Efficiency Study 
-Payments System Fee for Services 
Study 
-CEM Trade and Competitiveness 
- 
-NLTA on Quality of Spending on 
Social Programs 
-Pro-Employment Strategy 
Family Farm Development 

Health Reforms Implementation 
NLTA 

‐December 2008 
-June 2007 
‐June 2007 

-June 2010 (planned)
-July 2007 

 -May 2008 
 -January 2008 

-May 2008 
-December 2009 
-June 2009 

-December 2009 

No Done 

Not Done 

-June  2010 (planned) 

-June 210 (planned) 

24 Not included in the 2008 CAS Progress Report, but requested by the authorities following the presentation of the 
regional study on inequalities and opportunities in 2009.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
Annex C 
Page 1 of 5 

Annex C 
Macroeconomic Framework 

1. 
Recovery from the 2002 Crisis.  Growth in 2004-2008 averaged 6.6 percent per year 
and largely resulted from a rebound in domestic demand.  Investment, private consumption and 
exports were the main drivers of growth during that period. Investment was fueled by large FDI 
inflows during the 2006-2008 period and private consumption that expanded on the heels of 
declining unemployment, rising real wages and increased bank lending.  Export growth averaged 
13 percent per year in 2004-2008.  By sector, manufacturing, transport and communication, 
wholesale and retail trade, and construction contributed the most to economic growth; 
manufacturing alone accounted for about 29 percent of growth.  

2. 
Sound macroeconomic management instilled greater resilience to external shocks: the 
overall fiscal deficit declined from 3.7 percent of GDP in 2002 to zero in 2007, as expenditures 
growth was contained and the revenue tax base expanded. Monetary policy contained 
inflationary pressures from higher commodity prices and rising wages, and consumer price 
inflation converged to a preannounced target, which has been recently reduced to 4-6 percent. 
International reserves accumulation further supported confidence in Uruguay’s currency, which 
has been floating since mid 2002.  

3. 
Public debt as a share of GDP has fallen consistently and the Government’s debt 
management policies have successfully reduced medium-term debt obligations. Due to strong 
growth, the appreciation of the Uruguayan peso (27 percent), and a better fiscal position (average 
primary balance of 3.3 percent in 2004-2008), gross public sector debt decreased by more than 
40 percentage points of GDP from 105.0 in 2003 to 61.7 percent in end 2008.  

4. 
Effective social policies further contributed to job creation and poverty reduction prior to 
the 2008 crisis. Social policies, particularly the Plan de Asistencia Nacional a la Emergencia 
Social (PANES) as well as the Plan de Equidad that started in 2008, were successful in fighting 
extreme poverty, which declined from 3.9 percent in 2004 to 1.5 percent in 2008. Unemployment 
reached its lowest level in over a decade in 2008, falling from 13.1 percent in 2004 to 7.9 percent 
in 2008.  

5. 
The Impact of the Recent Global Economic Crisis. The global crisis impacted 
Uruguay initially through the financial sector. The Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in mid-
September 2008 sharply raised risk aversion in global financial markets which quickly spread to 
Uruguay. Sovereign debt spreads widened substantially in 2008, by over 500 points, peaking at 
907 basis points in October 2008 and remaining at high levels throughout the remainder of 
200825.  From August through December 2008, the peso depreciated by 26.4 percent against the 
U.S. dollar and foreign-currency deposits increased from 76 percent of total deposits in August 
2008 to 82 percent in May 2009. Inflation started to increase in September 2008 to a high of 9.2 
percent in January 2009.  Although capital inflows declined, they remained positive at about US$ 
1.7 billion in 2009, and their composition changed in favor of multilaterals. While private capital 

25 The substantial rise in sovereign spreads through the global crisis was not explained by macro fundamentals, 
which remained broadly adequate. Rather, it reflected global investor risk aversion towards sovereign paper, 
especially from smaller countries such as Uruguay whose sovereign debt tends to be less liquid than other larger 
middle-income countries’ debt. 

 
                                                            
Annex C 
Page 2 of 5 

inflows accounted for over 75 percent of total capital inflows in 2008, their share dropped to 25 
percent in 2009, with large disbursements from multilaterals filling the gap. The overall fiscal 
deficit widened from 1.5 to 1.7 percent of GDP in 2009, while the primary surplus declined from 
1.3 to 1.1 percent of GDP, as revenues slowed with the crisis and expenditures increased with 
fiscal stimulus. A severe drought further raised fiscal pressures as a shortfall in hydroelectric 
power generation needed to be covered by costly energy imports.  

6. 
Although the impact of the global crisis has been moderate, economic activity slowed in 
2009. GDP grew by 2.9 percent in 2009, one of the strongest growth performances in the region. 
The main factor behind the slowdown in GDP was the decline in investment (-10.7%). The 
contribution of public and private consumption was positive but small. The fall in domestic 
demand was partly offset by a recovery in foreign absorption, mainly due to a substantial decline 
in imports (-8.6 percent) and a moderate increase in exports (2.5 percent). The labor market 
experienced a downward adjustment in 2009 Q2, which was however strongly reversed in 
subsequent quarters. Unemployment peaked in April 2009 at 8.3 percent following the decline in 
output, but fell to 6.6 percent in the last quarter of 2009, the lowest level in over a decade. 
Overall, 32,400 new jobs were created during 2009. 

7. 
The Response to the Global Economic Crisis. The Government responded to the crisis 
with a mix of monetary, fiscal and social policies. The Central Bank initially increased interest 
rates to contain persistent inflationary pressures, but policy rates started to come down from 
March 2009 onwards, as inflationary pressure subsided.26 Fiscal policy responded with a 
moderate stimulus package that increased public investment, supported exporters, facilitated 
access to credit, and strengthened social protection. Although Uruguay’s relatively high debt-to-
GDP ratio and underlying inflationary pressures did not provide sufficient space to adopt more 
expansionary fiscal measures without threatening macroeconomic stability, the government 
successfully avoided a contractionary stance: the Government reallocated public spending 
towards objectives with a high growth impact and raised public investment by 0.3 percentage 
points of GDP. Furthermore, all public entities were required to reduce operational expenditures 
by at least 5 percent. At the same time, a moderate training subsidy was introduced. 

8. 
Growth: The Uruguayan economy is expected to continue to recover over the short and 
medium-term, provided the currently sound macro policy framework is maintained. As 
international and regional prospects improve, GDP growth is projected to increase from 2.9 
percent in 2009 to 5.5 percent in 2010. In addition, private investment is expected to accelerate 
after an upturn in the inventories cycle. Private consumption is also expected to hold up due to 
declining unemployment and a firm exchange rate. Space for further fiscal and monetary 
stimulus is restricted by a relatively high debt-to-GDP ratio and underlying inflationary 
pressures. In 2011, growth is expected to slow to 5.0 in line with expected weaker global growth, 
as policy stimulus packages around the world will be reduced and inventories have been 
replenished. In subsequent years, growth is expected to revert back to the long-run pre-global 
crisis average growth rate of 4.0 percent.  

26 The Central Bank further implemented four additional measures: (i) development of a futures market for foreign currency, where prices are agreed as far as 1 year in advance, to 
reduce foreign exchange risk; (ii) gradual reduction in the reserve requirements for deposits in foreign currency from 30 percent to 25 percent; (iii) an agreement with the Central 
Bank of Brazil to use domestic currencies in bilateral trade, rather than in U.S. dollars; (iv) repayment of export pre-financing in Uruguayan pesos instead of U.S. dollars, for 
operations performed in November 2009.  

 
                                                            
 
Annex C 
Page 3 of 5 

9. 
Inflation: Inflationary pressures from increasing commodity prices and wage increases 
are likely to persist and are expected to keep consumer price increases at the upper limit of the 4-
6 percent target range throughout the forecast period. CPI inflation is projected to reach 7.5 
percent in 2010, which would be slightly beyond the target range for this year of 5-7 percent, and 
then to slowly converge to its target range in the subsequent years. 

10. 
Fiscal accounts: Economic recovery and reduced fiscal stimulus are expected to 
contribute to gradual improvements on the fiscal side. The deficit is expected to narrow in 2010, 
posting a primary surplus of 2.1 and an overall deficit of 1.0 percent of GDP. In 2010, the 
primary fiscal balance is expected to improve as revenues increase faster than expenditures and 
public investment maintains a constant GDP share according to government projections. Interest 
payments increase by 0.3 percent of GDP in line with the payment schedule for public sector 
debt. Over the following years, the primary fiscal balance is expected to gradually improve due 
to lower projected expenditures. Following a high concentration of debt service payments in 
2011 (see below), lower subsequent interest payments are expected to improve the overall fiscal 
balance thereafter. 

11. 
Financing gap: Medium-term government borrowing requirements are manageable, but 
some risks arise in 2011. Including amortizations, interest payments and the recapitalization of 
Banco Hipotecario del Uruguay (BHU), gross financing needs of the overall government amount 
to US$2.7 in 2010. The Government has already secured US$500 million from bond markets last 
September and further holds more than US$1 billion in public sector deposits in the domestic 
banking system.  Together with available multilateral financing, borrowing financing needs for 
2010 appear therefore manageable, even though the Government faces a concentration of 
maturities in 2011, with payments worth US$2.3 billion or 5.6 percent of GDP.  Based on a 
conservative estimate of the primary fiscal balance, the gross borrowing requirements for 2011 
are likely to amount to US$2.9 billion or 6.5 percent of GDP.  Uruguay will therefore likely seek 
additional financing from multilateral institutions and capital markets to cover financing needs. 

12. 
External accounts: The current account is expected to decline from 0.7 in 2009 to -1.8 
in 2010, reflecting a decline in the trade balance and of net factor incomes.27 The current account 
is expected to improve over the medium-term, as the economy recovers and due to a persistent 
surplus in the services account, which is largely due to high tourism receipts that even held up 
during the crisis. 

13. Monetary accounts: After depreciating substantially between August and December 
2008, the Peso faced strong pressures to appreciate in 2009, with the UY$/US$ exchange 
declining by 19 percent during the year. At the same time, international reserves steadily 
increased as the Central Bank’s purchased foreign currency to smooth volatility. With CPI 
inflation on the decline and moderate economic growth, the Central Bank has cut interest rates 
from 10 percent to 6.25 percent in 2009. With the Government taking a more active stance in 
exchange rate policy, the exchange rate has recently started to revert to levels considered more 
competitive. 

27 The 2009 GDP growth rate is based on World Bank staff estimations, 2009-2010 inflation rates are government 
projections, the exchange rate projections for 2010-11 are Consensus Economist.    

 
                                                            
Annex C 
Page 4 of 5 

14. 
Financial system: Since the outbreak of the international financial crisis, the Uruguayan 
financial system has managed to navigate through the storm without major difficulties. In 
particular, the banking system consolidation process that occurred in the aftermath of the 2002 
crisis has apparently paid off as evidenced by the adequate performance of most financial system 
indicators. Even though, a scenario of more acute systemic deterioration cannot be disregarded at 
this stage, current fundamentals provide a high level of comfort.  In 2009, total volume traded in 
the primary market (Bolsa Electrónica de Valores) decreased 17 percent relative to the previous 
year. Despite lower trading activity, the market evidenced an increase in the number of new 
issuances relative to 2008. 

15. Medium-Term Challenges. Reducing macroeconomic vulnerability and sustaining 
equitable economic growth are expected to remain priorities of the new Government. Uruguay is 
still vulnerable to external shocks, through its dependence on neighboring Argentina and Brazil, 
and commodity prices. While dependence on its two large neighbors has decreased over the last 
few years, the correlation with economic activity in Argentina remains high and trade links with 
Brazil are strong. In addition, given the large share of agricultural commodities in total export, 
and its strong reliance on oil imports, the country’s economic performance is directly affected by 
fluctuating commodity prices.28 Despite significant progress in debt reduction, debt remains high 
and exposed to exchange rate fluctuations. During the current crisis, debt sustainability 
considerations limited scope for fiscal stimulus. Further debt reductions would create necessary 
space for effective countercyclical measures. A similar argument applies to monetary policy. 
Although inflation has been broadly kept within its range, it still remains relatively high and 
restricts monetary policy. At the beginning of the current crisis, monetary policy initially reacted 
pro-cyclically to counteract inflationary pressures on the wage bill. Lower levels of debt and 
inflation would ensure that monetary and fiscal policy can reinforce each other and act in a 
synchronized and countercyclical fashion; lower levels of dollarization would further strengthen 
the role of the exchange rate as a shock-absorber. Procedural and administrative obstacles for 
business activities have been also recognized as key structural challenges for economic 
development, and reform efforts have accelerated in this regard under the new administration. 
Over the longer term, an integral part of the reform effort plans to place heightened priority on 
expanding access 
to education, 
improving 
infrastructure and 
logistics, and reaching 
environmental objectives.  

28 This point is well illustrated in Box 4 of Uruguay—Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation, IMF, 
October 2009. 

 
 
 
                                                            
Annex C 
Page 5 of 5 

Table 1. Uruguay: Macroeconomic Framework 
(Key economic indicators in percent, unless otherwise indicated) 

Sources: Central Bank of Uruguay, Ministry of Economy and Finance, National Bureau of Statistics (INE), ECLAC, IMF, and World 
Bank staff calculations. 
Notes: 1/ Current account balance excluding imports related to the construction of pulp mill projects (Botnia and Ence) 
2/ Covers urban population (cities and towns of more than 5000 inhabitants). Period Average 
3/ Covers Central government and BPS.  Public debt‐to‐GDP ratio is calculated using end‐of‐the‐period exchange rate. 
"—" refers to data that is not available. 

Uruguay: M acroe conomic Indicators

(in percent, unles s otherwis e indicated)

2004 2005

2006

A ctual
2007

2008

2009

2010p

2011p

Pro jected
2012p
2013p

2014p

2015p

National accounts
Real GDP g rowth (%)
GDP (US$ b illion )

5.0
13.7

7.5
17.4

4.3
19.8

7.5
24.0

8.5
31.2

2.9
31.5

5.5
41.0

5.0
44.2

4.0
47.4

4.0
50.9

4.0
54.6

4.0
58.4

External s ector
Cu rren t accoun t balance (% o f GDP)
exclud ing pu lp mill p ro jects 1/
Trade b alan ce (% o f GDP, incl. s erv ices )
Expo rts o f goods and s erv ices (% o f GDP)
Impo rts o f goods and s erv ices (% o f GDP)
FDI (US$ b illion )

0.0
0.0
3.5
31.1
27.6
0.31

0.2
0.2
2.3
29.3
27.0
0.81

-2.0
-2.0
-0.5
29.2
29.7
1.49

-0.9
0.4
0.7
28.9
28.3
1.24

-4.8
-4.8
-2.9
30.1
32.9
1.79

0.7
0.7
2.4
27.2
24.7
1.23

-1.8
-1.8
-0.7
24.1
24.8
1.26

-1.5
-1.5
-0.4
24.5
24.9
1.30

-1.1
-1.1
-0.1
24.9
25.0
1.33

-0.6
-0.6
0.5
25.6
25.0
1.37

-0.4
-0.4
0.7
25.4
24.7
1.40

-0.2
-0.2
0.6
25.2
24.5
1.44

Prices
CPI (% ch ang e, end o f period )
CPI (% ch ang e, p eriod av erage)
Exchange rate (local cu rrency /US$, end o f period )
Real effective exchange rate (2005=100, + = app reciat ion )
Merchand is e terms o f t rade (2000=100)

7.6
4.9
6.4
9.2
4.7
6.4
26.4
24.2
24.5
89.1 100.0 101.9
99.9
90.7
88.6

8.5
8.1
21.6
103.9
88.7

9.2
7.9
24.4
116.1
92.3

5.9
7.1
19.6
121.5
—

7.3
7.5
20.1
—
—

6.7
7.0
20.8
—
—

6.2
6.4
21.4
—
—

6.0
6.0
22.0
—
—

6.0
6.0
22.7
—
—

6.0
6.0
23.7
—
—

Labor mark et (% )
Unemp loymen t rate 2/

13.1

12.2

11.4

9.6

7.9

7.3

—

—

—

—

—

—

Fis cal (% of GDP)
Rev enu es 3/
Cu rren t s u rp lus o f Pub lic Secto r En terp ris es
Cu rren t exp end itu res 3/
Pub lic inv es tmen t
Primary balan ce (deficit (-)/s u rp lu s (+))
Cen tral Gov ernmen t & Pub lic Secto r En terp ris es
BSE 4/
Cen tral Bank
Local Gov ernmen ts
In teres t p aymen ts
Overall fis cal balance (deficit (-)/s u rp lu s (+))

28.0
2.7
21.5
2.5
3.8
3.9
0.0
-0.2
0.1
5.6
-1.8

28.0
2.1
21.9
2.3
4.0
3.7
0.2
0.0
0.2
4.4
-0.4

28.0
1.4
22.0
2.6
3.6
3.5
0.0
-0.2
0.4
4.2
-0.5

28.0
2.4
21.9
2.9
3.5
3.2
0.2
-0.1
0.2
3.5
0.0

26.2
0.8
21.8
3.2
1.3
1.1
0.2
-0.1
0.1
2.9
-1.5

27.7
1.3
23.7
3.4
1.1
0.7
0.1
-0.1
0.3
2.8
-1.7

29.1
2.5
23.8
3.4
2.1
1.8
0.3
0.1
-0.1
3.1
-1.0

28.8
2.1
23.5
3.5
2.1
1.8
0.3
0.1
-0.1
3.2
-1.1

28.9
2.1
23.3
3.7
2.2
1.9
0.3
0.1
-0.1
2.8
-0.6

29.0
2.1
23.0
3.9
2.4
2.1
0.3
0.1
-0.1
2.7
-0.3

29.1
2.1
22.8
4.0
2.6
2.3
0.3
0.1
-0.1
2.4
0.2

29.2
2.1
22.6
4.0
2.9
2.6
0.3
0.1
-0.1
2.0
0.9

S avings and inves tment (% of GDP)
Gros s domes t ic inv es tmen t
Gros s n at ional s av ings
Fo reign s av ings

17.5
17.5
0.0

17.7
17.9
-0.2

19.4
17.4
2.0

19.4
18.4
0.9

22.7
17.9
4.8

17.9
18.6
-0.7

20.7
18.9
1.8

19.9
18.5
1.5

19.4
18.3
1.1

18.9
18.2
0.6

18.4
18.0
0.4

18.3
18.1
0.2

Indebtednes s  (% of GDP)
Pub lic s ecto r g ros s deb t 3/
o f wh ich FX-denomin ated

89.6
68.7

79.3
57.9

70.4
47.8

62.6
42.4

61.7
40.0

60.0
34.0

53.2
33.8

49.2
35.0

45.9
34.3

43.2
33.9

40.8
33.2

38.8
32.3

 
 
Annex D 
Page 1 of 5  

Annex D 
Debt Sustainability Analysis 

1. While limiting the fiscal space to engage into counter-cyclical measures, Uruguay’s 
public debt position is generally resilient to a range of simulated negative shocks.  However, 
further debt reductions would create necessary space for effective counter-cyclical 
measures, underscoring the importance of sustaining prudent macroeconomic policies. 
Under conservative assumptions, total gross public debt is projected to decline from 60.0 percent 
of GDP in 2009 to 38.8 percent of GDP in 2015. A series of stochastic simulations indicate a 
97.5 percent likelihood that gross public debt will be below 106.2 percent of GDP and a 50 
percent probability that it will be below 44.7 percent of GDP by 2015. Even though stochastic 
simulations suggest that the public debt profile is unlikely to differ from the baseline scenario, 
stress tests show that adverse shocks could at least temporarily reverse the favorable debt trends 
observed since 2003. Furthermore, different scenarios in terms of the share of foreign-currency 
denominated debt in total government debt were considered to assess the impact of dollarization 
on debt sustainability. The results of these bound tests (see below) indicate that de-dollarization 
would be able to gradually reduce the country's vulnerability to exchange rate fluctuations. 

PUBLIC DEBT TRENDS AND STRUCTURE 

2.1 Over the last five years, a successful debt management strategy has resulted in lower 
debt stock. As a result of the strong growth achieved in 2004-2008 (annual average of 6.6 
percent), the appreciation of the Uruguayan peso (27 percent) and a better fiscal position 
(average primary balance of 3.6 percent in 2003-2007), the gross public sector debt-to-GDP 
decreased by more than 40 percentage points of GDP from 2003 to 2008. Total public debt 
declined from 105.0 percent of GDP in 2003 to 60.0 percent of GDP in 2009 (in net terms, from 
71.2 percent of GDP in 2003 to 30.7 percent of GDP in 2009). 

2.2 
Debt composition has improved, with lower exposure to exchange risk and longer 
maturity. In terms of debt composition, by end-2009, 78.9 percent of total gross public debt was 
held by private creditors, compared to 55.7 percent by end-2004, reflecting restored access to 
market financing. The foreign currency share of total public sector debt fell from 76.6 percent in 
2004 to 56.7 percent in December 2009. As of end-December 2009, short-term debt (less than 1 
year) of the overall public sector was 3.3 percent of total debt, with long-term debt (over 5 years) 
representing 80.2 percent of all obligations, up from 58.6 percent in 2004.  

2.3 
In spite of these efforts to reprofile debt, medium-term borrowing requirements are 
expected to peak in 2011. Although the Government has succeeded in smoothing short-term 
obligations, attention should be paid to the medium-term debt calendar. Despite efforts made to 
repurchase debt due until 2012, there is still some concentration of payments around 2011 and 
2017-2018. 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex D 
Page 2 of 5  

Annual public debt as a share of GDP 

To tal PS Deb t
PS Ex tern al Deb t
PS Domes tic Deb t

120

100

P

D
G

f

o

t

n

e
c
r
e

P

80

60

40

20

0

0
0
0
2

1
0
0
2

2
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

6
0
0
2

7
0
0
2

8
0
0
2

9
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

1
1
0
2

2
1
0
2

3
1
0
2

4
1
0
2

5
1
0
2

Source: WB staff calculations. 

DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS 

2.4 
The debt sustainability analysis is performed on the basis of two methodological 
approaches. The deterministic approach presents the evolution of main determinants of public 
debt over time. The stochastic approach shows how the main determinants of public debt are 
affected by stochastic shocks.  

2.5 
A favorable medium-term macroeconomic framework would help preserve a stable 
path for Uruguay’s public debt in 2010-2015. The baseline for our debt sustainability analysis 
is conservative. It assumes an economic slowdown in 2009, followed by a recovery to 5.5 
percent growth in 2010. Fiscal accounts are expected to deteriorate with the economic slowdown 
in 2009, but to recover in the subsequent years, although not to pre-crisis levels. Under these 
assumptions, total gross public debt is projected to decline from 60.0 percent of GDP in 2009 to 
38.8 percent of GDP in 2015. The baseline scenario is based on the assumption of an average 
primary surplus of 2.4 percent during 2010-2015. 

2.6 
Sustained fiscal adjustment, economic growth and exchange rate stability are 
critical for continued improvement in public debt indicators. For the baseline scenario, we 
find that during 2004 and 2009 exchange rate stability accounted for 38 percent of debt 
reduction, while fiscal adjustment (primary surplus) and continuing healthy growth also played a 
significant role, with a contribution of 20 percent and 31 percent, respectively. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex D 
Page 3 of 5  

Table 1. 1. Cumulative Public Gross Debt Decomposition, 2001-2015 
Public Gross Debt Decomposit ion
2001-2015
2001-2003
2004-2009
Percent of GDP
Change in public sector debt
-2.6
63.7
-45.0
-21.3
Primary deficit (- surplus)
-34.0
-2.4
-17.4
-14.2
 -Seignorage
-7.9
-1.8
-9.3
3.2
Contribution from real interest rate
15.7
2.4
7.9
5.4
Contribution from real GDP growth
-33.3
5.3
-26.0
-12.6
Contribution from real exchange rate change
-11.3
24.3
-32.5
-3.1
Residual
68.3
35.9
32.4
0.0
Source: Central Bank of Uruguay, MEF, and World Bank staff projections. Note: gross debt of the overall public 
sector  
(NFPS and Central Bank). 

2010-2015

2.7 
Following a deterministic approach to the debt sustainability analysis, we find that 
adverse shocks could temporarily reverse the favorable debt trends observed under the 
baseline scenario. We consider various stress tests to evaluate the behavior of the public debt 
ratio under different scenarios. First, a one-time 30 percent exchange rate depreciation in 2011. 
This shock would cause the debt-to-GDP ratio to deteriorate rapidly to 58.6 in 2011, going back 
to 53.8 in 2012 and declining gradually thereafter. Second, a combined shock (two-standard 
deviations shocks to primary surplus-to-GDP ratio, real growth rate and real interest rates) in 
2010-2011. This combined shock would cause the projected gross debt to reach 62.4 percent of 
GDP and 65.0 percent of GDP in 2010 and 2011, respectively, decreasing in subsequent years.  

Table 1. 2. Gross Public Debt: Alternative Scenarios and Bound Tests, 2009-2014     (in percent of GDP) 

Bas e line

Alte rnative s cenarios
A1. Key variables are at their historical averages in 2010-15
A2. No policy change (constant primary balance) in 2010-15

Bound te s ts
B1. Real interest rate is at historical average plus two standard deviations in 2010 and 2011 
B2. Real GDP growth is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2010 and 2011
B3. Primary balance is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2010 and 2011
B4. Combination of 1-3 using one standard deviation shocks
B5. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2011
B6. 5 percent of GDP increase in other debt-creating flows in 2010 and 2011

Summary

Baseline
Second most extreme stress test (B4)
Most extreme stress test (B2)

Actual
2009
60.0

2010
53.2

2011
49.2

Proje cte d
2012
2013
45.9
43.2

2014
40.8

2015
38.8

60.0
60.0

60.0
60.0
60.0
60.0
60.0
60.0

54.5
54.2

55.9
64.3
56.7
62.4
53.2
58.2

50.4
50.6

53.5
68.4
55.4
65.0
58.6
58.3

46.6
47.2

48.9
63.4
50.7
60.1
53.8
53.5

43.0
43.9

44.3
58.4
46.0
55.1
48.9
48.7

39.6
40.6

39.4
53.0
41.0
49.9
43.9
43.6

36.4
37.2

34.3
47.4
35.8
44.4
38.6
38.3

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

60.0
60.0
60.0

53.2
62.4
64.3

49.2
65.0
68.4

45.9
60.1
63.4

43.2
55.1
58.4

40.8
49.9
53.0

38.8
44.4
47.4

Source: World Bank staff projections. Note: gross debt of the overall public sector (NFPS and Central Bank). 

2.8 
Stochastic simulations are then run to assess the impact of volatility and uncertainty 
on debt sustainability. Based on the historical variances of four simulated variables (real GDP 
growth, change in real exchange rate, real interest rates of domestic and external debt), and 
abstracting from any feedback of rising debt levels on fiscal policy, Monte Carlo simulations 
were run to obtain confidence bands around the baseline projections of the gross-debt-to-GDP 

 
 
 
 
 
ratio. Our simulations indicate a 97.5 percent likelihood that gross public debt will be below 
106.2 percent of GDP and a 50 percent probability that it will be below 44.7 percent of GDP by 
2015. 

Figure 1. 1. Gross Public Debt-to-GDP: Stochastic Simulations 

Annex D 
Page 4 of 5  

2.5 - 5.0 / 95.0 - 97.5 
5.0 - 95.0
Baseline

120

100

P

D
G

f

o

t

n

e
c
r
e

P

80

60

40

20

0

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

6
0
0
2

7
0
0
2

8
0
0
2

9
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

1
1
0
2

2
1
0
2

3
1
0
2

4
1
0
2

5
1
0
2

Source: World Bank staff projections.  
Note: gross debt of the overall public sector (NFPS and Central Bank). 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex D 
Page 5 of 5  

Table 1. 3. Uruguay: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2004-2014 

(in percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 

Notes: 1/ Gross external and domestic public sector debt. 
2/  The  domestic  real  interest  rate  contribution  is  derived  as  (id‐)/[(1+)(1+g)]  times  previous  period  gross  domestic  debt  ratio  as  defined  in 
footnote, with id=domestic interest rate, =domestic inflation rate; g=real GDP growth rate. 
3/ The  foreign  real  interest  rate contribution  is derived as  (if‐*)/[(1+*)(1+g)]  times previous period gross external debt  ratio, with  if=foreign 
interest rate, *=US inflation rate; g=real GDP growth rate. 

4/  The  real  exchange  rate  contribution  is  derived  as 
defined as in footnote 8/ and all other variables defined as in footnote 3. 
5/  Defined  as  public  sector  deficit,  plus  amortization  of  medium  and  long‐term  public  sector  debt,  plus  short‐term  debt  at  end  of  previous 
period.  
6/ Derived as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period gross public debt stock. 
7/ The real interest rate on public debt is calculated as 


1(

i
1()

e
1/()


)

1
1(

)

1(

i
1/()


)

, with t as the share of foreign 
currency denominated debt in total public debt and all the other variables defined as in footnotes 3/, 4/ and 6/. 
8/ Change in the real exchange rate êt is defined as (et∙Pt*/Pt)/(et‐1∙Pt‐1*/Pt‐1) = (1+st)∙(1+t*)/(1+t), in percent. 



 

)

1(

)

1(/)

)

1(

)

1(

*

1

*

1

*

^
t

t

t

t

t

l

t

t

f

g

nfa

i

b

i

e

























,  with  the  change  in  real  exchange  rate  êt 













1

*
t

t

d
t

t

t

f

t

t



2005

2006

Actual 
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Proje cte d
2012
2013

2014

2015

Public se ctor de bt 1/
o/w foreign-currency denominated (gross)

79.3
57.9

70.4
47.8

62.6
42.4

61.7
40.0

60.0
34.0

53.2
33.8

49.2
35.0

45.9
34.3

43.2
33.9

40.8
33.2

38.8
32.3

Change in public sector debt
Identified debt-creating flows
Primary deficit
Revenue and grants
Primary (noninterest) expenditure
 -Seignorage
 +Automatic debt dynamics:
Contribution from interest rate/growth differential
Of which contribution from real interest rate
Contribution from domestic real interest rate 2/
Contribution from real interest rate on  foreign debt 3/
Of which (- ) contribution from real GDP growth excl. OSF
Contribution from real exchange rate depreciation 4/
O ther identified debt-creating flows
 -Privatization receipts 
 -Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities
 -O ther (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization)
Residual, including asset changes

- 10.3
- 14.9
-4.0
28.3
24.2
-2.8
-8.1
-4.1
2.1
1.0
1.2
-6.2
-4.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.6

-8.9
-8.9
-3.6
28.2
24.6
-1.5
-3.7
-2.1
1.1
-0.6
1.7
-3.3
-1.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-7.9
-17.1
-3.5
28.2
24.7
-1.2
-12.4
-4.3
0.6
-1.2
1.8
-4.9
-8.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
9.3

-0.9
-4.2
-1.3
26.4
25.1
-2.0
-0.8
-4.7
0.2
-0.3
0.6
-4.9
3.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.3

-1.7
-11.6
-1.1
28.1
27.0
-0.9
-9.7
0.1
1.9
0.0
1.8
-1.7
-9.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.0

-6.9
-6.9
-2.1
29.4
27.2
-1.2
-3.6
-1.9
1.2
0.0
1.2
-3.1
-1.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-4.0
-4.0
-2.1
29.1
27.0
-0.4
-1.5
-1.3
1.3
0.0
1.3
-2.5
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-3.2
-3.2
-2.2
29.2
27.0
0.2
-1.3
-1.0
0.9
0.0
0.9
-1.9
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-2.8
-2.8
-2.4
29.3
26.9
0.8
-1.2
-0.9
0.9
0.0
0.9
-1.8
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-2.3
-2.3
-2.6
29.4
26.8
1.5
-1.3
-1.0
0.7
0.0
0.7
-1.7
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

-2.1
-2.1
-2.9
29.5
26.7
2.1
-1.4
-1.1
0.4
0.0
0.4
-1.6
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Public sector debt- to- revenue ratio 1/

280.6

249.4

221.6

233.4

213.7

181.1

169.3

157.5

147.5

139.0

131.4

Gros s financing ne e d 5/
in billions of U.S. dollars

18.0
3.1

33.6
6.7

5.1
1.2

7.8
2.4

6.8
2.1

4.2
1.7

12.0
5.3

8.2
3.9

7.0
3.6

6.2
3.4

6.0
3.5

Key M acroe conomic and Fiscal As sumptions

Nominal GDP (local currency)
Real GDP growth (in percent)
Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 6/
Average real interest rate (including exchange rate revaluation on foreign currency denominated debt) 7/
Exchange rate, end of period (LC per US dollar) 
Change in the real exchange rate (Local currency per US dollar) 8/
Nominal depreciation of local currency, end of period (LC per dollar)
GDP deflator (in percent)
Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent)
Primary deficit

425.0
7.5
5.4
-2.2
24.2
-6.1
-8.6
0.7
8.3
-4.0

476.7
4.3
5.9
-0.6
24.5
-2.8
1.2
7.5
5.9
-3.6

562.2
7.5
5.9
-11.4
21.6
-17.5
-11.9
9.7
8.0
-3.5

653.2
8.5
5.3
7.1
24.4
9.7
13.0
7.0
10.1
-1.3

711.1
2.9
4.9
-13.3
19.6
-24.1
-19.4
5.9
10.8
-1.1

806.5
5.5
6.6
-0.8
19.7
-4.9
0.1
7.5
6.4
-2.1

906.1 1002.7 1105.4 1218.5 1343.3
5.0
4.0
4.0
4.0
4.0
6.4
5.6
5.4
5.0
4.7
1.8
1.1
1.0
0.6
0.3
20.5
21.1
21.7
22.3
23.0
-0.8
-0.9
-1.0
-0.9
-0.8
4.2
3.2
2.8
2.8
2.9
7.0
6.4
6.0
6.0
6.0
3.9
4.0
3.8
3.7
3.4
-2.1
-2.2
-2.4
-2.6
-2.9

 
 
  
 
Annex E 
Banking Sector Update 

Annex E 
Page 1 of 8 

The Uruguayan financial system has so far managed to weather the global economic 
downturn without major difficulties. Lessons learned and reforms introduced after the 2001-2002 crisis 
(with its epicenter in Argentina) have helped the system to be better prepared to resist turbulence from 
abroad. In addition, proactive Central Bank intervention and supervision have contributed to assuring 
financial system stability. 

In recent years, the Banking System has consolidated its recovery and appears to have 
recovered from most of the effects of the 2001-2002 crisis. In particular, financial system deposits have 
recovered significantly and continued to grow at a strong pace while credit has also recovered, though at a 
milder rate. Asset quality has improved as well, with NPLs reaching record low levels in 2008. Improved 
regulation has facilitated reduced balance sheet mismatches and the creation of adequate capitalization 
and liquidity positions.  However, certain weaknesses inherent in the Uruguayan system, though less 
harmful than in the past, still persist.   

Uruguayan capital markets continue to be small and dominated by sovereign issues. In 
contrast, international debt issues are sizeable in proportion of GDP compared to other Latin American 
countries, but the bulk continues to be represented by the sovereign.  For their part, equity markets are 
among the less developed of Latin America relative to the size of the economy. In Uruguay, market 
capitalization is approximately 0.5% of GDP (December 2009), versus 61% of GDP in Brazil, 46% of 
GDP in Colombia, 21% in Argentina and 51% in Peru. 

AFTERMATH OF THE 2002 CRISIS: FINANCIAL SYSTEM RECOVERY 

Capital Markets 

Uruguay’s capital markets still play a minor role in investment financing. Although pension 
funds continue to accumulate funds, resources are largely channeled to investments in government 
securities.  Weaknesses in investor protection and corporate governance practices continue to limit 
enterprises’ access to the capital markets.  Leaving aside natural barriers such as the country’s small size 
that may limit potential market activity, studies and interviews with market participants point to problems 
not only at the issuer level but also at investors’ and exchanges’ level, as well as to weaknesses in the 
regulatory framework.  

In recent years, the Uruguayan Authorities have taken critical steps to facilitate the 
development of capital markets. In particular, efforts have included the drafting of a new Capital 
Markets Bill that was finally sanctioned in December 2009; and the reorganization of the Central Bank of 
Uruguay to address capital market issues and facilitate the implementation of the new Law. In addition, a 
new Bankruptcy Law has been recently sanctioned and is currently under implementation. The new 
regime seems to properly address the weaknesses of previous legislation. Finally, as part of the initiatives 
to enhance the reliability of information, a recently-signed decree puts in place a sustainable and effective 
process for the adoption of the most recent IFRS standards while a process is currently in place aimed to 
establish more homogenous working standards at the Registro de Estados Contables (REC). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex E 
Page 2 of 8 

Banking System 

The Argentine crisis led to a significant contraction in terms of financial intermediation and 
number of entities.  However, the regulatory and operating environments as well as the Uruguayan 
banking system fundamentals have improved substantially since then.  

As result of the crisis, Uruguay has made significant efforts to improve financial system 
regulation. In particular, progress has been made in the regulation and supervision of state banks. The 
largest state bank, BROU, has made considerable improvements in information availability, risk 
management and internal controls. The state housing bank, BHU has undergone an in depth restructuring 
process that has precluded it from offering new loans or taking new deposits until very recently. Finally, 
after a pause of several years, the proposed reform of the BCU charter was approved by the Parliament in 
October 2008. The reform is aimed to improve Central Bank autonomy and its role in financial 
supervision. In addition, the reform includes the creation of a (now operational) independent entity named 
Corporación de Protección del Ahorro Bancario, responsible for managing deposits insurance. 

In terms of structure, the banking system remains highly concentrated. The two existing 
public institutions, Banco de la República Oriental del Uruguay and Banco Hipotecario del Uruguay, 
account for approximately half of total banking system assets. In addition, if the five largest banks are to 
be considered, concentration reaches figures above 80% of total assets.  The recent acquisition of ABN 
Amro Bank by Banco Santander has further increased financial system concentration.  

Economic recovery consolidation and the gradual improvement in confidence have 
contributed to the normalization of total system liabilities. In particular, total deposits have recovered 
significantly both in domestic and foreign currency. Consequently, the system continues to be highly 
dollarized with dollar denominated deposits representing near 80% of total private sector deposits as of 
December 2009.  However, the share of non-resident deposits, once a source of financial system 
volatility, has dropped markedly from levels above 50% of the depositary base in 2001 to approximately 
19.5% as of December 2009. 

14.000

12.000

Deposits remain mostly short term in the form 
of checking and savings accounts (see Figure 1). The 
poor stock of term deposits that account for only 21% of 
total private sector deposits as of December 2009 can be 
attributed to a series of factors. In the first place, excess 
liquidity currently available in the system as a result of a 
constant inflow of domestic and international funds 
discourages banks from increasing interest rates in order 
to raise additional funds. Secondly, the relatively high 
reserve requirements of 35% and 25% for foreign 
currency and domestic currency denominated deposits, 
respectively; and the fact that no interest is paid on them 
have substantially reduced the intermediation margin of 
banks leading to further reductions in interest rates paid on deposits. 

10.000

n
o

i
l
l
i

2.000

4.000

3
0
0
2

-

c

i

d

M

Source: BCU 

Fig. 1: Evolution of Deposits 

(by Term, Million USD) 

Sight Depos its

Term Depos its

4
0
0
2

-

n
u

j

4
0
0
2

-

c

i

d

5
0
0
2

-

n
u

j

5
0
0
2

-

c

i

d

6
0
0
2

-

n
u

j

6
0
0
2

-

c

i

d

7
0
0
2

-

n
u

j

7
0
0
2

-

c

i

d

8
0
0
2

-

n
u

j

8
0
0
2

-

c

i

d

9
0
0
2

-

n
u

j

9
0
0
2

-

c

i

d

8.000

$
S
U

6.000

0

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex E 
Page 3 of 8 

Financial system assets have experienced a gradual revival. Currently, nearly 65% of assets 
are composed of cash and cash equivalents, deposits held in foreign banks and government bonds. The 
remainder consists mainly of credit to the non-financial 
private and public sectors. In particular, overall credit to 
the non-financial sector has improved in the last years 
ranging from 22% in 2003 to approximately 32% of 
banking system assets as of December 2009. However, 
origination volumes relative to GDP continue to lag 
behind pre-crisis levels. 

Fig. 2: Breakout by Type of Borrower 
- Dollar denominated Credit,  Dec 09- 

Ag r icul tural 
Sec to r 23%

Household
s 4%

Serv i ces 
17%

A breakout by type of borrower shows that 
corporate lending represents the majority of the stock 
of outstanding credit with a share of 72% of total non-
financial private sector credit as of December 09. The 
remainder corresponds to household related loans.  A 
breakout by currency shows 
that most of dollar 
denominated credit corresponds to corporate lending 
reflecting the series of prudential regulations currently in place (see Figure 2). 

Real Es tate 
3%

Commerce 
18%

Source: BCU 

In d us try 
35%

Access to bank financing by Uruguayan firms continues to be limited. The 2008 World 
Bank Investment Climate Survey highlighted the low use of bank credit by Uruguayan firms as it 
accounts for as little as 6 percent of working capital and even less for asset financing. The problem is 
more acute in the case of SME financing. Uruguayan enterprises are required to pledge more 
collateral as a percentage of their loans than enterprises in many comparable countries. 

140%

Fig. 3: Liquidity Ratio (*), 2004-2009 

Systemic liquidity has been enhanced in recent years with liquid assets to short term 
liabilities (with less than 91 days maturity) near 77% 
as of December 2009 (see Figure 3). On the funding 
side, Uruguayan financial institutions benefit from cheap 
retail deposits (mostly transactional) of domestic and 
international nature with limited reliance on market 
funding. In addition, tight BCU reserve requirements for 
domestic and foreign currency denominated deposits have 
helped increase the level of cash and cash equivalences 
available in the system. Finally, the modest growth in 
origination volumes has also contributed to further 
strengthen banks liquidity positions. Not surprisingly, the 
Uruguayan financial system exhibits a relatively low loan 
to deposit ratio of 47% as of December 2009. 

(*) Liquid Assets (Cash+short term investments) / Short 
Term Liabilities (includes credits below 91 days maturity) 
Source: BCU  

100%

120%

2005

2008

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

2004

2006

2007

2009

Asset quality has improved considerably in recent years (see Figure 4). A combination of 
sustained economic recovery, BCU support to troubled entities and the introduction of different 
refinancing facilities for delinquent borrowers has led to a sound recovery in asset quality.  This 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex E 
Page 4 of 8 

Fig. 4: NPLs %, Coverage Rates %, 2003-
2009 

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

improvement is evidenced by the ratio of NPLs to total 
loans that has ranged from figures near 25% in 2003 to 
new record lows of less than 1% in mid-2008. In addition, 
current systemic coverage rates remain robust as they 
represent more than five times the level of troubled loans.  

900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

Banks continued with the process of reducing 
their balance-sheet mismatches. In particular, the 
exposure to foreign currency mismatches has been reduced 
significantly thanks in part to enhanced prudential 
regulation. Currently, currency composition of loans is 
changing as the share of dollar denominated credit over total private sector credit has decreased from 
figures near 80% in 2003 to figures close to 50% in December 2009 (see Figure 5). Moreover, household 
related credit is currently originated almost entirely in Uruguayan pesos as borrowers income tends to be 
denominated in domestic currency as well. 

Source: IMF Global Financial Stability Report, 2010

NPLs (Right A x is )

Prov is ions

2004

2005

2008

2003

2006

2007

2009

Profitability has 
accompanied 
economic 
recovery.  Uruguayan banking system benefits from a 
wide net interest rate margin resulting from low cost 
domestic retail deposits and relatively high returns bared 
by assets deposited abroad usually in highly rated foreign 
banks. Other sources of profits are Uruguayan government 
securities and to a lesser extent proceeds arising from loan 
origination. On the other hand, relatively high and 
inelastic labor costs reduce the maneuverability margin of 
financial institutions in cases of declining earnings. 

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

Fig. 5: Private Sector Credit 
-Breakout by Currency- 

2003

2004
2005
US$ Credit

2006
2007
2008
Urg. Pesos Credit

2009

Source: BCU 

2,4

2,2

Fig. 6: Capital Adequacy vs. Regulatory 
Minima, (# of times) 

The capital adequacy ratio for the system 
remains robust with figures well above domestic and 
international requirements. The capitalization of the 
financial system has improved during the last years as a 
result of an increase in capitalized earnings and new 
capital contributions. A more 
favorable operating 
environment and a recovery of confidence have allowed 
the financial sector to increase financial intermediation 
and gradually stabilize its sources of recurrent earnings. In 
addition, prudential regulation and more conservative 
business strategies have led to a reduction in foreign 
currency risk. Improvements in asset quality have also contributed to the strengthening of capital levels. 
As a result, the systemic capital adequacy ratio relative to the minimum regulatory requirement has 
improved in the last years reaching a level of 2.09 times in December 2009 relative to approximately 1.3 
times in 2001 (see Figure 6). 

Source: BCU 

2009

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2008

2007

1,2

2

1,8

1,6

1,4

1

 
 
 
 
 
Annex E 
Page 5 of 8 

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL CRISIS AND ITS EFFECTS ON THE URUGUAYAN FINANCIAL 
SYSTEM 

Uruguayan Risk Profile 

Despite persistent volatility in the international front, the risk profile of Uruguay improved during 
2009. As of December 2009, the average UBI (Uruguayan Bond Index) spread was at 226 bps and 
remained below its 3-month moving average, showing a reduction of almost 500 bps from a peak reached 
in December 2008. A gradual easing in international market conditions explains observed performance. In 
January 2009, Moody’s upgraded Uruguay’s sovereign debt rating to Ba3 from B1 reducing to 3 notches 
the gap to investment grade. According to Moody’s press release, “the upgrade reflects reduced 
vulnerabilities associated with a somewhat lower degree of dollarization in government debt obligations 
and, at the margin, Uruguay’s banking system”.  In this regard, Uruguay benefits from strong market 
access and relatively low spreads as a result of a series of measures undertaken in recent years aimed to 
improve the sovereign debt profile.    

When compared to regional peers, Uruguay performed strongly with a risk profile similar to those 
of Chile, Brazil and Colombia (see Figure 7). Prospects on debt profile are encouraging – based on 
Uruguay’s track record – but are linked to the preservation of a conservative fiscal policy and further 
reductions in dollar denominated debt. 

Capital Markets 

Figure 7: EMBI Evolution, monthly, 3-month MA

2500

2000

1500

1000

In 2009, total volume traded in the primary 
market decreased 17% relative to the previous 
year. This performance was explained by extremely 
weak activity during the first half of the year as in the 
second and third quarters volumes surpassed by far 
previous year levels. Also, trading activity around 
public and private sector related issuances remained 
at similar proportions throughout the year.  Most of 
the volume traded in the primary market took place in the Bolsa Electrónica de Valores which accounted 
for 95% of total trades.  

Source: Bloomberg 

URU

ARG

BRA

CHL

COL

500

0

VEN

Despite lower trading activity, the market evidenced an increase in the number of new issuances 
relative to 2008. In particular, there were 5 corporate bond issuances for a total amount of USD 121 
million relative to 2 issuances for USD 37.7 million during 2008. Similarly, financial trusts totaled 3 new 
issuances for USD 34.6 millions relative to 1 large issuance in 2008 for USD 55.4 millions. As observed 
in previous years, no equity issuances took place during 2009.     

Banking System 

Despite the negative economic effects of the current international financial crisis on most 
developed and developing countries, the Uruguayan economy continued to exhibit strong economic 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex E 
Page 6 of 8 

activity until early 2009. This explains why the 
Uruguayan monetary policy strategy has differed 
substantially relative to regional partners as it has been 
aimed to contain inflationary pressures rather than 
boost economic activity. However, in the second 
quarter of 2009 the monetary policy rate was adapted 
to reflect an 
incipient 
less favorable economic 
environment (see Figure 8). In this context, the 
financial system exhibited signs of slight deterioration 
but fundamentals remained adequate.  

Non-resident deposits gained dynamism. 
Since the beginning of the international crisis back in mid-2007 and the series of political instabilities 
arose in Argentina during 2008, deposits far from losing dynamism, continued to exhibit strong growth 
rates thanks in part to increases in non-resident deposits. In particular, total private sector deposits have 
grown 21% in 2008 relative to 13% in 2007 while non-resident deposits have experienced a more 
vigorous behavior with annual growth rates of 41% in 2008 versus 8.2% in 2007. Thus, non-resident 
deposits could be a potential source of volatility in the future as they are susceptible to flight.  

Dollar-denominated deposits maintained their 
leadership in terms of level and growth rates (see 
Figure 9). This dynamic has been further exacerbated 
during 2008 and the first quarter of 2009 due to a series of 
portfolio dollarization episodes 
triggered by foreign 
exchange instabilities and inflows of non-resident deposits. 

A widespread slowdown in origination volumes 
of private sector credit began in the second half of 2008 
and continued until recently. In the second half of 2009, 
a reversal seems to have begun.  Performance prior to the 
second half of 2009 can be attributed to weakening 
international and domestic economic conditions. 
 In 
particular, credit stagnation has been more acute in commercial lines as companies (main destiny of credit 
origination) have adopted a wait and see strategy due to deteriorating prospects in economic activity. 
However, the recent easing in international conditions coupled with a change in the monetary policy 
strategy (aimed to boost economic activity) have positively impacted on credit figures.  It is still too early 
to confirm the observed improvement as a trend but if costs of funding remain adequate and domestic and 
international conditions do not deteriorate, demand for credit should improve further. 

Systemic liquidity figures have not varied relative to a year ago and remained at adequate 
levels.  Liquid assets to short term liabilities (less than 91 days maturity) reached 76.6% as of December 
2009 relative to 76.3% a year ago. These figures are explained by a growing depositary base coupled with 
a decline in liquid assets due to a gradual revamp in origination volumes. In particular, credit stagnation 
observed in 2009 could be argued to be demand-driven as companies (main destiny of credit origination) 

Figure 8: Monetary Policy Rate, Interbank Rate.

Source: BCU, Key Statistics, Daily 

Fig. 9: US$, Domestic currency Deposits 
(yoy growth) 

Source: BCU 

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

D

c
e

-

7
0

b
e
F

-

8
0

A

p

-
r

8
0

n
u
J

-

8
0

A

g
u

-

8
0

O

c

-
t

8
0

D

c
e

-

8
0

b
e
F

-

9
0

A

p

-
r

9
0

n
u
J

-

9
0

A

g
u

-

9
0

O

c

-
t

9
0

D

c
e

-

9
0

b
e
F

-

0
1

(

%

)

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Policy Rate

Interbank Rate

Inf lation Rate (2nd A x is )

-20,00%

-10,00%

10,00%
0,00%

30,00%
20,00%

50,00%
40,00%

60,00%

80,00%
70,00%

7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
7
8
8
9
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
y
y
y
e
b
n
u
o
p
v
c
e
b
n
u
o
v
c
e
b
n
u
o
p
v
c
a
b
a
c
a
b
a
e
c
a
a
c
n
e
u
g
e
o
d
n
e
u
g
o
d
n
e
b
u
g
e
o
d
e
a
a
o
n
e
a
o
n
a
o
n
s
s

-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
r
r
r
r
t
r
t
t
t
r

f

m

m

j

j

l

i

f

m

m

j

j

l

S
A

i

E

f

m

A

m

j

j

l

i

in US$

in Urg. Pesos

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex E 
Page 7 of 8 

adopted a wait and see strategy due to deteriorating prospects in economic activity. However, a more lax 
monetary policy coupled with a more benign operating environment has increased the appetite for credit. 

As of December 2009, systemic capital adequacy ratio and profitability indicators have 
improved slightly when compared to a year ago and remain at adequate levels (see Figures 10 and 
11). In particular, profitability figures experienced a gradual deterioration during 2008 as international 
conditions worsened. The relatively low reliance of the system on loan origination activities has not 
allowed developing a stable source of recurrent earnings. In turn, the main source of profits in recent 
years has been the differential between returns on assets held abroad and interest paid by banks on their 
deposits. Then, the drastic worldwide reduction in interest rates eroded significantly Uruguayan banks’ 
interest rate margin and thus their overall profitability.  

Fig. 10: Capital Adequacy Ratio 

Fig. 11: ROE and ROA, 2008-2009 

17,6%18,7%

16,7%

15,4%

17,3% 17,2% 17,6%

16,7%

20,0%

18,0%

16,0%

14,0%

12,0%

10,0%

8,0%

6,0%

4,0%

2,0%

0,0%
mar -08 jun-08 sep-08 dic -08 mar-09 jun-09 sep-09 dic -09

Source: BCU 

2009
2008

ROA

ROE

0%

2%

4%

6%

8%

10%

12%

14%

16%

Source: IMF Global Financial Stability Report, 2010 

Despite the current international financial crisis, asset quality continues to exhibit strong 
figures with NPLs to total loans at historically low levels of near 2% as of December 2009. 
Moreover, systemic coverage rates for public and private banks represent more than five times the level 
of troubled loans. In particular, the modest growth of credit in recent years has reduced the potential 
credit risk associated with unseasoned pools.  Existing systemic coverage rates provide a high degree of 
comfort, though a domestic downturn scenario might add pressure to observed performance,. 

TO SUM UP:  IMPROVEMENTS & CURRENT WEAKNESSES 

Structural Improvements 
- Regulatory environment has improved as a result of the last crisis; the regulator (Central Bank of 
Uruguay) takes a more proactive role. 
- Most weak banks have gone bankrupt or been absorbed; only strong entities remain. 
- Exposure of Uruguayan banking system assets to Argentine risk is currently limited in contrast with 
the situation experienced during the 2001 crisis. 
- Capital adequacy ratios are above domestic and international requirements, except for Banco 
Hipotecario del Uruguay (public bank) which underperforms.  
- Systemic liquidity continues to be high when compared to regional standards.  Liquid assets account 
for 60 percent of short term liabilities as of January 2010. 
- Banks count with good collateral and in many cases external support. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex E 
Page 8 of 8 

- Asset quality remains strong despite the current international financial crisis. The modest growth of 
credit in recent years reduces the potential credit risk associated with unseasoned pools. Coverage 
rates exhibit robust levels. Still, a downturn domestic scenario might put pressure to observed 
performance.  

Weaknesses 
- Financial system remains highly concentrated.  The two existing public institutions, Banco de la 
República Oriental del Uruguay and Banco Hipotecario del Uruguay, account for approximately half 
of total banking system assets.  If the five largest banks are to be considered, concentration reaches 
more than 80% of total assets. The recent acquisition of ABN Amro Bank by Banco Santander has 
further increased financial system concentration. 
- Non-resident deposits have decreased significantly over the years but their current high levels still 
pose a potential source of instability.  Nevertheless, reserve requirements seem to be adequate to deal 
with such an event. 
- Financial intermediation still has room for growth -- in particular, on the borrowers’ side.  SMEs’ 
insufficient financing makes it a niche with enormous potential for growth.  
- The lack of a significant source of recurrent earnings exposes systemic profitability to substantial 
volatility.  
- Relatively high and inelastic labor costs reduce the maneuverability margin in cases of declining 
earnings. 
- Uruguayan financial system’s still high dollarization limits the power of BCU to act as a lender of last 
resort. 

WHAT LIES AHEAD 

In sum, the Uruguayan Banking System has become more resilient than in the past to situations of 
distress. Fundamentals have improved as evidenced by enhanced asset quality, high liquidity figures, 
lower non-resident deposits and adequate capital ratios. However, Uruguayan banks still face risks 
associated with balance sheet mismatches as financial system dollarization, although lower than in the 
past, remains high in absolute and relative terms. An increase in exchange rate volatility could exacerbate 
the risk of balance sheet mismatch, although its consequences to overall financial system stability should 
remain bounded. 

 
 
 
 
 
Annex F:  IBRD Program Summary 

Annex F 
Page 1 of 8 

1. 

In line with the priorities identified by the Government, the 2010-2015 CPS will focus on the 
following four pillars:  (i)  Sustainable Economic Growth and Reduction in Macroeconomic 
Vulnerability; (ii) Competitiveness & Infrastructure; (iii) Agriculture, Climate Change, and 
Environment; and (iv) Increasing Social Inclusion & Equity.  Indicative support for this strategy is 
proposed to include a series of two DPLs totaling US$200 million (FY11 and FY12), investment lending 
totaling approximately US$500 million subject to IBRD’s overall lending capacity, and a well-focused 
and demand-driven AAA program.  

2. 

The proposed strategy places a heightened emphasis on supporting Uruguay in accessing 
international expertise and best practices, as well as sharing its own experiences with other 
countries through South-South exchanges.  Toward this end, the Government and the Bank agreed to 
introduce an innovative modality for analytical services, knowledge transfers and technical assistance 
based on the successful approach implemented as part of the Bank’s partnership strategy with Chile.  This 
modality–a joint analytical and technical assistance program–aims to enable the Bank to tailor its non-
lending program to needs expressed by the Government and respond swiftly and flexibly to demands.  
This joint program will be based on a framework agreement that clarifies the objectives, governance 
structure, and shared financing of the program.  Rooted fully in demand from the Borrower, an annual 
work program would be agreed between the Government and the Bank and define the main knowledge 
products and services to be elaborated in the following year, including a detailed timetable and cost 
estimates. 

3. 

Beyond from the need for continuity in existing areas of support to maintain momentum of 
reforms, the Government’s guiding principle for selecting new lending activities is “innovation.” 
There is a focus on using Bank resources for adding important value to critical interventions, contributing 
world class technical know-how in the respective areas and helping build strong institutional capacity, in 
particular in reform program design and managing for results.  Another important criterion for selecting 
new lending operations is to ensure that through close coordination with other donors, most notably the 
IADB, synergies are realized and duplications avoided.  Table 4 provides the agreed lending program for 
the first two years of the CPS, while providing only very indicative allocations for the reminder of the 
CPS period.  

Pillar 1:  Reducing Macroeconomic Vulnerability & Strengthening Public Sector Administration 

4. 

While Uruguay’s resilience in the face of the global financial crisis demonstrates the 
progress made in mitigating macroeconomic vulnerabilities, this remains a key priority for the 
Government and an area in which continued Bank collaboration is desired.  The Government and 
Bank concur that collaboration under the first two pillars of the previous CAS – reducing vulnerability 
and sustaining growth – provide a successful basis on which to build.  The CPS would have a particular 
focus on supporting Government efforts to achieve the following outcomes:  (i) contain expenditure 
growth to ensure no further deteriorate of fiscal balance in 2010, (ii) keep inflationary pressures under 
control, (iii) reduce dollarization levels.  Bank efforts supporting these outcomes include the following: 

5. 

The Programmatic Public Sector Competitiveness and Social Inclusion Development Policy 
Loan Series (FY11 and FY12).  DPL I supports the implementation of reforms which have been 
identified by the new Government as priorities for obtaining Bank support.  The program consists of a 
series of two loans, each amounting to US$100 million, which will support implementation of the 
Government’s agenda in three main areas: (i) public sector management, (ii) competitiveness, and (iii) 
social inclusion.  In particular, the main development objectives of the new loan are to strengthen the 

  
 
Annex F 
Page 2 of 8 

efficiency of 
the public administration while promoting macroeconomic stability, 
improve 
competitiveness through measures such as, facilitating trade, strengthening the business environment and 
development of financial markets.  It also seeks to improve social inclusion through measures targeted at 
enhancing the equity and efficiency of health, education and social protection systems. DPL I also targets 
the consolidation of reforms supported by the PRIDPL series (approved May 2007), and bolsters 
Government efforts in other areas were not supported by the PRIDPL series.  Specifically, the loan 
recognizes recent achievements in public sector management, business climate and social service delivery 
(prior actions for DPL-I). The indicative triggers for DPL-II reflect broad policy areas of support, 
anchoring the new Government’s reform agenda through 2011.  

6. 

Institutions Building Technical Assistance Project (IBTAL) and Additional Financing 
(ongoing).  The Bank has been helping the Uruguay Government with its state modernization agenda 
through the IBTAL including by financing technical exchanges between the New Zealand and Uruguay 
authorities in various aspects of public sector management.  Through the ongoing IBTAL loan of 
US$12.1 million and a potential Additional Financing for the same, the Bank will continue to provide 
support for the adoption and implementation of a program-based budget, as well as for the monitoring and 
evaluation efforts to continually strengthen the budget process.  The objective of the IBTAL is to improve 
the Borrower’s public sector performance by: (i) supporting its public sector modernization program in 
the areas of customs administration, monitoring and evaluation, performance-based budgeting, and e-
government; and (ii) strengthening its institutions involved with the design and implementation of public 
policy reforms in the areas of taxation, promotion of the business environment, and social protection.  

7. 

Treasury Department Services.  Uruguay has been a leading country in LCR in utilizing the 
IBRD Treasury Department’s banking products and services in order to manage some of its balance sheet 
risks, particularly interest rate and currency risks.  This partnership will likely strengthen over the next 
CPS period as further financing in Uruguayan Pesos is expected to be executed and as ongoing 
discussions on broader hedging strategies (energy, weather, etc) are completed.  

8. 

CFAA using the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) methodology. 
The last Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) was published in June 2005 (Report 
No.32851-UY).  Given the priority the administration places on its public sector reform program, this 
exercise presents an opportunity for the Bank to provide technical advice and support on Public Financial 
Management (PFM) reforms that are part of the government agenda.  It is proposed to conduct a PEFA 
study that would assess the status of country's Public Financial Management systems/ reforms against 28 
high-level of PFM indicators.  This study could serve as an objective baseline for the impact of the PFM 
reforms that the Government is initiating and also serve to measure their progress. 

9. 

CPAR.  As the last CPAR was conducted by the Bank in 1999 and the report delivered to the 
Government in 2000, the Bank proposes to update this analytical tool. At that time, IADB, UNDP and 
relevant government agencies provided valuable input on the local procurement environment, and the 
Bank would actively seek collaboration with other partners in the execution of the updated CPAR as well.  
A primary objective of the dialogue would focus on the attainment of consensus for the conducting of an 
assessment of the public procurement system using the indicators-based OECD/DAC tool.  

Pillar 2:  Improving Competitiveness & Infrastructure 

10. 

The Government seeks to strengthen competitiveness through increased coverage and 
better quality of infrastructure and establishment of a more conducive business environment.  
Beyond the strong demand for Bank expertise in the area of public-private partnerships, with PPIAF-
financed activities already launched, sector dialogue has shaped a proposed infrastructure program under 
the CPS to achieve: (i) improvement of the condition of key land transport infrastructure; (ii) efficiency 

  
 
Annex F 
Page 3 of 8 

improvements in OSE to free up resources for additional investment; (iii) diversification of sources of 
energy to reduce dependence on specific resources and decrease costs; and (iv) energy efficiency 
improvements by industry, agriculture and residential consumers to slow the growth of electricity 
demand.  Means of support under the 2010-2015 CPS include the following: 

11. 

Energy Efficiency GEF Grant (ongoing):  The Energy efficiency project is partially financed 
by a US$ 6.9 million grant. The development objective of this project is to increase the demand for and 
competitive supply of energy efficient goods and services, contributing to: (a) improved efficiency of 
energy use; (b) reduced reliance of the Uruguayan economy on imported electricity and fuels; and (c) 
reduced emissions from the energy sector.  The Project’s global environmental objective is to promote 
energy efficiency through (i) building capacity and know-how among stakeholders; (ii) stimulation of 
consumer demand; and (iii) promotion of project development and investment financing. The project 
consists of three main components: Energy Efficiency Market Development (implemented by MIEM); 
Utility Based Energy Efficiency Services (implemented by UTE); and. Project Management 
(implemented by MIEM and UTE). The project has supported the development of a string regulatory 
framework in energy efficiency in the country as well as its inclusion in the public agenda.  

12. 

Energy Sector Strengthening Project (Timing TBD):  The operation will strengthen energy 
security in Uruguay.  Given the draughts and the regional scarcity of natural gas, in recent years Uruguay 
faced strong difficulties to satisfy its electricity demand.  The operation would focus on enhancing 
transmission and distribution capacity, with a view to contributing to assure the adequate ease of use of 
electricity in all the country.  

13. 

  Transport Infrastructure Maintenance and Rural Access (ongoing):  The project’s 
development objective is to upgrade the country’s road transport infrastructure to a condition that 
facilitates the transportation of freight and passengers at a cost-efficient level of service.  This is being 
done by rehabilitating key transport links, removing existing bottlenecks, arresting any further 
deterioration of infrastructure due to budgetary constraints, and improving infrastructure management and 
safety. The project is helping to reduce transport costs and preserve the infrastructure stock in Uruguay in 
an efficient and sustainable manner at both the national and local levels.  In general, the structure and 
composition of the transport industry in Uruguay is highly competitive.  Thus, the net reduction in 
transport costs brought about by the project should translate into freight tariff reductions, ultimately 
reducing the price of the transported goods and stimulating higher levels o f productivity and economic 
activity. 

14. 

Transport Infrastructure Modernization Loan (FY12).  This operation would consist of an 
output-based loan supporting the MTOP five-year work program that finances typical road works (mainly 
CREMAS), and possibly supports the implementation of reforms in other surface transport modes as well 
as the institutional improvement of the MTOP.  The loan would disburse with indicators that link road 
condition and progress of the transport sector reform. 

15. 

OSE Modernization and Systems Rehabilitation project APL III/IV (FY12).  The project 
development objective (PDO) of the overall APL program is to increase the efficiency, coverage and 
sustainability of water supply and sanitation services through: (i) improved efficiency and effectiveness of 
OSE; (ii) increased capacity for pumping treated water in Montevideo and UFW reductions; and (iii) 
increased sewerage treatment and a new strategy for sewerage expansion. There is currently an ongoing 
project under this program (OSE APL II) and another under preparation (OSE APL IV).  A study on the 
preparation for the OSE APL IV project called Construction of Wastewater Treatment Plants is being 
conducted to support this investment operation.  It should be noted, however, that OSE is proposing to 
jointly prepare the APL III and APL IV projects (in a combined APL III). 

  
 
Annex F 
Page 4 of 8 

16. 

Integration of Public Policies on Risk Management for Threats of Water Origin (ongoing 
Technical Assistance) aims to support DINASA's (Direccion Nacional de Agua y Saneamiento) 
institutional and technical strengthening throughout financial and technical assistance in a specific field.  
It would be a bridge between the financial assistance provided by the World Bank Technical Assistance 
Loan (closed) and DINASA's financial support throughout Uruguay's National Budget. 

17. 

The Sewerage Access Study Trust Fund (ongoing) aims to support preparation of a study to 
evaluate impact on public health of connecting to a sewerage system. It’s the most advanced study of its 
kind in the Bank (and maybe in the world) today. 

18. 

Road Safety Trust Fund (ongoing).  The objective of this grant is to generate a sustainable 
cultural change trough information, education, training and awareness.  This campaign is line with the 
GoU´s recently approved Road Safety National Strategy, the implementation of which is led by the 
National Road Safety Unit (UNASEV), road safety lead agency created by law in 2008.  It finances the 
improvement of data collection on use of passive road safety elements for children, as well as a 
communication campaign to raise social awareness on the importance of using road safety elements for 
children. The activities financed under this grant are currently being disseminated at the regional level by 
the Global Road Safety Facility as best practice.  As a result of this grant the beneficiary is preparing a 
manual describing the methodology used in Uruguay to develop this Road Safety campaign aimed at 
protecting children, to share the experience and exchange information with other countries in LCR. 

19. 

IBRD has developed considerable experience in providing assistance on financial markets 
and business climate-related challenges throughout the region, and the Bank has already deployed 
a series of lending and non-lending instruments in Uruguay to tackle these fronts.  Preliminary 
feedback from these activities is promising.  Thus, a range of WBG support is proposed to further 
strengthen the business climate in the following ways:  (i) promotion of the new one-stop shop for firm 
creation; (ii) substantially increase the credit available to the private sector; and (iii) the completion and 
operationalization of several Public-Private Partnerships as key elements of meeting targets for 
infrastructure investment.  In addition to the DPLs, the achievement of these outcomes will be supported 
through the activities below. 

20. 

Promoting Innovation to Enhance Competitiveness Project (ongoing).  This project’s 
development objective is to strengthen Uruguay's capacity to generate, transfer and adapt knowledge and 
technology by supporting: (i) the institutional framework for science, technology, and innovation (STI); 
(ii) investments in human capital and high-quality research teams; (iii) technology transfer and private 
sector innovation; and (iv) cross-sectoral and international research collaboration and mobility of 
researchers between public institutions and the productive sector. There are 3 components. Component 
one will support STI policies and institutional strengthening.  Component two will build human capital 
and high-quality research teams and will strengthen the capacity to develop new knowledge.  Component 
three will promote innovation and technology transfer to the productive sector. 

21. 

AAA on competitiveness (ongoing). In response to the Government’s request, this study 
assesses Uruguay’s potential as a logistics hub and as a regional distribution center. The competitiveness 
of Uruguay’s logistics system is assessed from an international perspective and policy recommendations 
towards further efficiency gains are provided. The study focuses on policies related to enhancing 
domestic and regional trade facilitation and assesses the wider economic impact of such reforms on 
logistics costs and trade. 

22. 

Investment Climate Assessment (FY12). This activity would be a key ESW built on the 
previous Uruguayan Investment Climate Assessment carried out in 2007.  The study would seek to: (i) 
measure prevailing investment climate conditions in Uruguay and their evolution relative to the last 

  
 
Annex F 
Page 5 of 8 

assessment; (ii) provide international comparisons on key business climate indicators; (iii) identify the 
features of the investment climate that matter most for firm productivity and competitiveness; and (iv) 
make policy recommendations on key reform priorities. It will help identify priorities for policy reform 
and will provide the Government and the private sector evidence that can be used to advocate for further 
policy reforms.  

Pillar 3:  Protecting the Environment, Mitigating the Effects of Climate Change, and Strengthening 
Family Agriculture 

23. 

The WBG is well positioned -- in terms of the financing options, knowledge and expertise at 
its disposal – to support the implementation of  the National Response to Climate Change Plan and 
the National Action Plan on Production and Sustainable Consumption.  

24. 

Integrated Natural Resources and Biodiversity Management Project (ongoing).  The 
objective of this project is to conserve Uruguay's globally significant biodiversity particularly through 
financing the incremental costs associated with promoting integrated production systems in key 
biodiversity areas. In this context, this project fits perfectly with the Government strategy to expand the 
work initiated under the PRENADER Project, but with more emphasis on natural resources and 
biodiversity conservation and management.  The mainstreaming of biodiversity in the rural sector and the 
value added to rural land production based on sound practices may be replicated elsewhere with a strong 
communications scheme. The academic sector and civil society organizations would be key elements to 
disseminate and bring into concrete actions the lessons derived from this initiative. 

25. 

GEF Biodiversity Conservation (ongoing).  The first component, Natural Resources and 
Biodiversity Management Component provides technical and financial assistance to demand-driven 
activities aimed at promoting sustainable management of natural pastures and rain-fed agriculture.  The 
GEF contribution to the Fund would support mainstreamed demand for biodiversity initiatives in priority 
ecosystems. The second component, fully financed by GEF resources, establishes demonstration areas 
within the selected areas of GEF-interventions (grasslands and serranías), for a sustainable use of natural 
resources in key micro-catchments which are important for biodiversity, combining sound practices for 
natural resources management, and creating increased public awareness on the significance, and 
socioeconomic importance of biodiversity.  The third component develops support services that 
contribute to the efficient implementation of sub-projects, financed under the previous two components.  
The fourth component supports the sound and efficient management of the Project. 

26. Montevideo Landfill Gas Recovery Carbon Trust Fund (ongoing).  The project aims to 
design, install, and operate a landfill gas flaring unit at Montevideo's controlled landfill, thereby avoiding 
1,299,836 tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCOze) emissions from July 2007 to December 2012.  In 
addition to achieving carbon Emission Reductions (ERs) through methane combustion, the project will 
contribute to a positive local environmental impact under objective one above by controlling flammable 
gas migration and non-methane volatile organic compound (NMVOC) emissions, which can cause other 
local and global environmental effects and are hazardous in high concentrations. 

27. 

UTE 10MW Grid-Connected Wind Power Farm at Caracoles Hill Trust Fund (ongoing). 
This is a small-scale Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) activity aimed at reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions by displacing electricity generated from carbon intensive sources in the Uruguayan grid. Its 
main objective is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by grid-connected electricity generation from wind 
power. The emissions reduction will arise from the displacement of fossil-fuel-based electricity 
generation on the national grid. The project will contribute to the sustainable development of Uruguay, 
most notably through energy security and the substitution of crude oil and derivatives imports. This 

  
 
Annex F 
Page 6 of 8 

project being the first of its kind, it is designed as a small-scale pilot, aimed at being easily replicated in 
case of success.  

28. 

Carbon Finance Assistance (disbursing under TF054846).  The objective of this operation was 
to strengthen the national capacity at both institutional and technical level in order to enable the 
development of Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) projects and other mitigation activities. This 
technical assistance has achieved the following: (i) Capacity building within, and technical assistance to 
the DNA, (ii) Capacity building within other Government Agencies, (iii) Participation in Carbon Expo 
and preparation of promotional materials, (iv) Outreach to the private sector and the general public, (v) 
Analysis of the legal and regulatory framework for the approval of CDM projects and the sale of the 
corresponding CERs, and (vi) Technical assistance for development of programmatic CDM opportunities.  

29. 

Sustainable Industrial Development Project (FY12).  This operation would also strengthen the 
institutional capacity to enforce existing regulations both at national and sector levels.  In terms of the 
current institutional capacity to enforce compliance, the GoU has implemented some measures, including 
the control of regulations compliance. However, these efforts have been isolated. In this context, 
DINAMA, together with other ministries in relevant sectors, has agreed to coordinate efforts and to work 
together in the design of new and comprehensive instruments to facilitate supervision and control of 
cleaner production processes which would be part of the new IBRD operation. 

30. 

Promoting Cleaner Production & Improving Environmental Compliance in the Industrial 
Sector Trust Fund (RETF).  During 2010, the GoU has presented a National Action Plan on Production 
and Sustainable Consumption. This plan seeks to identify, coordinate, integrate and potentiate a set of 
actions, programs and projects targeted to prevent and minimize environmental impacts from production 
and consumption.  This project is expected to become active September 31 2010. Its objectives are to 
support activities that will seek to promote cleaner production, improve environmental compliance and 
boost competitiveness in the industrial sector (particularly for SMEs) in Uruguay, through the provision 
of technical assistance to the Dirección Nacional de Medio Ambiente (DINAMA).  These activities will 
be part of the project preparation activities relating to the Uruguay Sustainable Industrial Development 
Project. 

31. 

Integrated Agricultural Development and Natural Resources Management Project (FY12).  
The proposed operation would represent an innovative results-oriented initiative that would replicate the 
successful experience of the ongoing Natural Resources and Biodiversity Management Project, while 
expanding the objective and scope to incorporate a strong focus on Climate Change adaptation and 
mitigation in the agricultural sector.  The project would incorporate specific support to the development 
of innovative public instruments to improve information systems for planning and decision making, as 
well as supporting private sector investments to mitigate emissions, utilization of biomass for energy 
generation, and improve resilience to climate variability at the farm level.  Project design would also 
benefit from the conclusions and recommendations of the recently completed AAA on Family Agriculture 
regarding the specific factors that increase the vulnerability of this important subsector of the farming 
community, and the analytical work conducted on Climate Change.  The project, financed by a blend of a 
Bank loan and possibly GEF funds, would represent one element of an integrated results-oriented set of 
instruments that would also include Bank assistance to the Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and 
Fisheries (MGAP) to access other possible sources of bilateral and multilateral financing for climate 
change (such as the Adaptation Fund), as well as analytical support, technical assistance, and 
collaboration with MGAP regarding dissemination of experiences, organization of conferences, and 
participation in international events related to climate change.  

32. 

AAA on Family Agriculture (ongoing).  The Development Objective (DO) of the this Economic 
Sector Work (ESW) is to contribute to more equitable agricultural sector development in Uruguay while 

  
 
Annex F 
Page 7 of 8 

maintaining the country’s natural resource base and guaranteeing the long term sustainability of the 
farming community. Towards this objective, the ESW, through its diagnostics and recommendations 
focusing on the family agriculture segment, would contribute to an improved knowledge base within 
DGDR and a capacity for coherent programming of policies and instruments to address the main 
constraints to agricultural development in general, and by family agriculture in particular. 

33. 

AAA on climate change and agriculture (FY12). This analysis would assess international 
experiences and provide guidance to the development of the Government’s integrated strategy for 
mitigating and adapting agriculture and livestock production practices to climate variability, including by 
exploring the use of risk management (insurance) instruments. 

Pillar 4:  Increasing Inclusion & Social Equity 

34. 

The experience of the World Bank in Uruguay and other countries in the region positions it 
well to respond to the Government’s demand for technical assistance in the implementation of the 
National Plan for Social Equity, as well as to support the continuing reform in the health and 
education sectors.  Several interventions are proposed to support the aforementioned government 
objectives in the social sectors.   

35. 

Output-Based Social Sector Project (Timing TBD). This lending operation would contribute to 
finance the policies discussed and identified as efficient and priority in the studies on Health Reform 
Assessment, One laptop per Child and Social Policy Analysis, to help the Government implement 
necessary reforms.  

36. 

Human Opportunity Index (NLTA) (FY12). This is a possible follow-up work on "Monitoring 
social policy through the HOI".  It would be an input towards the preparation of the Social Sector Results-
based project.  

37. 

Social Policy Analysis (FY12).  This activity would comprise an evaluation of the Family 
Allowances and Tarjeta Alimentaria programs and discussion of further reform options on income 
transfer programs, including the use of FA and TA for the extreme poverty eradication plan, reforms in 
the FA program, and reforms in the old age non contributory pension program.  This ESW will include an 
analysis of public expenditure efficiency and impacts of these policies on the Human Opportunity Index. 

38. 

Reform of Housing Policies (FY11). The objective of this study would be to consider policy 
options to increase the supply of social housing, focused on creating incentives for self-initiatives. 

39. 

Social Sectors Public Expenditure Review (FY12).  Upon taking office, the administration 
proposed a public sector reform agenda aimed at, among other things, developing result-oriented 
medium-term budgeting, reforming the civil service, enhancing governance and transparency, and 
implementing effective and well-targeted social policies and programs supported by more effective social 
service delivery.  A Social Sector Expenditure Review would aim to achieve the following objectives: (a) 
develop an overview of the fiscal stance and a debt sustainability analysis, and their prospects in the 
medium term; (b) upgrade public expenditure management, supported by a PEFA evaluation; (c) assess 
recent social policies and their budgetary implications; (d) examine the incidence of social expenditure of 
the main social programs; and (e) complete an evaluation of key social programs (mainly family 
allowances and Tarjeta Alimentaria), while implementing impact evaluations wherever data make it 
possible.  

40. 

Third Basic Education Quality Improvement project (ongoing).  The objective of this project 
is to increase equity, quality, and efficiency in the provision of preschool and primary education. These 

  
 
Annex F 
Page 8 of 8 

objectives will be achieved by: (i) expanding the full-time school model, which focuses on students from 
socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds; (ii) improving the quality of preschool and primary 
education by enhancing the teacher training system and introducing new teaching and learning 
instruments in the classroom; and (iii) increasing the efficiency of education institutions.  There is an 
ongoing additional financing for this project which addresses the financing gap arising from the increase 
in project costs associated with a change in the Government of Uruguay's (GoU) strategy on civil works, 
and the significant escalation of construction costs in the country.  

41. 

Education Project (FY12).  The proposed education operation (estimated $40 million) would 
include continued support for the expansion of the full time school (FTS) and related activities, aimed to 
increase the quality of education at the primary level.  The envisioned activities expected to be financed 
under the project include; (i) the construction, rehabilitation and equipping of new FTS schools; (ii) the 
procurement of didactic materials for the schools (school equipment, learning materials, and school 
libraries); and (iii) teacher training for FTS. 

42. 

AAA on the One-Laptop-Per-Child initiative (FY11). This activity would consist of an 
assessment of the CEIBAL program and implementation so far, and discussion of possible options 
regarding the use of laptops in the classroom and expansion to secondary education.  

43. 

The Non-Communicable Diseases Prevention Project (ongoing).  The Non Communicable 
Diseases Prevention Project seeks to support the Government’s efforts to further strengthen its health 
delivery services and the current health policy framework for NCDs. In this context, the specific 
development objectives of the operation are (i) to expand accessibility and quality of primary health care 
services related to selected NCDs early detection and medical care; and (ii) to avoid and reduce exposure 
to selected NCDs risk factors as well as their health effects. The operation consists of four components: 
Component 1 - Strengthening of the MSP’s capacity to address the country’s changing epidemiological 
profile; Component 2 -Improving access to quality care services for prevalent NCDs in public primary-
care facilities; Component 3 - Implementation of the Previniendo Pilot Program; and Component 4 – 
Project Management. These components are implemented by the three main directorships within the 
MSP, with overall support and coordination from a Project Support and Coordination Unit (PSCU). 

44. 

IDF grant to Promote Equitable Access of Society to the Legal System (ongoing).  The first 
Bank grant to be executed by the Uruguayan Parliament, this is designed to raise awareness among 
vulnerable groups of the benefits and rights established in select social legislation.  It will allow 
Parliamentarians to monitor the social impacts of selected laws, develop tools to incorporate a social 
analysis when reviewing draft legislation, and, in cooperation with agencies of the Executive, develop 
institutional capacity to better implement such laws. 

  
 
 
Annex G 
Page 1 of 2 

Annex G:  IFC Program Summary 

1. 

IFC activities in Uruguay are focused on the country’s rich natural resource endowment, while 
fostering a more competitive private sector environment. The Corporation expects to move forward with a 
balanced approach that aims to finance private sector players with the scale needed to compete in global 
markets, while encouraging the growth of SMEs and supporting low-income groups. It expects to attain 
these objectives by expanding the availability of financial services, supporting agribusiness and forestry, 
financing infrastructure projects, and encouraging the growth of Uruguay’s tertiary and technical 
education system. These aims areas are in line with two of the four CPS pillars: improving 
competitiveness and infrastructure, and increasing inclusion and equity.   

2. 

Uruguay’s financial system has survived the global crisis, but lacks the depth achieved in other 
countries in the region such as Brazil and Chile. In 2008, domestic credit provided by the banking sector 
was equivalent to 33% of GDP, less than for regional upper middle income peers Chile or Brazil, but 
better than Argentina. Uruguay has an embryonic microfinance industry. Uruguay’s microfinance sector 
ranks 50th out of the 55 countries surveyed in the 2009 Global Microscope on the Microfinance Business 
Environment, reflecting low scores for institutional development and regulatory framework.   

3. 

This suggests that substantial opportunities exist for financial institutions to expand the range of 
services available to middle- and low-income households, as well as to second tier corporates and farms. 
Corporate lending in Uruguay tends to be concentrated at large companies.  

4. 

IFC aims to support banks and non-banks that focus on the mid-market corporate and low-income 
retail banking segments.  IFC is looking at opportunities to support local banks with onlending facilities 
for agribusiness SMEs and with trade finance lines for exporters. IFC currently has only one trade finance 
client in Uruguay with $160,000 in guarantees outstanding as of May 2010.  IFC has financed 
microfinance ventures elsewhere in Latin America, particularly in Bolivia, Mexico and Peru and thereby 
managed to reach groups that had previously been unable to obtain credit on acceptable terms. IFC is in 
talks with a potential client in this sector. It intends to help develop Uruguay’s small microfinance sector 
through investments with microfinance institutions, on a selective basis.  The Corporation also aims to 
support housing finance projects that can help expand this incipient market.  IFC has also gathered 
considerable experience in supporting the development of capital markets in other Latin American 
economies. 

5. 

Agribusiness is an important market for the IFC given its significance to the Uruguayan 
economy. Although it is a relatively small part of the economy, accounting for 10%-15% of GDP, 
agribusiness products comprise the bulk of Uruguay’s exports. The recent resolution of the legal conflict 
with Argentina over the construction of the Orion paper pulp project sponsored by UPM-Kymmene 
(formerly Botnia SA), and partly financed by IFC, may open the way for fresh investment in this sector. 
Uruguay’s excellent soils and temperate climate are favorable for the fast growth of commercial 
plantations.  

6. 

Orion and similar large-scale projects have the potential to reshape the structure of Uruguay’s 
industrial base and generate large export revenues in future years. Orion is the largest foreign investment 
in Uruguay's history and is enabling the country to move up the value chain beyond the export of raw 
materials. It is generating some 2,500 local jobs and has created opportunities for small independent 
suppliers to enter the company’s value chain. Orion has also deployed advanced environmental 
management techniques and technologies that allow it to sequester a net 500 kilos of CO2 equivalent per 
year per ton of paper produced. The plant will produce one million tons of paper per year during its 30-
year life.  

 
Annex G 
Page 2 of 2 

7. 

Despite the attractiveness of Uruguay’s fundamentals, its lack of scale often imposes higher 
financing and operating costs than direct competitors in neighboring countries. Competitors based in 
Brazil and Chile are able to attract substantial volumes of capital into their agro-industrial sector either 
through foreign direct investment or from their local financial system. Although FDI inflows have 
become significant as a proportion of Uruguay’s economy, their absolute volume is relatively modest; 
inflows have never greater than $2 billion per year.  

8. 

IFC’s investment focus is likely to remain on export-oriented enterprises with deep linkages to 
farms.  IFC expects to support projects that integrate SMEs into corporate supply chains. All three of 
IFC’s currently active investment projects in Uruguay are in export-oriented agribusiness companies. 
These include a citrus producer (Milagro, with a $9.56 million loan outstanding as of May 2010), and a 
dairy cooperative (Conaprole $17.01 million loan and $3.33 million in quasi-equity financing outstanding 
in May 2010), as well as UPM-Kymmene ($66.11 million loan outstanding in May 2010).   

9. 

IFC aims to reinforce the county’s competitiveness by financing infrastructure projects, especially 
those in the renewable energy, logistics, and water sectors once Congress has approved the relevant 
legislation and appropriate new regulations are in place.  The ongoing legal and regulatory reforms related 
to promotion of public-private partnerships and expanded scope of investments by institutional investors 
in the local capital market could open further opportunities for IFC involvement in this area.   

10. 

Uruguay’s education system has benefited from attention under the previous government and the 
Mujica administration has stated that it will remain focused on improving the country’s education system. 
The IFC hopes to support this strategy should opportunities arise to finance private for- and not-for-profit 
education institutions, particularly those that offer technical and vocational courses for low income 
students to improve their employability, raise incomes, and improve productivity. This would support the 
Government’s strategy by improving the range and quality of higher education and by improving equity 
within the system. IFC has built a portfolio of investments in successful technical and vocational colleges 
in Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and Mexico that are aimed at working adults and low-income students many 
of whom are the first in their families to enter college. IFC-financed colleges enrolled 802,000 students in 
calendar year 2008 throughout Latin America.  

 
 
Annex H 
Page 1 of 1 

Annex H:  Proposed Global Environmental Facility (GEF) Program 

1. 

The GEF provides financing for activities that achieve global environmental benefits.  It is the 
designated financial mechanism for the international conventions on biological diversity, climate change, 
persistent organic pollutants, and desertification.  It also collaborates closely with the Montreal Protocol - 
the legal instrument to implement the objectives set out in the Vienna Convention on Ozone Depleting 
Substances - and regional and international waters agreements.  The World Bank is one of the main GEF 
implementing agencies in Uruguay.  

2. 

Current GEF program:  The World Bank GEF program comprises two operations with total 
financing of US$ 13.8 million. The current operations span biodiversity and climate change (energy 
efficiency): 

 
Integrated Ecosystem and Natural Resources Management Project, (US$ 7 million) 
 Energy Efficiency Project, (US$ 6.8 million) 

3. 

The Bank's GEF strategy in Uruguay blends GEF-financed activities with Bank loans, not only to 
better leverage GEF resources but also to better mainstream global environmental concerns in country 
programs.  The Bank’s comparative advantage for implementing GEF projects is based on the following: 

 Leveraging investments, particularly as part of co-financing with IBRD operations in the area. The 
GEF helps develop, catalyze, and complement investment operations. 
 Leveraging dialogue based on areas of current engagement and technical expertise. The GEF is often 
a new entry point for dialogue in key sectors, including energy and transport. 
 Fostering new ideas and innovation, often with NGOs, the private sector, and others. 

4. 

GEF potential in Uruguay:  Current Government priorities are in the areas of climate change, 
biodiversity, and water resources management. Whereas biodiversity and climate change (energy 
efficiency) have been the dominant areas of World Bank GEF programming over the past few years, there 
are additional opportunities in nearly all areas eligible for GEF support.  

5. 

Currently the World Bank is implementing large-scale projects on biodiversity, and climate 
change and energy. These large projects are typically a blend between GEF-funds and WB loans while 
some only receive financing from the GEF. However, a key issue to consider is the System for 
Transparent Allocation of Resources (STAR) that the GEF has recently adopted, which implies a 
maximum allocation for Uruguay in the areas of Climate Change (US$ 3.9 million), Biodiversity (1.9 
US$ million) and Land Degradation (US$ 0.6 million) over 4 years. Although the current administration 
has decided to take maximum advantage of GEF, the strategic use of available resources has not been 
determined, and there are not projects have thus far been endorsed by the GEF under the new STAR.  

6. 

During the proposed CAS period, the Bank will continue its strategy of blending GEF activities 
with Bank loans, and will support stand-alone operations in those areas where there is a high potential of 
sector transformation while addressing global environmental issues. As an example of this approach, the 
Bank will continue working with Uruguay to finance the incremental costs of conservation in rural areas 
by means of a probable second phase for the Integrated Ecosystem and Natural Resources Management 
Project. The potential of renewable energies and energy efficiency are still opportunities to expand the 
future GEF cooperation. In addition, the Bank’s financial support for infrastructure, environment and 
rural development under the proposed CPS could open additional opportunities for GEF co-financing. 

 
 
 
 
Annex I 
Page 1 of 3 

Annex I:  Consultations 

1. 

The preparation of the CPS was highly participatory in terms of public sector stakeholders, and 
the new Government is leveraging the opportunity provided by the CPS preparation to plan an extended 
series of stakeholder consultations that will not end with the finalization of the CPS but rather continue 
into implementation. 

2. 

The consultative process commenced before the inauguration of the new administration.  
Discussions on a set of Policy Notes were held between the Bank and the newly elected authorities in 
February, 2010, followed by presentations to the main opposition parties.  These discussions were 
attended throughout by the President-elect, Mr. José Mujica, the elected Vice-president, Mr. Danilo 
Astori, and future cabinet members.  These interactions were appreciated both by the Government and the 
opposition, and enabled the Bank to gauge the relatively high degree of consensus that exists today in 
Uruguay on the policy agenda and development challenges.   

3. 

In April 2010, the dialog on the main priorities for the collaboration between the Bank and 
Uruguay over the next five years was deepened.  The Bank Vice President met with President Mujica, 
Vice-president Astori, the economic and social cabinet, as well as with representatives from the 
legislative branches, private sector and civil society.  These discussions generally confirmed as valid the 
proposed orientations of the DPL and, more generally, the forthcoming Country Partnership Strategy.   

4. 

In early May, 2010, consultations on the DPL, specifically, and the framework of the strategy, 
more generally, were held.  The main objective was two-fold: first, to seek feedback from Government, 
partners from academia, civil society organizations, Parliament, and the private sector on the various 
areas of reform covered by the new DPL series; and second, to explain the purpose and the design of the 
new DPL series in the context of the Government’s own development strategy and the Bank’s CPS to a 
wider stakeholder group, beyond the main partners in the Government.   

5. 

Another round of more detailed discussions on the results matrix and the program under the CPS 
was held July 1, 2010, resulting in an agreed lending program and a general framework for a joint AAA 
program.  From that point intensive dialogue on the finalization of the CPS was continuous. 

6. 

Finally, the aforementioned systematic stakeholder consultations were kicked off in late 
July/early August, 2010, and will continue through the first year of CPS implementation.  Given the 
multi-sectoral objectives of both the CPS and the Government’s own development strategy, this series of 
consultations is generally organized around the following themes rather than individual ministries or 
sectors: 

 Modernization of the Public Sector 
 Strengthening Competitiveness and the Business Climate 
 Strengthening the Infrastructure sector 
 Environmental Protection and Climate Change Adaptation 
 Social Protection and Equity 

7. 

The first round of consultations, organized jointly with the Ministry of Economy and Finance, 
focused on the preparation of the CPS.  While the broader CPS was presented, this group focused mostly 
on Competitiveness, Business Climate and Infrastructure.  There were participants from the Parliament, 
research institutes, consultant firms, and the private sector. 

 
 
Annex I 
Page 2 of 3 

8. 

There was a general consensus among participants that the main constraints to competitiveness of 
the Uruguay’s economy related to the insufficient quality of education, in particular the inability of the 
educative system to generate skills demanded by the economy, as well as inadequate reach and quality of 
infrastructure. Limited access to finance, caused by factors found both at the supply and demand side of 
the financial sector were also highlighted as a key underlying problem.  

Education 

9. 

Insufficient quality of education was a critical general concern voiced by participants.  The 
current problems at the secondary level (high dropout rates, teacher absentees, etc.) were mentioned as a 
threat for the society and the economy.  There was a discussion on how to strengthen education policy, 
especially at the tertiary level, in order to better match educational program with demands for skills from 
the private sector.  An important deficit on professional skills was identified. Companies situated in the 
interior of the country were particularly affected by this problem, as these areas suffered from a “brain 
drain” of professionals to the capital.   

Infrastructure and logistics 

10. 

The lack of well developed infrastructure, especially in areas beyond Montevideo, was mentioned 
as critical constraint to growth, with the view that very sizeable investments are needed to remedy this 
problem.  It was recognized that these investments could not be financed without the participation of the 
private sector, given the severe fiscal limitations.  Some participants felt however that public-private 
alliances were not possible without an initial injection of capital by the public sector (for instance for 
upgrading the railway infrastructure).  The reform of state-owned enterprises was seen by several 
participants as a key element in this regard, as by opening up these companies to the private capital, 
significant amounts of private capital could be mobilized.  

11. 

Logistics was highlighted by some participants as a key sector, both as source of growth itself as 
well as a key factor determining production costs of other sectors.  There was a discussion on how to 
improve the regulatory and administrative environment of the logistics sector, and the streamlining and 
professionalization of customs was highlighted in this regard.  

Access to finance 

12. 

There was a sense among participants that improvements in strengthening the regulatory and 
legal framework of Uruguay’s financial and capital markets have led to these markets now generally 
complying with international standards.  In view of this, it was advocated that the Bank should shift the 
emphasis of its support from strengthening regulation to promotion of market participation.   

13. 

Several participants stated that the emphasis should therefore now be put on promoting activities 
in the local financial and capital markets, in particular those that would help smaller economic agents 
improve their access to financing.  It was felt by most participants that the priority thereby should be to 
strengthen the demand side, by enhancing awareness about financial instruments and promoting the 
availability of information.  Increasing capacity in risk management was highlighted, through measures 
like promoting the use of derivatives by companies. At the supply side, there was still an important need 
for professionalization of key agents active in financial and capital markets.  

14. 

Some participants stressed the importance of better adapting bank regulations to the particular 
reality of small and medium enterprises (in terms of economic resources, time and human resource 
capacity), as a key factor for facilitating their access to the finance. This was also mentioned as a valuable 
tool for bringing small companies from the informal to the formal sector.  

 
Annex I 
Page 3 of 3 

Competitiveness 

15. 

Since strengthening Uruguay’s competitiveness is a national strategic priority, it was suggested 
by some participants that defining and implementing a reform agenda in this regard should be elevated 
above the political and economic cycles.  The creation of an independent institution for this purpose was 
put forward.  Participants also mentioned the lack of coordination among public institutions as hampering 
the effectiveness of the Government in promoting competitiveness. In this context, there were some 
references to a proliferation of institutions responsible for this reform agenda. Also, some participants 
expressed a need for enhancing capacity of the Foreign Service in promoting Uruguayan products and 
companies abroad.  

Next Steps 

16. 

Subsequent rounds of consultations will provide ongoing feedback from stakeholders to 
complement quantitative data on progress against the Government’s development objectives and against 
the CPS objectives, as well as informing the continued evolution of Government strategy.  Particular 
emphasis will be placed on those themes which were not fully addressed in the first round. 

 
 
