Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

The World Bank
For Official U s e Only
Report N o . 27341-PA

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR
RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE
WORLD BANK
FOR THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY
November 26,2003

COUNTRYMANAGEMENT
UNIT
ARGENTINA, CHILE, PARAGUAY
Y URUGUAY
LATINAMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN REGION
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f their
official duties. I t s content may not otherwise be disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit: Guarani
EXCHANGE RATE
Guarani 6,100 = US$1 (November 2003)
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 3 1
ABBREVIATIONS & ACRONYMS

AAA
AIEPI
BCP
BNF
CAE
CAS
CDD
CEM
CIF
CFAA
CPAR
CPPR

cso

DGEEC
DO
ECLAC
ERL
ESW
IBRD
IDB
IDF
IFC
IF1
IMF
IP
FOB
FSAL
FTAL
FY
GDP
GEF
MDG
MIGA
MSC
NGO
OED
PARN
PER

Analytical and Advisory Assistance
Atencion Integrada a las Enfermedades Prevalentes de l a Infancia
Central Bank o f Paraguay (Banco Central de Paraguay)
National Development Bank (Banco Nacional de Fomento)
Country Assistance Evaluation
Country Assistance Strategy
Community Driven Development
Country Economic Memorandum
Cost, Insurance and Freight
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Country Procurement Assessment Report
Country Portfolio Performance Review
C i v i l Society Organization
Direccion General de Estadisticas, Encuestas y Censos
Development Objectives
Economic Commission for Latin America
Economic Recovery Adjustment Loan
Economic and Sector Work
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Inter-American Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Financial Institutions
International Monetary Fund
Implementation Progress
Free o n Board
Financial Sector Loan
Financial Sector Technical Assistance Loan
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Minimum Subsidy Concession
N o n Governmental Organization
Operations Evaluation Department
Natural Resource Administration Project
Public Expenditure Review

i

PETROPAR
PI
PIU
PRODECO
PRSP
TA

UN

UNDP
VAT
WE31

National Petroleum Company
Performance Indicators
Project Implementation Unit
Community Development Project (Proyecto de Desarrollo Comunitario)
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Technical Assistance
United Nations
United Nations Development Program
Value Added tax
World Bank Institute

IBRD
Vice President
Country Director
Lead Economist/Task Manager

..

David De Ferranti
Axel van Trotsenburg
Peter M. Hansen

Country Assistance Strategy
for
Republic o f Paraguay
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVESUMMARY
INTRODUCTION

I.

V

- COUNTRY CONTEXT

POLITICAL SETTING
GOVERNANCE
AND INSTITUTIONAL WEAKNESSES
ECONOMIC
PERFORMANCE
11. PARAGUAY’S
DEVELOPMENT
CHALLENGES
GOVERNMENT’SDEVELOPMENT
STRATEGY
BANKASSESSMENT
MEDIUMTERMOUTLOOK
111. - WORLDBANKASSISTANCESTRATEGY
FEEDBACK
FROM CONSULTATIONS WITH CIVIL SOCIETY
PROPOSED
ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM,FY04-07
CAS OBJECTIVES
BANKSTRATEGY
BASE
CASELENDING
HIGHCASE
Low CASE
LENDING
TRIGGERS
FIDUCIARY ASSESSMENTS
AA.4 AND ESW
WORLD BANKINSTITUTE
OUTREACH
AID COORDINATION
IFC
MIGA
Iv. IBRD EXPOSURE
AND RISK MANAGEMENT
DEBTAND IBRD EXPOSURE INDICATORS
KEYR I S K S AND STRATEGY FOR MANAGING
THEM
EXPECTED
RESULTS OF THE CAS
CAS PROGRAM
MATRIX
(FY04-FY07)
ATTACHMENT TO CAS PROGRAM MATRIX-DESCRIPTION
OF PROPOSED INVESTMENT
STUDIES
PROJECTS AND DIAGNOSTIC

-

-

...

111

1
1
1
4
6
9
11
14
15
17
18
19
19
19
22
23
23
23
25
26
27
28
28
29
29
30
30
31
33
35
38

BOXES

Box 1. PUBLIC PERCEPTIONS IN PARAGUAY..................................................................................
Box 2 . POVERTYPROFILE IN PARAGUAY.......................................................................................

3
7

TABLES

TABLE 1. PROGRESS ON MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS .........................................
TABLE 2 . MEDIUM TERM PROJECTIONS. ADJUSTMENT SCENARIO ................................
TABLE 3. PROPOSED LENDING. FY 04-07 .....................................................................................
TABLE 4 . LENDING PROGRAM TRIGGERS, FY 04-07 ...............................................................
TABLE 5 . PROPOSED ECONOMIC AND SECTOR WORK. FY 04-07 ......................................

9
16
22
25
27

ANNEXES
PROGRESS TOWARDS REACHING THE MDGS IN PARAGUAY .................................. 46
EVALUATION OF BANK ASSISTANCE AND PORTFOLIO IMPLEMENTATION.......55
SUMMARY OF CONSULTATIONS WITH CIVIL SOCIETY ............................................ 60
AID COORDINATION........................................................................................................... 66
ANNEXA 1 PARAGUAY AT A GLANCE ................................................................................................. 69
ANNEXB2 SELECTED INDICATORS OF BANKPORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND MANAGEMENT....71
ANNEXB3 IBRD/IDA PROGRAMSUMMARY ........................................................................................ 72
ANNEXB4 SUMMARY OF NONLENDING
SERVICES ...............................................................................
73
ANNEXB6 KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS ........................................................................................... 74
ANNEXB7 KEY EXPOSURE INDICATORS ............................................................................................ 76
ANNEXB8 OPERATIONSPORTFOLIO(IBRDADA AND GRANTS)
................................................................. 77
ANNEX 1.
ANNEX 2 .
ANNEX 3 .
ANNEX 4 .

This document was prepared by a World Bank team led by Peter M. Hansen. I t reflects the views and
contributions o f the entire Paraguay team. in particular. Omar Arias. Carter Brandon. Sandra Cesilini. Juan
Gaviria. Maria Gonzalez de Asis. Jesko Hentschel. Lisandro Martin. Maria Luisa Masutti. Zeinab Partow and
Felipe Saez. Contributions are also acknowledged from the IFC and MIGA. Valuable assistance was
provided by Maritza Bojorge. Gloria Dure and Florencia Liporaci.
Special appreciation i s extended to officials o f the Paraguay Government and to representatives o f Paraguayan
civil society who participated in several day-long consultations on the Bank’s past activities and the proposed
program of assistance .

iv

Country Assistance Strategy for the Republic o f Paraguay
Executive Summary

Paraguay i s emerging from a prolonged period o f economic stagnation that has
left i t s population impoverished. During this period, Bank lending was l o w due to poor
portfolio performance, economic management and governance. The Administration o f
President Nicanor Duarte Frutos, which took office in August o f 2003, i s determined to
reverse this negative trend and i s building a coalition o f political parties to fight
corruption and introduce significant economic reforms. The Government has requested
active support from the international community, including the World Bank. This CAS
presents the Bank’s strategy for re-engagement with Paraguay.
Paraguay’s economy stagnated during the past five years, with per capita incomes
falling by 15 percent in local currency terms, and from U S $ l 8 10 to U S $ 1170 as
measured by the World Bank Atlas methodology. Poverty stood at 34 percent o f the
population in 2001 and i s now likely to be higher. M u c h o f the decline in per capita
income i s due to economic turmoil in the southern cone, which resulted in significant
devaluations for all countries in the region. But poverty increased in Paraguay also as a
result o f political instability, drift in economic policies and the inefficiencies o f a highly
informal and corrupt system. During this period, public finances weakened significantly
and, until lately, the Government has been unable to stay current with salaries, pensions
and debt service.

The political situation stabilized during 2003 with the election o f President Duarte
Frutos on a campaign to fight corruption and improve economic management, with an
emphasis on social and fiscal responsibility. The Government’s development strategy
a recovery o f confidence in state institutions through a sustained fight against
aims at (i)
sustainable growth
corruption and the modernization o f public administration; (ii)
through a change in the economic model from triangular trade and public employment
an increase in human capital
towards agro-industry and export diversification; and (iii)
through higher investment in health and education and policies that enhance equity and
increase access to these services.
Although the political opposition controls one house o f Congress, all parties agree
that the economy has reached a breaking point and that fundamental changes are needed.
The President has capitalized on this situation by striking an agreement with all political
parties to approve a package o f core economic reforms on a priority basis. These include
a fundamental tax reform, rationalization o f the government pension system, and
financial sector reforms to strengthen the banking system. These laws have been
prepared by a quality economic team and sent to Congress. Assuming approval o f these
reforms, economic growth could reach 3.5 percent per annum (about one percent per
capita) b y 2007.

V

O n the strength o f these reforms, the Administration approached multilateral and
domestic creditors for support. I t has already reached historic agreements with domestic
bond holders to reschedule the Treasury bill stock and with the IMF o n a Standby
Arrangement, the f i r s t in 46 years, which i s scheduled to be considered by the IMF Board
on December 15,2003.

The proposed Bank assistance strategy i s closely aligned with the Government’s
development objectives. Overall, the strategy aims to restore confidence in the economy
and lay the basis for sustainable growth and poverty reduction. To this end, the CAS
the fiscal and financial reforms the Administration has sent to Congress; (ii)
supports (i)
improved governance and transparency in public administration; (iii)
sustained growth,
particularly in the rural areas where poverty i s concentrated and deepest; and (iv) social
inclusion, to improve the coverage and efficiency o f basic social services to help
Paraguay meet the millennium development goals.

The proposed base case lending program for FY04-07 i s for US$325 million, o f
which US$SO million, or about 25 percent, are envisaged for two adjustment operations,
the proposed economic recovery loan to support stabilization o f public finances and help
finance the Government’s immediate financing needs, and a subsequent financial sector
loan to strengthen the banking system. The reforms to be supported by both operations
are essential for sustaining recently regained macroeconomic stability. An appropriate
macroeconomic framework i s currently in place for these loans. In addition, the base
case program includes investment projects that contribute to achieving the Government’s
development objectives in the areas o f governance and public administration, economic
growth and social inclusion.
The proposed Bank strategy recognizes the actions the new Administration has
taken to confront corruption, tighten control over i t s finances and build a political
consensus for important economic reforms. The strategy i s nevertheless mindful o f the
long history o f political difficulties and the lack o f institutional capacity that has hindered
reform efforts in the past. In this high-risk / high-reward situation, the Bank’s reengagement strategy i s based on clear performance criteria, and new commitments will
be proposed only in line with the Administration’s progress in building a credible track
record o f economic management and reform.
Paraguay’s continuation in the base case scenario will be subject to satisfactory
progress on a set o f key triggers for public administration, fiscal and financial sector
reforms, and portfolio implementation. In the event these triggers are not met, the
lending program would revert to a set o f core investments aimed to support the
millennium development goals. L o w case lending would be limited to US$120 million,
about one-third o f the base case amount. High case lending could be possible in the
second half o f the CAS period, after the Administrations builds a sustained track record
and has taken incremental actions that would indicate the probability o f faster economic
growth.

vi

The principal risk o f the proposed strategy i s that the reform program could go o f f
track soon after an increase in Bank exposure has occurred. This risk i s mitigated by the
strength o f the political consensus the new Administration has formed and the fact that it
i s willing to use i t s political capital at the beginning o f i t s term when it i s strongest. The
Bank’s strategy aims to manage the risk o f political backtracking through upfront policy
actions to the adjustment operations, for example, the approval o f a banking resolution /
savings deposit law which i s scheduled for approval by Congress prior to Board
consideration o f this CAS.
Other risks facing the program include attempts by vested interests to block the
Administration’s so-far productive campaign against tax evasion and corruption. The
best strategy against such threats i s firm support to an Administration that recognizes the
need to regain international credibility and that can use such support as a evidence o f the
positive results i t s anti-corruption efforts can bring to Paraguay. In addition, there are
implementation risks o f managing a larger portfolio o f projects which will need to be
managed carefully throughout the CAS period. The Administration’s decision to set up a
central unit for managing all external assistance i s a welcome step towards improving
implementation capacity, as are the principles for portfolio management that were agreed
during the last CPPR and are presented in Annex 2. Finally, payment risk to the Bank i s
also noteworthy, in view o f the three month suspension o f disbursements earlier this year
during the previous administration. This risk will diminish to the extent the proposed tax
and pension reform laws are approved and implemented.
The planned assistance program, if implemented in support o f strong policies,
together with support from other external partners, would help set the country on a new
development path. Indicative outcomes are presented in the CAS Program Matrix. Some
o f the highlights o f these indicators are:
0

0

A sounder financial sector that would lower the cost o f potential bank failures and
provide a sounder basis for the mobilization o f domestic savings;
Improved transparency and governance in public administration, especially in the
Ministry o f Finance which could act as a model for other ministries to follow;
Improved productivity in the rural sector, as evidenced by the scaling up to the
national level o f an improved extension model based on community participation
and improved soil management techniques by 2007; and

0

Gradual improvement in social indicators, as evidenced by an increase in the
secondary school enrolment rate from 33 percent to 42 percent by 2007, including
a narrowing o f the urban-rural divide, and decreases in the infant and maternalmortality rates by 10 percent by 2007.

vii

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE IBRD
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE WORLD BANK
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY
Introduction

The last CAS for Paraguay was discussed in April 1997. I t s main objectives were
1.
poverty reduction and state reform. I t recommended a program o f 1-2 projects per year
up to about US$50 m i l l i o n per annum, provided that Paraguay maintained an acceptable
level o f project performance (less than 25 percent problem projects) and a budget deficit
under 2 percent o f GDP. The 1997 CAS built on a steadily increasing portfolio o f
projects during the preceding five years, during which nine investment operations were
approved for a total o f US$350 million and which followed an eight year hiatus in
lending (from 1984-1992) during the final years o f the Stroessner dictatorship.'
In the event, country-Bank relations deteriorated considerably subsequent to the
2.
last CAS. In early-1998, the Government failed to complete negotiations for an urban
project due to political in-fighting. Later that year, the Region suspended preparation o f
new projects due to the Government's non-compliance with i t s social obligations
associated with the Yacyreta Hydroelectric Project.2 Problem projects increased to 50
percent o f the portfolio, and in 1999 the Government flip-flopped in i t s position regarding
the conversion o f a failed sewage project into a vehicle for privatizing the water and
telephone companies. As a result, the Region downscaled the resident mission that had
been established in 1998 to a liaison office. Portfolio performance nevertheless began to
improve in 2000, and specific sector conditions permitted the approval o f two new loans
for community development and education during the past year and a half. A turnaround in country relations now appears to be occurring with the recent change o f
government in August 2003.

I.- Country Context
Political Setting
Following several years o f political volatility, including the assassination o f the
3.
Vice President in 1999, the resignation o f the thempresident, and a four-year interim
presidency that presided over a period o f steady erosion o f governance and economic
Stroessner was ousted by a military coup in February 1989, after which significant financial reforms
were introduced in 1990-91 (in particular, unification o f multiple exchange and interest rates), a
constitutional assembly approved a new Constitution in 1992, and the Bank prepared i t s initial set o f
projects for the new democratic era.
A joint Argentine-Paraguay project on the Parana river which the Bank partially financed through loans
to Argentina.

1

decline, a new Administration took office in August 2003 that seems to have strong
legitimacy and willingness to set the country on a different development path.

4.
President Nicanor Duarte Frutos i s the first President o f the post-Stroessner era to
be elected without questions o f legitimacy. Also for the first time, the President was able
to pick a Vice President o f his own choosing, rather than having to accept a rival from
within the long-ruling Colorado Party. This combination i s proving to be a more
cohesive Executive, especially in i t s relations with Congress, and should improve the
effectiveness o f public administration.
5.
President Duarte ran on a platform o f fighting corruption and improving the
efficiency o f the public sector. H e i s perceived b y the public to be personally committed
to these goals and has made a credible start by making a public disclosure o f his personal
assets, along with requiring the same o f all o f his cabinet. In addition, President Duarte
has made widely-respected appointments o f several non-Colorado Party members to
important positions in the Cabinet, including the Ministers o f Finance and Industry.
These moves have earned initial goodwill among the population as well as with the
opposition parties.
The political balance o f power also changed as a result o f the 2003 elections. For
6.
the f i r s t time, opposition parties won a clear majority in the Senate, and the Colorado
Party no longer has an absolute hold on power. Making virtue o f necessity, President
Duarte has formed a working alliance with the opposition that culminated in early
October with the signing o f a political accord (Acuerdo Politico) in which all parties in
Congress agreed to pass six major pieces o f legislation, including a fiscally responsible
budget, reform o f the tax code and o f government pensions, a modern customs code,
financial sector reforms, including the public banks, and an eventual restructuring o f
public enterprises and the central administration. These proposed laws, most o f which
have already been sent to the Congress, are discussed further in Section 11.

7.
In general, the opposition has pledged i t s willingness to cooperate in pading these
laws that are widely acknowledged as needed to restore fiscal viability and to restart the
economy. Indeed, the most challenging opposition to these reforms i s likely to come
from within the Colorado Party, whose members have benefited during two generations
from the existing economic structures.
8.

The President and the opposition have also committed to change a large part o f
the Supreme Court, which i s widely viewed as a source o f corruption and impunity. As
o f mid-November, three o f the nine Justices have resigned, while impeachment charges
against another three have been introduced by a coalition o f all political parties in the
Congress. The outcome o f this process i s not yet certain. Yet, the “cleansing o f the
Court” i s widely supported by the population and i s viewed as a necessary condition for
restoring the rule o f law, as well as a precondition for renewed investment and the
eradication o f corruption.

2

9.

Over the past five years, civil society has become increasingly active and has been
clamoring for better govemance and public administration. The press, in particular, has
been a major critic exposing corruption in government and the judiciary. Experiments in
public participation in the formulation o f laws have occurred, such as those fostered by
the National Integrity Council (anticorruption commission) that was established with
WBI assistance (see Part 111). There i s a constant and growing demand for
decentralization o f government services and decision-making. In general, the public i s
awakening after a long period o f submission and non-critical behavior that was
characteristic o f the 35 years o f the Stroessner dictatorship, during which education and
economic freedoms were largely ignored, if not stifled.

10.
Yet, the very disappointing economic performance o f the past decade has taken i t s
toll on the credibility o f Government and public institutions overall. As reported in the
following box, there i s an increased longing for a retum to authoritarian rule under which
corruption was perceived to be not so widespread and poverty was less overt with a large
majority o f the population s t i l l living in the rural areas. As a result, the emerging
vibrancy o f civil society i s vulnerable to domestic political events that are not predictable
and that present a threat t o the continuation o f democratic institutions if there i s not an
improvement in economic and social conditions, as well as governance.
Box 1. Public Perceptions in Paraguay
Only 40 percent o f the population believe democracy i s preferable to any other kind o f government
(third lowest in Latin America), down from 59 percent in 1996 (the second sharpest decrease in LA).

Forty-four (44) percent believe that an authoritarian government can be preferable to a democratic one
(highest percentage by far o f any country in Latin America), up from 26 percent in 1996.
Paraguay’s population i s the most dissatisfied in Latin America with the way democracy actually
works (90 percent dissatisfaction rate).
Despite the high estimated level o f poverty (34 percent in 2001)’ only 11 percent o f the population
claims that their total family income does not allow them to cover their basic needs (the second lowest
in LA). This measure has nonetheless risen fiom 7 percent in 1996, as it has in almost all o f Latin
America.
About 50 percent o f the population believes that privatization has been beneficial (about average for
Latin America), while nearly 70 percent believe that a market economy i s the only system that can
develop the country (second highest rating in LA, only slightly lower than in Brazil).
Source: Latinobarometro, October 2003, P o l l o f 17 Latin American countries

11.
The present thus represents a point o f inflection for Paraguay, when sound
economic policies and honest leadership can pull the country out o f i t s prolonged
economic stagnation and fortify democratic tendencies, or where failure on this front
could lead Paraguay back to more undemocratic structures. The initial steps taken by the
Duarte Administration constitute a clear break with the political practices o f the past.
There are clear signs for optimism in terms o f the ability o f the Administration to restore
the trust and credibility o f the public in the integrity and effectiveness o f government.
3

The continuation o f these efforts will determine whether Paraguay has entered into a
virtuous cycle that will enhance i t s capacity to overcome the serious governance
shortcomings that have plagued previous Administrations and that have stifled i t s
development efforts.
Governance and Institutional Weaknesses

12.

Paraguay i s renowned for corruption and contraband. Perceptions o f corruption
have increased during the past decade, such that the “controlled” corruption o f the
Stroessner dictatorship has been “democratized” with many sharing the spoils, not just
the top. Transparency International consistently ranks Paraguay among the ten most
corrupt nation^.^ The IMF has estimated tax evasion, in particular customs and VAT, at
60 percent o f taxes due. A World Bank Institute survey o f public opinion identified
Customs and the Judiciary among the most corrupt institutions in the country.

As discussed in the 1996 Bank report, “Role o f the State,”4 Paraguayan
institutions have highly developed the art o f rent seeking. The base o f the system i s the
patronage politics o f the Colorado Party, which “nominates” party faithful to public
institutions. This system contributes significantly to maintaining a working majority o f
votes for the Party among the general population and creates a strong incentive against
“reform o f the state,” in particular, the privatization o f public enterprises. 5

13.

14.

While public entities do not dominate the economy, they nevertheless occupy
important segments, including the electricity, telephone, water, cement and o i l import
companies, as well as the social security (pension and health) system and the national
university. Aside from employment (about one-third o f the total public sector), these
entities provide the opportunity for corruption through the widespread abuse o f public
procurement, false billing and poor internal controls. A large number o f public banks
existed until 1998-99, but most o f these f e l l into bankruptcy as the result o f the undercollateralization o f loans largely financed with public funds, especially from the social
security system. At present, there remains only one public bank, the Banco Nacional de
Fomento, which i s technically insolvent but surviving from day to day.
15.

A beginning has been made to attack the pervasiveness o f a corrupt culture in
public administration. In 1999, an anti-corruption commission was formed with the
technical support o f the World Bank Institute. The commission comprised an equal
number o f government and civil society representatives. Based on the results o f the WBI
survey o f public opinion, the Commission decided to concentrate on three areas -customs, the judiciary and public procurement. The Commission developed a program o f
institutional reforms for each area during 2000 and, following a period o f public
consultation, has been actively promoting the adoption o f these reforms since then. The
main achievement o f the Commission to date has been shepherding the approval o f a new
procurement law through Congress and raising awareness within Government and the
In 2003, Paraguay received a score o f 1.6 on a scale o f ten.
Paraguay - Role o f the State, Report No. 15044-PA, April 1996.
There are about 220,000 public sector employees among a working population o f about 1 million.

4

public at large that concrete steps can be taken to reduce the institutional opportunities for
corruption. The Commission, which i s now known as the National Integrity Council, has
thus become an important agent for change that i s monitoring and pressing for improved
public policies and practices to reduce corruption.

16.
Corruption i s not the only institutional weakness in Paraguay, however. The basic
management systems o f government are also weak. For example, the social security
system has been run as an autonomous agency without transparency and only recently
has begun to provide information on i t s financial accounts to the Ministry o f Finance.
Within the central administration, the personnel management system i s at an embryonic
stage and i s only now pulling together a master roster o f all public servants. A much
larger task i s to embark on the professionalization o f the civil service, including
competitive entrance exams, career streaming and training. Also, while improvements
are being made in financial management systems, until this year the budgeting system has
been organized on a line item basis that obscured the linkages between expenditures and
results.
Governance has also been hampered by the emergence o f a multitude o f special
17.
interest groups that have been successful in pressuring the Government to accommodate
their interests, many o f which have contributed to a breakdown o f law and order. For
example, groups o f “landless” campesinos invade rural properties demanding land. The
Government responds by buying the land, but the campesinos often abandon the land
after cutting the trees. Campesinos block the highways demanding free seed, or
forgiveness o f credits, a long-standing practice that has created a bad credit culture and i s
responsible in part for the lack o f private credit to small farmers. Farmers’ organizations
block the highways until the Government reduces diesel prices. Fishermenblock the
river objecting to the ban on fishing during the spawning season, until the Government
gives them a month o f food supplies. These practices often lead to violent confrontations
and deaths. In a less violent way, industrialists and businessmenhave played the same
game by demanding guaranteed re-financings from the Government, or by simply not
repaying their debts to the public bank.

18.
Above all, the decline in the rule o f law i s seen by many observers and the public
at large as the greatest impediment to economic development in Paraguay. C i v i l court
procedures for the enforcement o f private property rights and contracts are slow at best
and corrupt at worst. Public prosecutors are inexperienced, understaffed and function
without basic equipment such as telephones and faxes. The National Police similarly
function with an untrained and under-equippedforce. According to a recent U N D P
report, one-third o f the police are untrained conscripts; sub-officials are required to
purchase their own arms; and the orientation o f police services i s more along the lines o f
military command and control instead o f providing physical security to the community.
As a result, and in combination with economic stagnation during the past five years, there
i s a growing incidence o f violent crime and lawlessness. Even more than education and
health, the Government has been increasingly unable to provide i t s most basic public
service--physical and judicial security - to i t s citizens and businesses.

5

Economic Performance

Paraguay i s a small open economy, heavily dependent on agricultural
19.
commodities and on regional conditions, particularly those o f i t s large neighbors, Brazil
and Argentina. This has left the Paraguayan economy vulnerable to events over which it
has little control, including international commodity prices and political and economic
events in i t s neighbors. While economic management was gradualist and fairly prudent
in the years following the end o f the military dictatorship in 1989, with balanced fiscal
accounts, small current account deficits and declining inflation, growth performance was
disappointing. The protracted slow growth since the mid-1990s i s a reflection o f slow
progress with structural reform, widespread corruption and a decline in total factor
productivity associated with a shrinking investment ratio. Rather than pursuing reforms
that could assist the economy in weathering external shocks, consecutive Administrations
were generally unwilling to undertake the measures required to impart the needed
resiliency to manage shocks, to modernize the country’s productive structure, or to
address the major governance problems that hold back investment and private initiative.

20.

In recent years, this combination o f factors was exacerbated by a series o f external
and domestic shocks. Major banking crises in 1995 and in 1997-98 led to the closure o f a
number o f domestic banks, the reduction o f credit to the private sector, and a sharp drop
in private investment. O n another front, Paraguay’s terms o f trade deteriorated
significantly over the last 5 years; the price o f soybeans and cotton (the latter i s
Paraguay’s main labor-intensive agricultural product) declined by 50 percent between
1995 and 200 1,while o i l prices rose. To a lesser extent, agriculture suffered from
droughts in 1999, 2000, and most recently in 2002. The economy has also been battered
by adverse developments in i t s main trading partners, including the Brazilian devaluation
in 1999 and recession and financial turmoil in Argentina in 200 1-2002. Both these
events had a significant negative impact on Paraguay’s trade with i t s regional partners
and led to significant devaluations o f the Guarani to regain competitiveness.

2 1.

More fundamentally, structural weaknesses suggest an exhaustion o f Paraguay’s
prevailing economic model that was based on import-export trade to neighboring
countries (so called “triangular trade”), cotton monoculture for small farmers and public
sector employment. Triangular trade, which used to represent up to 20 percent o f GDP,
has fallen significantly as a result o f Mercosur tariffs and greater border controls on
smuggling. Paraguay has not yet developed a plan to replace this segment o f GDP or to
reactivate the main triangular trade zone o f Ciudad del Este. Other parts o f the exhausted
economic model include the continued use o f government to provide patronage jobs,
continued government support for low-return cotton production, and in general the
crowding out o f productive expenditure from the Government budget (which i s now
mostly salaries and pensions, with little on operations and investment). Privatization o f
the telephone and water companies was attempted in 200 1-02, but was stopped by
Congress following accusations o f corruption and protests by campesinos who objected
to selling o f the national patrimony.

6

22.
Despite the overall flatness o f the economy, there are nevertheless a few sectors
that have experienced vigorous growth during recent years. These include parts o f
agriculture that remain internationally competitive (in particular, soybeans and meat
exports) as well as cellular telecommunications, in which foreign investment has been
significant. Agro-industry for export has also grown significantly, but transport costs for
Paraguay are the highest in the region (cif/fob ratio o f 13 percent vs. 7 percent for the rest
o f the region) and a deterrent o n growth. Due to the vibrancy o f these sectors, Paraguay’s
economic situation appears to be improving somewhat in 2003. The recent increase in
soy and cotton prices i s leading to considerably higher export revenues and an expected
current account surplus this year. Increased exports and improved domestic confidence
since the April elections are also providing a boost to the general economy, and GDP i s
expected to grow by 1.5 percent in 2003.
23.
The combination o f external vulnerability and a poor policy and institutional
environment has resulted in an exceptionally poor growth performance since the mid1 9 9 0 ~with
~ GDP growth averaging 1 percent per year, while annual population growth
rates stand at 2.6 percent. The outcome has been a secular decline in per capita GDP to
pre-1990 levels with increasing poverty exacerbated by polarized income and land
distribution.6 See Poverty Profile in Box 2.
Box 2. Poverty Profile in Paraguay

The poor amounted to nearly 2 million persons in 2001(34 percent o f the population), almost h a l f
o f whom constituted the extreme poor (16 percent). Recent estimates (still to be confirmed) point
to a firther increase in the poverty rate, with a corresponding increase in extreme poverty.
Inequality i s high in Paraguay relative to other countries in the region. National surveys point to a
Gini coefficient o f 0.53 for the country as a whole. The wealthiest 10 percent consumes 90 times
what the poorest 10 percent consumes, one o f the worst ratios in the world. This i s partly a
reflection o f extreme inequality in land ownership. Ten percent o f the rural population owns twothirds o f the land, while 30 percent o f the population i s landless.
The incidence of poverty i s particularly high among the young, who are also more prone to
unemployment than the average. Unemployment i s estimated at 24 percent for the population
between 15 and 24 years o f age.

The probability o f being poor rises with the number o f children in a household and for femaleheaded households. Similarly, those who speak only Guarani tend to have much lower incomes.
Poverty i s more widespread in rural than in urban areas. Three quarters o f the extreme poor and 56
percent o f the poor lived in rural areas in 200 1, while in the Greater Asuncion area the poverty rate
was 26 percent.
W h i l e poverty and inequality have worsened, some non-monetary indicators o f welfare have
improved. The proportion o f households with one or more indicators o f unmet basic needs
declined by 2 1 percent between 1992 and 200 1. This improvement, unusual during a time o f
economic crisis, i s largely due to significant gains in the education sector and to the trend toward
higher l i f e expectancy.

Gross national income as measured by the World Bank Atlas methodology f e l l from U S $ l 8 10 in 1998 to
US$1170 in 2002.

7

24.
A Poverty Assessment was carried out in 2001-02.’ I t s principal
recommendations were:
0

0

0

0

0

Economic growth i s the best overall strategy for reducing the number o f poor,
since the poor benefit most from increases in basic public services that rise as a
result o f increased government spending made possible by faster economic
growth and revenues. This assumes that the relative increase in spending on
social services that occurred during the past decade would continue.

The principal focus o f poverty reduction efforts should be in the rural areas. The
efforts should include appropriate land taxation policies to force unutilized land
onto the market, concentrated patterns o f resettlement (rather than stretched out
along roads) in order to improve the delivery o f public services to rural
communities, and focused technical assistance in agriculture.

The diverse social assistance programs should be concentrated into more focused
efforts, such as PROGRESSA in Mexico.
Expansion o f basic health, education and water services should continue to the
extent fiscally possible, as the poor remain relatively underprovided in these
services.
Poverty reduction goals need to take into account the fiscal realities o f Paraguay.

The Government prepared a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) in 2002
25.
with support from the U N D P and inputs from the IDB, the World Bank and others. While
Paraguay i s not a country that i s required to do a PRSP, the previous Administration
elected to design a poverty strategy as a means o f focusing i t s development strategy.
This strategy was discussed widely with civil society and with the various political
parties, and i s currently being reviewed by the new Administration.

26.

Analysis indicates that it i s unlikely that Paraguay will be able to meet most o f the
Millennium Development Goals by the year 2015. The tendency in recent years has been
for a deterioration in some indicators, implying that without significant changes in
economic and social conditions and policies, only a few o f the MDGs are likely to be
achieved, for example, attaining universal primary education and gender equality. The
likelihood o f Paraguay achieving the principal MDGs i s summarized in Table 1, and a
full assessment i s presented in Annex 1.

’

“Paraguay: Attacking Poverty,” Report No. 22703-PA (draft gray cover), Nov. 2002.

8

Table 1. Progress on Millennium Development Goals
Indicator

Likely Outcome

Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Reduce extreme poverty by 112
Halve under 5 malnutrition rate
Universal primary education
Achieve universal enrollment in primary education
0 Completion through grade 5
Gender equality and empowerment of women
Equality in education
Political and economic participation
Reduce child mortality
Reduce under 5 mortality rates
Improve maternal health
Reduce maternal mortality
Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Reduce the incidence o f A I D S
Decrease the incidence o f other diseases
Ensure environmental sustainability
Reverse loss o f forest cover
Halve population without access to potable water
Halve population without access to sanitation

Unlikely
Possible

Likely
On track
Achieved
Improving
Unlikely
O f f track but possible

n.a.
Possible
Highly Unlikely
Likely
Unlikely

11. - Paraguay’s Development Challenges
Paraguay’s poverty indicators and l o w prospects for attaining the MDGs reflect a
27.
host o f long-term development challenges that will require a sustained effort to
overcome. Chief among these i s that a large part o f work force i s functionally illiterate
due to l o w investment in education over decades. Even with the easing o f other
constraints, it will take time for the current generation o f school children to grow into the
workforce and for overall national productivity to increase at higher rates.
Both the l o w level and limited effectiveness o f spending o n social services in
28.
Paraguay limits coverage and accessibility o f the population. Combined social spending
rose considerably during the 1990s, especially on education, but s t i l l amounts to only 6
percent o f GDP (excluding pensions). Spending on health and social assistance
programs, in particular, are under-fundedwhen compared with other countries at similar
levels o f development. Basic public health services are concentrated in urban areas and
tend to provide higher complexity services for the 20 percent o f the population covered
by some sort o f health insurance.

29.
Reorienting services towards basic and preventive health will require either
additional resources, or a major increase in the efficiency o f delivery which would
include reforming the health provision o f the social security system. A similar pattern
can be observed in education, where overall enrolment rates in primary education are
high but in secondary education very l o w (3 1 percent), with striking differences between
9

urban (83 percent) and rural (17 percent) areas. Many small social assistance programs
exist which, combined, do not provide a social safety net for the poorest and vulnerable
population. Lastly, pension coverage o f the poor i s absent, while today’s considerable
spending on pensions (3.5 percent o f GDP) insures only about 10 percent o f the
population working in the formal sector. Providing access to basic social services to the
growing indigenous population i s a further challenge that requires special attention.
In terms o f infrastructure, the population’s access to basic infrastructure services
30.
i s probably the worst in the region. Only 23 percent o f all roads are paved and less than
43 percent o f these paved roads are in good condition. Only 70 percent and 37 percent o f
the population in urban and rural areas, respectively, are served by water supply. The
coverage o f sanitation networks i s much less. There are less than 5 fixed telephone lines
for every 100 inhabitants making it the lowest coverage ratio in comparative terms. Less
than 1 percent o f the population has access to internet connections.

A challenge for the country i s how to maintain the existing assets and expand the
3 1,
coverage o f basic infrastructure. The yearly financing requirements o f a modest
infrastructure program for roads, water, sanitation and basic telephone services would
require some US$150-200 million (compared to yearly investments o f US$40 million at
present) which i s far beyond the possibility o f present public finances. The non-existence
o f waste management facilities outside o f a few major cities i s an additional factor that
needs to be urgently addressed.
32.
In the agricultural sector, the frontier has basically vanished in the eastern region
as the push to expand soy production has resulted in nearly total deforestation o f the
native forests (less than five percent remain). Yet the expansion o f modern agriculture
has left the 300,000 small (and mostly poor) farmers behind, who continue with
subsistence farming based principally on cotton. The challenge here i s to increase their
productivity as well. Also, as a result o f deforestation, Paraguay has reached the
unthinkable point o f becoming a net importer o f wood, creating an unneeded drain on the
balance o f payments, not to mention the loss o f employment in the previously strong
forestry sector.

33.
Paraguay’s capacity for domestic savings mobilization i s severely limited by l o w
confidence in the financial system following eight years o f successive bank failures that,
to date, have cost about 11 percent o f GDP. Banking regulations and supervision are
weak and, as a result, financial intermediation i s l o w and interest costs and spreads are
very high. The lack o f sound long-term savings mechanisms also limits the population’s
ability to save for old age and provide some self-insurance against old age poverty. The
major remaining public bank (BNF) i s unviable in i t s current structure and insolvent with
bad loans accounting for about 50 percent o f i t s portfolio.
Within the public sector, the most entrenched feature o f public finances i s the
34.
structural deficit o f the Government pension system (Caja Fiscal), which i s currently
generating a deficit o f 2 percent o f GDP. Although the tax reforms that are being

10

proposed will likely close the overall fiscal gap, the deficit on government pensions will
take time to balance the government pension accounts.
Another structural constraint on public finances i s the growing burden o f external
public debt, which has risen considerably to 45 percent o f GDP due to large borrowings
in 1999 and to the large devaluations o f the past few years. The cost o f servicing this
debt now consumes about 20 percent o f government revenues and limits the
Government’s ability to increase public investment via borrowing. Also, various public
utilities have problems o f solvency or over-indebtedness and cannot mobilize the
required investments to expand the coverage and quality o f service.

35,

36.
A large informal economy, partly contraband trade but also a significant share o f
normal business activity, continues to operate outside the registered framework, mainly
to avoid taxes and high contributions to the inefficient social security system, but also to
avoid a complex and bureaucratic string o f administrative regulations.
O n the plus side, it should be noted that Paraguay possesses a number o f
37.
development assets which can be used in i t s favor, including a relatively young
population which provides a possible solution to grow out o f the bind o n the social
security system if new entrants can be enticed to j o i n the formal economy. Second,
Paraguay’s membership in Mercosur provides access to a large regional market. Third,
vibrant commercial farming and livestock sectors are oriented to export and remain
viable through all the turmoil o f recent years. And, fourth, abundant electricity supply i s
available, although transmission and distribution costs are high due to a monopolistic
state energy system.
Government’s Development Strategy

President Duarte Frutos and his team began working o n the Administration’s
development strategy well before the election in April 2003. By the time they took office
in August, the objectives o f their strategy were well developed. These consist of:

38.

i) A recovery o f confidence in state institutions through a sustained fight against
corruption and the modernization o f public administration. By putting emphasis
on improved governance, the Administration hopes to achieve greater formality in
the economy and to increase the international legitimacy o f Paraguay. Equally, it
aims to facilitate greater participation o f civil society in the formulation o f public
policy and the control o f public expenditure.

ii) Sustainable growth through a change in the economic model from triangular

trade and public employment towards agro-industry and export diversification.
While improved efficiency o f public sector services and public investment can
play a supporting role in achieving this objective, the Administration recognizes
that clear and predictable rules, judicial security and equality o f opportunities are
essential for increasing private sector competitiveness.

11

iii)An increase in human capital through higher investment in health and

education, policies that enhance equity and increased access to these services, and
well targeted poverty reduction programs to include the most vulnerable groups.

39.
While keeping the above objectives in view, the Administration also faced the
primordial need to regain control o f public finances and to put them o n a long-term
sustainable basis. This immediate priority was based on the recognition that expenses
have been rising faster than revenues, that there i s an abnormally high share o f rigid
expenses (salaries and pensions, which represent 90 percent o f recurrent expenditure),
that the deficit in government pensions (2 percent GDP) i s crowding out needed
development investments, that debt service i s consuming an unsustainable share o f total
expenditure (20 percent), and that the tax system suffers from a major deficiency in the
form o f multiple tax exemptions (42 separate laws) which are not only a cause for
revenue loss, but also create untold opportunities for tax evasion and corruption.

40.
The short-term severity o f the situation was brought home when the new
Administration took office and found itself facing a short-term financing gap o f US$175
million (3.5 percent o f GDP) in the form o f arrears and end-of-year debt service. O f this
amount, US$65 m i l l i o n represented arrears on existing debt service and US$115 million
o f debt service obligations falling due in the fourth quarter. About US$90 million o f
these amounts are domestic bonds in arrears or with bunched maturities in December.
4 1.
To address this situation, the Administration took a number o f measures to control
expenditure and increase revenues. On the expenditure side, it withdrew US$30 million
o f requests for budget increases that the previous Administration had sent to Congress,
and put on hold any discussion o f an increase in public sector salaries. I t also started a
census o f public employees and pensioners, in part to collect relevant data on personnel
capacity, but also to identify those receiving double salaries, o f which 1650 have been
identified to date and eliminated from the payroll.
42.
O n the revenue side, the Administration took a series o f measures to verify tax
registration and the proper use o f tax accounting books, to encourage delinquent
taxpayers to bring their payments up to date through the waiver o f fines, to eliminate 300
controllers for large taxpayers (which served mainly as a source o f corruption), and to
remove all non-customs employees from Customs entry points (another source o f
corruption). These simple moves to improve tax administration have already yielded
significant benefits, with tax revenues rising by 4 1 percent for the months o f August
through October, compared with the same period in 2002.
In terms o f the budget for 2004, the Administration sent a proposal to Congress
43.
that was recast in programmatic terms with identifiable objectives and results for each
program. Expenditure allocations were increased only for education and health, and
somewhat for agriculture. Overall, the budget aims for an “equilibrated” outcome o f 1
percent deficit with zero financing gap.

12

44.
The Administration also undertook some internal restructuring to integrate the
personnel and planning functions into Ministry o f Finance (they were previously separate
secretariats reporting directly to the President), which should improve control over the
largest element o f expenditure. Finance also created a central unit to manage external
assistance, and the Economic Cabinet was streamlined f r o m nine ministers to five
(finance, central bank, agriculture, public works and industry).
45.
In addition, the Minister o f Finance requested the Bank to prepare a “ministry o f
excellence” project to finance technical assistance for reengineering the ministry,
improving internal controls and audit, and to professionalize the civil service.
Regarding the long-term sustainability o f public finances, the Administration
46.
reached a political agreement with all the political parties o n the need for key economic
reforms. This “Acuerdo Politico” was signed o n October 6, 2003 with all political
leaders in Congress and committed them to pass the following laws o n a priority basis:
w

I

A fiscally responsible budget for 2004 (as described above);
A tax reform that would eliminate exemptions, extend the VAT to sectors that to
date remained untaxed (e.g., agriculture and professional services), and introduce
a personal income tax;

w

Reforms in Government pensions that would reduce the benefit formulas for
new retirees, equalize the conditions for different types o f state employees
(teachers, military, c i v i l servants, etc.), and eliminate the extra year-end pension
payment for retirees;

w

A modern Customs Code that would provide financial autonomy to the Customs
Service, streamline procedures and more clearly assign responsibilities;

I

Renegotiation o f public debt, in particular, rollover o f local Treasury bills whose
maturities are bunched towards the end o f 2003 (as described above);

w

Reorganization o f the public banks, to create a single first-tier window aimed at
small farmers and a single second-tier window to channel external resources
through the commercial banking system for long-term development loans; and

w

Reorganization o f the public administration and o f the public enterprises to
improve their efficiency, require financial discipline and incorporate private
capital t o help finance infrastructure investment.

Five o f the above laws have already been sent to Congress (budget, tax, pensions,
47.
customs and public debt). The bill on public banks is expected to be sent shortly, and the
one o n public administration and public enterprises during 2004.

13

I t should also be noted that apart from the Acuerdo Politico, the Congress i s
scheduled to approve prior to Board consideration o f this CAS an important financial
sector law that establishes a private sector funded deposit insurance scheme and a modern
banking resolution process. This law will allow the Government to act rapidly in the case
o f future banking crises to protect depositors and to limit the costs o f bank failures, which
in the past have cost over 10 percent o f GDP. This law will need to be complemented
with improved provisioning standards and banking supervision, preparations for which
are underway. Furthermore, the Administration i s drafting a new anti-money laundering
law which will play an important role in strengthening the governance o f the banking
sector.

48.

Based on the above actions, the Government has negotiated a 15-month Standby
49.
Arrangement with the IMF, which i s expected to be considered by the IMF Board on
December 15,2003.

Bank Assessment

50.

In formulating the above legislative proposals, the Administration has gone far
beyond many o f the more general recommendations that the Bank presented to the new
Administration in June.' In this regard, the proposed policy reforms have far exceeded
the Bank's expectations. If approved in their current form, the legislation would
constitute the most important reform agenda that Paraguay has prepared in modern times.
If approved, they should be sufficient to allow both an increase in development
expenditures, as well as attainment o f fiscal sustainability over the next few years.

5 1.
The above proposals focus on fiscal and financial sector reforms, which are
urgent for stabilization o f the economy. Paraguay nevertheless faces a much broader
development agenda. Based o n the exchanges on the Policy Options Report, the Bank
believes that there i s a general coincidence o f views with the new Administration o n this
agenda. Some o f the additional or deeper policy areas where the Bank has advised the
Administration to turn i t s attention after it has achieved the fiscal and financial reforms it
has set in motion include:

.

Elimination o f the untargeted subsidy on diesel fuel, which has cost the country
an average o f US$25 million per annum (0.5 percent o f GDP) over the past four
years. Closely related would be an improved regulatory framework for petroleum
product distribution and using the user fees that are collected from the fuel tax to
fund higher budget allocations for road maintenance;

Prior to the change o f administration, the Bank prepared a Policy Options Report that analyzed the
sectors and themes that Bank had worked on in recent years and formulated policy recommendations for
the future. The Bank presented this report to the new Administration in late June in a day-long seminar
attended by the President elect, Vice President elect, all members o f the new Cabinet and the economic and
social teams o f advisors. In this seminar, there was an excellent exchange o f views and considerable
coincidence o n the policy recommendations. The Administration then distributed the Policy Options
Report to newly elected Congress.

14

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

Overhaul o f the land tax, including market valuation o f land values, to create a
meaningful source o f revenue for local Governments and, more importantly, to
create a significant incentive for better land use, which would contribute to easing
the poor distribution o f land in Paraguay;
Nationwide implementation o f a comprehensive strategy for smallholder
agriculture based o n participatory models and environmentally sustainable
cultivation practices;
Promotion o f private-public partnerships for infrastructure development and
maintenance through, e.g., concession contracts for operation and construction,
performance based maintenance contracts, and minimum subsidy concessions for
expansion o f water and sewerage (pilot successfully underway);
Opening o f public monopolies to competition and capitalization, in particular, for
basic telephone service, water, and electricity transmission and distribution.
While the Administration i s committed to these policies in general, the specifics
are s t i l l in the formative stage and need to be developed over the coming year.
Similarly, it has not yet developed a policy for private sector development, other
than the general commitment to clear and predictable rules, judicial security and
equality o f opportunities.
Reorientation o f health services to focus on basic public health, focusing first on
maternal and child health, especially in rural areas;
Reduction in the untargeted subsidy to higher education (accompanied by the
introduction o f need-based scholarships) to shift resources to expansion o f
secondary education, for which quality improvements and coverage needs to be
improved significantly;

Within the context o f a poverty reduction strategy, consolidation o f social
assistance programs, establishment o f uniform eligibility criteria, and introduction
o f a result-oriented monitoring systems.

Medium Term Outlook
Paraguay’s immediate economic future depends heavily o n the Government’s
52.
ability to close i t s end-of-year financing gap and avoid falling into a protracted arrears
scenario. Given i t s agreement with i t s domestic bond holders and the prospects o f
support from the international financial institutions, and assuming continued tight
management o f public finances and passage o f the proposed legislation as outlined above,
Paraguay could enter a period o f renewed growth.

Under this scenario, growth i s likely to be positive in 2003 and 2004, due to
53.
favorable harvests and high commodity prices for soybean and cotton. For 2003, growth
i s projected at about 1.5 percent, rising to 2-2.5 percent in 2004. Provided the reforms
15

supported by the Acuerdo Politico are approved, and the Government maintains
credibility o n both the macro and political front, growth could reach 3 percent by 2005.
On this basis, it i s believed that significant investor confidence will return to Paraguay
and that private investment will increase sufficiently to spur growth to 3.5 percent in the
medium term.

Table 2. Medium Term Projections, Base Case

Real Sector
Real GDP Growth
CPI Inflation (%)
Gross Domestic Investment
Exports (% growth)
Imports (% growth)

e?)

e? GDP)

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

1.5
7.5
19.0
12.5
4.0

2.3
7.0
19.0
-4.4
3.3

2.8
6.0
20.0
5.1
5.2

3.2
5.0
20.0
5.0
5.9

3.5
4.0
20.5
3.2
3.5

3.5
4.0
21.0
3.0
3.5

Central Government Finances
Revenues
Expenditures
O f which Interest payments
Primary Balance
Overall Balance

_______________________ Percent of GDP _______________________
16.1
16.5
17.2
17.5
17.5
17.6
17.6
17.5
17.6
17.5
2.4
2.5
2.4
1.7
2.4
0.2
1.3
2.1
2.4
2.3
-1.1
-0.3
-0.1
-0.1
-1.5

17.5
17.5
2.2
2.1
-0.1

Public Sector Debt (incl. Pub. Ent.)

49.8

47.3

46.4

43.1

39.8

36.9

Balance of Payments
Current Account (% o f GDP)

4.3

1.o

1.3

0.6

0.0

-0.5

54.

The scenario outlined above assumes that the Government will attain fiscal
sustainability within two years as a result o f the proposed reforms, in particular the tax
reform which i s estimated to increase revenues by 1.5 percent o f GDP as i t s measures
come into effect, aided by continued improvement in tax and customs administration.
The proposed pension reform will also contribute to fiscal sustainability through an
increase in contributions amounting to an additional 0.2 percent o f GDP and through
reduced outlays over the medium term. Even allowing for some increase in capital
expenditures, primary surpluses should be possible o n the order o f 2-2.5 percent o f GDP,
allowing the gradual reduction o f the debt burden. Increased efficiency in public
enterprises would also contribute to a decrease in total public debt. As the debt-to-GDP
ratio declines, the primary surplus could be eased to accommodate greater investment,
without jeopardizing debt sustainability. Further details are provided in Annex table B6.
Another key assumption i s the stability o f the exchange rate. While much o f
55.
Paraguay’s debt i s on concessional t e r m s (30 percent), it i s almost entirely denominated
in foreign currency and i s highly sensitive to variations in the exchange rate. Mitigating
this sensitivity i s the fact that Paraguay enjoys significant dollar-denominated royalties
from the Itaipu hydroelectric plant that are somewhat higher than the Government’s hard
currency debt service.

16

56.
Paraguay will, o f course, remain vulnerable to regional events in Argentina and
Brazil, but given the major devaluations o f their currencies during the past few years, and
the tighter macro economic management currently in place, it i s likely that there will be
greater regional stability and growth over the medium term than during the past five
years. In addition, the banking sector reforms currently being put in place, together with
a clearly focused monetary policy and small fiscal deficits will allow the economy to
withstand external shocks more easily than in the past.

Given the more favorable regional and external environment, the main
57.
determinant to renewed growth would appear to be the passage and implementation o f
the Administration’s reform package. Without these policies, however, public finances
will remain very weak and the Government will face further renewed financing problems,
leading to continued l o w investment and probable stagnation o f the economy. Approval
o f the Acuerdo Politico i s thus crucial for turning the corner and restarting growth.
Nevertheless, while the above adjustment scenario implies a return to positive per
58.
capita GDP growth, it i s not sufficient to raise the income o f the average Paraguayan
back to the levels o f the early 1990s. For this to happen, growth o f 6 percent per annum
would be required through 20 10. Hence, more than the proposed reforms will be needed
to make a significant difference to per capita income. In particular, the Government will
need to find ways o f attracting higher levels o f private investment and improving the
efficiency o f public expenditure. Improvements in governance conditions, particularly on
the primacy o f the rule o f law and sustained anticorruption measures would be crucial in
improving the investment climate and public sector performance. The Bank’s assistance
strategy has been designed with this broad agenda o f change in mind, building on many
o f the deeper reforms mentioned in the preceding section on Bank Assessment.

111. - World Bank Assistance Strategy

The Bank’s assistance strategy in Paraguay i s essentially one o f re-engagement
59.
following a long period o f l o w activity and l i t t l e lending. The CAS o f April 1997
became stillborn following the Bank’s decision in 1998 to halt preparation o f new
projects due to the Government’s non-compliance with i t s social obligations under the
Yacyreta hydroelectric project. Poor portfolio performance and a lack o f interest by the
Government to continue borrowing from the Bank also contributed to this hiatus in
lending until FY02, when the first o f two new loans was a p p r ~ v e d .Although
~
no lending
occurred during five years, the Bank made sustained efforts to improve portfolio
performance during this period and carried out a minimum o f core economic and sector
work. It also initiated an anti-corruption program that continues to thrive, and it
contributed substantially to the preparation o f a poverty reduction strategy that the new
Administration i s in the process o f finalizing. A more extensive evaluation o f the Bank’s
past program i s presented in Annex 2.
60.

The lessons from this experience can be summarized as follows:
Community Development (US$9 million) and Education Reform (US$24 million) in early FY04.

17

0

0

0

A minimum field presence was essential for maintaining a dialogue with the
Government during this period and building contacts with c i v i l society and the
private sector.” This dialogue provided the basis for reactivating the Bank’s
program today.
Proactive portfolio management was important for maintaining a minimum
acceptable level o f project implementation in an environment where the portfolio
was severely affected by prevailing governance and fiscal conditions, in
particular, the frequent rotation o f project staff and shortfalls in counterpart funds.
Investment in governance and civil society organizations had high and lasting
payoff, e.g., the WBI-supported Anticorruption Commission was instrumental in
the passage o f a new procurement law and in promoting social participation in
governance issues.

Feedback from Consultations with Civil Society
In preparation for this CAS, a series o f consultations were held with a wide range
6 1.
o f Paraguay’s civil society and private sector, both in Asuncion, the capital, and in the
interior o f the country. The views o f civil society about the Bank’s operations and
Paraguay’s development priorities are presented in Annex 3, as well as on the Bank’s
regional office website. These consultations revealed that the public, especially in the
interior o f the country, has little information about Bank operations and, as a result, often
misinformed views. For example, a recurrent theme was that the Bank should involve
local organizations in the design and implementation o f Bank projects, even though most
active or recently active Bank projects in Paraguay already work principally with or
through local organizations, such as the rural waterjuntas, farmers’ groups and schoolparent associations. The c i v i l society representatives that participated in these
consultations also clamored for support to strengthen their organizations and for Bank
disbursements to be made directly to CSOs in Paraguay.
In spite o f the information gap that was revealed by the consultations, civil society
62.
offered several good suggestions for improving Bank operations, including engaging
local groups to supervise Bank-financed construction in their communities (they claim
that local groups can supervise the control o f materials much more closely than
infrequent supervision missions that work mainly in the capital), incorporating
development o f a national crop insurance scheme for smallholders in the Bank’s
financial/agricultural sector work, and repetition o f the consultation process at mid-point
in the CAS period (2005).

63.
A complete l i s t o f suggestions to improve Bank-civil society relations, as well as
the Bank’s intentions for incorporating these suggestions in i t s operations during this
CAS period i s also presented in Annex 3. Primarily among these i s the recruitment o f a
lo

After the resident mission was downsized to a liaison office in 2000, the ex-resident representative
stayed on in Paraguay as an economist with shared duties in Argentina.

18

civil society specialist for the Paraguay country office, a more active information
dissemination program, and the seeking o f an IDF grant to strengthen CSOs in Paraguay.

Proposed Assistance Program, FY04-07

CAS Objectives

64.

The objectives o f the CAS are aligned closely with the new Administration’s
development priorities. They both assign initial priority to the need for fiscal and
financial stabilization as the sine qua non for regaining confidence in the economy and
getting back to a sustainable growth path. As discussed in the previous sections, until the
Government regains control over i t s finances, it will not be able to spend efficiently and
obtain a growth dividend from i t s limited resources. Similarly, without strengthening, the
banking sector will remain a source o f risk, and any recovery o f growth will remain
vulnerable to new financial crises, just as during the past eight years when a series o f
financial crises took a heavy toll on Paraguay’s growth.

The second priority i s to support the Government’s efforts to restore confidence in
65.
state institutions by improving governance and transparency in public administration.
Improved governance i s another critical ingredient for growth in terms o f raising the
confidence o f the private sector to increase investment in Paraguay. Third, the Bank’s
assistance strategy aims to support the Administration’s goals o f achieving sustainable
growth through improved infrastructure and increasing the productivity o f the rural
sector, in particular that o f small farmers among whom poverty i s highest. And, fourth,
the strategy would support the Government’s efforts to expand the coverage and
efficiency o f basic social services (education, public health and watedsanitation), in order
to help Paraguay meet i t s millennium development goals. This objective would include,
inter alia, improvements in the targeting o f social protection programs, including
pensions if possible. In sum, the CAS objectives are:
0

Fiscal and financial sector stabilization;

0

Improved governance and transparency in public administration;

0

0

Enhanced and sustained growth, in particular in rural areas where poverty i s most
concentrated and deepest; and
Social Inclusion - improved coverage and efficiency o f basic social services to

help meet the MDGs.
Bank Strategy

66.
The proposed Bank strategy recognizes the new economic and political situation
in Paraguay, in particular, the actions the new Administration has taken to confront
corruption, tighten control over i t s finances and build a political consensus for important
economic reforms. The proposed strategy i s nevertheless also mindful o f the long history
19

o f political difficulties and the lack o f institutional capacity that has hindered reform
efforts in the past. In this high-risk / high-reward situation, it i s proposed to proceed with
a re-engagement strategy that i s based on clear performance criteria and to approve new
commitments in line with the Administration’s progress in building a credible track
record o f economic management and reform.

Within the above risk management framework, and in view o f the bulge in the
67.
Government’s financial obligations towards the end o f this year, the Bank’s program
includes the proposed Economic Recovery adjustment loan (ERL) as an initial element o f
the overall assistance strategy. This loan would support the Government’s actions to date
and the significant economic reforms that it has already sent to Congress, including the
reform o f the Government pension system, the Customs Code and the tax legislation that
were described in the previous section. In view o f the actions to date, the ERL would be
a one-tranche operation, in order to provide quick disbursing resources to help close the
Government’s end-of-year financing gap o f approximately US$175 million. The ERL
(US$30 million) would be part o f a concerted effort among other multilateral and private
creditors to close this gap. This burden sharing effort includes a US$30 million social
sector loan from the IDB and US$90 million from domestic creditors in the form o f
rescheduled domestic Treasury bills that are either in arrears or falling due in December.
This package o f creditor support would be accompanied by an IMF standby arrangement.
68.
As part o f a concerted package o f support from multilateral and domestic
creditors, the ERL would enhance the chances o f a successful outcome o f the
Administration’s efforts to stabilize public finances and win legislative approval for i t s
economic reform proposals. This element o f the Bank’s strategy would thus contribute to
the Government’s immediate priority objective o f fiscal stabilization.
69.
Provided substantial progress i s made towards approval o f the tax and pension
reform legislation supported by the ERL, the Bank’s strategy i s to proceed with the
second element o f i t s base case lending program, namely a financial sector loan (FSAL)
that would support an underlying reform o f the banking system. This loan, which has
been prepared in close coordination with the IDB and the IMF, together with a
companion financial sector technical assistance loan (FTAL), would reduce the risk (and
cost) o f future banking crises by supporting an improved banking resolution mechanism,
the establishment o f a private sector funded deposit insurance scheme, implementation o f
international best practice banking regulations, enhanced banking supervision and
implementation o f a revised anti-money laundering law that i s currently under
preparation. I t should be noted that the legislation creating the banking resolution and
deposit insurance scheme i s scheduled to be approved prior to Board consideration o f this
CAS. The FSAL (US$50 million) would be a traditional two-tranche adjustment loan
that would disburse in step with implementation o f these reforms. The FSAL/FTAL
package would also proceed in tandem with a similar adjustment loan from the IDB that
would support reform o f the public banking sector in Paraguay.
In sum, the first pillar o f the proposed Bank strategy i s to support key structural
70.
reforms needed to stabilize public finances and strengthen the financial sector, both

20

necessary ingredients for macro stability. These operations will provide financial
resources commensurate with the ambitious program o f reforms that the new
Administration has submitted to Congress and which has been approved in part. In turn,
the stabilization o f public finances and the strengthening o f the banking system will
provide the confidence necessary for private investors to increase their activities and w i l l
thus lay the groundwork for a sustained recovery o f the economy.

The second pillar o f the Bank’s strategy for FY04-07 i s to assist the Government
71.
in improving governance and transparency in public administration. Support would be
provided through a series o f technical assistance loans and grants. The first o f these
loans, already under preparation, aims to transform the Ministry o f Finance into a
“ministry o f excellence” via overhaul o f i t s internal controls, procedures, service
orientation towards the public, and a program for professionalization o f the civil service.
The ministry o f excellence project would seek to integrate improved management
practices with one or two key line ministries, e.g., Education, which i s also attempting to
improve i t s management practices through the Education Reform loan; as such, the
ministry o f excellence project could serve as a starting point for a deeper process o f
public sector reform. This project would be complemented by a project to improve
financial management capacity at the municipal level, in particular, better application o f
the land tax (impuesto inmobiliario) which i s the main (but vastly underutilized) source
o f municipal revenue. Improved management capacity at the municipal level i s a
necessary prerequisite for eventual decentralization o f public services, one o f the central
desires o f the Paraguayan public.
The third pillar o f the proposed strategy i s to support sustainable growth, in
72.
particular, in the rural areas where the majority o f the poor live, but also through private
sector development activities that would improve the general business environment.
Investment projects in support o f the rural areas would include a scaling up o f a
comprehensive agricultural extension and natural resource management model, support
for sustainable forest management to spur Paraguay’s huge potential in forest production
and export, an innovative program for maintenance o f secondary and rural roads, and
support for continued expansion o f water supply and sanitation in the rural areas. In the
latter two projects, innovative techniques would be used to harness private sector
involvement with the aim o f reducing costs and improving efficiency. These operations
will be supported by diagnostic work on the rural sector and the climate for private sector
investment.
73.
Social inclusion i s the fourth pillar o f our engagement over the coming years and
will be closely aligned with the implementation o f the Government’s poverty reduction
strategy. This would build - and also be dependent - on a successful rural-based growth
strategy as outlined above. Our activities would focus on supporting systemic reforms in
the social sectors that would increase effective delivery o f services benefiting in large
improving
part the rural poor. Necessary cross-sectoral reforms would include (i)
expenditure distribution to favor provision o f basic services and assistance programs in
the poorest areas; (ii)
rationalizing human resource planning, especially in the education
and health sectors; (iii)
ensuring that user costs for services contribute to the effective

21

delivery o f services at the level at which they are collected while introducing exemption
policies for the poor; and (iv) introducing specific outreach activities to reach the
indigenous population in Paraguay. Our policy dialogue and lending activities would
concentrate on (i)
introducing a maternal-child health insurance scheme, (ii)
assisting the
Government to rationalize (and expand) the many existing social assistance programs and
prepare the reform o f the pension system; and (iii)
supporting the ongoing secondary
education reform (which introduces both supply side incentives as well as demand side
support) through the second phase o f an adjustable lending program that began with the
recent education reform loan.

The relationship o f these projects and the associated diagnostic work with the
74.
Government’s and the CAS’ objectives i s shown in the CAS Program Matrix at the end
o f the main text. The attachment to the CAS Program Matrix provides a detailed
description o f each investment project and study included in the proposed program.
Base Case Lending
75.
The base case lending program aims to provide measured support to the
Administration for all four CAS objectives (stabilization, governance, growth and social
inclusion). I t consists o f the ERL and FSAL adjustment loans mentioned above, together
with 11 project loans (including the FTAL and three other TA loans to boost institutional
capacity), for total commitments o f US$325 million over the three and one-half year
period, mid-FY04-07. Adjustment lending would represent 25 percent o f the base case
lending program. The specific project proposals reflect the priorities o f the Government
as expressed in a CAS consultation meeting with high-level Administration officials in
early October. Base case lending assumes that there i s continued improvement in project
implementation, particularly with regards to the appointment and evaluation o f proj ect
staff on the basis o f merit. Moreover, problem projects should not exceed more than 20
percent o f the investment portfolio. Additional conditions for continuing in the base
case, which Paraguay currently i s considered to be in, are discussed under the Lending
Triggers section below.

Table 3. Proposed Lending, FY 04-07
Low Case

Ministry o f Excellence TA

Health I1
Rural Investment
Education Reform I1
Water Sector Modernization

for a total of US$120 million

Base Case
Economic Recovery
FSAL + FTAL
Ministry of Excellence T A
Health I1
Social Protection TA
Rural Investment
Forestry
Road Maintenance
Municipal Finance
Private Sector Development TA
Education Reform I1
Water Sector Modernization
for a total of US$325 million.

22

High Case
Base-case plus:
Land Administration
Municipal Services
Judicial Reform
Community Development 11,
and/or one or two adjustment
operations, e.g., Business
Development, Pension Reform,
Conditional Transfer Social
Protection, or Public Enterprise
Restructuring.
for a total o f up to US$425 million

76.

Given the considerable uncertainties and risks that the Bank faces in Paraguay,
including the potential for a high reward outcome, it i s proposed that the high and l o w
cases provide a much greater range o f commitment alternatives than usual.

High Case

77.

In the event that the Government complies with the high case conditions (see
lending triggers below), the Bank would proceed with additional investment projects
and/or adjustment operations in amounts up to an additional U S $ l 00 million, for a total
o f US$425 million for the CAS period. Given the nature o f the high case lending triggers
and the need to build a sustained track record o f macro management and project
implementation, it i s unlikely that Paraguay would enter the high case until the latter
years o f the CAS period. Nevertheless, some o f the possible operations in the high case
would be highly complementary to the base case (for example, a pension reform or
conditional transfer social protection adjustment loan to build on the social protection T A
project o f the base case, or the business development adjustment loan to build on the
private sector development TA project o f the base case). Such high case operations could
therefore have very high marginal returns in supporting one or more o f the CAS
objectives. The Bank will therefore work with the Government towards meeting the high
case conditions, with the aim o f boosting Paraguay’s growth beyond the 3.5 percent
envisaged in the base case macro scenario.

Low Case

78.
In the event that the Government no longer meets the base case conditions, the
lending program would revert to a core set o f projects that focus o n the Millennium
Development Goals. These projects comprise the aforementioned operations in health,
small farmer rural development, education and water. In all cases, these projects
represent continuation o f activity in areas where the Bank i s currently involved and
believes that i t s interventions are effective. The l o w case would thus assure continuity in
dialogue and working relationships with the ministries involved in these MDG areas.
Moreover, these projects would be phased equally over the CAS period, basically one per
year, thus minimizing the pace o f further Bank exposure. The only non-traditional
project proposed for the l o w case i s the “ministry o f excellence” project for Finance,
since this project would strengthen the financial management capacity o f this core
ministry. In the l o w case scenario, lending would be capped at US$120 million, or onethird o f the base case amount, for these projects.
Lending Triggers
As mentioned, Paraguay i s currently considered to be in the base case, in view o f
79.
the strong actions the Administration has taken at the beginning o f i t s term to deal with
the difficult financing situation it inherited as well as to lay the base for long-term
growth. Paraguay nonetheless needs time to build a track record o f good economic
management and policy reform. The base case lending triggers, which focus on a limited

23

number o f factors mostly related to fiscal and financial stability, have thus been
constructed as a set o f continuing conditions that could apply throughout the CAS period.
This would allow an assessment to be made at different points o f time o f whether
Paraguay i s making reasonable progress towards these goals.

80.
For example, to remain in the base case, Paraguay should maintain a satisfactory
macroeconomic framework throughout the CAS period. Similarly, it i s expected that the
Administration will make continuous progress in implementing the procurement and
financial management action plans that have recently been agreed following the CPAR
and C F A A evaluations. These plans have a two year timeframe and provide a roadmap
for assessment during this period. Special emphasis has been placed on the tax and
pension reform legislation that the Administration has sent to Congress and i s being
supported by the ERL. It i s expected that these laws, which are essential for stabilization
o f public finances, will be approved during the first half o f 2004. Their implementation
will nevertheless occur over time. Similarly, the financial sector reforms that are equally
important for macro stability will require a number o f years to be fully implemented. A
road map for assessing their implementation will be provided by the FSAL and FTAL
operations that will support these reforms. Maintenance o f satisfactory portfolio
implementation throughout the CAS period has already been mentioned.

8 1,

One specific base case trigger that requires early action by the Administration i s
to avoid further declines in the net assets o f Petropar, the national o i l import company.
Essentially this implies elimination o f the untargeted subsidy on diesel fuel, which would
be appropriate in light o f the considerable amount o f quick disbursing funds that the Bank
strategy includes in the base case. Maintaining this minimum net asset position would
also be required throughout the CAS period as evidence that the Government does not
revert to losing money through the operations o f Petropar. One other specific base case
trigger calls for the adoption o f a national poverty reduction program, which i s expected
during 2004. These base case conditions are shown in the table on the following page.

As mentioned, moving to the high case will take time (perhaps two years), not
82.
only in terms o f building a track record on basic economic management, but also in terms
o f meeting the specific high case triggers. In general, the high case triggers are designed
to recognize actions that will accelerate attainment o f long-term growth and equity goals
and move Paraguay to a higher growth path than envisaged in the base case scenario. To
keep this possibility within reach, the base case program, if implemented, will directly
support the Administration in meeting most o f the high case triggers.
83.
For example, the social protection TA project will assist the Government in
establishing a poverty monitoring and evaluation system. The land tax study would assist
in restructuring the land tax and improving equity in land distribution. The ministry o f
excellence TA project would support the design o f changes to the civil service law and
the introduction o f merit-based hiring. The road maintenance project would support
innovative contracts for associating the private sector in infrastructure maintenance.
High case adjustment lending would, nevertheless, also depend on the advancement o f
specific reforms to be supported by such operations.
24

Table 4. Lending Program Triggers, FY 04-07

a

Significant reduction in tax evasion as evidenced by
increase in VAT revenues as percent o f GDP.

Maintenance of a satisfactory macroeconomic
framework.

Povert 7 Triggers

Adoption of a national Poverty Reduction Strategy
Program.
Progress in providing titles to indigenous
communities for already demarcated lands.

Progress in implementing the national PRSP as
evidenced by, for example, establishment of a
poverty monitoring and evaluation system and
implementation of an agreed cross-sectoral
beneficiary identification method.
Restructuring of the land tax to convert it into a
significant source of revenue and to reduce
inequality in land distribution.

I
I

Governance and Public Accountability Triggers

a

Satisfactory
progress
in implementing agreed
. .
Procurement Action Plan, including, for example,
establishment of agency procurement units and an
electronic information and procurement system,
and strengthened contract management.
Satisfactory progress in implementing agreed
Financial Management Action Plan, including, for
example, introduction o f accrual accounting in
central administration and implementation of
integrated financial accounting system (SIAF) in
decentralized agencies

I

a

Enactment o f revised legislation on declaration of
assets, incl. enforcement mechanism.
Revisions to Civil Service law and establishment o f
merit-basedcriteria for hiring.

I

Structural and Sectoral Triggers

N o decline in net assets (patrimonio neto) of
Petropar below level o f December 3 1, 2003.
Substantial progress on tax and Government
pension reform, leading to passage and
implementation o f these proposed laws.
Satisfactory progress on financial sector reform, as
evidenced by, for example, strengthened bank
provisioning standards, satisfactory
implementation o f a new deposit insurance
scheme, and adoption of a modern (least cost)
banking resolution process.

I

Participation of private capital in public
infrastructure, as evidenced by, for example,:
k Further expansion of waterisanitation services
via existing minimum subsidy concession
(MSC) schemes with private operators;
k taking to point o f transaction two public-private
partnerships in infrastructure investment.

Portfolio Implementation Triggers

N o more than 15 percent o f projects rated
Unsatisfactory on either IP or DO, and an annual
disbursement ratio above 20 percent.

N o more than 20 percent of projects rated
Unsatisfactory on either IP or DO, and an annual
disbursement ratio of about 20 percent.

Fiduciary Assessments
As part o f the Bank's core diagnostic work, a Country Procurement Assessment
84.
Review (CPAR) was carried out in 2002 in close consultation with the IDB.' The report
was prepared in parallel with the approval o f a new procurement law by the Congress and

'' Paraguay - Country ProcurementAssessment Review, Report No. 25908-PA, January 2003.
25

contributed to the adequacy o f this law, as well as to the ensuing regulatory decree. As a
result o f this law, the Government established the Directorate o f Public Procurement
which i s in the process o f creating new norms and procedures to govern all state
procurement. Based on the CPAR, a procurement action plan has been agreed with the
Government that calls for full operation o f the Directorate o f Public Procurement and the
agency procurement u n i t s that will be established in other parts o f the Government, a
well defined institutional and operational framework, development o f human resources,
operational manuals and standard documents, and development and implementation o f a
modern information and e-procurement system. The Bank will monitor closely
implementation o f the action plan and continue to provide advice as necessary, in tandem
with the IDB which i s financing the activities o f the Procurement Directorate.

A joint Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) i s being conducted
85.
in collaboration with the IDB and i s in the process o f being finalized. This report
recognizes that significant advances have been made in public sector accountability as a
result o f the Financial Administration law o f December 1999, including introduction o f a
modern financial accounting system within the central Government. Nevertheless,
additional actions are needed, in particular, a change in the control environment o f
government to increase awareness and personal responsibility for the management o f
public resources. O n the basis o f the draft CFAA, a preliminary financial management
action plan has been agreed with the Government that includes the introduction o f
commitment accounting to the existing financial management system and the extension
o f the system to include all public enterprises and decentralized units o f government.
AAA and ESW
86.
The first priority for the proposed ESW program i s to complete the core
diagnostic work that remains to be done as a result o f the l o w level o f Bank activity
during the past CAS period. Apart from the CPAR and CFAA, a Poverty Assessment
was carried out in 2001-02 and served as an input to the Government’s poverty reduction
strategy. l2 Although not a core diagnostic study, the Bank prepared a Policy Options
report which was presented to the new Administration in June 2003, prior to i t s assuming
office. The Policy Options report consolidated the Bank’s knowledge on a wide range o f
topics in Paraguay, and many o f i t s recommendations are reflected in the Government’s
own program. Concerning the remaining core diagnostic work, an institutional and
governance review i s underway and will be followed by a public expenditure review and
a CEM.
In addition to the core diagnostic work, the base case program includes a social
87.
protection policy study (in process) and a health sector strategy study that i s about to
begin. A rural sector strategy that would draw on lessons learned at the local and
regional level to help shape the next generation o f Bank interventions in the rural sector.
A closely related study o n land taxation would aim to increase the effectiveness o f the
existing land tax as a tool to moderate the extremely skewed distribution o f land in
Paraguay, the highest in Latin America. This study would also serve as an input to the

’*

Paraguay - Attacking Poverty, Report No. 22703-PA, draft gray cover, November 2002.

26

municipal finance development project, since real estate taxes (impuesto inmobiliario)
are the principal source o f municipal revenue. More efficient land taxation would thus
contribute to setting the stage for greater decentralization o f government spending in the
future. Another important part o f the AAA program in the near term i s an assessment o f
the private sector investment climate (possibly in collaboration with IFC) that would fed
into the private sector development TA project. The following table shows the proposed
ESW for the CAS period.

Table 5. Proposed Economic and Sector Work, FY 04-07
Low Case
CFAA *
Social Protection Policy
Health Strategy
Institutional & Governance Review
PER *
CEM *
Poverty Update

* Core diagnostic work

High Case

Base Case

*

CFAA *
Social Protection Policy
Health Strategy
Institutional & Governance Review *
PER *
Investment Climate
Land Taxation
CEM *
Rural Sector Strategy
Financial Sector Update
Evaluation o f Secondary Education
Poverty Update

Base case plus:
Labor Market Study
Decentralization
Infrastructure Assessment

World Bank Institute

The WBI played a significant role in launching a comprehensive program against
88.
corruption directed by a coalition o f Government and civil society stakeholders in
Paraguay. Following a 1999 WBI survey o f the public perceptions o f corruption, the
Government invited representatives o f civil society and the political parties to form an
Anti-corruption Commission that received WBI orientation and training in how other
countries had approached the corruption issue. This Commission subsequently devised
an anti-corruption plan that focused on the areas o f procurement, customs and the
Judiciary. Following consultations with civil society, the plan was adopted as the
National Integrity Plan in December 2000 and was instrumental in building the
momentum for the passage o f a new procurement law in 2002. The Commission, now
called the National Integrity Commission, continues to function as a credible entity that
meets regularly and plays an active role in the national public debate on corruption and
governance. 13
89.
During the current CAS period, WBI intends to reactivate i t s program o f support
to the National Integrity Commission by supporting the Commission’s work in one o f i t s
three priority areas, namely, the Judiciary. In particular, WBI would include Paraguay in
a multi-country Learning Program that would analyze the main problems in the Judiciary
and aim to examine fundamental areas for judicial reform. It would feature discussions
across different types o f stakeholders/participants within Paraguay, as well as across
l3

The Commission’s work i s currently being supported by a grant from the IDB.

27

other countries in Latin America, regarding legal performance in their countries and areas
and initiatives for improvement. One objective in undertaking this program would be to
integrate Bank staff more closely into client-focused learning programs, as well as to
support a possible (high case) Judicial Reform Program for Paraguay. If such a project
materializes, WBI would work on the anticorruption component o f the project, analyzing
issues on independence and accountability for greater transparency and better
performance in the Judiciary.

Outreach

90.
Paraguay i s s t i l l very much a verbal society in which personal contact i s essential
for the advancement o f programs and new ideas. The Bank will address this situation by
working closely with the Executive to increase the awareness o f Bank programs, projects
and development issues among other branches o f government. An example o f such
outreach was a recent presentation by the Regional Chief Economist to the Congress on
the Bank’s views on the development challenges facing Latin America in general, with
emphasis on the circumstances o f Paraguay. Similarly, the Bank will take advantage o f
visits by technical missions to make presentations on other topics o f interest.

91,
With regards to civil society, the Bank i s in the process o f recruiting a civil
society / social development specialist for the Paraguay country office. This person will
have as a prime objective to extend Bank relations with civil society organizations,
contribute to the incorporation o f participatory mechanisms in the design and
implementation o f Bank projects, and, in general, to help get the Bank’s messages heard
and understood among a wider segment o f the population.
Aid Coordination
Paraguay i s one o f the few lower-middle income countries that has no
92.
consultative group or formal aid coordination mechanism. The Government has mainly
engaged with donors on a one-on-one basis, and, until recently, the aid coordination and
management function has been split between the Ministry o f Finance and the Secretariat
o f Planning and lacked a close coordination between the two. As a result, aid
coordination has been very weak in the past. The areas o f donor activities and interest
are shown in the partnership matrix attached to Annex 4.

93.

Despite shortcomings in the overall management o f donor assistance and the lack
o f a formal aid coordination mechanism, coordination between the Bank and some o f the
major donors has been good. Coordination with the IDB, by far the largest donor, has
been effective and several Bank-funded projects have been complementary to IDB
operations, for example, in maternal health, Bank and IDB financed similar programs but
with a different geographical coverage. In education, the IDB provided assistance at the
primary level, while Bank’s operations have been aimed at the secondary level. In
addition, the Bank and the IDB have collaborated effectively in the recent preparation o f
the fiduciary reports on procurement and financial management. Coordination between
the Bank and the U N D P has also been good, with the U N D P administering the financial

28

management aspects o f several Bank-funded loans and grants. Finally, coordination with
the IMF has also been constructive. Although Paraguay up to now lacked an IMF
program, collaboration and dialogue between the two institutions has been close and
constructive, particularly on the assessment o f the financial sector adjustment loan and in
the preparation o f the economic recovery loan.
94.
The new Administration has recognized the importance o f improving the
management o f external assistance and has taken a number o f measures, including the
creation within the Ministry o f Finance o f a unit dedicated to the management o f external
assistance (the Central Unit for Public Investment) and the decision to incorporate the
Planning Secretariat in the Ministry o f Finance (for which legislation has been sent to
Congress). Improving coordination among donors will be particularly important if the
Government wishes to mobilize additional external support to fund new poverty
reduction interventions as part o f i t s poverty reduction strategy.

IFC
95.
At present, IFC has no portfolio balance in Paraguay. Due to economic and
political uncertainties, and institutional and governance issues, the climate for private
investment has been poor. IFC reviewed a number o f projects during the last CAS
period; however, none has thus far materialized due to the project structure or riskiness.
IFC’s only current involvement in Paraguay has been through i t s regional investment. A
US$25 million loan and equity investment was committed in FY03 to UABL for an
expansion o f i t s river barge and terminal operations on the Parana and Paraguay Rivers
(the Hidrovia System). US$5 million o f this investment has been committed, but not yet
disbursed, to UABL Paraguay to (i)
acquire additional barges and tugs to expand i t s
operation, and (ii)
construct to expand barge and terminal operations.

Due to the past experience, IFC will remain very selective in i t s activity in
96.
Paraguay and continue to explore investment opportunities through regional projects.
IFC will also look at opportunities for i t s direct involvement in Paraguay, as the
investment climate improves and may provide some advisory work through FIAS. The
new Government’s efforts to improve macroeconomic management, public governance
and regulatory framework are an encouraging trend towards an improved investment
climate.

MIGA
97.
Paraguay has been a member o f MIGA since 1992. To date, MIGA has facilitated
an estimated US$lO million in foreign direct investment into Paraguay. In 1997, MIGA
issued a U S $ l 0 million guarantee against expropriation, transfer restriction, and war and
civil disturbance risks to Lloyds Bank, Plc. o f the United Kingdom for a loan to expand
the lending operations o f i t s subsidiary. The additional funding was to enable Lloyds
Paraguay to increase i t s medium-term U.S. dollar lending, mainly to companies in the
automotive and textile industry. This guarantee has since been cancelled. MIGA
remains ready to underwrite suitable foreign investments in Paraguay over the upcoming

29

CAS period. MIGA’s on-line investment promotion services currently feature 80
documents o n investment opportunities and the related legal and regulatory environment
in Paraguay.
In November o f 2003, at the request o f the Ministries o f Finance and Industry &
98.
Commerce, MIGA conducted a diagnostic mission to evaluate the institutional and
strategic environment for foreign direct investment (FDI) promotion in Paraguay. MIGA
met with over 50 members o f the private sector, public administration, and foreign
business communities to analyze the potential for proactive promotion o f FDI into the
country. The resulting report, which will be presented to the Government in early 2004,
will analyze and make recommendations on how the country can improve flows o f FDI.
The focus will be on institutional improvements, particularly in ProParaguay, strategic
organization within the Government to prepare for and support the promotion process,
and a preliminary identification o f target markets and sub-sectors from where investment
i s most likely to flow in the short to medium term. The report will also note central
investment climate improvements that will be required in the short t e r m if the country
hopes to mount successful promotion campaigns. Further work in Paraguay or the
initiation o f a long term technical assistance program will depend on MIGA human
resource availability, counterpart and donor funding, and Government commitment.

IV. - IBRD Exposure and Risk Management
Debt and IBRD Exposure Indicators
Paraguay i s a l o w to moderately indebted country, with total debt service about 12
99.
percent o f exports and total debt-to-GDP o f about 48 percent. The apparent difference
between these two measures o f indebtedness reflects the fact that the great majority o f
Paraguay’s external debt i s on long maturities with reasonably l o w interest rates. Debt
service i s thus relatively low. The debt-to-GDP ratio rose somewhat during the past few
years due to devaluation o f the Guarani, while the overall external debt stock remained
constant at about $2.7 billion.

100. With regard to IBRD exposure, Paraguay exceeds one o f the indicators, namely
the multilateral share o f public debt service, which i s about 60 percent o f the total. This
high share i s due to Paraguay’s heavy reliance on multilateral lenders, in particular, the
IDB, which holds about one-third o f total public debt. The reverse side o f this coin i s
that the high share o f multilateral exposure accounts for much o f the long-maturity and
low-interest rate structure o f Paraguay’s public debt. Paraguay i s below the other IBRD
exposure indicators with debt service to the World Bank accounting for only 2 percent o f
exports and 17 percent o f public debt service.
101. The real constraint on Paraguay’s creditworthiness i s not external, but rather the
fragile state o f public finances, in which there i s a constant struggle to pay salaries,
pensions and debt service, with little l e f t over for operating expenses and investment.
The severity o f this position was highlighted late last year when the Government was

30

unable to stay current with payments to the World Bank, and disbursements were
suspended for three months from January through mid-April. The new Administration i s
keenly aware o f the structural weaknesses in public finances, which i s why it has
assigned f i r s t priority to reform government pensions and the tax regime in order to put
public finances on a more sustainable basis from the beginning o f i t s term o f office.

Key Risks and Strategy for Managing Them

102. The overall risks o f re-engaging with Paraguay on a meaningful level are high.
To start, there are a number o f risks that are less present in countries where the Bank has
maintained a more continuous operational presence. The first such risk i s that in the
absence o f a long-standing dialogue on policy reform and in light o f past policy reversals
(e.g., suspension o f the privatization program in 2002), the program may go o f f track
early on. This would be the case if the Congress does not complete i t s side o f the
“Acuerdo Politico” and approve the proposed tax and pension reform laws soon after
disbursement o f the E m . The exposure risk would be even greater if this political
backtracking occurs after disbursement o f the first tranche o f the FSAL. The lack o f
experience in this type o f arrangements may entail some increased risk in comparison
with other countries familiar with adjustment type lending. O n the other hand, the good
record the authorities have demonstrated in managing the process provides the Bank team
with reasonable assurances o f success in being able to deliver in this ambitious endeavor.
103. Mitigating this risk o f political backtracking i s the fact that the Administration i s
advancing i t s reform agenda at the beginning o f i t s t e r m when i t s political capital and
public standing i s high, not in the middle or end o f i t s term as was the case with the
privatization program. Also, the Administration has succeeded in gaining the support o f
some o f the main groups affected by i t s proposals, such as the business organizations
with regard to tax reform and the teachers unions with regard to pension reform. Across
the political spectrum, all parties acknowledge the need for fundamental changes in the
management o f the economy.

104. While these factors provide some comfort, the proposed strategy also attempts to
manage this risk through upfront prior actions required for the ERL and the selection o f
the base case triggers. Consideration o f the ERL i s subject to prior approval o f the
banking resolution and deposit insurance law that i s currently scheduled for approval by
Congress prior to consideration o f this CAS by the Bank Board. While approval o f the
tax and pension reform laws i s not a prior condition for consideration o f the FSAL, the
proposed Bank strategy does expect that Congress will make considerable progress in i t s
treatment o f these laws before the FSAL will be ready for Board consideration. And
passage o f these laws i s certainly expected prior to release o f a second tranche o f the
FSAL. Equally importantly, proceeding with most o f the base case investment projects i s
subject to continued progress on the lending triggers, and the Administration i s keenly
aware o f the negative image that would result if a Bank program o f re-engagement were
to go o f f track early on. The combination o f these factors should thus provide sufficient
comfort to warrant taking the risk o f matching an ambitious reform program with an
ambitious program o f financial support.
31

105. A second risk o f re-engagement concerns the ability o f the Government to
manage a considerably larger World Bank portfolio, while maintaining an acceptable
level o f project implementation. This will require a major improvement in
implementation capacity vis-a-vis previous years. To manage this risk, the Bank will
follow closely the measures the Ministry o f Finance has already taken to improve the
management o f external assistance (namely, the creation o f a central unit for investment
and the proposed incorporation o f planning into the Ministry). Second, by financing
technical assistance to the Ministry o f Finance as part o f the “ministry o f excellence”
project, the Bank will directly support improvements in implementation capacity and
follow this process closely through supervision o f the “ministry o f excellence” project.
Third, the recent portfolio review agreement on generic portfolio issues, such as
appointment o f staff based on merit and access to counterpart funding (see Annex 3 for
the full set o f agreements), should provide for a more fluid implementation o f the base
case lending program.
Fiduciary risks are also noteworthy. In the area o f financial management, there are
two main risk areas - that pertaining to the overall management o f public expenditure,
which has a direct impact on Bank-funded adjustment operations, and that pertaining to
the management o f the Bank-funded portfolio o f investment operations. The Country
Financial Accountability Assessment that i s nearing completion has resulted in an agreed
preliminary action plan that addressed the former. In addition, a number o f reforms
supported by IDB-fundedtechnical assistance projects are taking place in several key
areas including budgeting, anti-corruption and government auditing. The Bank will
continue to monitor the implementation o f these reforms during the CAS period and will
complement IDB support through future interventions.

106.

107.

Financial management risks to the Bank’s investment portfolio have been
evidenced by past problems with misappropriations o f funds and weakness in the auditing
arrangements in a number o f projects. However, past problems have been detected early
on through active supervision, which will continue in the future. Despite these
shortcomings, Paraguay’s record o f compliance with audit requirements has been
adequate.

108.

Procurement under Bank projects has been relatively free o f major problems,
although there have been allegations o f corrupt procurement practices that have required
Bank and Government action. Implementation o f the new procurement law and
modernization plan supported by the IDB i s expected to bring about improvements,
although procurement risk will continue, at least in the medium-term, until the reforms
are fully implemented. To minimize the risk the Bank will continue providing technical
advice for the creation and implementation o f agency procurement units as called for by
the new law and will continue to provide close support and supervision. The Bank will
further ensure that the principles o f the procurement law are adhered to in Bank projects,
as long as they are consistent with the Bank’s guidelines.

32

109. Other risks to the program are more o f a general macroeconomic nature.
Paraguay, as a small open economy that trades considerably with i t s Mercosur partners,
will remain vulnerable to regional shocks as occurred over the past four years when the
respective devaluations o f the Brazilian Real and Argentine Peso upset trading balances
and led to a compensating devaluation o f the Guarani, as well as the financial crisis in
Uruguay which led directly to the closing o f some financial institutions in Paraguay.
Paraguay i s also vulnerable to fluctuations in commodity prices, especially soy, cotton
and meat, that can impact economic activity and hence government revenues.

110. The best strategy for managing such risks i s for Paraguay to regain a strong fiscal
position that will allow the Government to build up some precautionary balances, as well
as strengthening the financial system to withstand a possible further deterioration in the
quality o f commercial bank portfolios. The proposed CAS strategy o f providing early
adjustment lending support to a new Administration that i s willing to spend i t s political
capital in seeking the approval o f key reforms that will strengthen the fiscal and financial
situation i s thus the best risk management strategy against the impact o f future regional
volatility on Paraguay. Supporting policies that lead to a stronger fiscal position i s also
the best strategy for managing payment risk to the Bank, which i s s t i l l significant in light
o f the inability to stay current with IBRD debt service earlier this year during the last
months o f the previous administration.
111. Finally, the Bank should not underestimate the forces o f the informal economy
and other vested interests that will aim to block the current crack down on corruption and
the improvements in governance that the Government i s proposing. Such forces could
force the resignation o f current economic team and a reversion to policy drift. It i s
difficult for the Bank i t s e l f to manage such domestic risks, other than by providing
support, in concert with other multilateral institutions, to the reformers in government as
a signal o f international commitment to the reforms they are championing.
112. In the current Paraguay case, it i s the President himself who i s at the political
forefront o f the reform and anti-corruption effort and, due to the legitimacy o f his
election, i s not likely to be forced from office or replaced during the current five-year
t e r m (until August 2008). I t i s in the President’s own interest to keep a strong economic
team in place and to obtain approval o f the proposed reforms on an expedited schedule.
To a limited extent, the Bank could support this initiative though more active outreach to
other branches o f government and the public, stressing the importance o f sound economic
policies and the potential benefits o f reforms that address key constraints to Paraguay’s
economic, social and institutional development.
Expected Results o f the CAS

113. The proposed program by no means addresses all o f the development agenda in
Paraguay, for example, the base case program does not include the restructuring o f public
enterprises, the opening o f infrastructure to private sector investment, or the creation o f
conditional cash transfer social protection programs, all o f which would only be
supported in the high case. Also, Paraguay’s development outcomes will depend on a

33

host o f factors other than the Bank’s program, in particular, the policies that the
Administration chooses to follow and the assistance programs o f other external partners,
several o f which provide more assistance than the Bank. Yet, the proposed program i s
ambitious given Paraguay’s current context, and the outcomes could be highly rewarding
and help set the country on a new development path.

114. Indicative outcomes and intermediate results indicators are presented in the CAS
Program Matrix on the following pages. Some o f the highlights o f these indicators are
listed below:
Stabilization o f public finances and the increased likelihood o f fiscal
sustainability over the medium term, as indicated by an increase in tax revenues
by 1.5 percent o f GDP by the end o f 2005;
0

A sounder financial sector that would lower the cost o f potential bank failures and
provide a sounder basis for the mobilization o f domestic savings, as indicated by
the existence o f a functioning privately-financed deposit insurance scheme by
2005 and the increase o f commercial bank capital to Basel standards by 2007;
Improved transparency and governance in public administration, especially in the
Ministry o f Finance which could act as a model for other ministries to follow, as
evidenced by the incorporation o f public enterprises and decentralized agencies
into the central financial management system by the end o f 2004 and the majority
o f public procurement taking place via internet by the end o f 2005;

0

0

Improved productivity in the rural sector, especially among small farmers where
poverty i s concentrated and deepest, as evidence by the scaling up to the national
level o f an improved extension model based on community participation and
improved soil management techniques by 2007; and
Gradual improvement in social indicators, as evidenced by an increase in the
secondary school enrolment rate from 33 percent to 42 percent by 2007, including
a narrowing o f the urban-rural divide, and decreases in the infant and maternalmortality rates by 10 percent by 2007.

115. It i s proposed that the program be reviewed in a mid-termprogress report to the
Board in about two years.

34

.

e

.

.

.

E

CAI.

e

e

e

.

21 e

e

. .
35

. . .

e

e

.

.

e .

.

e

.

.

e

31.

.

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

36

e

b

a

a

a

a

37

a

a

a

CAS Program Matrix
Page 4 of 10

Attachment to C A S Program M a t r i x
Description o f Proposed Investment Projects and Diagnostic Studies
C A S Objective 1. Fiscal and Financial Stabilization

The content and purpose o f the Economic Recovery Loan and the Financial
1.
Sector Adjustment Loan are fully described in paras. 66-68 o f the main text.
C A S Objective 2.

-- Governance and Transparency in Government

2.

The Government has set the recovery o f confidence in state institutions as one o f
i t s primary development objectives. It intends to achieve this objective via a fight against
corruption and the modernization o f public administration. For this purpose, the
Government has requested the Bank to prepare a "Ministry of Excellence "project (FY04)
to convert the Ministry o f Finance into a center o f excellence and role model for
improving financial management, eliminating corruption, increasing transparency and
encouraging civil society involvement in the planning and monitoring o f results.

The project would support the design and implementation o f the Ministry o f
3.
Finance's reorganization, business reengineering, access o f information and delivery o f
services. It will also provide assistance to strengthen the budget, human resources,
procurement, internal control, anti-corruption and planning sub-systems and to expand
them within the rest o f the central Government and regions (7 Gobernaciones) to ensure
that these public institutions are capable o f responding to the Ministry's improve rules
and practices. The operation would build on the recommendations from the Country
Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) and the Country Procurement Report
(CPAR). In both cases time bound actions plans have been agreed with the Government.
4.
A second project in the area o f governance and public administration would be
the Municipal Finance Administration project (FY06), which would aim to strengthen
administrative and financial systems at the municipal level. Doing so i s a prerequisite for

greater decentralization o f government services, which i s one o f the strongest desires o f
civil society. In addition to training and systems improvements, the project would focus
on local resource mobilization at the municipal level via the real estate tax (impuesto
inmobiliario) which i s the main tax instrument available to municipalities, but which i s
highly ineffective due to poor assessment and collection practices. The project would
incorporate recommendations from the Land Tax Study (FY05), in particular, the
effective application o f the impuesto inmobiliario to rural and agricultural lands which
are subject to municipal tax authority, but which currently pay extremely l o w effective
rates. Creating an effective land tax instrument would contribute to both greater local
government autonomy as well as to reducing the skewedness o f land distribution in
Paraguay.

38

CAS Program Matrix
Page 4 of 10

5.
A third governance project i s Judicial Reform (FY07-high case), assuming there
i s interest on the part o f the Judiciary to pursue such a project following the outcome o f
the on-going IDF grant for judicial training. This project concept i s s t i l l tentative,
however, and may be substituted by another institutional development project following
the conclusions o f the just-started Institutional and Governance Review (FY04/05).
CAS Objective 3. Sustainable Growth

6.
Paraguay i s one o f the most rural and poorest o f South American countries, with
44% o f i t s population and 56% o f i t s poor in rural areas. The Bank strategy to address
this broad issue includes projects in the rural sector and infrastructure (especially in rural
water supply, sanitation, and roads), as well as l i n k s with human development (education,
health, and social protection) lending.

7.

Supporting small farmers. The Sustainable Rural Investment Project (FY0.5)
will focus on scaling up the already promising results o f the Natural Resources
Management Project through small farmer assistance in most o f the eastern part o f the
country. The project will promote decentralized watershed management planning, crop
diversification, risk mitigation, and community participation, largely through CDD-type
financing and cost-sharing combined with the reform o f agricultural extension services.

8.
Promoting sustainable forestry and growth. Paraguay has long been a
traditional wood exporter, but uncontrolled deforestation for agriculture and livestock has
resulted in severe environmental degradation and in Paraguay becoming a net wood
importer and losing i t s growth potential in this sector. The Forestry Development Project
(FY06) would aim to reinvigorate forestry investment, growth and exports in a
sustainable manner by (i)
introducing a reformed regulatory framework for sustainable
forest management (including transport regulations, pricing and royalties, plantations and
reforestation plans), (ii)
improving existing forest management practices, (iii)
strengthening institutions and transparency in the sector, and (iv) conserving and
protecting selected natural forest ecosystems through the incorporation o f GEF (Global
Environment Facility) resources.
9.
Improving property rights. The issue o f land ownership i s a focal point, albeit a
difficult one, for achieving rural development in Paraguay. Land ownership i s among the
most skewed in South America, with 10% o f the population owning two thirds o f the land
and one third o f the population owning no land at all. From a social perspective, this
issue lies at the core o f the country's income inequality; from an agricultural perspective,
it lowers overall agricultural productivity, and from an environmental perspective, it
drives the poor onto marginal lands, fueling deforestation and land degradation. To
address this issue, studies on land ownership and use (as part o f the proposed Rural
Sector Strategy) and land taxes (to better address both fiscal and land use objectives) will
be conducted. In addition, ongoing monitoring o f the process o f titling demarcated but

39

CAS Program Matrix
Page 5 of 10

untitled indigenous lands will be performed. These studies will shape the Land
develop a national strategy and
Administration Project (FY07, high case), which will: (i)
promote regulatory and institutional reforms
initiate the land regularization process; (ii)

'

70,000 hectares in the Eastern part o f the country i s demarcated but not titled as indigenous lands. Part o f
this land has already been purchased but lacks proper titling. The completion o f this titling process i s an
important social and rural development issue.

40

CAS Program Matrix
Page 6 of I O

to expedite the titling process; (iii)
strengthen the administration and management o f
catastral information, and (iv) improve access to land through appropriate land taxation
and other financing to provide a menu o f options for poor and indigenous communities.

10.

Regarding infrastructure and business development, the CAS strategies are:
0

0

0

0

Significant improvements in public infrastructure spending. Considering the
infrastructure bottlenecks and the deficit in investment and maintenance for basic
infrastructure in Paraguay, the interventions proposed in infrastructure will focus
on expanding coverage o f basic services and reducing logistic costs, with a focus
on improved quality and composition o f expenditures. The proposed projects will
improve the condition and sustainability o f the road network, expand coverage o f
water supply and sanitation, and assist municipalities in developing priority
municipal level infrastructure.
Innovative Private Public Partnerships. Given the large financing
requirements o f infrastructure, there needs to be an effort to mobilize privatepublic partnerships to improve the coverage, quality and affordability o f
infrastructure services. Innovative contracts are being developed in rural water
supply which would continue to be supported under the water supply and
sanitation projects. The minimum subsidy concession (MSC) program can be
expanded to extend water and sewerage systems in areas where the public water
entities do not operate. Under MSCs, the Government pays an agreed
competitively-bid subsidy to the private operator who offers to build and operate
the system for the lowest price. This approach has already been successfully
piloted in Paraguay with results that reduced investment costs by half. The
Government has also expressed interest in implementing performance-based road
maintenance contracts which could replace force account (administracion directa)
or traditional unit price contracts to maintain the core national road network and
some rural roads which can be supported under the road project. Substantial
savings on a per kilometer basis have been achieved in neighboring countries with
this system. Private sector concessions could be awarded for the maintenance o f
selected high traffic volume corridors (“Plan Triangulo”), and eventually for some
new road construction and other infrastructure investments.
Support f o r Public Utility Companies. The Constitution supports the improved
efficiency o f public utility companies and also o f a market-opening strategy in
areas where public enterprises continue to operate in a monopoly position. In the
current fiscal tight environment, the Government i s interested in obtaining
technical assistance support with the reform o f basic telephone service, the
importation and distribution o f diesel fuel, and eventually electricity distribution.
Business Environment Improvement. A key objective o f all interventions
during the CAS period will be to improve the business environment, simplify
procedures, improve the quality o f Paraguayan products and adoption o f best
practice technical norms, increase access to financing and facilitate and promote

41

CAS Program Matrix
Page 7 of I O

exports as a lead engine for growth, and reformulate the assistance programs for
SMEs.
11.
To support these infrastructure and private sector development strategies, the
CAS includes the following projects and studies.
12.
Road Maintenance Project (FY06). This project will focus on improvements in
planning and programming, improving the reliability o f allocations for road maintenance,
prioritizing rehabilitation and new development within fiscal constraints, effective
monitoring o f expenditures, decentralizing the implementation o f road maintenance
operations, and strengthening the capacity o f the Departments and Municipalities to
oversee road maintenance operations. The key will be to establish a reliable and
sufficient financing mechanism for road maintenance.
Water Sector Modernization (FY07). This project would embark on a substantial
effort to expand coverage o f water supply and sanitation in rural areas building on the
previous rural water supply and sanitation as well as reform o f urban water loans, support
the implementation o f a uniform financial policy regarding local contributions i s required
for all water supply and sanitation interventions, and promoting sustainable management
arrangements for the water utilities at the national and municipal levels.

13.

Municipal Services and Infrastructure @igh case - FY06). This project will assist
14.
the Government to support development o f priority municipal level basic infrastructure,
strengthening the human resource capabilities at the municipal level and integrating
proposed infrastructure interventions with sectoral strategies in roads, water supply and
sanitation, and solid waste. The proposed Project will develop and implement poverty
monitoring mechanisms in the participating municipalities which would allow to followand the impact o f the proposed interventions. For Project preparation complementary
resources will be sought from the Cities Alliance fund.

15.
Technical Assistance for Private Sector Development (FY07). This project would
support an initiative to improve the competitiveness o f Paraguay by reactivating the
business environment. The TA would support three initiatives led by the Ministry o f
Industry including: (i)
improved regulation and control o f product falsification, (ii)
streamline SME and micro-enterprise support programs, including reciprocal guarantees,
development o f export networks, launching a national quality program, and a certification
program, and (iii)
improving the business environment, assessing investment bottlenecks,
and strengthening the regulation o f business services. This project could also include a
component to improve the efficiency o f services, lower costs to the public, and reduce the
opportunities for corruption and mismanagement o f funds. In a high case, we could
support a proposed Business Development Adjustment Loan (FY06), to assist the
Governments efforts in this area.
Investment Climate (FY05) - An investment climate assessment will be
16.
implementedfollowing the standard methodology and instruments that the Bank i s

42

CAS Program Matrix
Page 8 of 10

employing throughout the world. This assessment will be useful as a benchmark to
evaluate confidence and major bottlenecks.
Infastructure Assessment (high case - 06) - An infrastructure assessment would
17.
be carried out to build on the PER for infrastructure considering that the sector
knowledge base i s s t i l l to be developed.

CAS Objective 4. Social Sectors and Inclusion

18.
The proposed work program in education, health, social protection and
community development constitutes the fourth pillar o f this CAS, social inclusion. The
proposed activities would be closely aligned with the implementation o f the Paraguay
Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) which i s currently in the final stages o f validation.
Obviously, poverty reduction and social inclusion cannot not be carried by social policies
alone and a successful implementation o f the Paraguay’s PRS hinges crucially on
revitalizing growth, especially in the rural areas. But improving protection o f the poorest
as well as assisting them in education and improving their health will be necessary for
today’s poor to be able to benefit and participate in a revitalized economy.
19.

For social services to reach the poor in Paraguay, a number o f reforms are
necessary which go beyond sector investments and sector policies and which are central
to this CAS. Such necessary cross-sectoral reforms would include (i)
improving the
overall expenditure distribution to favor provision o f basic services and assistance
programs in the poorest areas; (ii)
improving budget planning and execution; (iii)
rationalizing human resource planning and introducing incentives for staff to delivery
quality services; (iv) ensuring that user costs for services contribute to the effective
delivery o f services at the level at which they are collected while introducing exemption
policies for the poor; and (v) introducing specific outreach activities to reach the
indigenous population in Paraguay.

20.

Over the CAS period, the Bank would be working with Government in four areas:

(i)

Improving the quality o f education and increasing enrolment rates in
secondary school i s at the heart o f the Government’s reform agenda in the
education sector. Overall enrolment rates in primary education are high but in
secondary education very l o w (3 1 percent), with striking differences between
urban (83 percent) and rural (17 percent) areas. The reform, which the Bank
i s already accompanying through an approved First Education Reform Project
(FY04), includes the (i)
development o f a comprehensive and culturally
appropriate program to improve access to education by the rural and
indigenous population, especially at the secondary level; (ii)
improvement o f
sector efficiency and management capacity, including planning and
management o f human resource, information, evaluation, and supervision
systems at the central, state and local levels; (iii)
improvement o f teacher and
leadership capacity through improvements in teacher training nationwide and
preparation o f a core group o f education leaders; and (iv) provision o f

43

CAS Program Matrix
Page 9 of 10

opportunities for extremely poor children (scholarships) and alternatives for
rural and working children (alternative, flexible secondary school programs).
The proposed work program during this CAS period would support the
ongoing reforms through an Evaluation of Secondary Education ESW as well
as through the second phase o f the adjustable program lending Second
Education Reform Project (FY07).

(ii) Increasing efficiency and equity in the health sector i s central to our health
dialogue which would be guided by the results o f a Health Sector Review
(FY05). While health outcomes in Paraguay are poor, especially in rural
areas, basic public health services are concentrated in urban areas and tend to
provide higher complexity services for the 20 percent o f the population
covered by some sort o f health insurance. Health service productivity i s l o w
and unequal across regions. Reorienting services towards basic and
preventive health will require additional resources and/or a major increase in
the efficiency o f delivery which would include reforming health provision o f
the public insurance scheme. A proposed Second Health Project (FY05)
would assist Government in implementing a maternal-child health insurance
scheme for today’s poor and uninsured, especially in rural areas, by
strengthening health provision o f local health councils. Such a shift towards
primary care would necessitate key changes in health sector financing,
including a reform o f the current user cost system and human resource
management, comprising the introduction o f incentives for quality delivery o f
services.

(iii) Introducingfundamental reforms to the pension system and creating a
basic safety net for the poorest would be guiding our work program with
respect to social protection. A Social Protection Study (FY04) will include a

detailed analysis o f Paraguay’s social security and assistance system. Social
assistance spending i s very l o w compared with countries at similar levels o f
income per capita, being spread over a large number o f small programs and
hence reaching only a small fraction o f the poor. In parallel, social security
expenditures are very high (3.5 percent) but they are absorbed almost entirely
for spending on pensions which benefit few and do not reach the poor. A
Social Protection Technical Assistance Project (FY05) would assist
Government to rationalize (and expand) the many existing social assistance
programs and prepare a comprehensive reform o f the pension system. In the
high case lending scenario, such technical assistance would support a Social
Protection Adjustment Loan which would support a fundamental overhaul o f
the pension and social assistance system, including the creation o f a safety net
for the poorest, including those elderly poor without pension coverage today.

(iv)

Finally, promoting the social and economic empowerment o f vulnerable
and marginal communities i s an important element for improving social
inclusion and strengthening social services and social protection in Paraguay.
The country’s poverty gap (2.9%, the highest in South America) indicates the

44

CAS Program Matrix
Page 10 of 10

need to promote poverty targeted interventions for the most poor and
disadvantaged sectors o f the population. To address this, the Community
Development II Project (FY07, high case) will improve the capacity o f and

financial resources available to community organizations and local
Governments in both rural and urban areas. The project would be a scaling-up
o f the recently launched Pilot Community Development Project, assuming
implementation o f the pilot project goes well.

45

CAS :Annex 1
Page 1 of 9

Annex 1. Progress Towards Reaching the MDGs in Paraguay
Background

1.
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) were agreed to by the leaders o f all
United Nations member countries in September 2000 in the Millennium Declaration, as
modifications o f the International Development Goals (IDGs) originally established by
the OECD Development Assistance Committee in 1996. Seven o f the goals focus on
specific aspects o f the multiple dimensions o f poverty and the eighth focuses on
strengthening the support o f the international community to achieve these goals. Many o f
the goals specify quantitative targets and indicators to measure progress toward reaching
the goals.
2.
This note summarizes the progress and challenges faced by Paraguay to achieve
the MDGs. The United Nations has committed to reporting the progress o f reaching the
MDGs in collaboration with other institutions, including the World Bank, the IMF,
OECD and other regional agencies.' This report relies on Government statistics and
recent assessments made by UNDP, the World Bank and ECLAC.2

3.
In the last decade, the stability and sustainability o f economic progress in
Paraguay has been threatened by weak governance and institutions, increasing poverty,
and a deterioration o f the environment. In 2002, a National Poverty and Inequality
Reduction Strategy was developed with the objective to reduce poverty, especially in
rural areas, on the basis o f sustained economic growth, improvements in human capital,
attention to vulnerable groups, environmental sustainability and strengthening o f the
social fabric with greater gender equality and civic participation. The strategy pledges for
greater inter-institutional and inter-sectoral coordination o f public agencies and calls for
support from the international community. I t i s explicitly linked to the MDGs, using the
same timeline and targets. Hence monitoring o f progress towards the MDGs i s key to
inform the public policies outlined in the strategy.
4.
While Paraguay has made important progress towards reaching some o f the
MDGs, there are several areas in which the country i s off-track or even falling behind.
The following describes the situation o f the country in each o f the goals, highlighting key

challenges to accelerate progress.

Implementation o f the United Nations Millennium Declaration: Report o f the Secretarv General, United
Nations General Assembly, 2002. See Annex 1.
The World Bank projections are made using the SimSIP program, which include assumptions about the
rate o f population growth, urbanization growth, estimates o f the elasticity o f poverty and other social
indicators, as well as GDP growth between 1998 and 2015. The population and urbanization growth
assumptions are based o n UN projections and the elasticities are calculated fi-om world and LAC panel
regressions. See Hicks and Wodon (2002).

46

CAS Annex I
Page 2 of 9

Goal 1: Eradicate Extreme Poverty and Hunger
Target: Cut in half from1 990 to 2015 thefraction of the population in extreme poverty
One o f the indicators to measure this goal i s the fraction o f the population living
5.
on incomes below $l/day PPP. Data for this indicator are not available for Paraguay.
However, since an income o f $ l/day i s not sufficient to buy the basic national food
basket, the national indigence line' i s a more appropriate indicator to monitor this goal.
Consistent poverty figures with national coverage have become available only in recent
years precluding the use o f a base line from the early 1990s. Poverty rates have increased
since 1995. In 1995, 13.9 percent o f the population had incomes below the national
indigence line and by 2001 this fraction had increased to15.6 percent, while total poverty
increased from 30 percent to 34 percent during this period. Preliminary results from the
2002 household survey suggest that there might have been an increase in poverty.
Chronic malnutrition in children under age 5, the indicator used to monitor hunger, has
also increased. By 2001 4.6 percent o f children under age 5 had l o w weight for their age
up from 3.7 percent in 1990.

Thus, the country has been moving off-track to meet this key goal. The SimSIP
6.
simulations find that on the basis o f a projected 2.6 percent annual GDP growth through
2015 and no major new efforts Paraguay i s unlikely to reduce poverty and extreme
poverty by 50 percent by 2015. A recent UNDP assessment also deems unlikely for the
country to meet the goal. However, expectations are s t i l l favorable to the country
reaching the hunger reduction target. Both UNDP and WB SimSIP assessments find that
the country i s s t i l l likely to halve the under 5 malnutrition rate despite the increase seen
recently.
H o w much longer Paraguay takes to achieve this goal will depend on whether
7.
sustained growth and considerable improvements in social policy are realized. This will
require maintaining macroeconomic and political stability, strengthening governance and
institutions, an increase in investment, growth in agriculture and exports through rural
development that improves productivity o f the poor, support to local development
projects and increased civic participation from vulnerable groups. Strengthening the
institutions and programs which provide services to the poor through decentralization and
greater transparency and accountability and improved coordination between the many
government agencies and actors in these programs will be necessary to ensure that
resources are used effectively.

' Income below that needed to buy the basic basket o f food sufficient to meet nutritional and caloric needs.
47

CAS Annex I
Page 3 of 9

Coal 1: Reduce Poverty and Hunger
-

20

5*
0

,

Population Below National Extreme
Poverty Line (%)

1995

Cronic Malnutrion (wtlage) in Children
under 5 (%)

I

2000

2005

2010

2015

0.00

I

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Goal 2: UniversalPrimary Education Completion
Target: Ensure that all children complete the cycle of basic education by 2015

8.
Reforms to the public education system in Paraguay began in 1994. These
reforms included a change in the starting age for primary education from 7 to 6 and an
extension in the length o f primary education from 6 to 9 years. However, enrollment in
the first and second cycles (grades 1-6) f e l l from 93 percent in 1990 to 90 percent in
2001. The enrollment in the third cycle (grades 7-9), however, did increase significantly
from 27 percent in 1990 to 53 percent in 2001. The UNDP and WB assessments find that
achieving a 100 percent enrollment in primary education by 20 15 i s s t i l l likely.
Completion through grade 5 seems also on track to reaching the goal, having increased
from 70 percent in 1990 to 78 percent in 2000.

9.

Among the key challenges to achieve this goal are reducing high repetition rates,
socio and geographic differences in education quality and expanding equal access to
education by improving educational infrastructure. Policy priorities include evaluation o f
current programs in order to replicate successful strategies and promoting programs that
reduce repetition and drop-out rates. Strengthening training programs for teachers,
extending the number o f hours in classes and developing community participation are
also key elements o f the required educational policy package.
I

~

% Enrolment in Primary and Secondary
School

Primary Education Completion Rate (%)

II

48

I2O

1

100

1

CAS Annex 1
Page 4 of 9

Goal 3: Gender Equality and Empowerment o f Women
Target: Ensure gender equality in access to all levels of education by 2015
10.
The targets for this goal points to equality for girls and boys in access to primary
and secondary education, and greater economic and civic participation o f women.
Equality in education has basically been achieved in Paraguay, with near equal
enrollment in primary and secondary education o f girls and boys, as well as near equal
literacy rates. Although data i s fragmentary less equality exists in the economic sphere
and even less in political participation. Just over 40 percent o f working age women
participate in the non-agricultural labor sector compared to 75 percent o f men. Also,
female political participation has almost doubled since 1989. Women's seats in Congress
have risen to 13 seats in 2003, but s t i l l only 8 percent o f the seats are filled by women.
Actions to facilitate the equal participation o f women in the labor market and in
11.
political institutions are needed. Further development o f the office o f the Secretary o f
Women through greater coordination with other departments and programs can favor
improvements in the status o f women. Labor market interventions that improve job
opportunities for women are also important, as well as child care programs that can allow
more women to work. Additionally, promoting better access o f women to the benefits o f
public programs will favor their empowerment. More research i s also needed on the
economic status o f women, as many statistics do not look at women separately.

Goal 3: Gender Equality and Empowerment of Women
R Women of Total Labor Force and

Ratio of Girls to Boys in Primary and
Secondary School Enrolment

Parliament

50

,

".11

0.95
0.94
0.93
0.92 I , ,
1990

10

0.958

0
1998

,

I

1995

I

2000

,,,

I I I I I

2005

,,, ,

2010

I

1

2015

2001

eJ Non-agricukural labor

Seats Held in Parliament

Goal 4: Reduce Mortality o f Children under 5
Target: Cut in two thirdsfrom1990 to 2015 the under 5 mortality rates
12.
The Millennium Development Goal calls for a 2/3 reduction o f the mortality rates
o f children under 5 years old. The indicators for this goal include infant mortality (deaths
per 1,000 births) and under 5 child mortality (deaths per 1,000 births). While the recent
UNDP assessment deems likely that the country can meet this goal, the World Bank

49

CAS Annex I
Page 5 of9

SimSIP analysis indicates that Paraguay i s far behind and unlikely to achieve this goal by
2015.

13.

Administrative records o f the Ministry o f Public Health and Social Well-Being
indicate that the registered infant mortality rate has fallen from 30.4 per 1,000 births in
1990 to 19.7 in 2001. Also, the registered under 5 mortality rate has dropped from 40 to
25 in the same period. However, while there have been improvements in official
registers, these figures may be affected by significant underreporting. The General
Statistics Office o f Surveys and Census (DGEEC) estimates that the infant mortality i s
much higher than registered. The registered rates are about half o f DGEEC adjusted rates.
In any case, both sources indicate that the country i s off-track to meet the 2/3 reduction
by 2015.
14.
New data and analysis i s needed to clearly ascertain the trends and main causes o f
infant mortality so as to better inform the public policies needed to accelerate progress
towards this MDG. One central challenge to further reducing child mortality i s
strengthening the emphasis on preventive rather that curative care with scaled up costeffective interventions including improved education and health o f mothers. Paraguay has
a multitude o f programs ran by both the Government and NGOs aimed at reducing infant
mortality. Decentralization could improve delivery o f services, and increased
participation o f the NGOs i s desired. A recent careful impact evaluation o f a particularly
innovative one, the Cuban doctors intervention, suggest that integrated primary health
care interventions with active local participation can indeed constitute a cost-effective
strategy (Molinas and Galiani, 2003). Improving the monitoring system and registered
data i s a top priority, as well as increasing the demand for services through community
development programs. The AIEPI', a program o f integrated attention o f prevalent infant
illnesses, could be instrumental to further strengthen coordination o f the many existing
programs in the country.

Goal 4: Reduce Child Mortality
Registered and Estimated Infant Mortality
Deaths per 1,000 births

Mortality of Children under age 5,
deaths per 1,000 births

30
25
20
15

5
1
0

1990

estimated

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

AIEPI was established in 1997 in the Department o f Children's Health, within the Ministry o f Health and
with support from many NGOs.

50

CAS Annex I
Page 6 of 9

Goal 5: Reduce Maternal Mortality
Target: Cut in threefourths from1990 to 2015 the maternal mortality rate

15.
Data limitations again preclude to clearly ascertain whether maternal mortality
rates have declined or increased since 1990. According to administrative health records,
the country seems to be off-track to meet this goal. During 1990-1997 the registered rate
f e l l from 150 to 102 (a 67 percent decline) and increased to 160 in 2001, Also, the
proportion o f births attended by a medical professional f e l l from 66 percent in 1990 to 61
percent in 1998. However, as with infant mortality, many maternal deaths remain
unregistered. The DGEEC estimates that maternal mortality f e l l from 34 1 per 100,000
live births in 1990 to 187 in 1997 (a 54.8 percent decline). There are not recent estimates
o f the adjusted rates. In any case, these figures indicate that the target for maternal
mortality i s unlikely to be reach. The country's challenges l i e in not only reducing the
overall mortality rate, but reducing the gap in mortality rates that exist between areas.
For example, in Asuncion in 200 1, the maternal mortality rate was 2 1 per 100,000 live
births, while in the mostly rural Caazapa the rate was 214 per 100,000 live births.

The main causes o f maternal deaths are preventable, such as hemorrhages during
16.
birth and pregnancy, which could be greatly reduced by improving o n the l o w rate o f
births attended by health professionals, especially in rural areas. As with child mortality,
programs that expand services provision as well as increase the demand for pre-birth
preventive services are vital to reducing maternal mortality in the country. Many
programs have been established to target maternal mortality, as part o f the National
Reproductive Health Plan o f 1997-200 1, however limited funds and coordination

problems continue to limit effectiveness.

Coal 5: Improve Maternal Health
Births Attended by Trained Personnel I%)

Registered and Estimated Maternal
Mortality
Deaths per 100,000 live births

1990

-registered
-estimated

1995

2000

-

1

2005

2010

-*-

-registeredtrend

'"

'estimated trend

120

7

2015

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases

The incidence o f H I V / A I D S remains l o w in the country however, again, it i s
17.
suspected that a high level o f cases are unregistered. The majority o f cases are sexually
transmitted and the reported use o f condoms by women i s very l o w (just above 6 percent
o f all women reported using condoms in 1998), indicating that H I V / A I D S could become
51

CAS Annex
Page 7 of9

a larger problem in the future. A recent National Program to combat AIDS has defined a
200 1-2004 strategy to reduce the incidence o f the disease and to improve the quality o f
l i f e for those already infected.
Malaria has been decreasing since 1980, although an epidemic between 1997 and
18.
1999 increased the number o f infected cases from 23 to 412 per 100,000, it has not
caused any deaths since 1989. A network o f vigilance has been established in
communities to combat the disease at the local level.
19.
The incidence o f tuberculosis has been slowly falling from 5 1 per 100,000 people
in 1990 to 35 in 2000, but it i s believed there this may mask an increase in the number o f
unregistered cases. Mortality rates from tuberculosis have risen slightly from 3 to 4 per
100,000 people between 1990 and 2000, but there has been increasing success with
DOTS treatments'. There are important differences in incidence and mortality rates
between geographical areas and socio-economic status. The National Program to Control
Tuberculosis has been working to increase treatment by DOTS through public and private
institutions.
20.
The main challenges to fighting these myriad o f potentially epidemic
diseases in Paraguay l i e in improving institutional capacity to provide prevention and
treatment services, as well as the quality and availability o f technology and trained health
staff. The expansion and improvement plans are constrained by limited funding.

Goal 6: Combat HlVlAlDS and other Diseases
Tuberculosis, Incidence and Mortality,
Per 100,000 Inhabitants

Use of Condoms by Women
% of all Women

1990
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

1995

I-incidence

-mortality

2000

I

Goal 7: Ensure Environmental Sustainability
Target: Reduce by half the proportion of population without access to safe drinking
water or sanitation.
DOTS i s a treatment plan that combines five elements: political commitment, microscopy services, drug
supplies, surveillance and monitoring systems, and use o f highly efficacious regimes with direct
observation o f treatment. Dosages are closely monitored by health personnel to ensure the full course o f
medications have been received by the patient.
(World Health Organization website,
http://www.who.int/gtb/dots/whatisdots.htm).

52

CAS Annex 1
Page 8 of 9

2 1.
This goal includes integrating sustainable development practices into policies, and
increasing access to safe drinking water and sanitation to improve the lives o f slum
dwellers. The proportion o f land covered by dense forest has declined reaching an
estimated 7 percent in 1997. Paraguay has made considerable improvements in the
proportion o f the population with access to safe drinking water. Between 1992 and 2001
the proportion has increased from 25.4 percent to 52.5 percent so the country i s well on
the way to reach one o f the targets for this goal. However, there remain challenges to
improve access in rural areas, which was only 21 percent in 2001 compared with 80
percent in urban areas. These figures are among the lowest in Latin America. A strategy
i s underway for reaching poor and rural communities, including innovative interventions
for peri-urban areas and larger rural communities. Sustained financial support i s needed
to achieve meaningful progress towards this MDG.

The targets calls for reducing by half the proportion o f population without access
22.
to safe drinking water or sanitation. The country appears off-track to reaching a 50
percent reduction in the proportion o f the population without access to sanitation.
Between 1992 and 200 1, the percentage o f the total population with access to the
adequate quality sanitation network increased only 2 percentage points, from 7.2 percent
to 9.2 percent, while the urban population with access f e l l from 18.3 percent to 16.9
percent during the same period.'
Among the main challenges to improve access to safe water and sanitation are
23.
limited financial resources for expansion o f service networks and difficulties in
coordinating the administration and maintenance o f current infrastructure. There i s also a
need to reverse the loss o f environmental resources which requires strengthening the
support to the newly created Ministry o f Environment.

Goal 7: Ensure Environmental Sustainability

70

_-

Population with access to
SanitationSewage
- - -

60

50
40
30
20
10
0

_-

1
1
1
1
1

r l

F

JL .J

------

r

A[

----

- -+E?-

- --

c

60.00
50.00
40.00
30,OO
20.00
10.00
8.80
0.00
1990 1995 2000 2005

-

L34

~

, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,

2010

' Measurements o f access to sanitation vary by country and region so are not filly comparable.
53

2015

CAS Annex 1
Page 9 of9

Summary

24.
While Paraguay has made some important progress towards the MDGs, there are
s t i l l many areas in which the country i s off-track or falling behind. Completion rates in
primary education have been increasing and are currently on track to reach universal
completion. Gender equality in education has been achieved, although the country i s far
behind from gender equality in the economic and political participation spheres. Data are
lacking on the H I V / A I D S situation, but tuberculosis has been decreasing and country
programs seem to be successful at continually reducing incidence per 100,000 people.
While under registration o f child and maternal mortality makes it difficult to completely
assess recent and prospective progress, the country seems unlikely to reach the child
mortality reduction target by the 20 15 without major additional efforts o n this front.
Poverty has been increasing recently putting the country off-track to reach the poverty
reduction target. Although the target o f halving the population with hunger by 20 15 i s
s t i l l possible, child malnutrition rates have risen recently. Finally, it appears that the
country i s on track or likely to reduce the proportion o f the population without access to
safe water, but i s far behind reaching the access to sanitation target.

25.

Strengthening o f decentralization, scaling up successful initiatives and better
coordination o f the various Government and private programs with incidence in the
MDGs i s vital to accelerate the country’s progress toward achieving these goals. The
country faces financial and technical constraints to expanding successful programs so the
commitment and support from the international community i s also necessary.

54

CAS Annex 2
Page 1 of 5

Annex 2. Evaluation o f Bank Assistance and Portfolio Implementation
Previous Bank Assistance and Overall Evaluation

1.

The Bank has not played a major role in Paraguay, where it i s only the fourth
largest official lender, after the IDB (by far the largest lender), Japan Bank for
International Cooperation and Taiwan. Since lending began in 1952, IBRD/IDA lending
has typically involved one or two operations per year. IDA lending ended in 1977.
Overall, the Bank’s operational experience has been mixed. During the period from 1952
to 1984, lending centered on regional agricultural developments, transport, education,
water supply and sanitation, and industrial credit. Although the projects’ physical
objectives were largely achieved, the pace o f implementation was slow and institution
building efforts were generally less successful. Two notable exceptions were in the water
supply and education sectors, where projects built successfully on Paraguay’s strong
tradition o f community participation.

2.
This was followed by a hiatus in Bank lending between 1984 and 1992. In 1984
the Bank suspended lending to Paraguay due to disagreements on macroeconomic issues.
In 1989, at the end o f the Stroessner regime, the Bank resumed preparation o f new
projects and launched an intensive program o f economic and sector work (ESW) to
update i t s knowledge base. Although the ESW was well focused, many o f the Bank’s
recommendations were not adopted by Government, for example the need to improve
financial regulation and supervision and improve management o f public enterprises,
including privatization. Most o f these recommendations were not translated into action.
Similarly the impact o f the 1998 Green Cover Policy Notes prepared for the new
Administration o f President Cubas was limited, as Cubas resigned six months after the
report was issued.
3.

Bank lending resumed in 1992 with the approval o f two operations. A new
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) followed in 1993, proposing a US$270 million
program for FY94-97, focusing mainly on private sector development, agricultural
development and poverty alleviatiodhuman resources development. A total o f nine loans
focusing on basic needs were approved between 1992 and 1997, the majority o f which
experienced implementation difficulties mainly due to weak public sector capacity, lack
o f familiarity with Bank procedures and the institutional complexity o f the projects.

4.
A transitional CAS was prepared in 1997, focusing mainly on short-term
objectives that were attainable within the country’s policy and institutional constraints.
The 1997 CAS recommended a cautious base-case scenario strategy, with a maximum o f
one or two loans per year, mainly for poverty-oriented projects with an emphasis on
piloting. The 1997 CAS, however, become rapidly inoperative as the Bank decided in
1998 to halt preparation o f new projects due to the Government’s non-compliance with
Yacycreta social obligations and poor portfolio performance. The Bank’s Resident
Mission in Asuncion, which was established in 1998, was downsized to a Liaison Office
in 2000. In FY02/03, the program was reactivated with the approval o f two operations
(Community Development Project and Education Reform Project).

55

CAS Annex 2
Page 2 of 5

5.

The Operations Evaluation Department (OED) prepared a Country Assistance
Evaluation (CAE) in 2001, which viewed the overall outcome o f Bank assistance to
Paraguay in the past decade unsatisfactory, due to i t s modest relevance and negligible
efficacy. In reality, the projects approved and implemented during this period, mainly
focusing on basic needs, were appropriate for the country’s realities and relevant to i t s
development agenda. Unfortunately, the implementation record was spotty, thereby
limiting the efficacy and impact o f the operations. The serious implementation problems
that Bank funded operations have faced since 1992 are largely attributable to underlying
governance problems, poor institutional capacity and insufficient social and political
ownership for the administrative and economic reforms the Bank supported. Both the
efficacy and efficiency o f the Bank’s assistance are rated as l o w in the OED report.

The report also points out that implementation has been slow across the board and
6.
that, because o f the long intervals in which there was no new lending to the country,
Paraguay has started to exhibit many o f the characteristics o f new borrowers, including,
inter alia, the lack o f qualified professionals who are familiar with Bank policies and
procedures. Further, in view o f the Bank’s past difficulties in achieving ownership and
institutional development objectives, lack o f progress in key structural reforms and the
limited impact o f ESW, the OED report rates the institutional development impact o f
Bank assistance as negligible and sustainability as unlikely. The report nevertheless
admits the positive experiences in education and rural water supply, where projects built
successfully o n Paraguay’s strong tradition o f community participation.
Lessons Learned

7.

While the Bank’s decision not to invest heavily in Paraguay limited i t s exposure,
it also reduced i t s influence. As a result, overall Bank effectiveness in Paraguay was
constrained not only by the adverse policy environment and systemic problems, but also
by the Bank’s limited role as a donor and by two long periods o f hiatus in lending.
8.
Further, experience from the past indicates that Bank lending had limited impact
in the absence o f a minimum program o f reforms by the authorities to get on the path o f
sustained growth and poverty reduction. In addition, program reversals are to be expected
when there i s l o w political commitment to reforms. This was the case with the failure o f
the privatization program in 2002, which was not a part o f the 1997 CAS strategy, but
evolved from the restructuring o f the Asuncion Water and Sanitation Project. The
restructured project intended to support the privatization o f the water and
telecommunication companies, following the enactment o f privatization legislation.
Ultimately, l o w political commitment to the privatization process was the main cause for
program reversal.

9.

Active follow-up by the country office i s often critical for project implementation
in countries facing the same implementation difficulties as Paraguay. Since i t s
establishment, the local office has been substantially involved in portfolio management in
order to improve portfolio performance. Responsible portfolio management, including
semi-annual portfolio reviews (CPPRs) and the restructuring o f two projects during the

56

CAS Annex 2
Page 3 of 5

1998-2001 period, coupled with active supervision, improved portfolio performance from
“one o f the ten worst” in 2000, to acceptable during the past three years (less than 25
percent o f active projects rated as problem projects), in line with the 1997 CAS
performance trigger.
10.
In retrospect, the decision to maintain a minimum presence in the country despite
the absence o f new lending proved to be the right one.2 Minimum field presence was in
fact essential for maintaining a dialogue with the previous Government and the new
administration, building contacts with civil society and the private sector, as well as for
providing a basis for reactivating the program under the present CAS.

The engagement by the World Bank Institute (WBI), which inter alia led to the
11.
establishment o f the Anti Corruption Commission, has generated important benefits,
including the recent passage o f a new procurement law and a constructive dialogue with
civil society.
12.
Finally, the lack o f a common donor position on key reforms and governance
issues has limited the impact and effectiveness o f past Bank assistance. Donor
coordination efforts need to be substantially increased in the future if external resources
are to be effectively utilized by Government (see Annex 4).
Current Portfolio and Implementation Issues

13.
Paraguay has a small ongoing portfolio, comprising six active projects for a total
value o f US$176 million, o f which US$85 million were undisbursed as o f 30 September
2003. O f the six active projects, four are rated as satisfactory, one i s rated unsatisfactory
on implementation progress (Asuncion Sewerage Project), and one has yet to become
effective (Education Reform Project). Although several implementation bottlenecks
remain to be addressed, as described in detail below, the general health o f the portfolio
has improved with respect to previous fiscal years. The general good standing o f the
current portfolio therefore provides comfort to move ahead with new lending under the
upcoming CAS period.
The portfolio review carried out on October 2, 2003 identified a number o f
14.
systemic issues affecting the portfolio, and singled out measures to address these
problems and improve overall portfolio performance. The main generic issues affecting
the portfolio include the following:

High Turnover of Staffat the Project Units. P I U Directors and other key P I U
staff have often been appointed on the basis o f political affiliation rather than
1

Four projects were closed over the last three fiscal years (Land Use Rationalization, Private Sector
Development/El Nino, Eight Highway and Secondary Education Improvement). O f these, the fvst two
projects received an overall unsatisfactory rating by OED, and the latter two received an overall
satisfactory rating.
After the Resident Mission was downsized to Liaison Office, the former Resident Representative stayed
on in Paraguay, working half-time between Paraguay and Argentina as a country economist.

57

CAS Annex 2
Page 4 of 5

qualifications, and they tend to be replaced whenever a new Minister i s appointed
(this was particularly problematic during the past Presidential period, e.g. seven
Ministers o f Agriculture were appointed in five years). The high turnover o f
project staff considerably slows down the pace o f implementation and inhibits
capacity building in project management and administration;

Lack of Timely and Adequate Availability of Counterpart Funds. This has been
the source o f considerable delays in project implementation in the past, due to
increasing fiscal constraints.
Cumbersome Proceduresfor the Flow of Funds to the Projects. The main issue
i s that the Special Accounts are hosted in the Banco Central de Paraguay (BCP)
and it takes the PIUs about 20 to 30 days to access the funds. This negatively
impact the projects’ ability to disburse and implement quickly.
Delays in Effectiveness and Project Start-up. The delays stem largely from the
current legislative practices, requiring all projects to be approved on an individual
basis by Congress before they can become effective. Both IDB and the Bank have
flagged this as a major hindrance to project execution.
Limited Disbursement Capacity and Limited Knowledge of Bank Procedures.
The general weakness in project administration i s particularly noticeable in the
disbursement area. Close supervision o f procurement has also been necessary.

15.

To address these constraints, the Bank has agreed with the new Administration on
a series o f measures that will improve the administrative climate for future Bank
operations in the country. To address the issue o f high staff turnover at the PIUs, the
Government proposes that the new Central Unit for Public Investments (Unidad Central
de Inversidn Pziblica), mainly charged with aid management and donor coordination
functions, issue norms on the selection, appointment and performance o f staff for
externally financed projects. This would ensure that project staff will be hired on the
basis o f competitive processes and i t s performance assessed on a yearly basis.
Concerning counterpart, the Government has committed to provide 100 percent o f
counterpart funding for externally financed projects starting in 2004. To address the issue
posed by the cumbersome procedures for the flow o f funds to the projects, Government i s
preparing a revised manual o f Treasury procedures and the Bank will be given the
opportunity to comment on the draft manual, completion o f which i s expected in the
medium-term.

16.
The Government also recognized the difficulties posed by the current legislative
requirements on the timeliness o f project effectiveness and start-up, and i s identifying
options to resolve the issue, including informing early and more extensively members o f
Congress o n the operations that are going to be presented for their approval. Finally, in
order to address the delays created by the lack o f knowledge o f Bank procedures, and
particularly by the repeated rejection o f improperly completed withdrawal applications,
the Bank will train the administrative officer in the Asuncion office in the Bank’s

58

CAS Annex 2
Page 5 of 5

disbursement procedures and this person will be available to assist project staff. As a
complementary measure, LOA will field a disbursement mission on a semi-yearly basis
to assist the project units.

The main generic issues affecting portfolio performance and the agreed actions
17.
are summarized in the table below.

Agreed Actions

Issues

Central Unit for Public Investments to issue norms
on technical nature o f appointments, hiring by merit
and qualifications, and to conduct annual evaluation
o f Derformance
Commitment to provide 100% o f counterpart funds
for externally funded projects, starting w i t h the
2004 budnet
Completion in the medium-term o f a revised manual
o f Treasury procedures, incorporating comments
from the Bank
Various options explored, including the provision o f
more extensive and early information to Congress
on upcoming operations to be presented for
approval
Training o f a disbursement assistant in the Bank’s
office in Asuncion to screen withdrawal
applications. Fielding o f a disbursement mission
twice a year to provide troubleshooting support to
moiect units.

Staff Turnover at the Project Units

Lack o f Availability o f Counterpart Funds
Cumbersome Procedures for F l o w o f Funds
Delays in Effectiveness and Project Start-up

Limited Disbursement Capacity

59

CAS Annex 3
Page I of 6

Annex 3. Summary of Consultations with Civil Society
1.
Building on an open relationship with leading civil society organizations (CSOs),
the Bank i s starting a wide program o f civil society organizations activities throughout
the country. To ensure that the analysis on which i t s assistance strategy would be based i s
as sound, and reflective as possible o f the experiences o f most o f the Paraguayans, the
Bank turned to i t s partners in civil society.
In September and October o f 2003, the Bank held three consultative meetings
2.
with representatives o f leading Paraguayan Civil Society Organizations (CSOs). The
purpose o f the consultations was to strengthen the Bank’s support to Paraguay by hearing
directly from grass-roots organizations i t s opinions about governance, economic growth
and social policies, among other issues. The CSOs are the vehicle to hear the poorest
and most vulnerable people in the country, that will be the focus o f the 2003 CAS. In
each o f the discussions, Bank management and staff sought to provide for an open and
candid discussion about the role o f the Bank, the quality o f i t s assistance. In addition the
Bank sought to receive practical suggestions that can help it to improve its effectiveness.

The f i r s t meeting was held in the capital, Asuncion, and the two others in the
interior, in the cities o f Villarica and Bella Vista Sur. A diverse variety o f organizations

3.

participated in the discussions, including faith groups, trade unions, farmer cooperatives,
small and medium enterprises federations, academic community, women organizations
and youth alliances, local and international NGOs, the press, and groups representing
indigenous people, the unemployed, students, teachers and other professionals. Local
and regional (departmental) government officials were also present.

Despite the number o f organizations and variety o f interests represented, a
4.
number o f common themes emerged. First, there was remarkable convergence around
the proposition that the Bank’s assistance could have greater impact o n poverty with
increased participation o f c i v i l society. Second, in terms o f where the Bank should focus
i t s support, CSOs in each o f the consultations identified governance as the main target,
with issues o f agriculture and land titles, access to a good quality o f health and education,
access to adequate infrastructure in rural and urban areas, access to mechanisms o f credit
for the poorest, especial environmental compensations and social monitor o f the public
expenditures as the key areas where an improved and more open public sector could most
effectively support the development process.

View of civil society on the development objectives and priorities for Paraguay
In addition to specific issues about improving and making more productive the
5.
partnership between the Bank and civil society in Paraguay, there was a great deal o f
valuable discussion about three key policy areas to be pursued in coordination by
Government, civil society and the international community: (i)
governance; (ii)
economic
growth, and (iii)
social inclusion.

60

CAS Annex 3
Page 2 of 6

6.
There was broad recognition that these policy goals can not be pursued in
isolation, and that latter two o f these priorities - economic growth and social inclusion are impossible without clear and determined efforts on the first, good governance. Here
also there was a great deal o f discussion about reducing corruption and even the basic
ethic and civic values o n which public policy rests.

7.

Corruption was identified as one o f the most challenging problems o f the country.
I t i s perceived as a major hindrance to achieve sustainable development, and as limiting
the full effectiveness o f projects financed by the World Bank. In particular, inadequate
transparency in bidding documents and deep political clientelism were recurrent themes.
Wider and more consistent publication o f bidding documents was one common suggested
response. Fixing the overlapping administrative jurisdictions and diffusion o f
responsibilities which many felt characterize institutional system was another. Here,
many suggested administrative decentralization and increased autonomy to local
Governments in the design o f their development strategies as a practical policy step. This
i s fully consistent with a broader feeling by participants that more decentralization to the
local level - and to community groups and NGOs would contribute to better and more
efficient policymaking, including World Bank supported projects. Finally, it was
emphasized that the efficient decentralization o f jurisdictions should be performed
together with the corresponding decentralization o f resources.

8.
The formation o f ethic and civic values that encourage the exercise o f a
committed and responsible citizenship and foster industriousness as the irreplaceable
source o f economic growth are perceived as indispensable requisites for the sustainable
development o f Paraguay. Education would play a substantive role in this, by including
the family in formal education and in the development o f a curricula that would help
prepare students to meet the particular needs o f their communities. This, it was thought,
would promote a greater sense o f belonging to the whole o f society, and o f shared
responsibilities on the development o f the country.
Regarding economic growth, substantial attention was placed o n supporting
9.
agriculture, including through direct assistance to small farmers and land titles. Specific
ideas included increasing access to credit and crop insurance, improving technical
capacity and information, and reforming the system o f land and property titles, especially
with the indigenous people.

10.
There was also much discussion about strengtheningagricultural infrastructure.
One example i s the need to improve communications between different regions o f the
country, as informal contact among small producers throughout the country i s difficult
due to the precarious infrastructure o f the existing rural roads. A second i s the lack o f
coordination o f agricultural production that would allow for producers to benefit from
comparative advantages. It i s estimated that the implementation o f policies for fostering
geographical integration among small producers would increase the volumes produced
based on crop complementary planning, reduce production costs, socialize technical
expertise, and design joint strategies to access markets.

61

CAS Annex 3
Page 3 of 6

11.

The consultations were particularly useful in providing space to address how
vulnerable segments o f the population, such as indigenous people, women, children and
youth more generally, are affected by the lack o f jobs and economic opportunities.

12.

Poor, or virtually nonexistent, access to basic social services such as health care
and education was a consistent theme. In health, the situation was essentially
characterized as “inequitable, exclusionary and discriminatory”. And while the
educational system i s perceived to be in better condition, it was felt that coverage and
quality i s s t i l l far from satisfactory. I t was also raised the lack o f bilingual education in a
Country where the poorest are mainly guarani speakers.

13.
Paraguay i s receiving a lot o f money from the international organizations (donors
and multilateral financial institutions) but the CSOs has not control over it, producing a
lack o f balance o f power among the civil society depending o f the their relationships with
governmental leaders.

14.

The CSOs during the consultations recognized their co-responsibility in the
country main problems, e.g., the passive attitude o f the CSOs facing corruption and lack
o f participation. The CSOs s e l f assessment concluded that they need to improve the
quality o f social inclusion by reverting the inadequate information about the programs,
the lack o f participation in decision making, the unsuitable focalisation o f social

programs and the cultural obstacles for accessing public services.

The Role o f the Bank

With respect to identifying an increased role for civil society in helping the Bank
in i t s support to Paraguay, participants focused on: i)design and implementation o f
projects, ii)supervision o f projects, and iii)capacity building among CSOs.
15.

First, the design o f investment projects would require a more in-depthevaluation
o f i t s potential social and environmental impact, and a more accurate knowledge o f
Paraguayan political culture and regional particularities. The Natural Resources
Management Project (PARN) and the Pilot Community Development Project
(PRODECO) projects were cited as examples o f designs which suffered from inadequate
understanding of, and sensitivity to, local concerns.

16.

17.

Second, many participants expressed concern about the capability o f the
supervision mechanisms employed by the Bank to prevent irregularities in the
management o f the disbursed funds. The lack o f periodicity, scarce knowledge o f local
usage, and insufficient depth o f supervision missions result in unrealistic evaluations.
Many participants offered that increased participation o f local CSOs, including through
the establishment o f formal monitoring committees, could improve the quality and
transparency o f the supervision process.
Many believed that the Bank could do more to welcome the contributions o f the
18.
skilled and committed Paraguayan civil society. Experience has amply demonstrated that

62

CAS Annex 3
Page 4 of 6

the participation o f civil society in the design, implementation and monitoring o f the
projects increases efficiency, while saving resources in administrative expenses. In this
context, participants requested: (i)
better access to information; (ii)
more training
direct management o f disbursed funds.
opportunities; and (iii)

19.
Third, CSOs representatives asked that the Bank provide more, and more timely,
information to enable their adequate participation in Bank projects from inception
through implementation, Toward this end, participants reminded staff that it i s necessary
to diversify the dissemination channels as computers and other technological equipment
are not o f commonly available in Paraguay.
Related to the above, participants also stressed that the need for training and other
20.
forms o f capacity building to ensure their most effective participation in WB projects.
Although this was a common request, it came more frequently from organizations from
within the interior o f the country and rural areas, where there i s a lack o f technical
knowledge which compromises the ability to compete o n public biddings, access
government programs and/or take part on initiatives undertaken by the World Bank.
Moreover, many CSOs’ representatives indicated that real participation requires
2 1.
adequate financing. In their perception, the lack o f financing sources i s the bigger
obstacle that civil society faces for achieving a true impact on public policies and in the
development process o f the country. In this context, and in light o f the growing attention
paid to increasing scrutiny in the use o f public funds, they have requested the Bank to
consider a project design that would allow direct disbursement o f resources to civil
society.

There was a welcome recognition by civil society represented in the consultations
22.
that the Government’s stated commitment to the fight against corruption and for widely
shared economic growth provides potential opportunities for a more active participation
o f civil society in the change process. Nevertheless, there was very clearly a wait-andsee attitude among many to determine whether these commitments will materialize into
real improvements in access to and influence on decision-makers.
W o r l d Bank’s comments on the views o f civil society

The quality o f the interventions and the commitment o f the participants in the
23.
consultations have made clear that civil society in Paraguay can make a major
contribution to the development process in their country.
24.
The Bank i s already working in cooperation with i t s CSOs partners to strengthen
coordination and information sharing between the Bank, the Government and civil
society, and i s considering approaches to support capacity building in the NGOs and
other groups which could participate in the preparation and implementation o f Banksupported projects. More formally, the Bank i s working toward the creation o f a
coordinated “Monitoring Committee” made up o f Bank staff, international, organisations

63

CAS Annex 3
Page 5 of 6

(UNDP, GTZ) CSOs and local Government to provide additional supervision and control
o f projects.

Indeed, as useful as the consultations were in generating new ideas and proposals
for cooperation, they were equally important in demonstrating the extent to which even
sophisticated representatives o f civil society are unaware o f how the Bank provides
support, particularly with respect. In this regard, in thinking together about new
approaches to intensify communication between the Bank and civil society, it was helpful
to identify areas where collaborative work i s already underway, and this could be built
25.

on.

26.

For example, local communities are already working with the Bank towards
execution o f a number o f Bank supported projects. A Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
Project i s administered by local “Sanitation Boards”; PARN, which works directly with
associations o f farmers in the planning o f micro river basins and with small lowresources groups o f rural producers; and PRODECO, which i s jointly administered civil
society organizations and the local Government.

27.

Even in project design, there are interesting examples about which many
participants were unaware. For instance, a dynamic consultation involving teachers
unions, parents and other crucial stakeholders contributed substantially to the
development o f the last Secondary Education Reform project.
Actions proposed by the Bank to strengthen its relationship with CSOs

28.

With the goal o f contributing to the consolidation o f a mature civil society, able to
actively participate in the activities o f the Bank and to provide suggestions for the
sustainable development o f the country, the Bank recognizes the need to: (i)
increase the

initiatives o f information transmission to civil society; (ii)
develop training programs for
CSOs; and (iii)
deepen the dialogue between CSOs and the Bank.

29.

To secure these objectives, the Bank intends to
8

8

H i r e a Civil Society and Social Development Specialist for the Paraguay office to
improve this incipient relationship between WB and the Paraguayan citizens.
Create a section in the Bank’s Paraguay web page for civil society, which would
provide information related to: projects under implementation, possibilities for
civil society involvement in Bank supported projects; findings o f the Social
Monitor, scheduling o f supervision missions; results o f the Small Grants Program,
and any other relevant information for CSOs.

a

Circulate written information on the Bank’s activities on a regular basis; and

e

Design a proposal to apply the Institutional Development Fund (IDF) for
strengthening o f CSOs in Paraguay.

64

CAS Annex 3
Page 6 of 6
0

Evaluate the current social monitor initiative (that monitors four current Bank
projects until the second semester 2003) and widen this initiative if it i s
considered by the Government, the Bank and the civil society an adequate tool for
improving social auditing mechanisms.
Integrate Paraguayan civil society in the participatory discussions in the region,
especially about PRSP, integration and equity, empowerment and social
accountability.

0

0

0

Develop a common strategy for including social development and participatory
issues in the Mercosur Agenda.
Dissemination among civil society nation-wide o f studies produced by the WB in
sensitive issues like, civil society profile, gender review, indigenous people, etc.
Disseminate the results o f the small grant program in the past two years, evaluate
the main results o f the program and help in learning process around these
experiences and use this knowledge provided by the grassroots organizations in
the loans’ design and execution.
Provide technical assistance to CSOs’ using the synergies o f the southern cone
initiatives.

65

CAS Annex 4
Page 1 of 3

Annex 4. Aid Coordination

1.
Paraguay i s one o f the few Bank clients that has no consultative group or formal
aid coordination mechanism. The Government has never requested any particular donor
to take the leadership in aid coordination, and no donor has taken up this challenge,
although the local donor representatives do meet on an ad hoc basis on topics such as
health and decentralization. The Government has mainly engaged with donors on a oneon-one basis. In addition, the aid coordination and management function within
Government has been split between the Ministry o f Finance and the Secretariat o f
Planning in the Presidency and lacked a close coordination between the two. As a result,
aid coordination has been very weak in the past.
In designing i t s projects, the Bank has coordinated with the IDB, by far the largest
donor, and several Bank operations have been complementary to IDB-fundedprojects.
For example, Bank projects have financed secondary education, while IDB projects have
financed primary education; in maternal and child health, the Bank has been active in six
departments and the IDB in others. In addition, there has been good collaboration
between the Bank and the IDB in the preparation o f two joint fiduciary assessments, the
Country Procurement Assessment Report and the Country Financial Accountability
Assessment. Coordination between the two institutions on macro-conditionalities has
been limited, however. Coordination between the Bank and the U N D P has been good,
with the UNDP administering the financial management aspects o f several Bank-funded
loans and grants. The relationship has been facilitated by the location o f the Paraguay
country office in the UN House.

2.

Although Paraguay lacked up to now an agreement with the IMF, collaboration
between the Bank and the Fund has been close and constructive, and has taken place in
the form o f frequent dialogue and consultations both at headquarters and in the field.
Such close collaboration has been particularly evident in the ongoing preparation o f the
Financial Sector Adjustment Loan as well as in the preparation o f the Economic
Recovery Structural Adjustment Loan.

3.

4.

The limited impact o f past donor assistance i s partially attributable to the lack o f
efforts on the part o f both Government and donors to better harmonize and coordinate

their programs and to reach common positions on structural and sectoral reforms. It i s
therefore imperative that donor coordination be improved in the future if the country i s to
utilize donor financing more effectively and to attract higher levels o f external support.
This will be particularly important if the Government wishes to mobilize additional
external support to fund new poverty reduction interventions as part o f the recently
prepared Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), once it i s formally adopted by the
Government.

5.
Optimally, the Government should take a leadership position in the coordination
and management o f foreign aid. The new administration has recognized the importance
o f increasing donor coordination efforts and has taken a number o f administrative
measures, including the creation within the Ministry o f Finance o f a unit dedicated to the

66

CAS Annex 4
Page 2 of 3

management o f external assistance (the Central Unit for Public Investment) and the
decision to incorporate the Planning Secretariat in the Ministry o f Finance (for which
legislation has been sent to Congress).

6.
The attached Partnership Matrix provides an indication o f the distribution o f
external assistance and interests by donor.

67

Enterprise Privatization

I I I I I I

+I-

68

CAS Annex A I
Page 1 of 2

Annex A1
Paraguay at a Glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2002
Population, mid-year (millions).
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

11/21/03

Paraguay

Latin
America
8 Carib.

LowermiddleIncome

5.8
1,170
6.4

527
3,280
1,727

2,411
1,390
3,352

2.6
3.2

I.5
2.2

1.o
1.2

78
6
111
113
110

76
71
27
9
86
11
130
131
128

49
69
30
11
81
13
111
111
110

Development diamond*
Life expectancy

T

Average annual growth, 1996-02
Population (%)
Labor force (%)
Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1996-02)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% o f children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (% ofpopulation)
Illiteracy I% ofpopulation ape 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% o f school-age population)
Male
Female

34
57
71
25

GNI
per
capita
i

Access to improved water source

-

Paraguay
Lower-middle-income group

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1982

1992

2001

2002

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investment/GDP
Exports of goods and ServiceslGDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP
Gross national savings/GDP

5.4
25.6
12.1
18.0
19.2

6.4
22.9
28.1
12.4
12.7

6.8
19.8
27.4
10.8
15.7

5.6
18.6
33.6
13.6
16.9

Current account balance/GDP
Interest payments/GDP
Total debWGDP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debWGDP
Present value of debVexports

-9.3
0.8
24.0
17.9

-0.9
3.6
25.3
24.2

-4.1
1.8
41.2
14.2

I.7
1.9
48.4
11.6

1982-92

1992-02

2001

2002

2002-06

3.3
0.2
12.7

1.5
-1.0
-6.0

2.7
0.1
-0.4

-2.2
-4.8
0.1

1.5
-1.1
3.7

1982

1992

2001

2002

25.9
26.0
16.4
48.1

24.5
25.9
16.5
49.6

29.0
18.7
14.1
52.3

29.4
18.2
14.0
52.4

74.9
7.1
19.8

81.1
6.5
38.6

79.6
9.6
36.4

76.8
9.6
38.6

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services

Economic ratios'
Trade
T

Domestic
savings

Investment

-

Indebtedness

Paraguay
Lower-middle-income orour,

STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agricu Iture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

1982-92

1992.02

2001

2002

3.7
3.4
0.7
3.1

2.1
2.8
0.8
0.5

2.2
-9.8
-6.0
-0.6

1.4
-7.4
-0.7
0.2

3.4
6.3
3.8
12.3

2.4
3.3
-2.5
-4.1

7.8
-1 1 .o
-16.0
-1.6

-4.1
-4.4
-7.3
-15.0

Growth of exports and Imports (Oh)
'0

T

1-40

1

* T h e diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

69

I

CAS Annex A I
Page 2 of 2

Annex A-1 (Continued)
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator

1982

1992

2001

2002

5.1

15.1
14.7

7.3
1.7

14.6
12.0

T

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Soy products
cotton
Manufactures
Total imports (ci0
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

15

10
5

Government finance
(% of GDP, includes cunent grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surDlusldeficlt
TRADE

1982

13.4
2.1
-0.6

17.2
1.6
-1.1

16.0
0.9
-3.2

1992

2001

2002

2,118
137
209
1,461
1,988
751
145
404

1,883
358
84
1,210
2,499
1,032
181
491

1,917
341
36
1,274
2,162
877
154
418

0
97

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance
Net income
Net current transfers
Current account balance

1982

1992

2001

2002

670
1,209
-539

2,362
2,453
-91

1,876
2,495
-619

1,878
2,159
-281

32
2

-28
62

175
166

95
280

-506

-57

-278

94

382
124

-303
360

327
-49

136.0

614
I.500.0

723
4,105.9

641
5,715.9

1982

1992

2001

2002

1,298
147
47

1,633
213
39

2,820
205
27

2,706
216
25

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

142
16
1

626
82
1

266
25
2

218
26
2

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

8
91
152
37
0

43
-84
-168
118
0

1
-29
82
0

-7
-30
-8
-30

99
44
6
37
10
27

52
10
43
-33
21
-54

0
27
15
12
11
0

9
14
17
-3
11
-14

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)
EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ millionsj
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

00

99

deflator

02

01

*CPI

96

97

98

00

99

.Imports

I

I

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
5,000

MExports

-12
-82

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

98

-GDP

Export price index (7995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995.700)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS

I

Inflation (Oh)

01
O2

I

Current account balance to GDP (X)
3 r
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Composition of 2001 debt (US$ mill.)

I

E: 406
A - IBRD
B - IDA
C IMF

.

.

D Other multilateral

E . Bilateral
F - Private
G -Short-term

11/21/03

70

CAS Annex B2

Annex B 2
Selected Indicators of B a n k Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 11/14/2003

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a , c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2001

2002

2003

2004

6
5.9
0.0
0.0
16.7
23.0
28.6

5
5.3
20.0
32.8
40.0
59.1
21.2

5
6.3
20.0
20.7
60.0
52.9
15.2

6
5.6
16.7
17.9
50.0
45.7
9.2

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
27
4
592.0
165.0
37.0
50.0
43.8
45.8

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

71

CAS Annex B3

Annex B3
IBRDDDA Program Summary
As of 11/14/2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

PY Economic Recovery Loan
PY Financial Sector Ad] Loan
PY Financial Sector T A
PY Ministry of Excellence T A

30.0
50.0

7.0
10.0

Total

97.0 (c)

PY- Health Project II
PY Social Protection Monitoring TA
PY Sust Rural Investment

25.0
10.0

Total

65.0

PY Forestry
PY Road Maintenance
PY Municipal Finance Administration

25.0

20.0

Total

95.0

Secondary Education 111
Rural Water
Private Sector Development T A

25.0

Total

68.0

30.0

50.0

30.0
13.0

Overall Total

H
H
M
H

H
H
L
M

M
M
H

M

H
H
H

M

M
M
M

M
M
M

325.0

(c) Excludes Education Reform Project ($24 million) approved in July 2003 as part of 1997 CAS allocation

72

L
M

M
H

CAS Annex B4

Annex B4
Summary o f Nonlending Services
As of 11/14/2003

Product

Completion FY

Cost (US$OOO)

Audience a

Objective

Recent completions
Poverty Assessment
Financial Sector Review
CPAR
Policy Options for the New Adm.

02
03
03
03

303.0

GIDIB

KGIPD

135.8
133.8

GIDIB
GIDIB

KGlPS
KGlPD

Underway
CFAA
Social Protection
Health Strategy
Inst. Development Assessment

04
04
05
05

88.2
259.5
115.0
165.0

GIDIB
GIDIB
GIDIB
GIDIB

KGIPS
KGIPS
KGIPS
KGIPS

Planned
PER
Investment Climate
Land Taxation
Evaluation of Sec. Education
Financial Sector Update
CEM
Poverty Update

05
05
05
06
06
06
07

165.0
115.0
115.0
85.0
165.0
85.0
85.0

GIDIB
GIDIB
GIDIB
GIDIB
GIDIBIPD
GIDIBIPD
GIDIBIPD

KGlPS
KGlPS
KGlPS
KGlPS
KGlPD
KGIPDIPS
KGIPD

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

73

CAS Annex 86

Annex B6

Paraguay - Key Economic Indicators

74

CAS Annex B6

4. I

75

3.7

30

32

CAS Annex B7

Annex B7
Paraguay - K e y Exposure Indicators

Indicator

Total debt outstanding and

A d
1999

1998

2000

Estimate
2002

2001

2003

Projected
2005

2004

'

2006

2125

2641

2519

2359

2481

2654

2507

2552

2470

28

476

29

-29

-3 7

-60

-85

-35

-30

206

185

259

224

215

203

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)
N e t disbursements (US$m)

Total debt service (TDS)

262

266

218

(US$m)'
Debt and debt service indicators

(%I

TDOKGS

59.9%

114.5%

108.5%

125.7%

132.1%

125.7%

128.0%

120.2%

110.7%

TDOIGDP

24.7%

34.1%

32.6%

34.4%

44.4%

49.8%

48.8%

46.4%

43.1%

TDSKGS

5.8%

8.0%

11.3%

14.2%

11.6%

12.3%

11.1%

10.1%

9.1%

32.3

27.8

27.9

28.1

21.6

17.4

16.7

17.1

17.2

Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DSipublic DS

16.2

17.5

11.3

9.3

11.9

Preferred creditor DS/public

51.7

62.9

43.2

47.6

58.6

DS (??)

IBRD DSKGS
IBRD TDO (US$m)

0.9
165

1.4

1.3

182

20 1

1.3
205

1.4
216

2.1
23 8

1.9
273

1.7
311

1.6
328

Of which present value o f
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (??)

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.3

I D A TDO (US$m)

31

30

28

27

25

24

22

20

IFC (US$m)
Loans

Equity and quasi-equity
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

76

19

V

d

77

