Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f

The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No.: 25873 HO
MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR

THE REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS

May 29,2003

Central America Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
~~

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EOUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Lempira (L)
1 U S Dollar = L17.23
FISCAL YEAR

January 1 to December 3 1

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AMLICFT
CAFTA
CAS
CPI
EFA-FTI
EMTAC
FHIS
FIAS
FSAC
FSAP
FTA
GDP
GNI
GNP

HDI

HIPC

IDA
IDB
IDF

IFC
IF1
IHSS
IMF
OECD
PRAF
PN
PRGF
PROHECO
PRONADERS
PRSC
PRSP
MIGA
MDG
MERECE
MSME
NAC

NGO
NPV
SME

ss

TFP

UN

UNFPA
UNICEF
USAID

WB

Anti Money Laundering/ Combating the Financing o f Terrorism
Central American Free Trade Agreement
Country Assistance Strategy
Consumer Price Index
Education for All - Fast Track Initiative
Economic and Financial Management Technical Assistance Credit
Honduras’ Social Investment Fund
Foreign Investment Advisory Service
Financial Sector Adjustment Credit
Financial Sector Assessment Program
Free Trade Agreement
Gross Domestic Product
Gross National Income
Gross National Product
Human Development Index
Highly Indebted Poor Country
International Association for Development
Inter-American Development Bank
International Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Financial Institutions
Honduran Institute o f Social Security
International Monetary Fund
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Family Assistance Program (Programa Asistencia de Familias)
National Party
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Community Education Program (Programa Hondureiio de E d u c a c i h Comunitaria)
Honduras’ National Sustainable Rural Development Program
Poverty Reduction Support Credit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Millennium Development Goal
Mesa Redonda de Donantes en Educaci6n (Round Table o f Donors for Education)
Micro-, Small- and Medium-Enterprises
National Anti-Corruption Council
Non-Governmental Organizations
Net Present Value
Small- and Medium-Enterprises
Secretaria de Salud (Ministry o f Health)
Total Factor Productivity
United Nations
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Children’s Fund
United States Agency for International Development
World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL, USE ONLY
MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE S U M M A R Y ...........................................................................................................................

i

I
. THE COUNTRY CONTEXT...................................................................................................................

i

POLITICAL CONTEXT........................................................................................................................
MACROECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENTS
AND EXTERNAL
ENVIRONMENT
.............................................

1
2
WCOME POVERTY AND INEQUALITY ..............................................................................................
4
ACCESS TO SERVICES ....................................................................................................................... 5
AND THE MILLENNIUM
DEVELOPMENT
GOALS....................................................
6
PRSP TARGETS
11. H O N D U R A S ’ GROWTH AND POVERTY REDUCTIONS T R A T E G Y

............................................
PILLAR I.
ACCELERATING
EQUITABLEAND SUSTAINABLE GROWTH
............................................
PILLAR 11.
REDUCING
RURALPOVERTY
.......................................................................................
PILLAR 111 - REDUCING URBAN POVERTY ...................................................................................
PILLAR Iv - INVESTING IN HUMAN
CAPITAL ...............................................................................
PILLAR v - STRENGTHENING SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR SPECIFIC GROWS................................
PILLAR V I - GUARANTEEING
SUSTAINABILI
TY ...........................................................................

111. THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S PARTNERSHIP WITH H O N D U R A S ...........................................

THELAST CAS: IMPACT AND LESSONS
....................
................................................................
IDA Experience ............................................
................................................................
IFC and MIGA Experience ...............................................................................................
COOPERATION WITH DEVELOPMENT
PARTNERS ...........................................................................
OBJECTIVES OF BANK GROUPASSISTANCE
AND C A S DEVELOPMENT PROCESS ........................
THEBANKGROUP’S
ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM IN HONDURAS
.........................................................
........................................ .................................................
C A S SCENARIOS .....
C A S PROGRAM RESULTS AND MONITORING
.................................................................................
RISKS ...................................................................................................................
C A S PROGRAM
TEXT BOXES

8
9
12
13
14
17
18
21

21
22
24
26
28
29
37
38

B o x 4: Progress o n PRSP Implementation ........................................................................ 9
Box B: Honduras FSAP Findings.........................................................................
10
B o x C: Honduras’ Education for All Initiative ...............................................................
15
B o x D: Honduras CFAA: K e y Findings .......................................................................... 19

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used b y recipients only in

.

the performance of their official duties I t s contents m a y not be otherwise disclosed
/without W o r l d Bank authorization

.

I

TEXT TABLES
Table 1:Honduras - K e y Macroeconomic Indicators ..................................................................... ..2
Table 2: Honduras - Medium Term Macroeconomic Framework ................................................... 4
Table 3: Share o f Households in Poverty 1991-2002 ....................................................................... 5
Table 4: Honduras: Millennium Development Goals and PRSP Targets. ........................................ 7
Table 5: Selected Indicators o f Bank Portfolio Performance FY97-FY03 ..................................... 24
Table 6: Donors Activities Supporting the Six PRSP Programmatic Areas .................................. 27
Table 7: Active Portfolio and Proposed Base Case Bank Assistance Program FY03-06 ..............33
Table 8: Honduras - Triggers for IDA Assistance Scenarios ......................................................... 36
Table 9: K e y Benchmark Indicators for Evaluating CAS Results .................................................
37
ANNEXES
A 1 HONDURAS AT A GLANCE
B1 HONDURAS CAS COUNTRY PROGRAM MATRIX (FY03-06)
B 2 SELECTED INDICATORS OF BANKPORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE AND
MANAGEMENT
B 3 PROPOSEDIDA BASE-CASELENDING
PROGRAM (FY03-06)
B 4 SUMMARY OF NON-LENDING
SERVICES
B 5 HONDURAS
- SOCIAL INDICATORS
B 6 HONDURAS
- K E Y ECONOMIC INDICATORS
B 7 HONDURAS
- K E Y EXPOSURE INDICATORS
B8 STATUS OF BANKGROUP’S
OPERATIONS
B8B STATEMENT OF IFC’S COMMITTED AND DISBURSED
PORTFOLIO
B 9 CAS SUMMARY OF DEVELOPMENT
PRIORITIES
B 10 HONDURAS: KEY ENVIRONMENTAL
INDICATORS
C

2000 CAS
STATUS OF A D V A N C E IN IMPLEMENTING

D.

STATUS OF PRSP PROGRESS REPORT

E.

CAS CONSULTATIONS WITH HONDURAS’
STAKEHOLDERS

F

HONDURAS: DEBTSUSTAINABILITY

ANALYSIS

MAP IBRD NO. 26280

Vice President:
Country Director:
Task Managers:

IDA

David de Ferranti
Jane Arinitage
Neeta Sirur
Joseph Owen

Vice President:
Director:
Manager:
Task Manager:

IFC
Assaad J. Jabre
Bernard C. Pasquier
Toshiya Masuoka
Junko Oikawa

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY: REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS
Executive Summary

(9
This i s the f i r s t Country Assistance Strategy to be prepared for Honduras since completion of the
country’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) in October 2001. The PRSP, which was presented to the
Board in FY02, presents a coherent and credible - if ambitious - strategy to reduce poverty in Honduras, and
i s consistent with i t s poverty diagnosis which takes into account the historical and structural roots of the
country’s high inequality and widespread poverty. The PRSP was developed following a broad and deep
consultation process with stakeholders throughout Honduras. The current Honduran Government, which took
office shortly after the completion o f the PRSP, has confirmed i t s commitment to the objectives and priorities
expressed in the PRSP, which serves as the basis for this CAS. The CAS also takes into account experience
with PRSP implementation to date, including new issues that Government i s considering, as the country’s
circumstances evolve. In i t s discussion of this CAS, the Board may wish to consider the following issues:
Does the proposed strategy adequately address the main development needs articulated in the PRSP? D o
Directors consider that the proposed strategy f i t s appropriately within the overall programs of multi-lateral and
bi-lateral assistance to Honduras?
0
I s the balance between investment and quick-disbursing lending appropriate? Should a quicker shift to
programmatic quick-disbursinglending be contemplated, given that Honduras i s a PRSP country?
0
Does the design o f the program and i t s triggers offer a sufficiently flexible yet careful response to country
conditions and risks?
0
D o Directors support the shift towards regional activities, both in selected lending activities and,
especially, with respect to analytical work and other knowledge services?
0

11
Government i s currently in the process o f developing i t s f i r s t PRSP Progress Report (PRSP-PR),
which has been delayed pending agreement on new macroeconomic parameters and structural targets that
would underpin a possible new PRGF arrangement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The
previous arrangement had been off-track since the last year of the previous administration, and the incoming
Maduro Government’s efforts to negotiate a new PRGF have been hampered by differences on fiscal policy as
well as the difficulty o f moving forward on key structural reforms (especially passage of a comprehensive
civil service law) in the face of a divided Congress and opposition from vested interests. Prospects for
achievement o f a new PRGF arrangement have brightened in recent months. The Honduran Congress recently
passed a substantial tax package which w i l l help ameliorate the country’s fiscal situation, and negotiations
with stakeholders are underway on civil service reform and a related wage bill. The expectation i s that an
agreement on the PRGF would be reached in the latter half o f this calendar year - in turn, paving the way for
achievement o f the HIPC completion point and related debt relief.

...

The previous CAS for Honduras was developed in the immediate aftermath of Hurricane Mitch
(October 1998), which had a devastating impact on Honduras’ people and economy. As such, the CAS
focused on reconstruction and on laying the basis for sustained poverty reduction and inclusive growth in the
medium and longer term, inter alia, through assisting in the development o f the PRSP, supporting a sound
macro framework and focusing on strengthening social services, the safety net , and rural development. Most
o f these priorities were met, with the notable exception of the above-mentioned weaknesses in fiscal
management, which emerged in the run up to the 2001 elections and derailed the last PRGF arrangement.
Through i t s basis i n the PRSP’s six pillars, this CAS builds on the accomplishments o f the previous one, but
lays greater emphasis on addressing long-standing structural barriers to inclusive growth (including trade
enhancement, competition policy, financial sector reform, property rights, urban and rural employment and
governance improvements). I t also continues to support human development efforts and improved
environmental management.
111

iv
The CAS covers a period o f about three and a half years (FYs03-06) in order to better align with
Honduras' political cycle. Starting from a portfolio and recent lending program dominated by investment
projects, the CAS program envisages a moderate increase in programmatic approaches and quick-disbursing
budgetary support but, given a continued need to strengthen institutional/technical capacity and public
resource management, also maintains a substantial program of investment operations. The aim i s to start
using a programmatic approach in supporting implementation o f the PRSP, while simultaneously
strengthening the country's public financial management and procurement systems in line with the
recommendations of key fiduciary assessments, which are now underway. As the fiduciary environment
improves and commitment to (and capacity for) effective PRSP implementation i s demonstrated, a higher
proportion of IDA assistance could eventually be provided in the form o f budgetary support. Analytic work i s
focused on Honduras-specific core diagnostic work and on Central America wide studies on sectoral topics
such as the coffee shock, rural growth, CAFTA, HIV/AIDS, decentralization and disaster mitigation.
V.
The IDA resource envelope for the four fiscal years covered by this CAS amounts to SDR211 (or
approximately US$296 million) in the base case. The high case would provide an additional SDR 63 million
(about US$SS million), and would be triggered on the basis of accelerated implementation o f key PRSP
objectives, improved public resource management and good IDA portfolio performance, reflecting adequate
institutional capacity to implement the program. Triggers for the high case include general triggers as well as
operation-specific triggers linked to each of two quick-disbursing credits contemplated in the high case.
However, at the present time, in the absence of a satisfactory macroeconomic framework and uncertainties
surrounding passage of the civil service reform law, IDA assistance w i l l be limited to the low case, which
includes investment lending o f SDR161 million or about US$226 million. I t i s anticipated that these issues
w i l l be addressed during the next 4-5 months, enabling a shift to the base case assistance scenario.

vi.
In tandem with IDA, IFC and MIGA w i l l support the implementation of Honduras' PRSP, with a
particular focus on i t s first pillar - accelerating equitable and sustainable growth. IFC and MIGA w i l l pursue
their objectives in partnership with the private sector through investment and non-investment vehicles. IFC's
approach in Honduras i s to support private sector development through activities at both the individual
country and regional levels. I t s priorities in Honduras over the CAS period w i l l include: (a) supporting
growth o f export-oriented SMEs (through financial intermediaries and/or technical assistance); (b) supporting
internationally competitive firms with inadequate long-term capital access; (c) helping to strengthen the
business environment (through technical assistance); and (d) supporting the financial sector. The level of
financial support from IFC in i t s areas of emphasis w i l l continue to depend on viable investment opportunities
in Honduras and the Central America region as a whole. This, in turn, w i l l depend on overall improvements
in the business environment, regulatory framework and macroeconomic stability.
vii
Specific benchmarks have been identified for evaluating the results and impact o f the CAS.
Outcome indicators are closely linked to the PRSP and MDG goals. Intermediate and process benchmarks are
also included, which help establish the links between Bank assistance and expected outcomes. However, the
strategy faces a number o f important risks with respect to potential for macroeconomic instability, political
and social hurdles to policy reform and weak institutional capacity. The economic risks arise from both
external and domestic factors. On the external side, Honduras remains vulnerable to natural disasters and
terms o f trade shocks, either of which could derail i t s economic program. On the internal side, economic
stability could be threatened by fiscal slippages in the face of political exigencies or by the need for
unanticipated expenditures in support o f the country's fragile banking system. On the political side, there i s
some risk that the PRSP's ambitious legislative agenda could become victim to political gridlock in Congress
and/or that passage of key fiscal measures could provoke social unrest. Finally, weak financial management
and institutional capacity in the line ministries could adversely affect program implementation. These risks
appear to be manageable, in light o f Government's demonstrated commitment to addressing them with the
support o f Honduran stakeholders and external partners, including the IFIS.

Honduras: Country A ssiktanceStratef v

1

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY FOR THE

REPUBLIC OF HONDURAS

I.

THE COUNTRY CONTEXT

Political Context
1.
Following several decades o f authoritarian rule (both civilian and military), Honduras began a
transition to democracy in the mid 1980’s. I t has since seen five successive, peaceful transitions of power
- indicating considerable maturing o f the country’s democratic processes. The most recent transition
occurred on January 27,2002, when President Ricardo Maduro o f the National Party (PN) assumed office
for a four-year term, after winning the November 2001 election with over 52 percent o f the vote.
Elections for the 128-member Honduran Congress were held in conjunction with the presidential election,
and, for the first time in recent history, did not yield a simple majority for the ruling party. Although a
governing coalition has been constituted through a formal alliance between the P N and a minor party, the
lack o f a clear majority implies that the Executive needs to seek compromise solutions on many issues, in
order to pass legislation and avoid the risk of legislative gridlock. Results o f local elections were also
mixed, with just 50 percent of municipalities led by the PN. This, in turn, has complicated progress on
decentralization -and by extension, improved services and social equity.
2.
The Maduro Government has given high priority to poverty reduction as the central theme of i t s
administration and moved quickly to endorse the country’s October 2001 Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP), which was developed under the previous Government, via a broad consultation process.
The PRSP i s described in some detail in the next section o f this report, as i t forms the basis for the Bank’s
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for FYs03-06, presented in this memorandum. It should be noted
here, however, that the Government faces an uphill battle in implementing several aspects of the PRSP.
This i s especially true with regard to maintaining fiscal discipline and increasing the sustainability of
public finances, inter alia through improving the efficiency and targeting o f public expenditures. Many
Hondurans believe that economic orthodoxy i s exacerbating the country’s high unemployment and
poverty rates, and there have been numerous street demonstrations protesting conservative fiscal policies.
Unions, which are relatively well-organized in Honduras, have taken to the streets to demand higher
wages (especially teachers and health workers), in part to demand fulfillment o f wage commitments made
by the previous Government. Thus far, popular protests have been largely peaceful although there i s
some risk o f escalation in the future.

3.
Despite the above difficulties and some setbacks, Government has recently made a renewed
commitment to reining in the fiscal deficit and public debt as part o f an ongoing effort to access HIPC
debt-relief, PRGF resources from the IMF, and quick-disbursing funds from the IDB and World Bank in
support of the country’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (see section I1below). I t s development strategy also
places considerable emphasis on increasing democratization, via transparency and consultation, with a
view towards forging a sustained, durable societal consensus on the country’s development issues and the
way forward. In this regard, a key priority i s guaranteeing access to information via a new Public
Disclosure Law and creating systems to provide credible information on public expenditures and their
impacts.

Macroeconomic Developments and External Environment

4.
Recent Developments. Over the past five years, the Honduran economy has been in a process o f
recovery from the devastating impact of Hurricane Mitch, which struck the region in October 1998. In
addition to i t s tragic human toll, Mitch wreaked severe damage on the Honduran economy. Losses were
estimated at about US$2.2 billion for direct damage to property, and almost US$3.8 billion for all losses
including indirects such as those resulting from suspension o f economic activity due to physical damage.
The receipt of generous support from the international community has since allowed Honduras to rebuild
much of i t s damaged infrastructure.

5.

On the downside, the post-Mitch inflow of foreign assistance was a key factor in the appreciation
o f the Lempira, which appreciated by 28 percent in real terms between 1997 and 2001. This exchange
rate appreciation, and adverse external developments including economic deceleration in the U S and other
principal trading partners and worsening terms of trade for key exports such as coffee, combined to
dampen export performance. This, in turn, contributed to a generalized economic slow-down,
exacerbated by a deterioration of public finances and a restrictive monetary stance which limited private
investment (Table 1).

Table 1: Honduras Key Macroeconomic Indicators
1998
Real GDP
Inflation (eop)
Real Effective Exchange Rate (eop)

2.9
15.6
6.2

Fixed Capital Formation
Gross National Savings

28.2
25.8

Public Sector Revenues
Public Sector Expenditures
o/w central gov’t wages and salaries

29.0
27.2
6.9

Overall Public Sector Balance

1.8

1999

2000

2001

Annual nrowth rates (%I
-1.9
5.7
2.6
10.9
9.8
9.4
7.9
4.1
7.5
Shares of GDP (%I
29.9
26.5
23.6
25.4
22.3
19.5
Shares of GDP (%)
30.7
29.6
29.5
30.9
30.3
31.7
8.0
9.0
10.1

-0.3

-0.8

-2.3

2002
2.5
7.4
-3.7
21.6
18.7
27.4
30.8
10.8
-3.4

11.0
-2.5
-2.0
Export o f goods and services (% annual growth)
12.2
-8.6
17.5
6.9
9.3
5.2
-3.3
Imports o f goods and services (% annual growth)
BOP C A Balance before grants (% of GDP)
-7.1
-11.5
-9.3
-10.5
-6.9
-2.4
-4.4
-4.1
-4.6
-3.7
BOP CA Balance after grants (% o f GDP)
Gross International Reserves (US$ millions)
804
1,230
1,285
1,386
1,493
Sources: Central Bank o f Honduras, IMF and Bank staff estimates. Note: 2001 and 2002 figures may be subject to revision.

6.
When the Maduro administration assumed office in January 2002, it inherited a slowing economy
and a deteriorating fiscal balance under the previous Government, which fell from a surplus of 1.8 percent
of GDP in 1998 to a deficit o f 2.3 percent in 2001. This deterioration resulted from the steady decline of
public revenues over the period, reflecting the downturn in economic activity, sluggish tax collection and
a weaker operating surplus by the public enterprises. At the same time, non-interest expenditures had
steadily increased, mainly due to ballooning of central government wages resulting from agreements
reached by the previous government with civil service unions. The new authorities introduced a package
of revenue measures upon assuming office, but this has been insufficient to halt the downward tendency
in revenues thus far. On the expenditures side, an increase in teachers’ compensation, negotiated in the
context o f commitments made b y the previous Government, generated further upward pressure on the
public sector wage bill, which reached 10.8 percent o f GDP in 2002 and i s significantly higher than in
other countries in the region. For 2002, the total public sector deficit reached 3.4 percent o f GDP,
considerably above the availability o f concessional external financing.

7.
Despite the overall fiscal and growth deterioration, however, some macroeconomic indicators
have remained remarkably stable. In particular, inflation has maintained i t s declining trend since 1998,
reflecting the application of disciplined monetary policies as well as the overall economic slowdown.
Another favorable development has been the maintenance of a strong international reserves position, in
spite o f declining exports. This position was partly sustained in 2002, however, through the one-time
repatriation of assets held abroad by the national telephone utility company. The Maduro government has
also revised Honduras’ exchange rate policy since 2002 in an effort to revitalize exports. The change has
led to a real depreciation o f the Lempira of about 3.7 percent during 2002, although i t has not reversed the
accumulated appreciation that took place since 1997’.
Medium-Term Outlook. A PRGF arrangement had been agreed with the Fund in March 1999,
8.
after which Honduras reached the HIPC Decision Point in October 2000. This arrangement has been offtrack since December 2001, in large measure due to the deteriorating fiscal situation and public sector
wage bill, and expired at the end o f 2002. This has created considerable uncertainty about the future
evolution o f fiscal balances in the medium-term and constrained the country’s ability to implement i t s
poverty reduction strategy. At the same time, the deviations from the fiscal targets and consequent
derailment o f the PRGF arrangement, led to the postponement o f the HIPC Completion Point, which was
originally envisaged to be reached at the end o f 2002. Since most of the interim debt relief contemplated
under the HIPC initiative has already been delivered, agreement on a new PRGF agreement i s vital to
averting a significant increase in Honduras’ debt servicing obligations, with obvious implications for
further pressure on the country’s fiscal position.
9.
The prospects for achievement o f a new PRGF arrangement have brightened in recent months.
The Government and the IMF have reached preliminary agreement on overall macroeconomic objectives
of the program -- including macroeconomic stability, protecting investment and prioritizing povertyreducing spending -- although policy instruments to achieve the objectives are s t i l l under discussion.
Meanwhile, the Government i s developing important elements o f i t s strategy, including a strengthened
wage policy resulting from civil service reform and means of strengthening the financial sector. The
program agreed thus far i s based on a gradual recovery o f economic growth from 2.5 percent in 2002 to
4.5 percent in 2005 and a gradual decline of inflation to 5 percent in 2005, while aiming for a modest
accumulation of reserves equivalent to five months’ worth o f imports. The fiscal adjustment
contemplated in the program calls for a reduction in the overall public sector deficit to 2.5 percent o f GDP
in 2003, 1.5 percentage points in 2004 and below 1.0 percent by 2005. This adjustment i s to be achieved
mainly through: (i)
passage o f a tax package to increase public revenues; (ii)
containment o f the central
government wage bill, in part through adoption o f a new civil service framework law which would allow
for implementation o f a uniform, equitable and sustainable wage policy for all public sector employees;
and (iii)
maintaining o f the operating surplus o f the public enterprises at 2002 levels, via gradual
adjustments to tariffs and containment o f wage increases. In addition to these growth and fiscal targets,
the revised program w i l l call for strengthening of the financial system and increased private participation
in the telecommunications and electricity sectors.

10.
Provided the policies outlined in the preceding paragraph are implemented satisfactorily, i t i s
expected that it w i l l be feasible for Honduras to attain external debt sustainability. Given narrowing o f
the external current account deficit to 4 percent o f GDP by 2004 (as export growth picks up), i t i s
estimated that the external debt-to GDP ratio would decline steadily from 67 percent o f GDP in 2002 to

’ The exchange rate i s determined through a system of daily currency auctions by the Central Bank within a crawling

band. The width o f this band i s 7% on either side of a “base rate”. The Authorities had been adjusting the base rate
at a slower pace than the inflation differential between Honduras and its trading partners, which led to a gradual
appreciation. Since end-2001, the rate of crawl was increased to offset the expected inflation differential.

55 percent by 2007. Over the same period, the net present value (NPV) o f debt to current government
revenue would decline from 252 to 177 percent, well below the debt sustainability threshold o f 250
percent under the HIPC initiative. See Annex F for further analysis of Honduras’ debt.

Table 2: Honduras - Medium T e r m Macroeconomic Framework
2002

Real GDP
Inflation (eop)

2.5
7.4

Fixed Capital Formation
Gross National Savings
Current Account Balance
Overall Public Sector Balance (after grants)
O/w Central Gov’t Balance (after grants)

21.6
18.7
1.4
-3.4
-5.6

Export o f goods and services (annual growth, %)
-2.0
Imports of goods and services (annual growth, (%)
-3.3
BOPCA Balance after grants (% of GDP)
-3.7
Gross International Reserves (US$ millions)
1,493
Sources: I M F and Bank staff estimates. Note: figures for 2003 are preliminary projections.

2003

2004

Annual nrowth rates (%)

2.5
7.1

3.0
6.5
Shares of GDP (%I
23.8
24.4
18.7
20.8
3.2
5.0
-2.5
-1.5
-3.5
-2.1
Shares ofGDP (%)
4.6
6.0
8.7
2.6
-5.3
-3.6
1,492
1,585

-

2005
4.5
5.0
25.5
22.0
6.2
-0.9
-2.5
6.4
5.9
-3.6
1,718

11.
Congress has just approved the new tax reform package which will, inter alia, increase tax equity
(through making some bonus payments subject to tax and introducing a temporary 5 percent solidarity
profits tax), widen the tax base (through additional taxes on tobacco and alcohol and a new withholding
tax at wholesale level as well as reduced exemptions in sales tax) and introduce measures to reduce fiscal
evasion. The Government expects that the tax package w i l l yield additional revenues o f about 3.3 percent
o f GDP when it i s fully implemented. For 2003, additional revenues are expected to amount to about 2.0
percent o f GDP. Consideration i s also being given to the design of additional, contingent measures in the
event that these expected revenue estimates do not materialize. Early approval by Congress o f
Government’s proposed civil service reform law will, together with the tax reform, help smooth the way
towards finalization o f a PRGF agreement with the Fund. Government i s expected to submit the draft
civil service law to Congress within the next few weeks but the outcome in Congress remains uncertain,
given the political difficulties noted previously (para 2).

Income Poverty and Inequality
12.
Present-day Honduras, reflecting a legacy dating back to Colonial times, i s one o f the poorest and
most unequal countries in the Latin America and Caribbean region. With a per capita GNI o f US$920 in
2002, the country i s the third poorest in Latin America, and, given high inequality (the national Gini
coefficient i s 0.6), income poverty i s widespread. Nearly two-thirds o f the population i s poor and nearly
half i s extremely poo?. Table 3 below shows trends in poverty for the period 1991-2002. As the table
indicates, poverty headcounts f e l l steadily, albeit slowly, from 1991 to 1998, before rising again in the last
year o f the decade following the onslaught of humcane Mitch. The effect o f Mitch was more pronounced
in the (already poorer) rural areas, given extensive crop damage affecting both own production and
opportunities for agricultural labor. While the impact o f Mitch on urban labor incomes was less severe,
many urban households, like their rural counterparts, suffered from a loss in assets and incurred direct
costs for health, housing and food. Since Mitch, poverty has again been on a downward trend, although
improvement has been slow due to low GDP growth and high population growth rates.

’The extreme poor are those living below the extreme poverty line, which i s the cost o f a food basket designed to meet
basic nutritional needs. The moderate poverty line multiplies this cost by a fixed factor in order to also take into
account the cost of basic non-food needs.

Table 3: Share of Households in Poverty 1991-2002
National
Extreme poor
All poor*
Urban
Extreme poor
All poor *
Rural
Extreme poor
All poor

-

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2001

2002

54.2
74.8

47.4
69.9

45.1
67.5

47.0
67.4

47.4
67.8

53.7
68.7

48.4
65.8

45.6
63.1

48.6
65.9

47.4
64.5

45.2
63.3

46.7
68.4

39.2
61.6

31.6
55.5

39.8
62.6

40.6
62.8

38.7
61.0

35.2
59.0

35.7
57.0

36.5
57.3

36.1
56.3

27.2
55.5

59.9
79.6

53.9
76.5

55.8
77.1

52.9
71.1

53.1
71.9

66.4
75.3

60.0
71.7

55.4
69.2

60.9
74.6

60.5
73.8

62.7
70.8

c

13.
While absolute levels of poverty fell during the 1990s, relative levels of poverty increased
somewhat, as measured by increased inequality in per capita income - an important dimension, given
that individuals often assess their well-being in comparison to others, rather than in absolute terms.
Analysis using three different measures of inequality confirms that inequality increased by about 3
percentage points nationally from 1991-99. In urban areas, there was a decrease in inequality but this was
offset in the overall numbers by a marked increase in rural areas. Moreover, the inequality between
urban and rural areas has risen, contributing to national inequality. Thus on both absolute and relative
poverty dimensions, rural households fare worse than urban households, indicating an urgent need to
develop programs targeted to the rural poor-and, given rapid rural to urban migration, to improve
services and income-earning opportunities in marginal urban areas, where most recent migrants settle.
14.
Apart from rural-urban location, there i s an important gender dimension to income poverty in
Honduras. Analysis o f poverty data suggests that female-headed households have per capita incomes that
are 15 to 30 percent lower than male-headed households, largely reflecting household labor scarcity and
the generally lower human capital and asset ownership o f women. This i s supported by evidence showing
that male-headed households with only one working adult (Le., the woman i s generally not in the labor
force) are also substantially poorer on average - once again suggesting the need for improved
employment, training and earning opportunities for women. Finally, findings that households with a large
number o f children have significantly lower per capita consumption than smaller households, underscore
the need for policies enabling women to take control o f their fertility, with the likely effect o f lowering
birth rates and increasing consumption, as resources would need to be shared by fewer household
members.

Access to Services
15.
While progress in addressing income poverty has been slow in Honduras, due largely to sluggish
GDP growth, the country has been much more successful in improving basic and social services.
Comparatively good performance in health and education i s reflected in the Human Development
Index3(HDI) which i s slightly above expectations for the country’s per capita GDP level. This i s at least
partially attributable to the high priority attached by successive Honduran administrations to protecting
spending on education and health care, particularly at the basic levels. Thus, despite a reduction in public
deficits and rapid population growth in the 1990s, basic expenditures per capita in both education and
health actually increased over the period. This in turn has allowed for expanded coverage of basic social
services with positive outcomes for the poor. Over the past decade, health service provision has improved
markedly: vaccination programs achieved near-100 percent coverage; maternal mortality f e l l by 38
percent (to 108 per 100,000) between 1990 and 1997; chronic malnutrition in children 1-5 years declined
from 44 percent in 1987 to under 33 percent in 2001; and, infant mortality declined, albeit more slowly,
The HDI i s a weighted sum of three indices dealing with life expectancy, educational attainment and per capita GDP.

from 39 per 1,000 in the 1986-1990 period to 34 per 1,000 in 1996-2000. Similar improvements are
observable in education where the net primary school enrollment rate i s now about 85 percent, illiteracy
has fallen from 29 to 19 percent between 1990 and 2000 and improvements in access to early childhood
and secondary education have taken place, although absolute levels are s t i l l low. Despite these advances,
health and education indicators still lag considerably behind those of almost all the countries in Central
America and there are still important inequities in quality and access. More concerted efforts, including
demand side measures as well as improved program efficiency w i l l be needed in the coming years in
order to achieve the MDG targets and/or those laid out in Honduras’ PRSP.
16.
The population’s access to basic infrastructure services has also expanded considerably in recent
years. Official statistics indicate that 89 percent of the population has access to potable water - one o f
the highest coverage rates in Central America. However, continuity, reliability and quality o f service i s
poor, implying the need for major changes in sector performance in order to meet the MDG goal of
reducing by half the number o f people with sustainable access to an improved water source. Currently,
coverage numbers mask huge disparities in continuity o f water service particularly in marginal urban
areas, where several communities have to cope with intermittent distribution o f water, sometimes
amounting to only one hour o f water service every four days. Future progress w i l l also be made difficult
by the fact that the majority of those currently without access live in hard-to-reach dispersed rural
communities or marginal urban areas. The picture with regard to sanitation i s similar to that for water.
While Honduras has made important headway in improving coverage o f sanitation services for the
population as a whole (reaching 70 percent in 2002), there are a number o f concerns related to the type o f
infrastructure services, environmental impacts and sustainability o f investments. While coverage has
indeed expanded in rural areas (from 3 1 to 72 percent over the past decade), this has been mainly through
“latrinization” which has a limited life and which must be accompanied by improved hygiene information
and practices to realize the full health benefits. Moreover, waste disposal remains a major challenge in
large urban centers, where untreated waste water i s s t i l l sometimes dumped into rivers and informal
dumping o f solid waste i s common, with potentially serious health consequences. Coverage of electricity
services showed improvement during the 1990s, rising from 33 percent o f households to 52 percent of
households between 1989 and 1999, with the increase benefiting both middle-income and poor
households. In contrast, transportation services, while expanding, have not reached poor Hondurans.
Household data indicate that 63 percent o f people in the lowest income quintile have no access to
transportation and less than a quarter use buses as a principal means o f transport.

PRSP Targets and the Millennium Development Goals
17.
In summary, as suggested in the preceding discussion o f the macro-economy and social welfare,
Honduras’ prospects for meeting the targets laid out in the PRSP, and, by extension, the MDGs for 2015,
are uncertain. Table 4 provides an overview o f the PRSP targets and MDGs as applied to Honduras as
well as the current status with respect to each target. As indicated in the table, overall trends on most
indicators have been favorable for the past 10-12 years and many targets could be achieved if past trends
continue unabated. However, progress in the first year since finalization of the country’s PRSP in late
2001 has fallen short o f expectations in a number o f areas (though numbers are s t i l l being refined), which
casts doubt on successful implementation of the strategy unless there i s a quick improvement in
implementation performance. This i s especially true in two areas -- infant mortality and environmental
sustainability -- where even projections based on the 1990s’ performance suggest that achievement o f the
2015 targets i s unlikely without substantial additional efforts in the future. In addition to implementation
problems (associated with weak capacity and, in some cases, strong political opposition to policy reform),
poor performance in moving forward PRS targets during 2001-2 i s related to shortcomings in the
operationalization o f the poverty reduction strategy. This involved bundling a number o f a relatively
unfocussed set of projects into a core “anti-poverty” program, without adequately analyzing the relationship

5

Table 4: Honduras: Millennium Development G

>

Millennium Development
Goals
1990-2015

1. Poverty and Hunger
Reduce extreme poverty by
almost half

-

- Reduce malnutntion rate by
ialf

Likelihood
of achieving
results
sought”

Present Status

-

Extreme Poverty declined
from 54% in 1991 to 45.2%
in 2002
Child malnutntion in
children aged 0-5 decreased
from 44% in 1987 to 33% in

I-

MDG

Likely

54%

Likely

44%
(1987)

45.2%

-

33%
(2001)

education

rimary school to 100%

- Raise ratio of girlshoys in

- There are no significant

100%

genders in respect of
education
Gender Development Index

- Rase Gender Develoument
p

I

1

-

is%

-

82%

84.7%

95%

100%

65

45
(2001)

22

22

220
(1995)

108
(2001)

73

55

births between 1990 and 2001

Maternal mortality has
declined from 220 per
100,000 live births to 108
between 1995 and 2001‘ (a
(reduction of 51% in six years)

20%

Likely

Reduce child mortality

5. Improve maternal health
Reduce the rate of maternal
iortality (for each 100,000 live
irths) by three-fourths

27%

I

I

. Increase net enrollment ratio in

t

30%

Likely

1malaria, & other diseases

Reduce by half the incidence of
IIV/AIDS by 2015 and begin to
:verse propagation

7. Ensure environmental
sustainability
Halve the proportion of
idividuals without access to
nproved water source

-

1.6% of adult population
infected, assumed to be the
highest incidence i n Central

1

nla.

America
.............................................................................................................................

-

Incidence of HIV/ AIDS
i n women (ages 15-24)

-

-

__

nla.

Access to improved water
Likely
increased from 84% to 88.7%
of the population between
1990 and 2001
..........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Unlikely
Halt forest degradation (% of
Forest area has been
otal land)

-

__

1.9
(1999)

84%

(2001)

53.4%

48.1%
(2000)
~

I
I

95%

92%

56%

54%

a. Likelihood based on the SimSIP system for goals 1,2,4,7, on the basis of growth projections, population growth, urbanization and poverty elasticities and sccial
indicators on these variables. Sources: “World Bank, World Development Indicators;2002; A Better World for All- Progress towards achievement of the
internationaldevelopment goals,”2000. JMF, OECD, UN, WB.
b. The GDI measures the same variables as the Human Development Index but measuresthe inequality between men and women.
c. Estimate for 1995 developed by WHO, UNICEF, UNFFA, 2001; the estimate for 2002 i s that o f the Government of Honduras.

8

Honduras., Countrv A sszktanceStratepy

o f these projects to Government’s main ongoing programs, covering both investment and recurrent
(including wage) expenditures. To begin to rectify this, Government i s working, in the context of the
multi-year budgetary process, to clarify the relationship between main programs and complementary
projects in meeting PRSP and MDG targets in the short, medium and long terms. The Bank has been
requested to assist in this effort.

18.
While many o f the specific implementation problems which hindered progress last year can be
(and are being) resolved, the ovemding challenge for the longer term i s to break the cycle o f low, and
narrowly-based, growth in which Honduras i s mired if progress on PRSP and MDG targets i s to be
accelerated in the future. T o be able to come near the PRSP and Millennium Development Goal (MDG)
o f cutting extreme poverty in half by 2015, Honduras w i l l have to grow substantially faster than i t s
historic growth performance, which has been among the least dynamic in Latin and Central America.
Moreover, structural and social barriers to broad-based participation in economic growth will need to be
addressed energetically to raise the economy’s poverty reduction/growth elasticity ratio, which i s
currently very low at about 0.65. During the 1990s, annual growth per capita averaged only 0.2 percent
per annum. Recent studies reveal that this slow growth performance i s not due to insufficient factor
accumulation, as total investment ratios and labor growth are generally high by Latin American standards.
Rather, the country’s slow growth i s mainly attributable to low total factor productivity (TFP) growth,
which reflects deficiencies in the allocation and efficiency o f factor resource use. While the growth rate
was better in the 1990s than in the 1980s, reflecting modest progress in addressing structural and
institutional reforms, a more comprehensive and intense effort i s needed in the coming years if the
Honduran economy i s to be extricated from i t s low growthhigh poverty trap. Preliminary analyses
suggest that the greatest opportunities for raising Honduras’ economic growth and making it more
inclusive lie in the areas o f increasing human capital (particularly education), expanding infrastructure
and deepening the financial sector. Finally, Honduras’ weak governance i s also an impediment to
building investor confidence. Governance-improving reforms are needed to restore private sector
dynamism, which will be essential for sustained growth. These issues w i l l be explored further in a
Development Policy Review (DPR), which i s currently being undertaken b y the Bank in close
coordination with the Honduras’ Government.

11.

HONDURAS’GROWTH AND POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY

19.
As noted in para 2, Honduras’ Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), which was completed
in October 2001 following an extensive consultation process, has placed poverty reduction squarely at the
center of the Government’s development agenda. The main objective o f the strategy, which analyzes the
causes of poverty and encompasses investment programs and reforms in a broad range of sectors, i s to
reduce poverty by 24 percent points over the period 2001-2015. Overall, the PRSP presents a coherent
and credible - if ambitious --strategy to reduce poverty in Honduras and i s consistent with the poverty
diagnosis. The strategy itself i s structured around six pillars as follows: (i)
accelerating equitable and
sustainable growth to levels consistent with the income poverty reduction targets; (ii)reducing rural
reducing urban poverty; (iv) enhancing investment in human capital; (v) strengthening
poverty; (iii)
social protection for specific vulnerable groups; and, (vi) ensuring the sustainability o f the strategy
through governance and institutional reforms and enhanced environmental sustainability. Each of these
programmatic areas (both key issues and priorities) i s described below in some detail, as the poverty
reduction strategy forms the basis for the Bank’s assistance strategy to Honduras. The discussion of
programmatic areas focuses on Honduras’ progress in PRSP implementation and highlights new issues
and approaches that Government i s considering under the framework as experience with the strategy
evolves. A PRSP Progress Report which i s currently under preparation by Government and has been
circulated for consultations maintains the same long-term vision and targets o f the PRSP. Box A and
Annex D provide summaries o f the draft report.

Pillar I:Accelerating Equitable and Sustainable Growth

20.
A fundamental element o f this pillar i s the establishment and maintenance o f a stable
macroeconomic framework as the foundation for private investment/employ'ment creation and a

sustainable program o f enhanced public spending on poverty reduction. The macroeconomic program
laid out in the PRSP focuses on maintaining sound monetary and exchange rate policies to ensure singledigit inflation and interest rates favorable to investment, while reining in the fiscal deficit, inter alia, via:
(i)tax reforms and improved tax administration to increase revenues; and (ii)
exerting firm control on
expenditures, including through establishment o f equitable public sector salaries and a comprehensive
civil service reform law. The PRSP also lays out specific targets for monetary, fiscal and structural
reforms, which underpinned Honduras arrangement with the IMF for continued support from the PRGF.
However, as discussed above, the Government was unable to achieve these targets and the PRGF program
has consequently been off-track since December 2001. As also noted previously (para 9), the
Government and IMF have recently agreed on revised macroeconomic targets and structural reforms, and
Government i s in the process o f revising the PRSP to reflect the new agreements and serve as the basis
for a possible new PRGF arrangement (expected later this year). The Government i s currently making
concerted efforts to address fiscal issues, in line with the revised targets and structural benchmarks, but
the outcome remains uncertain given tough political obstacles.

10

Hondurax. Country A mktance Stratepv

21.
Integral to the focus on re-establishing a satisfactory macroeconomic framework, a second area of
reform emphasized within the PRSP’s growth pillar relates to the continued strengthening o f the
country’s financial system, which i s beset by a number of problems. Recent actions to improve the
financial system include improving the legal framework for supervision o f the financial system, raising
minimum capital requirements for banks, and fostering systemic stability b y liquidating two insolvent
banks and capitalizing two others. Notwithstanding these efforts, the banking system has remained
fragile. Portfolio quality, provisions against losses and the risk-weighted capitalization level are among
the lowest in the region and discipline has been weakened by successive bailouts o f agricultural debtors
and regulatory forbearance for banks, leading, in turn, to undistributed losses hidden in bank balance
sheets. In addition, a blanket deposit guarantee has led to a large fiscal contingency - part of which has
already materialized. Finally, the Honduras authorities are concerned that the level o f penetration of
money laundering in the financial sector may be significant, given drug trafficking and other criminal

activity in the region. In 2002, Honduras enacted a new anti money-laundering law that significantly
enhances the legal framework and available investigative and prosecutorial tools in the fight against
money laundering. The law i s a major step forward, but considerable further effort i s needed to

implement it. In this context, the Government requested the IMF and the Bank to undertake an
assessment o f Honduras’ financial sector with a view to identifying weaknesses and specific areas for
improvement. This assessment (FSAP) was completed in February 2003 and i t s key findings are
described in Box B above. Government has indicated i t s strong commitment to addressing the issues
identified and has requested assistance from the I F I s in support of a sectoral reform program.

22.
The third key component of the PRSP’s growth pillar, aims at strengthening private investment
levels and improving investment efficiency, in order to increase employment opportunities for the
Honduran people. While recognizing the critical importance of a sustainable macroeconomic framework
and sound financial system for increasing productive investment, the PRSP also aims to address a number
of regulatory, institutional and structural factors, which constrain private sector investment and
productivity in Honduras. These include: (i)
the investment climate, including burdensome regulation for
business registrations; (ii)
low quality o f infrastructure services and high logistics costs; (iii)
limited use
o f technology and innovation and lack o f quality systems; and (iv) labor market rigidity and low labor
skills. To address these constraints, Honduras has passed an Administrative Simplification Law to
simplify regulations for establishing businesses, and i s currently working on the reactivation o f a one-stop
window for investment applications, reform of the Labor Code, modernization o f the Commercial Code,
resolution o f property insecurity issues, and measures to substantially increase private participation in the
provision of public services (including electricity generation, airports, water and sewerage, transport and
telecommunications). While some progress has been made in the latter area, efforts to deepen private
involvement in infrastructure provision have been hampered by weaknesses in the existing regulatory
framework, weak public confidence in the benefits o f privatization and political opposition by vested
interest groups.
23.
While the constraints to private investment identified above affect all firms, the PRSP calls for
special attention to two groups of high-potential business sectors. The f i r s t o f these i s the micro-, smalland medium-enterprises (MSMEs) group for whom the cost o f regulatory constraints i s especially high.
Higher growth in the M S M E sector i s especially valued from a poverty reduction standpoint because
these businesses tend to be generally more labor-intensive than larger firms. The second group consists
o f f i r m s operating in industries with high comparative advantages, such as tourism, maquila, nontraditional agriculture and forestry, where investments would provide a quicker return to the country’s
overall productivity and economic growth. To further the development o f these two groups o f businesses,
the Government has recently established a National Competitiveness Council, tasked with defining and
facilitating the implementation o f strategies for developing key clusters, including productive linkages
and improved access to financing via the banking system.
24.
A final area o f emphasis within the PRSP’s growth pillar, relates to improving Honduras’
competitive access to international markets. In this regard, high priority i s given to strengthening
Honduran participation in the Central American integration scheme, including completing actions to
establish a customs union with Guatemala, El Salvador and Nicaragua (and possible extension to Costa
Rica), harmonization o f tariffs, reduction of non-tariff bamers and promoting the creation o f a regional
capital market and a Central American Logistics Corridor. Moving beyond the immediate region, the
PRSP also emphasizes the need to enlarge and improve trade relations with a number of farther neighbors
- Canada, Chile, Dominican Republic, Mexico and Panama -- with a view towards effective inclusion in
the Free Trade Agreement o f the Americas. While Honduras already has lowered tariffs quite
dramatically during the 1990s (average about 8 percent) and has diversified i t s exports (maquila and nontraditional agriculture), further advances in openness and integration with more dynamic markets could
offer significant results in terms o f enhancing TFP and attracting new investments/technologies.

25.
Since completion o f the PRSP, discussions have also been initiated between the countries of
Central America and the United States on the establishment o f a Central America Free Trade Agreement

(CAFTA). The Honduran government has been a strong supporter of the CAFTA process since the
agreement would offer an important opportunity for Honduras to shift to a higher growth trajectory.
Expectations are that CAFTA could be helpful inter alia by: (i)
making market access more permanent
and granting investors a fuller set of protection and dispute resolution rules; and (ii)
imposing on
Honduras an obligation to upgrade many of i t s own rules and institutions (e.g., in intellectual property
rights, labor4 and environment) with the likely impact o f boosting both foreign and domestic investment
as well as raising TFF. I t should be noted, though that CAFTA also entails some risks. Chief among
these i s that failure to accompany CAFTA with key complementary actions such as investments in
infrastructure, upgrading o f education systems and improvements in investment climate could mean that
foreign investment does not materialize (or worse, i s diverted from Honduras to other C A countries).
With regard to investment climate, Honduras needs to pay particular attention to concerns surrounding
crime and violence, property rights and judicial efficiency. Second i s a r i s k that CAFTA benefits are
captured only by small clusters of (large) f i r m s and relatively better o f f laborers - suggesting the need to
invest in building the capacity o f small and medium enterprises to benefit from CAFTA. The
Government i s well-aware o f these risks and i s working (with external support) to try to mitigate them.
Pillar 11: Reducing Rural Poverty
26.
In recognition of the severe poverty and inequities pervading rural Honduras, the PRSP stresses
implementation of a comprehensive strategy to improve access to productive assets, infrastructure,
markets and technology for poor smallholders. This i s seen as critically important in the overall effort to
reduce poverty since over 50 percent of the Honduran population and a disproportionately high share o f
the poor live in rural areas. Indeed, the rural economy has been basically stagnant in the latter half of the
1990s. Agriculture has grown at barely 0.3 percent per year since the mid-l990s, reflecting exogenous
factors (falling commodity prices, natural disasters), macroeconomic conditions (exchange rate
overvaluation, high interest rates) and institutional and program weaknesses. The strategy for rural
poverty reduction laid out in the PRSP includes three main components as described below.
27.
The first component o f the second pillar aims to improve access to land via several actions
including enlargement of an existing land regularization program covering small independent farmers,
strengthening land rights of indigenous and Afro/Honduran groups, completion o f a nationwide agrarian
and forest cadastre, implementing a rural property registry, developing programs to provide the rural
landless poor with access to productive lands and recognizing traditional rights and usufruct on public
lands (which constitute some 70 percent o f the total land area). In each o f these areas special attention
would be paid to ensuring the property rights o f women, both single women and women in marital
unions. Indeed, Honduras has made considerable progress on the institutional and legal aspects o f land
reform, focusing on modernizing the cadastre and registration system nationwide with support from the
USAID, IDB and the Bank. In addition, an agreement has been reached between the executive and
judicial branches to integrate the cadastre and real estate registries. These reforms are expected to go a
long way towards regularizing ownership and providing the conditions for a transparent and efficient land
market. This, in turn, should have a major impact on poverty reduction, given that most unregistered,
informal land assets (estimated value o f US$12 billion) are owned by poor households. However,
continued intensive efforts to maintain progress on land regularization w i l l s t i l l be needed and
inexpensive and expedient procedures for conflict resolution, including via the judicial system, need to be
established.
I t should be noted that Honduras has ratified all international conventions related to core labor standards (including
freedom o f association and collective bargaining, elimination of forced and compulsory labor, elimination o f
discrimination with respect to employment and occupation, and the abolition o f child labor). However, various
provisions in the existing labor law - which i s currently being revised - place some restrictions on freedom o f
association. Moreover, better enforcement i s needed with respect to all core labor standards.

28.
A second emphasis under Pillar I1 i s to promote sustainable development in priority areas
through broadening the Honduran Secretary o f Agriculture’s National Sustainable Rural Development
Program (PRONADERS) and i t s supporting services. PRONADERS coordinates some 18 participatory
projects targeted to smallholders to increase productivity via improved natural resource management,
crop diversification, quality improvements and production and marketing support services. During the
last year, substantial expansion was in fact achieved, with PRONADERS benefiting nearly 95,000 rural
households (i.e., close to 600,000 people). This initiative, combined with favorable weather and passage
o f the Solidarity with the Farming Sector Law, appears to have achieved good outcomes thus far.
Agricultural outputs have increased significantly between 2001 and 2002. For example, corn production
rose from 840 million lbs to about 1,110 million lbs, the production of beans increased from 90 million
lbs to 100 million lbs and rice production went from 20 million lbs to 50 million lbs. Another focus of
this component relates to the diversification o f sources o f rural income including via small forestry
schemes and tourism development in the coastal areas and in the Copan valley, which contains one of the
most significant Mayan sites in Central America. While, progress on tourism i s proceeding satisfactorily,
particularly in the Copan Valley (in part with Bank assistance), efforts to promote forestry have been
hampered by the conflictive situation around forest land tenure and usufruct in the public forest lands, an
obsolete centralized institutional framework, a legal framework which i s dispersed and contradictory, and
a lack of policies and instruments to increase private and community investment in sustainable forestry
activities. Efforts to address these weaknesses via a new Forestry law have been impeded by strong and
competing political, economic and social interests.
29.
Pillar I1also calls for improvements to rural infrastructure (including rebuilding damaged rural
roads and bridges, increasing micro-irrigation schemes and expanded rural electrification), development
of “campesino” enterprises through business and technical training for small rural entrepreneurs provision
o f privatized technical services (extension, training, research) and improved access to credit. The
Government has recorded some progress in each o f these areas during the first year of PRSP
implementation, albeit slower than had originally been targeted. Most notably, irrigation was expanded
by about 90 km2, principally for horticultural export production such as cantaloupe, vegetables, manioc
and others. Privatized extension services (supported by the Bank and FAD, among others) have greatly
enhanced Government’s technical assistance and training outreach to poor rural households. Credit, too
increased by nearly 67 percent over the previous year, though this reflects both debt readjustment
operations as well as new lending to productive units. Some progress on rural electrification has also
been made in part with support from the IDB and the Japanese and Taiwanese Governments. Finally,
continued progress was made in repairing damage to infrastructure as a result o f Hurricane Mitch and in
expanding social infrastructure and the scope o f poverty reduction programs in the poorest rural areas.

Pillar III: Reducing Urban Poverty

30.
While rural poverty i s a tremendous challenge in Honduras today, there are also pockets o f severe
poverty in large and intermediate cities, which are growing at about 4 percent per year and which require
a different set o f measures than the ones identified above to assist the rural poor. T o this end, the PRSP’s
third pillar focuses on means o f improving the welfare o f poor urban households. A key element o f the
strategy for urban poverty reduction emphasizes the need for working through municipalities in both large
and intermediate cities to provide improved infrastructure including low cost housing and basic services
such as water, sewerage, electricity and transport to the urban poor - in part through the establishment o f
a municipal development fund. While investments in basic services have progressed satisfactorily, there
i s considerable concem that these may not be sustainable in the long-run, given deficiencies in the
regulatory framework. As suggested in para 16, this i s especially true in the water and sanitation sector,
where devolution o f responsibilities to municipalities, privatization and the development o f an appropriate
incentive structure for providers has been occurring in an ad hoc manner, leaving some municipalities far
better served than others. Moreover, the picture i s further complicated by the existence o f multiple legal

frameworks for water, which allow several agencies the role o f policy development, regulation and
operation. Efforts to pass a comprehensive water sector reform have been stalled in Congress, due to
strong political opposition from vested interests.
31.
Finally, in order to improve employment opportunities in urban areas, this pillar places high
priority on strengthening the micro-, small- and medium-enterprise (MSME) sector, which accounts for
nearly half of the country’s GDP and a still-higher proportion o f employment for the active population.
However, as suggested in the discussion o f overall private investment constraints under Pillar I(paras 2223), MSMEs - in part because o f their smaller size --are more constrained (than large firms) by the
burdensome regulations, high transactions costs and poor logistics which characterize Honduras’ business
climate. They are also disproportionately affected by credit constraints and the paucity o f relevant
information, and knowledge and advisory services. In addition, the institutional framework in support of
MSMEs i s fragmented, duplicative and often inappropriately oriented - in many instances the institutions
are more oriented towards relieving poverty than improving MSMEs productivity and sustainable growth.
In recent years, the Government has made some progress towards helping MSMEs to benefit from i t s
economic policies and become an engine for future growth. First, responsibility for support to MSMEs
was moved from the Social Investment Fund (FHIS) to the Ministry o f Trade and Industry. In addition,
Government created the National Commission for Micro- and Small-Enterprises to begin coordinating the
various meso-level activities (NGOs, micro-finance institutions and training programs) targeted to
MSMEs and has begun strengthening M S M E associations as a vehicle for provision o f business and
technical training and knowledge services.

Pillar IV: Investing in Human Capital
32.
As noted in para 15, Honduras has made considerable progress in increasing access to education
and health over the past decade, but human capital indicators remain lower than those o f many o f i t s
neighbors. Analysis o f the country’s education sector indicates that the average level o f education o f the
population aged 10 years and older i s s t i l l low, at 4.7 years, and that the gross completion rates of children
enrolled in primary education i s only 69 percent. While there has been substantial improvement in
primary education coverage and literacy indicators in recent years, high repetition rates, large proportions
o f over-age students, and unacceptably high dropout rates are having a serious impact on the efficiency
and performance o f Honduras’s educational system. Indeed, 26.1 and 17.5 percent respectively of total
social expenditures are absorbed by repeaters and dropouts. In addition, coverage at secondary school
level i s very low at 35 percent, and preschool education (one grade prior to primary schooling) covers
only 42 percent of the 5.5-6.5 year old cohort. The return on education i s s t i l l the lowest in the countries
of Central America, reflecting low quality. This, in turn, has depressed demand for education in
Honduras. Given this context, the PRSP places high priority on strengthening the education sector and
lays out the core elements of a strategy for improvement at the various levels o f education.
33.
In light o f the PRSP targets and overall poverty reduction objectives, highest priority within the
strategy i s given to the improvement o f access and quality in basic education (grades 1-9), which have
been the focus of Government attention over the past year. Government, with donor and N G O support,
has achieved some important advances in improving the quality o f basic education including reforming
the curriculum, introducing active and participatory pedagogical methods, improving instructional
materials and teacher training, and monitoring education quality through sample-based standardized
testing in 3‘d and 6” grade (and 9” grade to be implemented for the school year 2003). However, for these
efforts to have a measurable impact in the classroom, concerted effort w i l l also be needed to substantially
improve the management o f human resources in the education sector. In recent years, weak management
o f school calendars and daily schedules has led to a significant reduction in effective class time, and the
situation has been exacerbated b y high teacher absenteeism due in part to the occurrence o f frequent

teachers’ strikes. As a result, students only receive instruction for an average o f 100-110 days per year
(for 3-4 hours each day) - i.e., only about 30 per cent o f the time needed to complete curricular goals.
34.
Despite this abysmal performance, pay rises for teachers have continued unabated. Teacher
salaries have increased 62 percent in the last four years under a special wage regime (Estatutos de
Docentes) approved by Congress in 1997. In 2002, the new administration took steps to reverse this trend
by phasing the wage increases scheduled for that year over a four-year period extending to 2005, after
which all increases would be tied to increases in the minimum wage (indexed to the CPI) and subject to
the availability o f budgetary resources. However, even this (more favorable) deal w i l l continue to have a
sizable impact on the public sector wage bill and crowd out other planned education expenditures for
improvements in coverage and quality. Passage o f the comprehensive civil service reform law, which the
Government i s currently presenting to Congress (para ll),
could help ameliorate the situation from a
fiscal angle - at least in the medium term--but improved management o f schools w i l l also be necessary to
enforce improved work discipline on the part o f teachers and administrators. In this regard, a core
priority for reform in the education sector concerns systematic expansion (especially in rural areas) o f a
model for school-based management with community participation which has been piloted under the socalled PROHECO scheme, supported by the Bank.

35.
Finally, given the large number o f donors active in the education sector in Honduras each with
separate ring-fenced projects, complicated administrative procedures and differing objectives,
Government has been stressing the need to develop a common vision for, and coordinated support of,
education development in Honduras. To facilitate this, a key cross-donor effort was put in place through
the creation of a formal forum for multi-donor planning and strategic coordination called MERECE
(Mesa Redonda de Donantes en Educacion). In parallel, the acceptance of Honduras’ proposal for the
achievement o f universal primary education by the Education For All Fast Track Initiative (EFA-FTI) -one o f only 7 proposals to be accepted world-wide -- has provided a concrete framework to test the ability
o f donors to work together towards implementation of a common goal. The current status o f the EFA
process in Honduras i s described in some detail in Box C. The EFA initiative w i l l be fully integrated into
the PRSP progress report, which i s currently under preparation.
36.
The second component of the PRSP’s human capital pillar concerns the provision of better access
to high-quality health services to the Honduran population, including adequate coverage o f rural
dwellers. As previously discussed (para 15), Honduras has made important progress in expanding the
coverage o f public health and basic services, but a number o f important challenges remain which w i l l
require concerted effort over the medium- to long-term if PRSP and MDG targets in health are to be met.
Currently, the health sector i s characterized by a high degree o f fragmentation between the public, private
and social security sub-sectors, resulting in critical inefficiencies and bottlenecks. Considerable
differences exist between the packages o f services provided to the Secretaria de Salud (SS) population
and the Honduran Institute o f Social Security (IHSS) members. This fragmentation i s exacerbated by a
weak regulatory framework that has not developed the stewardship functions o f the SS related to policy
malung, planning and quality assurance. In addition, the institutional capacity to implement and enforce
regulations i s virtually non-existent. Another key concern, relates to the l o w quality and productivity of
health services, especially in rural areas. A recent FHIS evaluation found that rural health centers had in
stock only 55 percent of basic equipment items and only 43 percent o f the prescribed list of 38 basic
medicines in stock.

37.
In large measure, low quality and productivity are closely linked to human resource management
issues. I t i s estimated that nearly US$4 million are lost each year due to high absenteeism and multiple
employment - highlighting the need for effective civil service reform. Finally, the health sector has been
facing severe financial constraints in recent years. Most notably, the IHSS (which covers about 15
percent of the population) has seen an erosion in real terms o f i t s revenues - and a consequent
deterioration in services --- due to a long-standing ceiling o f 600 Lempiras on payroll contributions. This
was partially corrected in 2001 when the contribution ceiling was raised to 2,400 Lempiras with further
limited increases approved to 2003. The IHSS now needs to ensure that these increased contributions are
channeled to improved services and increased coverage, to help rebuild public confidence in, and demand
for, i t s services.
38.
Against this background, the PRSP emphasizes three broad areas for future investments and
sector reforms. These include: (i)
strengthening the stewardship function o f the SS, including public
health and regulatory functions; (ii)
improving resource allocation, and the financial stability o f the SS
and IHSS; and (iii)
increasing health services coverage, quality and efficiency. In the latter area, the
focus i s on ensuring the availability o f a basic package o f primary health services (including ensuring the
availability of necessary medicines and basic equipment) at all health facilities, and, in particular, on
strengthening services for women and children including reproductive health services and communitybased heath and nutrition promotion for children. Finally in view o f recent findings o f HIV/AIDS
prevalence of 1.6 percent in the adult Honduran population - the highest prevalence in Central America,
following Belize-- Government i s now developing a plan to combat the disease in a comprehensive
manner. The country has recently received a grant from the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria,
which should help facilitate implementation of a national strategy.

Pillar V: Strengthening Social Protection for Specific Groups

39.
The overall objective o f the PRSP’s fifth pillar i s to improve the welfare o f population
groups living in vulnerable situations and poverty conditions, focusing especially on children and
adolescents, the elderly, women, disabled persons and ethnic minorities. A key aspect o f
achieving this objective concerns rationalizing the country’s array o f existing social safety net
programs, which though effective to varying degrees in terms o f their individual goals, do not
collectively satisfactorily address the needs o f the most vulnerable groups. A recent assessment
o f Honduras’ social safety net indicates that programs are frequently duplicative and overlapping
in assisting particular groups, while other -equally needy - groups are virtually untouched by
existing programs. For example, multiple programs touch on the health, nutrition, early stimulation

and education issues of small children - often in an uncoordinated way, using contradictory designs. At
the same time, little attention i s paid to adolescents, disabled persons or indigenous communities. In this
context, a core strategic objective o f this pillar i s to reorient the activities o f the Honduras two main safety
net programs, the FHIS and the PRAF away from general development activities (such as infrastructure
development) -- which should increasingly be taken on b y local authorities under the Government’s
decentralization efforts -- and towards a more focused support for the identified vulnerable groups. Some
progress in this direction i s already apparent. For example, the FHIS has begun to promote and support
social assistance projects for specific vulnerable groups (at-risk children and adolescents, the handicapped
and the elderly). I t has also embarked on a major effort to support Afro-Honduran and indigenous groups
to develop their communities, in part through the Bank-supported “Nuestru Ruices” program.

40.
In addition to improving the targeting and focus o f the country’s social safety net, the PRSP
places high priority within this pillar on promoting gender equity and equality. While the Gender
Development Index (GDI)5 has seen an improvement from 0.600 in 1998 to 0.633 in 2002 which
indicates progress towards gender equality, i t s t i l l only places Honduras at a rank o f 98 out of 146
countries measured, and i s only above Guatemala in Central America. While women’s participation in
administrative, professional and technical posts i s slightly higher than that o f men, their earnings amount
to only about one-third the incomes of men on average. In addition, women’s representation in political
life i s low - e.g., only 8.6 percent o f Congressional representatives are women. However, broad civil
society participation in the nomination o f Supreme Court judges has seen increased representation o f
women on the bench, reaching 60 percent at the current time. Against this background, the PRSP calls
for better enforcement o f women’s rights including the Law o f Equal Opportunity for Women and
systematic mainstreaming o f gender issues in development programs (e.g., land regularization and MSME
development) to improve women’s economic inclusion. Some progress in these areas i s already apparent.
In addition, an important aim i s to explicitly incorporate gender equity concerns in the allocation of public
resources. Moreover, in view o f high incidence of domestic violence against women in Honduras, the
PRSP calls for revision of the Law against Domestic Violence and i t s strict enforcement.
41.
The last component o f the PRSP’s social protection pillar concerns improving the socio-economic
status of Afro-Honduran and 10 ethnic indigenous groups (7 percent o f the total population) which
tend to be poorer than the general population and are severely underserved by public programs. Besides
stressing the need to specifically address the needs o f these groups within other PRSP priorities
(especially land regularization, health, education, SMSE development and safety nets), the PRSP also
seeks to strengthen the right o f ethnic groups to self-development based on their own identity. To help
achieve this, the intention i s to put in place a National Ethnic Council with the responsibility for

’ The G D I measures the same variables as the Human Development Index (HDI) but measures the inequality between
men and women.

18

Honduras..Country A sxikfance Strateav

developing a national agenda to facilitate proper coordination o f programs and projects benefiting ethnic
communities and ensuring adequate funding from public and private sources.

Pillar VI: Guaranteeing Sustainability
42.
Recognizing that the sustainability of many (if not all) o f the priorities and programs discussed in
the preceding five pillars i s highly dependent on a State where transparency, participation, justice,
personal security and effective public management prevail, the last pillar o f Honduras’ PRSP emphasizes
the need to significantly improve the country’s governance structure and processes. It also emphasizes
another aspect o f sustainable growth and poverty reduction - namely, the need to reverse the process o f
environmental deterioration, reduce ecological vulnerability and mitigate the impact o f future natural
disasters on Honduras’ people and development advances.
43.
Improving governance and transparency in public management continues to be an extremely
important priority for Honduras’ development agenda. Shortly after taking office, the Maduro
administration renewed the mandate of the National Anti-Corruption Council (NAC), under the
leadership of Cardinal Rodriguez. The NAC, which i s comprised of both government and c i v i l society
representatives, i s now moving ahead with implementation o f the recommendations of i t s anti-corruption
strategy with the full support o f the Administration. Several o f the actions recommended concern
improvements to public sector accountability. These are described below.
44.
A key priority identified by government -- with support from the IDB, the Bank, the EU and
some bilateral donors - i s the strengthening of systems for financial management and public procurement,
in line with the recommendations o f NAC. In a preliminary move towards increasing public sector
accountability, Government has recently taken steps to establish a strong Office o f the Auditor General,
through the merging o f the office of the Comptroller General and the Ethics Office. I t has also secured
approval o f a new State Procurement Law which brings all Government agencies under a single set o f
rules, provides for the establishment o f a new Procurement Regulatory Office, mandates open competitive
procedures for procurement (including some leveling o f the playing field between international and local
suppliers) and includes important disclosure provisions. However, considerable effort i s s t i l l needed to.
effectively implement the provisions of the new law, including establishment o f the new national
procurement office and effective dissemination o f i t s provisions to the various government agencies, the
private sector and the general public. Action plans to complete the organizational and institutional
framework for an improved procurement system are currently being developed, in part with assistance
from the IDB under i t s Program o f Efficiency and Transparency in Government Procurement. A full set
o f recommendations for further implementation of procurement improvements w i l l be included in the
Country Procurement Assessment Review (CPAR) update, being prepared jointly by the IDB and the
Bank, and which i s scheduled for completion by mid-2003.
45.
In parallel with improvements to procurement, Government, with Bank assistance, i s beginning to
focus on upgrading and modernizing government financial management systems, streamlining processes
and procedures, and rationalizing and strengthening institutions responsible for ensuring accountability.
In this regard, Government i s keenly aware of the need to both update the legal framework that governs
financial management as well as to urgently upgrade human resources for financial management
throughout the public sector. Further detailed areas for action are being defined in the context of the
ongoing CFAA, which i s being prepared by the Bank with the full cooperation of the Honduran
Government. The C F A A i s expected to be completed in June 2002 but preliminary findings have already
been discussed with, and endorsed by, Government. These are described in Box D below.

46.
Finally, the active participation o f civil society organizations (CSOs) in public life i s an
important factor contributing to strengthening governance in Honduras. A notable success has been the
role o f CSOs in the selection of new Supreme Court justices (see para 47 below). Moreover, civil society
i s fairly represented in the Consultative Council for the PRS, where they are expected to shape the
revisions to the PRSP and carry out social audit functions. Government, with support from the Bank and
a number of other donors, i s exploring ways to ensure regular consultation with CSOs in the monitoring
of PRSP implementation including the audit o f public expenditures and monitoring of public service
delivery. The government also intends to seek ways to further involve indigenous and Afro-Honduran
communities in public decision making and in sharing the benefits of economic growth.
47.
The second major component o f the PRSP’s Sustainability pillar involves strengthening o f the
judiciary and the rule of law, including improving the personal security o f the Honduran population.
The judicial system in Honduras has traditionally been plagued by inefficiency, corruption, political
patronage in appointments, weak human and financial resources, archaic laws and administrative
bottlenecks. Recognizing these shortcomings, the Maduro administration has embarked upon a program
to strengthen the rule of law, promote judicial independence, improve judicial system performance and
strengthen the access to justice o f disadvantaged population groups. Consequently, reforms have recently
been passed and implementation work has already commenced. The first step in the process has been the
enactment of a constitutional amendment (in 2002) to enable the selection and appointment of a new
Supreme Court through a transparent process involving civil society participation and open competition.
The number o f justices was increased from nine to 15 and the term of office increased to seven years, thus
greatly improving judicial independence. Since i t s appointment early last year, the new Supreme Court
has taken the lead in improving the performance o f the Judicial Branch and has already implemented a
proactive program to fight corruption within the judiciary, introduce oral procedures in penal courts,
develop training plans for staff and judges, and establish justice o f the peace courts.

48.
In parallel with judicial reforms, the Government has given high priority to increasing the
personal security o f Hondurans. Restoration of public security was at the center of the PN’s platform
during the last electoral campaign, in response to a sharp rise in crime and drugs-related gang violence in
Honduras in recent years. While concrete data are lacking, there i s some evidence that, besides i t s severe
human impact on Honduran citizens, the high incidence o f crime may have been a key factor in the
closure of some muquilu (assembly for re-export) operations and i s acting as a brake on new investments
in manufacturing and tourism. To combat this trend towards increasing crime, the Government has
embarked on a highly-publicized “zero tolerance” campaign against crime, including deploying additional
police and security forces in urban areas and expanding their powers of search, seizure and detention.

49.
The third major component under Pillar V I relates to modernization and decentralization of
public administration in Honduras. In this regard, the major challenge facing the country i s civil service
reform. The central government employs around 110,000 people, or about 5 percent o f the total labor
force, with a wage bill that accounted for 10.7 percent of GDP in 2002. Civil service reform i s long
overdue and critical to modernising the public sector and delivering on the country’s poverty reduction
strategy. Key deficiencies in the current system include: lack o f a coherent public sector wage policy;
political interference in recruitment and excessive staff turnover during changes in administration; high
absenteeism and multiple employment; significant s k i l l s mismatch; and, lack o f performance evaluation
systems. The civil service reform law currently being prepared for presentation to Congress w i l l address
many o f the shortcomings identified. However, implementation w i l l probably be a difficult process
requiring sustained commitment and widespread popular support.
50.
Another aspect o f public sector modernization emphasized in the PRSP concerns more rapid
progress towards decentralization. To further this end, the PRSP calls for creation of a single agency the Ministry o f Governance and Justice - to serve as the normative entity for the coordination and
regulation o f the municipal sector and to support the development o f local governments and communities.
It also seeks to strengthen the role of local governments as development promotion agencies, inter alia,
by reforming the Law of Municipalities, transferring responsibility for the management of natural
resources, developing institutional capacities for planning and evaluation, establishing clear guidelines for
partnerships with the private sector (for service provision) and with civil society (for program monitoring)
and moving forward with fulfilling legal requirements for revenue transfers to local governments within
the constraints imposed by the need to maintain a stable macro-economic framework. Thus far progress
on decentralization has been relatively slow in Honduras, in part reflecting political difficulties mentioned
at the outset of this report (para 1). The Government i s developing a strategy to “reformulate social
policy” focusing on decentralizing responsibility for the provision o f selected social services to the local
level, focusing initially on the 80 poorest municipalities and 7 cities. This initiative is, however, s t i l l in
the early stages and its future i s s t i l l unclear.
51.
Finally, Pillar V I emphasizes the need for much greater attention to environmental issues as a
core element in increasing the sustainability o f Honduras’ poverty reduction strategy. Honduras’
topographical features, predominantly mountainous with narrow coastal plains and numerous inland
valleys, make sustainable environmental management difficult. High population growth, skewed land
ownership, conflictive tenure and usufruct situations in public forest lands, inappropriate land
management and forestry policies have been responsible for the conversion o f large areas of forest for
activities of dubious economic value and the depletion o f coastal and marine resources. A clear effect has
been the loss of the environmental services provided by the forested uplands and the lowland, tropical
forests -- degradation o f water quality and o f soil resources, increased vulnerability to natural disasters,
and the loss of biodiversity. Inappropriate land use and human settlement patterns have adversely
impacted watersheds and accentuated the country’s vulnerability to natural disasters such as Hurricane
Mitch.

52.
Honduras has diverse ecosystems, with rich flora and fauna, particularly in i t s humid tropical and
subtropical forests. The Honduran National System of Protected Areas (SLNAPH) has 107 protected
areas which represent about 45 percent of forest areas. However, the current policy and institutional
framework does not allow effective enforcement o f environmental laws and regulations. In addition, due
to limited financial resources, only one quarter o f the protected areas are actually serviced, many are not
adequately demarcated and penalties for misuse are inadequately enforced. Improving Honduras’s
environmental management will mean addressing a number o f key institutional challenges. Prominent
among these are: (i)
the legal definition and security of property ownership and rights to invest in and
benefit from forests and land; (ii)reform o f the current public forest institution and strengthening o f the
lead environmental institutions, decentralization of environmental management, and development of
clearly defined strategies for protected areas and land use; (iii)
implementation o f programs to encourage
community participation and empowerment; (iv) establishment o f a framework o f rights, responsibilities
and subsequently, clear incentives for environmental management; (v) integration o f environmental
management concerns into sectoral and development planning; and (vi) development of regionallyintegrated environmental management strategies. Many of these are already addressed under other pillars
of the poverty reduction strategy, especially Pillar 11(reducing rural poverty). Finally, i t should be noted
that since 2001, Government, has required the conduct of environmental impact assessment for all
infrastructural investments both public and private. The Government i s now in the process of transferring
responsibility for the conduct and review o f these impact assessments to local authorities, while, in
parallel, strengthening local capacitating.
53.
Finally, i t i s necessary to continue to strengthen Honduras’s capacity for management of natural
disasters. Hurricane Mitch exposed weaknesses in the design and construction quality of public works;
urban planning and emergency response capacity.
The government’s plan for environmental
sustainability and disaster mitigation i s focused on policies and programs to: (i)
create an appropriate
legal and institutional framework and ensure full compliance with the law - Draft Laws pending
legislative approval include Land-Use Planning, Water, Forestry and one for the establishment of a
National System for Risk Reduction and Emergency Planning; (ii)decentralize responsibility for
environmental management to local governments; (iii)
improve and make more transparent procedures for
environmental impact assessments and licensing; (iv) apply financial and economic instruments to
promote conservation and sustainable use of natural resources; (v) implement a national biodiversity
action plan, and; (vi) promote active community and civil society participation in environmental
protection and risk-management activities, especially in areas with the most vulnerable sub-populations.
Many o f these issues have begun to be addressed, in part with assistance from a Bank-financed project.

111. THE WORLD BANK GROW’S PARTNERSHIP WITH HONDURAS
The Last CAS: Impact and Lessons
54.
The previous CAS was discussed by the Board o f Executive Directors in February 2000.
Developed in the aftermath o f Hurricane Mitch (late 1998), the overall thrust o f the last CAS was to help
Honduras rebuild, while laying the basis for a stronger economy and a more equitable distribution of
growth. With regard to the longer-term reform agenda, the overriding priority o f the CAS was to assist
the Government to develop, adopt and implement an outcome-based poverty reduction strategy, with a
strong emphasis on improving social service provision, strengthening the safety net, fostering indigenous
and Afro-Honduran people’s development, mainstreaming gender and supporting sustainable rural
development. The strategy supported faster growth, as an essential complement to poverty reduction,
through infrastructure rehabilitation, strengthening the financial system and private sector development.
I t also sought to ensure sustained progress via a focus on macro-economic stability, institution building,

22

Honduras: Country A swktance StrateRv

governance improvements and improved environmental management and disaster-preparedness. The
CAS base case lending scenario amounted to US$3 17 million, reflecting an extraordinary increase to
support Government’s post-Mitch reconstruction program.

IDA Experience
What worked well. The last CAS identified six criteria for judging the success o f the Bank’s
55.
assistance over FYs00-02: (i)
developing and implementing an outcome-based poverty reduction strategy;
(ii)improving the quality o f social services; (iii)
strengthening the social safety net; (iv) improving
indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples’ development; (v) mainstreaming gender as a policy
consideration; and (vi) supporting rural development. In broad terms, performance on all o f these
measures was satisfactory. Most notably, the PRSP was completed in 2001, and i s now central to the
country’s development agenda. Bank assistance has also been instrumental in strengthening statistical
capacity and poverty monitoring (including improved disaggregation o f data by race, ethnicity and
gender) driving the reorientation of the government’s social policy agenda. Important advances .were
made in education via the PROHECO program, which expanded coverage and improved quality through
the establishment o f 1,250 community-managed schools and bilingual education. Social safety nets were
strengthened, particularly the FHIS which i s now well-established and, by and large, working effectively
in poor communities, including special emphases on women, and Afro-Honduran and indigenous groups.
The rural development agenda also moved forward with significant improvements occurring (through the
Rural Land Management Project) in land regularization, strengthening involvement o f and providing
benefits to forest dwelling communities through management o f public forests, development o f privatized
technical service provision to households of rural poor in public forest lands, and a successful “Access T o
Land Pilot” project to provide the poor with land via private financing. Progress on gender
mainstreaming has also occurred with a recognized “Best Practice” approach to gender in provision o f
extension services through the Rural Land Management Project and improved health care for women at
primary care centers as well as a number of activities targeted to women under the FHIS.
56.
The Bank was also able to provide timely and effective support to post-Mitch reconstruction
efforts. A Fast-Track Hurricane Emergency Project for US$200 million was approved to provide balance
of payments support for financing critical imports during the immediate reconstruction phase. T h i s
operation was recently reviewed by OED and found to have been satisfactory in i t s overall design and
impact. In addition, the Bank restructured five ongoing operations within existing credit amounts that
financed about US$75 million of hurricane-related expenditures. In addition, five supplemental
operations were approved to provide the additional funding needed to accomplish project objectives after
the hurricane. At the request of several donor countries, the Bank established, and i s s t i l l administering,
the Central American Emergency Trust Fund (CAETF) to which donor contributions were made to
support Honduras (and other hurricane-affected countries) in covering multilateral debt service payments.
To date about US$115 million has been paid to Honduras’ multilateral creditors on i t s behalf via the
CAETF. The effective implementation o f reconstruction programs by government and civil society
enabled Honduras to complete most reconstruction tasks by the end o f 2001. Honduras has also begun (in
part with Bank assistance) to strengthen i t s disaster mitigation capabilities through strengthening national
and local level capacity for disaster prevention (including early warnings and land use planning) and the
establishment o f disaster vulnerability programs in municipalities most vulnerable to natural disasters.
57.
Budgetary support from the Bank and other donors and sound macroeconomic management in the
initial CAS period led to a resumption o f growth in 2000 and 2001 (real GDP grew by 5.7 and 2.6 percent
respectively). Enhanced HIPC debt relief came one step closer to fruition when Honduras achieved the
Decision Point in July 2000. During the period 2000-2002, Honduras received US$168.9 million of
interim debt relief. Unfortunately, as previously discussed, lax fiscal management during 200 1, an
election year, and a deteriorating external environment at the end o f the same year, led to the derailment

o f the macro-framework, stalling the on-going PRGF program with the IMF and significantly delaying
achievement o f the HIPC Completion Point. However, important improvements occurred on the
governance front including the formation of the National Anti-Corruption Council with civil society
participation, the establishment o f the Office of the Auditor General and the significant reforms o f the
judicial system referred to earlier (paras 43 and 47).

58.

What went poorly. As noted above, macroeconomic management weakened significantly in the
last year of the previous CAS, largely due to the ballooning public sector wage bill. Progress toward
structural reforms was also mixed. Given the government’s preoccupation with the reconstruction agenda
and the narrow window o f opportunity for deep structural reform (due to long electoral campaign
periods), Honduras made little progress in implementing i t s institutional reform agenda -- including
public sector modernization, civil service reform and decentralization. A marked failure was in the
financial sector where early warnings (including two bank failures) of sector weaknesses were largely
ignored. Similarly, insufficient emphasis was given to improving the business climate and facilitating
private sector growth, including expanding the role o f the private sector in the provision o f public
services. Other areas where structural reform measures were stalled as a result o f political opposition
include forestry and water, as discussed in Section I1above.

59.
T o a large extent, the above failures reflect the problems encountered b y successive Honduran
Governments in generating a strong national consensus around the exigencies o f sound macroeconomic
management and the benefits of structural reform. In many instances, progress on reform has stalled due
to popular opposition, despite strong commitment by senior decision-makers in Government. This, in
turn, suggests the need for sustained effort to develop a continuous dialogue with civil society and key
sectoral stakeholders on development issues, prior to the launching o f new initiatives. In this regard, the
consultation process surrounding the PRSP and the PRSP Progress Report have for the first time provided
a forum for consultation with civil society leaders, the private sector, the catholic church and other
stakeholders on the country’s development vision, reform agenda and program implementation. This
consultation system has recently been formalized via the creation o f permanent mechanism -- the Poverty
Reduction Strategy Consultative Council - to maintain continuous dialogue with c i v i l society, other key
stakeholders and the donor community on the implementation o f the Poverty Reduction Strategy. The
challenge for the Government over this CAS period i s to effectively engage with the Council on the
content, design and implementation o f development programs and structural reforms. This should go a
long way towards ensuring smoother progress on the reform program and the sustainability o f policy and
structural changes.

60.
Portfolio Performance. The Honduras portfolio, at the time o f the last CAS, had eleven projects
under implementation. Since then, eight new projects were approved and a similar number closed6. As of
March 31, 2003, the portfolio contained eleven projects for a total commitment o f US$293 million, of
which US$l85 million remain undisbursed. The Honduras portfolio i s relatively young, with an average
implementation period o f only 2.3 years in FY02. Despite sporadic implementation delays, all active
projects are currently rated satisfactory both in terms o f achieving their Development Objectives and
Implementation Progress. Table 5 below provides an overview o f portfolio performance.

O f the eight projects closed, two were rated unsatisfactory in the achievement o f development outcomes by OED.
However, in one o f these cases, the project had been restructured to respond to the Hurricane Mitch emergency. As
acknowledged by OED the project had performed fully satisfactorily with respect to the reprogrammed activities.
However, a formal “unsatisfactory” rating had to be given to the project, since reprogramming meant that the
project’s original objectives had not been met by the time o f completion.

Table 5: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance FY97-FY03a

............ .....................................................
~

a. As of May 15,2003.

61.
Summary of Lessons from Recent Portfolio Performance. The last formal Country Portfolio
Performance Review took place in April 2000 - however the current administration has set up the
Executive Office for Project Monitoring (OPSP) in the Presidency to help resolve emerging project issues
on an ongoing basis. A number o f issues and lessons were drawn through careful monitoring o f the
portfolio, consultations with Task Team Leaders and a recent Portfolio Review Meeting with project
managers o f ongoing Bank projects and senior government officials. This consultative process has helped
to shape this CAS, and w i l l be considered in future project design. Key lessons learned include:
Financial management and procurement: Financial management and procurement expertise i s weak
which in some cases affects project implementation. Sharing experiences among Project
Implementation Units (PIUs) and training o f procurement personnel should be considered key
elements of project development to avoid implementation delays in the future. Moreover, the Bank
and IDB via the CPAR and CFAA and their follow-up are working with Honduras to significantly
strengthen the country’s capacities in these areas.
Participation of stakeholders: Inadequate participation o f stakeholders in project development can
impede project ownership and the longer-term sustainability o f policy reform and investments. T o
address this issue, the Bank intends to: (i)
significantly enhance consultations and consensus-building
efforts with key stakeholders (e.g. central and local government, civil society, and donors) in the
design and throughout implementation of new and existing operations; and (ii)actively support,
through advice and technical assistance, the effective functioning o f the Poverty Reduction Strategy
Consultative Council, which i s a promising forum for the generation of consensus on policy reforms
and program implementation strategies.
External assistance coordination: The demands o f multiple, ring-fenced assistance operations supported
by different development partners have greatly stretched Honduras’ limited capacity for policy
formulation and progradproject implementation. Improved coordination with donors (including via
new lending modalities such as SWAPSand programmatic lending) i s therefore, a high priority.
Moreover, with the Bank’s IDA resource envelope decreasing from i t s peak in the post-Mitch era,
program selectivity and effective coordination with other development partners will assume even more
importance in the effort to assist Government in achieving PRSP objectives.

IFC and MIGA Experience

62.

ZFC. In the previous CAS period, IFC’s priorities included: (i)
assisting Honduras in extending
private participation in infrastructure; (ii)
strengthening the financial sector and broadening access to
capital; (iii)
helping to improve the enabling environment for the private sector in Honduras; and (iv)
selectively providing direct financing in industry, services, and agribusiness. Given Honduras’ weak
business environment during the period and consequent limitations on viable financing opportunities, IFC
focused on providing a mix o f investment and non-investment activities aimed at the above priority areas

at both country and regional levels. Some lessons o f IFC’s experience during this period included: (i)
the
regional approach increased investment opportunities for IFC in Central America due to economies o f
scale; and (ii)many small- and medium-sized enterprises need capacity-building prior to accessing
financing.
63.
In the financial sector, IFC has recently been involved in three regional projects for a committed
total o f US$48.7 million. These projects, in the Central America Growth Fund (a private equity fund),
Cuscatlan (a regional financial group), and TUCA (a credit bureau company), aim to help strengthen
Central America’s financial sector by improving access to capital for competitive f i r m s and strengthening
asset quality management practices.
64.
To help improve the enabling environment in Honduras, FIAS, jointly with IDA, studied the
business environment for foreign direct investment, assisting in setting a strategic reform agenda. The
study, which was released in May 2001, identified five areas for improvement (deregulation; legal
system; economic opening for increased competition; privatization o f infrastructure; and education) to
better attract foreign investment and recommended strengthened collaboration between the public and
private sectors in the process of moving forward.
65.
In infrastructure, IFC has been in discussions since 1998-99 on potential advisory work on the
privatization of a distribution arm of the ENEE (Empresa Nacional de Energia Electrica), a Honduran
power utility, with a view to increasing private participation in the sector. The privatization program was
stalled under the previous administration as the proposed Electricity Law was not approved. The Maduro
administration however aims at re-launching power sector reform, including unbundling of the ENEE and
subsequent privatization of a couple o f the resultant (distribution) companies. In this context, the Maduro
Government has requested IFC to move ahead on i t s advisory work with respect to the privatization
program and the activity i s expected be launched shortly.
66.
In Central America IFC also reviewed a few projects in support o f private participation in
infrastructure, which led to investments in two regional projects in power and information technology for
a total amount o f US$23 million. The results of these investments have thus far been uneven, due to the
nascent and fragmented nature of the infrastructure sector in the Central American region, particularly in
terms o f private participation.
In Honduras, IFC also considered financing for an airport concession
project and undertook due diligence studies. I t did not proceed, however, because o f an added investment
requirement under the concession that made the project unbankable on commercial terms.
67.

Finally, during the last CAS period, IFC provided technical assistance (TA) supported by several

trust funds, which complement IFC’s investment operation. On the country level, TA was provided to
assist in privatization, modernization and expansion o f HondTel, a state-owned telephone network, and in

drafting o f a new legislative framework for insurance. On the regional level in Central America, IFC’s
projects covering Honduras included: an insurance market and investment assessment; SME development
efforts; a private health and education development initiative; and a study on a possible insurance scheme
against natural disasters. The SME and health and education projects covered Honduras, Guatemala,
Nicaragua and El Salvador, the countries hit by the Hurricane Mitch.
68.
As o f April 2003, IFC’s outstanding portfolio in Honduras stood at a total of US$26 million
including US$5 million for participant’s account, with three companies in agribusiness, power, and
tourism.
69.
MZGA. MIGA’s experience in Honduras up until the present has been consistent with the private
sector development strategy for the country and has centered on facilitating private sector participation in
infrastructure, particularly in the energy sector. Ip this regard, MIGA has issued six contracts o f
guarantee, which mobilized US$7 1.2 million o f investments in the power sector. Three of these contracts

are currently outstanding, accounting for an exposure o f US$11.3 million, none of which i s reinsured.
This exposure accounts for 0.22 percent o f MIGA’s overall gross portfolio and 0.36 percent of MIGA’s
portfolio net of reinsurance. The existing pipeline o f projects in Honduras includes applications for
coverage in the infrastructure sector -- continuing interest in the power sector, and a waste treatment
project - and interest has also been expressed in the financial sector. MIGA has only begun to provide
technical assistance to Honduras and in this regard cannot provide any experience-related comments on
sector targeting or investment promotion initiatives generally.

Cooperation with Development Partners
70.
Sources of External Assistance. Aid assistance from the international donor community plays a
crucial role in supporting the implementation of Honduras’ PRSP. The volume o f aid approved for
Honduras over the past 5 or so years exceeds US$2.3 billion (almost one-third of GDP) and consists of
357 operations under implementation. As this suggests, the Bank Group’s program o f assistance i s only a
part o f a complex mosaic o f externally-assisted programs supported by a large number o f development
partners (Table 6). The Bank has been the second largest lender to Honduras, after the ZDB, which
accounts for about 27 percent o f aid operations currently under implementation. IDB’s portfolio in
execution consists o f 34 projects and 74 technical cooperation activities for an amount o f US$621 million.
Annual disbursements in the period 2000-2002 have averaged about US$77 million and disbursements for
2003-2005 are projected at about US$85 million annually. In November 2002, IDB presented i t s Country
Strategy for the four year period 2002-2005 with a base case lending program o f US$460 million
consisting o f 20 projects. O f this amount, about US$125 million would be provided as programmatic
budgetary support loans for poverty reduction and financial sector strengthening - these operations w i l l
be closely coordinated with the Bank’s proposed adjustment operations under this CAS. IDB’s
investment operations are listed in Table 6. The IDB also plays an important role in assisting
Government with the organizing and chairing o f the Consultative Group process. Following IDB and the
Bank, the EU i s Honduras’ third largest multilateral partner, with about 18 operations under
implementation for an amount of US$l50 million, o f which about US$lOO million i s currently available.
A memorandum of understanding was signed with the Government in March 2001 for an aid package of
147 million Euro for the period 2000-2006. The EU’s Country Strategy for 2002-2006 continues to
emphasize support for strengthening local government and development; secondary education, and the
sustainable management o f natural resources.
71.
Among bilateral partners, USAZD i s the largest, with a portfolio o f 18 programs under
implementation for an amount o f about US$320 million, o f which about US$119 million i s s t i l l available.
More than half of these resources are for programs for potable water supply, family health and food aid.
Other areas include: economic policy reform and productivity; vocational education; protected areas,
watershed and forests; and democracy building. Future programmed support includes strengthening
secondary cities, trade diversification, education, health and governance. Honduras has also been
identified as a potential recipient for resources from the US Government’s Millennium Challenge
Account. Japan i s the next largest bilateral donor with a portfolio o f 17 programs for an amount o f
U S $ l l 6 million, of which about US$38 million remains to be disbursed. Japan’s support covers: poverty
reduction; education; infrastructure, agriculture; health and sanitation, and; housing. Spain’s assistance
amounts to about US$lOO million, o f which about US$67 i s currently un-disbursed, for programs in
education, housing, water and sanitation, local government development, judiciary, democracy building
and environment. Other active donors include Italy (US$68 million), Germany (US$50 million), Canada
($43 million), Taiwan (US$36 million), Sweden (US$19 million), Netherlands (US$13 million) and the
United Kingdom (US$9 million). Canadian assistance through C I D A i s being implemented through i t s
strategy for 2002-2008 known as ProMesas which w i l l support PRSP implementation in five key areas,
namely: education, health, water and sanitation, forestry and rural development. Support w i l l also be
provided for cross-cutting themes such as equity, gender, decentralization and governance.

TABLE6: DONORACTIVITIES

AND SUSTAINABLE

Competitiveness ($1Omill); Financial
Sector PBL ($25miIl); Global Credit
($35mill), Supportfor Poverty
Reduction PBL ($60mill); Highway
Rehabilitation ($50mill).

11. REDUCING RURALPOVERTY

i Revitalization o f Rural Economy;
RuralLand
i Potable Water and Sanitation;
Management ($42
: mill), Access to Land
j
I Pilot ($8mill), Roads i Pro-Forest ($20mill); Poverty
: Reconstruction and
1 Reduction and Local Development
Improvement ($67
($35mi11); Electricity Transmission
i mill)
L and Supply ($20mill);

I

and social services

111. REDUCING
URBAN
POVERTY

i
I

I

- Health and Nutrition
- Education

Nnnmv

i
1
i
i

R u r a l Development: F A D , FAO,
Netherlands, Canada, Switzerland,
CABEI, Japan, Germany, EU, Sweden,
UNDP,USAID
, Irrigation: Italy, Kuwait

1

Municipal Development Program;
Post Hurricane Housing; San Pedro
1 Sula Development 11; Program to
1 Fight Urban Poverty; Puerto Cortes
I Sewerage;

. Housing & U r b a n Development:
Taiwan, EU, USAID, Sweden
I Water & Sanitation: Sweden, Canada,
Japan, Switzerland, USAID, EU, Nordic
; Fund, Italy

i Suvvlementarv Water & Sanitation

i

I ($Gmill);

‘

Iv. INVESTMENT IN HUMAN
CAPITAL

i Communitv Based

Education ;$42 mill),
Health System
Reform ($27 mill);

1 Basic & Middle Education; National

Education: Sweden, Canada, USAID,
Germany, Japan, Spain, EU, CABEI, Italy,
Netherlands, Nordic Fund, DFID
Health: USAID, Spain, EU, Sweden,
Japan, Global Fund to fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malana
Nutrition: wFp, USAID, EU, UNDP,
Japan, F A 0

Education Reform; Expansion o f
Technological Capacities in Poor
Communities; Reorganization o f
Health System;

Secondary Education and Technical
Training ($34mill),

v.

a

USAID: Policy and produstiiity
Enhancement
S\IE Development: German), L’SAID.
Spain, Switzerland, Setherlands
Financial Sector: CABEI. Spain
(microfinance).
Transport: CABEI, Japan, Spain,
S ~ e d z n Nordic
,
Development Fund.
OPEC, Kuwait
Energy: Spain. CABEI, Japan. EL, Korea.

Strengthening of Road Sector, Energy
Sector Hybrid; C. Amencan Electnc
Interconnection; Modernization o f
Agncultural Technology Services;

~

- SME development
- Intermediate cities
- Urban infrastructure, housing

OTHER
DONORS

ECONOMIC ;RO\VTH
I\IF: PRGF, financial sector
Road Infrastructure; Institutional

Economic and
Financial
Management
($19mill),IDF grant
Improving Social
Statistics (MECOVI),

i

-

P

I. ACCELERATE
EQUITABLE

- Macroeconomic Framework
- Financial Sector
- Infrastructure
- Pnvate Sector Development
- Labor & Technology
- Trade & Regional Integration

- Land Reform
- Rural Productivity
- Rural Infrastructure
- Improving Social Conditions

SUPPORTING THE SIX PRSP PR( ; R A 3 1 h U T I C ARES

SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR VULNERABLE GROUPS
Social Investment
Farmly Allowances 11, Poverty
Social Investment & Poverty: Spain,
OPEC, KfW, Taiwan, Sweden, CABEI,
Fund V ($60 mill),
Reduction and Local Development,
I D F Grant: AfroSocial Investment Fund 111; Support to Japan, Netherlands, UNDP, Italy, DFID
Indigenous and Afro-Honduran
descendents Comm.
Organizations;
Communities;
PRoFUTURo ( $ I 2
Integrated Social Protection
mill);
j ($30mill);
VI. SUSTAINABILITY OF STRATEGY
GEF Biological
Efficiency and Transparency in Gov’t i Judiciary: USAID, Spain, Netherlands,
- Governance & Transparency
Procurement; Modemization o f
i UNDP
Corridor ($7 mill),
- Judicial Reform
Honduran Congress; Natural Resource i
Sustainable Costal
- Citizen Security
Management in Priority Watersheds;
j Public Security: USAID, Netherlands,
Tourism ($5 mill),
- Public Administration
1 Sweden, UNDP
Emergency Disaster
Bay Islands Environmental
- Decentralization
Management ($11
Management; Modemization o f
- Env’t Protection & Risk
I Transparency: USAID, Sweden, DFID,
Statistics System; Instruments for
mill)
Mitigation
Implementing Poverty Reduction
Canada, Switzerland
Strateev:
u,
Decentralization and Municipal
Enhancement of Public
Development: USAID, Sweden, DFID,
Administration PBL ($40mill),
Germany, Netherlands, Spain, EU, UNDP
Modernization of Justice
! Administrution ($30mill); Valle de
I Sula Public Security ($20mill);
I
a. The table only includes the Wc IBank’s ongoing activities, future activities (lending and non-lending ) are listed in Table 7.
b LDB’s active portfolio had $390 m. undisbursed as o f Nov 02 and its country strategy for 2002-05 has a base case lending planned o f $460 mill.
Social safety nets
- Gender eaualitv
- Indigenous people
-

~

I
~

I

72.
Sector Distribution of Available Aid. The health and nutrition sector i s the largest recipient o f
external assistance, with about US$191 million in available funds. About 70 percent of this i s provided by
the Bank, IDB and USAID for health system reform, public health and food assistance. Other large donors
active in this sector are the EU and Spain. Poverty and social investment operations account for about
US$148 million with about 70 percent being provided by the Bank and IDB, mostly for social investment
funds. Transport i s the second largest recipient sector with about US$156 million available, o f which the
Bank accounts for around 36 percent for roads and bridges and the IDB another 20 percent. CABEI, Japan
and Spain have about US$57 million available for road and bridge rehabilitation. Much o f the investment in
the transport sector i s to repair the damage caused by Hurricane Mitch. Water and sanitation has about
US$121 million available o f which about 82 percent comes from the EU, the IDB and Italy with an
additional 14 percent from Japan and Canada. The EU has an operation to repair and upgrade the water
systems in five municipalities and the IDB has operations in 21 communities. Other sectors with large
donor programs include agriculture and forestry, urban development and housing, governance and
modernization o f the state, education, energy and environmental protection.

Aid Coordination. With over US$1 billion available in external assistance to Honduras, aid
73.
coordination and accelerated implementation of donor-assisted operations i s a major concern for the
country. This i s especially true in light of Honduras’ generally weak institutional capacity and limited
human resource base for project management. Efforts are being made b y the Government to take a more
prominent leadership role in aid coordination with better identification and articulation of aid requests and
improvements in public financial management and oversight mechanisms to facilitate the eventual
adoption of sector wide approaches by donors. As noted earlier, a key step has been the preparation o f
the PRSP, which has provided a framework for donors to coalesce around country-owned priorities.
Moreover, Government has established seven roundtables for aid coordination around specific sectoral
themes to ensure regular exchange of information and improved coordination o f activities. Some external
assistance partners are making dramatic institutional changes to enable this new way o f working (e.g.,
C I D A has recently decided to fully decentralize funding approvals), while many others have changed the
way existing policies are implemented in the country. In addition to the thematic roundtables, a key step
has been the establishment o f the Executive Office for Project Monitoring under the Presidency to
unblock project implementation bottlenecks and accelerate the achievement o f results on the ground.
74.
In addition, Government has been negotiating with donors to restructure a number o f existing
operations to ensure greater coherence between the programs themselves, as well as with the priorities
laid out in the PRSP. There i s also a healthy trend towards division o f labor amongst external assistance
agencies with lead responsibility for dialogue in individual sectors being shared according to comparative
advantages and greater willingness to co-finance operations led b y other donors. For example, the Bank
i s taking the lead on land administration while the IDB w i l l progressively take over leadership on forestry
sector dialogue. In Education, the Bank has been focusing on primary education while the IDB has
concentrated on secondary and technical education. Other areas o f BanWIDB cooperation include the
PRSC, judicial reform, financial sector, water, transport and health. The Bank and the IDB have
fielded joint missions to carry out the C F A A and CPAR exercises and coordinated the formulation o f
their respective CASes. Broader coordination among external partners especially with respect to the
fiduciary requirements for externally supported programs/projects i s underway. An important step was
the implementation in Honduras o f a workshop on aid harmonization in March 2003. The use o f
harmonized reporting and fiduciary arrangements w i l l be piloted under the EFA program.

Objectives of Bank Group Assistance and C A S Development Process

75.
The Bank Group’s assistance over the three and a half-year period covered by this CAS (Fys0306) will support Honduras’ efforts to implement i t s poverty reduction strategy as laid out in the PRSP and

summarized in the preceding section of this report. The core goal i s to support Honduran efforts to shift
to a sustainable and inclusive higher-growth trajectory as a principal means o f reducing poverty and
inequality in line with PRSP and MDG targets. Within this broad objective, and taking into account the
Bank’s comparative advantages as well as the activities o f the Government and other development
partners, the main emphases o f the Bank’s lending and knowledge services to Honduras are three-fold: (i)
to increase productive economic opportunities by helping to address structural and institutional barriers to
economic growth and broad-based participation in growth; (ii)
to continue to invest in human capital and
the protection o f vulnerable groups; and (iii)
to support the transparent and responsive functioning of
the public sector. IFC’s assistance to Honduras over the CAS period will be fully aligned with the first o f
these objectives. I t s priorities will include supporting growth o f export-oriented SMEs, supporting
internationally-competitive firms with inadequate capital access, helping to strengthen the business
environment and supporting the financial sector.
76.
The above objectives and the Bank’s country assistance strategy (discussed below) were
developed via a process o f consultation with the Honduran Government and Congress, civil society, thinktanks, private sector stakeholders, the media and the international development community represented in
Honduras. Consultations on the CAS were conducted in two stages. An early, informal round of
consultations was held in November 2002, involving a series a meetings with separate groups o f
stakeholders aimed at soliciting views on priority areas for Bank involvement in Honduras. These early
meetings generated a number o f suggestions for the Bank‘s strategic directions which were incorporated in a
draft program o f country assistance prepared during the first quarter o f 2003. In April 2003, a second, more
formal round o f consultations was held with stakeholders in Honduras centered around a power-point
presentation o f proposed areas of emphasis and the draft program o f lending and non-lending activities in
support of Honduras’ PRSP. As a result of these consultations, a number o f important shifts were made in
the proposed program including a greater emphasis on forestry, substitution of a proposed urban water
activity by a broader urban services and urban violence operation, and the inclusion o f additional activities
targeted to vulnerable groups, including youth at risk and indigenous and Afro-Honduran communities.
Annex E provides further information on the CAS consultation process.

The Bank Group’s Assistance Program in Honduras
77.
As indicated in para 75, the Bank Group’s support to Honduras over the FY03-06 period i s fully
aligned with the six pillars o f Honduras’ PRSP. The specific objectives listed for this CAS and areas to
be supported under the wide-ranging PRSP umbrella were carefully coordinated with the ongoing and
planned assistance from other external partners, to ensure program impact and minimize pressure on the
country’s implementation capacity. In this regard, starting from a portfolio and recent lending program
dominated by investment projects, this CAS contemplates a moderate increase in programmatic lending
(including quick-disbursing budgetary support and sector-wide approaches) to allow for better alignment
with Government’s own implementation processes and procedures and an increased emphasis on
outcomes. A number o f development partners have expressed their interest in collaborating with the
Bank in the design and implementation o f these programmatic approaches, implying, too, that these could
prove to be useful vehicles for furthering the country’s aid coordination agenda. At the same time, given
a continued need to strengthen institutionalltechnical capacity and public resource management, the CAS
maintains a substantial program o f investment operations alongside the (new) programmatic approaches.
Finally, in a departure from past practice, this CAS includes a number o f regional or sub-regional
activities covering Honduras and i t s neighbors, whose aim i s to exploit commonalities, share experience
and promote regional integration. The approach i s also expected to yield some economies o f scale,
enabling coverage of a wider number of substantive areas. The increased emphasis on regional activities,
balanced with country-specific work, i s common to all branches o f the Bank group.

78.
The assistance program outlined in the CAS covers a period o f about three and a half years
(Fys03-06) in order to align better with the political cycle in Honduras’. In terms of new lending, the
base case CAS program comprises 14 operations over NsO3-06, amounting in total to about US$296
million (SDR 211 million), of which, about US$70 million would be in the form o f quick-disbursing
budgetary support. This represents a somewhat lower IDA allocation than was made available to
Honduras over the last CAS period, reflecting both the tapering off o f extraordinary support related to
post-Mitch reconstruction and Honduras’ poor fiscal outcomes since 2000.
79.
With regard to AAA and related knowledge services, the CAS includes two types o f activities.
The f i r s t set includes core diagnostic analyses, which would be country-specific and address important
cross-cutting issues including deepened understanding o f poverty, growth, public expenditures and
fiduciary issues. The second group o f AAA activities, as well as many WBI-sponsored learning
activities, would be Central America-wide or sub-regional in scope focusing on topics and themes
relevant to several countries but including sufficient country-specificity to further Honduras’ development
agenda and support the design of lending operations. In addition to new lending, the Bank foresees a
number of areas where ZDF and trust fund resources could be combined with the Bank’s
experiencehkills to further key PRSP objectives. These grant-funded activities are integral to the Bank’s
assistance strategy for Honduras and are therefore included in the CAS. It should be noted, though, that
although (based on current status) there i s a strong expectation that the grant-financed activities included
in the program w i l l go forward, final approval o f the grants may lie outside the Bank Group’s direct
control. Moreover, additional grant-financed activities could be supported in the CAS period as new
priorities emerge.
80.
The core areas o f the base case CAS program are described below and summarized in Table 7.
While the assistance activities are described under specific pillars, the close inter-linkage among the
pillars necessarily means that the development impacts o f each activity w i l l not necessarily be confined to
the pillar under which it i s listed. Activities which are fully cross-sectoral in scope are separately
identified.
81.
Cross-Cutting Activities. A major vehicle for Bank support for the Govemment’s poverty
reduction agenda during the CAS period would be through the provision o f quick-disbursing budgetary
support, via a PRSC (FY04) and an associated PRSC TA Credit (N04). The PRSC and the PRSC T A C
would focus on consolidating reforms in the education sector including with respect to teacher wage and
employment conditions, assisting the Govemment to address other civil service reform issues, improving
public resource management and increasing transparency and promoting greater civil society participation
in the formulation, implementation and monitoring o f the poverty reduction strategy. The PRSC TA
credit will, inter alia, help Govemment to improve public resource management, building on the findings
of the CFAA, CPAR and work already being implemented under the ongoing Economic and Financial
Management TA Credit, which was approved by the Board in FYOI. Analytical work, which w i l l assist
Government in updating i t s PRSP, includes a Poverty Assessment, planned for FY05 and a Public
Expenditure Review (PER) in FY06.
82.
Support for Pillar I(Accelerating Equitable and Sustainable Growth). Within this pillar, a
major emphasis of Bank Group support to Honduras involves strengthening and deepening the financial
sector. Following on the completion of the joint IMF-World Bank FSAP report (FY03), two financial
sector operations are envisaged over the CAS period. The first i s a Financial Sector Technical
Assistance project which i s being presented to the Board alongside this CAS, and aims at strengthening
the financial sector through changes in the legal and institutional framework for managing banking crises,
A new Government i s expected to be in place in January 2006.

improving supervision of financial institutions and strengthening corporate governance and bankruptcy
proceedings and enhancing the regime for AML/CFT (including training for prosecutors and judges). A
Financial Sector Adjustment Credit (FSAC) would follow in FY04 to support the implementation of
actions developed under the FSTAC and provide budgetary support for poverty reduction goals. In
addition to these Bank-supported activities, the IFC would also seek opportunities to support the financial
sector with the aim o f helping to improve the private sector’s access to capital.

83.
The Bank Group would also undertake a number of other activities in support of the first pillar of
the PRSP. In particular, a Trade Facilitation and CompetitivenessProject (FYO4) which would focus on
actions to reduce business costs, improve the investment climate, increase inflows o f high valued added
FDI into the country, support MSME development and begin to address rigidities in the labor market.
This project would also directly support the PRSP’s third pillar (reducing urban poverty) which lays
considerable emphasis on MSME development. Development o f the project would involve close
coordination among IDA, IFC and MIGA particularly in the assessment o f ways to strengthen the
business environment, increase investment flows, and competition policies.
84.
ZFC‘s support to Honduras i s provided through i t s assistance both on the country and regional
levels, as in other counries in Central America. The priorities in Honduras during the CAS period will
include: (a) supporting growth of export-oriented SMEs (through financial intermediaries and/or technical
assistance); (b) supporting internationally-competitive f i r m s with inadequate long-term capital access; (c)
helping to strengthen the business environment (through technical assistance); and (d) supporting the
financial sector. The level o f financial support from IFC in i t s areas of emphasis w i l l continue to depend on
viable investment opportunities in Honduras specifically, and the Central American region as a whole. This,
in turn, will be closely related to overall improvements in the business environment, regulatory framework,
and macroeconomic stability. In the Central American region, IFC expects i t s emphases to be centred in the
following areas: (i)physical infrastructure; (ii)strengthening and deepening the financial sector; (iii)
supporting competitive f i r m s in agriculture and industry; and (iv) promoting investments into Central
America from other Latin American and emerging market economies.

85.
Drawing on lessons of past experience and working closely with IDA and MIGA, IFC aims,
during this CAS period, to give high priority to smaller businesses through non-investment support such
as technical advice and capacity building activities. One activity envisioned i s the establishment o f a
multi-country SME facility covering Honduras as well as three other Latin American countries’. The
facility’s target areas include improving SME access to finance, improving the business enabling
environment and strengthening areas with a high potential for export. Activities in Honduras under the
facility are expected to include support to export-oriented businesses in areas such as ornamental plants,
wood products and tourism, programs linked to IFC investments in second-tier banks and support for red
tape simplification.
86.
MZGA will be working independently and in conjunction with the Trade Facilitation and
Competitiveness Project to strengthen the institutional framework for FDI attraction, create linkages with
the local private sector, and facilitate higher valued-added direct investment flows. MIGA conducted an
assessment o f the national investment promotion agency, FIDE, in the fall o f 2002 which provides the
basis for MIGA’s present work program in Honduras. The export orientation of Honduras existing FDI,
the upcoming CAFTA, recognized weaknesses in the investment environment and institutional
framework, including FIDE (as identified in the PRSP and MIGA’s assessment) point to the importance
of technical assistance in this area. MIGA w i l l work first with the Government o f Honduras and FIDE to
This LAC SME facility, which i s expected to cover Bolivia, Honduras, Nicaragua and Peru, i s scheduled to be
presented to the Board in FY03.

devise an investment promotion strategy that will diversify and facilitate higher valued-added FDI. This
w i l l be followed by capacity building for FIDE and other institutions involved in the investment process,
guidance in launching proactive promotion campaigns to target new sectors, programs to improve the
image o f Honduras as an investment platform, and work with the local private sector to increase linkages
between foreign investors and local businesses. MIGA’s previous experience in the design and
implementation o f the investment promotion component o f the Nicaragua competitiveness program
provides practical lessons that can be applied in Honduras including importantly an established system o f
cooperation to facilitate the success of the Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness Project.

87.
FIAS i s also collaborating closely with the Honduran Government in support of the National
Competitiveness Program. Recently FIAS undertook a review of Honduras’ draft competition law, and
follow-up work in support o f the creation of a competition policy framework and agency i s expected.
Presently under preparation i s a second technical assistance project on foreign direct investment and labor
skills training with the objective o f reviewing the effectiveness o f the existing vocational education and
training program in Honduras and developing reform alternatives to better meet industry needs for labor
skills. I t should be noted, too, that the Bank will undertake an Investment Climate Assessment in FY04
to help deepen understanding o f the constraints to investment in Honduras. A Country Economic
Memorandum (CEM) planned for FY04 would also provide support to Honduras’ efforts to accelerate
inclusive growth. Finally, a planned Central America-wide regional study on CAFTA would be
completed in FY04, to be followed in FY05 by a regional study on Trade Facilitation. IFC would also
identify activities to help Honduras, and the Central America region more broadly, to take advantage of
the CAFTA initiative.
88.
Support for Pillar I1 (Reducing Rural Poverty). In support o f the PRSP’s second pillar (rural
poverty reduction) the CAS program w i l l include the Copan Valley Development Project (FY03) which
aims to spur economic activity (particularly tourism) and reduce poverty - especially among indigenous
groups -in one o f the poorest rural regions of Honduras. Three additional rural-focused projects are
envisaged over the CAS period. The first i s a Land Regularization and Administration Project (FY04),
which w i l l provide continuing support to land titling, regularization o f traditional rights o f occupants o f
public forest lands and land registration efforts. The project w i l l lay special emphasis on safeguarding the
property rights o f women (both single women and women in marital unions) and indigenous groups.
Moreover, the project, which w i l l also be implemented in urban areas, should have significant positive
implications for both rural and urban poverty and significantly improve the environment for business
development. The second operation in support o f this pillar i s a Forestry and Rural Productivity Project
(F04), which will, inter alia, tackle community forestry and incorporation o f local populations and
communities into management o f (and receipt o f benefits from) public forests, strengthen provision of
privatized technical services for poverty reduction and economic diversification, and, support
involvement o f municipal governments in management and conservation of natural resources and forestry
development. The third project Rural Infrastructure (FY06), would focus on coordinated development
of rural infrastructure in poor areas, building on the findings o f a Regional Study of Rural
Infrastructure, scheduled for completion in FY05. As has been established through numerous analyses
o f rural poverty, infrastructure i s perhaps the most vital ingredient in promoting increased productivity
and growth in agriculture and off-farm activities. While no Honduras-specific analytical work i s planned
in this area, two other Central America-wide studies w i l l benefit Honduras - these include a study o f the
impact of the Coffee Crisis and means o f addressing emerging issues (FY03), and an analysis o f the
Drivers of Rural Growth in FY04. The latter w i l l also analyze promising approaches to the
mainstreaming of environmental issues in a range o f developmental programs.

U

>

e

!

E

dc
f

C
C

i

s

c

;
t

e
c

;
zs

7

d
7

c

e

4

c

t

e
E

t:
E

2b
U

89.
Support for Pillar I11 (Reducing Urban Poverty). In large measure, the Bank Group’s strategy
for addressing urban poverty during the CAS period focuses on improving income earning opportunities
for the poor through SME development (via the Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness project under
Pillar I)
and regularization o f property rights (Land Regularization Project under Pillar 11). In addition,
both as a support to enhancing the environment for business and, especially, to improve the quality of
urban life, an Urban Services and Urban Violence project i s planned for FY05. While there are a
number o f outstanding issues in the urban water and sanitation areas as discussed in preceding sections of
this report, no significant new lending i s planned in this area given the heavy involvement o f LDB and a
number o f other external partners. However, to help Government and i t s partners in moving forward in
the sector and to maintain an active policy dialogue, the Bank expects to undertake two activities in the
water sector and one activity in sanitation, using grant funds. These are being closely coordinated with
other partners in the sector. The first o f these, involves a joint Government o f Netherlands-Bank
supported activity to test innovative approaches to design Pro-poor Water Transactions aimed at
extending water services to poor people and unconnected communities via public-private partnerships
(FY03). The second involves the development of a Comprehensive Water Strategy for Honduras under a
separate Netherlands Government grant (FY04). The third activity, also expected in FY04, concerns the
testing o f New Sanitation Technologies with support from the Japan Social Development Fund.
90.
Support for Pillar I V (Investing in Human Capital). Given recently approved operations in
education and health (FYs 01 and 02 respectively), very limited new lending i s planned in this CAS
period. In each sector, however, the Bank w i l l play a critical role in working with Government and
external partners to program and implement new programs being supported via grant funds. In education,
the Bank w i l l play a coordinating role in assisting Government to implement i t s EFA-FTZ proposal,
including working with a number o f external partners to establish a sector-wide approach to improve the
quality o f basic education, with the aim of achieving universal completion o f primary education by the
year 2015, as noted in Box B above. The EFA-FTIplan would complement the ongoing, Bank-supported
Community Based Education Project, which i s focused on expanding coverage through communitymanaged schools. Consideration i s also being given to supporting the EFA-FTI proposal with IDA
funding. A notional IDA allocation o f US$5 million has currently been included in the program, but this
would be revised upwards or downwards, depending on the availability o f resources from other sources.
In addition to support for basic education via the EFA-FTI, an Education Policy Note will be completed
in FY05, which will take a broader look at the challenges in Honduras’ education sector.

91.
The ongoing Honduras Health System Reform Project, which was approved by the Board in
FY02, combines support for policy reforms in system financing and service delivery with funding for
investment subprojects. The investment subprojects have a focus on improving the quality and coverage
of maternal and child health services, with the objective o f further reducing maternal mortality and infant
and child mortality over the CAS period. A Health Policy Note programmed for FY04 w i l l suggest
directions for further sectoral development. In addition, the Bank expects to assist Government in the
design o f a comprehensive HZV/AZDS program to be financed from a US$22 million grant made
available to Honduras by the Global Fund for AIDS, TB and Malaria. The Bank w i l l also help in the
effort to combat AIDS via a Central America Regional HZV/AZDS project (FY05) to support activities
that are best supported at a regional level, including, possibly, regional surveillance, regional training, a
regional reference laboratory, and regional prevention efforts aimed at migrant populations.
92.
Support for Pillar V (Social Protection and Vulnerable Groups). Building on past experience
with Bank support for Honduras’ Social Investment Fund (FHIS) and the findings o f a planned FY04
Central America-wide study on Shocks and Social Protection, the CAS envisages two new projects to
extend safety nets for the poor and protect vulnerable groups. The first o f these, a Nutrition and Social
Protection Project (FY05), will, inter alia, assist Government in developing and implementing a
comprehensive strategy to address child malnutrition and continue and expand the most successful safety

net activities undertaken as part of the ongoing F H I S V project. A second operation, Nuestras Raices

(Our Roots), planned for FY05, will also build on a successful component o f the FHIS V, which
implemented a radical community driven development approach to the prioritization, design and
financing of about 4,200 small and micro-projects among indigenous Honduran communities. The
component, which w i l l continue to be financed under the free-standing Nuestra Raices operation during
this CAS period, also had a successful gender strategy, with women comprising over 40 percent o f the
participants in training, small-scale sub-projects and community banks under the component. While
building on the successes of the FHIS component, the planned FY05 project w i l l also try to address some
weaknesses in the design of the sub-projects and community bank schemes to strengthen their long-term
sustainability. In addition, the Bank will implement a Norwegian grant-funded activity to promote
Indigenous People’s Sustainable Development (FY04), which would support the design and
implementation o f activities targeted to indigenous peoples within the context o f broader development
programs and projects. Finally, in view of growing concern within Honduras regarding the welfare status
of out-of-school adolescents and youth - including low skills, high unemployment, high teen pregnancy
and vulnerability to HIV infection, and rising criminal activity - the Bank expects to use grant funds to
develop a TA activity aimed at analyzing Youth-At-Risk issues and piloting promising interventions.
Successful interventions would then be expanded via the Urban Services and Urban Violence project
discussed under Pillar 111.
93.
Support for Pillar VI (Ensuring Sustainability). A number of activities are included in the CAS
program in support of Honduras’ efforts to improve governance and transparency. In this regard, key
ongoing pieces o f work include the CFAA, which i s scheduled for completion in FY03, and a CPAR
Update which will be completed in FY04. As noted above, implementation of the recommendations of each
of these reviews w i l l be supported through the PRSC,and the PRSC TA Credit. The Bank i s also working
with Honduras to develop a Judicial Reform Project (FY04) which would support the development and
implementation of a modernization program for the supreme court and the lower courts, strengthening of
human resource management capacities for judicial and administrative staff, strengthening o f access to
justice by the poor and disadvantaged segments of the population (e.g.; women, children and indigenous
populations), and promotion of transparency and civil society participation in administration o f justice in
urban and rural areas. The project would also provide training to judges and other judicial system staff on
the handling and ajudication of issues arising from the enactment of new laws in a range o f sectors as
required for the implementation of the country’s PRSP. The project preparation would draw upon diagnostic
reports prepared by the USAID, IDB, CIDA and others. In addition, an IDF grant would be made available
for implementation of Honduras’ Anti-Corruption strategy (para 43), led by the National Anti-Corruption
Council. Finally, in support of the Govemment’s efforts to move forward with decentralization of
responsibilities for key basic and social services A FY05 Central America regional study on
Decentralization will include a special focus on Honduras.

94.
With regard to promoting environmental sustainability, the Bank’s core objectives during the CAS
period are to assist the Government to conserve and promote sustainable use of Honduras’ natural and
socialkultural resources. Three projects listed under Pillar I
Iwould play an important part in supporting this
goal-namely, the Copan Valley Development Project, the Land Regularization Project and the Forestry
and Rural Productivity Project. Biodiversity conservation i s also a major priority for the Bank given the
links between conservation and environmental services offered by forested areas (hydrological services,
carbon storage, non-timber forest products and tourism) and the Bank‘s leadership on the Mesoamerican
Biological Corridor in Central America as well as on its marine extension, the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef
System. With several conservation projects in the Central America Region and Honduras now nearing
completion, two new GEF financed activities are planned for the CAS period. These include: the
Consolidation of the Transfrontier Corazon Biosphere Reserve Project (FY04), a bi-national (Honduras and
Nicaragua) project focusing on the core o f the Mesoamerican Biological Project in Honduras; and a CentralAmerica-wide project on Indigenous Management of Natural Areas (FY04). In addition, Honduras would

be a beneficiary under another Americas-wide GEF project, the hemispheric level Inter-American
Biodiversity Information Network Project, which will also be finalized in FY04. Finally, the Bank would
continue to support Honduran efforts to reduce the population's vulnerability to natural disasters, building
on the ongoing Emergency Disaster Management Project which was approved in WOO. Two non-lending
activities are planned for the CAS period - the first would be the implementation of a Japan Social
Development Fund grant to promote Community Disaster Management (FY04) approaches in 20 of
Tegucigalpa's poorest neighborhoods and the second would be a Central-America-wide analysis o f
development strategies for Disaster Prevention Management (FY05). Although the Bank recognizes the
importance of pollution and water contamination isssues in Honduras, there are no proposed World Bank
programs in this area given a more active role being played by other donors including IDB.

95.
In each o f the six pillars, Bank support for capacity building in Honduras would incorporate WBZ
activities. During the CAS period WBI expects to implement a number of learning and knowledge
dissemination programs, for the Central American region in areas such as community enpowerment and
social inclusion, education reform, fiscal policy for poverty alleviation, deregulation, municipal
development and govemance (incuding judicial reform). All of these activities will be open to Honduran
participants. The Bank, through WBI, i s also prepared, should the Honduran Govemment request it, to
implement country-specific activities aimed at the development of a stronger national consensus on the core
outsanding reform issues under the PRSP.
CAS Scenarios

96.
The CAS envisages three scenarios for lending to Honduras during the FYO3-06 period: (i)
a low
case, amounting to SDR161 million or approximately US$226 million, which would comprise 12
investment operations aimed at strengthening govemance and transparency, addressing long-standing
barriers to the inclusion o f the poor in economic growth, and investing in human capital; (ii)
a base case of

-

Table 8: Honduras T ggers for I D A Assistance Scenarios
BASE CASE (US$296 million)
Includes 12 investment projects plus PRSC I($45
million) and FSAC (US$25 million)
Triggers for moving to the base case
*: Establishment of a sustainable macroeconomic

framework and satisfactory implementationof the
framework in terms of fiscal and monetary targets.

9 Satisfactory implementationof the PRSP as
evidenced by the annual Progress Report.
9 Passage of a new civil service law, satisfactory to
IDA, which provides for a coherent public sector
wage policy, protection from political interference,
and competitive hiring practices.
*: Strengthenedaccuracy and transparency of
financial administrationsystem via a revised strategy
for expanding the implementation of SIAFI in a

manner satisfactory to IDA.

*: At most two IDA-supportedprojects rated

unsatisfactory.

5

HIGH CASE (US$384 million)
Includes base operations plus expanded FSAC ($28 million additional)
and/or PRSC I1 (US$60 million)
Triggers for moving from base case t o s h case
For both expanded FSAC and PRSC I1
*: Maintenance of a sustainable macroeconomic framework.
9 At most one IDA-supportedproject rated unsatisfactory.

FSAC-specific trigger
*3 Design and implementationof a bank resolution mechanism
satisfactory to IDA.
PRSP I1 -specific triggers
Satisfactory implementation o f new civil service law provisions for
competitive hiring, rational personnel deployment and establishment
of a uniform salary structure.
0:.

9 HIPC tracking mechanism operating adequately including periodic
reports generated through S I A F I on total anti-poverty spending and
total resource inflows (encompassing all donor and domestic
resources).
9 Substantially improved climate for private sector development as
demonstrated by establishment of a unified property registry and
implementation of a satisfactory competition framework.

SDR211 million or about US$296 million which would include an additional $70 million (over the low
case) in fast disbursing budgetary support for a PRSC operation (US$45 million) and a financial sector
adjustment credit ($25 million); and, (iii)
a high case of SDR274 million or about US$384 million which
would include additional funds (of about US$28 million) for the FSAC plus a second PRSC operation of
about US$60 million. Table 8 above presents the specific triggers identified for each case. It should be
noted that, within the high case, triggers specific to each operation have been identified, that would
demonstrate exceptional progress in addressing the core issues related to each operation. As such,
expansion of the FSAC to US$53 million would require decisive action to address vulnerabilities in the
banking system. Similarly, a PRSC I1would depend on demonstrated success in advancing PRSP priorities
including good governance, substantially strengthened public sector management and reduction o f key
structural barriers to broad-based economic growth. Finally, in interpreting the table, it should be bome in
mind that at the present time, in the absence of a final agreement on a satisfactory macroeconomic
framework and some uncertainty as to the timing of the passage o f a comprehensive civil service reform
law, lending levels to Honduras will be consistent with the low case. Based on recent actions by the
Government to address these areas, however, there i s an expectation that movement to the base case should
occur later this calendar year.

CAS Program Results and Monitoring
97.
Given the close interrelationship between this CAS and the Govemment's Poverty Reduction
Strategy, movements over the mid-2003 to early 2006 period towards achievement o f the long-term
benchmarks/outcome targets included in the PRSP are relevant to assessing the impact of the CAS in
general terms. This i s particularly true in the case of PRSP targets aligned with the MDGs (given in
Table 4), which are an institutional priority for the Bank. However, to the extent that achievement of the
PRSP targets involves a large number of Honduran and extemal actors and institutions, making
attribution difficult, the impact o f this CAS should also - perhaps primarily -- be assessed in terms of the
growth and poverty-reducing impacts of the assistance activities in which the Bank intends to play a

-

Area
Outcome indicators
Poverty....................................

Benchmark Indicators for Evaluating CAS Results
Indicator and or Performance Criterion for End of CAS Period

- T

~
j Extreme
.............................................................................................
.
poverty reduced from?5%

.120!?2&.i2lTo

...........................................

..

j ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Time needed to establish new businesses reduced by at least50%
e!si?ess c!imate .......................................................... ..;
.,E.mp!oyrnent. .and..busi?tlss..c!i.m?te..,
.......,. Non~farm,ruralefn~!o~.ment,inc~e~~e~,,b~,,at
!east $%.a ...........................................................................................................................
Education
...........................................................................................................................................................................................
I Coverage of basic education increased...fre.m..8~.~..,~~~0~~..~~...at..~~a~~
99%.........................................................

..

Health

*: Child mortality rate reduced from 45/1000 to below 42/1000
! 9 Deceleration observed in the rate of spread of HIV/AIDS
,

Intermediate Indicators

sustain&!!? macro

M?C'oecono,@c

......
P??gfam........................................ i....
....
...frame.work..estab!ished..and.Raintai?ed..........................................................
Fiscal management
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
i Sustained deceleration achieved the
sPending..on.?a~es
...........
. .poverty,,
.................................................... +j ...............................
Poverty spending
.......................................................................

spendins

Govemance

.............................................................................................................

Improved operational public finance mgmt system established (in line with the CFAA)
0 System established for enhanced disclosure of public expenditures and results

j *:

/

1

in ..rate..of.~ro,\t~..~~,~ent~a!..~~~~.

.i?crea~ed...in..!ine...lth..be~ch.ma~ks...~?..the..pRsp~pR

?....Mo:e.accessib!e.c9!.~..:.Y?!em,. .\ith.at.l.east..a..s'..i?c~ease..in..case!.oad

.............................................

Measurable improvement in the status of women and indigenous households including
i ownership of legal assets, access to services and income-eaming
opportunitiesa
..............................................................................................................................
.... ......................................................................................................................................................................................................
i 6 Modem bank resolution system designed and implemented
Financial system
i 6 Modem payments system established
.................................
................................................
-. ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
1 At least 100,000 land parcels registered in an integratedregistry & cadastre system
Rural land
j 0 At most 2 projects in portfolio rated unsatisfactory
I 0 Commitments in problem projects below 20% of total commitments in CAS period
Portfolio Performance
9 Multi-donor sector-wide approach fully operational in at least one sector
Vulnerable Groups

a. baseline to be established via GOH household survey

....

direct role. Table 9 lays out the key outcome, program and portfolio indicators, which should be used to
assess the impact o f the CAS These benchmarks are closely linked to the Bank’s and other partners’
planned assistance activities, as shown in detail i n Annex B1. . For example, governance improvements
are closely linked to the Bank’s and IDB’s ongoing program o f fiduciary assessments and judicial reforms
coupled with implementation support from ongoing and planned lending operations (EMTAC, PRSC I,
PRSC TAC, Anti-Corruption IDF and Judicial Reform). The fiscal and economic growth targets are
related both to lending (PRSC I,
Financial sector TA, FSAC, Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness, and
possible IFC lending) and non-lending (CEM, support for CAFTA, Investment Climate Assessment, and
IFC, FIAS and MIGA TA). Rural targets (plus some benchmarks related to gender and indigenous
groups) are supported, inter alia, by the Land Regularization Project, Forestry and Rural Productivity
Project, Rural Infrastructure Project and Copan Valley Regional Development Project as well as a number
of ESW tasks. Finally, social sector benchmarks and some targets related to vulnerable groups are closely
linked to ongoing education and health operations as well as new activities such as the EFA, HIV/AIDS
grant funded program, Nuestras Raices and the Nutrition and Social Protection Project.

CAS Program Risks
98.

The CAS faces three major risks:

Potential for Macroeconomic Instability. Honduras remains vulnerable to natural disasters (El Nifio,
drought, hurricanes) and to terms of trade shocks (commodity price declines for coffee, bananas,
African palm o i l and oil price hikes), either of which could produce setbacks to the Government’s
macroeconomic program. Fiscal slippages due to failure to curb the rising public sector wage bill and
lower-than-expected revenue collection would limit the mobilization o f domestic savings for poverty
reduction spending. Moreover, the fragility o f the financial system makes Honduras vulnerable to
crises triggered by external shocks or corporate governance deficiencies. Close monitoring and
support provided by the IMF’s PRGF program and the Bank and IDB’s programmatic budgetary
support loans would help to identify potential problems early on and assist the Government to take
timely remedial measures.
Political and Social Risks. Broad political support w i l l be needed to move forward with the
ambitious legislative agenda needed to implement the PRSP. In the short term, the Government w i l l
need to get Congressional approval for a Civil Service Law in order to conclude a new PRGF
arrangement with the IMF - debt relief associated with the HIPC Completion Point and significant
external financing from the I F I s and many bilateral partners i s contingent on this. Political
opportunism and a strident trade union movement that i s increasingly more coordinated threaten the
passage of these reforms and could provoke large-scale social unrest. Actions being taken by
Government to revive and systematize regular consultations with diverse stakeholders should help to
lessen this risk. Moreover, the Bank has been instrumental in mobilizing a number of external
partners to assist the Government in the formulation and implementation of a comprehensive
communications strategy in support of economic reform and to generate widespread understanding o f
the risks and opportunities o f emerging development challenges (e.g. CAFTA).
Institutional Capacity. Weaknesses in government financial management, the judiciary, the supreme
audit agency and executing line ministries could negatively affect CAS program implementation.
Conscious o f this, the Government has placed very high priority on improving governance and
fighting corruption, and has taken important actions in these areas with some notable successes. To

39

Honduras: Countrv Assistance Strategv

mitigate the risk o f weak institutional capacity, IDA’S CAS contemplates a strong element of
institution-building technical assistance and related support in all lending scenarios and i s undertaking
immediate work on fiduciary assessments, public sector management and judicial reform.

James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:

Shengman Zhang
Managing Director

Attachments
Washington, D C
M a y 29,2003

Peter L. Woicke
Executive Vice President, I F C

Annex AI

Honduras at a glance
POVERTY and SOCIAL
2001
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Honduras

Latin
America
& Carib.

Lowermiddleincome

6.6
890
5.9

524
3,560
1,862

2,164
1,240
2,677

2.6
3.7

1.5
2.2

1.o
1.2

Average annual growth, 1995-01
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

9/16/02

Development diamond'
Life expectancy
T

GNi
per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1995-01)

63
54
66
34
33
89
19
108
107
110

76
70
29
9
85
11
130
131
128

46
69
33
11
80
15
107
107
107

1981

1991

2000

2001

2.8
21.1
30.8
14.1
10.0

3.1
24.7
33.0
20.0
15.3

5.9
32.5
42.1
18.2
22.3

6.4
30.6
38.3
13.6
19.5

-11.1
3.4
60.5
25.6

-9.2
4.8
110.7
27.6

-9.3
2.6
71.6
14.8
52.5
102.0

-10.5
2.1
67.8
13.2

1981-91

1991-01

2000

2001

2001-05

3.0
-0.1
1.4

3.0
0.2
1.7

5.7
2.3
7.3

2.6
0.1
4.6

3.0
1.2
7.5

1981

1991

2000

2001

224
229
144
547

227
273
169
500

15 1
32 2
200
527

203
547

731
128
377

681
120
377

695
13 3
557

726
14 3
550

1981-91

1991-01

2ooo

31
3.4
3.9
2.6

1.7
3.5
4.1
3.7

95
5.2
5.5
4.4

-0.9
1.6
5.2
4.5

2.9
2.5
6.2
2.8

2.8
4.0
5.0
3.5

4.6
15.7
-0.8
3.8

3.8
11.3
-3.9
3.6

Poverty (% of populationbelow nationalpovertyline)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under51
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

8 -

Gross
primary
enrollment

Access to improved water source

-

Honduras
Lower-middle-incomegroup

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmenVGDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Gross domestic savings/GDP
Gross national savingslGDP
Current account balancelGDP
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debVGDP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debVGDP
Present value of debffexports
(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY

(% of GDP)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

1
,

Economic ratios'
Trade

-

I

I

Indebtedness

I
~

-Honduras
Lower-middle-incomegroup

Growth of investment and GDP (%)

0

Growth of exports and imports (%)
*O i

j

IO

Note: 2001 data are preliminary estimates.

* The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average. if data are missing, the diamond will
be incomplete.

I

I

Annex A I

Honduras
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Government finance
(% of GDf, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surpius/deficit

1981

7.1

1991
34.0
26.0

2000
10.7
8.5

2001
10.3
9.2

18.2
-0.3
-5.3

18.0
0.5
-6.8

18.2
-0.4
-8.1

1981

1991

2000

2001

784
213
173

835
314
146

1,426
124
339

1,379
204
161

976
160
163
216

1,001
140
150
186

2,855
470
384
722

2,997
480
402
667

92
79
117

98
131
75

90
133
68

1981

1991

2000

2001

884
1,061
-177

997
1,139
-142

2,483
3,333
-850

2,420
3,507
-1,087

Net income
Net current transfers

-153
18

-192
53

-153
447

-148
563

Current account balance

-313

-281

-556

-672

Financing items (net)
Changes in net reserves

239
74

350
-69

576
-20

752
-80

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, /oca//US$)

2.0

198
5.3

1,285
14.8

1,386

1981

1991

2000

2001

1,705
176
77

3,396
551
126

4,258
152
838

4,340
125
901

Total debt service
IBRD
IDA

236
20
1

307
88
2

369
48

8

319
36
10

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

25
172
61
-4
0

549
121
52
0

5

292
316
16
262
0

344
195
-72
186
0

0
42
6
37
15
22

91
78
45
33
45
-12

154
38
35
3
21
-16

66
96
27
71
19
52

(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Bananas
Coffee
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods
Export price index (1995=100)
Import price index (1995=100)
Terms of trade (1995=100)

BALANCE of PAYMENTS

(US$ millionsf
Exports of QOOdS and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS

(US$ millions)
Total debt outstandino and disburseda
IBRD
IDA

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

a. includes medium and long-term public and publicly guaranteed external debt,
Development Economics

30

T

20
10

13.5
-0.6
-9.5

TRADE

Inflation (X)
40

97

96

98

GDP deflator

W"*

99

I
01

00

IO'CPI

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
4'000

T

95

96

97

98

Exports

w

99

01

Imports

Current account balance to GDP (X)

-15

1

15.5

Composition of 2001 debt (US$ mill.)
~

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

.

D Other multilateral

E Bilateral
F - Private
G -Short-term

9/16/02

F

,..

ir
0

a

I--

+
0
m

m

0

3

Annex B2

Honduras

Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio performance and Management
As of April 30,2003
Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a,
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a,
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yeslno)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)
Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

2000

2001

2002

2003

10
3.9
0.0
0.0
10.0
1.7
74.6

13
2.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
52.2

12
2.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
30.4

11
3.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
14.7

Yes
656,000
65,600

Yes
758,000
58,308

Yes
1,161,000
96,750

No
675,000
61,364

Since FY 80

38
1,465.8
23.7
17.1

Last Five FYs

8
500.2
25.0
24.5

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) andlor implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.

Note: All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

Annex 83

Honduras: Bank Group Program Summary
Proposed IDA Base-Case Lending Program (FYO3-06)
N

$ Million

Project

Strategic
Rewards (HIMIL)"

Implementation
Risks (HIMIL)"

2003

Copan Valley Development
Financial Sector TA
Subtotal for 2003

12.0
9.0
21.o

M
H

L
L

2004

Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness
Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC)
Poverty Reduction Support TAC
Forestry and Rural Productivity
Land Regularizationand Administration
Financial Sector Adjustment Credit (FSAC)
Judicial Reform
Education For All (EFA)'
Subtotal for 2004

25.0
45.0
10.0
20.0
25.0
25.0
15.0
5.0
170.0

H
H
H
M
H
H
H
H

L
M
M
M
M
M
M
L

2005

Nutrition and Social Protection Project
Urban Services and Urban Violence
Nuestras Rakes
Subtotal for 2005

20.0
15.0
10.0
45.0

M
M
M

M
M
M

2006

Rural Infrastructure
Subtotal for 2006

60.0
60.0

M

L

-

296.0

TOTAL 2003 06

a. This table presents the proposed program for the next three fiscal years.
b. For each project, the table indicates whether the strategic rewards and implementation risks are expected to be high (H),
moderate (M), or low (L).
c. IDA funds will be included in EFA in the event of a financial gap.

IFC and MlGA Program, FY99-2002
(as of February 28,2002)
Fiscal Year

Category

2000

2001

2002

2003

IFC Approvals ($ million)

43.5

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Sector (%)
Accommodation & Tourism Service!
Food & Beverages
Information
Utilities
TOTAL

23
30
23
24
100

Investment Instrument (%)
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity (Loan type)
Quasi-Equity (Equity type)
Guarantee
Risk Management Products
TOTAL

89
0
11
0
0
0
100

MlGA Guarantees ($ million)

20.2

Annex B4

Honduras: Summary of Nonlending Services
Product

Completion FY

Recent completions:
Poverty Update
Rural Poverty Study
Public Expenditure Review
Poverty Assessment II
Commercial Debt Reduction
PPIAF
PRSP
Infrastructure Assessment

Amount (US$OOO)

35
10
269
110
18.5
425

Underway:
PRSP Progress Report
Social Impact of Coffee Crisis (regional)c
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
Country Financial Accountability (CFAA)
Planned:
Country Economic Memorandum (CEM)
Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR)
Investment Climate and Trade
Water Strategy
Drivers of Rural Growth (regional)c
Shocks and Social Protection (regional)c
CAFTA Trade Challenges (regional)c
Education Policy Note (regional)c
HIV/AIDS Review (regional)
Poverty and Social Impact Assessment
Decentralization (regional)c
Trade Facilitation (regional)c
Rural Infrastructure (regional)c
Health Sector Reform (regional)c
Disaster Prevention Management (regional)c
Poverty Assessment
Public Expenditure Review
Social Sector Financing (regional)c
Environmental Policy Review (regional)c

-

Corazon Biosphere Reserve GEF (regional)c
Indigenous Mgmt of Nat Resources - GEF (regional)c

Objective

Analvtical WorWReaorts

FYOO
FYOO
FYOl
FYOl
FY02
FY02
FY02
FY02

Improving Social Statistics MECOVI
Afro-Descendents (regional)c
Tegucigalpa Disaster Mitigation
Promoting Trade Participation (regional)c
Public Institutions and Anticorruption
Sustainable Sanitation Solutionsd
Indigenous People Sustainable Devlopmentd
Youth at Riskd

Audience a

430

G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B
G, D, B, PD
G, B
G, B
G, D, B
G, D, B

KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD
KG, PD
KG, PS
KG, PS

FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03

41
4
222
91

G, D, B
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B
G, D, B

KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY06
FY06
FY06

170
35
53

25
14
14
8
28
28
165
230
38
38

G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B
G, D, 8, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, 8, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B
G, D, B, PD
G, B, D, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B
G, D, B
G, D, B, PD

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PD, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

399
115
2,000
100
270
1,500
700
2,000

G, D, B
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, B, PD
G, D, 8, PD

KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS
KG, PS

3,000
2,300

G, D, B
G, D, B

KG, PS
KG, PS

IDF and JSDF Grants
FY02
FY02
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY04
FY04
FY04

Other

FY04
FY04

a. Government (G), donor (D), Bank (B), public dissemination (PD).
b. Knowledge generation (KG), public debate (PD), problem-solving (PS).
c. Honduras' share of regional task.
d. Grant funding requested.

--

__

43
31
49
8

__

Annex 85

Honduras Social Indicators
Latest single year
POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

Same regionlincome group
Latin America
Lower-middle

1970-75

1980-85

1996-02

3.0
3.0
32.1
6.8

4.2
3.2
37.7
5.6

6.4
2.7
46.9
3.9

515.7
1.6
75.4
2.6

2,047.6
1.1
42.0
2.1

3,670
144

1,130
146

2.8
4.7
2.2

2.8
3.3
7.4

2.3
4.6

85

97
99
98

91
91
91

89
96
82

85
93
62

80
95
69

53
58

98
95
33

93
87
9

89
89
11

56
54
58

63
61
65

66
63
69

70
67
74

69
67
72

90
170

62
103

34
45

29
37

33
41

361
283

306
237

245
152
108
55

208
121

192
125

POVERTY (% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)

income

63.3
55.5
70.8
400
12

790
26
22

INCOMElCONSUMPTlON DISTRIBUTION
Share of income or consumption
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

920
160
192

56.3
2.2
59.4

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)

3.6
1.2

Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female

4.0

78
78
78

Access to an improved water source
(% ofpopulation)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(% under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(Years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

50

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies
between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data.
2002 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

H o n d u r a s - Key Economic Indicators
Actuals

National accounts (YOGDP, current mp)
Gross domestic product
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Prelim

(Projected Base Case Scenario)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

100.0
19.0
30.5
50.4

100.0
16.0
32.4
51.6

100.0
15.1
32.3
52.6

100.0
13.7
31.6
54.7

100.0
15.2
33.5
51.4

100.0
16.1
35.3
48.7

100.0
15.6
34.0
50.4

100.0
15.5
34.1
50.4

Total Consumption

77.7

78.8

82.8

86.9

87.8

86.6

84.3

84.0

Gross Domestic Fixed Investment
Government Investment
Private Investment

28.2
6.7
21.5

29.9
7.3
22.6

26.5
5.9
20.6

23.6
6.7
16.9

21.6
5.2
16.4

23.8
5.5
18.3

24.4
6.2
18.2

25.5
6.5
19.0

Exports (GNFS)"
Imports (GNFS)"

46.4
54.1

41.3
56.4

41.3
55.7

37.9
55.0

37.1
52.5

38.4
56.5

37.6
53.5

37.7
53.4

Gross Domestic Savings
Gross National Savingsb

22.3
25.8

21.2
25.4

18.2
22.3

13.6
19.5

15.0
18.7

14.0
18.7

15.3
20.8

15.5
22.0

5,262
730

5,424
760

5,950
850

6,399
890

Real Annual Growth Rates (%, 1978 prices)
Gross Domestic Product
Gross Domestic Income

2.9
3.6

-1.9
-1.6

5.7
5.4

Real Per Capita Growth Rates (%, 1978 prices)
Gross Domestic Product
Total Consumption
Private Consumption

0.2
2.9
1.8

-4.4
-2.4
-3.6

245 1
1613
2857
2371
-406
24 1

Current Account Balance (before official grants)
Net Foreign Direct Investment
Long-term Loans (net)
Other Capital (net, incl. errors & omissions)
Change in Reservesc

Memorandum items:

7,852
1,070

920

6,965
980

2.6
0.4

2.5
2.2

2.5
2.0

3.0
2.4

4.5
4.0

3.1
5.5
4.4

0.1
2.9
1.9

-0.2
-0.2
0.1

-0.1
-1.2
-1.0

0.7
-0.9
-1.0

1.8
2.4
2.7

2237
1218
3051
25 10
-814
353

2483
1426
3333
2670
-850
447

2420
1379
3507
2807
-1087
563

2372
1334
3390
2748
-1018
742

248 1
1399
3697
3005
-1216
849

2630
1495
3785
3056
-1155
89 1

2798
1585
4009
3228
-1211
934

-374

-625

-556

-672

-453

-532

-456

-480

99
81
353
-159

237
169
559
-340

282
20
274
-20

195
104
453
-80

143
58
381
-129

245
-19
306
0

249
-12
289
-70

275
-13
338
-120

Current Account Balance (after official grants)
Net Current Transfers (% o f GDP)

-7.8
-7.1
-2.4
4.6

-15.0
-11.5
-4.4
6.5

-14.3
-9.3
-4.1
7.5

-17.0
-10.5
-4.6
5.7

-15.4
-6.9
-3.7
11.3

-17.5
-7.6
-5.3
12.2

-15.6
-6.2
-3.6
12.1

-15.4
-6.1
-3.6
11.9

Exports o f Goods and Services (% annual growth
Imports o f Goods and Services (% annual growth

12.2
17.5

-8.6
6.9

11.0
9.3

-2.5
5.2

-2.0
-3.3

4.6
8.7

6.0
2.6

6.4
5.9

Gross Domestic Product (US$m, current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

Balance o f Payments (US$ million )
Exports (GNFS)"
Merchandise (fob)
Imports (GNFS)"
Merchandise (fob)
Resource Balance
Net Current Transfers

Memorandum items:
Resource Balance (% o f GDP)
Current Account Balance (% o f GDP)

6,594

7,385
1,030

Annex 66
Page 2 of 2

-

Honduras K e y Economic Indicators (continued)
Actuals

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)d
Current Revenues
Current Expenditures
Capital Expenditure
Overall Balance Surplus (+) or deficit (-)

Foreign Financing (including grants)
Grants
Monetary indicators
M 2 i G D P (at current market prices)
Credit to Private Sector/GDP(current, mp)
Growth o f M2
Price indices (1990 =loo)
Merchandise Export Price Index
Merchandise Import Price Index
Merchandise Terms o f Trade Index
Real Exchange Rate (US$/Lempiras)e

Real Annual Growth Rates (1978 urices)
Consumer Price Index (average, % change)
Consumer Price Index (end o f period, % change)
GDP Deflator (% change)

Prelim

(Projected Base Case Scenario)

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

18.7
15.1
5.0
-1.4

19.4
16.7
7.1
-4.4

18.0
17.6
7.1
-6.7

18.2
18.6
7.5
-7.9

18.3
18.9
6.1
-6.7

20.1
18.7
5.9
-4.5

20.3
18.6
5.7
-4.0

20.5
16.1
5.7
-3.8

2.3
0.5

8.0
0.6

2.4
1.o

5.3
1.8

2.5
1.1

4.5
1.o

4.5
1.o

5.0
1.o

37.7
31.3
22.0

42.3
36.7
23.4

45.0
37.8
20.6

47.0
38.3
14.2

48.9
38.4
13.4

49.3
38.4
11.5

52.9
38.4
11.5

54.1
38.4
11.5

115.3
138.6
83.2
6.2

106.3
137.1
77.5
7.5

106.8
140.9
75.8
7.9

94.8
142.8
66.4
4.1

89.0
144.3
61.7
-3.7

88.5
149.2
59.3

88.2
153.1
57.6

86.0
158.5
54.2

13.7
15.6
11.6

11.6
10.9
11.5

10.7
9.8
8.5

10.3
9.4
9.2

8.1
7.4
6.6

7.5
7.1
6.3

6.9
6.5
5.5

5.2
5.0
5.0

a. GNFS denotes goods and non-factor services.
b. Includes net unrequinted transfers, excluding official capital grants.
c. Includes use o f IMF resources.
d. Consolidated central government.
e. An increase denotes appreciation.

Annex 87

Honduras - Key Exposure Indicators
Actuals

1998
Total External Debt Outstanding
I n US$ millions
Total debt outstanding and disbursed (TDO)a

Net disbursements
Total external debt service Due (TDS)b
Total external debt service
(TDS)

1999

Prelim

2000

2001

(Projected Base Case Scenario)

2002

2003

2004

2005

3793

4288

4258

4340

4228

4276

4332

4430

-58
435
211

117

-13

107

-44

-20

-6

35

462
111

369
97

319
87

348
121

385
133

366
110

353
116

235.3
72.1
13.1

352.1
79.1
9.1

298.6
71.6
6.8

314.6
67.8
6.3

317.0
64.1
9.1

306.4
61.4
9.5

290.7
58.7
7.4

279.2
56.4
7.3

15.6
49.5

14.0
73.0

13.0
80.7

11.4
69.1

9.4
60.6

8.6
64.6

5.8
64.5

5.7
64.3

Debt and debt service indicators l%i
TDO/XGS'
TDO/GDP
TDS (paid)/XGS

IBRD and I D A exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferredcreditor DS/public
IBRD DS/XGS
IDA DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (US$mld

2.8
0.2

2.9
0.3

1.9
0.3

1.5
0.4

1.4
0.5

1.3
0.7

0.8
0.8

235

185

152

127

105

92

77

0.7
0.9
62

IDA TDO (US$~I)~

579

841

838

901

1014

1095

1183

1277

a. Includes medium and long-termpublic and publicly guaranteed external debt.
b. Debt service paid including the IMF.
b. XGS denotes exports o f goods and services.
c. Includes present value o f guarantees.

Annex 88
Page l o f 2

-

Honduras Status of Bank Group Operations
As of April 30,2003
Operations Portfolio
Closed projects: 53
Board
Date
Fiscal
Year

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Active Projects

1997 PO07398 Rural Land Mgmt
1998 PO44343 Biodiversity Conservation (GEF)
1999 PO57350 Profuturo
2000 PO64913 Emerg Disaster Mgmt (Tal)
2001 PO73035 Access To Land Pilot (PACTA)
2001 PO07397 Community-BasedEducation Project
2001 PO60785 Economic & Fin.Management Project
2001 PO64895 Fifth Social Investment Fund Project
2001 PO57538 Road ReconstructionAnd Improvement
2002 PO53575 Health System Reform Project
2002 PO57859 Sustainable Coastal Tourism Project (LIL)

Total Disbursed (IBRD and IDA):
of which has been repaid:
Total now held by IBRD and IDA'b:

DeveloDment lmolementation
Obiectives
Proaress
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

S
S
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Oriqinal Amount in US$ Millions
Disbursements'
IDA
42.3
12.3
10.8
8.0
41.5
19.0
60.0
66.5
27.1
5.0

All Projects
IBRD
IDA
690.9
1071.4
589.2
37.4

Total
1758.5
626.6

97.5

1134.9

1037.4

a. Intended disbursements to date minus actual disbursements to date as projected at appraisal.
b. Including a valuation adjustment for $177,311.

GRANT

7.0

Undisb.
3.8
2.7
4.3
7.6
6.6
40.2
13.4
28.0
46.7
30.1
4.8

Orig. Frm Rev'd
-2.6
2.6
0.0
-3.4
3.1
13.5
14.0
-1.6
2.3
-1.2
1.2

-2.6
0.0
3.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.7

Annex 88
Page 2 of 2

Honduras : Statement of IFC's Committed and Disbursed Portfolio
As of April 30,2003
(US$ millions)
FY
Approval

Company

1998
Camino Real Plaza
1995/1998 Elcosa
1986/1999 Granjas Marinas
Total Portfolio:

Loan

Committed
Equity
Quasi

Partic.

Loan

Disbursed
Equity
Quasi

Partic.

7.7
4.1
4.5

0.0
2.6
0.0

0.0
2.6
0.0

0.0
4.7
0.0

7.7
4.1
4.5

0.0
2.6
0.0

0.0
2.6
0.0

0.0
4.7
0.0

16.3

2.6

2.6

4.7

16.3

2.6

2.6

4.7

Annex 89

HONDURAS
CAS Summary of Development Priorities

Network area

Country
performance a

Poverty Reduction & Economic
Management
Poverty reduction

Good

Economic policy

Country
priority’

Bank priority“ Reconciliation of
country and Bank
priorities

Implement poverty reduction
strategy, improve data base

High

High

Fair

Maintain stable macro structure,
especially fiscal discipline

High

Moderate

Public sector

Good

Improve transparency, justice,
participation, security, and
public management

High

High

Gender

Fair

Need to mainstream across
public sector institutions and
programs

Moderate

Moderate

Good

Improve quality and coverage
of basic education, encourage
community participation, and
improve efficiency across sector

High

High

Health, nutrition & population

Good

Strengthen basic health
services, especially in poor
rural areas

High

High

Social protection

Good

Increase the efficiency and
targeting of safety nets,
including indigenous groups

Moderate

high

Integrate with poverty
reduction, land regularization,
and rural credit

High

High

Human Development Department
Education

Environmentally & Socially Sustainable
Development
Rural development
Good

Major issue

Environment

Fair

Improve natural resource
management

Moderate

High

Social development

Good

Strengthen social infrastructure,
widen coverage of programs

High

High

Strengthen the financial
sector by applying the Basel
Core Principles and AMUCFT
standards

High

High

Finance, Private Sector & Infrastructure
Financial sector
Good

IMF has the lead

ongoing dialogue

ongoing dialogue

ongoing dialogue

Private sector

Good

Streamline regulations, improve
incentives for MSME

High

High

Energy & mining

Fair

Incentives for private sector
participation

Moderate

Low

Other donors have
have the lead

Infrastructure

Good

Incentives for private sector
participation

High

Moderate

Other donors have
have the lead

a. Use “excellent,” “good,” “fair,” or “poor.”
b. Indicate principal country-specific problems (e.g., for Poverty reduction, “rural poverty;” for education, “female secondary completion;” for
environment, “urban air pollution”).
c. To indicate priority, use “low,” “moderate,” or “high.”
d. Give explanation, if priorities do not agree; for example, another MDB may have the lead on the issue, or there may be ongoing dialogue.

Annex 910

Honduras: Key Environmental Indicators
Honduras

Lam
America
& Carib.

Lowincome

Population (millions), 2000
Urban population (% of total), 2000
GDP ($ billions), 2000
GNI per capita, Atlas method ($), 2000

6.4
46.9
6
860

516
75.4
2,001
3,670

2,048
42.0
2,347
1,130

Environmental strategy / action plan (year prepared)

1993

Agriculture
Land area (1,000 sq. km)
Agricultural land (% land area)
Irrigated land (% of crop land)
Fertilizer consumption (100 grams/ ha arable land)
Food production index (1989-91=100)
Population density, rural (people/ sq. km arable land)

112
29.8
4.3
1,082
116.2
229

20,062
37.9
14.0
856
133.5
252

43,596
33.4
24.1
1,204
155.9
642

54
48.1
1.o

9,440
47.1
0.5

13,881
31.8
-0.1

Biodiversity
Mammal species, total known
Mammal species, threatened
Bird species, total known
Bird species, threatened
Nationally protected area (% land area)

173
9
422
5
6.0

7.4

4.9

Energy
GDP per unit of energy use (PPP$ / kg oil equiv)
Commercial energy use per capita (kg oil equiv)
Traditional fuel use (% total energy use)
Energy imports, net (% commercial energy use)
Electric power consumption per capita (kWh)
Share of electricity generated by coal (YO)

4.5
522
55
44
449

6.0
1,171
16
-39
1,470
5.2

3.7
1,146
6
-28
1,065
42.9

0.3
5.1
0.8

0.4
1,308.3
2.6

0.8
6,140.7
3.1

52

119

24

90
82
97
14,976
1.6
91
94
57
44

85
62
93
32,905

80
69
95
7,836

74
87
48
37

76
79
35
41

31.3
5.6
25.8
3.5
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.5
28.6

17.0
10.6
6.4
4.2
5.1
0.6
0.0
0.4
4.4

32.4
9.7
22.7
2.9
10.1
0.2
0.1
2.0
13.1

Forests
Forest area (1,000 sq. km)
Forest area (% total land area)
Annual deforestation (%, 1990-2000)

Emissions and pollution
COz emissions per unit of GDP (kg per PPP $ of GDP)
Total COz emissions, industrial (,OOO kt)
COz emissions per capita (mt)
Suspended particulate in largest city (microgr/m3)
Passenger cars (per 1,000 people)
Water 8 Sanitation
Access to improved water source (YOtotal population)
Access to improved water source (% rural population)
Access to improved water source (% urban population)
Freshwater resources per capita (cubic meters)
Total freshwater withdrawal (% total water resources)
Agriculture withdrawal (% total freshwater withdrawal)
Access to sanitation in urban areas (YOurban population)
Access to sanitation in rural areas (YOrural population)
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)

-

National accounting aggregates 2000
Gross national savings (% of GNI)
Consumption of fixed capital (% of GNI)
Net national savings (% of GNI)
Education expenditure (% of GNI)
Energy depletion (“h of GNI)
Mineral depletion (% of GNI)
Net forest depletion (% of GNI)
C02 damage (% of GNI)
Adjusted net savings (% of GNI)

u

ai

I
0

I

a,

I

a,

E

r

em

g
c u

I

I

I

I

I

L

I

I

1 . c

I

b

I

Annex D - Honduras: Status o f the PRSP Progress Report
1.
Honduras completed a full Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) that was presented t o
the Boards o f IDA and IMF in October 200 1. The preparation o f the first PRSP Progress Report i s
underway and will be completed over the next several months, pending agreement with the IMF on
the parameters o f the macroeconomic framework. A draft version o f the Progress Report was
consulted through 16 workshops involving several sector groups (“mesas sectoriales”) integrated
by govemment, civil society and donor community representatives, and through the Consultative
Poverty Council (“Consejo Consultivo de l a Pobreza”) during March and April 2003. Civil society
and the donor community (including the Bank and Fund) have presented comments and
recommendations for improving the Progress Report.
2.
The draft Progress Report maintains the same long term vision o f the PRSP. I t proposes to
update some elements o f the strategy in response to recent developments and defines some specific
steps for implementing the strategy to reach intermediate targets set for the period 2003-2005 in
line with govemment priorities. In particular, the inability to comply with the previous PRGF
arrangement has led to a systematic revision o f certain elements o f the macroeconomic strategy and
structural reforms, but the central poverty reduction target remains the same. That is, the draft
Progress Report s t i l l aspires to reach the Millennium Development Goal for poverty reduction,
which would call for a 24 percentage point reduction in extreme poverty between 2001 and 2015.
T o achieve this goal, the Progress Report estimates that Honduras’ economic growth rate will have
to increase to an annual average o f 5.1 percent over that period, or more than double the 2 percent
averaged over the last four years.
3.
Honduras has made considerable advances during the 1990s in poverty reduction and
improving social indicators. This improving trend was temporarily interrupted by hurricane M i t c h
in 1998, but resumed in 2000. The progress made since the full PRSP was completed in 2001
appears t o have been modest, with about half the PRSP targets for which data i s available having
been met after one year. The extreme poverty (indigent) rate declined to 45 percent in 2002, in line
with the PRSP target, while the advances in the reduction o f child malnutrition, maternal mortality
and access to water exceeded the corresponding intermediate PRSP targets; see Annex Table D1.
On the other hand, the advances achieved in the overall poverty rate, infant mortality, access to
sewerage and gender equality fell short o f the intermediate targets. This shortfall i s likely to be
related in part t o the general economic deterioration that took place after 2000. While the PRSP
projected an average annual GDP growth o f 3.8 percent during 2001-02, actual growth only
reached 2.3 percent.

4.
With respect to policy implementation, the PRSP Progress Report indicates that the
ambitious legislative and administrative reform agenda set in the PRSP for 2001 and 2002 could be
only partially achieved. The main achievements are (i)
measures t o strengthen the judicial system
and combat corruption, (ii)passage o f the l a w o f Administrative Simplification, (iii)the
establishment o f the National Competitiveness Council and (iv) the initiation o f negotiations
toward the Central America - U S Free Trade Area (CAFTA).

1

Gender-potential Index
I
a. This l i s t does not comprise all the PRSP indicators, but only a select sample for which data was
available during preparation o f the draft Progress Report.
Source: Govemment o f Honduras.
Important policy measures envisaged in the PRSP that could not be implemented so far
5.
include the following legislation:
0
The civil service reform law
0
the energy and water sector framework laws
0
the forestry law
0
Reforms to the Labor Code
0
Reforms o f the Commercial Code
0
the Competition Promotion Law
0
the Capital Market Law
0
the Social Security Reform L a w
0
the Housing Sector Modernization Law, and
0
the Education Framework L a w
These pending reforms are being revised and reprogrammed for submission to Congress. In
hindsight, the PRSP may have underestimated the complexity o f developing these laws and the
effort required to achieve a sufficient consensus for their passage within an extremely short time
frame.
6.
The draft PRSP Progress Report documents that public spending on the poverty reducing
programs identified in the PRSP has averaged only 50 percent o f the spending levels projected for
2001 and 2002. The PRSP had envisaged a total spending on poverty reducing projects o f US$343
million in 2001 and US$380 million in 2002, but only managed to execute US$202 million and
US$165 million (averaging to 2.5 percent o f GDP) in those two years. T h i s spending shortfall i s
mainly explained by (i)capacity constraints that prevented a faster implementation o f new
programs envisioned in the PRSP and (ii)shortfalls in domestic funds for poverty reducing
projects. The draft Progress Report indicates that the total HIPC interim assistance received from
the Bank, IDB and IMF during 2000-02 amounted to US$81.7 million. O f this amount, US$67.2
million were spent on poverty reducing programs, with the balance placed in the Poverty Reduction
Fund waiting to be assigned.
7.
Finally, the draft Progress Report brings to light deficiencies in the tracking mechanism
used to account for the sources and uses o f savings from HIPC debt relief. The PRSP takes a
narrow a view o f poverty reducing spending by limiting itself to new projects financed with
additional resources. T h i s does not permit a comprehensive understanding o f the overall evolution

2

of poverty reducing spending in Honduras in relation to overall assistance flows. The Honduran
authorities have indicated that there are revising the HIPC Tracking Mechanism to incorporate a
more comprehensive view o f poverty reducing spending. This will require the strengthening o f the
integrated financial management system (SIAFI), to permit establishing a “tagging” mechanism in
the government budget and financial accounts to track all spending classified as poverty reducing.

Concluding Summary

8.
Honduras has made significant inroads to the reduction o f income poverty and improved
access to basic services over the last decade. However, it needs to increase the rate o f progress to
meet PRSP and MDG goals. The findings presented in the draft Progress Report appear to indicate
that, so far, the PRSP has not achieved the necessary acceleration. T h i s i s likely due to the lack o f
a clear articulation between the goals and the interventions in the original PRSP, coupled with
over-ambitious programming. The Progress Report places heavy emphasis on the need to focus the
interventions in a programmatic setting and gear resource assignments - including the main
programs funded with national resources, as well as donor-funded interventions - to the meeting o f
key PRSP goals. The donor community i s supporting a gradual shift towards programmatic
lending that will support this process. Work i s also underway to refine the PRSP indicators and
improve monitoring mechanisms to track the financial flows associated with poverty-reducing
public spending, as well as poverty outcomes.

3

-

Annex E CAS Consultations with Honduran Stakeholders
1.
Formal consultations o n the World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy for Honduras
were held in Tegucigalpa from April 22-25,2003 with representatives o f the Executive branch o f
Government, the international donor community, c i v i l society, members o f the Honduran
Congress, think tanks, as well as private sector and media representatives. The Bank was
represented at these consultations as follows: from Headquarters, by Jane Armitage (Country
Director); Neeta Sirur (Country Operations Advisor); Department Sector Leaders: Helena Ribe
(HD), Manuel Sevilla (FPSI), Martin Raine (ESSD), Felipe Jaramillo (PREM); U l r i c h Lachler
(Country Economist); Marianella Zeballos (Country Officer); Stig Trommer (Operations
Analyst); f r o m Nicaragua resident mission, by Violeta Granera (Civil Society Specialist); and
from Honduras resident mission, by Joseph Owen (Resident Representative); and Dante Mossi,
(Resident Economist). An earlier informal round o f consultations was held in November 2002,
involving a series o f meetings with separate groups o f stakeholders to solicit views on priority
areas for Bank involvement in Honduras. These earlier meetings produced a number o f
suggestions for the Bank’s strategic direction which were incorporated in the draft program o f
country assistance prepared during the first quarter o f 2003.

2.
The methodology used during the latest and more formal round o f consultations centered
o n introductory remarks by the Country Director, a Power-Point presentation o f proposed areas o f
emphasis and a listing o f proposed lending and non-lending activities in support o f the Honduras
PRSP. After these items were presented, the meetings were opened up for general discussion.
This methodology allowed the Bank to hold a set o f productive and frank discussions with the
different stakeholders. A s a result o f these consultations, a number o f important shifts were made
in the proposed program, including a greater emphasis o n forestry, the broadening o f a proposed
water activity to encompass a wider range o f urban services, the inclusion o f additional activities
targeting youth-at-risk, and the development o f indigenous and Afro-Honduran communities.
Following i s a summary o f the views expressed by the different groups o f stakeholders during the
last round o f consultations.
Executive branch of government
The government endorsed the Bank’s proposed areas o f support, allocation o f lending (split
between budgetary support and sector projects) and non-lending activities, the timetable for
implementation o f the activities and the trigger conditions for the different lending scenarios. In
addition, they expressed their satisfaction with the significant increase in FY03-06 IDA resources
for Honduras. The Government requested the Bank’s support in their efforts to obtain resources
and technical assistance for other areas o f strategic importance such as nutrition, assistance for
the rural sector affected by l o w commodity prices (especially coffee growers), infants and youthat-risk, remittances, and CAFTA. The Government also recognized the Bank’s effort to
coordinate i t s assistance program with other donors by suggesting sector-wide approaches with a
long-term vision. This approach has already generated positive results in the education, health
and forestry sectors. Finally, the Government requested additional training on Bank procurement
and financial procedures to strengthen the capacity o f the project-executing agencies, as well as
government official responsible for project implementation (in addition to more frequent project
supervision missions).

1

International Donor Community
The donors emphasized the need for greater coordination between Cooperation Agencies in
Honduras to promote efficiency in the use o f scarce resources. Furthermore, they recommended
maintaining a dialogue among stakeholders, supplemented by periodic evaluations o n the levels
and impact o f the international aid allocated in support to the PRSP. The donor community
considered the Bank’s l i s t o f lending and non-lending activities for FY03-06 to be complete and
well targeted. They especially endorsed the Bank’s proposed work o n the rural sector, trade
promotion (CAFTA), and the decentralization process.
Civil Society
A broad sample o f civil society organizations participated in the CAS consultations (including
representatives o f the National Anti-Corruption Council, leaders from organizations advocating
o n behalf o f women, indigenous groups and other minorities, academics, and religious groups).
They reiterated the important role they play in the development o f the country, pointing out that
civil society has become increasingly involved in the processes o f formulating public policy.
With relation to the proposed Bank’s proposed assistance program (FY03-06), the representatives
o f civil society concluded that the proposed activities would help to advance the PRSP objectives.
In addition, they recommended that the Bank strengthen the involvement o f civil society in the
formulation and implementation o f projects to ensure that the benefits reach the largest number o f
people. The c i v i l society representatives suggested further Bank support in the areas o f infant and
youth-at-risk, the penal system, C A F T A and other free trade agreements, remittances, political
reform, decentralization, food safety, micro-financing, judicial reform, and passage o f the C i v i l
Service Law. Finally, the Bank was congratulated for the success o f “Nuestras Rakes,” one o f the
few successful programs to benefit ethnic minorities. Further support for this program was
strongly endorsed.
Members of Congress
Members o f Congress representing all political parties agreed o n the need to maintain
macroeconomic stability, while reactivating economic growth and addressing the institutional
weakness affecting government agencies and the financial sector. Representatives o f the main
opposition party offered to assist the Government in fulfilling the C A S trigger conditions, thereby
allowing for an expanded IDA allocation. The congressmen also agreed that, in general, the
proposed assistance program (FY03-06) supported the pillars established in the PRSP. In
addition, they emphasized the need to improve efficiency and transparency in the management o f
public resources, the need to adopt sector-wide approaches, and the need to improve coordination
within the activities supported by international financial institutions.
Private Sector
The private sector was represented by the presidents o f the chamber o f commerce and other
prominent leaders from the private sector. These representatives pointed out the current difficult
economic situation o f Honduras and the need for wide international support. They were
especially concerned about the growth o f public spending in recent years and the lack o f
transparency in economic policies. Special emphasis was placed o n the importance o f improving
Honduras’ competitiveness in the context o f CAFTA and other likely future trade agreements.

2

Annex F - Debt Sustainability Analysis

1.
Honduras reached the HIPC Decision Point in June 2000, qualifying under the fiscal
criteria (NPV o f debt-to-revenue ratio above 250 percent), but not under the export criteria (NPV
o f debt-to-export ratio above 150 percent). Since that time, Honduras’ external public debt has
remained virtually unchanged in U S Dollar terms. I t s total external public debt amounted
toUS$4,228 million in nominal terms at the end o f 2002, versus US$4,288 million at the end o f
1999. This represents a significant decline in Honduras’ overall debt burden: in net present value
terms (NPV), the total public external debt declined as a share o f exports o f good and services
from 142 percent in 1999 to 125 percent in 2002, and as a share o f GDP from about 59 percent to
46 percent. It also declined as a share o f government revenues, from 322 percent in 1999 to 252
percent in 2002, putting i t very close to the debt sustainability threshold under the fiscal window.
(The domestic public debt has remained steady at around 5 percent o f GDP).

f

Table F1: Honduras Predicted Evolution and Updated Estimates of External Debt Ratios
N P V Debmevenues

270
172
252
~.
Source; the original predictions are fiom the HIPC Decision Point Document (June 2000) and refer to projections after
2002

~~

~

enhanced HIPC Initiative assistance, while the revised estimates are fro the IMF Article I V Consultations Report (April
2003).

2.
The decline in Honduras’ external debt burden i s significant, but not as pronounced as
had been projected in 2000. The main reasons for this divergence are the slower-than-predicted
growth o f exports and public revenues. Exports were projected at the Decision Point to grow by
17 percent per annum in real terms during 2000-2002, but they only grew by about 2 percent
during that period. Similarly, ratio o f central government revenues (excluding grants) to GDP
was projected to increase to 19 percent in that period, but remained instead near 18 percent.
Honduras was also expected to reach the HIPC Completion Point in June 2002, but this has been
postponed with the derailing o f the PRGF-supported macroeconomic program in 200 1, so that
some o f the HIPC assistance envisioned for 2002 could not be obtained.
3.
Even though export growth and central government revenue growth remained
considerably below the projected values, Honduras’ external debt levels did not expand. This
fortuitous outcome was mainly due to the unexpectedly rapid growth in net transfers, which i s
mainly attributable to the growth o f foreign remittance inflows; see Table F2. The lower current
account deficits called for a lower capital account surplus, and correspondingly lower pressure on
both the public and private sectors to borrow abroad.

1

Table F2: HONDURAS Balance of Payments (in U S $ millions)
As projected in the HIPC Decision Point Document (2000)
1999
2000
2001
2002

2003-05

Current Accounta
Balance or Goods &
Services
Exportsb
Imports
Public sector interest debits
Other income (net)
Transfers (net)

-249
-745

-504
-882

-427
-766

-375
-719

-440
-725

2,312
-3,057
-161
3
654

2,610
-3,492
-136
2
511

3,066
-3,832
-129
-9
477

3,484
-4,203
-94
-14
452

4,477
-5,202
-127
-61
473

Capital Account
Public Sector (net)
Disbursements
Amortization
Private Sector net

321
192
399
-207
129

355
72
285
-213
283

424
141
3 17
-177
283

444
160
350
-191
284

546
311
521
-21 1
235

Overall balance

123

-149

-3

69

106

As recorded in the IMF Article I V Consultation Document
Actual
prelim.
prelim.
1999
2000
2001
2002

Projected
2003-05

(2003)

Current Accounta
Balance o r Goods &
Services
Exportsb
Imports
Public sector interest debits
Other income (net)
Transfers (net)

-241
-815

-251
-850

-262
-1087

-188
-1019

-304
-1192

1,695
-2,510
-192
28
737

1,820
-2,670
-187
34
753

1,720
-2,807
-155
-7
973

1,730
-2,748
-161
-16
1,008

1,900
-3,091
152
-32
1,074

Capital Account
Public Sector (net)'
Disbursements
Amortization
Private Sector net
Errors & Omissions

159
118
387
-270
41
162

-24
-13
169
182
-1 1
96

153
107
27 1
-164
46
65

100
-44
143
-187
144
107

387
190
406
-216
197
0

Overall balance
80
-179
-44
a. Including official transfers.
b. Exports f r o m maquila industries are included o n a net basis.
c Projected public sector balance and disbursements include financing gap.

19

84

4.
Table F3 presents the projected evolution o f the principal external debt ratios before the
granting o f further debt relief under the enhanced HIPC initiative. These simulations are based
o n the revised macroeconomic framework that has been tentatively agreed to by the Honduran
authorities and IMF staff in the context o f the ongoing PRGF negotiations. Under this revised
framework, output growth i s assumed to converge to 4.5 percent per annum (instead o f 6 percent
in the HIPC Decision Point document), real export growth i s assumed to average around 7
percent per annum (versus 15 percent), and central government revenues are assumed to remain
steady at around 20 percent o f GDP in response to recent tax reform measures. The NPV o f the

2

public extemal debt under this macroeconomic framework declines as a share o f GDP, exports
and govemment revenues, but much more gradually than had been envisioned at the HIPC
decision point. That is, under this scenario, the extemal debt ratios originally envisioned at the
Completion point in 2002 would be reached in 2008. Several sensitivity analyses carried out by
the IMF (2003 Article I V Consultation Report) involving a temporary decline in GDP growth,
lower export growth, lower central govemment revenues, a lower primary balance and a one-time
appreciation o f the real exchange rate result in a more gradual rate o f decline in these debt ratios,
but do not alter their overall declining trend.
Table F3: Honduras Revised Public External Debt Scenario
N P V o f Public Sector Extemal Debt,
as a share of:

1

2003

1

2004

1

2005

I

2006

1

I

2007

Source: IMF, Honduras- Staff Report for the 2003 Article I V Consultation, April 2003.
Note: These simulationsrefer to evolution of medium and long term public and publicly guaranteeddebt before debt
relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative.

5.
The preceding simulations are broadly consistent with the World Bank’s lending program
as proposed in this CAS. Table F2 presents projected annual disbursements to the public sector
o f US$ 400 million. Meanwhile, the Bank’s lending program envisages average annual
commitments o f between U S 7 2 million (base case) and US$88 million (high case), which i s
considerable below the Bank’s traditional share o f Honduras’ external debt. Debt owed to the
World Bank comprised 25 percent o f Honduras’ total external debt in nominal terms at the end o f
1999. If the Bank were to maintain the same share o f total disbursements as i t s share o f the
external debt, it could disburse up to US$lOO million per annum under the current projection
framework without jeopardizing Honduras’ debt sustainability.

3

