Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 26756 TU
MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTIONAND DEVELOPMENT

AND
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

Public Disclosure Authorized

TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
OF THE
WORLD BANK GROUP

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF TURKEY
October 2,2003
Turkey Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
Southern Europe and Central Asia Department
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used b y recipients only in the
performance o f their official duties. I t s contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization

The FY01-03 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Turkey was discussed by the Executive
Directors on December 21, 2000 (R2000-218; IFC/R2000-221). The CAS Progress Report
was considered by the Executive Directors on July 12, 2001 (R2001-0113/1; IFC/R20010 134/1).

CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit: Turkish Lira (TL) as of August 3 1,2003
US$1 = TL1,400,998

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

FISCAL YEAR

Metric System

January 1- December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
MDGs
Justice and Development Party
AKP
MIGA
ARIP Agricultural Reform ImplementationProject
MIS
BRSA Bank Regulation and Supervision Agency
MOE
Country Assistance Strategy
CAS
NEAP
Central Bank of Turkey
CBT
NBFI
Conditional Cash Transfers
CCT
NEP
CEM Country Economic Memorandum
NGO
CFAA Country Financial Accountability Assessment
OECD
CPAR Country Procurement Assessment Report
OED
Direct Income Support
DIS
PEIR
Export Finance Intermediation Loan
EFIL
PFSAL
ERL
Economic Reform Loan
PFPSAL
European Union
EU
PPSAL
FDI
Foreign Direct Investment
SDIF
FSAL Financial Sector Adjustment Loan
SMEs
Gross Domestic Product
GDP
SRMP
Global Environment Facility
GEF
SSAL
Gross National Product
GNP
Deutsche Gesellschaft fur TechnisL..e Zusammena-it UN
GTZ
UNDP
HIES Household Income and Expenditure Surveys
IBRD International Bank for Reconstructionand Development UNICEF
International Finance Corporation
WBI
IFC
International Financial Institution
WHO
IF1
International Monetary Fund
IMF

Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Management Information System
Ministry of Environment and Forestry
National Environmental Action Plan
Non-Bank Financial Institutions
New Economic Program
Non-GovernmentalOrganization
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Operations Evaluation Department
Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
Programmatic Financial Sector Adjustment Loan
Programmatic Financial and Public Sector Adjustment Loan
Programmatic Public Sector Adjustment Loan
Savings Deposit Insurance Fund
Small and Medium Size Enterprises
Social Risk Mitigation Project
Special Structural Adjustment Loan
United Nations
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Children’s Fund
World Bank Institute
World Health Organization

WB Managers and Staff Responsible for this CAS
Vice President
Country Director
Responsible Staff

Mr. Shigeo Katsu
Mr. Andrew Vorlunk
Mr. Andras Horvai
Mr. James Parks

IFC Managers and Staff Responsible for this CAS
Vice President
Director
Responsible Staff

Mr. Assaad J. Jabre
Mr. Khosrow Zamani
Ms. Sujata Lamba

TABLE OF CONTENTS

...........................................................................................................
THE COUNTRY CONTEXT ...........................................................................................

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1

I.

3

Economic Crisis and Recovery ......................................................................................
The Medium-term Economic Program ........................................................................

............

3

..5

11.

WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE AND LESSONS LEARNED

111.

MAIN DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES AND THE COUNRTY ASSISTANCE
STRATEGY
12

......................................................................................................................

Turkey’s Vision and Economic Priorities ....................................................................

The Country Assistance Strategy .................................................................................

Working with Other Development Partners ................................................................

IV.
V.

...................................................................
MANAGING THE RISKS AND IBRD EXPOSURE ..................................................
LENDING PROGRAM AND TRIGGERS

Managing the Risks......................................................................................................
IBRD Exposure ............................................................................................................

VI.

8

CONCLUSIONS

..............................................................................................................

BOXES, TABLES, AND FIGURES
Box 1:
Box 2:
Box 3:
Box 4:
Box 5:
Box 6:
Box 7:
Box 8:
Box 9:

The Achievements and Remaining Agenda
IFC’s Strategy Following the 2000/2001 Financial Crisis
Impact of the Basic Education Reform
Poverty and Inequality in Turkey
Sub-regional Cooperation
CAS Consultations
Turkey’s Progress Towards the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
Collaboration with the EU
Triggers for the High Case

Table 1:
Table 2:
Table 3:
Table 4:
Table 5:
Table 6:
Table 7:

Key Economic Indicators
Portfolio Overview
Key Outcomes and Bank Group Benchmarks
Indicative Lending Program FY04-06
Public Debt Dynamics
External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2000-2004
Summary Lending Figures

Figure 1:

GNP per capita ($)

12
19
30

31
34
34
39

40

ANNEXES
Annex A1
Annex A 2
Annex A3
Annex A4
Annex A5
Annex A 6
Annex A 7
Annex B1
Annex B 2
Annex B 3
Annex B 4
Annex B 5
Annex B 6
Annex B 7
Annex B 8
Annex B 9
Annex B10

Private Sector Strategy
Retrospective Review
CAS Consultations
Strategic Links in the CAS Program
Country Gender Assessment Summary
Financial Accountability and Public Sector Governance
Fund Relations Note
Country-at-a-Glance
Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
IBRD Program Summary
Summary of Non-lending Services
Poverty and Social Development Indicators
K e y Economic Indicators
K e y Exposure Indicators
Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA) and IFC’s Portfolio
Country Assistance Strategy Matrix
CAS Summary o f Development Priorities

-1-

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
Turkey has learned from crises and been strengthened by reforms over the past
five years. Natural disasters as well as financial crises were painful but also shocked the system
and focused the nation on the need for fundamental reforms to modernize the country and i t s
governance. The economy started to rebound strongly last year, and the Government, which
came to power with significant popular support following early elections at the end of 2002, has
now the opportunity to put Turkey on a sustainable economic growth path. But this w i l l be a
challenge as the economy, while recovering, i s s t i l l vulnerable and the debt remains high. The
international environment presents both economic uncertainties and political risks that absorb the
Government’s attention. The Middle East remains on edge. The Cyprus question continues to
be unresolved. The international economic situation remains cloudy. Nevertheless, if Turkey i s
successful in steering through this difficult period and getting on the path towards EU accession,
the country could achieve stable growth and improved living conditions. The Bank Group
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) i s designed to help Turkey to do so.

..

11.

...

In discussing the CAS, Executive Directors may wish to address these questions:
D o the objective and main themes o f the CAS adequately reflect Turkey’s economic

priorities?
Are the lending scenarios, including the sharp difference between the high case and the
low case and the roughly 50 percent adjustment lending in the high case, appropriate for
Turkey’s specific circumstances?
D o Directors support the continued emphasis on programmatic lending in the areas of
public and financial sector reform as a core o f the high case scenario?

The objective of the CAS i s to help Turkey implement fundamental reforms to
reduce economic vulnerability and achieve high and stable growth, and continue the
process of addressing some long neglected social and environmental problems. The last
CAS focused heavily on crisis management. This CAS aims at reducing the risk o f reemergence
of crises and helping Turkey address the many economic challenges of preparing for EU
membership. The planned assistance program for FY04-06 and the expected outcomes are
structured around four development themes in line with the Government’s priorities: (i)
sound
macroeconomics and governance; (ii)
equitable human and social development; (iii)attractive
business climate and knowledge; and (iv) strong environmental management and disaster
prevention.
111.

iv.
The two Bank lending scenarios described in this document are very different in
size and composition. This reflects the risks associated with the assistance strategy, as
summarized in vii. below and in Chapter V. A lending program of US$4.5 billion i s envisaged
in the high case and US$1.3 billion in the low case. The program under the high case w i l l
include support for the economic reform program, focusing on public sector management and
accountability, and the business climate, including the financial sector, to address the underlying
economic problems that make the Turkish economy vulnerable. Triggers for the high case are
based on key reforms supported b y ongoing and planned adjustment operations as well as on
indicators of satisfactory macroeconomic performance. I f lack o f progress on the reform
program were to push Bank lending to the low case, Bank support would concentrate on human
development, disaster and environment management, and local level interventions to reduce

-2poverty. Similar to the past CAS, the self-regulating nature o f the strategy w i l l be a key risk
mitigating mechanism.
In view of Turkey’s particular poverty profile, with low levels of extreme poverty
but relatively high incidence of vulnerability, the planned program, together with the
implementation of the ongoing operations, will focus on: (i)malung the economy more
resilient to crises (including natural disasters) that disproportionately affect the most vulnerable;
(ii)contributing t o sustainable economic growth that i s critical to pull many o f the poor out o f
poverty; (iii)
promoting human development to create opportunities for the poor, make access to
health and education more equitable and the social protection system more efficient; (iv)
reducing regional differences by improving the delivery o f and access to services, and creating
jobs in disadvantaged areas; and (v) increasing empowerment through enhanced local
participation and c i v i l society involvement.
V.

vi.
The Bank Group strategy recognizes that the complex second generation policy
and institutional reforms that Turkey i s undertaking need to be supported over the
medium term. This recognition provides the rationale for proposing a sizeable program
envelope should the macro situation continue to improve and the reform process remain on track.
I t also justifies the reliance on programmatic adjustment lending as the main delivery instrument
to allow for a reasonable degree o f adaptability o f the program to unfolding events on the
ground. The lending program in the high case i s designed in such a way that investment projects
in key areas would complement reforms to be supported under the planned programmatic
adjustment loans. The AAA program i s also structured around the four themes o f the CAS and i s
focused on building an analytical base that w i l l position the Bank to maximize the effectiveness
o f i t s assistance.
vii.
Turkey’s reform program entails significant risks, as witnessed by developments
over the past two years, which can only be overcome by sustained implementation of the
reforms. The situation in Turkey has been and w i l l continue to be subject to continued
the continuing
uncertainty as events unfold on the ground. The three main risk factors are: (i)
macroeconomic vulnerabilities arising from the 2001 crisis and subsequent international and
regional developments; (ii)a potential loss o f consensus for political or social reasons stemming
from the social impact of reforms; and (iii)
institutional challenges in implementing the program.
...
The active support of the IFI’s has been instrumental in helping Turkey address
viii.
the risks and pursue i t s reform program. The economic recovery and disinflation progress
recorded in 2002 and the first half o f 2003 provide encouragement that the exceptional support
from the I F I s has helped Turkey weather the worst o f the 2001 crisis while maintaining i t s
reform course. The new Government’s stated commitment to the program demonstrates that
political support for economic reform in Turkey transcends specific political parties and
personalities. However, the Government w i l l be continuously challenged by the need to
implement a long l i s t o f difficult and painful reforms in a context o f pressure for populist
measures and special interest lobbying. The irreversibility o f the structural reforms put in place
since 1999 cannot be taken for granted and the near-term risks remain significant given the depth
o f Turkey’s economic vulnerabilities and extent o f the reforms that lay ahead. In recognition o f
the situation, the CAS envisages a graduated response that corresponds to the strength o f the
economic program, and which w i l l allow the Bank to mitigate the risks and tie increases in i t s
exposure to concrete improvements in Turkey’s economic fundamentals.

-3 -

MEMORANDUM OF THE PRESIDENT
OF THE INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTIONAND DEVELOPMENT
AND THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
ON A COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF TURKEY

I.

THE COUNTRY CONTEXT

Economic Crisis and Recovery
1.
For many years Turkey’s economy seemingly defied rationality but fiscal
imbalances and delayed structural reforms finally led to a series of crises. Until the late
1990s, Turkey achieved real economic growth o f 4-5 percent in the face o f chronically high
inflation. Borrowing, domestic and international, allowed Turkey to keep up this high-wire act
despite accumulating macroeconomic vulnerabilities. I t finally came to an end in 1999 when the
economy shrank by some 6 percent. Turkey then embarked on an ambitious exchange rate-based
disinflation program combined with structural reforms. However, the process o f implementing
these second generation structural reforms (the first round o f reform was implemented some 15
years before and focused on trade and financial liberalization) was interrupted in early 2001 by a
very severe economic crisis which followed on an earlier bout o f financial instability in
November 2000. The crisis had been building up for some time and was the result o f two
overriding factors: the emergence o f huge fiscal imbalances over the 1990s resulting from
underlying structural imbalances and rigidities, and the lack o f attention to the accumulation o f
systemic banking sector risks.

The 2001 crisis was deep and triggered the start of fundamental reform. The
2.
authorities responded to the crisis b y designing a New Economic Program (NEP) announced in
M a y 2001, following the collapse of the crawling peg and subsequent devaluation. The key
structural and social elements o f the program were: (i)a macro-framework designed to restore
financial stability and ensure public debt sustainability--principally through a further tightening
o f fiscal policy with a primary surplus target o f 5.5 percent o f GNP in 2001 increasing to 6.5
percent thereafter; (ii)
rapid restructuring o f the banking sector--especially o f state banks and
insolvent private banks intervened by the regulatory authority (BRSA)--based on large resource
transfers from the budget; (iii)a more ambitious program o f public sector reforms centered on
deeper structural fiscal reforms and institutional reforms to improve public expenditure
management and public governance; (iv) a renewed privatization drive in combination with
further liberalization measures (particularly in energy, telecommunications and agriculture) and
strengthening o f the role o f independent regulatory bodies to improve the climate for private
investment; and (v) strengthening o f social assistance to help low. income groups adversely
affected b y the crisis.
3.
Just when the program began to show initial signs of recovery in the summer of
2001, the economy was hit by an external shock after September 11, 2001. Although
Turkey’s financial markets quickly regained the ground lost, this was due in large part to investor
expectations that the country would benefit from additional support f r o m official creditors to

-4help overcome the negative effects o f the shock. Turkey ended 2001 s t i l l very vulnerable to
external events and with deep cuts in output, employment and income. Following a nominal
devaluation o f some 50 percent in February 2001, the exchange rate stabilized by the end o f the
year. Interest rates were brought down, but they remained high in real terms. The combination
o f high real interest rates, a large devaluation, the huge fiscal cost o f bank restructuring and deep
recession caused the stock o f public debt to rise significantly. The ratio o f net public debt to
GNP increased from 58 percent at the end o f 2000 to about 95 percent o f GNP b y the end o f
2001. A serious drought exacerbated the recession with agricultural output contracting by some
6 percent. Overall, output shrank by more than 9 percent in 2001 and the official unemployment
rate increased from 6.6 percent to 8.5 percent. In response, the authorities tightened
macroeconomic policies further and attempted to accelerate reform implementation with stepped
up support from the I F I s .
4.
The economy recovered strongly during 2002 despite continuing volatility in the
financial markets. GNP growth reached 7.8 percent, more than double the original target o f 3
percent, although per capita GNP in current US$ terms in 2002 remained 17 percent below the
1998 peak (Figure 1). The strong growth performance was due in part to base effects from the
recession and stock building. However, there was also a positive story on exports and tourism
which responded to the real exchange rate adjustment following the 2001 crisis. A rebound in
agricultural output estimated at 7
percent was another factor. A sharp
increase in government absorption
driven by pre-election spending
played an important role in sustaining
demand in the second half o f the year.
However, private consumption also
started to recover and the fall in
O
m N
m Z Z % Z S ! g Z g 8 2
private investment was reversed in the
z
z
z z s s s z z z oN oN
last quarter. End-year CPI inflation
was just below 30 percent, the lowest
Source: State Insititute o f Statistics

5.

The prospects of war in I r a q and some initial policy signals from the new
Government created new concerns at the beginning of 2003. Some o f the initial actions by
the Government, such as the adoption o f an interim budget inconsistent with the announced

-5primary surplus target, concerns about the independence o f the regulatory boards, an ad hoc
pension increase, introduction o f a tax amnesty, and increased price support for tobacco, were at
odds w i t h the program. These actions sent problematic signals to the markets already nervous

1

Table 1: Key Economic Indicators

t
M A I N MACRO INDICATORS
GNP Growth
CPI Inflation (Dec-Dec)
Nominal Interest Rate
Unemployment Rate
Unit Wage Index (1997=100)
PUBLIC SECTOR

primary Balance (% GNP)
Overall Deficit (% GNP)
Net Public Debt (% GNP) 1/
of which net extemal debt (% GNP)
privatization($ bn)

EXTERNALBALANCE

Current account balance (% GNP)
Exports (fob, $ bn)
Tourism ($ bn)
Extemal Debt (% GNP)
CBT Foreign ExchangeReserves (S bn)

Memo

GNP (TL quadtillion)
TLTJSD Exchange Rate (annual average)

2000

Actual U
2001

Estimate U
2002

programy

2003

Projection 4/

2004

2005

2006

I

6.3
39.0
38.0
6.6
103.6

-9.5
68.5
99.1
8.5
70.7

7.8
29.7
63.5
10.6
72.2

5.0
20.0
46.4

5.0
12.0
31.3

5.0
8.0
29.3

5.0
5.0
25.7

2.7
19.2
57.7
18.5
3.3

5.5
21.1
94.0
37.7
2.8

4.0
12.3
80.0
32.1
0.5

6.5
9.3
69.6
27.3
2.1

6.5
6.8
66.2
25.1
1.5

6.5
4.2
62.3
21.4
1.5

6.5
3.5
59.6
17.5
1.5

4.9
30.7
7.6
59.0
23.2

2.4
34.4
8.1
79.1
19.8

-0.8
39.8
8.5
72.4
27.9

-3.2
47.5
8.5
58.3
28.3

-2.0
52.5
9.8
54.4
29.0

-1.1
58.2
10.2
50.3
27.8

-0.2
64.0
10.6
46.1
27.4

125.6
623,947

176.5
1,225,490

273.5
1,505,290

359.4

426.2

491.3

547.7

1/ Includes the g o v e m n t securities issued to recapitalizethe SDIF and state banks.
Z Governmentfigures as adjusted by IMF and WB estimates.
3/ 2003-04 programfigures are updated as of the 5th IMFreview.
4/ 2005-06 f i w e s are World Bank estimates based 5th review projections.
. "
Source: Govemnt, IMF and WB estimates.
I

about several months o f reform slowdown during the run-up to the November 2002 elections.
Uncertainties related to the looming war in Iraq and possible U.S. bilateral assistance added t o
investor concerns. As a result, the benchmark bond rate rose steadily to a peak o f about 75
percent in March. This market response highlighted to policymakers the need for the
Government to focus on the economic reform agenda and build up a strong track record o f
implementation o f policy reforms in order to restore market confidence and establish the
conditions for sustained recovery.

The Medium-term Economic Program

6.

The Government has shown a renewed commitment to economic reform after
some initial delays. The economic program continues to rest on the three-pronged strategy
articulated in response to the 2001 crisis: (i)
tight fiscal and monetary policies underpinned b y
large primary surpluses, a flexible exchange rate, and strong initial IF1 support transitioning to
structural measures aimed at correcting the financial and
greater reliance on private flows; (ii)
public sector weaknesses underlying the crisis, improving the investment climate, and

I

-6establishing a more sound basis for disinflation and growth; and (iii)strong social policies
including enhanced social dialogue to achieve price and wage policies consistent with
macroeconomic stability, and increased emphasis on the protection o f the most vulnerable
groups o f society. This strategy and the specific actions to be completed by the end o f 2003 are
presented in detail in the Government’s Urgent Action Plan adopted in January. Progress in
implementing the Urgent Action Plan began in earnest with the passage in April o f a full-year
2003 budget consistent with the primary surplus target. This was followed b y the passage o f
important structural legislation by mid-year including a first phase o f direct tax reform, a new
FDI law, institutional strengthening o f the social security system, and changes in the bankruptcy
law. The Government continued with implementation o f key structural reforms launched earlier
including the new public procurement and public debt management laws. The Government also
announced an ambitious privatization program and proceeded to launch a series o f tenders.

7.
The Government’s program sets ambitious targets for the next two years. Key
program targets include economic growth o f 5 percent in 2003 and 2004 (see Table 1) and
inflation falling further to 20 percent by the end o f 2003 and 12 percent in 2004. The program
aims to ensure sustainability o f the public debt through a combination o f economic growth,
sustained fiscal adjustment and improved investor confidence. The primary surplus o f the
consolidated public sector i s targeted at 6.5 percent o f GNP in 2003 and 2004. After falling
significantly in 2002, the ratio o f net public sector debt to GNP i s now projected to fall to about
70 percent in 2003 and drop further in 2004. Finally, the program targets a continued buildup o f
international reserves based on a recovery o f private capital inflows beginning in 2003. Private
capital inflows are projected to strengthen in 2004, providing the resources to finance the onset
o f large repayments to the IMF starting in 2004. (The external financing plan underpinning the
macroeconomic framework i s summarized in Table 5 in the risk section below. Provided the
2003-04 targets are achieved and reform implementation i s sustained, the prospects w i l l be good
for the positive growth and stabilization trends to continue into 2005-06.
8.
Support for Turkey’s reforms from the international community remains strong.
The IMF approved in early 2002 an SDR 12.8 billion (US$16.2 billion) Stand-by Arrangement
for Turkey covering the 2002-04 period, bringing total IMF commitments for the program to
over US$30 billion since 1999. The fourth review under the new IMF program was completed
in April and the fifth review was completed in August 2003. Bank assistance has also been
substantial. Since 2000, the Bank has disbursed US$2.5 billion in quick-disbursing lending and
an additional US$0.5 billion o f such assistance i s available for disbursement. The Government
has agreed with the Bank revised roadmaps for financial and public sector reform to continue
support under the Programmatic Financial and Public Sector Adjustment Loans (PFPSAL), as
well as a new roadmap to complete the privatization agenda and other structural reforms
supported by the Economic Reform Loan (ERL). In parallel, the Government has made
significant progress on the political criteria for EU accession including authorization o f minority
language broadcasts and restructuring o f the National Security Council, thereby improving the
prospects for opening accession negotiations after 2004. An agreement was signed with the
United States in mid-September on an assistance package for Turkey o f US$8.5 billion in
concessional loans which w i l l further mitigate risks to public debt sustainability and the external
financing plan. The authorities have agreed to direct such assistance primarily to lengthening the

-7maturity o f government debt. The U S bilateral assistance has not been factored into the program
baseline.

9.
The economy has responded well to the Government’s recent reform actions and
the sustained international support. Sustained export performance and increases in capacity
utilization indicate that the 5 percent growth target i s achievable. Consumer price and wholesale
price inflation were negative in June and July, representing successive negative monthly inflation
rates for the first time in recent past, bringing the year-end target within reach. Domestic interest
rates have declined sharply with secondary market rates on government securities falling to the
35 percent level by mid-September, compared to 50 percent in mid-July. Real interest rates have
also declined. Although fiscal performance fell short o f the targets for mid-year, the
Government introduced additional measures in the context o f the 5thIMF review including cuts
in on- and off-budget expenditure, and increases in tobacco and alcohol excises. While the
current account has deteriorated, and i s now expected t o record a US$7.5 billion (3.2 percent o f
GNP) deficit in 2003, the L i r a has been very strong with the trade weighted real exchange rate
index suggesting an appreciation o f about 20 percent by early September. Turkey’s access to
international capital markets has been restored w i t h the Government tapping markets for a total
o f US$5.3 billion so far this year.
10.
Sustaining Turkey’s economic recovery will hinge on vigorous reform
implementation. The recent growth performance has placed Turkey in the category o f rapidly
recovering post-crisis countries, although the positive outcomes so far represent in part a rebound
from the post-crisis overshooting seen in other crisis countries. Sustaining the improvements in
financial market conditions and real sector recovery will depend on continued progress in
implementing the reform program. The objective i s to catalyze a virtuous circle whereby
sustained fiscal adjustment and more effective government lead to improvements in market
confidence which in turn drives down real interest rates on a sustained basis. Lower rates,
combined with efforts to improve the business climate, should in turn engender an increasingly
robust private sector response, and eventually create the space for funding necessary public
investment and social expenditures. Achieving this virtuous circle w i l l require that the
Government translate i t s renewed commitment t o reform into credible and sustained
implementation over time. The Government has achieved some important reform results, but
there have also been delays and slippages, and a challenging agenda lies ahead. Structural
reform priorities include restructuring/privatization o f state banks; continued modernization of
fiscal management; further overhaul o f the deficit-ridden social security system; privatization in
the enterprise, energy and telecommunications sectors; and institutional strengthening o f the
social safety net. In these areas, rapid and comprehensive action i s needed in the coming
months. The key issues for sustaining the medium term recovery are analyzed in the new
Country Economic Memorandum, circulated t o the Board o f Executive Directors in August
2003’.

’

Turkey: Country Economic Memorandum: Towards Macroeconomic Stability and Sustained Growth, Report No.
26301-TU, July 28,2003.

-8-

11.

WORLD BANK GROUP ASSISTANCE AND LESSONS LEARNED

11.
The unsustainable build-up in public debt and banking sector liabilities led
ultimately to the 2001 crisis. Based on economic indicators, the last five years i s a period when
Turkish incomes remained on average unchanged, and a series o f economic and natural crises
devastated many people’s lives. But looking from a longer perspective, this period can be seen
as the inevitable outcome of rapid, unsustainable expansion fueled in part by excessive
government overspending and lax public oversight. With the crises came the opportunity for
dealing more systematically with the underlying problems, and establishing modern economic
and social institutions for the 2lStcentury. T o this end, the Bank’s assistance program has been
shaped by two overriding objectives: (i)
to help Turkey mitigate the impact o f these crises-to support the modernization and strengthening o f
financial and tectonic--on its people, and (ii)
institutions for the future.
12.
The CAS for FY01-03 was initially undertaken at a time of opportunity for
structural reform, building on measures taken in late 1999 and early 2000. The Govemment
had declared i t s commitment to extensive reforms, and had enacted several important laws
despite the disruption o f the Marmara and Duzce earthquakes in August and November 1999,
respectively. An IMF program was initiated in December 1999, and the ERL was approved b y
the Bank in M a y 2000. At the time the CAS was being drawn up with the Government, a
program o f investment loans in support o f institutional changes to buttress the structural reform
policy measures o f the ERL, and a Financial Sector Adjustment Loan, were being prepared. The
Bank had helped lay the groundwork for extensive reforms through economic and sector work
and an active dialogue, facilitated b y the move o f the Country Director to the field in 1998 and
the subsequent strengthening o f the field-based economic management, human development, and
portfolio implementation teams.
The CAS was discussed by the Board in December 2000, as the financial market
13.
turbulence experienced by Turkey in November 2000 was fresh in the minds of observers.
The Government made an effort to restore the momentum o f reform after the November 2000
financial turmoil, but the underlying imbalances proved impossible to resolve quickly, leading to
the full-blown economic crisis o f February 2001. A CAS Progress Report was discussed with
the Board in July 2001, at which time the severe need for deeper reform had been made clear and
the Government’s resolve had firmed. The Bank was positioned to support immediately the
reform actions required to initiate a rapid and sustainable recovery. The PFPSAL operations
were added to the revised CAS to support the most important and urgent o f the reforms. These
addressed the regulatory, resolution, and recapitalization needs o f the banking sector; and began
to rectify the weaknesses in fiscal management and public governance that had allowed the
mismanagement o f government expenditure and public banks for so long. Strengthened support
to the social sectors was also put in place quickly given the expected impact o f the crisis on
vulnerable people.

-9-

~

~~~~

Box 1: The Achievements and Remaining Agenda

The reforms have brought about some lasting changes, in particular where the supporting institutional changes
have been made. Viewing each o f the original CAS thrusts, the areas in which the aims have been realized and
where more attention i s needed during the new CAS period can be assessed. The Retrospective Review in
Annex A2 provides a detailed assessment o f reform implementation supported by the Bank program during the
past CAS period.
Implement reforms for growth and employment generation. Significant reforms have been made including
clean-up o f the banking system; enhanced regulation in the banking, energy and telecommunications sectors; and
reduction o f agricultural subsidies with the parallel introduction o f targeted income support for farmers.
However, pressure to reverse some o f these measures must be resisted. More rapid progress i s needed on
privatization and the FDI agenda.
Improve public management and accountability. Rationalization o f public investment, elimination o f most
extra-budgetary funds and automation o f public accounting are solid achievements. The adoption o f a new
Public Debt Management Law and the creation o f the Middle Office for Debt Management have set the stage for
more effective management o f public liabilities. Enactment o f the new procurement law and establishment of
the independent Public Procurement Agency constitute a key improvement in fiscal transparency; but vigorous
implementation o f the new public procurement framework must be ensured. Enactment of the Special
Consumption Tax and reform o f the income tax are the first steps towards a more equitable and supportive tax
system. Looking forward, further progress on public financial management and initiation o f municipal reform
will be important.
Expand social services and social protection. Substantial, sustainable improvements have been made in basic
education. Targeting has improved for social welfare for the poorest, but the system needs more funding and a
stronger institutional framework. A second stage social security reform i s needed to rationalize the institutional
framework, extend coverage and restore financial balance. Health outcomes remain poor for a middle income
country, particularly for maternal mortality.
Strengthen environmental management and disaster mitigation. In environmental management, successes
have been dramatic and sustainable where achieved, but national replication o f regional successes i s not yet
taking place. For disaster mitigation, despite the excellent results in reconstruction after the earthquakes o f 1999
and initially successful launch o f a national catastrophic insurance pool, the institutional framework for disaster
prevention remains weak.

14.
The achievements during the CAS implementation period were made possible in
part due to a three-pronged approach. First, new loans have been large (up from an average
size o f US$95 million in FY94-97 to US$440 million in FY98-02), but focused on few strategic
goals. Second, extensions on older loans not related to the current strategy have been
discouraged. Third, tight adherence to the strategy has improved the Bank’s ability to manage
the program and work towards shared goals with the client. The Bank’s ability to scale up has
been built on a basis o f analytical work and dialogue. For example, the 2000 C E M laid out the
need for reforms and institutional changes to improve private sector development in agriculture,
energy, privatization, and telecommunications; while the PEIR, CPAR and CFAA laid the
groundwork for the PFPSAL operations. Twinning adjustment operations with investment has
supported required institutional changes with considerable technical assistance to contribute to
the durability o f structural policy reforms. For example, the Export Finance Intermediation Loan
helped bring five private banks to world standards, while the F S A L and PFPSALs supported the
strengthened regulatory environment for banking.

-10-

15.
As of June 2003, the portfolio of Bank-financed projects comprised 16 active
operations (including an economic reform loan and a programmatic adjustment loan) with
total net commitments amounting to about US$4.8 billion (see Table 2).2 Of this amount,
about US$2.4 billion (some 50 percent) remained undisbursed. Net IBRD commitments more
than doubled between FY99 and FY02, driven by a series o f adjustment loans and several large
investment loans in the agriculture and social protection sectors which are in direct support o f the
economic reform program. The average age o f loans has decreased significantly from 5 years at
the beginning o f FY97 to about 4 years in June 2003.
Table 2: Portfolio Overview

Number o f Effective Projects at FY end a/

FY97 FY98 FY99 FYOO FYOl FY02 FY03
22
22
20
23
19
18
16

Net Commitments ($m) at FY end

2,763

2,434

2,632

3,801

4,344

5,890 4,820

Undisb. Balance at FY start ($m)

1,633

1,233

1,509

1,673

2,419

2,542 4,002

b’

329

259

264

957

820

1,679

788

Disb. Ratio Investment Projects (%)

20

21

17

20

21

17

16

Disb. Ratio inc. Fast Disb. Loans(%)

20

21

17

57

34

66

2C

Gross Disbursements during FY ($m)

Cancellations ($m)

86

53

104

41

448

New Commitments ($m)

20

603

528

1,770

1,628

1
5

3

4

4

3

5

2

14

20

17

16

28

13

37 1,093
2,950

300

Unsatisfactory Projects
Number
Percent

al Only IBRD financed projects, including two - one of which with unsatisfactory rating - that closed on 6/30/2003. Hybrid loans are
divided by component for calculating disbursement percentages.
b/ Undisbursed balance on 6/30/2003 was US$2,432 million.

16.
The performance of the Turkey portfolio continues to compare favorably to Bankwide averages, and has continued to strengthen. At the beginning o f FY04, only one project
had an unsatisfactory I P or D O rating. This i s a noteworthy accomplishment in particular in light
o f the 2001 crisis. A pro-active JPPR done in the late spring o f 2001 helped to anticipate r i s k s
that faced project implementation as a result o f the crisis and led to early government attention to
budget issues so that the feared shortfall o f counterpart funding did not emerge. The JPPR
completed in late 2002 did not reveal significant cross-cutting issues affecting implementation,
but highlighted factors worthy o f vigilance on a project-specific level. Again this was a useful
guide for portfolio managers in the Government and the Bank and after a slowdown in FY02,
disbursements accelerated in early FY03. Unfortunately, early 2003 brought a near stoppage o f
disbursements. The Government applied new budget procedures, and signaled a need to revisit
the portfolio in light o f changing priorities and greater commitment to managing tightly the
public investment program-all based on valid principles o f sound fiscal management and
accountability, but at the outset bringing constraints and some confusion t o project
implementation. By June 2003, many o f these issues had been resolved. The Government i s
In addition, the World Bank portfolio includes two grant financed projects with net commitments o f US$22.2
million.

-11currently engaged in a tightly run process o f examining the intended use o f remaining large
undisbursed balances to determine if there are issues o f weak strategic alignment and a
consequent need for restructuring and redesign. This i s expected to lead to decisions in a series
o f project mid-term reviews and the finalization o f the latest JPPR in the Fall o f 2003.
Box 2: IFC’s Strategy Following the 2001 Crisis
IFC’s strategy shifted to respond to the pressing needs o f the corporate sector that was forced to adjust to the
effects o f the economic crisis. Consequently, IFC’s incremental investment approvals during the year 2002
were in the magnitude o f about US$300 million diversified amongst banks, aluminum, paper, textiles, glass,
tableware, electronics and ceramic products.
With regards the financial sector, the IFC managed to leverage its knowledge o f the financial sector to advise the
Turkish government in the restructuring and rehabilitation o f the banking sector during the banking crisis. In
addition, the IFC has been assisting in the institutional development o f banks, leasingfinance companies, the
reinsurance sector and in providing IFC funding to Sh4Es.

A major focus on the IFC’s investments was to enable i t s existing export-oriented clients to generate foreign
exchange cash flows to service their debt, thereby avoiding insolvency. In addition, the IFC also helped the
growth o f promising companies b y providing them access to global markets. IFC’s assistance was geared to
enabling companies to improve competitiveness and adapt to international environmental standards. In addition
to traditional project finance, IFC also provided working capital finance and on occasion, restored confidence in
credible operating enterprises by replacing anxious commercial lenders.
In general, the IFC has and w i l l continue to emphasize security arrangements for i t s credit to minimize
difficulties with regards recovery. The IFC has been extremely selective in its equity investments as
hyperinflation and substantial devaluation have limited opportunities for equity/quasi-equity investments.
Overall however, the IFC’s portfolio has managed to weather the volatile economic environment o f recent years
better than others.

17.
To summarize, the previous CAS represented a significant change in approach
which has important lessons going forward. A programmatic approach, especially in the areas
o f public and financial sector reform at the heart o f Turkey’s macroeconomic instability,
combined with twinning o f adjustment and investment operations, e.g. in agriculture, energy, and
privatization, leveraged the impact o f the Bank’s overall program and ensured close links to the
reform process. Scaling up in a few focused lines o f business--instead o f dispersing Bank
resources on a large number o f smaller interventions--ensured a significant and visible
development impact in the country. A self-regulating program, which offered Turkey substantial
support carefully calibrated t o disburse on the basis o f concrete reform implementation and
improved macroeconomic outcomes, helped manage risks.3 As the pace o f reform slowed down
over the last year, so did too the Bank’s financial assistance. This support could be accelerated
under the new CAS as the Government moves forward in implementing i t s reform program.

Only one operation under the previous CAS, the PFPSAL I,has been reviewed b y OED. The outcome o f the
operation has been considered satisfactory. OED’s Evaluation Summary o f the ICR review notes as an important
lesson o f broad applicability that “implementing financial sector and public sector reforms concurrently yields
considerable benefit, in that establishing an improved fiscal situation removes the major source o f the country’s
macroeconomic instability and thereby lessens pressures on the financial sector”.

-12-

111.

M A I N DEVELOPMENT C H A L L E N G E S A N D THE COUNRTY ASSISTANCE
STRATEGY

Turkey’s Vision and Economic Priorities
18.
Turkey’s vision: a modern democracy with close ties to its history and traditions,
fully integrated in Europe and playing a strategic role in the regional context. Turkey’s
long-term agenda i s articulated in the 23-year National Development Plan (2001-23), while
priorities o f the new government are spelled out in i t s program presented to Parliament and the
Urgent Action Plan. Long-term development goals include transforming the country’s economic
and social structure in order to become an influential regional power, raising the level o f health
and education in the society, improving the income distribution, strengthening scientific and
technological capacity, enhancing effectiveness in infrastructure services and protecting the
environment. The vision that Turkey has for itself i s of a modern and secular participatory
democracy, fully integrated in the European community, playing a critical role in i t s region, with
an export-oriented, technology-intensive production structure. Turkey sees the EU accession
process as an important opportunity for harmonization w i t h international norms and standards.
Also, Turkey’s geo-strategic position offers a unique opportunity to reach i t s true economic
growth potential.
19.
Turkey’s development agenda i s centered around four major themes: (a) sound
macroeconomics and governance; (b) equitable human and social development; (c) attractive
business climate and knowledge; and (d) strong environmental management and disaster
mitigation. These themes, albeit to varying degrees depending on the Bank’s comparative
advantage and the role o f other development partners, are also the areas o f focus for the CAS.
(a) Sound Macroeconomics and Governance

20.
Chronic instability has prevented Turkey from realizing i t s full growth potential.
Despite impressive achievements over the past two decades, Turkey’s economy has operated
under a cloud o f vulnerability-plagued
by persistent fiscal imbalances, chronically high
inflation, and sharp swings in the business cycle. Earlier attempts to stabilize the economy fell
short, and high growth has never been sustained for long. The “boomhust” cycle, which
characterized Turkey’s economy throughout the 1990s, has continued in the new decade with 6
percent growth in 2000 followed by a record contraction o f over 9 percent in 2001 and a strong
recovery o f almost 8 percent in 2002.
While the immediate trigger for the 2001 crisis was the fragility of the banking
21.
system, underlying this and previous crises i s a deeper problem of governance. This i s
manifested in serious, non-transparent and unsustainable imbalances o f public finances.
Correcting these structural weaknesses require fundamental changes in the institutional
arrangements for the management o f public finances to ensure transparent public resource
allocation and real accountability for results.

-13-

22.
Permanent fiscal adjustment i s the key to macroeconomic stability. Turkey w i l l
need to run large primary surpluses over the medium term to lower i t s public debt level to
manageable proportions. Tight fiscal policy i s also required to meet i t s disinflation objectives.
The longer-term permanence o f fiscal adjustment i s a major issue for Turkey. The impressive
adjustment since 1999 has relied heavily on revenue increases and cuts in quasi-fiscal
expenditures, such as credit subsidies. Non-interest expenditures have actually increased
significantly since 1999. Deeper structural reforms to the social security system, together with
continued progress in public investment and public employment rationalization, improvements in
public
liability
management,
agriculture
subsidy
reform,
state
enterprise
restructuring/privatization, and energy reform are all needed to contain non-interest expenditures
as part o f a broader effort to ensure sustainability o f the fiscal adjustment.

23.
Continuing the public sector reforms and reshaping the role of the state in the
economy will be a main challenge for the Government. Improving the effectiveness o f
government (understood to be a more efficient and more transparent provider o f public goods
and services) i s a multi-faceted task, whose full achievement i s a long-term project. The Turkish
public sector i s much larger than O E C D comparators such Portugal or Spain, and public
spending has greatly exceeded available resources. Central to the problem has been extensive
intervention by all levels o f government throughout the economy and an under-performing
system o f public sector management. In 2001, Turkey started a comprehensive process o f
reforming the public sector aiming at addressing the structural factors that led to the crisis, in
order to ensure that these conditions do not recur in the future. The main objective o f the
program i s to break the vicious circle o f an unsustainably large public sector and inadequate
public sector management leading to ever increasing public indebtedness that fuels financial
sector weakness.
24.
A more effective and better performing judiciary i s an important aspect of
improved public sector governance. The Government i s giving utmost importance to judicial
reform, and efforts in this area are ongoing. The key challenges o f a comprehensive judicial
reform program include: strengthening the effectiveness o f the judiciary; facilitating access to
justice and public awareness; and ensuring adequate continuing legal education.
25.
Effective decentralization through greater empowerment of municipalities will
lead to improved services. Governance o f the increasingly complex urban economies must
shift from reliance on central government micro-management to municipal administrations
accountable to their citizens. Greater local revenue generation would both heighten citizen
oversight and reduce municipal dependence on the central government budget. Coupled with
enhanced financial accountability, and improved monitoring and public reporting o f municipal
performance benchmarks, decentralization w i l l foster the sustainable provision of services such
as water supply, and wastewater treatment, urban transport, road maintenance and solid waste
management.

26.
Participation improves policy effectiveness. Greater engagement o f c i v i l society in
Turkey’s development-for
designing strategies and implementing programs-will
raise the
effectiveness and relevance o f the government’s efforts in the eyes o f i t s citizens. While Turkey
has made noteworthy strides towards civic engagement, channels o f effective communication

-14and cooperation between the state and civil society organizations remain limited, and the
regulatory system for NGOs i s complex.

27.
Enhancing macroeconomic stability and strengthening public sector governance
require sustained focus on: (i)
implementing structural fiscal policies to help ensure permanent
fiscal adjustment; (ii)carrying out a medium-term program to improve the transparency and
efficiency o f public expenditure management; (iii)implementing broad-based institutional
reforms to improve the quality o f public sector governance; (iv) embarking on a judicial reform
program based on a comprehensive judicial sector assessment; (v) improving the mechanisms for
service delivery including through a process o f decentralization; and (vi) strengthening the legal
framework for the establishment, operation and financing o f c i v i l society institutions.

(b) Equitable Human and Social Development

28.
Human development i s critical for Turkey’s ambitions for EU accession and the
reduction of inequality. Stabilizing the economy, creating and sustaining growth, and
modernizing the role o f the state are key strategic objectives for Turkey, but none o f them may
be fully achieved or sustained without improving the country’s human capital. Currently,
educational attainment o f the Turkish population and labor force i s by far the lowest o f all OECD
countries. Raising the educational qualifications o f the population i s a crucial requirement for
improved labor productivity and employment growth in Turkey. I t i s also critical for making the
country more competitive in the global economy and to meet the goal o f EU accession.
Turkey has made unprecedented strides in the basic education program launched
in 1997 (see Box 3). N o w the twin challenges are to increase gradually the share o f GNP
dedicated to education in a manner consistent with the medium-term fiscal targets. This w i l l
require accepting that not all improvements in education can be afforded at once and more effort
i s needed to prioritize. The objective to improve s k i l l s and knowledge beginning in the early
years i s the right one, and Turkey needs to stay on track w i t h i t s ambitious reform o f basic
education. I f Turkey i s to remain competitive in the global economy i t should also expand and
reform secondary education to provide all youth with a secondary education that w i l l address
short and long term goals, including providing them with core competencies and knowledge,
including foreign language and information technology skills, as a base for lifelong learning and
active participation in a modem, knowledge economy. In addition, Turkey should develop more
o f an enabling framework for tertiary education that would encourage postsecondary institutions
more innovative in the creation, dissemination, and application o f knowledge; (ii)
more
to be: (i)
responsive to the needs o f a globally competitive knowledge economy and the changing labor
more diversified in terms o f revenue
market requirements for advanced human capital; and (iii)
sources to finance their reorientation, expansion, and increased effectiveness.

29.

-15-

Box 3: Impact of the Basic Education Reform
In August 1997, the Government o f Turkey introduced broad reforms to i t s education system. These reforms
were supported by legislation that extended the duration o f compulsory education from five to eight years and
launched a major expansion and quality upgrading o f eight year basic education schools. In six years, these
reforms have contributed to improving children’s learning achievement b y dramatically raising the conditions
o f schooling for millions o f children:

Enrolling over 10 million students in compulsory education (of which 4.8 million girls), an increase of
1.3 million children since the program started.
Increasing net enrollment in 1st through 8th grades from 76% in 1996 to nearly 100% today.
Employing over 390,000 teachers (of which more than 218,000 are women).
Providing professional development and training to 370,000 teachers, principals, and inspectors.
Providing books, other didactic materials, and computers and education software to tens o f thousands of
schools.
Bussing over 660,000 poor students from small village schools to central village schools (and providing
free school uniforms and lunches).
Building more than 30,000 new schools.
Attaining the Government’s goal o f maximum 30 students per classroom in 65 o f 81 provinces.
Maintaining, b y the Government, o f its commitment regarding provision o f education for all by:
o Protecting education expenditures (4.25% o f GDP)
o Introducing a fine for non-attendance in basic education.

30.
Turkey ranks far behind most middle income countries in terms of health status.
Furthermore, equity in the health sector i s one o f the important stumbling blocks that the country
must address in order to achieve social peace and international credibility. Currently, Turkey has
one o f the most complex health care systems in the world. A wide array o f health care providers,
financiers, and organization arrangements has resulted in an inefficient system which
increasingly fails to meet effectively the health needs o f the country’s 70 million population.
Poor health status o f the population relative to the country’s income level, inequitable access to
health care, an unsustainable public insurance system, inefficient use o f resources and the need
for better public governance b y the Ministry o f Health make health care reform imperative.
31.
Turkey i s a country with low extreme poverty but high income inequality. Tight
macro policies, sustained fiscal adjustment and actions t o downsize staffing levels in the state
enterprises, aggressive banking and corporate sector restructuring, and accelerated structural
reforms all pose major political challenges to the government and entail significant social costs
as well. While extreme poverty (US$1 a day) remains very l o w in Turkey, both urban food
poverty and economic vulnerability are significant and have grown recently (see Box 4). Turkey
needs a strong social protection system to reduce these. Currently, the system o f social
protection i s unaffordable and unbalanced. The social security system suffers from poor
management, l o w collection performance, chronic cost overruns, and ad hoc increases in
benefits. Social protection spending i s projected to reach some 9 percent o f GNP in 2003, well
above the benchmarks set under the PFPSAL program. However, this overall result i s due
primarily to overruns in social security expenditure which mask important shortfalls in other
social protection programs. The large deficit o f the social security system (which i s expected to
approach 5 percent o f GNP in 2003) i s a key factor in crowding out social assistance which is, on
the other hand, underfunded. The other key issue for social assistance i s the need to

-16institutionalize the delivery mechanism. The root cause of much of the ad hoc nature of social
assistance in Turkey i s the ad hoc nature of the institutions delivering it, including the Social
Solidarity Fund.
Box 4: Poverty and Inequality in Turkey
e

e

e

e

e
e

e

e

e

e

Extreme poverty (US$1 a day) i s quite l o w b y international standards and has remained basically unchanged
since 1994. In 2001, less than 2 percent o f the population had per capita consumption under US$1 per day,
and only 3 percent had per capita income under US$1 per day. If higher poverty lines are used
(corresponding to the E C A poverty report), then poverty i s more substantial-close to 18 percent o f the
population was under US$ 2.15 per capita per day in 2001, and 42 percent had per capita consumption
under US$4.30 per day.
Inequality remains high (Gini coefficient for income was 46 in 2001 and 40 for consumption), and i s
primarily driven by extreme regional differentials, with poverty rates sharply higher in the Southeast than in
the rest o f the country.
Larger households are poorer and children are more vulnerable than the elderly. Education and j o b access
are major factors in determining household well-being or poverty. Illiterate household heads and those with
primary only education are much poorer than those with secondary education, and almost no households
with heads with tertiary education are poor.
Rural to urban migration has been an important part o f the coping strategy for many o f the poor, including
internally displaced families. Other coping mechanisms, especially relying on relatives and neighbors for
in-kind and cash assistance, have come under stress and the poor reported a decrease in assistance from
these traditional channels.
Informal employment, an important mainstay o f the poor, has been reduced as a consequence o f the crises.
In spite o f their reluctance, some o f the poor have been forced to either pull their children from school or
have them attend less, for lack o f resources to cover out-of-pocket expenditures, and need o f informal
earnings from child labor.
Turkey has embarked on a significant reform to address both extreme poverty and poverty more broadly
defined. These efforts are supported, among others, b y the Bank-financed Social Risk Mitigation Project
(SRMP).
Targeting the extremely poor families with children, the SRMP helps finance conditional cash transfers
(CCT) which are cash payments to mothers o f extremely poor children provided that they attend school and
health clinics regularly. A new targeting mechanism, a scoring formula (proxy means test), has been
developed based on the 2001 household data. The conditional cash transfers are significant in that while
modest in size, they are regular cash payments to extremely poor families to enable them to cover the outof-pocket costs o f getting their children to school or health clinic.
The SRMP also includes a social fund-type component, the Local Initiatives, which i s targeted towards
vulnerable households. This builds on an existing program o f small income generating projects but with
significant systems improvements. B y design, the poorer regions benefit more from the proceeds o f the
loan.
Turkey i s also improving i t s institutions for poverty monitoring, SRMP monitoring, and for social assistance
and child welfare. Under the SRMP, part o f the costs o f regular household income and expenditure surveys
(HIES) are being financed, enabling Turkey to regularly monitor poverty. A HIES was undertaken in 2002,
and the authorities have agreed to issue joint poverty numbers with the Bank from this survey. At the same
time, more work i s necessary to improve Turkey’s capacity to deliver a full Poverty Assessment including
incidence analysis o f public expenditure programs. A management information system (MIS) i s being set
up in all 931 offices o f the Social Solidarity Fund as well as in the General Directorate for Child Welfare,
and these software and hardware costs are being financed through the SRMP.
Turkey: Poverty and Coping After Crises, World Bank, 2003. Making the Transition Work for Everyone,
World Bank, 2001.

-1732.
The following activities emerge as priorities: (i)continuing the reform o f the
education sector by moving to secondary and technical education with the objective o f linking
the curricula to labor market requirements and expanding and upgrading the s k i l l s base o f the
country; (ii)
advancing the reform o f the health sector to make i t more equitable and efficient;
(iii)
continuing the reform o f the social security system as a natural complement to health sector
reform and the broader public sector reform program; (iv) monitoring and assessing poverty and
vulnerability for effective poverty reduction; and (v) analyzing the constraints currently affecting
the Turkish labor market (formal and informal sector) to pave the way to necessary reforms.

(c) Attractive Business Climate and Knowledge
33.
Turkey should address the unfinished agenda of financial sector reform. The first
phase o f financial sector reform following the 2001 crisis addressed the urgent banking sector
priorities including upgrading the regulatory and institutional framework o f the banking sector to
international levels, restructuring and clean up o f the private banking sector, and the financial
and operational restructuring o f the state banks. A degree o f short-term stability has been
achieved in the banking sector, and the emphasis i s now on consolidation and sustainability o f
the remaining reforms, focusing primarily on institutional strengthening and independence o f the
Bank Regulation and Supervision Agency (BRSA) and the Savings Deposit Insurance Fund
(SDIF), privatization o f the state banks, reform o f the deposit insurance regime, and sales o f non
performing assets held by the SDIF. On a more strategic level, in addition to further
improvements in the banking sector, development of a broader and deeper financial sector i s
essential for sustained financial stability and economic growth. I t i s therefore timely for the
Government and the private sector t o broaden their focus to encompass diversifying the financial
system beyond banking, along with a balanced set o f incentives for complementary development
o f banlung and non-bank financial institutions (NBFI) and markets. This w i l l be essential to
improve real sector access to a wider range o f modern financial products and services; to
improve access to finance for a broad range o f economic agents, including SMEs, microenterprises and l o w income earners; and to reduce the systemic risks in the financial sector
through diversification. Completion o f the reform agenda in the banking sector and development
o f well-regulated non-bank financial intermediation are key t o sustainable economic recovery.
34.
Implementation of the Istanbul Approach and S M E development are important
for strengthening the real sector. Business was badly affected by the 2001 crisis, and although
now exhibiting signs o f growth, continued implementation o f the Istanbul Approach (a voluntary
workout scheme) remains essential for i t s full recovery. In addition, the growth o f small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which account for 95 percent o f all enterprises and employ
more than 40 percent o f the workforce, should be supported through enhanced access to financial
and non-financial services, knowledge and technology, as well as reduced bureaucracy, and clear
official procedures. This would lead to employment generation, mitigation o f regional
imbalances o f income, and ultimately poverty reduction.
35.
M o r e decisive political will i s needed to achieve a fully private sector-led
development model. Privatization in Turkey has lagged behind other emerging countries in
Latin America, Asia and Eastern Europe with state enterprises continuing to account for 20
percent o f total manufacturing industry value-added in 2002. Turkey should be a magnet for

-18foreign direct investment (FDI) given i t s large market size, skilled domestic labor, and
However, Turkish FDI levels have
competitive local f i r m s as suppliers t o multinationals.
stagnated during the last 15 years while total FDI worldwide increased by a factor o f 12.
Acceleration o f privatization, a full-scale review o f commercial law and competition policy to
identify and address obstacles o f FDI, and the development o f a strategy to facilitate the flow o f
“greenfield” FDI to S M E s are key actions to achieve more robust private sector-led growth.

36.
Utility sector reform continues to be a high priority. Energy prices in Turkey are
now well above OECD averages, which imposes a cost on the whole economy. The centralized
development model based on state owned monopolies and guaranteed take-or-pay contracts has
not delivered affordable energy. The transformation o f the electricity and gas sectors to
competitive, appropriately regulated, private energy markets aims to decrease costs and risks
currently borne by the government by attracting private capital not relying on government
guarantees. In telecommunications, credible restructuring and privatization o f Turk Telekom
and further regulatory improvements, including enhanced competition, are required to make the
sector an important driver o f technological change and economic growth.
37.
Raising the efficiency of Turkey’s transport sector will contribute to economic
growth, environmental sustainability and poverty alleviation. The transport sector i s in need
o f major structural reform to develop a culture focusing on users’ needs and affordability. This
would help Turkey’s competitiveness by lowering logistics costs. I t would also increase the
access o f rural and urban populations to basic services, markets and jobs, and reduce the high
human and economic costs o f traffic accidents. Mobilizing private investments and managerial
know-how in this effort w i l l also help reduce the sector’s current onerous deficits.
38.
In recent decades, agriculture and other rural economic activities have failed to
live up to their potential as contributors to growth, rural employment, and rural welfare.
Falling growth rates o f value added have been the legacy o f costly agriculture support policies
that distorted markets. The comprehensive reform in agriculture now underway has reduced the
fiscal subsidies and enabled direct income support to be paid to 75 percent o f farmers. A broader
strategic rural development challenge for the Government i s to curtail involvement in
commercial activities and focus on improved support for market development; strengthened
management o f investment and services in irrigation, forestry, and rural cooperatives; and
ensuring the provision o f services to rural areas to support the delivery o f government activities
where market failure i s prevalent. Other rural initiatives would be left to the private sector.
39.
Key medium-term priorities for promoting private sector development include: (i)
completing the process o f reforming the banking and financial sector; (ii)
fully implementing the
Istanbul approach to revitalize the enterprise sector; (iii)
addressing constraints to S M E growth;
(iv) accelerating privatization and removing barriers t o FDI; (v) improving the governance o f the
transport sector to reduce i t s fiscal burden and improve i t s competitiveness; (vi) continuing the
restructuring and privatization o f public utilities coupled with sector reform; (vii) following up
on the agricultural sector reform implemented under the previous CAS; and (viii) implementing
the reform process inherent in the EU acquis communautaire.

-19-

(d) Strong Environmental Management and Disaster Prevention
40.
Turkey i s highly vulnerable to natural disasters, especially earthquakes and
floods. In 1999, the Marmara earthquake caused extensive loss of human life and large
economic costs, pointing to the need to improve disaster prevention and emergency
preparedness. High priority needs to be given to reducing the impact o f future earthquakes
affecting Istanbul and, specifically, to saving lives and mitigating the social and economic
impacts that can be expected to occur. Special emphasis should be attached to strengthening the
region's emergency management capabilities, including planning, public education, and
conducting region-wide emergency exercises. Seismic strengthening o f Istanbul's most critical
facilities (hospitals, emergency facilities) and major lifelines would assure that the essential
infrastructure of the region would continue to function in the aftermath of a major earthquake.
More broadly, Turkey needs a coherent approach to environment protection, otherwise, like
many other industrializing countries, i t faces the risk o f allowing i t s economic growth to result in
unacceptable depletion o f water, forestry, biodiversity and air quality. As part o f the EU
accession process, Turkey i s required to enhance i t s environmental standards and compliance
mechanisms, and the EU i s taking the lead in supporting this effort. Complying with the EU
environmental directives i s a major challenge for Turkey, and requires significant increases in
environmental investments over a long period o f time. Appropriate management o f the
environment i s also fundamental to the Government's poverty reduction efforts since the
relationship between poverty and environmental degradation presents the characteristics o f a
vicious circle: in some rural areas depleting natural resources appears to be the only way for the
poor to survive and in poor urban areas a degraded environment contributes to ill health and
social exclusion.
41.
As reversing the trends of environment degradation i s a long-term agenda,
requiring institutional and cultural changes, it i s important to concentrate on key priority
areas: (i)
strengthening the country's capacity for emergency preparedness; (ii)
making further
progress in adopting EU environmental standards; and (iii)
introducing sound practices for air,
water, solid waste, soil and forestry management.
Box 5: Sub-regional Cooperation
While in its foreign and economic policy, Turkey i s projected towards Europe and the west, at the same time, its
ambition i s to establish i t s status as a regional power b y keeping close ties with the Caucasus and Central Asia
countries, taking the lead in the reconstruction effort in Afghanistan, and playing a conflict-resolution role in the
Middle East. Turkey has close economic and cultural relationship with the Caucasus and Central Asia countries,
nurtured by playing a prominent role in a whole range o f multilateral regional activities. The Committee for
Economic and Commercial Cooperation o f the Organization o f Islamic Conference (COMCEC); the Economic
Cooperation Organization (ECO); and the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) are among those initiatives
where Turkey has assumed a leading role. The Bank w i l l provide assistance to Turkey to support selected
activities under the Black SedDanube Partnership Initiative and the Caspian Oil and Gas Initiative.

The Country Assistance Strategy

42.
The objective of this CAS i s to help Turkey continue to implement fundamental
reforms to reduce economic vulnerability and achieve high and stable growth, and continue

-20the process of addressing long neglected social and environmental problems. This i s not a
crisis management strategy but one which aims at reducing the risk o f reemergence o f crises and
helps Turkey achieve i t s key objective o f getting ready for EU membership. The two lending
scenarios described in this document are very different in size and composition, reflecting the
risks associated w i t h the assistance strategy. I f the authorities are ready to pursue consistent
implementation o f structural reforms resulting in reduced economic vulnerability, the Bank
would be willing to increase i t s exposure from i t s current level. However, if this were not the
case, the low case lending program would be quite limited.

43.
The Bank strategy has been developed in close cooperation with the Government.
There i s consensus on the main elements o f the reform program that the Bank would support
under the CAS. At the same time, there i s a risk that implementation may falter or certain
reforms may proceed as scheduled while others may encounter implementation difficulties. This
i s evidenced, for example, in the limited progress in institutionalizing social assistance and
delays in privatization. In recognition o f this risk, the assistance strategy contains important risk
mitigation measures, including: (i)a comprehensive set o f triggers t o help the Government
maintain i t s overall focus on the program; (ii)
the use o f programmatic lending that transforms
the triggers into specific implementation benchmarks, but with the flexibility to adjust the
benchmarks from one operation to the next based on evolving circumstances on the ground and
the variations in reform progress in specific areas; (iii)
selective investment lending in the high
case to support reform implementation in specific sectors; and (iv) an AAA program aimed at
helping the Government design specific reform measures and providing the analytical
fundamentals o f the Bank’s program.
44.
T h e planned assistance program for FY04-06 i s structured around four
development themes in line with the Government’s priorities:

.
.

Sound macroeconomics and governance
Equitable human and social development
Attractive business climate and knowledge
Strong environmental management and disaster prevention

Table 3 summarizes, by development theme, the key outcomes the Government would like to
achieve by the end o f the CAS period, as well as a select number o f Bank Group benchmarks
representing outcomes and outputs that the Bank’s program aims to influence. In addition to
these monitoring indicators, a series o f other country performance indicators and Bank Group
benchmarks have been identified in each o f the four development themes, and these are
presented in the Country Assistance Strategy Matrix (Annex B9).
Box 6: CAS Consultations
The choice of priority areas o f assistance also reflects the outcome o f consultations with the civil society and
other stakeholders, carried out jointly by the Government and the Bank in July 2002. The consultations took
place in Ankara, Istanbul, Gaziantep and Izmir, and included Parliamentarians, local leaders (Governors’ and
Mayors’ offices), business representatives, NGOs and the Bank’s key development partners. A summary of
these discussions i s included in Annex A3.

-21-

Development Themes
Sound
Macroeconomics and
Governance

Table 3: Key Outcomes and Bank G
Key Outcomes
jtabilization o f public creditworthiness
ndicators at sustainable levels

up Benchmarks
Bank Group Benchmarks
Satisfactory macroeconomic and fiscal
'ramework consistent with the key outcomes

Less volatile economic growth in the
.ange o f 5 %

[mplementation o f public sector reforms,
'ocusing on: (i) the tax system; (ii) public
:xpenditure management; (iii) the social
security system; (iv) the civil service; (v)
oca1 government; and (vi) anti-corruption
Public expenditure on health, education and
jocial protection are sustained at pre-crisis
levels. The benchmarks as shares o f GNP
ire: (i)
education: 4.25%;
:ii)health: 3.25%, and (iii)
social protection:
7.00%

Single digit inflation
Equitable Human and
Social Development

Low
extreme
poverty
(1.8%)
maintained and vulnerability reduced
from 15% in 2001 to 12% in 2006
?Jet enrollment rate in basic education
naintained at not less than 99%; girls'
Znrollment increased, especially in
iecondary education: male/female ratio
improved from 1.20 to 1.15 by 2006
Child mortality reduced and maternal
health improved to make progress
towards the MDGs

Attractive Business
Climate and
Knowledge

Exports growth rate exceeds GNF
growth rate
Foreign Direct Investment reaches
US$1.5 billion on average during the
CAS period
Stability o f financial markets improved

[mplementation o f (i)the Conditional Cash
Transfer program to benefit over 1 million
children, and (ii)
at least 1,500 local initiative
projects to support vulnerable people
Renovation and modernization o f schools,
including in disadvantaged areas, and
implementation of reforms in secondary
education
Improvements in access and quality o f basic
health provision
Increase in export capacity o f enterprises
financed through lines o f credit provided by
the World Bank Group
Improvements in the overall investmen1
climate, implementation o f the new FDI law.
and establishment o f an Investmenl
Promotion Agency
Continued independence o f financial markets
regulatory agencies

Strong Environmental
Management and
Disaster Prevention

Significant convergence
environmental standards

with

EL

Disaster prevention and managemeni
system improved

Completion o f privatization o f state banks
passage o f new Bankruptcy Law anc
Commercial Code, and implementation 0'
non-bank financial institutions reform
Environmental sector priorities updated in tht
EU context
Introduction o f mandatory insurance cover o
private housing units; creation o f a strict and
enforced construction code enforcement
system, and strengthening o f emergency
preparedness

-2245.
The planned assistance program supports poverty reduction. I t aims at: (i)
making
the economy more resilient to crises (including natural disasters) that disproportionately affect
contributing to sustainable economic growth that is critical to pull many
the most vulnerable; (ii)
o f the poor out o f poverty; (iii)
promoting human development to create opportunities for the
poor, make access to health and education more equitable and the social protection system more
efficient; (iv) reducing regional differences by improving the delivery o f and access to services,
and creating jobs in disadvantaged areas; and (v) increasing empowerment through enhanced
local participation and civil society involvement.
(a) Sound Macroeconomics and Governance

46.
Top priority will be given to completion of the public sector reform. The first step
w i l l be for the authorities to complete the agreed actions under the program supported b y the
Programmatic Financial and Public Sector Adjustment Loans (PFPSALs). The first PFPSAL
was approved in July 2001 and disbursed in a single tranche. The PFPSALII was approved in
April 2002 as a three-tranche operation in part on SSAL terms. However, disbursement o f the
second and third tranches o f the PFPSALII was delayed b y a slowdown in implementation o f the
economic reform program during the run-up to the elections held in November 2002. The new
Government decided not to draw on the PFPSALII and the undisbursed amount o f US$900
million was canceled at the Government’s request. At the same time, the Government
committed to the principle objectives o f the program and requested the Bank to prepare a new
two-tranche PFPSAL3 operation with a revised implementation timetable in line with the
Government’s priorities for 2003 and early 2004. The backbone o f the structural conditionality
for the PFPSAL3 draws on the program for the PFPSALII second and third tranches. In key
areas o f the program where there have been problems, the conditionality has been strengthened.
These include adoption o f legislation to institutionalize the direct income support program for
farmers, lifting o f restrictions on BRSA’s operational independence, a new roadmap for Vakif
Bank privatization, and elimination o f the system o f earmarked revenues and expenditures left in
place after the closure o f budgetary and extra-budgetary funds. New benchmarks are also being
set under the tax strategy and public employment program. Macroeconomic outcomes under the
PFPSAL3 w i l l be monitored against key indicators determined on the basis o f the
macroeconomic framework agreed with the IMF.
47.
Going forward, programmatic lending will be split between the financial sector
and public sector components. As Turkey moves beyond crisis management, the more
specialized nature o f the reforms implies that i t w i l l no longer be optimal to combine the two
strands o f the PFPSAL program in the same operations. T w o Programmatic Public Sector
Adjustment Loans (PPSALs) will continue to support the phased process o f restructuring the
public sector started under the FYO1-03 CAS. This support w i l l be closely coordinated with the
IMF program and w i l l focus on structural fiscal policies to underpin adjustment; public
expenditure management (encompassing budget reforms, financial accountability and public
liability management); and public sector governance. The legal and institutional framework for
the PPSAL program w i l l encompass the Public Financial Management and Control law expected
to be enacted in the fall o f 2003, implementation o f the new public procurement law which went
into effect in January 2003, introduction o f a comprehensive risk management framework under
the Public Debt Management law enacted in early 2002, implementation o f the National Anti-

-23corruption Strategy adopted in late 2001, and introduction o f the civil service reform strategy
scheduled to be adopted b y end-2003. The first PPSAL, scheduled for early FY05, w i l l focus on
the next phase o f institutional and structural reform o f the social security system which i s
essential to underpin the fiscal adjustment and create the financial headroom needed for
rebalancing the social protection system. I t w i l l also continue support for the on-going agenda o f
public sector reforms supported b y the PFPSAL operations and underpin initiation o f local
government reforms based on analytical work noted below. The second PPSAL, scheduled for
FY06, w i l l build on the progress and momentum established under the program and begin to
shift the emphasis from reforms to measurable improvements in public service delivery. The
programmatic nature o f Bank lending to support continuation o f the Government’s public sector
reforms w i l l help phase Bank assistance in line with program progress, and provide the necessary
flexibility to adjust to future developments with regard to program implementation.

48.
The Bank i s ready to support the Government’s activities in the legal and judicial
reform area, initiated under the Urgent Action Plan. With respect to legal reform, Bank
assistance will continue to focus on improvements in the legal framework for economic reforms
and private sector development in the context o f the planned adjustment operations. With
respect to judicial reform, the Bank i s prepared to provide financial and technical assistance,
through an IDF grant or other means, to support the Government’s efforts in this area.
Strengthening and modernizing the judicial organization, administration and resource use,
improving the efficiency o f the judicial system through better case management, ensuring
adequate continuing legal education, and facilitating access to justice through adequate
awareness and public education campaigns are the main elements o f a judicial reform program.
In order to share experience between Turkey and other countries in the region, WBI i s
considering the possible participation o f Turkey in the distance learning program on judicial
reform targeted to E C A countries.
49.
Bank assistance to help improve decentralized service delivery and implement
municipal reform i s planned. The Bank has been working with the Government to develop a
local government reform strategy with the objective o f providing better local infrastructure
services (water, roads, transport, solid waste management etc.) to the urban population that
represents about 70 percent o f the population. A Municipal Reform and Services Project i s
foreseen for FY05 in support of an overall effort to improve municipal services to the urban
population. The design o f the program w i l l be based on the results o f analytical work carried out
under an IDF grant, and w i l l also take into account lessons learned through the work financed b y
other development partners, in particular GTZ and KfW. This operation w i l l be closely linked
with the PPSALs that w i l l address the overall public sector reform agenda, including local
government reform. Turkey would also benefit from training and capacity building activities
planned by WBI in the area o f municipal reform.
The Bank will continue to support the role of civil society organizations. I t w i l l
50.
hold regular consultations on program and project design, and w i l l use the Small Grants Program
to provide small-scale financing for local NGOs. I t w i l l also contribute to the preparation o f a
comprehensive NGO directory.
Analytical work will support implementation of the reform program and provide
51.
the basis for Bank interventions. The Bank plans to carry out a series o f economic reports and

-24sector studies to inform the debate on key reform issues. Following a set o f comprehensive
Policy Notes prepared for the new govemment in FY03, a CEM focusing on the recovery and
medium-term agenda for sustained growth was finalized in July 2003. In FY04, economic work
w i l l be launched to analyze the interactions between the financial sector, the real sector and the
labor markets, the results o f which w i l l be used in the context o f the planned adjustment
operations. A new C E M i s planned for FY05 on the implications o f the process towards EU
accession. As in the past, the public sector reform program w i l l be guided by the PEIR, the
C F A A and the CPAR that w i l l be updated in the later part o f the CAS period. The Bank w i l l
also continue i t s support for implementation o f Turkey’s anti-corruption strategy, including
through the key fiduciary economic work mentioned above and continued collaboration with
national NGOs for diagnostic surveys on corruption.

(b) Equitable Human and Social Development

52.
Reform of the education sector will be continued at the secondary and postsecondary education level. The process o f reforming the education sector started with the
comprehensive basic education reform that the Bank i s supporting through an adaptable program
loan begun in FYOO (see B o x 3). The Government has now expressed willingness to address the
reform agenda for secondary education, and requested Bank support through a Secondary
Education Project, scheduled for FY05. This operation has the objective o f improving access to
high quality and economically relevant secondary education on an equitable basis. The project
would focus on three priority areas: (i)
formulation, planning and launching o f a secondary
education reform strategy including revision o f general and vocational programs, provision o f
support for
information communication technology, and career guidance and counseling; (ii)
post-secondary programs including pre-service teacher training, in response to changes in
secondary programs, and improving the quantity and quality o f post-secondary technician
improving quality and assessment o f students, programs, and institutions. The
training; and (iii)
EU i s actively engaged in the reform o f secondary education, and the preparation o f the
Secondary Education Project i s being closely coordinated with EU-financed activities. A WBI
conference on secondary education, and education sector work are also planned for FY04 and
FY05, respectively. I F C has taken an active interest in the education sector and efforts aimed at
the expansion of higher educational services w i l l continue, in addition t o monitoring existing
investments in the sector.
53.
Radical reforms are necessary in the health sector. Given the complex nature o f the
sector and the vast fragmentation in financing and delivery, reforms in the health sector need to
be accompanied by reforms o f the social security system. The objective o f the reforms i s to
streamline service provision, do away with arbitrary differences in the provision o f health care,
and extend health insurance coverage to 100 percent o f the population in a fiscally sustainable
manner. Improvements in resource utilization need to be accorded high priority, and efficiency
in the delivery o f health services in hospitals needs to be improved. Systemic changes in the
health sector should also target improvements in management and organization of health
services. Specific reforms should aim at improving the poor health status o f the population,
particularly for mother and child health, increasing the coverage and use o f preventive care, and
enhancing equity in access to health services. Given the extensive role o f social security
institutions in health care provision, the financial imbalances in the social security system, and

-25the overall fiscal constraints, i t i s necessary to coordinate closely reforms in the health sector
with the broader reform o f the social security system and ensure that these reforms can be
financed within the overall fiscal program.
54.
These issues are highlighted in the Government’s Urgent Action Plan. I t envisages:
(i)
introduction o f universal public health insurance to ensure equity and access to health services
for the entire population; (ii)separation o f provision and financing o f health care for more
efficient resource allocation and use; (iii)financial and administrative autonomy for public
hospitals to improve technical efficiency and strengthen management; (iv) introduction o f family
medicine to integrate and streamline delivery o f primary health care with inpatient care and
ensure comprehensiveness and continuity in health care; and (v) a special emphasis on
improving maternal and child health, in conformity with the Government’s commitment to the
Millennium Development Goals (see B o x 7 ) . A Health Sector Transformation Project i s planned
for FY04 to support implementation o f the Government’s plan and facilitate improvements in the
health status o f Turkey’s population. The project would also provide financial and technical
assistance to improve the health information management system necessary for effective
functioning o f the transformed health care system, and may include a component to help
strengthen the social security administration. IFC i s hoping to increasingly take an active role in
the health sector, with a recent example in the field o f private health care.

55.
The assistance program will continue to focus o n social protection. With a long
history o f economic, financial and natural crises, Turkey has learned the importance of
protecting i t s population against lifetime risks associated with drops in income and loss o f assets.
In 2001, the Bank supported the Social Risk Mitigation Project which financed a wide range o f
social assistance activities, including cash and in-kind benefits, as part o f the immediate crisisresponse strategy. Following up on a review o f the crisis impact carried out in FY02-03, a full
Poverty Assessment is planned for FY05 which w i l l also provide an in depth understanding o f
how the economic crisis has affected people’s living standards, and how a social protection
strategy can build upon most commonly utilized coping mechanisms. The reform o f the social
security system w i l l constitute a key component o f the PPSAL program. The Bank would
support implementation o f the pension policy reforms enacted in 1999 and the
administrative/institutional reforms launched in 2000 under the ERL. I t would also support the
design o f further policy and institutional reforms in response to the unexpected re-emergence o f
financial imbalances in the pension system, and in the areas o f health insurance and social safety
net. Finally, labor market policies w i l l be reviewed to identify potential misalignments with the
requirements o f a modernizing economy, and to enhance the poverty reduction and incomeredistribution impact o f economic growth. The Labor Market study, scheduled for completion in
FY04, w i l l explore why Turkey has had difficulties generating sufficient formal sector jobs for
i t s growing work force.

-26-

I

Box 7: Turkey’s Progress Towards the MillenniumDevelopment Goals (MDGs)
Within the international system, the monitoring o f the MDG targets and indicators, and progress towards
achieving them, i s being led by the UN. These efforts involve monitoring at the country level through country
MDG Reports, sponsored b y the UN Country Teams, which also involves participation b y World Bank staff. In
Turkey, UNDP has been working with the Turkish authorities and the State Institute o f Statistics to establish an
appropriate database and monitoring mechanism, and the first comprehensive MDG Report for Turkey i s
expected to be ready by the first quarter o f 2004. The summary below represents a preliminary assessment b y
Bank staff o f Turkey’s status vis-h-vis the MDGs on the basis o f information available to the Bank. This
assessment w i l l be revised once the results o f the UNDP-led effort become available.
Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger. The prevalence o f extreme poverty at $ Uday was limited to 1.8 percent
o f the population in 2001, declining from 2.4 percent in 1994. However, poverty more broadly measured has
increased following the 2001 crisis. As much o f this poverty i s shallow, the recovery o f 2002 should already
have started some reversal of this situation. Several Bank interventions are in place to help reduce poverty
directly including the Social Risk Mitigation Project approved in FY02.
Achieve universal primary education. Net primary enrollment rate i s now close to 100 percent. Turkey has
achieved major strides in extending the coverage o f primary education since 1997 when the compulsory 8-year
education system was introduced-now the Government proposes to increase this to 12 years, posing an even
larger financial challenge. The Bank, through the Basic Education APLs I.and II.i ,
s contributing to the success
o f the Government’s efforts in this area.
Promote gender equality and empower women. There remains a gender gap o f 15-20 percent in enrollment
rates o f girls and boys in secondary education. While there have been improvements during the past few years
in reducing this difference, eliminating gender disparity in secondary education b y 2015 will be a challenge.
The Bank-financed education projects have supported the faster increase in girls’ school enrollment, and the
secondary education project in the lending program w i l l continue to focus on this objective.
Reduce child mortality. Under-five mortality rate i s high at 45 o f 1,000 live birth in 2000 but the steady
improvement in the last decade holds promise for attainment o f the target o f reducing the under-five mortality
rate b y two thirds between 1990 and 2015.
Zmprove maternal health. Although data i s scarce, maternal mortality rates are high and the target for this
MDG, i.e. the reduction o f the maternal mortality rate b y three quarters between 1990 and 2015 might be
difficult to meet. Through improving girls’ education, better access to services and targeted health sector
interventions supported by the Bank-financed education and health projects, the Bank w i l l continue to support
the authorities’ efforts to reduce child and maternal mortality.
Combat HZV/AZDS, malaria and other diseases. There were 1,000 registered HIV/AIDS cases in 2000. In
view o f the low base, the target o f halting the spread o f HIV/AIDS by 2015 and beginning to reverse i t thereafter
may not be realistic. Turkey i s currently on track on the MDG target related to the incidence o f tuberculosis.
The recently completed health sector report (Turkey: Reforming the Health Sector for Improved Access and
Efficiency, June 2002) provides a detailed review o f Turkey’s MDG status.
Ensure environmental sustainability. The percentage o f people served with improved water supply reached 83
percent in 2000, an increase from 80 percent in 1990. While the trend i s improving, i t i s difficult to judge
whether the target o f halving the proportion o f people without sustainable access to safe drinking water b y 2015
w i l l be met. The rural sector study w i l l review the water supply situation in rural areas. The planned Municipal
Reform and Services operation could contribute to better access to safe drinking water in urban areas, and could
also improve the lives o f slum dwellers. The Anatolia Micro Watershed Project should help address natural
resource deterioration but there i s much progress to be made on protected area management. Turkey has
adopted sound energy policies overall, and the planned Renewable Energy Project will help manage dependency
on fossil fuels. The environment work related to EU accession should also help Turkey move forward in this
area.

-27-

(c) Attractive Business Climate and Knowledge
56.
The Bank will continue to support the comprehensive financial sector reform
program. This support started under the FSAL, and continued w i t h the PFPSAL Iand 11, and
the proposed PFPSAL 3 (see above). T w o subsequent Programmatic Financial Sector
Adjustment Loans (PFSAL Iand 11) are planned, the first falling in the C A S period. The reform
program supported by these loans w i l l strengthen the foundation for an efficient and healthy
banlung system that could be competitive in quality and performance at the international level;
reduce i t s vulnerability to external shocks; and position Turkey’s banking system for EU
accession. The loans, as the two previous ones, will focus on: (i)the legal and regulatory
the privatization o f state-owned banks; and (iii)
regulatory issues
framework for banking; (ii)
related to capital markets, insurance and other non-bank financial institutions. Sector work on
the ongoing banking reform i s also planned for FY04. T o support the reform o f the financial
sector, the IFC w i l l help restructure and strengthen the banking system and to expand the range
o f financial institutions in the market. The IFC strategy w i l l focus on: (i)
assisting the authorities
with the sale o f intervened banks, as appropriate, and o f the non-performing loans o f these
banks; (ii)working with mid-sized banks to strengthen their balance sheets and to use them as a
continuing with efforts aimed at institution building
platform in the consolidation process; (iii)
and the introduction o f new products.

57.

Bank Group assistance will help revitalize the real sector. An important factor to
determine future growth prospects for Turkey w i l l be the capacity o f transforming the economy
into an export-oriented, technology-intensive production structure. In addition t o advisory work
related to the improvement o f the overall business climate, and adjustment lending to help the
completion o f financial sector reforms, the Bank Group intends to support this priority through
several interventions. A Second Export Finance Intermediation Loan (EFIL 11) i s scheduled for
F Y 0 4 to succeed the successful EFIL whose implementation has come to an end.4 The EFILs fill
an important gap by providing funds to exporters with longer maturities than those available
otherwise through the banking sector. In addition, a Knowledge Economy Assessment w i l l be
completed in F Y 0 4 to identify success factors and lessons learned f r o m world leaders and
Turkey’s competitors, analyze Turkey’s strengths and weaknesses in the area o f knowledge
economy and define an agenda for the future. The Assessment would also set up the framework
for a Knowledge Economy and Technology Development Project planned for FY05. The
program also includes an S M E Finance Project in F Y 0 6 to improve SMEs’ access to commercial
credits. In the area o f privatization o f state-owned enterprises, the Bank Group will follow up on
the initiatives undertaken under the Economic Reform Loan and w i l l take up the dialogue with
the Government on the various case by case privatization strategies, and provide know how and
technical advisory assistance to the Government. Such dialogue and non-lending assistance
could be further supported b y technical assistance lending components in any o f the forthcoming
adjustment loans. I F C w i l l continue to finance viable private sector export oriented projects in
line with efforts to revive the corporate sector, including S M E s (see Annex A1 on Private Sector
Strategy). IFC i s also looking for ways to enable intermediaries to increase the amount o f trade
finance through the provision o f trade facilities and r i s k sharing mechanisms that w i l l increase
Exports of enterprises benefiting from the EFIL have increased b y some 60 percent over the last 3 years.

-28the amount o f trade financing capacity in Turkey by helping supplement restricted country limits
available to banks. Finally, Turkey would continue t o benefit f r o m MIGA guarantees, and
several Turkey-specific and regional training programs related t o corporate governance and
broader issues o f investment climate offered by WBI.’

58.
Bank assistance in agriculture will focus on increased productivity. This includes
addressing issues o f human capital and employment in an effort t o promote diversification o f
employment sources in rural areas and reduce excessive reliance on agriculture alone. The
agriculture reform carried out under the ARIP started the process o f transforming the rural sector
b y reversing the trends o f high subsidies, low productivity and obsolete technological inputs. A
stock-taking study i s being completed to review the impact o f the reforms to date on productivity
and, in particular, on the economically vulnerable in rural areas. The reform process w i l l be
continued through the activities described in the CAS. A Rural Sector Study, planned for FY05,
w i l l identify further steps to improve productivity in agriculture and increase off-farm income
opportunities for rural inhabitants. This study w i l l also provide the basis for identifying the most
suitable area o f intervention for the Bank in the rural sector, scheduled for FY06. Such
intervention could focus on: (i)improving rural services key t o sustaining off-farm private
sector development in rural areas; or (ii)developing a sustainable rural finance system (e.g.
through the restructuring o f credit cooperatives) capable o f serving the many small and medium
sized farmers currently losing access to rural finance. The preparation o f the study and the
project w i l l be coordinated with the EU’s program o f assistance in the rural sector and for the
development o f a Regional Development Strategy.
59.
A n important element of the program will be continuing the reforms in
infrastructure. In the energy sector, a Renewable Energy Project i s planned for F Y 0 4 to help
increase privately owned and operated generation from renewable resources, without the need
for government guarantees, within the market-based framework o f the new Turkish Electricity
Law. Under the previous CAS, the Bank supported privatization in the energy sector, and this
process w i l l continue with an Energy Project, scheduled for FY06, which w i l l improve the
regulatory framework for the sector and finance priority investments. A Gas Sector Note,
planned for FY04, w i l l support preparation o f this operation. In the transport sector, the Bank
w i l l focus on the restructuring o f the railways, based on a recently completed report that outlined
options for reform. A Railway Restructuring Project, scheduled for FY05, will, in coordination
with the acquis communautaire, aim at improving sector governance and advancing the
decentralization process through (i)
unbundling ports and railways; (ii)
separating infrastructure,
freight and passenger services; (iii)reducing staff; (iv) divesting non-core activities; (v)
supporting a sound investment program; and (vi) involving the private sector in freight
operations. In telecommunication, sector reform, and within that a clear time-bound roadmap for
privatization o f Turk Telekom w i l l continue to be in the center o f the Bank Group’s dialogue
with the authorities and an important component o f the Economic Reform Loan. I F C aims to
play a key role in the anticipated increase in the need for infrastructure financing as the
privatization process gains momentum. The I F C can potentially stimulate foreign investor
interest in the privatization o f some o f the most visible projects (ports, telecommunications,
transport), providing both advisory and direct lending roles in the envisaged transactions in the
A detailed description of the Private Sector Strategy of the Bank Group i s attached in Annex A l .

-29infrastructure sector. Overall, the Bank Group w i l l be selective in financing new infrastructure
investments, bearing in mind the active role o f some o f i t s development partners in this area,
especially that o f the European Investment Bank.

(d) Strong Environmental Management and Disaster Prevention
60.
Given Turkey’s high seismic risks and history of flooding, improving emergency
preparedness and seismic risk mitigation i s critical.
The Marmara quake o f 1999
demonstrated the urgent need for a more comprehensive approach to disaster preparedness,
catastrophic insurance, sound governance o f construction practices and other risks minimization.
The Seismic Risk Mitigation Project (scheduled for FY05) w i l l finance activities to mitigate
seismic risks in the municipality o f Istanbul and to further strengthen capacity for emergency
preparedness in order to reduce social and economic impacts o f future earthquakes. The project
would assist the Government and the municipality o f Istanbul by: (i)strengthening the
institutional capacity to identify and prioritize essential risk-mitigation investments; (ii)
providing funding and technical assistance for implementation o f a comprehensive riskmitigation program for seismic strengthening o f critical facilities: schools, hospitals, public
safety and other essential public services; and (iii)strengthening and upgrading Istanbul’s
emergency response capacity. The project w i l l explore the possibility o f introducing a system o f
incentives that w i l l encourage private building owners to improve the safety o f their buildings.
In addition, technical assistance w i l l be provided to promote strict enforcement o f building
standards and safety codes. To complement and support the Bank’s operational work, WBI i s
considering the continuation o f i t s disaster management related activities following the
successful workshop on the Role o f Local Government in Natural Disaster Risk Management
held earlier this year in Istanbul.
61.
Environment and natural resources management i s a high priority for Turkey,
particularly in view of EU accession, which will require the adoption of European
environmental standards.
Bank-supported activities to follow up on the National
Environmental Action Plan (NEAP) would be designed to assist Turkey in this endeavor. Such
activities may include the updating o f priorities for public investments related to the EU
environmental directives, as well as for the implementation o f the legal and regulatory
framework, and the adoption o f environmental directives. The Bank may also assist the Ministry
o f Environment and Forestry (MOE) in providing clear guidelines on the present compliance
status o f enterprises slated for privatization and to indicate how environmental regulations w i l l
change as the country moves toward EU accession. Since the EU i s playing a key role in this
area assisting the authorities through an active program aiming at increasing environmental
awareness and building institutional capacity, Bank-supported activities w i l l continue to be
closely coordinated with the EU. As regards Bank lending, a Micro-Watershed Management
Project i s planned for FY04 to build on the successful community-level experience o f the East
Anatolia Watershed Project, and an accompanying GEF project will contribute to the regional
effort to reduce chemical run-off into the Black Sea. A GEF project to address critical industrial
environmental problems (perhaps in the context o f privatization) w i l l also be explored.

-30-

Working with Other Development Partners

62.
The Bank’s assistance program i s built on and implemented in close collaboration
with other development partners. Working with other development partners to develop
synergies, applying selectivity, and focusing on the Bank’s comparative advantages in
supporting national priorities are key features o f the Bank’s program in Turkey. The Bank has
been working very closely with the IMF, particularly in the areas o f public sector, financial and
enterprise sector reforms. In the collaboration on the public sector, the Fund has taken the lead
with respect to the short-term measures needed for fiscal adjustment such as incomes policy,
urgent revenue and expenditure measures, and budget monitoring and reporting. The Bank has
taken the lead in assisting the Government with the preparation and implementation o f the
medium-term public expenditure management strategy, including budget management reforms,
rationalization o f the public investment program, public procurement reform, accounting reform,
and public liability management. In the financial sector, the Bank has taken the lead with respect
to the reform o f the legal framework and regulations for bank supervision, the institutional
development o f the regulatory bodies, and the structural reforms required to guide the
restructuring and improve the governance o f the state banks, as well as the work on non-bank
financial institutions. The Fund has taken the lead in assessing the soundness o f the banlung
system and where there was an immediate macro-fiscal impact such as the re-capitalization o f
the state banks, the closing o f insolvent banks, and the private bank re-capitalization scheme. O n
the state banks agenda and resolution o f private banks, the Fund and the Bank have worked
closely as a team. This cooperation i s expected to remain strong in view o f the interlinked
reform agenda supported by the Fund and the Bank in the CAS period.
63.
The Bank has also established close collaboration with the EU and members of the
UN system. As regards the EU, strategic joint agendas include environment, education,
financial and public sector reforms, including governance and anti-corruption (see B o x 8).
Partnership with the UN system i s particularly close in the social sectors (UNICEF, WHO), and
in poverty alleviation and local development/participation (UNDP). Finally, in the area o f
municipal reform and decentralized service delivery, the Bank i s looking at the significant
experience gained by GTZ and other bilateral partners active in this field. The Country
Assistance Strategy Matrix in Annex B 9 provides details o f ongoing and planned activities o f the
Bank’s development partners.

-31-

Box 8: Collaboration with the EU

The Bank pays special attention to support Turkey’s preparation for EU membership and to work closely with
the EU in this process. For example in the area o f public and financial sector reforms, the PFPSAL program i s
consistent with Turkey’s national program for EU accession and the Bank i s working closely with EU staff
responsible for Turkey. The banking sector reforms supported by the PFPSAL operations are designed to ensure
that Turkey’s banking supervision framework complies with both EU standards and Base1 norms. The Bank has
coordinated closely with the EU its advice on the new public procurement law and follow up technical assistance
to the Public Procurement Agency established under the law. The new public procurement law moves Turkey
towards compliance with EU directives. The Bank’s assistance o n public debt management issues has been
oriented towards EU practices and the Maastricht criteria. The Bank i s coordinating i t s dialogue on financial
management issues with the EU, and the new law on public financial management and control i s expected to be
consistent with EU standards on internal control. The EU i s preparing to support additional institution-building
initiatives under the public sector reform program including support for a peer review and twinning
arrangements for the Turkish Court o f Accounts.
EU assistance to Turkey i s undergoing a major change. The European Council meeting held in Copenhagen at
the end o f 2002, announced a significant increase in pre-accession financial assistance and requested the
Commission to prepare a revised Accession Partnership document that was subsequently approved in M a y 2003.
The pre-accession financial assistance i s expected to increase gradually from Euro 250 million in 2004 to about
Euro 500 million in 2006, and will cover the following main elements:
0
The Copenhagen political criteria
0
Economic reform and support to the new regulatory bodies
0
Strengthening public administration
Justice and home affairs
0
Economic and social cohesion
This program offers both important complementarities as well as areas o f collaboration, especially in the fields
o f economic reform, public administration, and economic and social cohesion, with the Bank Group assistance.

IV.

LENDING PROGRAM AND T R I G G E R S

64.
The CAS presented to the Board in December 2000, was designed to help Turkey
lay the basis for sustained long-term growth and reduce economic vulnerability. I t
envisaged a lending program o f US$5 billion in the high case for FYO1-03. The CAS Progress
recover from the
Report, discussed by the Board in July 2001, focused on assisting Turkey to: (i)
economic crisis o f February 2001; (ii)
mitigate the worst effects of the crisis on the population;
and (iii)
address i t s deeper causes, especially the large and inefficient public sector and the
fragile banking sector. Accordingly, the lending program in the Progress Report proposed
exceptional financing o f US$l.2 billion, on Special Structural Adjustment Loan (SSAL) terms,
over the original CAS envelope.
65.
With initial stabilization and economic recovery, this CAS returns to the primary
objective of helping Turkey move to a path of sustained growth by addressing the root
causes of macroeconomic and social vulnerability. A lending program o f US$4.5 billion i s
envisaged in the high case and US$1.3 billion in the l o w case (see Table 4). The program under
the high case w i l l include support for the economic reform program, focusing on public sector
management and accountability, and the business climate, as described in the previous section.
Triggers for the high case lending program, some o f which w i l l be further elaborated in the
relevant loan documents, are summarized in Box 9. Macroeconomic outcomes w i l l be evaluated

-32on the basis o f the overall program and with respect to agreed indicators. I f the reform program
were to progress sufficiently slowly to push Bank lending to the l o w case, Bank support w i l l
concentrate on human development, disaster and environment management, and local level
interventions to reduce poverty. In designing the strategy, the introduction o f a base case lending
scenario was also considered but i t was discarded. While actual lending outcomes may, at the
end, fall between the high case and the low case, the planned program, with significantly
different lending scenarios, reflects the risks associated with the strategy. Similar to the past
CAS, the self-regulating nature o f the strategy w i l l be a key risk mitigating mechanism.
~

~

~

~

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

~

~

Box 9: Triggers for the High Case
Macroeconomic
Implementation o f a satisfactory macroeconomic framework consistent with the Country Performance
Indicators included in the Country Assistance Strategy Matrix. Macroeconomic indicators w i l l be
monitored on a quarterly basis.
Structural
Sustained satisfactory implementation o f public sector reforms, including:
P budget reforms to improve transparency and effectiveness o f public expenditure;
9 tax reforms to improve efficiency and equity, and promote growth; and
9 public liability management reforms to manage financial and fiscal risks.
0
Sustained satisfactory implementation o f regulatory reforms, privatization and liberalization of the
energy and telecommunications sectors; and o f the agriculture reform program designed to replace
indirect subsidies with direct income support and promote the development o f agriculture markets.
Sustained satisfactory implementation o f financial and private sector reforms, including:
9 continued independence and further strengthening o f financial markets regulatory agencies;
P completion o f privatization o f state banks;
9 passage o f an amended Bankruptcy L a w and revised Commercial Code;
Design and implementation o f the next phase o f a comprehensive social security reform.
Social

Maintenance o f public expenditure targets for health, education and social protection as agreed with the
Bank.

66.
The Bank strategy recognizes that the complex second generation policy and
institutional reforms that Turkey i s undertaking need to be supported over the medium
term. This recognition provides the rationale for proposing a sizeable program envelope should
the macro situation continue to improve and the reform process remain on track, and the reliance
on programmatic adjustment lending as the main delivery instrument to allow for a reasonable
degree o f adaptability o f the program to unfolding events on the ground. The use o f
programmatic lending i s also envisaged to enhance focus, achieve sustained impact and scale up
results. The lending program in the high case i s designed in such a way that investment projects
in key areas would complement reforms to be supported under the planned programmatic
adjustment loans. Finally, the AAA program i s also structured around the four themes o f the
CAS and i s focused on building an analytical base that w i l l position the Bank to maximize the
effectiveness o f i t s assistance. The strategic links in the CAS between the AAA program and
lending as well as the adjustment and investment operations are illustrated in Annex A4.

-33Table 4: Indicative Lending Program FYO4-06’’

US$ million
High Case

Low Case

PFPSALS

900

Health Sector Transformation

200

Export Finance I1

300

Renewable Energy

202

Health Sector Trans.

200

Micro Watershed

37

Renewable Energy

202

Micro Watershed

37

Total

1650

Total

450

PPSAL

500

Seismic Risk Mitigation

400

Municipal Reform and Services

200

Secondary Education

200

Railway Restructuring

200

Knowledge Econ. & Tech. Dev’t

100

Seismic Risk Mitigation

400

Secondary Education

200

Total

1600

Total

600

PPSAL I1

400

Rural Development

250

PFSAL

400

250

SME Finance

100

Energy

100

Rural Development

250

Total

1250

Total

TOTAL

4500

TOTAL

1300

I!In addition to US$SOO million for possible emergency lending in case of a large scale natural disaster. The amounts are rounded. The
specific loan amounts will be determined during project preparation.

-34-

V.

M A N A G I N G THE R I S K S AND IBRD EXPOSURE

Managing the Risks
67.
Risks and mitigating measures. Turkey’s reform program entails significant
risks, as witnessed by developments over the past two years, which can only be overcome
b y sustained implementation of the reforms. The situation in Turkey has been and w i l l
continue to be subject to continued uncertainty as events unfold on the ground. The three main
risk factors are:
the continuing macroeconomic vulnerabilities arising from fundamental structural
problems, the continuing impact o f the 2001 crisis, and international and regional
developments;
a potential loss o f consensus for political or social reasons stemming f r o m the social
impact o f reforms; and
institutional challenges in implementing the program.
68.
Macroeconomic risks. The main macroeconomic risk i s the potential for market
confidence in the credibility of the reform program to weaken which could lead to higher
interest rates than in the program baseline. High real interest rates would slow the recovery,
negatively affect public debt sustainability and create the conditions for renewed instability.
Sustainability o f the public debt i s critical t o macroeconomic stability and the ultimate success o f
the reform program. Under the program, the public debt to GNP ratio (net o f C B T net assets),
which fell from 95 percent o f GNP in 2001 t o some 80 percent in 2002, i s now projected to fall
further to about 70 percent in 2003 (see Table 5) in part due to the unexpectedly strong Lira. The
debt burden i s projected to fall to about 66 percent of GNP in 2004. Extending the programmed
trends for the key macroeconomic parameters (including growth, interest rates and the primary
surplus) until 2006 results in a further steady decline in the public debt to GNP ratio to the 60
percent range. Realizing this outcome hinges on sustained recovery, a fall in real interest rates,
and a sustained primary surplus o f 6.5 percent of GNP. I t also depends on stability o f the real
exchange rate at or near current levels. While the strong L i r a has underpinned the fall in
inflation and decline in the public debt ratio, the extent of the exchange rate appreciation and
current account deficit that have accompanied the recovery has generated additional sources o f
macroeconomic risk.

69.
A sensitivity analysis of the public debt dynamics demonstrates the central role of
credible policies to build confidence and deepen the fiscal adjustment. The level and
structure o f Turkey’s public debt leave the Treasury’s borrowing program vulnerable to a
potential loss o f market confidence. The short average maturity o f the domestic debt leads to
high monthly rollover requirements.
Foreign exchange exposure i s another important
determinant. Turkey’s crisis response program has featured debt swaps by the Treasury to
eliminate the excess open FX position o f the banks, together with increased FX and FX-linked
borrowing. As a result, the share o f FX and FX-linked debt in the total public debt stock has
risen sharply. Moreover, a high proportion o f the domestic debt i s in floating rate notes which
increases exposure to interest rate movements. Finally, a very substantial share o f Turkey’s

-35public debt i s to preferred creditors. T o illustrate the risks, a low-case scenario can be
formulated where the political w i l l to strengthen the fiscal program falters and the primary
surplus does not exceed the 4 percent o f GNP realized in 2002. As a result, real interest rates
could be in the 20 percent range, i.e., well above the projected program path. The recovery
would be expected to falter under the burden of sustained high real interest rates with growth
falling short o f the 5 percent target for 2003 and slowing further in 2004. A slowdown in the
recovery and deterioration in the public debt dynamics could lead to renewed capital account
outflows and exchange rate instability which would exacerbate the impact on the debt burden.
Under these conditions, the projected decline in the debt to GNP ratio in 2003 could fail to
materialize and the public debt burden could begin to increase in 2004. This analysis
underscores the critical need for the Government to strengthen the fiscal program and establish
i t s reform credentials firmly.
Baseline
Public Debt Forecasts (in % o f GNP)
Total Debt Stock
Domestic Debt Stock
Domestic Interest Payments 11
D o m Debt Amortization

Nominal Interest Rate (%)
CPI Inflation (%, Dec/Dec)
Real Interest Rate 3/
Depreciation (Dec/Dec)
REER (Dec/Dec)
GNP growth rate (%)
Primary Balance (% o f GNP)
Avg Maturity o f new dom bor in TL 41

Table 5: Public Debt Dynamics

I

2000
57.7
39.2
14.9
12.9

2001
94.0
56.3
14.9
23.2

2002
80.0
47.8
14.9
24.8

2003
69.6
42.3
13.1
22.6

2004
66.2
41.0
12.7
29.6

2005
62.3
40.9
9.9
28.5

2006
59.6
42.2
9.3
35.6

2000
38.0
39.0
-11.4
24.8
13.7
6.3
2.3

2001
99.1
68.5
31.4
115.3
-24.0
-9.5
5.5
4.8

2002
63.5
29.7
11.8
13.3
11.1
7.8
4.0
8.7

2003
46.4
20.0
16.0
-3.0
20.2
5.0
6.5
9.8

2004
31.3
12.0
15.7
9.0
-0.2
5.0
6.5
11.9

2005
29.3
8.0
17.2
5 .O
-0.2
5.0
6.5
11.9

2006
25.5
5 .c
18.2
2.5
-0.2
5.c
6.5
11.5

Notes:

1) For the Central Government
2) For the Consolidated Public Sector
3) Computed as the average of the monthly auction rates deflated by inflation over the previous 12 months.
4) For Auction Debt
,Source: IMF and WB staff estimates.

70.
Balance of payments risks. The risks to the balance of payments are significant.
Turkey’s external vulnerability i s exemplified b y the currency crisis and large capital outflows in
2001, as well as the September 11 shock. A forward-looking indicator i s the projected annual
gross financing requirement of US$29 billion in 2003 falling to US$18 billion by 2006 (Table 6).
Recent history, including the 200 1 crisis aftermath, indicates the responsiveness o f Turkey’s
current account to shocks, although at a significant cost to growth. Moreover, the improving
level o f Central Bank gross reserves (nearly US$31.5 billion as of mid-September) could provide
some additional cushion in case o f a severe external shock. However, the scope for a reserve
draw-down i s limited and could raise investor concerns about the longer-term external payments
picture. The stock o f external debt i s now projected to reach US$136 billion by the end o f 2003,

-36equal to about 58 percent o f GNP, o f which about US$24 billion in IMF credit and some US$6
billion in W o r l d Bank debt. Strong export performance kept the debt service ratio to below 40
percent in 2002, and i t i s projected to remain in the 40 percent range through 2006. The high
level o f private capital outflows in 2001 was partially reversed in 2002. Loolung ahead, the
extent to which Turkish banks and enterprises w i l l be able to r o l l over their external obligations
and attract new financing on favorable terms w i l l remain an important determinant for the
program. The reliance on private capital inflows w i l l increase in 2005-06 when Turkey w i l l face
annual repayments to the IMF averaging U S $ 9 billion.
71.
Mitigating macroeconomic risks. Reform progress has mitigated a number of
macroeconomic risk factors, but the economy remains vulnerable. The floating exchange
rate regime introduced in 2001 has increased the economy’s ability t o absorb shocks. Systemic
risks in the banking sector are being addressed, the state banks have been re-capitalized, and the
open foreign exchange position o f the banking sector has moved close to balance. Central bank
independence and the newly established regulatory bodies for banking, energy,
telecommunications and public procurement are helping to de-politicize economic management
in line with international and EU norms. Structural reforms since 1999 have helped shift the
primary fiscal balance from deficit to surplus and the legal framework for better fiscal
management i s being gradually put in place. Stronger economic and fiscal management, coupled
with steadily improving financial accountability and oversight, w i l l assist sound program
implementation and reduce the risk o f backtracking.6 Nevertheless, the problems o f Turkey’s
banking sector and public finances w i l l take time t o resolve, and the country w i l l remain
vulnerable to internal and external shocks over the medium term. The effectiveness of the
floating exchange rate as an adjustor w i l l be limited for some time to come by the large public
debt a substantial share o f which i s in foreign currency.

Further improvements in investor confidence require a combination of credible
72.
economic policies and adequate financing. Bringing real rates t o sustainable levels depends on
further improvements in investor confidence which requires in turn a combination o f credible
economic policies and adequate financing for the public debt. Policy credibility depends first
and foremost on strong political leadership and sustained progress in tackling the core structural
issues in the banking and public sectors. The new Government’s confirmation o f the basic thrust
o f the reform strategy and continued external financing from the I F I s w i l l help bolster credibility
and build up market confidence. Attracting additional capital inflows will also be important in
creating the conditions for a sustained decline in domestic interest rates. I f a significant share o f
the “hot money” outflow in 2001 can be replaced with longer maturity inflows-especially FDI,
the country’s external vulnerability w i l l be permanently reduced. In this regard, decisive
implementation of measures to promote FDI w i l l be extremely important. Even with sustained
reform effort, Turkey i s likely to face continued volatility with respect to growth and the real
exchange rates which w i l l impact the public debt dynamics. Adherence to the program w i l l
reduce volatility but not eliminate i t in the timeframe of the CAS.
73.
Political and social risks. Political stability has increased following the election of
the new single-party Government. Political uncertainty did materialize in mid-2002 leading to
Annex A6 provides a summary of financial accountability and public sector governance issues.

-37the early elections in November 2002 which resulted in the victory o f the Justice and
Development Party (AKP). The popular support and parliamentary majority enjoyed b y the new
Government provide a good opportunity for consistent pursuit o f reforms. However, continuing
the economic reform program with i t s emphasis on fiscal discipline o n the one hand while
pursuing a more active social agenda as described in i t s program on the other, w i l l test the
Government. Maintaining public support while taking tough measures to build up investor
confidence will require a constant balancing act. At this point the biggest political risk i s that the
stated commitment to comprehensive reform will not be fully realized. The Government could
also be distracted from a focus on economic reform by other pressing issues such as Iraq, Cyprus
and the political conditions for EU accession.

74.
The social risks of the reform program cannot be fully mitigated despite efforts to
protect social spending and improve targeted social assistance. The commercialization and
privatization o f the state-owned banks remains a major political hurdle. The restructuring and
privatization o f Halk and Ziraat banks have social implications as their workforces are
downsized, although this i s mitigated to a significant extent by the relatively extensive social
protection programs for civil servants and public sector workers. The reform agenda for the
public sector i s also politically sensitive. Institutional change has faced resistance from vested
interest groups that would prefer to maintain the status quo. T o mitigate this risk, the program
relies on strong consensus and up-front ownership o f the strategy by the Government. Sustained
fiscal adjustment i s generating social costs; incomes policy and action to retrench staffing levels
in the public sector i s particularly sensitive. The Government i s trying to mitigate these risks by
strengthening i t s social protection programs and through dialogue with key social partners. The
introduction o f direct income support starting in late 2001 has eased the burden o f the crisis on
farmers and the programs o f the Social Solidarity Fund are being strengthened in collaboration
with the Bank. However, funding for targeted social protection faltered in 2002. T o help build
and sustain social consensus for the program during the tough austerity phase, the new
Government w i l l need to fully fund these social programs in order to deliver on i t s election
promise to strengthen the social dimension o f the reform program.

75.
Implementation risks. There are implementation risks related to institutional
constraints as well as to possible problems with counterpart funding. The complex reforms
are challenging the institutional capacity o f the administration. The Bank has provided intensive
technical support for key public sector institutions, and i t stands ready t o consider additional
financial support for selected institution-building initiatives linked to the C A S program. Finally,
meeting the counterpart funding requirements o f Bank-financed projects on time in an
environment o f fiscal austerity w i l l be a challenge. This requires appropriate planning, and close
collaboration between the sector ministries and the central government agencies, especially the
State Planning Organization and the Treasury.

-38Table 6. External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2000-2004
(inbillions of US dollars)
Actual
2000

2001

Estimate
2002

Program 5/
2003

2004

Projection 6/
200s
2m

koss financing requirements

25.9

10.5

243

28.8

24.0

20.0

18.1

Current account deficit (excl. official transfers
Amortizationon debt securities, o/w:
Public sector
Deposit money banks
Mediumand long-termdebt amortization,o/w
Public sector 1/
Private sector
Deposit money banks
Accumulationof gross reserves

10.0
1.7
1.4
0.4
13.8
3.6
7.9
2.3
0.4

-3.2
2.1
2.0
0.0
14.3
3.6
8.9
1.9
-2.7

2.0
2.7
2.3
0.4
13.4
3.0
8.8
1.6
6.2

8.0
3.8
3.7
0.1
16.4
3.4
11.9
1.1
0.5

5.8
3.5
3.5
0.0
14.1
3.4
9.6
1.2
0.6

3.6
3.1
2.8
0.3
14.5
3.2
9.9
1.4
-1.2

1.1
2.t
2.:
0..
14.'
3.(
10.:
1.!
-0.d

Lvailable financing

25.9

10.5

243

28.8

24.0

20.0

18.

0.1
3.4
7.5
0.5
-4.6
18.1
3.4
12.8
1.9
3.6
0.2
-2.8
3.4
3.4
-0.1

2.8
-1.7
2.1
0.0
-3.8
13.2
3.2
9.2
0.9
-12.1
0.2
-2.1
10.2
11.3
-1.1

0.9
4.2
3.3
0.0
0.9
15.7
2.9
11.5
1.3
-2.5
0.5
-0.9
6.4
12.5
-6.1

1.3
5.5
4.5
0.2
0.8
17.2
3.5
13.1
0.6
4.7
0.5
-0.4
0.0
1.7
-1.7

1.0
6.6
4.7
0.2
1.7
19.5
3.6
14.2
1.6
-1.6
0.5
0.0
-2.1
2.4
-4.4

1.3
7.6
5.0
0.3
1.8
19.9
3.0
15.0
1.8
-1.4
0.5
0.0
-7.3
0.0
-7.3

1.6
8.6
5.0
0.3
1.9
21.0
3.1
15.9
2.0
-1.5
0.6
0.0
-10.7
0.0
-10.7

4.2
0.8

11.3
1.1

7.0
0.6

0.6
0.6

-1.1
1.o

-6.4
1.o

-10.5
0.2

rotal Extemal Debt
d w Short-termDebt
rotal Extemal Debt/GNF'

118.7
28.3
59.0%

113.9
16.2
79.1%

131.6
15.2
72.4%

136.2
18.1
58.3%

140.4
20.1
54.4%

140.3
22.2
50.3%

138.2
24.4
46.1%

Debt Service Ratio 31 4/

35.4%

44.0%

38.2%

40.4%

40.6%

40.8%

41.1%

Foreigndirect investment (net)
Portfolioflows
Public sector
Deposit money banks
Private sector (net)
Mediumand long-termdebt financing, o/w:
Public sector 11
Private sector
Deposit money banks
Short-termdebt financing (net)
Official transfers
Other 2/
IMF (net)
Purchases
Repurchases
nemo
Vet official infiows
d w World Bank (updated 09/2003)

I / General government and Central Bank of Turkey.
2/ Errors and omissions.
3/ Interest plus medium- and long-termdebt repaymentsincluding IMF repurchases as percent of exports of goods and services.
U 2002 figure does not include the SRF repaymentsof $6.1 billion.
5/ 2003-04 programfigures updated as of the 5th IMFreview.
6/ 2005-06 figures are World Bank estimates based on 5th review projections.
Source: Central Bank, IMF and WB estimates.

-39-

76.
The active support of the IFI’s will continue to be instrumental in helping Turkey
address the risks and pursue its reform program. The economic recovery and disinflation
progress achieved since early 2002 provide encouragement that the exceptional support from the
I F I s has helped Turkey weather the impact o f the 2001 crisis while maintaining i t s reform
course. The new Government’s stated commitment to the program demonstrates that political
support for economic reform in Turkey transcends specific political parties and personalities.
However, the Government w i l l be continuously challenged by the need to implement a long l i s t
o f difficult and socially painful reforms in a context of pressure for populist measures and special
interest lobbying. The irreversibility o f the structural reforms put in place since 1999 cannot be
taken for granted and the near-term risks remain significant given the depth of Turkey’s
economic vulnerabilities and extent o f the reforms that lay ahead. In recognition of the situation,
the Bank’s assistance strategy incorporates significant mitigation measures, in particular
disbursements under adjustment lending w i l l continue to be closely linked to actual progress in
reform implementation as per the previous CAS.

IBRD Exposure
77.
With the sharp increase in IBRD lending, since 2000, which reversed a period of
decline over the last ten years, Turkey i s becoming an increasingly large part of the IBRD
portfolio. However, this increase has been carefully managed and the Bank’s response has been
closely linked to fundamental reforms. Waivers under adjustment operations have been
consistently avoided and disbursements have been strictly tied to the actual implementation of
agreed policy actions. Moving forward, management of exposure with the same careful link to
reforms which w i l l improve Turkey’s creditworthiness will continue to be a high priority.
Under the high case lending program, IBRD debt outstanding and disbursed
78.
(DOD) would increase to about US$8.2 billion in 2006. This would represent about 7.5
percent o f the IBRD portfolio, up from 3.0 percent in 2000. Financial markets perceive Turkey
as a risky country, as seen in the large premium on Turkish dollar Eurobonds over LIBOR.
Additionally, Turkey has a high external debt burden with a debt service ratio in the 40 percent
range. As shown in Table 7, debt service to preferred creditors as a share of external public debt
service i s expected to reach about 34 percent, while IBRD debt service as a percentage o f exports
o f goods and services w i l l remain modest at 1.5 percent in 2006.
Bank lending envisaged in this CAS for FY04-06 would amount to US$4.5 billion
79.
in the high case and US$1.3 billion in the low case. This compares to the CAS Progress
Report lending program for FY01-03 o f US$6.2 billion in the high case, including US$1.2
billion on Special Structural Adjustment Loan (SSAL) conditions, and U S $ l billion in the base
case. In this CAS, under the high case scenario, IBRD D O D at i t s peak (US$8.2 billion) would
be well below the level projected under the CAS Progress Report (US$9.2 billion). I f Turkey’s
reform progress significantly surpasses the performance contemplated by this CAS, a CAS
Progress Report may be considered during the FY04-06 period to assess any possible additional
financial needs.

-40-

Table 7: Summary Lending Figures
Calendar Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
(million US$)
1,787
2,200
1,650
1,238
700
1,950
1,100
Commitments I’
1,291
1,096
1,537
1,031
1,591
1,705
1,020
Disbursements
6,005
7,019
3,634
4,707
5,367
7,970
8,179
IBRD DOD
3.9
4.4
3.0
5.2
6.3
7.3
7.5
Share o f IBRD Portfolio
16.3
23.7
24.8
14.6
33.8
29.0
Preferredcreditor DS/pubic DS (%)
15.7
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.5
1.5
IBRD Debt Service
(as % o f exp. of goods and serv.)
BRD Portfolio
121,637 121,658 121,836 115,544 111,394 109,348 109,055
1 / US$384 million second tranche of the FSAL was cancelled and merged into the PFPSAL. The second
and third tranches of the PFPSALII o f US$900 million were cancelled in 2003.
Source: IMF and WB

I

VI.

CONCLUSIONS

80.
The Bank i s ready to assist Turkey to reduce economic vulnerability, achieve high
and stable growth, and address long neglected social and environmental problems. These
efforts w i l l also prepare Turkey for EU membership, an objective pursued with full
determination in Turkey. As described above, the risks to the success o f Bank support are not
insignificant. As in the past, the Bank will, through a graduated response that corresponds to the
strength o f the economic program, mitigate the risks and contain the Bank’s exposure. Whether
Turkey succeeds in putting i t s economy on a sustainable, high growth path i s important not only
for the well-being o f i t s 70 million citizens but also for the prosperity and stability o f the region.
James D. Wolfensohn
President
By:
Shengman Zhang

Washington D.C.
October 2,2003

Peter Woicke

Private Sector Strategy

Annex A 1

Introduction

1.
A central objective o f the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) i s to assist in
reducing Turkey’s economic vulnerability as i t strives to achieve the goal o f high and
stable economic growth. The private sector has an essential role to play in generating this
stable economic environment and i t i s within this context that the private sector strategy
(PSS) should be considered. Turkey’s development strategy requires the creation o f an
enabling environment for private sector development t o boost growth, employment
creation and assist the country in taking advantage o f i t s unique geographical location, i t s
large domestic market, and accession plans with the European Union (EU).

2.
Despite the difficulties o f years o f macroeconomic instability, high real interest
rates, the limited availability o f long term credit, an inefficient regulatory environment,
and the dominance o f state owned enterprises in economic activity, Turkey’s
entrepreneurial private sector has taken advantage o f the opportunities available,
particularly in terms o f export orientation and regional expansion. While large
companies continue to dominate productive activities, the small and medium size
enterprise ( S M E ) sector also has an important role to play. This importance o f the private
sector in generating economic growth has been acknowledged b y the Government, with
the focus increasingly on improving Turkey’s competitiveness and facilitating a business
environment conducive to private sector development and increased foreign direct
investment.
3.
The PSS i s organized into three sections: i)a description o f the private sector and
the current business environment, including impediments to private sector development;
ii)a summary o f the Government’s strategy to promote private sector development; and
iii) an outline o f the W o r l d Bank Group’s strategy geared towards the further
development o f the private sector.
Turkey’s Private Sector

4.
Turkey’s private sector has a major role to play in the future growth and
development of the country. The potential for private sector development i s based on the
following factors: i)Turkey’s strategic location between the former Soviet Union, the
Balkans, Central Asia and the Middle East; ii)Turkey’s well developed and vibrant
entrepreneurial culture; iii)a large domestic market; iv) an open economy; and v) strong
ties to the EU (both through the customs union and discussions on EU accession).

5.
Turkey’s economic development has suffered f r o m global and domestic crises,
most recently the 2001 financial crisis. As a result, private sector development remains
below i t s potential and below levels seen in fast growing developing countries. There are
a number o f factors that have and continue to impede private sector growth. These
include i)macroeconomic instability; ii)financial sector weakness; iii)consequent l o w

2
levels o f foreign direct investment; iv) a large public debt burden leading to high real
interest rates and a crowding out o f private borrowers; v) a regulatory environment and
bureaucracy that i s not conducive to attracting necessary private investment; and vi)
issues surrounding corporate governance. Progress has been made over recent years to
address these issues, facilitating improvements in the business environment and renewed
opportunities for a dynamic private sector.

6.
2000/2001 Crisis and Economic Impact: The cumulative effects o f the crises
ending with the February 2001 crisis were felt throughout the economy - starting in the
public sector, spreading to the financial sector and causing increasing distress in the real
sector. The crisis hit S M E s especially hard. The uncertain macroeconomic environment
combined with the limited availability o f reasonably priced term credit financing t o the
private sector negatively affected private sector investment rates during the 1990s. Gross
fixed capital formation as a share o f GNP declined during the 1990s from 26.3% in 1993
to 17.2% in 2002. Similar evidence can be found in private sector fixed capital formation
data, which fell by a third as a share o f GNP, f r o m almost 20% o f GNP in 1993 to 11.3%
o f GNP in 2002. Private investment in the housing sector decreased in importance during
the 1990s (housing accounted for 21.6% of total private investment in 2002, down from
over 40% in the early 1990s). Investment in industrial production (mining and
manufacturing) has remained largely static as a share o f total private investment during
the late 1990s and through to 2002l. In addition, private sector investment in energy and
infrastructure has remained l o w (see Table 1). While macroeconomic uncertainty has
been a dominant factor in investment decisions during recent years, the strong role played
by the state in industry and in particular, infrastructure development, has further limited
the opportunities for private sector investment in productive activities. However, given
the improving regulatory environment (as Turkey looks towards EU accession) and the
increased focus on privatization o f state economic enterprises, the potential for increased
private sector investment to boost Turkey's economic growth outlook and employment
opportunities are promising.
Private InvestmenffGross Domestic Fixed Investment (Yo) Private Sectoral lnvestmentrrotal Private Investment (%)

Agriculture
Mining
Manufacturing
Tourism
Energy
Transportation
Housing
Education
Health
Other Services
Total
Source : SPO

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

63
73
96
96
36
64
99
19
70
37

45
72
96
97
30
56
98
26
67
39

41
70
96
97
31
62
99
30
68
36

34
58
91
96
45
63
99
26
62
40

36
53
92
97
42
64
98
31
71
40

5
1
23
4
3
21
34
1
4
4

3
2
24
5
3
20
34
2
3
5

3
1
27
6
3
26
24
2
4
5

2
1
23
6
6
21
27
2
4
6

2
1
23
7
5
23
25
2
5
7

b4

70

70

69

69

1100

100

100

100

100

' 2002 SPO data.

3

7.
Trade Structure: Turkey i s a fairly open economy, w i t h exports and imports
accounting for over 50% o f GNP. Regional trade incentives, including with the EU,
provide a range o f opportunities for Turkey’s industry. However, increased competition
on the domestic front and the need to focus on higher value added goods and services
away from l o w quality, labor intensive products represent a serious challenge for
Turkey’s industry.

8.
The structure o f Turkey’s export sector has been shifting over recent years.
Exports o f food and beverages have shown a sizeable decline, while exports o f
chemicals, textiles, plastics and mining-related products have increased significantly on
an annual basis. In fact, the share o f agricultural products in total product exports shrank
from 7.1% in 2001 to 5.7% in 2002, w i t h manufacturing sector exports managing to gain
further ground, accounting for 93% o f total product exports. Despite the global economic
slowdown, exports have continued t o improve and have managed a further 27% rise in
value terms from the first quarter o f 2002 to the first quarter o f 2003.
9.
FDI Inflows: Turkey should be a magnet for foreign direct investment (FDI)
given i t s large market size, skilled domestic labor and the competitiveness o f local f i r m s
as suppliers to multinationals. However, Turkish FDI levels have stagnated during the
past 15 years while total FDI worldwide has increased by a factor o f 12. FDI flows have
consistently been below US$1 billion per year (less than 1% o f GDP), modest by Asian
or Latin American standards (see Graph 1 and Table 2). As can be seen f r o m Graph 1, the
exception was 2001 when privatization receipts boosted FDI flows to US$2.8 billion.
Increased FDI i s necessary to boost the competitiveness o f Turkey’s productive sector
and to meet the growing energy and infrastructure needs o f a country looking towards EU
accession. Within this context, certain key actions are required to boost FDI flows,
including the acceleration o f privatization, a full scale review o f commercial law and
competition policy to identify and address obstacles o f FDI and the development o f a
strategy to facilitate the f l o w o f ‘greenfield’ FDI to SMEs. Within this context, the
recently adopted new Foreign Direct Investment L a w and the decision to create an
Investment Promotion Agency w i l l facilitate an environment conducive to increased
foreign direct investment.
Graph 1 : Foreign direct investment
(US$ mn)

3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0

Source : Central Bank

10.
Performance of the Real Sector: Net profitability o f companies declined
between late 1997 and late 2000, then turned into major losses in the first half o f 2001 in
the manufacturing sector (except for cement and glass) as a consequence o f the 2001

4
financial crisis. Industrial production fell 8.9% in 2001 but rose 9.1% during the course
o f 2002, returning the industrial production index back to levels seen before the 2001
financial crisis. Most o f this growth in industrial production has taken place in the
manufacturing sector, specifically, petroleum products, plastics, machinery and motor
vehicles. The need for a comprehensive corporate restructuring program emerged to deal
with the damaging effects o f the 2001 crisis on the real sector (see Istanbul Approach
below). Most f i r m s were adversely affected by the high financial charges associated with
high real interest rates, the high cost o f servicing debt denominated in foreign exchange
and associated foreign exchange losses following the sharp devaluation o f the Lira. In
addition, despite improved opportunities for exporting firms, sharply lower domestic
demand affected f i r m s catering for the domestic market resulting in a number o f f i r m s
failing or suffering severe difficulties.

T h e Financial Sector: Turkey’s financial services industry i s in an early stage o f
11.
development. Credit markets are dominated b y banking (accounting for over 85% o f
financial system assets), while capital markets are dominated by government securities
(accounting for over 90% o f trading). Furthermore, government securities account for an
increasing percentage o f banks’ assets, subjecting banks to increased risk from any
perceived or actual risk o f sovereign default. As a result, financial intermediation in
Turkey remains small when compared with the size o f the economy, with the financial
services industry vulnerable to shocks and crises that hinder the development o f private
sector growth.
In response to the environment o f high real interest rates, high inflation, limited
12.
availability o f credit, volatility and tough regulatory environment, Turkey’s economic
agents have tended to focus on financial contracts o f a shorter duration, while banks have
looked to government securities for their strong source o f income. Moreover, any real
sector lending tends to focus on clients with known credit credentials and sufficient
collateral. As a result, the S M E sector has suffered. Financial institutions in Turkey
remain reluctant to lend to SMEs2 given their l o w level o f financial literacy, lack o f a
credit history and l o w levels o f collateral. Given the importance o f SMEs in the Turkish
economy3, particularly from an employment perspective, there i s a definite need to
improve financial intermediaries’ outreach to S M E s .
The Turkish Government
recognizes the fact that S M E s face serious constraints to growth, specifically, lack o f
access to working capital and long term finance, lack o f adequate collateral, high real
interest rates, excessive bureaucracy, opaque tax legislation and corruption. Efforts to
improve the general business environment and macroeconomic stability w i l l have a
beneficial effect on S M E development, as w i l l moves t o address issues such as
bureaucracy and corruption.
The financial crisis o f 2001 resulted in a further significant contraction o f bank
13.
credit, as the financial condition o f private banks deteriorated sharply. As can be seen
from Table 2, credit to the private sector as a share o f GDP was significantly lower in

* Internal financing i s the main source o f funds for most SMEs.

SMEs are estimated to account for over 95% o f all enterprises in Turkey, employing more than 40% of
the workforce and accounting for half o f all investment and 30-40% o f total exports.

5
Turkey than in comparable countries in 2000 (with the exception o f Mexico), a trend that
continues to manifest itself at present.
Gross
domestic
investment (% GDP)
2000
Turkey
Thailand
Malaysia
Mexico
Brazil
Upper Middle Income Countries
High Income Countries

24
23
26
23
21
22
22

Private Investment
(% GDFI)
2000
12
68
51
90
86

78
82

Foreign Direct Investment
(9% GDFI)
(% GDP)
2000
2000
0.9
2
12
2.8
7
2.0
10
2.3
21
6.0
15
4.0
14
10.1

Credit to Private
Sector (% GDP)
2000

24
68
136
13
38
48
136

14.
Banking Sector: Turkey’s banking sector i s undergoing rapid change as part o f
the reform program to align Turkey’s banking sector to EU requirements. There are 53
banks o f which 39 are commercial banks and 14 development and investment banks4.
Around 30% o f total banking assets are held by the three state banks (the govemmentowned Halkbank and Ziraat Bank and the govemment controlled Vakif Bank), and
another 7.5% held by foreign and investment banks. About 54% o f banking assets are
held by private banks, with the remainder under the control of the Savings Deposit
Insurance Fund (SDIF)’. T o sustain growth over the medium term, changes in the
incentive structure o f financial institutions and increasing the level and quality o f
financial intermediation in the long term w i l l be important. While there are a number o f
sophisticated players in the market, Turkey’s financial system i s not deep relative to the
size o f the economy. As the regulatory and taxation issues are addressed and with further
consolidation and privatization o f state banks, Turkey’s banking sector w i l l have an
increasing role to play in private sector development, particularly in facilitating access to
long-term financing to the private sector.
15.
Non-bank Financial Institutions ( N B F I s ) such as insurance companies, private
pension funds, leasing, factoring and venture capital f i r m s account for less than 15% o f
financial system assets and less than 15% o f GNP. The equity market accounts for only
30% o f GNP, while the corporate debt market does not exist and organized derivative
markets are in their infancy. There i s significant scope for expansion o f the insurance,
pension and mutual fund industry, while venture capital and capital market development
w i l l further facilitate opportunities for private sector development.
The future
development o f NBFIs and capital markets can provide a means towards improving
funding opportunities for the private sector thereby increasing the scope and level o f
private sector economic activity in Turkey.
16.
Infrastructure: The pace o f infrastructure reform suffered during the crisis o f
2001 and while the need to boost Turkey’s competitiveness, improve investment flows
and align Turkey towards EU membership has led to an increased focus on infrastructure
End December 2002 data (www.tbb.org.tr).
The SDIF i s tasked with insuring savings deposits, restructuring banks intervened by the B R S A and
transferring these banks to a third party. There are currently 3 banks under the control of the SDIF,
Bayyndyrbank, Pamukbank and Imar Bank.

6
reform and privatization, developments have largely remained modest. The telecoms
sector has seen the sale o f three GSM licenses, although progress towards the
privatization o f Turk Telekom has been slow. Regulatory developments in the energy
sector have improved more recently, although energy prices remain well above OECD
averages. While raising the efficiency o f the transport sector w i l l undoubtedly have a
positive impact on Turkey’s economic growth potential, major structural reforms have
yet to be implemented, with little scope for private sector participation at present (see
sections below for a detailed review). Furthermore, the privatization process has only
recently gained momentum, with privatization sales consistently falling short o f
expectations over the last decade.

17.
An analysis o f developments in the private sector suggests that there are a number
o f key themes that should emerge in any private sector agenda aimed at improving
Turkey’s growth potential, i t s competitiveness and importantly, i t s capacity as an
investment destination. The first area requiring further attention i s the financial sector,
where the momentum o f financial sector reform needs to be sustained. In addition,
continued emphasis must be placed on expanding the range o f financial products and
access to finance available to the private sector, particularly SMEs. A closely related
issue i s the continued refinancing and restructuring o f the corporate sector to further
augment the current recovery o f the real sector. In order t o foster investment flows,
particularly FDI, a review o f commercial laws and competition policy remains crucial, as
does a review o f the existing regulatory environment affecting SMEs. A further theme
that provides significant scope for private sector development i s that o f privatization and
the sustained commitment from the government towards a viable and effective
privatization agenda. This i s particularly crucial in the context o f the reforms and
restructuring required to generate effective and competitive utilities that foster economic
growth and the further development o f the private sector.
Government Strategy for Private Sector Development

18.
The Government remains committed to the development o f a more attractive
business environment t o encourage the private sector, thereby improving economic
growth and employment prospects in Turkey. T o assist in achieving private sector led
growth, the Government i s increasingly focusing on an enabling environment, including :
i)macro-economic stabilization (see main CAS for details); ii)improved efficiency o f the
financial sector; iii)deregulation and privatization; iv) improvement o f the investment
climate to boost investment, both foreign and domestic; v) improved delivery o f social
services (see main C A S for details); and vi) infrastructure investment.
19.
Financial Sector: Substantial progress has been made in terms o f financial sector
reform, with banking legislation continuing to move towards EU norms. Reform
measures have included the creation o f an independent Bank Regulation and Supervision
Agency (BRSA), the intervention b y BRSA and SDIF in over twenty insolvent private
banks, the implementation o f a recapitalization program for private deposit taking banks
and the restructuring o f t w o state-owned banks. While reform i s s t i l l required in a
number o f areas, there are a few crucial issues that need t o be addressed to improve the

7
functioning o f the financial sector. The Government needs to further strengthen the
institutional capacity o f the BRSA and create a long term role for SDIF. Continued effort
must be made to privatize the remaining state banks and deal with the few insolvent
banks s t i l l under the auspices o f the SDIF. Bankruptcy laws must be reformed to deal
with the difficulties arising from non-performing loans (NPLs) held by the banking
system and the SDIF, and bankruptcy issues as pertaining to the Istanbul Approach,
especially as there are many companies that have not fallen under the Istanbul Approach
but which remain financially weak and could cause further NPLs to banks should the
economic recovery falter. In July 2003, amendments to the Bankruptcy Law were
enacted which will enhance enforcement o f creditor rights. In addition, the Government
intends to introduce provisions in the Law on pre-packaged bankruptcy before the end o f
the year.
20.
The Istanbul Approach (IA), the cornerstone o f the Government’s efforts to
revitalize the real sector, i s a comprehensive corporate restructuring program that began
functioning in mid-2002. Once a firm voluntarily enters the IA, there i s a formal review
process by a Creditors Committee to determine the long term viability o f each candidate.
Once this i s ascertained, a formal restructuring i s considered (such as an interest holiday,
capitalization o f interest in arrears, extension o f loan maturities, lending o f new money,
or conversion o f debt to equity). These longer-term financial changes are conditional on
the implementation o f an agreed business plan that may require some form o f company
restructuring (management changes, fresh equity, sales o f assets or divisions, mergers or
even company takeovers by new owners). Once the details have been agreed to, the
creditors and the company sign an agreement stipulating the terms and conditions o f the
deal, including details on triggers that could result in a review of the agreement. As of
June 2003, close to 300 f i r m s were participating in the Istanbul Approach with some
US$4.8 billion in loans being restructured. These firms had approximately 46,000
employees, sales o f US$2.9 billion and exports o f about US$0.8 billion, and about
US$7.5 billion in assets. Disappointingly, however, in several cases, only debt
rescheduling rather than real corporate restructuring was actually carried out. Within the
context o f corporate restructuring, corporate governance issues remain a concern. For
example, bankruptcy legislation must be overhauled to facilitate efforts to bolster the
private sector.
21.
FDI: The government i s currently developing an FDI strategy in an attempt to
improve FDI flows and improve Turkey’s global competitiveness. Assessments o f the
FDI environment have been undertaken with the assistance o f the Foreign Investment
Advisory Service (FIAS). In an attempt to address some of the issues raised by FIAS, a
new FDI law and a new company registration law have been passed by parliament6, while
the Government i s looking to create an Investment Promotion Agency (IPA). Further
work i s needed to foster FDI flows particularly with regard to issues relating to
commercial law and competition policy and the pace o f privatization.

This new FDI law allows foreign investors to be treated in line with local investors and looks to introduce
measures to remove existing obstacles to attracting FDI.

8
22.
Privatization Program: Privatization in Turkey has proceeded much more
slowly than in other emerging countries in Latin America, Asia, and Eastern Europe.
Privatization sales have consistently fallen below US$1 billion per year, with the
exception o f 2000, when the sale o f the majority stake in POAS (petroleum distribution)
and a third G S M license pushed sales above US$5 billion. Turkey has managed US$11.5
billion in privatization revenues since 1985. Delays in implementation can be attributed
to a number o f factors, including the requirement that the Privatization High Council7
approve all transactions, regardless o f size; the existing cross subsidy mechanism
between profit and loss making companies in the Privatization Administration’s portfolio;
the focus on revenue gains and not on improving competitiveness; as well as the fact that
the privatization o f large holdings (telecommunications and state banks) are the
responsibility o f the line and state ministries. Turkey’s disappointing privatization
performance has been a factor in i t s failure to attract significant levels o f FDI. However,
the Government has embarked on an ambitious privatization program for 2003 as i t aims
to improve competitiveness and investment flows into the Turkish economy. The new
program includes the privatization o f major companies o f national importance. These
include Petkim (petro-chemicals), Tupras (oil refinery, partly divested in 2000), Turkish
Airlines, Erdemir (steel), Tekel (tobacco and steel) and Seker (sugar). In addition, a
number o f smaller holdings and Government land holdings have also been mandated for
privatization. The further privatization o f state banks and ports are also anticipated.
Energy: Energy prices in Turkey are well above OECD and other comparable
23.
countries. Despite high prices, the sector continues to suffer from serious financial
difficulties due to expensive independent power producers (IPP) contracts, excessive
distribution losses and poor billing and collection. Turkey’s electricity and gas sectors
are undergoing significant reform as part o f a policy o f continuing market reforms and
harmonization with the European Union. The reforms aim to decrease costs and risks
currently borne by the Government by attracting private capital into the sectors. The
creation o f an energy regulatory authority, and new electricity and gas laws enacted in
2001 have set the stage for privatization o f the energy sector and initial steps towards
privatization have been taken, particularly in the field o f renewable energy. However, the
energy sector faces a number o f difficulties that negatively impacts on profitability and
w i l l hinder the privatization process unless adequately resolved. These include the large
scale o f non-payment for electricity services; a large number of generation and
distribution projects with transfer-of-operating-rights (TOOR) or a Built-OperateTransfer (BOT) approach to private participation that have s t i l l to be resolved, as well as
a large number o f contracts signed in anticipation o f increased demand at high take-off
volumes and prices that w i l l take many years to realize.

24.
Information and Communication Technologies: Turkey’s telecommunications
sector has continued along a path o f further liberalization and i s currently considered to
be at a comparable stage to developments in other EU accession countries such as Poland
and Hungary. Following on from the two G S M licenses issued in the 1990s, the
The Privatization Administration i s responsible for carrying out the privatization program under the
authority o f the High Privatization Council, a group o f ministers chaired b y the Prime Minister.

9
Government successfully auctioned a third license to A r i a in 2000 and following the
failure o f attracting bidders for a fourth license, issued the fourth directly to Turk
Telekom (Aycell). At present, there are plans to restructure the mobile telephony
subsector, with substantial private sector participation. The privatization plan of Turk
Telekom itself has progressed more slowly. With the full liberalization o f the telecoms
sector scheduled for the end o f 2003, and given the difficulties experienced globally in
the telecoms sector, the restructuring o f Turk Telekom to improve competitiveness ahead
o f full liberalization has taken precedence over privatization. The Board o f Directors has
undertaken a corporatization plan to commercialize Turk Telekom’ s operations by
restructuring the company along business lines. However, in line w i t h the Government’s
agreement with the IMF, the privatization o f Turk Telekom remains a key objective. The
Government plans to announce a new privatization strategy during the third quarter o f
2003 and the privatization o f the entire entity i s tentatively scheduled for the second
quarter o f 2004, although significant work remains t o be done on the regulatory
environment ahead o f a successful privatization initiative.

25.
Physical Infrastructure: Turkey’s EU accession plans require significant
investment in physical infrastructure, both to meet EU norms and t o address the growing
demands on urban utilities. However, high logistic costs continue to hinder the country’s
competitiveness, further obstructing private sector development. The transport sector
accounts for 30% o f public investments, but i s a substantial financial drain on the
Government’s accounts thereby adding to the country’s substantial public debt burden.
Major structural reforms are necessary to effectively meet growing infrastructure
demands. This requires institutional reforms to improve efficiency and accountability as
well as incentives to mobilize private sector participation t o improve existing
infrastructure given the Government’s budgetary constraints.
Bank Group’s Strategy

26.
The W o r l d Bank Group has provided significant assistance t o Turkey. As o f endFY03, IBRD had a portfolio o f active projects for which loan commitments totaled over
US$4.8 billion. IFC’s Turkey portfolio was the fourth largest in terms o f exposure after
Brazil, Argentina and India, accounting for 4.8 percent o f the total IFC portfolio. Total
IFC committed portfolio for Turkey stood at about US$S05 million. With gross exposure
of about US$214 million, Turkey was the fifth largest host country in MIGA’s portfolio
in FY03. Thus, the role of the World Bank Group has been important, as a leading
multilateral source o f long-term finance for the Government and the private sector.
27.
The W o r l d Bank Group’s private sector strategy in FY04-06 w i l l focus on
supporting the Government’s program o f further improving the business climate. There
has been a shift in emphasis f r o m crisis management, which followed the 2001 crisis, to
policies that support further recovery o f the corporate sector. The priorities include:
completing the unfinished agenda o f financial sector reform, supporting the strengthening
o f the corporate sector, especially SMEs, in the aftermath of the financial crisis,
accelerating privatization and removing barriers t o FDI, continuing the restructuring and
privatization o f public utilities, and investments in infrastructure.

10

28.
The strategy i s based on the complementary roles and instruments o f the members
o f the W o r l d Bank Group. IBRD w i l l support the implementation o f economic reforms
through adjustment lending, and w i l l complement these operations with investment
projects in support o f reforms in key areas, as detailed in the main C A S text. IFC w i l l
rely on i t s established multi-prong strategy focusing on projects with tangible benefits o f
growth and reform and on demonstration projects that could be replicated elsewhere.
MIGA w i l l continue to play an important role in facilitating foreign direct investment
flows through i t s guarantee program and its Investment Marketing Services’ support t o
the Center for Private Sector Development in Istanbul. F I A S w i l l follow up on its work
w i t h the Government on improving the environment for increased foreign direct
investment on issues such as streamlining administrative procedures, establishment o f the
investment promotion agency, FDI spilloverAinkages, and competition policy.

29.
As in the past, I F C w i l l collaborate w i t h IBRD on private sector inputs for the
structural reform program. Improvements, recommended by the Bank, in the legal and
regulatory framework for telecommunications, energy and financial sectors are expected
to increase investment opportunities for I F C in these areas. The complementary focus o f
IBRD, IFC and MIGA in infrastructure and financial markets w i l l enhance the quality o f
the economic reform being supported by the W o r l d Bank Group.
30.
Financial Sector: Completing the unfinished agenda o f financial sector reform,
including the further strengthening o f the banking sector and deepening financial
intermediation through development o f the non-bank financial sector, are key to
improved economic stability and private sector growth. IBRD’s planned assistance,
which includes a combination o f economic and sector work, adjustment and investment
lending, i s described in detail in the main CAS text. IFC’s strategy in the financial sector
w i l l be closely coordinated with and w i l l reinforce the proposed Bank support. I F C w i l l
assisting the authorities with the sale o f intervened banks, as appropriate,
focus on: (i)
and o f the non-performing loans o f these banks; (ii)working with mid-sized banks t o
strengthen their balance sheets and to use them as a platform for helping in the
consolidation process; and (iii)expanding the range o f financial institutions in the
market.
Box 1: IFC’s Plans in the Financial Sector

F C has been working actively with SDIF to support the non-performing loans (NPLs) auction
process. IFC will provide funding to successful bidders in the auctions, b y so doing potentially
attracting a higher number o f bidders to the auctions, enhancing the value o f the portfolios being
auctioned, and acting as a safeguard that the process w i l l be transparent and according to
international standards.
The consolidation o f the banking sector will probably continue although at a slower pace than in the
previous two years. In the short term, the focus needs to be o n strengthening viable financial
institutions hit by the downturn. In this regard, IFC has assisted a mid-size bank to strengthen i t s
capital base; this could be used as a platform to promote the consolidation o f the banking system, b y
acquiring weak or intervened banks, assets, andor through management contracts. This could also
provide a channel for extending credit to the SME and corporate sectors, both o f which are facing a
liquidity squeeze.

In addition, IFC will also continue with efforts aimed at institution building and introduction o f new
products, including the development o f the insurance sector, mortgage finance and contractual
savings institutions, and development of the private equity market.

11

31.
Corporate Sector/SMEs: The financial crisis in 2001 hit hard the enterprise
sector as documented in the Corporate Sector Impact Assessment Report prepared by
IBRD. While the Istanbul Approach provided debt relief for many enterprises and 2002
registered strong economic recovery, the corporate sector remains vulnerable and
generally lacks access to commercial bank credit. Therefore, the Bank Group’s strategy,
in addition to focusing on the improvement o f the overall business climate and financial
sector reform, also envisages the provision o f finance through proper financial
intermediaries to the enterprise sector. I B R D ’ s program, as described in the main text o f
the CAS, includes operations to support export finance and the S M E sector. IFC, despite
the difficult environment, w i l l continue to pursue new investments o f projects with strong
operating intrinsics. In addition, the IFC’s short-term focus w i l l be on highly visible
interventions with strong demonstration effects and positive impact on market
psychology. Special emphasis w i l l be made to address the paucity o f equity financing and
the lack o f access to capital markets by developing model transactions to demonstrate
how companies can de-leverage their balance sheets, improve their liquidity and enhance
corporate governance. Instruments to address these needs include, inter alia, corporate
and working capital loans. The I F C has increasingly been successful in investments in
Turlush projects in Central and Eastern Europe and Central Asia, with over US$lSO
million already invested in the former Soviet Union, Romania, Azerbaijan and
Kazakhstan. The I F C has deliberate plans to further grow this development partnership
with Turkey. In addition, IFC i s looking for ways to enable intermediaries to increase the
amount o f trade finance through the provision o f trade facilities and risk sharing
mechanisms that w i l l increase the amount o f trade financing capacity in the country by
helping supplement restricted country limits available to banks.
In connection with the planned Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) Pipeline investments,
32.
I F C i s considering ways to have the local businesses (mainly SMEs) benefit from supply
chain linkages to the large investment expenditures surrounding the B T C project:
0

0

0

0

IFC w i l l first undertake an S M E map detailing the S M E business environment
and hurdles to growth at both the firm and institutional levels. The map w i l l also
identify potential follow-on initiatives via workshops and seminars with the
business community.
S M E s in several o i l and gas sub-sectors w i l l receive specific technical assistance
to improve their productivity and quality assurance in a program funded jointly by
IFC, BP, Statoil, Unical, the A I O C Enterprise Centre and GTZ (German
Development Corporation).
In addition, training w i l l be provided to local business development service
providers, which in turn w i l l assist SMEs.

SMEs may be funded through credit lines to the banks or a specialized S M E fund,
which could have participation from private investors involved in BTC.

12
0

Lastly, some community development programs area also expected to ensure that
a wider segment o f the population i s able to benefit f r o m the ACG/BTC
investment.

33.
Privatization and FDI. Privatization in the main infrastructure sectors has been
an important component o f the Bank Group’s policy dialogue with the authorities,
including in the context o f the Economic Reform Loan. The establishment o f a proper
regulatory and legal framework for privatization in the telecommunications and energy
sectors, supported by IBRD, provides for the necessary environment for private
investment. IFC’s strategy i s to support flagship privatization to help restore investor
confidence, attract foreign interest and stimulate the flow o f foreign direct investments in
privatization deals. To achieve this goal, I F C w i l l support privatization of visible
telecommunication and infrastructure projects.
34.
In view o f Turkey’s great potential to expand foreign investment flows-both as a
significant source o f private investment in neighboring countries and as a large recipient
o f foreign investment, MIGA w i l l continue to play an important role in facilitating
foreign direct investment flows. Thus far, the amount o f foreign direct investment
facilitated by MIGA i s close to US$1 billion, and i t i s expected to grow as the
Government’s ambitious privatization program i s implemented.

35.
FIAS has led a Bank Group initiative to enhance the quantity and quality o f FDI
inflows. An analysis o f administrative and regulatory barriers has been carried out, and a
work plan for their removal has been agreed with the authorities. These measures are
central to improving the investment climate and addressing some of the underlying
causes o f the 2001 crisis. As a result o f this work, a new FDI law and a law on the
creation o f an Investment Promotion Agency have been passed. F I A S w i l l continue i t s
dialogue with the authorities as the recommendations o f the study on the administrative
and regulatory barriers to FDI are implemented.
36.
Infrastructure. I B R D ’ s planned assistance in infrastructure, beyond the policy
dialogue in the telecommunications and energy sectors, w i l l focus on supporting
investments at the municipal level in the context of local government reform, the
restructuring and renewal of the railway sector, and the liberalization process in the
energy sector to allow for increased private sector participation without government
guarantees. IFC, as noted above, would be ready to support privatization o f Turk
Telekom and other visible projects in infrastructure. As part o f a regional undertaking,
I F C i s also considering the financing o f the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Oil Pipeline.
37.
Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC) Oil Pipeline: IFC, together with EBRD, i s
considering supporting the investments needed for the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan (BTC)
pipeline. The B T C pipeline w i l l carry o i l primarily from the Azeri, Chirag and
Gunashli (ACG) o i l fields in Azerbaijan to the Turkish port o f Ceyhan on the
Mediterranean Sea through Georgia. The Shah-Deniz pipeline w i l l transport gas from
Azerbaijan to Turkey, also through Georgia, and the development and exploitation of
the Shah Deniz gas field and associated gas pipeline project i s to be assisted b y EBRD.

13

The project i s expected to be considered by the Board in FY04 and the IFC expects to
provide up to US$lSO million to finance the B T C project.
IFC’s role in this proposed investment i s to:
0

assist in mitigating political risk perceived by international investors in a crossborder project and help ensure stability of the project’s arrangement and
operation;
provide long-term financing (both directly and by mobilizing commercial bank
funding through i t s B loans) that i s especially needed by the smaller borrowing
companies;

0

provide a framework for the development and operation o f the project in an
environmentally and socially sustainable manner;
help ensure broader development impacts by IFC’s S M E and community
development programs;

0

0

help assist in the effective governance and promote transparency; and
act as a neutral third party in projects, which are based upon a number of Host
Government Agreements (HGAs) and an Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA)
for o i l transport involving cooperation between three Govemments, several state
companies, as well as a diverse group o f the international o i l companies.

Annex A2
Retrospective Review
T h e Opportunity

1.
The CAS for FY01-03 was undertaken at a time of opportunity for structural
reform, building on initial measures taken in late 1999 and early 2000. The
Government, following i t s entry into office in the spring o f 1999, had declared a

commitment to extensive reforms, and had enacted several important laws despite the
disruption o f the Marmara and Duzce earthquakes in August and November 1999,
respectively. An IMF program was initiated in December 1999, and the Economic
Reform Loan (ERL) was approved by the Bank in M a y 2000. At the time the C A S was
being discussed with Government, a program o f institutional changes to buttress the
structural reform policy measures o f the ERL was being prepared, as well as a Financial
Sector Adjustment Loan. The Bank had laid the groundwork for extensive reforms
through economic and sector work and an active dialogue, facilitated by the move of the
Country Director to the field in 1998 and the subsequent strengthening o f the field-based
economic management and portfolio implementation teams.

2.

The CAS was discussed with the Board in December 2000, as thefinancial market
turbulence experienced by Turkey in November 2000 was fresh in the minds of observers.
The slowing o f reform implementation in mid-2000 was reversed and some momentum

emerged briefly, but the underlying imbalances proved impossible to resolve quickly,
leading to the full-blown financial crisis o f February 2001.

The CAS Progress Report (CAS PR) was discussed with the Board in July 2001,
at which time the severity of the need for reform had been made clear by the crisis and
the Govemment’s resolve had again firmed. The Bank was positioned to support

3.

immediately the rapid reform actions needed to get a sustainable recovery underway.
The Programmatic Financial and Public Sector Adjustment Loans (PFPSALs) were put in
the revised CAS to support the most important and urgent o f the reforms: to address the
regulatory, resolution, and recapitalization needs o f the banking sector; and to rectify the
weaknesses in governance and public management that had allowed the mismanagement
o f public expenditure and public banks for so long. Strengthened support to the social
sectors was also put in place quickly, given the expected impact o f the crisis on
vulnerable people, and the demonstrated need for a more robust social welfare system to
mitigate the social risks associated w i t h economic fluctuations.

The Results

4.

The reforms have brought about some lasting changes, in particular where the
institutional changes needed for sustained implementation have been made. There have

also been difficulties, stemming from periods o f crisis, political uncertainty, and
wavering counterpart commitment to priorities. Viewing each o f the original CAS

2

thrusts, we can assess the areas in which the aims have been realized and are likely to be

sustained, and those where more remains to be done.

Implement reforms for growth and employment generation.
Significant reform
progress has been achieved, but permanence o f some o f the reforms i s unclear. With
much o f the legal and regulatory framework in place, the focus i s now on
implementation. Backtracking has been signaled in certain socially sensitive areas (e.g.
agricultural subsidies) and other areas have been subject to implementation delays (e.g.
privatization).

>

>

>

>

Macroeconomic outcomes under the IMF program have been broadly positive
with a strong recovery starting in early 2002 and a reduction in inflation to the 30
percent level achieved by end-2002. However, there have been problems
achieving the primary surplus targets, and the quality o f fiscal adjustment has
fallen short o f expectations. There have also been delays in a number o f
structural areas.
Banking reform has been a major area o f progress. Prudential standards have
been upgraded to international norms, an independent bank supervision and
regulatory agency has been established, insolvent private banks have been
intervened and resolved, a recapitalization exercise has been carried out for the
remaining private banks, one public bank was merged with another, and the
remaining public banks have undergone operational restructuring. Legislation i s
in place to prevent un-funded “duty-losses” in the public banks. Privatization o f
the public banks i s on the agenda but the means o f doing this are s t i l l under
debate.
The shift from indirect agricultural subsidies to direct payments to farmers (DIS)
as the major instrument o f agriculture support has been largely achieved, and
framework legislation to institutionalize the D I S has been prepared. However,
further progress in reducing indirect subsidies i s needed; additional, unplanned
Progress towards
payments to hazelnut farmers were made in 2002-03.
privatization o f agricultural SOEs has been halting, but may be gaining
momentum with the adoption o f a privatization plan for TEKEL (tobacco, alcohol
and salt) in early 2003. Legislation i s in place to liberalize gradually the tobacco
and sugar markets. Restructuring o f the agriculture sales cooperative unions
(ASCUS) has been initiated, but stricter financial discipline i s needed to see this
program through. N o irrigation strategy has been adopted, but pilot management
o f local systems b y Water User Associations has led to efficiency gains and
increased private funding.
Considerable progress has been made towards creating a competitive, regulated
electricity market, including creation o f an independent regulatory agency which
also oversees the gas sector. However, progress towards privatization o f
electricity generation and distribution has been slower than planned.

P An independent regulator has been established in the telecommunications sector

with full licensing responsibility, a G S M 1800 license was sold t o a private
consortium in 2000, and the national operator Turk Telekom i s being
corporatized. However, efforts to privatize Turk Telekom have fallen short so far.

P A package o f laws to help promote FDI was passed by Parliament in June 2003

introducing a more level “playing field” between foreign and local investors.
However, implementation o f other reforms including tax administration and
further administrative reform o f social security to ensure collection discipline are
needed to establish a truly level playing field.

P Enterprise privatization has been slow, partly due to poor market conditions and

partly as a result o f insufficient political will. POAS (petroleum distribution) has
been 100 percent privatized and the state stake in ERDEMlR (steel) has been
reduced below 50 percent. A new privatization program was announced in
January 2003 and a number o f smaller sales have occurred, with several large
ones scheduled to be completed during the second half o f 2003.

Zmprove public management and accountability. A comprehensive public sector reform
program has been launched encompassing structural fiscal reforms (taxation and public
employment), public expenditure management, and governance.
Tax reform,
rationalization o f public investment, elimination o f most extra-budgetary funds, and
improvements in public debt management have been solid achievements. Other aspects
o f public sector reform have progressed more slowly. Municipal reform i s needed t o lay
the basis for matching revenue raising capability with responsibility for public service
delivery.

P Reform o f tax policy has made significant progress with the introduction o f a
unified special consumption tax in mid-2002 and a package o f legislative reforms
to simplify and rationalize the direct tax system in April 2003.

>

A comprehensive public employment program i s in place with an overall ceiling
and quarterly monitoring in the public administration, and gradual reduction o f
identified redundancies in the SOE sector.

P The public investment program i s undergoing phased rationalization and the
Government has shown increasing resolve in focusing on fewer priority projects
with speedier implementation. The average project completion time has been
reduced from 12.5 years in 2001 to an estimated 7.6 years in 2003.
P Almost all budgetary and extra-budgetary funds have been eliminated. However,
further legislation i s needed to close the special accounts and special
appropriation mechanisms left in place after closure o f the funds.
P A fully automated public accounting system has been introduced for the
consolidated budget agencies and an international standard budget coding system

4

(GFS) i s being introduced in the 2004 budget cycle. A comprehensive public
financial management and control act was submitted t o Parliament in August
2002 and i s undergoing further revision in consultation with the Bank.

k Under the new public debt management law enacted in 2002, procedures for
issuance o f Treasury guarantees have been greatly tightened and a new office for
public debt and risk management has been established in the Treasury.

k A new procurement law in line with the international U N C I T R A L standards went
into effect in January 2003. An independent Public Procurement Agency to

oversee public procurement has been established. A series o f amendments to the
law were enacted in July 2003, including articles to authorize the limited use o f
commercial practices by public enterprises.

k The public debate on reducing opportunities for corruption has intensified. The

Bank’s support to the anti-corruption conference in late 2001 and related factfinding b y a leading local think-tank has contributed to this. A national strategy
for combating corruption was published in March 2002.

k Some aspects o f infrastructure management have been improved, but the results

o f the limited introduction o f private operators in municipal water have been
mixed.

Expand social services and social protection. There have been substantial and
sustainable improvements in basic education. Targeting has improved on social welfare
for the poorest, but that system i s under-funded. Social security i s not well targeted and
i s unsustainably expensive. The crisis increased urban vulnerability and poverty. Health
outcomes remain poor for a middle income country, particularly for maternal mortality.

9 A major social security reform was enacted starting in 1999. Parametric reforms
to the public Pay-As-You-Go (PAYG) pension reform have been introduced, and
legislation to support individual supplementary pension schemes was enacted.
However, planned institutional and administrative reforms have lagged behind.
The improvements in the financial balance o f the social security system expected
from the reform have not materialized and ad hoc increases in pensions in January
2003 have pushed the system’s overall deficit to close to 5 percent o f GNP.

k Seventy-five percent o f the nation’s farmers are enrolled in the Direct Income
Support system; DIS payments are being made, albeit with some delays, and
targeting i s good, based on annual farmer registration.

k Funding for social assistance through the Social Solidarity Fund has increased but
remains short o f the 0.3 percent o f GNP target. A Conditional Cash Transfer
system has been tested and i s ready to r o l l out, with a scoring formula for careful
targeting to the poorest 6 percent.

5

>

>

Girls’ enrolment in basic education reached a target o f 4.8 million in 2001-2. A
remaining challenge i s to get attendance t o match enrolment. All basic education
schools have improved educational materials.
Teacher training has been
strengthened towards the aim o f yearly training.

The unemployment insurance fund began t o pay claims in March 2002, but
benefit payments have lagged behind projections and the fund is running a large
surplus. A structured approach to rebalancing the fund i s needed. Establishment
legislation for the unemployment insurance fund was adopted in June 2003
following a long delay.

Strengthen environmental management and disaster mitigation. In environmental
management, successes have been dramatic and sustainable where achieved, but national
replication o f regional successes i s not yet taking place. For disaster mitigation, despite
the excellent results in reconstruction after the earthquakes o f 1999, the institutional
framework for disaster prevention remains weak.

>

>
>

The number o f communities with natural resource management plans under
implementation has increased.
The Turkey Emergency Management Agency was established in name only; lack
o f a shared concept among the many ministries and agencies involved in
emergency mitigation has blocked adoption o f a single coordination model.
The Turlush Catastrophic Insurance Pool was established; the number o f policy
holders has been fluctuating over the past year between 2.5 and 1.7 million.
Currently, there are about 1.8 million policy holders. One o f the main reasons for
this fluctuation i s that the law to make such insurance compulsory has not yet
been passed.

Accelerate connectivity and technological capabilities.

>
>

2,802 I C T classrooms have been installed in primary schools, but teacher training
to shift from teaching how to use computers to how t o use using computers t o
learn i s a remaining challenge.
Despite some slowdown after the February 2001 crisis, the profits and number o f
private sector clients o f R&D agencies supported through the Industrial
Technology Project have increased, and the linkages between R&D institutions
and industry have been strengthened.

Program Design and Delivery

5.

The achievements during the CAS implementation period were made possible in
part due to a three-pronged approach: new loans have been large (up from an average
size o f US$95 million in FY94-97 to US$440 m i l l i o n in FY98-02) but focused on few

6

strategic goals; extensions on older loans not related to the current strategy have been
resisted; and taking advantage o f tight adherence to our strategy has improved our ability
to manage as well as work towards shared goals with the client. Our ability to scale up
was in turn predicated upon a basis o f analytical work and dialogue; for example, the
C E M o f 1999 laid out the need for reforms and institutional changes to improve private
sector development in agriculture, energy, privatization, and telecommunications, while
the PEN, CPAR and C F A A laid the groundwork for the PFFSAL series. Twinning
adjustment operations with investment has enabled institutional changes to be undertaken
with considerable technical assistance to contribute to the durability o f structural policy
reforms; for example, the Export Finance Intermediation Loan helped bring five private
banks to world standards, while the F S A L and PFPSALs supported the strengthened
regulatory environment.

6.

Due to the many political issues involved for any govemment to implement
sweeping structural reforms in times of economic volatility, it is important to be poised
opportunistically to support openings as they arise. The Bank program succeeded in this

respect because intensive E S W was available to provide guidance for reforms as they
became feasible, and the dialogue on these issues was kept strong through significant
field presence and strategic technical assistance.

7.

Despite the achievements during the CAS period, there are vulnerabilities in
Turkey’s development prospects. There i s “reform fatigue”. The new government,

whose election was an expression o f a desire for change, does not wish to replicate the
program of i t s predecessor and faces large demands for populist measures. Poverty has
risen and there i s not yet a coherent approach to pro-poor development. The
Government’s urge to assist the economically vulnerable i s manifested through
discussion o f such possibilities as new crop-based subsidies, agricultural debt write-offs,
initiating universal health insurance, and raising pension payments, but the fiscal cost and
risk o f weak targeting with such measures must also be considered.

The Portfolio

8.
As of end-June 2003, the portfolio of Bank-financed projects in Turkey comprised
16 active projects, including an economic recovery and an adjustment loan. Total net
commitments’ amounted to US$4,820 million o f which US$2,432 million (50.4 percent)
remain undisbursed. In addition, the W o r l d Bank portfolio includes t w o grant financed
projects with net commitments o f US$22.2 million. Net IBRD commitments more than
doubled between F Y 9 9 and FY02, driven by a series o f adjustment loans and several
large investment loans in the agriculture and social protection sectors, which are in direct
support o f the Government’s economic reform program. The net commitments dropped
in FY03, in particular due to cancellation o f US$900 million from the PFPSAL I1 and
US$120 million from the Emergency Flood and Earthquake loan, as well as closure o f
some loans. Six loans were closed during FYO1, two during FY02, and three during the
course o f N 0 3 . 2 T w o new investment projects and one adjustment loan, with total
Net commitments are defined as original loan amount minus cancellations.

* An additional two projects closed on June 30,2003.

7

commitments o f US$1.6 billion, were approved in FYOl, one investment project and two
adjustment loans with total commitments o f US$2.9 billion were approved in FY02, and
one investment loan o f US$300 million was approved in FY03 (see Table 1).
9.

Reflecting the priorities set in the CAS and the CAS PR, the portfolio's emphasis
has shifted towards supporting the Govemment 's reform program with adjustment loans
and higher lending in sectors where structural reforms can be supported with investment
projects such as rural development and social protection. As o f June 2003, 29 percent o f

commitments were for human development and social protection, one quarter o f
commitments for adjustment lending in support o f private sector development and public
and financial sector reform, and 18 percent for emergency preparedness and
reconstruction.
Table 1: Portfolio Overview
FY97 FY98 FY99 FYOO FYOl FY02 FY03
Number o f Effective Projects at FY end a/
Net Commitments ($m) at FY end
Undisb. Balance at FY start ($m) b/
Gross Disbursements during F Y ($m)
Disb. Ratio Investment Projects (%)
Disb. Ratio inc. Fast Disb. Loans (%)

Cancellations ($m)

New Commitments ($m)
Unsatisfactory Projects
Number

22
23
19
22
18
20
2,763 2,434 2,632 3,801 4,344
1,633 1,233 1,509 1,673 2,419
259
329
264
957
820
21
17
17
20
21
20
21
20
17
57
34
66
104
41
448
37 1,093
86
53
20
603
528 1,770 1,628 2,950 3

Percent

1
5

3
14

4
20

-

4
17

3
16

5
28

a

13

a/ Only IBRD financed projects, including two - one of which with unsatisfactory rating that closed on 6/30/ 2003. Hybrid loans are

divided by component for calculating disbursement percentages.
b/ Undisbursedbalance on 6/30/2003 was US$2,432 million.

10.
The performance of the Turkey portfolio continues to compare favorably to Bankwide averages, and has continued to strengthen. At the beginning o f FY04, only one
project had an unsatisfactory IP or DO rating. This i s a noteworthy accomplishment in
particular in light o f the severe economic crisis that affected Turkey starting in February
2001. A quick pro-active JPPR done in the late spring o f 2001 helped to anticipate risks
that faced project implementation as a result o f the crisis and led to early government
attention to budget issues so that the feared shortfall of counterpart funding did not
emerge. The JPPR completed in late 2002 did not reveal significant cross-cutting issues
affecting implementation, but highlighted factors worthy o f vigilance on a projectspecific level. Again this was a useful guide for portfolio managers in the Government
and the Bank and after a slowdown in FY02, disbursements accelerated in early FY03.
Unfortunately, early 2003 brought a near stoppage o f disbursements. The Government
applied new budget procedures, and signaled a need to revisit the portfolio in light o f
changing priorities and greater commitment to managing tightly the public investment

8

program-all based on valid principles o f sound fiscal management and accountability,
but at the outset bringing constraints and some confusion t o project implementation. By
June 2003, many o f these issues had been resolved, and the Government is engaged in a
tightly run process o f examining the intended use o f remaining large undisbursed
balances to determine if there are issues o f weak strategic alignment, and a consequent
need for restructuring and redesign. This i s expected to lead to decisions in a series o f
project mid-term reviews and the finalization of the latest JPPR in the fall o f 2003.
Box 1: Client Survey
In summer 2002, over 200 stakeholders participated in a client survey to provide views on the Bank’s
assistance to the country. Some 44 percent o f the respondents worked for the central government
while the rest o f the participants represented a variety o f groups, such as the media, academia, NGOs,
donors, the private sector and local administrations. Some o f the highlights, based on the responses
provided by the participants o f the survey, are summarized below:

Perceived overall value of the Bank in Turkey
Most important: financial resources, resource mobilization, facilitation
Relatively less important: lending when others w i l l not, policy advice, and the Bank’s knowledge
Areas where the Bank should be involved
Most important: encouraging greater transparency in governance and safeguarding against corruption
in projects, closely followed by strengthening the financial sector, bringing about economic growth
and strengthening the education sector
Relatively less important: improving the judicial system, strengthening the public sector, and ensuring
that attention i s paid to gender disparities
Specific areas o f effectiveness
Most effective: improving the regulatory framework, strengthening the financial sector, and
safeguarding against corruption in projects
Relatively less effective: improving the judicial system, reducing poverty, and strengthening the health
sector
make the Bank’s policy advice and knowledge
The results o f the client survey suggests a need to (i)
transfer even more relevant to Turkey’s particular circumstances; (ii)increase the effectiveness of
Bank support for poverty reduction, and disseminate information more widely on these efforts; and
(iii)
improve the efficiency o f Bank assistance in the health sector.

Lessons for the Future
There are benefits to a scaled-up and tightly focused program. This approach
concentrates effort and funding for each o f the limited number o f strategic priorities.
Because i t improves the ability to communicate and clarify to the client and inside the
Bank what the objectives o f our work are, a focused program eases joint work and makes
the Bank’s efforts more comprehensible to other partners.
Nevertheless, this approach can lead to complex operations. Although a few strategic
objectives are agreed, and a small number o f larger operations designed for each, often a
large number o f actions on the institutional front have to be undertaken in a concerted
way to reach those objectives. This i s not always recognized in budgeting and planning

9

for intensive supervision, but where i t has been properly resourced, including by the
counterparts, i t i s successful.
Comprehensive structural reform requires supporting institutional changes, which in turn
take time. Thus it has been important not only to link institution building investment
loans to policy based SALS, but also to get a longer term programmatic approach, with
consistent objectives for more than a 2-3 year CAS period to make reforms permanent.
Keeping project implementation times shorter is important to avoid disproportionate
effort by the Bank to supervise the tail end o f projects that are n o longer aligned with
objectives o f a government different from the one that undertook the project originally.
The ability to proactively restructure or cancel parts of loans i s vital f o r a program that
must respond to changes on the ground in uncertain and risky times.
An emerging lesson of experience in the portfolio is the need to press for legal and
institutional changes prior to project implementation, if they are important for efSective
implementation. There i s often a trade-off between needing to begin quickly (e.g. for
reasons o f emergency or economic crisis, perceived short window o f opportunity, or
desirability o f keeping momentum on critical issues) and having t o pursue certain
regulatory and institutional changes with due allowance for necessary procedures and
consensus building.

0

Y
Y

E

3

i

i

i

Annex A3
CAS Consultations
In addition t o several rounds o f discussions with the Government, the Bank team held
consultations with different groups o f stakeholders to gauge their views on economic
priorities and the Bank’s role. CAS consultations took place in Ankara, Istanbul, Gaziantep
and Izmir, and included Parliamentarians, local leaders (governors’ and mayors’ offices),
business representatives, NGOs and the Bank’s key development partners. The summary o f
these discussions are presented below, organized around four main themes:
0

0
0
0

Reform o f the public sector and better governance;
Improvement o f the business climate;
Human development; and
Environment management and disaster prevention.

With respect to the reform of the public sector and better governance, opinions focused
mainly o n the need to improve transparency, combat corruption and increase the role o f local
administrations.
In order to enhance transparency, participants emphasized the importance o f information
dissemination to the public and participation in decision-making, Participants also pointed
out that sharing information and carrying out consultative meetings w i t h interest groups,
including parliamentarians, regarding the reform program would improve the chances o f
success in implementation. I t was also suggested that the Bank be more transparent and share
more information with the public regarding i t s activities in Turkey. Giving consultative role
to NGOs in every stage of project implementation was also recommended.

Introduction of measures to fight corruption was stressed during the consultations. In order to
reduce corruption, participants suggested that the role o f government be reduced parallel to
speedy privatization. Efficiency o f public activities and spending was one o f the major issues
raised by the participants. In this context, recommendations were made for simplification o f
the tax system and making the private sector responsible for collecting some o f the taxes.
Majority o f participants, including the governors and mayors, stressed the urgency of
transferring increased responsibility to local administrations. They pointed out that delivery
o f services locally would also ensure improved transparency through public participation and
monitoring. This would also help encourage the application o f the user pays/polluter pays
principle to recover the cost o f services because i t i s easy to control and monitor the local
administrations. The municipalities consulted, requested financial and technical assistance
from the Bank in order t o upgrade the level o f services delivered b y them.
Regarding the improvement of the business climate in Turkey, the main complaint o f the
participants concerned the difficulty for businesses to have access to credit at reasonable
terms. They pointed to the high interest rates and very short maturities. In addition to the
question o f bank financing, the following common problems were mentioned:

~

-

inefficient bureaucracy
high inflation rate
severely fluctuating exchange rate

2

-

high taxes and complex tax system
expensive telecommunication, energy and transportation services
insufficient support for R & D

Participants also noted the need for technical and financial advice to S M E s to restructure their
operations, prepare new projects, develop or adopt new technologies, identify new markets
and manage their financial risks. In order to increase efficiency, support for training o f the
work force and industry-university cooperation was also emphasized.
Participants confirmed that completion o f the banking sector reform agenda, the strengthening
of the non-bank financial sector, and the continuation o f the debt work-out scheme under the
Istanbul approach were important priorities.
In order to attract more foreign direct investment, participants referred to the necessary
legislative changes. Some participants suggested that select central bureaucratic
responsibilities, such as the provision o f permissions, licenses or some incentives, could be
turned over to local chambers o f industry or commerce. There was nearly full consensus
regarding the need to speed up privatization. Finally, several participants suggested that a
new strategy should be prepared for the modernization o f agriculture.

With respect to human development, participants stressed the importance o f developing new
strategies for the social sectors. Education was mentioned as the highest priority. Participants
stressed that transportation problems should be addressed, regional boarding schools,
especially for girls, should be established, and that curriculum development should be given
high priority. Participants also noted the need to improve technical training.
In addition to formal education, participants also drew attention to special education needs,
including education programs for handicapped persons, literacy and entrepreneurship
programs for women, and s k i l l s upgrading programs for youth.

As regards the health sector, participants pointed out that family planning was s t i l l a problem,
resulting in fast population growth and high infant mortality rate, health services in rural areas
remained limited, and the health insurance system needed reform. Some participants
recommended that health care services should be privatized together w i t h the health insurance
system. Training activities regarding preventive health care should be continued, especially
for the poor segments o f the population.
Several participants advocated an increased role o f NGOs in the social sectors. Participants
also noted that strengthening the family structure and implementing youth development
programs could prevent the emergence o f many social problems. Finally, participants
recommended that social sensitivity analysis be carried out before the introduction o f reforms
to ensure their success.
Awareness regarding the importance o f environment management and disaster prevention
increased in Turkey, as noted b y participants. Consecutive large-scale natural disasters and
increased coverage o f environmental problems b y the media helped both the Government and
the public understand how serious the problems were. Participants stressed the importance of
the following steps:

3

-

-

projects should be developed and implemented, as soon as possible, in
order to prevent natural disasters in sensitive areas
soil protection and erosion control measures should be taken
further migration from rural areas should be avoided to solve urban
environmental problems
the use o f alternative energy sources, such as w i n d and solar energy, should
be increased
pollution of the Black Sea should be prevented
historical and cultural heritage inventory should be completed and these
two concepts should be included in the definition o f environment

Annex A4

Strategic Links in the CAS Program
ESW

Policy Notes for the New Government, CEM, PEIR, CPAR,
CFAA, Social Cost of Adjustment

Operations

Dialogue

Programmatic Financial and Public Sector .Adj. Loan 3
Programmatic Public Sector Adjustment Loans

Policy Notes for the New Government,CEM, NBFI
Corporate Sector Assessment, Social Cost of

Financial Sector Adjustment Loans

Corporate Sector Assessment, Banking Sector Report
Health Sector Report

th Sector Transformation Project

1Municipal Sector Review, Water Sector Report
1Railway Restructuring Report

Railway Restructuring Project

1Knowledge Economy Assessment

Knowledge Economy and Technology Development Project

15nergy Sector Strategy, Gas Sector Note
I <Ural Sector Strategy
-

gy Project
Rural Development Project

Strategic Links in the CAS Program
Adjustment

Policies for public sector reform

and Investment Lending

Support implementation of health finance reform and
strengthening of the social security administration
Municipal

Reform and Services Project

tment in municipal services
Railway Restructuring Project
Support downsizing of the railway company to reduce fiscal
burden of the railways and increase efficiency

Support privatization, and reduction of government liabilities in

Programmatic Financial Sector Adjustment Loan
Policies for financial sector reform

Support financing, through the strengthened financial sector, for
SME Finance Project

Policies for agriculture reform

Support improved productivity in agriculture and increase in

Programmatic

Approach: Public Sector Reforms

Public Expenditure
and Institutional

September 2000
May 2000

*
Launch fiscal
adjustment.
Initiate closures of
budgetary funds and
EBFs.
lmplement structural
reforms to social
security system,
agriculture, energy
and
telecommunications.
Establish regulatory
agencies for
telecommunications
and energy which
support transparency

July 2001

August 2001

September 2001

July 2001

Implement urgent
supplementary fiscal
package for 200 1.
Initiate preparation of tax
strategy.
Adopt medium-term
strategy for PEM reform.
Complete planned closures
of budgetary funds and
EBFs.
Launch PIP rationalization.
Initiate preparation of
national anti-corruption
strategy.

on Promoting
Good Governance

December 2001

Adopt tax strategy and
enact indirect tax reform.
Initiate comprehensive
public employment
program.
Initiate PEM reform
including pilots for GFS
classification and modified
accrual accounting,
adopting rationalized 2002
PIP, and enacting new
public procurement and
debt management laws.
Adopt and publish national
anti-corruption strategy.

Macroeconomic
and Sustained

June 2003

April 2002

Implement 2002 fiscal
package.

Expenditure Reform

Al

fall 2004

fall 2003

,,

Implement 2003 fiscal
package.

Implement 2004-05 fiscal
packages.

*
Implement 2005 - 2006
fiscal package.

Enact direct tax reform and
functional reorganization
of tax administration.

Initiate second phase of
social security reform.

Implement second phase of
social security reform.

Deepen public
expenditure and public
governance reforms.

Complete initial phase of
PEM reform with new
Medium-term Expenditure
Framework and continue
implementation of public
governance reforms.

Implement public
employment program.
Continue PEM reform
including enactment of
PFMC law and institutional
development of PPA and
Treasury middle office.
Implement anti-corruption
strategy and prepare civil
service reform strategy.

Initiate local government
reform.

Implement local
government reform.

r

Programmatic

@@

Approach:

Financial Sector Reforms

:--,i,

November 1998

February 2000

August 1999

Establishing dialogue
with the banking
sector, introducing
comprehensive risk
management to 5 of
the largest/strongest
private banks,
provision of export
finance.

December 2000

Banking Law,
creation of an
independent
BRSA,
intervention in
failed banks,
enabling law on
privatization of
state banks.

Strengthening financial
intermediation through

~~~~~~~~

January 2002

July 2001

Introduce LLP tax
deductibility, consol.
Connected and forex
exposure, institutional
strengthening of BRSA,
eliminate overnight repos
and recapitalize SDIF and
state banks, revoke Emlak
license & merge with
Ziraat, initiate
recapitalization of
remaining capital deficient
private banks.

March 2003

March 2002

Implement BRSA
institutional
development, remove
tax and legal hurdles
for bank mergers,
resolve all 13 SDIF
banks, recapitalization of
private banks by
owners, Vakif
privatized,
operational restructuring of Ziraat
and Halk 50%
complete.

December 2003

fall 2003

Advance regulatory
enforcement,
substantially complete
BRSA and SDIF
institutional development
programs, resolve
remaining SDIF banks,
improve legal/tax regime
for insolvency and debt
workouts, privatize Vakif
and do Halk strategic
study.

2005

Implement SDIF
institutional
development, resolve
remaining insolvent
private banks,
privatize Halk, new
insurance law, full
IAS for banks, listing
and disclosure reform
for ISE, deposit
insurance reform,
consolidated
supervision,
privatization of
Ziraat, SDIF
autonomy.

Turkev High Case: Business Lines

Sound Macroeconomics

Public Finance
Management
Economic
Reform
Loan
Programmatic
Financial
and
Programmatic
Financial
and
Programmatic
Financial
and
Programmatic
Public Sector

Health

Sector
Riclf

IAttractive

I

and Governance

Fiscal

Years

1

FY 00

FY 01

FY02

FY03

FY 04

FY 05

FY 06

Project

Public Sector
Adjustment
Public Sector Adjustment
Public Sector Adjustment
Adjustment
Loan I

Loan
Loan
Loan

I
II
3

Transformation
hditinrh-m

Business

Climate and Knowledae

Total

number

of oDerations

I

at vear

end1

17

18

20

16

15

15

16

I

Annex AS
Country Gender Assessment Summary

A comprehensive gender assessment has been prepared by a group o f Turkish experts
covering ten areas to reflect gender issues with special relevance to poverty: the legal
framework; education; health; labor and social security; microenterprises; rural women
and poverty; migration, poverty and social protection; state, politics and c i v i l society;
violence against women; and disaster assistance (Turkey: Country Gender Assessment,
draft, December 2002). Below are excerpts from the Conclusions o f the draft report:
“Regional and rural-urban differences were relevant in all sectors (particularly in
education, health, labor and social security, and violence) and they appeared to
compound gender differentials. Moreover, not only these two dimensions were highly
instrumental in analyzing gender disparities, but they proved to be equally significant in
understanding poverty. As expected, highest levels o f gender inequality were found t o
coexist with worst cases o f poverty in the society. Gender disparities reflected in
women’s unfavorable position get further magnified in all sectors in rural as opposed to
urban areas and in Eastern, Southeastern and Black Sea regions, which also suffer f r o m
deeper poverty. Another striking observation was that the women in ‘second wave’ o f
migrants experienced pronounced forms of gender inequality while the major
transformation caused by this migration introduced new faces o f poverty and disrupted
existing social safety nets in urban areas.

[...I
comparing de jure v. defacto dimensions o f gender equality also reflected significant
differences between the two. For instance, despite the C i v i l L a w providing for equal
inheritance and property ownership rights for women and men since 1926, women are
estimated to own less than 10% o f agricultural land and about 9% o f urban real estate.
In light o f the analyses o f gender disparity [. ..I,
three main cross-cutting issues can be
identified. These constitute fundamental factors which are responsible for hampering
women’s attainment o f equality with men in Turkish society. They are also inextricably
linked to poverty, since they reflect women’s inadequate access to opportunities and
capabilities or inability to attain desirable levels o f security and empowerment to escape
poverty.

Economic dependence of women emerges as a primary problem area. I t i s reflected
in findings such as l o w and decreasing labor participation rates o f women; their higher
urban unemployment rates; remarkably high proportions as unpaid family workers; lower
average wages; high ratios in insecure jobs in the informal sector; disproportionately l o w
ownership o f real estate; inability to provide collateral as entrepreneurs in the different
sector analyses.
Lack of skills as reflected mainly by education and employment data constitutes
another underlying force accounting for women’s disadvantaged position in the
society. I t i s not only demonstrated in women’s lower levels o f literacy and education or

2
rural women’s lack o f access to technology and machinery and urban migrant women’s
inability to join the formal labor market, but also through the difficulties experienced by
different groups o f women in accessing information and services such as health,
transportation, banlung or dealing with bureaucracies.

Traditional values and cultural stereotypes pose a major obstacle for women to
attain equality with men. Reflections o f discriminatory and debilitating traditions and
gender stereotypes are observed in the whole range of sectors reviewed. Sex-typing o f
occupations and gender-segregated labor markets; women primarily defined as ‘care
givers’ and men as ‘breadwinners’; women’s lack of mobility; notions o f women’s
outside work being considered incompatible marriage and motherhood are only some
examples o f such practices. Moreover, women’s exposure to suppression and violence in
the family and community i s often legitimized on the basis o f traditions and culture that
are internalized by women themselves to function as self-limiting influences. [. . .]
The analyses and recommendations [. . .] regarding the measures needed to combat gender
inequality are also informative for poverty reduction strategies. In this context, targeting
o f poverty assistance schemes to vulnerable women (e.g., illiterate, non-workmg migrant
women o f the ‘second wave’; single migrant women; female headed households; rural
older women) appears as the most obvious need for the short term. Similarly, immediate
attention i s required to devise measures (e.g., insurance coverage) to reduce vulnerability
o f unemployeduninsured women in rural and urban areas.
Short-term to medium-term measures are required to improve women’s capabilities and
opportunities. In order to address poverty, informing rural and urban women o f assistance
and j o b possibilities, as well as providing know-how and facilitating application for
assistance and jobs promise significant benefits for the vulnerable groups. While
neighborhood and community solidarity networks come across as important safety nets
for needy women, their potential to function as social control agents on women thereby
impeding women’s long-term empowerment should not be overlooked. Literacy and
vocational training o f women to improve their chances o f employment in better paying
and secure jobs can be provided by state and civil society agents, with a view to promote
women’s participation in unconventional areas. O n the legislative front, enactment o f
equal opportunity legislation as well as legislation to prevent sexual harassment and
discrimination at the work place; establishment o f new mechanisms (e.g., gender
ombuds) to monitor practices are deemed essential to ensure gender equality in the labor
market.
Comprehensive and coordinated efforts b y state, c i v i l society, and mass media as well as
international organizations need to be expanded in the medium- to long-term to
effectively combat discriminatory traditions and practices that impede women’s
economic independence and perpetuate low status in the family and community. To this
end, sustained programs to socialize and train women and men in a ‘culture o f equality’
w i l l ensure improvement o f women’s equal opportunities and empowerment.”

Annex A6
Financial Accountability and Public Sector Governance

Financial Accountability
1.
Modernization o f Turkey’s system o f public financial accountability in line with
international standards i s an urgent public expenditure management priority. As detailed
in the August 2001 CFAA, some o f the basic building blocks are in place: an established
legal framework; reliable, albeit fragmented, accounting processes; regular reporting of
financial results; an apparently independent Supreme Audit Institution, the Turkish Court
o f Accounts (TCA), which reports to Parliament; a relatively open system o f
accountability and plenty o f skilled personnel. However, deeper analysis reveals
significant problems and lack o f systemic coherence. Complex institutional relationships,
multiple sources o f public funds, heavy emphasis on ex ante controls and inadequate
reporting to the legislature reduce transparency and weaken financial management.
Accounting and procurement legislation have not kept up with evolving international
standards. Similar to the budget, the audit system i s fragmented with many bodies
besides the TCA carrying out activities analogous to external inspection and audit.
2.
Accounting. Efforts to upgrade the public accounting system are steadily gaining
momentum under the PFPSAL program after many years o f limited progress. The
say2000i automated accounting system i s operational in virtually all o f the approximately
1,500 sites o f the MOF’s General Directorate o f Public Accounting across Turkey.
Under this internet based system, the MOF’s central accounting data base contains data
on all individual transactions wherever they occur in the system. The initiative to
introduce modified accrual accounting in compliance with GFS requirements i s making
progress. The Public Financial Management and Control (PFMC) law w i l l replace the
existing public accounting law (No. 1050) and provide MOF with permanent authority to
issue budget coding and accounting standards for all general government agencies. The
M O F has prepared a regulation referring to accounting policies and principles, and
containing framework accounting standards and a framework chart of accounts consistent
with GFS. This framework chart o f accounts w i l l be adapted to meet the specific
requirements o f individual agencies while maintaining full compliance with GFS
standards.’ The new chart o f accounts i s being piloted within consolidated budget
agencies including several joint pilots with the GFS budget classification. Following
approval b y TCA, the new accounting regulation w i l l be published in the official gazette
in 2003.2 Based in part on the experiences from the pilots, the timetable for the
accounting reform has been revised and i s now as follows: (i)
introduce modified accrual
accounting in consolidated budget entities in 2004, (ii)begin introduction o f the full

’

The new chart o f accounts i s based on an economic classification. The coding for the functional,
institutional and financial classifications are being built into the accounting software running under
say2000i.
This will be a framework chart o f accounts which w i l l be adapted b y MOF to meet the specific
requirements o f individual agencies while maintaining overall consistency with GFS standards.

2
accrual basis in entities outside the consolidated budget in 2004, and (iii)
introduce full
accrual accounting for consolidated budget entities by 2007. The government accounting
standards board to be established through the PFMC law w i l l be responsible for
transforming the framework standards included in the accounting regulation into fullfledged accounting standards over time.
3.
Procurement. Turkey has moved decisively over the past year to upgrade i t s
public procurement legislation and practices in line with international standards. The
new public procurement law was enacted in January 2002. The new law i s based on the
U N C I T R A L model and moves Turkey in the direction o f compliance with EU standards.
The independent Public Procurement Agency (PPA) established under the law to oversee
public procurement and ensure enforcement o f the new procurement standards i s fully
operational. A set o f technical amendments to the law were adopted in mid-2003, and the
Government i s working on new procurement legislation for SEES in the public utilities
sectors consistent with the relevant EU directive.
4.
Auditinn. Effective financial accountability requires extensive modernization o f
Turkey’s public audit system. The objectives are two fold: (i)clarify institutional
responsibilities, promote improvements in audit quality in line with international
standards and support the shift from ex-ante controls to ex-post monitoring in harmony
with the efforts to improve operational performance; and (ii)
expand the scope o f T C A
audits to cover the entire general government including local administrations,
autonomous agencies, social security institutions, remaining extrabudgetary funds and
revolving funds, with the overall objective o f transforming the T C A into an effective
state audit institution. These objectives w i l l be facilitated by enactment o f the PFMC
law. With regard to audit quality, the law w i l l clarify the roles and responsibilities o f the
line agencies, the MOF and the TCA. The law w i l l establish a framework for
decentralizing internal audit to the line agencies in line with EU requirements. I t w i l l
allow the T C A to discontinue involvement in budget execution and focus on ex-post
audits, including performance audits. With regard to the transformation o f TCA, the law
will: (a) include all consolidated budget agencies under TCA’s annual audit; (b) subject
TCA’s own accounts to external audit with reports submitted to the Parliament; and (c)
expand the scope o f T C A audits to cover the entire general government. As with any
major institutional reform, the transformation o f T C A into a modem state audit institution
must be carefully designed to build consensus with the public administration. The T C A
i s committed to undertake internal reforms to align i t s institutional structure with
international standards for state audit institutions, to upgrade i t s audit capabilities, and to
reach consensus with the other government audit bodies on implementation o f the reform.
A draft action plan for the TCA’s internal reform has been prepared and w i l l be
improved, including through a peer review by auditors from other European state audit
institutions. The action plan i s expected to be adopted by the Government and T C A in
the fall of 2003.

3
Public Sector Governance

5.

Good governance. A national strategy to enhance transparency and good
governance in the public sector was published in March 2002 under the slogan “A
Transparent and Clean Turkey: Together Hand in Hand”. The objective o f the strategy
i s to provide a comprehensive framework for improving governance and reducing
political influence over the economy which establishes clear priorities and benchmarks,
and empowers and energizes public opinion to fight corruption. Priorities under the
national anti-corruption strategy are summarized in Box 1below. The basic structure and
actions o f this strategy have been reflected in the Urgent Action Plan (UAP) of the new
Government. The ministerial committee for enhancing transparency and improving good
governance was established in March 2003. The committee w i l l steer relevant actions o f
both the UAP and national strategy in this reform area. The ministerial committee w i l l
prepare regular implementation reports for the national strategy within the context o f the
UAP. Among a comprehensive set o f substantive actions i s the Law on “Freedom o f
Information for Citizens”, which has already been drafted and sent to agencies for
comments. This law i s expected to be passed in the fall o f 2003. Legislation establishing
a code o f conduct for civil servants and public administrations i s expected to be passed
by end-2003. The Government i s counting on the active involvement o f national nongovernmental organizations (NGO) to improve public awareness about good governance.
One o f the major national NGOs, Foundation for Economic and Social Studies (TESEV),
has completed two diagnostic surveys co-sponsored by the Bank on corruption covering
households and the business community respectively. W o r k on a third survey covering
civil servants was delayed by the elections.

6.
Civil Service Reform. Sustained improvements in public governance w i l l hinge in
large part on effective reform o f the civil service. Indeed, civil service reform features
prominently in the national anti-comption strategy and features in the UAP. C i v i l
service reform i s vital to raising the quality o f public services and ensuring the quality o f
the fiscal adjustment. The Government has already initiated work on a n o m cadre
system to establish benchmarks for staffing in public agencies which i s now operational
within the Ministry o f Education. There i s widespread acknowledgement that a more
complete, medium-term approach i s needed in order to adapt the civil service to the
changing role o f government in Turkey and to internalize the on-going reforms to PEM.
In addition to questions about the size and composition o f the civil service in a changing
Turkey, the reform w i l l need to address issues such as distorted salary incentives, career
development requirements and inadequate operational budgets in most agencies. In
February 2002, a ministerial committee was established to oversee the preparation o f a
civil service reform strategy and carry out a full functional review o f government in
preparation for further decisions about what functions to retain within government and
what to devolve to the private sector. Preparations for the functional review were
initiated in mid-2002, but then delayed by the run-up to elections. The functional review
has been re-launched under the responsibility o f SPO and the draft report was completed
in July 2003. Responsibility for preparation o f the civil service reform strategy has now
been confided in the UAP to the State Personnel Presidency under the overall direction o f
a Deputy Prime Minister. A timetable o f end-2003 has been set for the preparation and
adoption of the civil service reform strategy by the Council o f Ministers.

4
Box 1: Priorities under the National Strategy
to Enhance Transparency and Good Governance in Turkey’s Public Sector
Accelerating the completion o f ongoing work, within the framework o f public administration
reform, for institutional improvement and financial management.
Implementing amendments to the L a w on the Contents o f a Declaration o f Wealth, Bribery and
Anti-Corruption (No. 3628) in order to make these declarations public and to require mandatory audits and
public access to the declarations for all elected officials.
Enacting regulations to ensure that inspections o f campaign financing, income and the expenses o f
political parties and election candidates are made available to the public. Amending the existing Law on
Political Parties to require that political parties and candidates make a public declaration o f contributions
from individuals and legal persons above a fixed amount. The High Elections Board w i l l be responsible for
publishing and auditing this information.
Implementing amendments to the Law on the Prevention o f Money Laundering Law (No. 4208) to
expand the list o f criminal activities giving rise to illegitimate profits and to restructure M A S A K in order to
provide investigative powers to M A S A K experts in specific areas.
Creation o f an Inspection and Audit Services Class and passage o f an Inspection Law to put intc
effect inspection standards, to allow for a complete restructuring o f all inspection and auditing units, and tc
implement changes to appointment procedures to allow for fixed-term appointment o f presidents. .
Amending the C i v i l Service Law (No. 657) to include a specific employment category for inspection anc
auditing services.
Establishing specialized courts to facilitate quick resolution o f corruption cases. Founding
specialized units within the security forces and under the supervision and inspection o f the Chief State
Prosecutor to investigate corruption cases.
Implementing ethic agreements in Turkey.

Annex A7

Fund Relations Note

Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 02/46
April 19,2002

International Monetary Fund
700 19t” Street, NW
Washington, D. C. 20431 USA

IMF Concludes 00 Article I V Consultation with Turkey
On April 15, 2002, the Executive Board o f the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the
Article I V consultation with Turkey.’
Background
Turkey i s in the midst o f a determined campaign to turn around decades o f weak performance. N o t
only has growth been on a downward trend since the 1970s (and inflation on an upward one), i t has
also become increasingly volatile. This performance reflects pervasive structural rigidities, weak
public finances, and l o w policy credibility. Despite many achievements since the economic
liberalization o f the 1980s, deep-rooted structural problems remain a drag on growth, and past
disinflation attempts have had l i t t l e success.

The past couple o f years have witnessed three major attempts at addressing underlying weaknesses.
The first was during 2000 under the three-year Standby Agreement initiated in December 1999. The
program instituted strong fiscal adjustment and a preannounced exchange rate crawl to restore debt
sustainability and to break entrenched inflation expectations. The program also included a wideranging structural reform agenda-especially in banking, social security, privatization, and
agriculture-to set Turkey on a higher sustainable growth path. Despite some notable achievements
in structural reforms, in turning around the public sector primary balance, and in reining in inflation,
a worsening current account and a fragile banking system led in late 2000 to a liquidity crisis which
turned into a full-blown crisis, with a large loss of reserves. Prompted by political tensions, this was
followed b y another speculative attack in February 2001, forcing the government to float the
currency amidst high interest rates and a renewed acceleration in inflation.
The second phase was the adoption in M a y 2001 o f a strengthened program aimed at restoring
investor confidence b y addressing the roots of the crises, with the help o f additional IMF support.
Under Article I V o f the IMF’s Articles o f Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every
year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the
country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the
basis for discussion by the Executive Board. A t the conclusion o f the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman o f
the Board, summarizes the views o f Executive Directors, and this summary i s transmitted to the country’s authorities.
This PIN summarizes the views o f the Executive Board as expressed during the April 15, 2000 Executive Board
discussion based on the staff report.

-2The authorities’ revised program featured a fundamental restructuring o f the banking sector (a key
source o f vulnerability in the past), a commitment to a floating exchange rate (reducing vulnerability
to shocks), continued disinflation, substantial fiscal adjustment to underpin debt sustainability, and an
enhanced role for the private sector. Just as the revised program was beginning to show results, the
events o f September I 1 triggered a deterioration in market sentiment and a re-emergence o f serious
financing problems. Meanwhile, Turkey continued to suffer from an inefficient public sector, barriers
to private sector development, a banking sector damaged b y the earlier crises, and a high public debt
burden, fuelled in part b y publicly-funded bank recapitalization.
In response to September 11, the Turkish government initiated a new intensified IMF-supported
program, both to protect the economy against future crises, and to continue Turkey’s ambitious
reform agenda. Under the 2002-04 program, the continuation o f the float w i l l limit the potential for
speculative attacks. Ongoing financial sector reform together with corporate sector restructuring w i l l
help strengthen the banking and business sectors, and continued fiscal discipline should foster
medium-term debt sustainability. The program’s strong structural reform agenda should, once
macroeconomic stabilization i s achieved, finally set the stage for sustained economic growth.

Developments under the new program have been promising. Financial market conditions have
improved markedly from their post-September 11 lows; the benchmark bill rate has fallen sharply,
and the Turkish l i r a has appreciated b y more than 20 percent to around TL 1.3 million to the U.S.
dollar. Against this background, the trend toward dollarization has diminished, and even shown signs
of reversal in recent months, the stock market has risen b y over 50 percent in lira terms since midSeptember, and the roll-off o f external interbank credits has ceased. Short-term concerns about the
public debt rollover have also largely abated, allowing a lengthening o f maturity o f domestic debt
and strong demand for new Eurobond issues. Inflation has started to decline, helping to reduce
inflation expectations and allowing the Central Bank o f Turkey (CBT) to reduce the overnight rate by
14 points (to 66 percent) in three steps over the past two months.

A large number o f policy measures have been taken under the new program. In January, the
authorities met more than ten prior actions in the fiscal and structural areas needed for the approval o f
the SBA. Subsequently, all quantitative performance criteria relevant for the first review were met.
Base money came in below the end-February ceiling, while Net International Reserves and N e t
Domestic Assets targets were met comfortably. The public sector primary surplus target o f
5.5 percent o f GNP for 2001 was exceeded b y an estimated 0.4 percent o f GNP, and in January the
consolidated government sector exceeded i t s primary surplus target comfortably. Solid progress has
also been made in meeting the program’s structural conditionality.
Executive Board Assessment

Executive Directors welcomed the Turkish authorities’ decisive efforts to address the problems o f the
past and implement an ambitious economic reform program to lay the basis for sustainable growth. In
the past, financial indiscipline and structural weaknesses had prevented Turkey from realizing i t s
economic potential, and had created an environment o f highly volatile growth and inflation spanning
several decades. These problems had their roots in fiscal laxity, deficiencies in governance, lack of a

-3nominal anchor, and inefficiencies and nontransparencies in the public sector, and were evident in
barriers to private sector development and a banking sector damaged by the two recent crises.
Directors welcomed the Turkish authorities’ progress in addressing these weaknesses and reduce the
vulnerability o f the economy to shocks through their bold three-year program. They noted that the
program represents a further decisive step away from the interventionist policies o f the past, and that
i t would lay the groundwork for a stronger performance in the future.
In this regard, Directors commended the authorities for maintaining the positive momentum o f
macroeconomic adjustment and structural reform established in response to the events o f September
1I.Macroeconomic policies have remained prudent; and the government has continued to press
ahead w i t h structural reform, notably with respect to the identification o f public sector staffing
redundancies and the adoption o f the legislative basis for improved public debt management. The
authorities’ efforts have been rewarded by a substantial decline in interest rates, a strong balance o f
payments position with an associated appreciation o f the Turkish lira, and a drop in inflation and in
inflation expectations.

Directors noted that, while these positive results should help lay the basis for sustainable growth,
there are downside risks. In particular, they emphasized that the strength and timing o f the recovery
in output are uncertain, and that financial markets have remained alert to the possibility o f further
shocks. Directors expressed concern that prolonged slow economic growth would have an adverse
impact on Turkey’s debt sustainability. T o boost growth, they emphasized the importance o f
structural reforms to raise private investment and productivity and to lower real interest rates.
Directors stressed that successful program implementation in the months ahead w i l l require the
undivided support o f the government coalition.
Directors stressed that, although fiscal developments remain on track, strict budget implementation
must continue in order to ensure a sustainable debt position. While commending the authorities’
commitment to the target o f a public sector primary surplus o f 6.5 percent o f GNP in 2002, they
stressed the need to remain mindful o f possible downside risks, and urged the authorities to stand
ready to take further offsetting measures to safeguard the primary surplus target and maintain
external debt sustainability.
Directors noted that, to be sustainable, the achievement o f the overall budget targets w i l l need to be
underpinned by decisive reforms. They were encouraged b y the government’s efforts to improve
expenditure management, streamline tax policy, and strengthen revenue administration. On the tax
side, they stressed the importance o f simplifying the tax code. On the expenditure side, they noted the
importance o f moving expeditiously w i t h the much-needed downsizing o f the state economic
enterprises and civil service reform.
Directors noted the increasing scope for monetary policy to promote disinflation and enhance
confidence. In this regard, Directors were encouraged by the recent decline in current and expected
inflation. The introduction o f inflation targeting w i l l further anchor inflation expectations. While a
number of Directors noted that, with strong efforts b y the C B T and the government, the preconditions
for introducing formal inflation targeting could be in place by midyear, some other Directors

-4-

considered that a longer track record on disinflation would be needed for such a framework to be
credible. Regarding reserve management, they urged the C B T to continue to make use o f the betterthan-expected balance o f payments developments to build up foreign exchange reserves, which
should further improve confidence, and welcomed the authorities’ recent move to pre-announced
foreign exchange purchase auctions. They urged further development o f the money and foreign
exchange markets to help ensure a smoother functioning o f the floating exchange rate regime, and
welcomed the authorities’ plans to lower distortionary taxes and reform the system of reserve
requirements. They also stressed the need to closely monitor Turkey’s external competitiveness in
light of the recent appreciation o f the Turkish lira.
Directors welcomed the progress in banking sector reform, including the implementation o f the bank
recapitalization plan, but called for further rapid movement on corporate debt restructuring. M o v i n g
forward, Directors stressed the importance o f preserving the integrity and transparency o f the bank
recapitalization process, and o f sticking to i t s announced timetable. They also underlined the need to
maintain the independence o f Turkey’s regulatory institutions. Directors urged the authorities to
accelerate privatization now that market conditions are more favorable, noting that inefficiencies in
state economic enterprises are a core factor behind Turkey’s disappointing growth performance in the
last decade. Similarly, Directors urged the government to be forceful in demonstrating i t s
commitment to dealing w i t h deficiencies in the investment environment and promoting transparency
and efficiency o f public administration both at the central and local levels. Directors welcomed the
measures taken to combat money laundering and the financing o f terrorism.
Directors commended recent moves to improve transparency and data provision. Although some
deficiencies remain in fiscal statistics, they welcomed the recent extensive improvements in fiscal
transparency.

-5Press Release No. 03/135
August 1,2003

International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20431 USA

The Executive Board o f the International Monetary Fund (IMF) today completed the fifth review o f
Turkey's economic performance under i t s Stand-By Arrangement. Completion o f the review enables
Turkey to draw S D R 340.2 million (about US$476 million) immediately under the arrangement.
The Executive Board also approved a one-year extension to the obligation dates o f time-based
repurchase expectations for the period 2004 and 2005 in an aggregate amount equivalent to SDR
8.2 billion (about US$11 billion).
Turkey's Stand-By Arrangement was approved on February 4, 2002 (see Press Rclcase No. 02/7) in
a total amount o f SDR 12.8 billion (about US$18 billion). So far, Turkey has drawn SDR 10.4
billion (about US$15 billion) under the arrangement.
Following the Executive Board discussion, Horst Kohler, Managing Director and Chairman, said:

"The Turkish authorities have made strong and welcome efforts in recent weeks to implement their
program o f stabilization and economic reform. These include the measures put in place to safeguard
the primary surplus target o f 6%percent o f GNP, the enactment o f legislation to underpin social
security reform while excluding amnesties, and the progress made on the program's structural
reform agenda. These actions bring policies back on track to achieve the basic objectives o f the
Fund-supported program, namely, disinflation, debt reduction, and sustained economic growth.
"Economic conditions have improved following the rapid conclusion o f the war in Iraq. Progress on
European Union-related legislation i s also welcome; this has undoubtedly contributed to improved
market sentiment. With strong output recovery and continued disinflation so far this year, the
program's projections o f 5 percent output growth and 20 percent inflation in 2003 are within reach.
However, real interest rates remain high reflecting underlying fragilities.
"Completion o f the review provides a valuable opportunity for the Turkish authorities to
demonstrate full program ownership, and continue w i t h consistent and steadfast program
implementation. Key in this regard would be the maintenance o f fiscal discipline to safeguard the
6% percent o f GNP primary surplus target, not only for this year but also in 2004.
"The Central Bank o f Turkey (CBT) i s to be commended on i t s skillful conduct o f monetary policy.
The C B T has successfully managed to increase confidence in i t s inflation objective, cut interest
rates and accumulate reserves. The diligence shown b y the Banking Regulation and Supervision
Agency (BRSA) in i t s supervision o f banks i s welcome, as are other banking sector reforms. The

-6authorities need to build on this progress by further improving bankruptcy procedures, privatizing
state banks, and resolving the intervened banks. T o enhance policy credibility, the authorities need
to strengthen the operational and financial independence o f regulatory agencies, including the
BRSA.
"In line with Fund policy, the Fund's Executive Board supported moving part o f Turkey's
repayments from 2004-05 to 2005-06 to strengthen debt management and thereby contribute to the
success of the authorities' reform program.

"Continued strong policy actions w i l l allow Turkey to achieve i t s macroeconomic targets and
maintain a viable debt position in the medium term. The Government's recent actions bode well for
the success o f the Fund-supported program. O n this basis, Turkey's efforts deserve the continued
support of the international community," Mr. Kohler stated.

Annex B1

Turkey at a glance
POVERlY and SOCIAL
2002
Population, mid-year (millions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)

Turkey

Europe &
Central
Asia

Lowermiddleincome

69.6
2,500
173.9

476
2,160
1,030

2,411
1,390
3,352

1.7
2.2

0.1
0.4

1.o
1.2

77
70
33
8
82
14
101
105
96

63
69
25
91
3
102
103
101

49
69
30
11
81
13
111
111
110

1992

2001

2002
183.7
21.3
28.7
19.6
20.6

9/26/03

Developmentdiamond'
Life expectancy

Average annual growth, 1996-02
Population (%)
Labor force (%)

GNI
Per
capita

Most recent estimate (latest year available, 1996-02)
Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)
Urban population (% of total population)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 7,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)
Access to an improved water source (?Aofpopulation)
Illiteracy (% ofpopulation age 15+)
Gross primary enrollment (% of school-age population)
Male
Female

Access to imDroved water source

-

Turkey

__ Lower-middle-incomegroup

KEY ECONOMIC RATIOS and LONG-TERM TRENDS
1982

GDP (US$ billions)
Gross domestic investmenUGDP
Exports of goods and serviceslGDP
Gross domestic savingslGDP
Gross national savingslGDP

64.4
17.0
11.9
13.8
18.5

158.9
23.9
14.4
20.9
24.4

145.2
16.8
33.7
19.2
20.7

Current account balancelGDP
Interest paymentslGDP
Total debVGDP
Total debt servicelexports
Present value of debVGDP
Present value of debVexDorts

-1.5
1.a
30.6
29.4

-0.6
2.0
35.6
32.1

2.3
3.6
78.5
44.0

-0.8
3.4
71.6
38.2

1982-92

1992-02

2001

2002

2002-06

5.1
2.7
5.5

2.8
1.o
11.4

-7.5
-9.0
7.4

7.8
6.1
11.0

4.7
3.6
4.9

1982

1992

2001

2002

22.7
25.1
17.7
52.2

15.3
29.9
18.9
54.7

12.8
26.1
15.8
61.1

13.0
25.4
16.0
61.6

76.3
9.9
15.0

66.2
12.9
17.3

66.6

14.2
31.3

66.2
14.0
30.4

1982-92

1992-02

2001

2002

1.4
7.2
7.2
4.2

1.1
2.6
3.3
3.1

-6.0

-7.2
-8.0
-6.2

7.6
5.7
8.2
7.0

4.3
3.4
5.0
8.8

2.2
4.4
1.1
8.3

-9.2
-8.5
-42.0
-24.8

2.6
5.4
35.7
15.7

(average annual growth)
GDP
GDP per capita
Exports of goods and services
STRUCTURE of the ECONOMY
(% of GDP)
Agriculture
industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Imports of goods and services

(average annual growth)
Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services
Private consumption
General government consumption
Gross domestic investment
Imports of goods and services

Economic ratios'
Trade

-

I

Domestic
savings

Investment

~

I

-

Turkey

I
1

1

-

Lower-middle-income group

Growth of investment and GDP (Yo)

1-40~

Indebtedness

-50 -

-

GDI

'IOIGDP

Growth of exports and imports (%)

-30

-Exports

-Imports

~

Note 2002 data are preliminary estimates
*The diamonds show four key indicators in the country (in bold) compared with its income-group average If data are missing, the diamond will
be incomdete

I

I
I

I

Turkey
PRICES and GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Domestic prices
(% change)
Consumer prices
Implicit GDP deflator
Govemment finance
(% of GDP, includes current grants)
Current revenue
Current budget balance
Overall surplusideficit
TRADE
(US$ millions)
Total exports (fob)
Textiles
Processed agricultural products
Manufactures
Total imports (cif)
Food
Fuel and energy
Capital goods

Export price index (1994-100)
Import price index (1994=100)
Terms of trade (1994-100)
BALANCE of PAYMENTS 11

1982

..

28.2

1992

2001

2002

70.1
63.7

53.9
54.8

44.8
43.8

..
..
..

19.0
-1.3
-10.7

29.3
-15.0
-21.9

28.1
-4.6
-12.2

1982

1992

2001

2002

5,890
1,145
1,571
4,655
0,843
123
3,943
2,214

14,891
5,603
2,293
13,440
22,871
1,398
3,903
7,970

34,373
10,344
1,876
28,695
41,399
848
8,316
7,344

39,827
12,066
1,705
32,673
51,270
1,211
8,955
8,949

..

87
87
100

90
09
101

99
98
101

(US$ millions)
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Resource balance

1982

1992

2001

2002

7,818
9,592
-1,774

23,343
26,706
-3,363

50,403
45,816
4,507

54,608
55,095
-487

Net income
Net current transfers

-1,455
2,277

-1,670
4,059

-5,000
3,803

-4,549
3,496

Current account balance

-952

-974

3,390

-1,540

Financing items (net}
Changes in net reserves

1,120
-168

2,458
-1,484

-16,314
12,924

1,328
212

Memo:
Reserves including gold (US$ millions)
Conversion rate (DEC, local/US$)

2,027
162.9

15,252
6,881.3

30,192
1,228,367

38,067
1,505,290

1982

1992

2001

2002

19,716
1,962
107

56,554
5,564
148

113,949
4,707
95

131,551
5,367
89

2,968
209
3

9,086
1,207
6

24,606
723
7

22,540
708
7

Composition of net resource flows
Official grants
Official creditors
Private creditors
Foreign direct investment
Portfolio equity

307
762
146
55
0

506
-509
3,604
779
-1,194

0
74
-2,187
2,769
-4,611

334
797
3,811
862
-1,180

World Bank program
Commitments
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Net flows
Interest payments
Net transfers

648
500
86
415
127
288

686
286
733
-447
480
-928

2,200
1,537
437
1,100
292
808

1,650
1,031
442
588
272
316

EXTERNAL DEBT and RESOURCE FLOWS
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
IBRD
IDA

Total debt service 21
IBRD
IDA

I

40

Development Economics
I / 2001 and 2002 are based on the new classification
2/ Year 2002 figure does not include the SRF payment of $6.1 billion.

Export and import levels (US$ mill.)
60,000
50,000
40,000

30,000
20,000

10.000
0

Q6

97

98

QExports

99

00

01

02

mlmports

Current account balance to GDP (%)
'7.

I
Composition of 2002 debt (US$ mill.)

G 15.155 A 5'367

A - IBRD
B - IDA
C - IMF

R RQ

D - Other multilateral

E. Bilateral
F - Private
G - Short-term

9/26/03

-

CAS Annex B2 Turkey
Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As of 06/30/2003

Indicator

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)
Percent of Problem Projects by Number
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount as
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a , d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a , d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$ million)
Average Supervision (thousand US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eva1 by OED by Number
Proj Eva1 by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2001

2002

2003

19
3.4
15.8
14.7
15.8
14.7
21.2

20
3.8
25.0
18.8
25.0
18.8
17.5

16
4.2
6.3
6.8
6.3
6.8
22.0

Yes
2.1
112

Yes
3.0
149

Yes
2.5
142

Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
97
13
10,365.7
2,482.0
30.5
8.3
32.5
1.I

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year. Investment projects only; hybrid operations are considered adjustment loans.
* All indicators are for projects active in the portfolio, including GEF grants, with the exception of
the Disbursement Ratio which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the FY.

-

-

CAS Annex B3 IBRD Program Summary Turkey
Proposed IBRD High-Case Lending Program al
As of 06/30/2003
Fiscal year

Proj ID

US$(M)

2004

PFPSAL 3
EXPORT FINANCE II
HEALTH SECTOR TRANSFORMATION
RENEWABLE ENERGY
MlRCO WATERSHED
Result
PPSAL
MUNICIPAL REFORM AND SERVICES
RAILWAY RESTRUCTURING
KNOWLEDGE ECON. & TECH DEVT
SEISMIC RISK MITIGATION
SECONDARY EDUCATION
Result
PPSAL II
PFSAL I
SME FINANCE
ENERGY
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Result

900.0
300.0
200.0

2005

2006

Overall Result

Strategic Rewards b/
(H/M/L)

202.0
37.0

1,650.0
500.0
200.0
200.0
100.0
400.0
200.0
1,600.0
400.0
400.0
100.0
100.0
250.0
1,250.0
4,500.0

a/ This table presents the proposed high case lending program for the next three fiscal
years. The amounts are rounded. The low case program amounts to US$I .3 billion.
b/ For each project, the table indicates whether the strategic rewards and implementation
risks are expected to be high (H), moderate (M), or low (L).

Implementation b/
Risks (H/M/L)

H
M
H
M
M

H
L
M
L
L

H
H
H
M
M
M

H
H

H
H
M
M
H

H
H
L
M
M

H
M
L
M

CAS Annex B3 (IFC & MIGA) for Turkey

-

Turkey IFC and MIGA Program,
FY 2000-2003
-

IFC approvals (US$m)

Sector (%)

FINANCIAL SERVICES
FOOD & AGRO-BUSINESS
HOTELS & TOURISM
INFRASTRUCTURE
MANUFACTURING
OIL, GAS and MINING
PRIMARY METALS
SOCIAL, SERVICES
TEXTILES
TIMBER, PULP & PAPER

Total

2000

200 1

2002

2003

181.18

108.51

283.77

118.60

32
24

51

51

8

14
14

1
37

11
6
101

11

100

1
27
9
2
1
8
100

65
17
9

100

Investment instrument(% )
Loans
Equity
Quasi-Equity
Other

Total

MIGA guarantees (US$m)

83
3
14

91
4
5

100

100

63
9
5
23
100

100

100

246.9

153.8

256.9

213.9

-

-

CAS Annex 6 4 Summary of Nonlending Services Turkey

Product

As of 0613QI2QQ3

Completion FY Cost (US$OOO) Audience a/ Obiective b/

Recent completions
Policy Notes for the New Government
CEM
Non-Bank Financial Institutions Report
Municipal Sector Review
Water Sector Report
Energy Sector Strategy
Gender Assessment
EU Accession Conference

FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03
FY03

35
270
330
175
60
60
50
50

GDPB
GDPB
GDPB
GDB
GDB
GDB
GDB
GDPB

KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PD
KG,PD

Underwaylplanned
CAS
Labor Market Study
Social Cost of Adjustment
Impact of Agriculture Sector Reforms
Banking Sector Report
Knowledge Economy Assessment
Investment Climate Dialogue
Gas Sector Note
Caspian Oil and Gas Dialogue
NGO Outreach
CEM
Poverty Assessment
Rural Sector Study
Education
Environment
NGO Outreach
CAS PR
CFAA
CPAR
PElR
NGO Outreach

FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FY04
FYO4
FY04
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY05
FY06
FY06
FY06
FY06

300
295
100
140
100
190
125
50
15
95
350
120
140
150
70
150
100
30
30
300
150

GDPB
GDB
GB
GDB
GDB
BDPB
GB
GB
GB
GPB
GDPB
GDPB
GDB
GDB
GDB
GPB
GDPB
GB
GB
GDPB
GPB

KG
KG,PD,PS
KG
KG,PS
KG
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG
PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PD,PS
KG,PS
KG
KG PS
PD,PS
KG
KG,PS
KG,PS
KG,PD,PS
PD,PS

a/ Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination,
b/ Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

Annex B5

Turkey Social Indicators
Same region/income group

Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Growth rate (YOannual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)

1970-75

1980-85

1995-2001

Europe &
Central
Asia

LowermiddleIncome

40.0
2.5
41.6
4.7

50.3
2.5
52.5
3.8

66.2
1.5
66.2
2.3

474.6
0.1
62.8
1.6

2,163.5
1.o
45.6
2.1

1,180
0

1,320
1
1

2,530
2,439
201

1,970

1,230

4.0
4.4
8.8

2.6
4.6

POVERTY
(“7 of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (1995=100)
Food price index (1995=100)
INCOMEKONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (%of GDP)
Education (%of GDP)
Social security and welfare (% of GDP)
Net primary school enrollment rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an improved water source
(“7 of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Immunization rate
(“7 under 12 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000 live births)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 N e births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

40.0
6.1
46.7

2.1
0.3

1.8
0.2

9a

3.6
3.5
2.7

99
102
96

82

ai

86

92
92
93

91
96
a3

80
95
70

61
55

90
88
8

95
94

84
83
10

59
57
62

63
61
66

70
67
72

69
64
73

69
67
71

127
167

82
104

36
43

31
38

33
41

218
120
55

317
137

205
130

76

ai

87

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment rate: break in series between 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97; ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies between the estimates of school-age population
and reported enrollment data.
2003 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank

Annex B6
Page 1 of 2

Turkey - K e y Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta
Agriculture
Industry
Services

Estimate
200 1

2002

Projected
2004

2003

2005

2006

100
13
26
61

100
13
27
60

100
12
27
61

100
12
27
61

100
12
27
62

100
11
27
61

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

81
18
6
13

84
18
6
12

86
18
6
12

84
18
6
12

83
19
6
13

82
19
6
13

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

34
31

30
30

27
29

27
28

28
28

28
28

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings'

19
21

16
17

14
15

16
17

17
18

18
19

Memorandum items

Gross domestic product
(US$ m i l l i o n at current prices)
GNF' per capita (US$, Atlas method)

145,244

183,665

235,940

259,990

279,266

299,857

2410

2500

2720

3270

3720

3990

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated f r o m 1994 prices)
-7.5
Gross domestic product at market prices
Gross Domestic Income
-8.3

7.8
9.9

4.8
5.1

4.7
6.1

4.5
4.8

4.8
5.3

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated f r o m 1994 prices)
-9.0
6.1
Gross domestic product at market prices
-10.6
13.6
Total consumption
-10.7
14.7
Private consumption

3.2
6.5
7.3

3.1
2.7
2.5

3.O
1.4
1.2

3.3
2.1
1.9

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB

w o r t s (GNFS)~
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
N e t current transfers
Current account balance
N e t private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, h c L errors & ommissions)
m a n g e in reservesd
Memorandum items

Resource balance (% o f GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR94 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Merchandise imports (0

50,403
34,373
45,816
38,916
4,587
3,803
3,390

54,608
39,827
55,095
48,194
(487)
3,496
(1,540)

63,292
47,484
68,043
59,759
(4,750)
3,611
(7,496)

70,120
52,515
72,846
63,847
(2,726)
4,056
(5,264)

76.800
58,225
77,517
67,949
(717)
4,546
(3,056)

83,550
63,998
82,572
72,425
977
4,757
(550)

2,769
(1,131)
1,296
(2,427)
(17,952)
12,924

862
2,832
1,651
1,181
(2,366)
212

1,327
3,647
692
2,956
3,051

1,042
3.841
1,170
2,671
3.059

1,280
4,653
529
4,124
3,292

(530)

(2,678)

(6,168)

1,567
4,373
(147)
4,520
4,932
(10,321)

3.2

-0.3

-2.0

-1.0

-0.3

0.3

16.2
-23.2

10.6
21.2

10.6
12.6

9.0
6.4

9.7
5.9

8.7
6.1

(Continued)

Annex 66
Page 2 of 2

-

Turkey K e y Economic Indicators
(Continued)
Indicator

200 1

2002

Public finance (as % of GDP a t market prices)e
29.3
Current revenues
44.3
Current expenditures
-15.0
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
6.9
Capital expenditure
0.7
Foreign financing
-21.9
Monetary indicators
40.8
M2/GDP
29.4
Growth of M 2 (%)
65.0
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YW4 =loo)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index

GDP deflator (% change)

2003

Projected

2004

2005

2006

28.1
32.7
-4.6
7.6
8.5
-12.2

30.2
31.9
-1.7
7.5
1.3

30.5
29.8
0.7
7.4
1.7

30.7
29.4
1.4
7.7
0.3

30.2
27.0
3.2
7.7
-0.5

41.7
26.0
70.6

42.5
33.9
78.3

45.1
25.4
65.0

46.4
18.0
70.3

45.5
9.1
40.7

87.3
87.3
100.0

90.1
89.2
101.0

99.0
98.2
100.8

100.5
98.6
101.9

101.6
99.1
102.5

102.7
99.6
103.1

54.8

43.8

25.2

12.9

9.8

6.2

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central govemment.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in USS/LCU denotes appreciation.

Annex B7
Page 1 of 1

-

Turkey K e y Exposure Indicators

Indicator
Total debt outstanding and

200 1

2002

Projected
2003

2004

2005

2006

113,948

131,551

136,212

140,295

140,283

138,156

Net disbursements (US$m)a

(4,742)

40,301

29,997

24,163

18,235

5,792

Total debt service (TDS)

24,606

22,540

27,340

30,485

33,515

36,985

disbursed ( D O ) (US$m)"

(US$m)a
Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGSb

TDO/GDP
TDS/XGS
Concessional/TDO

203.7
78.5
44.0
3.6

222.8
71.6

201.3
57.7

186.6
54.0

170.6
50.2

153.4
46.1

38.2
3.2

40.4
3.3

40.6
3.3

40.8
3.3

41.1
3.3

5.5
24.8

4.7

3.1

3.2

3.4

3.4

14.6

16.3

23.7

29.0

33.8

IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public D S
Preferred creditor DS/public
D S (5%)'

IBRD DS/XGS
IBRD TDO (us$mld

1.3
4,707

1.2
5,367

1.2
6,005

1.3
7,019

1.5
7,970

1.5
8,179

Share of IBRD portfolio (96)

3.9

4.4

5.2

6.3

7.3

7.5

IDA TDO (us$m)d

95

89

84

79

74

68

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
Year 2002 figure does not include the SRF payment of $6.1 billion.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the

Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

-.Ea

2

a

E

n

a

P
L

a*

'i

b

CAS Annex 68 (IFC) for Turkey
Statement of IFC's
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
As of 06/30/03
(In US Dollars Millions)

0

5 00

1998

Adana Cement

200112003

Akbank

55 w

199612000

Alternatif Bank

5 36

0

0
0

OW
0 00

0

5.00

000

5 00

0

0

55 00

ow

0

0

0

5 00

0 00
000

1995/1996/200112003

Arcelik

76 66

0

0

50 03

2000

Arcelik LG Klima

1377

0

0

4 71

1994/1997/2002

ASSan

26 99

0

1.50

0 00

2 36
76 66
1377
26 99

2002
2wO
19941199@2000

Atilim

6 50
1500
7 50

0

0

000

5 00

0

2002
2w1
1994/1995/199611997

Beko

Banvit

ow

0

0

50 03

0

0

4 71

0

1 50

0 00

4 58

0

0

15 00

5.00

0

0 00
000

0

0

000

7 50

0

0

0 00

0

0

29 03

29 03

0

0

Bilgi

29 03
12 00

0

0

0

0

Borcelik

1000

9 66

0

000
0 00

29 03
OW

CBS Boya Kimya

3 65

OW

ow

0

0

CBS Holding

0 00

1994

0
400

9 66
3.65

0

1995/1996

1000
0

0

0

0

CBS Printas

0

0

0

0.64

0

1992
19901199312002

Cayeii Bakir
Conrad

000
0 00
000
000

4 00

199612001

0
OM

4 20
1064

0

0

OW

0

0

199711998

0
0

0 40

0

0
0
0

000
OW

2002
19861199311996

111
1214
21 25

0

0

BayindirbankA.S

4 20

0

0

0
0

0

Demir Leasing

1064
111

EKS

1214

0

0
0

Elginkan
Entek

0 40

0

0

0

0

Finans Leasing

21 25
111

0

0

Finansbank
Garanti Leasing

6 67
111

0
0

Gumussuyu Kap

400

0

199612000/2002
1990

lpek Paper
Kepez Elekirik

19861199011996

Kiris

1991
199311996

Kuia

6 69
6 88
33 68
6 48
25 W
4 93
2 47

0

1998

Gunkol
lndorama lplik

0
0
3.24
6.69

1995
199711998
19901999
1994/199wzo00
1999
2001

Medya
Milli Re

2w2
199612w2
1991
2002
1998
1983/199411998
199412WO

2001

Turkish PEF

26 67
0

1999
1999

Unye Cement

1457

Uzel
Viking

9 48

Yalova Actylic
Yapi Kredi Lease

2 50
0 96

197W1971119801983'1998
1995
199711998

.

0

0

0

4.99

0

ow

000
000
1329

0.66

0

0
0
0

5w
0
0

0 00

0

0

0

0 00
000
000

0 00

0

0

000

0

0

000
3 55

22 73
10 18

0
0

0
0

0

0
0
0

ow

4 99
0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

000

0

0
0

7 50
2 43
6 29
1281
21 67

0

0

0 00
0 00

0

0

0

0

1695

0

0

0

3 40

0

2 98
59 17

0

0

0

0

1511

0
0
3 43

0

0

15.00

1000
0

0
0

0
0

0

0

0

0 00
5 69
0 00
1 33

0

0

0 00

6 29
1608
21 67
2 98
97 85
11 79
2 22

Turk Ekon Bank

400
6 69
6 88

0

Pinar ET

1995/1999/2002

10 35
000

6 48
25 00
4 93
2 47

2 43

Trakya Cam

ow

0
0
3 24
6 69

000
000
000
0 00

Pasabahce-Schotl

Soktas

0

0
0

0
0

0

TEB Finansal

000
1491

0

0

I018
7 50

199612002

ow

ow

111

33 88

NASCO
Pasabahce

1999
1979/1980198311989/19911199611999

000

ow

ow
ow

6 67
111

000
1329

50 00
22 73

Silkar Turizm
Sise Ve Cam

1993/1996120002W3

000
1035

0
5.00

Modern Karlon

Pinar SUT
SAKoSa

1999
198M 99011998

0 66
0
0

000
000
000
1491

12 w

0

8 17

0
0

0

000
000
16 95
3 40
39 28
000
000
0 00

ow

0 00

ow

3 55
OW
OW
000

11 79

0

0

2 22
0

0
3.43

ow

0 00

26 67

0

0
0
1500

0
1457
9 48

120

000

0

0
0

0

0

8 17

000
5 69

0

0

000

2 50
0 96

0

0

1 33

0

0

000

Approvals Pending Commitment for Turkey
As of 06l30l03
(In US Dollars Millions)

2001
2003
2wO
2002
2003
2002
2w3
2002

TOTAL Pmdlng:

Akbank
Cayeli Expan 2
Erbakir
KCC
MESA Hospital
Mil11Reasurans
Slsecam EXD

10022
11690
9602
11309
20661
11061
11627

Ti8

11325

'

000

000
000
OW
0 00
10 00
000
3 00
10.00

25 00
000
0 00
0 00
0 00
0 00
000
000

25.W

0 00
20 w
5 00
50 00
11 w
0 00
0 00

c 00
86.00

0 00
000
5 00
0 00
000
0 00
0 00
0 co

5.00

25 00
20 00
10 00
50 00
11 00
1000
0 00
000

126.w

80 00

0 00
0 00
000
OW
000
7 50
5c 00
137.50

000

ow

I

x

c

\

