Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

88940 v1

KENYA
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FY2014-2018

Photo: KPLC

Executive summary

1

Kenya can be one of Africa’s success stories.
It holds great potential including from its
growing and youthful population; dynamic
private sector; a platform for change laid down
by the new Constitution and recent peaceful
elections; and its pivotal role within East Africa
and further afield. Yet poverty remains high with
4 out of 10 Kenyans living in poverty and the
richest 10 percent of the population receiving
40 percent of the nation’s income. Governance
concerns persist; and growth, while solid, has
been constrained by low investment and low
firm-level productivity and has yet to take off at
the rapid, sustained rates needed to transform
the lives of ordinary citizens.
Progress and prospects: Diagnostic review of
the country context and development agenda

2

This strategy is based on a systematic review
of evidence to identify the key challenges
and opportunities for Kenya to accelerate
progress toward the twin goals. The poverty rate

Partnership for Shared Growth and Prosperity

fell from 47 percent in 2005 to 39 percent based
on best estimates in 2012. Some social indicators
have improved notably, yet inequality is high
(Gini of 47.4); there are significant differences in
opportunities and outcomes between women
and men, for those living in the remote and most
underdeveloped regions, and ethnicity remains
an important factor in societal development.
Looking ahead, ending extreme poverty by
2030 would imply a cut in the poverty rate of 2
percentage points each year, likely requiring the
economic growth rate to double and inequality
to halve. To unlock rapid and uninterrupted
growth that is sustainable and inclusive, Kenya
must address the key binding constraints of
low investment and low firm-level productivity.
Faster growth needs significant policy reform
to redirect public spending to meet growing
infrastructure needs. It also needs an improved
business environment that encourages private
sector expansion and carefully manages the tax
burden on business.

iii

Vision: Government priorities and
medium-term strategy

3

Kenya wants to be a globally competitive and
prosperous nation with a high quality of life.
“Vision 2030”, a broad-based agenda straddling
the current and previous administration, rests
on three pillars: economic, social, and political.
The economic pillar envisages moving up the
value chain in key areas, including agriculture
and financial services, to consistently deliver 10
percent annual growth. The social pillar focuses
on investing in people, including in education,
health, and housing, and with a focus on
women, youth, and vulnerable communities.
The political pillar seeks to “move to the future as
one nation,” including improving the rule of law,
transparency, and accountability. Vision 2030 is
operationalized by the second Medium-Term
Plan (MTP2, 2013-17), and this national agenda is
entirely consistent with the Bank Group’s global
timeline targeting an end to extreme poverty.
This, together with stakeholder input gathered in
extensive consultations, provides a good anchor
for this Country Partnership Strategy (CPS).
Development challenges and opportunities

4

Against this backdrop, achieving rapid
and uninterrupted growth over a decade
or more is the foundational challenge. The
Government’s second Medium-Term Plan
calls for huge investments in infrastructure.
A key opportunity here is to leverage private
sector resources through innovative publicprivate partnerships (PPPs), which are currently
underdeveloped. To underpin a sound
macroeconomic framework, a renewed effort is
merited to help stabilize the wage bill. A more
forceful initiative is needed to improve the
business environment, including tackling some of
the deficiencies pinpointed in World Bank Group

iv

(WBG) analytical work. Much of this change
agenda will only be possible when relevant,
accurate, and timely statistics are produced to
inform policies and help evaluate programs.

5

Placing a premium on human development
is essential from several vantage points.
Growth must be inclusive so that prosperity can
be shared by all. From an equity perspective
it cannot be right that maternal mortality
is among Africa’s highest at 488 deaths per
100,000 live births; and many lack access to
food security, clean water, good healthcare, and
proper housing. Youth unemployment at 21
percent is double the adult average. Equipping
young people with a modern education and
job opportunities is essential to make the most
of their talents. Cities must not only generate
economic activity but also provide basic
services for those who dwell in them. And
the cohesiveness of Kenyan society calls for
renewed efforts to include the marginalized
and disadvantaged. To curb poverty, growth
must take place in sectors where the majority of
the poor live. Investment must be redirected to
projects closer to the poor, including improving
agricultural productivity in rural areas, expanding
and targeting unified social protection programs
that keep people from slipping into poverty,
attracting private sector investment and
participation into education, and improving
service delivery in health at the local level.

6

The changing institutional landscape is
undergoing a tectonic shift with powers
and 30 percent of government revenues
moving from the national government to
the 47 new county administrations. This
transition is truly historic and few countries
have attempted anything on this scale. The

F Y 2 0 1 4 - 2 0 1 8 • country partnership strategy for K enya

forthcoming challenge is to deliver a “devolution
dividend” through greater citizen engagement,
direction, and oversight of public authorities to
fundamentally deliver better services to ordinary
people; building new local governmental
structures that are responsive and responsible;
and fresh inter-governmental relationships,
including resource transfers that translate policy
priorities into meaningful on-the-ground services.

7

All of these opportunities would be
amplified by improved governance and
reduced corruption, or undermined by any
deterioration in the prevailing environment.
In moving forward the WBG will be firm in
its intolerance for corruption and desire for
impunity to end, while setting expectations
sensibly to make step-by-step progress. There
are opportunities to continue improving public
financial management, corporate governance
standards, openness, transparency, and
accountability in government; and to maintain
robust safeguards. Such an “institution-building”
approach will protect not only the integrity
of WBG resources but also Kenya’s internally
generated resources that contribute to 90
percent of all public spending.
Strategic options to make the most
of the WBG assets

8

To help Kenya address these challenges, this
CPS draws on a fruitful country relationship
established over several decades and sets out
how the combined resources of the Bank,
IFC, and MIGA can best help Kenya fulfill its
ambitions of becoming a modern economy
in which growing prosperity is shared across
all communities. The Bank will use a “selectivity
test” that deploys a four-pronged benchmark
to guide the deployment of scarce resources to

Partnership for Shared Growth and Prosperity

maximize the prospects of success: (a) confirming
a credible line of sight to make a sustainable
impact on poverty and prosperity; (b) critically
reviewing WBG capability and comparative
advantage, including assessing opportunities
for WBG collaboration; (c) cementing client
ownership; and (d) calibrating client capacity and
accompanying project design. The selectivity
test is used in a cascading fashion to establish
the three domains of engagement, the sectors
within each of the domains, and to make tradeoffs between particular operations and analytical
advisory activities (AAA).

9

The first domain of engagement is
competitiveness
and
sustainability.
Improving infrastructure and the business
environment, while being responsive to
environmental pressures, is the backbone
of long-term growth. WBG policy advice will
help the authorities create a well-functioning
and properly regulated energy market; IDA
financing will be used for some publicly merited
investments; and IFC and MIGA instruments
will help leverage more private resources. More
broadly, the Bank Group will redouble its support
to public-private partnerships, especially in
the water and transport sectors where there is
medium-term potential. On transport, the focus
of new IDA lending will be on significant rural
feeder roads within and between counties to
connect communities to emerging economic
opportunities. Competitiveness can also be
enhanced through improving the business
environment, unleashing the potential of
specific sectors and geographic locations,
and ramping up financing sector and capital
market development. The Bank will support the
Government’s oversight of the rapidly emerging
oil and gas sector. Both IFC and Bank resources
will be deployed to help create private sector

v

jobs and try to make cities livable and sustainable,
with a special focus on secondary cities where
poverty is proving most stubborn.

10

The second domain of engagement is
to protect the vulnerable and help them
develop their potential, which is critical to
sharing in prosperity. Social protection plays
a pivotal role—the Bank’s strong engagement
will be maintained. Health is also a pressing
priority; in this sector the combined resources
of IDA and IFC, alongside global funds and
other partners, will be scaled up. Another key
to help target support for the poor is to focus
on agriculture, a high priority since it has such
a direct link with helping families in rural areas
where a majority of Kenyans live. Potential IFC
investments in infrastructure, agro processing,
and financial institutions further support the
goal. The burgeoning youth population brings
opportunities and challenges for WBG support
in education, jobs, and skills. Protecting the
poor who are disproportionally impacted by
climate variability will also be an area of support.
And across the board the gender focus of WBG
operations and analytical work will be upgraded,
including support for female education,
entrepreneurship, and rural women’s groups.

11

The third domain of engagement focuses
on building consistency and equity. This
is a really long-term drive that has devolution
at its core. The Bank’s large-scale capacitybuilding and AAA program will inform a series
of IDA operations to help counties and national
agencies to make devolution work. Upon
request, the Bank would assemble and manage
a Trust Fund framework to maximize donor
coherence in this fluid arena. IDA investments
will support a more evidence-based approach
to policy making, public spending, and public
administration reform. The consistency of Kenya’s

vi

development will be buttressed by deepening
regional integration with its neighbors; and
WBG investments will be made in multi-country
projects, including in energy and transport.

12

Individually
and
collectively
the
achievement of sustainable development
results will only be possible if they are bound
together through a connecting platform of
garnering good governance, which in some
ways has been an Achilles heel in the past.
The WBG support has at its heart supply-side
capacity building to strengthen oversight
institutions, including support for better public
financial management and for more effective
institutions of accountability, combined with
demand-side accountability such as the use
of open community meetings for beneficiary
engagement. The Bank will continuously
review the impact of project-level governance
measures that have been put in place, scaling
up those that have been effective, including
drawing on input from the WBG’s Integrity Vice
Presidency (INT) on project safeguards and
institutional support to agencies such as the
Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC).
The WBG will deploy “corruption calibration” to
its lending program—adjusting areas of focus
and/or scaling back resources in the event of
issues, which threaten the security of IDA and
IFC resource use.
Implementing for results

13

The strategy incorporates a results-focus
in this CPS and in specific operations and
is flexible in responding to new conditions
and information such as updated poverty data
in due course. Targeted outcomes have been
articulated in a multi-sector fashion, reflecting
the interdependence of products across the
strategy. The Bank Group’s efforts to manage for

F Y 2 0 1 4 - 2 0 1 8 • country partnership strategy for K enya

results across the country program are built on
country systems and capabilities for measuring
and monitoring progress. Collaboration across
the Bank Group and with other partners will
be purpose driven in specific areas such as
business climate, financial sector, publicprivate partnerships, energy, and agriculture.
The selectivity test is already pushing the Bank
Group to expand in some fields—such as
supporting secondary cities, promoting rural
development and devolution—and tapering
Bank involvement in others such as highways,
natural resource management, and legal reform.
This process is dynamic, and the assessment will
be continuously updated.

14

The WBG could be providing over US$1
billion per year to Kenya over the life of
this CPS. Careful portfolio management will
continue to be an important ingredient of the
drive for results—with tailored approaches to
suit the particular circumstances of Bank, IFC,
and MIGA investments. IFC is targeting portfolio
expansion perhaps even beyond the US$785
million of commitments at mid-FY14 if market
conditions permit. MIGA’s current total exposure
to Kenya is US$255 million, and international
investors’ interest in infrastructure, power, and
agri-business sectors provides potential for this to
expand further. The Bank’s annual commitments
will be governed by the IDA17 settlement,
provisionally assumed at around US$600 million
each year. This will build on the IDA portfolio in
Kenya of US$4.3 billion at mid-FY14, covering 23
national projects (US$3.5 billion) and 7 regional
projects in which Kenya is a partner (US$0.8
billion). It is important to continue to “move to
scale” especially in IDA investments, but also in
IFC commitments, by focusing on larger projects
and the judicious use of additional finance.

Partnership for Shared Growth and Prosperity

Managing risks

15

Any instability in the macroeconomic
environment would probably be the
single most damaging factor to overall
poverty prospects. The mitigation strategy
revolves around the long-term drive to improve
competitiveness and exports, combined with a
prudent strategy on reserves and international
capital access to cope with potential volatility.
Disasters and insecurity, natural or manmade, can be expected to occur even though
their timing and severity typically cannot be
predicted; and the Bank Group and its partners
will seek ways to help cope with such risks in the
future. Other strategic risks include unexpected
changes in political leadership, policy direction
and ministerial leads in key sectors, funding
priorities of other donors, or a loss of appetite
of strategic partners for IFC- and MIGAsupported deals. Each of these would require
nimble re-engagement to prevent changes
unduly affecting the WBG-supported program.
Finally, operational risks include a worsening of
the governance and corruption environment,
including in new county administrations as
their activities expand. The mitigating measures
include (a) the thrust of this CPS to help garner
good governance, including as part of the
devolution process; (b) active cooperation
between INT, the Bank, and the authorities in
order that preventive measures are built into
project design, and allegations when received
are handled firmly and decisively; and (c) good
communication with stakeholders, including
the Board, so due proportionality can be applied
in any strategic response needed by the Bank.

vii

