Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 58075-RW

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND
THE MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA

Public Disclosure Authorized

February 9, 2011

Eastern Africa Country Cluster 2 (AFCE2)
Africa Region
The International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not
imply a presumed outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and
the updated document will be made publicly available in accordance with the Bank’s Policy on
Access to Information.

DATE OF CURRENT COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
AUGUST 7, 2008
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective November 2, 2010)
Currency Unit = Rwanda Francs (Rwf)
US$1.00 = 579 Rwf
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
July 1–June 30
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
AfDB
CAS
CAS PR
CPAF
CPI
DfID
DHS
DOL
DRC
EAC
EC
EDPRS
EFA FTI
FIRST
FY
GDP
GAFSP
GFCRP
ICA
ICT
IDA
IFC
IMF
JGA
KCC
MDG
MDRP
M&E
MIGA
MW
PBF
PEFA
PFM

Analytic and Advisory Activities
African Development Bank
Country Assistance Strategy
CAS Progress Report
Common Performance Assessment Framework
Consumer Price Index
UK Department for International Development
Demographic and Health Survey
Division of Labor
Democratic Republic of Congo
East African Community
European Commission
Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy
Education For All Fast Track Initiative
Financial Sector Reform Strengthening Initiative
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
Global Food Crisis Response Program
Investment Climate Assessment
Information and Communication Technology
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Joint Governance Assessment
Kigali Convention Center
Millennium Development Goal
Multi-country Demobilization and Reintegration Program
Monitoring and Evaluation
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Megawatt
Performance Based Financing
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
Public Financial Management
ii

PPP
PRSF
PRSG
PSI
REC
RWF
SME
SWAp
SWG
UN
VUP
WBG

Public-Private Partnerships
Poverty Reduction Support Financing
Poverty Reduction Strategy Grant
Policy Support Instrument
Regional Economic Communities
Rwanda Francs
Small and Medium Enterprise
Sector-Wide Approach
Sector Working Group
United Nations
Vision 2020 Umurenge Program
World Bank Group

Vice President
Country Director
Country Program Coordinator
Country Manager
Task Team Leader

IDA
Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili
Johannes Zutt
Marie-Hélène Bricknell
Omowunmi Ladipo
Johannes Widmann

iii

IFC
Thierry Tanoh
Jean Philippe Prosper

MIGA
Izumi Kobayashi
Ravi Vish

Arthur Mambou

Thomas A. Vis

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 1
II. Country Context ................................................................................................................................... 1
A.
Economic Context ..................................................................................................................... 1
B.
Policy, Operating and Political Context .................................................................................... 2
III. Progress toward CAS Outcomes ......................................................................................................... 4
A.
Progress on CAS Strategic Theme 1: Promoting Rwanda’s Economic Transformation for
Sustained Growth ...................................................................................................................... 4
B.
Progress on CAS Strategic Theme 2: Decrease Social Vulnerability ....................................... 6
IV. Adjustments to the CAS, Partnerships and Progress in Implementation ............................................ 7
A.
CAS Program Adjustments ....................................................................................................... 7
B.
Partnership Arrangements ......................................................................................................... 7
C.
Implementation Progress........................................................................................................... 9
V. Risks ................................................................................................................................................... 10
Annex 1: Updated Results Framework for the Rwanda CAS FY09-FY12 ................................................ 12
Annex 2: Updated and Revised CAS Outcome Indicators ......................................................................... 18
Annex 3: IDA Lending Program ................................................................................................................. 19
Annex 4: IDA Analytic Program ................................................................................................................ 20
Annex 5: WBG Collaboration..................................................................................................................... 21
Annex 6: Rwanda Division of Labor .......................................................................................................... 22
Annex 7: Use of Trust Funds in Rwanda .................................................................................................... 23
Annex 8: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management ................................................. 24
Annex 9: IDA Operations Portfolio ............................................................................................................ 25
Annex 10: IFC Program .............................................................................................................................. 26
Annex 11: Rwanda at a Glance ................................................................................................................... 27

Map of Rwanda No. IBRD 33471

iv

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
I. Introduction
1.
This Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report (CAS PR) assesses the
implementation of the World Bank’s FY09-12 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for
Rwanda.1 The CAS supports flagship programs on growth and social protection as formulated
in Rwanda’s Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EDPRS). The CAS has
two objectives: (i) to promote economic transformation and growth and (ii) to reduce social
vulnerability. Within these objectives, the CAS is supporting five CAS outcomes. This CAS PR
describes changes in the country context, progress toward CAS outcomes and any remaining
challenges. It sets out adjustments to the CAS program and partnership arrangements, and
reports on implementation progress. The last section updates the risk framework.
II. Country Context
A.
Economic Context
2.
Rwanda experienced a slightly delayed impact of the global economic crisis but is
already showing signs of recovery. According to the IMF’s Staff Report for its 2010 Article IV
mission and first Policy Support Instrument (PSI) review, growth of real gross domestic product
(GDP) fell to 4.1 percent in 2009 from 11.2 percent in 2008, but is expected to rebound to 6.5
percent in 2010. Growth in 2009 was mainly driven by agriculture, with a rate of 7.7 percent.
The expected recovery in 2010 will be driven by a rebound in growth in services and
construction in addition to continued growth in agriculture. The average growth rate of 2006-10
is estimated at 7.3 percent annually and remains below the EDPRS target of 8 percent.
3.
Inflation has returned to single digit numbers as global food and fuel prices eased
off. Inflation retreated in 2009 from peak levels at end-2008, with the Consumer Price Index
(CPI) standing at 22.3 percent. So far in 2010, the CPI has remained under 5 percent, declining
to 1.5 percent by end-September. The decrease in import prices and good performance in food
production were the major cause of this evolution.
4.
The trade deficit continued to widen during 2009, due to both a decreased demand
for Rwanda’s exports and a significant growth in imports. The trade deficit reached 16
percent of GDP in 2009, up from 13.1 percent in 2008. While imports continued to rise, external
demand for Rwanda’s main export products fell. Export values declined by 28.0 percent in
2009, reflecting also lower international prices. Import values grew by 16.4 percent in 2009,
mainly driven by an increase in imported consumer and energy goods. The current account
deficit deteriorated to 7.4 percent of GDP in 2009, following a downward trend since 2007.
Trade data for the first half of 2010 show slight improvements, mainly due to a rebound in prices
and strong volumes of tea exports. Going forward, the high trade deficit and low exports are key
challenges that could derail Rwanda’s ambition to become a lower middle-income economy.
5.
The most recent Debt Sustainability Analysis of May 2010 confirmed that Rwanda
remains at moderate risk of debt distress. Rwanda’s central government external debt
1

The CAS (Report No. 44983-RW) is dated August 7, 2008.

1

(including guarantees) amounted to 14.4 percent of GDP at end-2009, with more than four-fifths
owed to multilateral creditors. Debt indicators remain most vulnerable to an export shock,
further underlining the need to expand and strengthen the export base. While the external debt
dynamics appear sustainable, there are risks, especially in the short term, associated with
additional non concessional external borrowing. It would therefore be imperative to continue to
carefully assess the economic viability of large investment projects, and consider financing
options that incorporate participation from the private sector.
6.
Medium-term growth prospects are favorable, with growth benefitting from
increases in agriculture productivity and recovery in services. Increased investments in
improved inputs (fertilizers and seeds) together with irrigation, extension in services and the
dispatch of farm machinery will sustain the positive trend in the agriculture sector, while services
will benefit from the recovery in lending activities. Other factors that will have an impact are
marketability, price developments, improved value chains, and a stronger role for the private
sector, together with improvements in infrastructure (energy and roads). Growth is also forecast
to be supported by the Government’s strategic investments strategy, which is expected to lead to
an increase in capital spending. Rwanda’s medium-term framework expects real growth of 6 to
7 percent per year for 2010-13. The current account is expected to remain in deficit, due to
higher capital imports associated with the expanding public investments program. Imports are
expected to outpace moderate expansion in exports.
7.
Macroeconomic prospects are favorable, but some potential fiscal risks remain.
While the macroeconomic framework is considered adequate and the first review of the IMFsupported PSI program has been satisfactory, there nevertheless remain risks with respect to
potential future expenditures on the strategic investments and the need to increase revenue
generation. The overall fiscal deficit (excluding grants) increased in 2009/10 to 13.7 percent of
GDP, from 11.5 percent in 2008/09, which was driven mainly by spending on RwandAir and the
Kigali Convention Center (KCC), two of the government’s strategic investments. Net lending
increased in 2009/10 and was mostly absorbed by these investments. For 2010/11, net lending
will remain flat, with new net-lending planned to be mainly absorbed by RwandAir, due to the
delay for an agreement on further KCC lending. Future expenditures on the strategic
investments could lead to an increase in net lending and have a negative impact on the fiscal
deficit. To minimize the fiscal deficit, revenues would need to continue to increase at ambitious
levels—consistent with the EDPRS—by 2 percent of GDP between 2010/11 and 2012/13. This
will need to be backed by significant revenue administration reforms.
B.
Policy, Operating and Political Context
8.
The Government of Rwanda has identified six strategic investments to address
Rwanda’s lack of economic infrastructure, which constitutes a binding constraint on
increasing and diversifying exports. A March 2010 government paper identified six
complementary investment projects aimed at employment generation, poverty reduction and an
increase in traditional exports (coffee, tea, mining and tourism) as well as new exports
(horticulture, ICT, and business services). The paper is a direct response to the trade deficit
described above. The six investments are: (i) Energy Rollout – an increase in household grid
connections from 6 percent at end-2008 to 16 percent by 2013; (ii) Core ICT Infrastructure – the
building of infrastructure for high-speed broadband; (iii) KCC – a five-star hotel and convention
center; (iv) RwandAir – expansion of the fleet and flight connections of the state airline; (v)

2

Regional Railway – the building/rehabilitation of a railway linking Rwanda to Burundi and
Tanzania; and (vi) Bugesera International Airport – the construction of a new international
airport. As discussed below, the World Bank Group (WBG) programs are largely already
aligned with the strategic investments within the framework of the CAS.
9.
The Government of Rwanda has also adopted a new strategic approach to capacity
strengthening, with a focus on identifying the main capacity constraints in priority sectors
for export promotion and growth. In an initiative related to the strategic investments with a
focus on the public sector—but also aimed at increasing exports—capacity needs assessments
have been carried out in the agriculture, electricity and mining sectors. These assessments
formed the basis for a US$34 million proposal of technical assistance support over the mediumterm to address staffing and skills gaps and strengthen the centre of government. The initiative
will help to address the issues of poor retention, high turnover and skills gaps affecting the civil
service. The Bank will support this new approach through measures further outlined below.
10.
In July 2010, the Government finalized a division of labor (DOL) exercise, which
aimed to limit each development partner’s activities to three sectors. Rwanda continues to
be considered a model partner, which uses financial assistance effectively, and continues to
attract a large number of donors. There are currently 12 bilateral, 3 multilateral and about 16 UN
organizations active in Rwanda. The DOL is the Government’s attempt to reduce transaction
costs and improve aid effectiveness. To map partners to sectors, the government took into
account financing gaps under EDPRS programs as well as specific donor characteristics such as
a donor’s preferred aid modalities, track record, mandate, and global experience. The DOL,
presented in Annex 6, confirms the Bank’s priority engagement in three sectors—agriculture,
energy, and transport (including ICT)—as well as some cross-sector areas. The implications of
the DOL on the Bank’s program are discussed further below.
11.
Other challenges in the operating context include the common performance
framework that underpins IDA’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Financing (PRSF) as well as
a re-examination by Government of its participation in regional projects. With respect to
the former, a Common Performance Assessment Framework (CPAF) has been in place since
end-2008. While contributing to improved alignment of PRSF prior actions with EDPRS
objectives and targets as captured in the CPAF, this alignment effort has also generated some
tensions, as the CPAF and the Bank are not always monitoring the same policies (this is
discussed further below). Regarding the latter, the Government has expressed concerns about
the development effectiveness of IDA-supported regional projects as currently designed, noting
that their success depends on the political will and readiness of other governments, which often
results in slow progress in overall implementation.
12.
On the political front, recent negative perceptions of the scope and quality of
democratic space in Rwanda, widely reported in the international media, could have a
detrimental impact on the continued ability of Rwanda to attract high levels of
development assistance. While this development—further discussed in the risks section—does
not currently warrant adjustments to the CAS, any significant decline in the volume of external
financing made available to Rwanda over the medium term could jeopardize the achievement of
CAS outcomes.

3

III. Progress toward CAS Outcomes
13.
Rwanda’s performance toward CAS outcomes has been largely positive, but
important challenges remain. Within the two CAS objectives of (i) promoting economic
transformation and growth and (ii) reducing social vulnerability, the CAS heavily focused on
activities under the first theme. The recent DOL confirmed the priority engagement of the Bank
within this theme, and the focus of the rest of the CAS period will be primarily on promoting
economic transformation and increasing growth, especially of exports. While the Bank under the
DOL will no longer provide direct financing in some sectors—such as health and education—it
will nevertheless continue to be a silent partner in social protection and support cross-cutting
areas including skills, employment and demobilization. This section provides only a broad
account of progress on the CAS outcomes, with a focus on the remaining challenges. A detailed
assessment of progress towards CAS milestones and outcomes can be found in Annex 1.
A.

Progress on CAS Strategic Theme 1: Promoting Rwanda’s Economic
Transformation for Sustained Growth
14.
The CAS outcomes under Theme 1 are improvements in (i) agricultural production,
particularly for food crops; (ii) the access to and quality of key infrastructure services; (iii) the
environment for sound private sector development; and (iv) the capacity to manage public
resources at central and local levels.
15.
Progress toward the increase in agriculture production was considerable, but there
is a strong need to improve the value of agriculture exports. There has been considerable
progress in intensification and increased production in marshland and hillside areas, targeted by
both active Bank projects. Production of rice and other food crops are expected to increase
drastically over the rest of the CAS period. The importance of agriculture for Rwanda’s
development was underlined during the 2009 global economic downturn. While other sectors of
the economy were heavily affected and overall economic growth declined sharply, agriculture
proved resilient and with a growth rate of 7.7 percent was the main contributor—by about 80
percent—to growth. Nonetheless, export values declined at the same time, due inter alia to the
weak demand for Rwandan tea and coffee. Going forward, the Bank will focus on further
promoting horticulture, tea and other agriculture exports as part of a stronger focus on private
sector development.
16.
Progress on improving transport infrastructure has generally been good, but high
transport costs remain a key challenge. Road rehabilitation resulted in a significant
improvement in national road conditions, but accessibility in rural areas, where the majority of
the population lives, remains poor, and most rural roads (about 70 percent) are in poor condition.
Transport costs from the main ports in Mombasa and Dar es Salaam to Kigali are estimated to be
at least 70 percent higher than in the rest of the East African Community (EAC) and account for
about 40 percent of the cost of imported goods and 50 percent of exported goods. A key
challenge over the rest of the CAS period and the next CAS will be to improve further the
condition of rural roads within Rwanda and transport links with the rest of the EAC.
17.
There has been good progress in the energy sector, but energy generation and access
remain very low. Generation capacity has increased from about 41 MW in 2004 to 84 MW in
2010, but remains too low to support the country’s economic transformation, especially with
respect to increased investments by the private sector. Rwanda’s electricity access rate of about
4

8 percent is still the second lowest in EAC after Burundi and among the lowest in the world.
Government and Development Partners in March 2009 agreed on the National Electricity Access
Roll-out Program, which features among the country’s strategic investments and is supported by
the Bank. However, an increase in energy access will have to be accompanied by a parallel
increase in generation. Both challenges will remain key for the remainder of this CAS and the
next. As further outlined below, the WBG works closely with Government to support increased
private as well as public-private investments in the energy sector.
18.
Rwanda has made good progress on the roll-out of ICT network coverage and
development of ICT applications, but overall access remains low. IDA supports the national
data backbone—one of the strategic investments—by connecting Rwanda to neighboring
countries and fiber-optic cables off the coast of East Africa. In addition, there has been support
to providing connectivity to key institutions and the development of several online services. The
remaining challenge will be to increase network coverage further. In the medium term, a
challenge will be to increase accessibility to a population with low levels of knowledge in ICT.
19.
There has been excellent progress in improving the regulatory business
environment, but challenges remain to increase investments and trade. Rwanda was named
the top reformer in Doing Business 2010 and the second best reformer in 2011, having jumped
from 143 to 67 and subsequently to 58 out of 183 countries. It is now easier, faster and less
expensive to do business in Rwanda. Nonetheless, as noted above, the growing trade deficit
presents some concern. In addition, foreign direct investments, at about 0.5 percent of GDP, are
well below the Sub-Saharan average of 2.5 percent. The Investment Climate Assessment and
other surveys point to a number of constraints beyond those measured by the Doing Business
indicators, including low labor productivity, lack of skills, and limited access to finance and
electricity. As outlined further below, the WBG will collaborate on various fronts in order to
improve trade and the environment for private investors further. For example, the WBG’s focus
in this area over the remainder of the CAS period will be to support the Government with the
establishment of an effective public -private dialogue mechanism that will help set and
implement a broader Investment Climate reform agenda focused on the private sector. In
addition, the WBG will help guide and focus the Government’s efforts to accelerate investments
and exports in the horticulture and tea sectors by supporting an initiative that will combine
efforts to address the binding constraints to more investment in these sectors with a parallel
highly-targeted investment promotion effort.
20.
Key education indicators are largely on track, but there remains an acute shortage
of skills to support the country’s economic transformation. School completion rates and
other indicators on education quality have improved but there remain questions about the
sustainability of further progress in the education sector. Education is no longer a Bank sector
under the DOL. Nonetheless, recognizing the issue of skills constraints mentioned above, the
Government has requested the Bank to support addressing skills shortages as a cross-sector
concentration by moving forward the planned Skills Development Project from FY12 to FY11
and increasing its IDA amount from US$10 million to US$30 million.
21.
While there has been progress in strengthening the capacity to manage public
resources, important challenges remain with respect to the broader reform agenda. There

5

has generally been good progress in the areas of public finance management and strengthening of
auditing and procurement functions of central and local government agencies. Findings from the
2010 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment exercise show some
significant improvements inter alia in the areas of public expenditure management, budget
reporting and procurement controls. Improvements in procurement systems also resulted in the
Bank approving Rwanda as the first pilot country for the use of procurement systems.
Challenges for the rest of the CAS period remain regarding the broader aspects of civil service
reform, including Bank support to the new initiative on capacity strengthening.
B.
Progress on CAS Strategic Theme 2: Decrease Social Vulnerability
22.
The CAS outcome under Theme 2 is to mitigate significant health and social risks to
vulnerable groups and to social cohesion in Rwanda.
23.
There has been good progress on several health outcomes, but challenges remain
with respect to maternal mortality, fertility, under-nutrition and population growth.
Rwanda remains on track to achieve MDG4 on under-five mortality and has made important
progress in terms of improving the efficiency and equity of health services, notably through
performance-based financing. Nonetheless, progress on MDG5 on maternal mortality has been
uneven. While the overall trend remains downward from 750 per 100,000 live births in 20002004, previous estimates of 383 in 2008 had to be adjusted upwards to 540. Further remaining
challenges include high fertility (with a total rate of 5.5) and under-nutrition (with prevalence of
stunting among under-five children at 45 percent in 2005/06). Continued high population growth
of 2.9 percent remains a key challenge, impacting not only on social outcomes but also economic
development. In line with the DOL, the Bank will phase out its lending activities in the health
sector and contributions to health outcomes (including the ones in the CAS) will increasingly
come from other development partners. That said, the Bank will continue to provide analytic
and policy support on a demand basis, especially on population growth and other demographic
issues.
24.
There has been good progress in implementation of a social safety net, but
challenges remain with respect to youth employment. Government continues to expand
services to the most vulnerable segments of the population under the Vision 2020 Umurenge
Program (VUP). Under the DOL, the Bank is a silent partner in social protection and continues
to provide any required analytic support and potential financing in areas that are cross-sectoral.
For example, the Bank currently provides technical assistance to generate lessons from the VUP
and enhance sustainability through capacity strengthening. One important area in direct
relationship to the population growth issue mentioned above is youth. Youth between the ages
of 14 and 35 years currently constitute 40 percent of the population and 42 percent of these youth
are either unemployed or work on seasonal small-scale agriculture. The social and economic
costs of the failure to include the youth in Rwanda’s development can be vast and can
profoundly affect the well-being of society and the ability of Rwanda’s economy to grow at a
rate that reduces poverty. Going forward, the Bank will provide analytic support in the area of
youth employment, with a potential financing operation envisaged for the new CAS.
The Bank-supported demobilization, reinsertion and reintegration program for
25.
former combatants and government soldiers as well as their families progresses well, but
challenges remain with respect to economic reintegration and pre-discharge orientation.

6

About 29,000 ex-combatants of the Rwandan Defense Forces and armed group members plus
their dependents received reinsertion and/or reintegration support. Going forward, the focus will
be to provide for economic reintegration as well as to increase the provision of trauma
counseling during pre-discharge orientation and strengthen gender-related issues.
IV. Adjustments to the CAS, Partnerships and Progress in Implementation
26.
The overall objectives as set out in the CAS remain valid and relevant. While this
CAS PR proposes no major changes to the CAS program, it proposes increased efforts in some
areas in order to respond adequately to the changes in context and remaining challenges
discussed above. The following section presents: (i) proposed CAS program adjustments,
including enhanced collaboration within the WBG and support to the new capacity strengthening
approach; (ii) proposed changes in partnership arrangements, including the DOL, use of trust
funds, regional projects and the CPAF; and (iii) progress on the implementation of the CAS
program, including updates to the results framework.
A.
CAS Program Adjustments
27.
In order better to align support to Rwanda’s strategic investments plan, efforts are
underway to deepen WBG collaboration. With the exception of two out of six strategic
investments—the regional railway and the airport—the realization of the investments plan is well
underway. Two investments—energy rollout and ICT—are supported by ongoing IDA projects.
None of the other investments currently receive any direct IDA financing, although there is
indirect support such as the feasibility studies for the railway done by AfDB. Nevertheless, the
WBG strives to make sure its activities are aligned with the key objectives of the strategic
investments plan. In particular, the WBG is focusing on support that can leverage the resulting
enhanced investments in physical infrastructure. During a June 2010 private sector development
retreat, IDA, IFC and MIGA agreed on proposed focus sub-sectors on the basis of potential
impact on export growth, jobs creation, and contribution to GDP growth. As a follow-up, in
November 2010, the WBG supported an agribusiness investors’ forum to help identify potential
investors for Rwanda’s horticulture and tea sub-sectors. Annex 5 shows the alignment of current
IDA, IFC and MIGA activities, the proposed focus sub-sectors and cross-cutting issues.
28.
The Bank will support Government’s new strategic approach to capacity
strengthening. The Bank has been engaged in the preparation of the approach and is currently
exploring options to support its implementation across all sectors through trust funds and the
potential use of IDA16 resources in the next CAS. It has also commenced new diagnostic work
to help the Government identify structural civil service-wide constraints that continue to impede
the development of sustainable institutional arrangements in Rwanda. Instead of pursuing the
idea of a capacity building filter attached to individual project preparation, as originally
envisaged by the CAS, the Bank will support the new initiative with its potential to leverage a
more strategic approach to capacity strengthening across the board. The Bank will also explore
opportunities to support the building of capacity of civil society and private sector actors. These
efforts come in addition to other efforts to strengthen capacity, for example the 2010 approval of
Rwanda as the first pilot country for the use of country procurement systems.
B.
Partnership Arrangements
29.
The CAS priorities and the planned program for the rest of the CAS period are
fully aligned with the DOL. The CAS focus on agricultural production and basic infrastructure

7

services (in energy, transport and ICT) is fully aligned with the Bank’s sectors of engagement
under the DOL. The Bank will remain focused on a limited number of sectors in the spirit of the
DOL and based on the Government’s request. Ongoing lending activities in the health sector,
which is not a Bank sector under the DOL, will not be succeeded by new investment projects in
the sector, though Bank support may continue through technical assistance associated with the
PRSF series in cases where the Bank and the Government agree that such support should exist.
IDA projects in skills development, youth employment, private sector and any other crosscutting areas are exempt from the DOL. The Bank also remains a silent partner in social
protection. Furthermore, providers of general budget support are in principle free to take part in
any sector dialogue and the Bank on a demand basis may continue to provide technical and
policy support in any sector. Given Rwanda’s Vision 2020 objectives of private sector led
development, there are no constraints on the sectors in which MIGA or IFC can engage.
30.
In order to improve further the alignment of the Bank’s program with the DOL and
the CAS priorities, this CAS PR proposes a more explicit strategy for the deployment of
trust funds in Rwanda. Since FY02, about 42 Bank-administered trust funds (among 21 trust
fund programs) have been active in Rwanda. Together these trust funds disbursed about US$295
million in FY07-09 and even exceeded IDA disbursements in FY09. About 91 percent of
disbursements during this time came from two large vertical funds, namely the Global Fund for
Aids, Tuberculosis, and Malaria—in which the Bank serves solely as the trustee—and the
Education for All Fast-Track Initiative. There is a strong need for the Bank to consolidate its
oversight of trust funds and ensure that they are closely aligned with the overall country program
and consistent with DOL arrangements. One future prerequisite for the use of trust funds in
Rwanda will be their inclusion in the country program’s annual budget plan. Annex 7 provides
examples of the preferred use of trust funds as well as a menu of options for task teams on the fit
of various trust fund programs with the CAS.
31.
A new approach might be needed in connection with support under regional
projects that include Rwanda. As mentioned above, the Government has recently questioned
the development effectiveness of regional projects due to their complexity as well as the fact that
they invariably require timely alignment of multi-country objectives in order to be implemented
expeditiously. Rwanda thus favors approaches to regional projects that cascade down Regional
Economic Communities (REC), and thus have REC-wide commitment, as opposed to multicountry approaches that may lack the commitment of one or more of the countries in the regional
project. An approach to be explored during the rest of the CAS period is to pursue regional
projects only if they are based on clear demand within the EAC.
32.
It remains challenging to balance the CPAF process with the Bank’s policy
requirements on development policy lending. Formulation of CPAF indicators and policy
actions takes place in the Sector Working Groups (SWGs). While this process has resulted
overall in greater participation of development partners in policy discussions and greatly
facilitated the reform progress, there is also a significant variation in the quality of CPAF
indicators and policy actions that come out of the SWGs. The Bank currently co-chairs, through
Rwanda-based sector staff, the agriculture, energy, public financial management and capacity
building and employment promotion SWGs. Other SWGs are co-chaired by other donors and
have only limited Bank engagement due to the lack of Rwanda-based IDA staff in those sectors.

8

In these latter SWGs, the Bank’s emphasis on policy actions (which are the basis for policybased lending) is not shared by other donors, with the result that CPAF indicators in those
sectors tend to be process- and not policy-based. Going forward, the Bank will generally only
include, as sectors of focus for the PRSF series, Bank DOL sectors or sectors in which the Bank
co-chairs the relevant SWG. The Bank will nevertheless continue to support the overall
implementation of the EDPRS and its monitoring through a high quality CPAF.
C.
Implementation Progress
33.
While there have been some slippages in the planned IDA lending program, overall
delivery is on track. There have been three minor slippages, including: (i) the Electricity
Access Scale-up Project slipped from FY09 to FY10, due to a prolonged discussion on the
potential triggering of OP4.10 (Indigenous Peoples); (ii) the Second Emergency Demobilization
and Reintegration Program slipped, due to the need to reconfirm the project’s financing in the
wake of Rwanda’s shift to a fifty percent IDA credit/grant share between FY09 and FY10; and
(iii) the Additional Financing to the Transport Sector Development Project moved to FY11 from
FY10 to allow for more preparation time. The Skills Development Project, on the other hand,
was moved forward from FY12 to FY11 based on the Government’s increased priority for
support in this area. The only dropped project was the IDA Lake Kivu Methane Guarantee; a
MIGA guarantee is planned instead. The only project not anticipated in the CAS was the FY11
East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project. Every planned regional project
(except the FY09 Communications Infrastructure Project) slipped by at least one fiscal year.
Annex 3 presents planned and actual delivery of the CAS program and the remaining pipeline.
34.
The current IDA portfolio has nine projects with net commitments of US$237
million. Key sectors include: energy (33 percent); agriculture (29 percent); and private sector
development (20 percent). There is one problem project (4 percent), net commitments at risk of
US$11 million and one over-age project (more than eight years). The undisbursed balance as of
January 2011 was US$144 million. The current IDA operations portfolio is presented in more
detail in Annex 9. In addition, a total of three regional projects are active within Rwanda. Most
trust funds are programmatic and child trust funds. Rwanda’s portfolio performance is good,
with key project performance indicators above AFR and Bank-wide averages.
35.
IFC’s current total exposure in Rwanda is US$28 million in five projects. IFC has
invested US$10.5 million in Bakhresa Rwanda to transform wheat grain into wheat flour; US$4
million in the Lake Kivu Methane Gas project; US$2.3 million in Hotel Mille Collines; US$7.3
million in Tourism Promotion Services (operators of the Kigali and Lake Kivu Serena hotels);
and US$4.4 million in Intraspeed Rwanda, a regional freight and forwarding company. Thus,
IFC’s top investments are in agribusiness (37 percent), tourism (34 percent) and transport/
logistics (15 percent). In the financial sector, IFC has signed a local currency swap facility with
the Banque Nationale du Rwanda to provide up to US$50 million local currency equivalent for
long-term financing (up to 7 years) in Rwandan Francs. A first agreement under this swap
facility was signed in November 2010. In FY10, IFC committed a Tier II loan of US$2.1 million
to Ecobank Rwanda (EBR) as part of the multi country IFC Capitalization Fund loan to the ETI
Group and also approved a US$5.0 million trade finance line to the same Bank. In FY08, IFC
approved a US$2.0 million trade finance line for Banque Commerciale du Rwanda (BCR).

9

36.
In addition to its investment projects, IFC provides various advisory services. The
Investment Climate Reform Project seeks to improve the regulatory environment, build
institutions, and attract private sector participation in key sectors; IFC’s Credit Reporting
program has been working closely with the central bank to develop the legal framework for
sharing information and selecting a private credit bureau operator; and its Entrepreneurship
Development Program promotes SME competitiveness through building capacity and linkages
with larger firms as well as entrepreneurship among youth and women.
37.
MIGA’s activities consist of guarantees for two private investments in the financial
sector, with a major guarantee planned for the energy sector. The current gross exposure is
US$17.3 million, including: (i) a US$9.5 million guarantee to ADC IT & Payment Solutions of
Mauritius covering its equity investment in the Société Monétique et de Télé-Compensation au
Rwanda (SIMTEL); (ii) a U$1.8 million guarantee to ShoreCap International of the Cayman
Islands covering its equity investment in Companie Générale de Banque in Rwanda
(Cogébanque). The pipeline includes a US$99 million guarantee for ContourGlobal of the
United States for its US$139 million equity investment in KivuWatt Ltd. The latter is for the
construction and operation of a 100 MW power-generation facility using methane gas from Lake
Kivu. The project is currently planned to be in two phases, with the initial phase covering 25
MW of power generation. Potential further investment guarantees in horticulture are
forthcoming.
38.
This CAS PR provides some updates to the CAS indicators to improve quality and
realism of the results matrix. The results matrix with 23 indicators proved relevant to measure
the outcomes that the Bank is trying to achieve. CAS outcomes are well aligned to EDPRS
objectives, with a majority of indicators directly derived from the CPAF. As already anticipated
during CAS preparations, some indicators required updating, due to either: (i) the use of a CPAF
indicator, which had since been revised; (ii) a change in program delivery; or (iii) project
restructuring. Annex 2 provides an overview of the updated CAS outcome indicators.
V. Risks
39.
Weak implementation capacity in the central administration continues to be a key
risk. The Government continues to seek to address this issue, which arises primarily from
constraints in two areas. First, there are significant skills gaps country-wide. The growth
diagnostics which informed the EDPRS identify skills shortages, together with weak
infrastructure, as one of the two most important obstacles to economic growth. Also, in a 2006
manufacturing survey, 40 percent of firms in Rwanda reported the lack of skilled labor to be a
major constraint for doing business. By comparison, only 24 percent of firms in Tanzania and 30
percent of firms in Uganda identified skills as a major or severe constraint. Second, efforts by
the Government to determine optimum civil service staffing levels have had impact. Over the
past ten years, Rwanda completed extensive civil service reforms characterized by downsizing,
restructuring, and pay reform in addition to moving staff to sub-national levels. Over 2004-07,
the number of all staff in the central administration was reduced from 2,000 to 500. A 2008-09
functional review indicated possibly inadequate staffing levels for service delivery. For
example, the Ministry of Agriculture, with a 2009/10 budget of U$53 million, has only 31 posts,
of which a third were vacant in late 2010. As described above, the Bank will support the
Government’s evolving strategic approach to capacity strengthening and civil service reform.

10

40.
Rwanda remains vulnerable to exogenous shocks, including global economic
slowdowns. As described above, the global crisis decreased Rwanda’s GDP growth by about 7
percentage points between 2008 and 2009. Agriculture was the only sector that performed well
during this period, and it remains a key sector in responding to external shocks and adding to
GDP growth. To help address the global slowdown, the Bank in FY10 allocated US$29.8
million in additional resources to its Poverty Reduction Support Grant (PRSG) from the IDA
pilot Crisis Response Window to protect spending on EPRS priorities in the wake of a reduction
in export earnings. In FY08, in the wake of the food and fuel price crisis, the Bank used US$10
million in supplement financing to the PRSG from the Food Price Crisis Response Trust Fund to
support a Government program aimed at sustaining food crop production and intensification.
The Bank will continue to strive to utilize resources quickly to respond to external shocks.
41.
Changes in international perceptions about political governance and human rights
in Rwanda may have a negative impact on the flow of development assistance. Commentary
in the international media around the August 2010 elections alleged suppression of various
political opposition groups and individuals. An August 2010 Amnesty International report
alleged that Rwanda’s genocide laws are deliberately vague to allow criminalization of dissent.2
In addition, a UN report on events in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) from 1993-2003
alleges acts of brutality by the Rwandan Patriotic Army in the DRC during that decade.3 For
several bilateral donors, issues of democratic governance, political and media freedom and equal
access to justice are key factors in determining funding levels, including for general budget
support, which amounted to about 41 percent of total Government spending in 2009/2010. The
Government views these reports as baseless and flawed, pointing, for example, to the numbers of
its forces deployed as UN peace-keeping forces across Africa as an indicator of a disciplined
force. In addition, Rwanda continues to work on the redrafting of its genocide ideology laws.
The Government also remains committed to finalizing the update of the Joint Governance
Assessment (JGA) in the near future. To date, no donors have indicated planned reductions in
overall assistance, and so the achievement of development outcomes (including the ones
supported by the CAS) is not currently at risk. The Bank’s support for strengthened governance
will continue within the parameters of its 2007 Governance and Anticorruption Strategy,
including with regard to supporting the finalization of the JGA, and strengthening capacity of
civil society and private sector actors.

2

See Safer to Stay Silent: The Chilling Effect of Rwanda’s Laws on ‘Genocide Ideology’ and ‘Sectarianism’,
Amnesty International, August 2010.
3
See Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1993-2003: Report of the Mapping Exercise documenting the most serious
violations of human rights and international humanitarian law committed within the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo between March 1993 and June 2003. United Nations Human Rights Commission, October
2010.

11

Annex 1: Updated Results Framework for the Rwanda CAS FY09-FY12
CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
CAS Outcome 1.1 Agricultural
production—particularly for food crops—
sustainably raised

2010 Status

 Production of rice in targeted marshlands
increased by at least 100% by 2012
relative to the baseline (8,757 tons).
[Updated Baseline.]

 On track. [9,052 tons
by October 2010 with
only few marshlands
under production.]

 At least 50% of farmers in targeted areas
have adopted sustainable marshland or
hillside intensification technologies by
2012 (2008 baseline 25%).

 On track. [No progress
on indicator value but
related activities are on
track.]

 Increase in use of Mineral Fertilizer from
14,000 MT in 2006 to 47,600 MT in
2011/2012. [Revised CPAF Indicator]

 On track. [27,906 MT
of fertilizer used in
2009/10.]

CAS Outcome 1.2 Improved access to and
quality of key infrastructure services
Transport:
 50% of paved roads in good condition

 Achieved [72.9% of

CAS Milestones and Status

WBG Program

 At least 1,400 additional ha of irrigated
marshlands have been rehabilitated or developed
by 2010 (EDPRS/PSTA indicator). On track.
[1,040 additional ha were developed by October
2010 - 4,150 ha total from the 2008 baseline of
3,110 ha.]
 At least 4,200 additional hectares of hillsides
have been sustainably developed by 2010
(EDPRS/PSTA indicator). Off track. [2,828
additional ha were developed by October 2010 17,313 ha from the 2008 baseline of 14,485 ha.]
 Milestones to increase farmer access to finance.
Achieved [The PRSG series supported the
operationalization of a microfinance credit
fund.]
 Extension Strategy fully operationalized in 30
districts by 2009. Not Applicable. [According
to PRSGV, Belgium took the lead to support
extension services.]
 A charter for fertilizer importers/wholesalers,
dealers, retailers is developed in Rwanda by
2009. Achieved. [PRSGVI supported the
development of an action plan for a private
sector-led fertilizer distribution system.]
 Common SLM Programmatic Framework
Roadmap and Country SLM Investment
Framework (CSIF) developed by 2010.
[TerrAfrica indicator – status unclear.]

IDA Ongoing:
 RSSP II (FY08)
 Land Husbandry, Water
Harvesting & Hillside
Irrigation (FY10)
 Integrated Management of
Eco-Systems – GEF (FY05)
 PRSF series

Transport:
 83 km of the Kigali-Ruhengeri section of
Kigali-Gisenyi road rehabilitated. On track.
[Rehabilitation work is underway.]

12

IDA Pipeline:
 Regional: Lake Victoria
Env. Management (FY11)
 Agriculture Additional
Financing (FY12)
Others (IFC & Trust
Funds):
 GAFSP additional financing
to LWH (FY10)
 USAID/CIDA additional
financing to LWH (FY11)
 IFC investment in Bakhresa
AAA:
 Multi-year Agricultural
Policy TA (FY08 – FY12)
 Sustainable Land
Management (TerrAfrica;
FY10)
 Regional Agriculture
Research TA (FY09)
Other Donors:
IFAD, EC, Belgium, AfDB,
UK, US, Netherlands, Japan
IDA Ongoing:
 Transport Sector
Development Project
(FY08) incl. Africa

CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
(average IRI less than 4m/km) by 2012 up
from 23% in 2007.
 Population having access to paved roads
o Kigali: from 59% in 2005 to 69% in
2009 and onwards;
o Huye: from 12% in 2005 to 22% in
2009 and onwards.

Energy:
 Reduction of unplanned outages
(outages in minutes per month) from
2,530 to 1,898 from 2009 onwards.


120,000 additional households
connected to electricity by 2012 (2006
Baseline 91,332) (CPAF).

2010 Status

CAS Milestones and Status

WBG Program

paved roads were in
good condition as of
June 2010.]
 Achieved. [Kigali
70%; Butare 47% as of
December 2009.]

 550 km of paved trunk roads maintained by
2011. N/A [Indicator not available.]
 Complete and adopt the Transport Master Plan
(TMP) by 2010. (CPAF policy action.) Not
achieved. [Completion and adoption of the
TMP is a FY12 CPAF policy action.]
 Complete District/Rural Road Condition
Inventory by 2009 (CPAF policy action).
Partially achieved. [Road condition inventory
for all classified district roads has been
completed in 2009/2010. However, no data has
been collected for rural roads.]
 Implementation of priority district/rural road
maintenance program launched by end 2009.
Achieved. [Program was launched and
implementation is ongoing.]

Catalytic Growth Fund
 PRSF series
 Regional: East Africa Trade
and Transport Facilitation
Project (FY06)

 Achieved. [As of endDecember 2009 there
has been no load
shedding in the
Electrogaz Network.]
 On track. [Number
of electricity
subscriptions was
159,516 in October
2010 with goal to
reach 270,000 in
2011/12.]

Energy:
 Jabana Thermal power plant (20 MW) in service
by 2009. Achieved. [Jabana power plant
became operational in May 2009]
 Birembo substation completed and in service by
2009. Achieved [Birembo substation was
completed in 2009 and is in service.]
 SWAP in the energy sector in place and first
investment prospects financed by 2009.
Achieved. [SWAP MOU signed in July 2008
and investment prospects signed.]
 Improved tariff structure in place (i.e. eliminates
cross-subsidies from water, reflects cost
structure of electricity, and differentiates
between different customer types) by end 2009.
Not Achieved. [Tariff study on improved tariff
structure is still ongoing.]
 Billing to supply ratio raised from 78% to 84%
from 2009 onwards. N/A [Indicator not
available.]

13

IDA Pipeline:
 Transport Sector Dev
Additional Financing
(FY11)
 Transport Project (FY12)
 PRSG/F series
 Regional: East African
Transport Links (FY12)
Others (IFC):
 IFC investment in
Intraspeed Rwanda
Other Donors:
AfDB, China, EC
IDA Ongoing:
 Electricity Access (FY10)
 PRSF series
IDA Pipeline:
 Energy Additional
Financing (FY12)
 Regional: East Africa Power
Market (FY12)
 Regional: Rusumo Falls
Hydro (FY12)
 PRSF series
Others (IFC, MIGA &
Trust Funds):
 Urgent Electricity
Rehabilitation GEF (FY09)
 IFC Lake Kivu Investment
Project (FY TBD)
 MIGA Guarantee to

CAS Outcomes
and Indicators

2010 Status

CAS Milestones and Status

WBG Program
ContourGlobal/KivuWatt
Ltd. (planned FY11)

ICT:
 ICT composite network coverage
increased from 75% in 2006 to 100% in
2012.

CAS Outcome 1.3. Improved environment
for private sector development
Financial Sector
 International Financial and Reporting
Standards implemented by all financial
institutions by 2012.
 Time to process a check reduced from 3
days (2008) to 1 day in 2012.

Business Environment
 Number of days required to obtain a
construction license reduced from 275
days (2007) to 180 by 2012 (IFC).
 Time required to export reduced from 60
days (2007) to 40 days in 2012 (IFC).

 On track. [82%
national coverage 100% in urban areas
and 79% in rural
areas.]

 On track. [ICPAR
will be responsible for
disseminating the
IFRS. See milestone.]
 On track. [Rwanda
Integrated Payment
Processing System
(RIPPS) is scheduled
to go live in December
2010. RIPSS will
contribute to
accelerating check
processing. ]
 On track. [210 days
in 2009.]
 Achieved. [38 Days
in 2009.]

ICT:
 Technical, financial and corporate structure of
Backbone system in place by 2010. Achieved.
 At least 10 public internet access points
developed by eRwanda by 2010. Achieved. [A
total of 34 access points developed by 2010: 22
for public usage; 12 for use by local
governments.]
 Price of wholesale international E1 capacity
link decreased by 20% by 2010. Achieved.
[28% reduction – from US$10,000 in 2008 to
US$7,200 in 2010]

Financial Sector
 ICPAR assisted in implementing new
accounting law and standards by 2010.
Partially achieved. [ICPAR was created in
early 2009, and started to organize training on
auditing and standards. Its capacity is still very
low.]
 Automated clearing house (ACH) and Real
Time Gross Settlement implemented to
modernize the payment system by 2010.
Achieved. [The ACH and RTGS will be under
the RIPPS which is expected to go live in
December 2010.]
 Leasing Law amendment adopted by cabinet by
2009 (IFC). N/A [Awaiting IFC input.]
 8 Financial Institutions launching leasing
products by 2009 (IFC). N/A [Awaiting IFC
input.]
Business Environment
 Licensing system simplified by reducing the
number of overall licenses from more than 300
in 2008 to 250 by 2010 (IFC). Achieved. [The

14

Other Donors:
EC, AfDB Netherlands,
Belgium, GTZ
IDA Ongoing:
 eRwanda (FY06)
 RCIP II (FY09)
Other Donors:
SIDA, EC, DfID, USAID,
UNDP, Belgium, South Korea

IDA Ongoing:
 Competitiveness and
Enterprise Dev. &
Additional Financing
(FY08)
 PRSF series
IDA Pipeline:
 PRSF series
Others (IFC& MIGA):
 IFC Leasing Development
Program (FY 07)
 IFC investment in Hotel
Milles Collines
 IFC investment in Tourism
Promotion Services
 IFC investment in Ecobank
 FIRST Initiative: second
Phase (FY09)
 MIGA Guarantees for 3
private investments in
financial sector (SIMTEL,
Cogébanque)

CAS Outcomes
and Indicators

2010 Status

CAS Milestones and Status
number of licenses was 185 as of October
2010.]
 14 Commercial Laws updated in line with
international best practice by 2010. Partially
achieved. [11 out of 14 laws have been updated
as of October 2010. The Competition and
Consumer Protection Law; Draft bill on
provisions applicable on privately financed
infrastructure and the Contract Law are still in
the process of being updated.]

WBG Program
 MIGA Guarantees for
horticulture investments
(planned FY11-12)
AAA:
 Financial Sector
Assessment Program
(FSAP) update (FY11)
 Multi-year Just-in-time
Policy Notes (FY09-12)
 Employment and Growth
Policy Note (FY11)
 Study on EAC (FY11)
 Investment Climate
Assessment (FY09)
Advisory Services IFC:
 Entrepreneurship and SME
Development Program
 Investment Climate Reform
Program
 Efficient Securities Markets
Institutional Development
(ESMID)
 Credit Reporting program
 Privatization of Rwanda Air

Skills Development
 Primary school pupil to qualified teacher
ratio reduced from 73:1 in 2006 to 61:1
in 2012 (CPAF).
 Transition from basic education (TC) to
upper secondary education raised from
82% in 2006 to 92% in 2012 (CPAF).
 Skills Development indicator TBD as
part of the planned ESW and the new
operation. [Will insert once developed.]

 Off Track. [68:1 in
2010 versus 67:1 in
2008.]
 On track. [90.2% in
2009.]

Skills Development
 National Skills Development Policy, including a
Post-Basic Education policy in place by 2010.
Achieved. [Education Sector Strategic Plan for
2010-2015 finalized in 2010.]
 National Skills audit completed by 2009.
Achieved. [Skills audit completed in 2009.]
 3,000 teachers hired on contract basis until
TDM adopted. Not achieved. [2,000 teachers
hired by 2008, but only 750 in early 2009.]
 Develop and cost Teacher Development and

15

Other Donors
AfDB, DfID, USAID,
Netherlands
Ongoing:
 PRSF series
 PSCBP (FY05)
IDA Pipeline:
 Skills Development (FY11)
 PRSF series
Others (IFC):
 IFC Africa Schools Rwanda
Program (FY09)

CAS Outcomes
and Indicators

CAS Outcome 1.4 Capacity to manage
public resources–at central and local
levels—strengthened
 Proportion of audited public agencies
receiving unqualified public audit
opinions increased from 1.7% in 2009 to
7% in 2011. [Revised Indicator]
 Proportion of the value of procurement
tendered competitively or justified
increased from 86% in 2008 to 89% in
FY12 (CPAF). [Revised Indicator]
 Finalization of a new national payment
and retention policy by 2011. [New
Indicator]



2010 Status







Percentage of Districts which achieve a

minimum of 80% of their service delivery
and sustainable local development targets
for which they are responsible as assessed
by/in the IMIHIGO assessment report
increased from 60% in 2006 to 75% in
2012 (CPAF). [Revised Indicator.]

CAS Milestones and Status

Management (TDM) Strategic Plan by 2010.
Achieved. [TDM was adopted in 2009.]
 Targets for classrooms rehabilitation and
constructions under EFA FTI financing met.
Achieved. [Increase in classroom constructions
from 2,315 in 2008 to 3,076 in 2010.]
 Targets for procured textbooks under EFA FTI
financing met. Achieved. [Purchase and
distribution of over 1.6 million textbooks
between 200-2010.]
 Targets for trained teachers under EFA FTI
financing met. Achieved. [Exact targets were
not available, but EFA-FTI contributed to
increase in training of teachers, inspectors,
directors and parent teacher associations.]
Overall effectiveness/service delivery
 Increased number of MDAs that have service
delivery directories published. Achieved. [21
On track. [Awaiting
out of 40 in 2010 from zero in 2008.]
OAG update on this
 MIFOTRA agrees with all PRSG ministries on
indicator.]
staffing levels and ministerial structures for
optimal performance within fiscal limits.
Achieved. [100% of the
Achieved.
value of procurement
tendered competitively PFM
or justified in
 Increased number of budget agencies that
2009/2010.]
produce annual financial statements within
On track. [Policy
stipulated timeframe. Achieved. [In 2009 100%
expected to be drafted,
of budget agencies produced statements – 56%
endorsed by key
on time from 17% in 2008.]
stakeholders and
 Number of projects from the district
adopted by Cabinet in
development plans implemented under the
2011.]
DCDP (disaggregated by type). On track.
[Select facilities built or rehabilitated by type
under the project are: health: 11; classrooms:
420; Water tanks: 131 etc.]
On track. [67% in
2009/10.]

WBG Program
Other Donors
AfDB, DfID, Belgium,
Netherlands, UNICEF, EC

IDA Ongoing:
 PSCBP (FY05)
 MDTF for PFM Reforms
(FY05)
 PRSF series
 DCDP (FY04)
 E-Rwanda (FY07)
 Statistics for Results (FY10)
IDA Pipeline:
 PRSF series
Others (Trust Funds)
 Economic Empowerment of
Young Women – Adolescent
Growth Initiative
 Social Risk Management of
Climate Change
AAA:
 Public Expenditure
Management (Multi-year)
 Capacity Building (FY11)
Other Donors:
DFID, UNDP, Belgium, GTZ,
SIDA, USAID

16

CAS Outcomes
and Indicators
CAS Outcome 2.1 Significant health and
social risks—to vulnerable groups and to
social cohesion in Rwanda—are mitigated
Maternal and Child Health


% of assisted births in an accredited
health facility increased from 28% in
2006 to at least 60% in 2012 (CPAF).

2010 Status

 Achieved. [66.2% in
2009. Indicator to be
verified through the
2010 DHS.]

CAS Milestones and Status
Maternal and Child Health
 Pilot reducing ticket modérateur and introducing
conditional cash transfers for children less than 5
and pregnant women by 2010. Achieved. [As
of October 2010 a pilot initiative removing ticket
modérateur for children under five has been
implemented in two health centers in two
districts. Pregnant women are exempted from
paying the ticket modérateur.]
 Per capita allocation to Performance Based
Financing (PBF) for health facilities and
community health cooperatives reaches US$2.25
by 2010 (CPAF). Not Achieved. [US$1.85 in
2009. Expected improvements in this indicator
due to scale-up of the community PBF in 150
sectors by end-2010.]

WBG Program
IDA Ongoing:
 CLSG series including
Health Results Innovation
Trust Fund
 PRSF series
 RDRP2 (FY10)
IDA Pipeline:
 PRSF series

AAA:
 Rwanda Health Study (FY08)
 Human Resources for Health
(FY08)
 Social Protection Study
(FY08)
 Youth and Gender in postSocial Protection/Implementation of Vision
Social Protection/Implementation of Vision 2020
conflict (FY08)
2020 Umurenge program
Umurenge program
 Social Risk Management of
 Percentage of eligible households granted  On track. [91% of
 Participatory Assessment is completed by end
Climate Change (FY11)
eligible households
public works in a sample of VUP pilot
2009 of whether income-generating activities,
 Youth Employment Study
were employed in
Sectors is 35% each year in 2008-12.
direct support, public works and micro credits
(FY12)
2009/10.]
(CPAF) [Revised Indicator.]
have been successful. Partially achieved. [M&E
 On Demand Policy Notes in
survey was conducted and report is being
the Social Sectors (TBD)
Reintegration of ex-combatants
finalized. The survey was not participatory.]
 On track. [22,675
 Up to 26,675 RDF and 11,292 Armed
 Lessons of VUP pilot in 30 sectors are
Other Donors:
RDF ex-combatants and
Group members and dependents received
incorporated and extended to at least another 60 UNICEF, Belgium, DFID,
6,292 Armed groups exreinsertion and/or reintegration support by
sectors by end 2009. Achieved. [Lesson have
Germany, USAID, SIDA
combatants received
2012. [Updated Indicator.]
been incorporated and extended to 90 sectors.]
reinsertion and
 Procedures for identifying vulnerable households,
reintegration benefits by
mode and amount of social assistance transfers
end 2008.]
and public works implemented by end 2009.
Achieved. [Procedures have been agreed,
incorporated in operational manuals for each of
the VUP components and are being
implemented.]

17

Annex 2: Updated and Revised CAS Outcome Indicators
Original CAS Indicators
Updated and Revised Indicators
CAS Outcome 1.1 Agricultural production—particularly for food crops—sustainably raised
 Production of rice in targeted marshlands
 Updated: The baseline is 8,757 tons instead of
increased by at least 100% by 2012 relative to
2,340 tons. A 100% increase by 2012 is
the baseline (2,340 tons).
equivalent to 17,514 tons.
 25% of farmers using chemical fertilizer by  Updated: Increase in use of Mineral Fertilizer
2012 up from 12% in 2006 (CPAF indicator).
from 14,000 MT in 2006 to 47,600 MT in
2011/12 (Revised CPAF indicator).
CAS Outcome 1.2 Improved access to and quality of key infrastructure services
 Rural access indicator to be determined as part  Dropped. Project was moved to FY12.
of the FY10 Rural Roads project.
CAS Outcome 1.3. Improved environment for private sector development
 Primary school pupil to qualified teacher ratio  Updated: Primary school pupil to qualified
reduced from 72.7:1 in 2006 to 56:1 in 2012
teacher ratio reduced from 73:1 in 2006 to 61:1
(CPAF).
in 2012 (revised CPAF target).
 Skills Development indicator TBD as part of
 New: [Once project results framework is
the planned ESW and the new operation.
further advanced.]
CAS Outcome 1.4 Capacity to manage public resources–at central and local levels—strengthened
 No. of targeted institutions that achieve at  Dropped.
least 80% of their target outputs.
 No. of budget agencies use internal capacity to  Revised: Proportion of audited public agencies
receiving unqualified public audit opinions
prepare and publish audited financial
increased from 1.7% in 2009 to 7% in 2011.
statements with unqualified audit opinions.
 Revised: Proportion of the value of procurement
 No. of budget agencies with satisfactory
tendered competitively or justified increased
compliance with national procurement
from 86% in 2008 to 89% in 2011/12 (CPAF
policies and rules.
indicator).
 New: Finalization of a new national payand
retention policy by 2011.
 100% of Districts able to produce
 Revised: Percentage of Districts which achieve
consolidated reporting on spending on an
a minimum of 80% of their service delivery and
annual basis (i.e. on resources both from
sustainable local development targets for which
transfers and on own revenue) from 2009
they are responsible as assessed by/in the
onwards up from 0% in 2007.
IMIHIGO assessment report increased from
60% in 2006 to 75% in 2012 (CPAF indicator).
CAS Outcome 2.1 Significant health and social risks—to vulnerable groups and to social cohesion
in Rwanda—are mitigated
 % of under five children using Insecticide
 Dropped: Indicator is not supported by Bank
Treated Long Lasting mosquito nets increases
program. In addition, health is no longer a Bank
from 16% in 2006 to 85% in 2012 (CPAF).
priority under the DOL.
 Percentage of vulnerable men, women and
 Revised: Percentage of households granted
children assisted through safety net schemes
public works in a sample of VUP pilot Sectors is
raised from 12% in 2006 to 20% in 2012.
35% each year in 2008-12. (CPAF)
 Up to 28,500 former Rwandan Armed Groups,  Updated: Up to 26,675 RDF and 11,292 Armed
RDF and dependents received reinsertion and/
Group members and dependents received
or reintegration support by 2011.
reinsertion and/or reintegration support by 2012.

18

Annex 3: IDA Lending Program
Fiscal
Year

Original CAS Program

Original IDA
Amount
(US$ million)

2009 Poverty Reduction Strategy Grant (PRSG) V

Revised Program

Revised IDA Amount
(US$ million)
National Regional CRW

70.0

Actual

80.0

-

6.0

Actual (CLSG I)

6.0

-

-

40.0

FY10 (Electricity Access Scale-up and SWAp Development Project)

-

-

-

Lake Kivu Methane Guarantee

5.0

Dropped

-

-

-

Rwanda Demobilization and Reintegration Program

8.0

FY10

-

-

-

8.0

Actual

-

Health /Social Protection DPL
Electricity Access Roll-Out

Regional: Communications Infrastructure Project
Total
2010 PRSG VI

137.0

-

8.0

16.0

94.0

16.0

-

-

29.0

86.0

Actual

86.0

Land Harvesting Water Management and Hillside Irrigation

35.0

Actual

34.0

-

-

Transport Sector Development Project AF

25.0

FY11

-

-

-

Rural Roads

25.0

FY12 (Transport Sector Project)

-

-

-

Regional: East Africa Road Network

8.0

FY12 (East Africa Transport Links)

-

-

-

Regional: Lake Victoria

7.0

FY11

-

-

-

8.0
70.0

-

-

-

-

Additional Actuals:
Second Emergency Demobilization and Reintegration Program (from FY09)
Electricity Access Roll-Out (from FY09)
Community Living Standards Grant (CLSG) II*
Regional: East Africa Public Health Laboratory (not in CAS)
Total
2011 PRSF VII**
Regional: Rusumo Falls Hydro
Regional: East Africa Power Mark et

186.0
80.0

Planned

10.0
4.0

6.0
5.0
209.0
104.4

10.0
10.0 29.0
-

-

FY12

-

-

-

FY12

-

-

-

Additional Planned:
Transport Sector Development Project AF (from FY10)

11.0

-

-

Skills Development Project (from FY12)

30.0

-

-

Community Living Standards Grant (CLSG) III*
Regional: Lake Victoria (from FY10)
Total
IDA 15 Total
2012 PRSF VIII

6.0

-

-

5.0

10.0

-

95.0

156.4

10.0

418.0

459.4

36.0 29.0

-

70.0

Planned

70.0

-

Agriculture (Additional Financing)

30.0

Planned

30.0

-

-

Energy (Additional Financing)

30.0

Planned

30.0

-

-

Skills Development

10.0

FY11

-

-

-

Additional Planned:
Transport Sector Project (from FY10 Rural Roads)

40.0

-

-

Regional: East Africa Transport Links (from FY10)

8.0

16.0

-

10.0

20.0

-

6.0

12.0

-

Regional: Rusumo Falls Hydro (from FY11)
Regional: East Africa Power Market (from FY11)
Total

140.0

194.0

* Planned to be merged with PRSG in the CAS, but remained standalone.
** Due to the move of Rwanda to an IDA blend country, the FY11 PRSF consists of a credit/grant mix rather than 100 percent grant financing.

19

48.0

Annex 4: IDA Analytic Program
Fiscal Year

Analytic and Advisory Activities by CAS Theme

2009

Cross-Cutting
Multi-year Public Expenditure Management TA
Multi-year Just-in-time Policy Notes (Finance/PSD)
Promote Economic Transformation and Growth
Multi-year Agriculture Policy TA
Investment Climate Assessment
Regional Agriculture Research TA
Reduce Social Vulnerability
Multi-year Education Policy Analysis
Health Study

2010

Cross-Cutting
Multi-year Public Expenditure Management TA
Multi-year Just-in-time Policy Notes (Finance/PSD)
Promote Economic Transformation and Growth
Multi-year Agriculture Policy TA
Sustainable Land Management TA
Reduce Social Vulnerability
Multi-year Education Policy Analysis
Education Country Status Report
Social Protection Study

2011

Cross-Cutting
Multi-year Public Expenditure Management TA
Multi-year Just-in-time Policy Notes (Finance/PSD)
Poverty Monitoring TA
Promote Economic Transformation and Growth
Multi-year Agriculture Policy TA
Sustainable Land Management TA
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) update
Employment and Growth Policy Note
Capacity Building
Regional EAC Study
Reduce Social Vulnerability
Multi-year Education Policy Analysis
Post-Basic Education Study
Social Risk Management of Climate Change

2012

Cross-Cutting
Multi-year Public Expenditure Management TA
Multi-year Just-in-time Policy Notes (Finance/PSD)
Youth Employment Study
Promote Economic Transformation and Growth
Multi-year Agriculture Policy TA
Reduce Social Vulnerability
On Demand Policy Notes in the Social Sectors
Multi-year Education Policy Analysis
Social Safet Nets Strengthening TA

20

Annex 5: WBG Collaboration
1. Leveraging of WBG programs
IDA
IFC
Ongoing and planned programs Ongoing and planned programs in:
in:
 Investment climate reform – aimed
 Agriculture – aimed at
at increased investments, exports and
increased productivity and
employment linked to horticulture
diversification including
and Special Economic Zones, the
with respect to horticulture;
level of Small and Medium
Enterprise tax revenues, and
 Energy – aimed at increased
increased access to finance for
access;
SMEs;
 Transport – aimed at the
rehabilitation of rural/feeder  Entrepreneurship development –
supporting the growth and
and main roads; transport
competitiveness of SMEs and
links with EAC.
helping develop local entrepreneurs.

MIGA
Ongoing and planned
programs in:
 Investment promotion
–targeting of investors
and supporting
investment projects in
priority sectors
including energy and
agribusiness;
 PPP origination.

2. Focus sub-sectors







Horticulture (fruits and vegetables): High potential impact on trade balance, jobs creation and high
demand in global/regional markets. Sector aligns well with ongoing support in agriculture and WBG
is well placed to address remaining constraints including infrastructure (transport and energy) and
investment environment.
Construction Materials: High potential impact on trade balance, jobs creation and high local
demand. High prospect for investors from East Africa.
Tea: High potential impact on trade balance, jobs creation and high demand in global markets (but
lower in regional/local markets). Favorable investor prospects and relatively few barriers of entry.
Mining: The WBG also agreed to provide catalytic support at the margins for mining as a sector
with a potentially high future impact. This includes technical assistance for implementation of a
framework for negotiations of production sharing and concession arrangements.

3. Cross-cutting issues
 Support to the implementation of Government’s SME strategy. Work program to be undertaken
by IDA, Investment Climate Advisory Services and IFC advisory services.
 A more holistic focus on access to finance. Work program to be led by IDA.
 A concerted focus on post harvest and transport logistic. Work program to be led by IDA.
 Acceleration of WBG work in the areas of tax reforms, land use programs and Special
Economic Zones. Work program to be led by Investment Climate Advisory Services.
 Support for the strengthening of the PPP institutional framework including WBG assistance in
identifying a PPP pipeline. Work program to be led by IDA.

21

Annex 6: Rwanda Division of Labor

X

X
S

X

X

X

X

S

X

X
X

X

X

S

X
S

X

WB

S

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

France

X

X

Austria

X

Luxembourg

X

FAO

X

ILO

X

X

UNDP

S

X

UNEP

X

X

S

S

S
S

UNFPA

S
X

UNHCR

S

X

S

UN‐Habitat
UNICEF

S
X

X

X

S

S

X

UNIDO

X

X

UN Women
WFP

S
X

X

X

IFAD
WHO

X

X

EC

UNESCO

S

X
S

X

Switzerland

Justice, Reconciliation, Law &
Order

S

X

US
AfDB

X
X

Sweden
UK

X

Decentralization/CDF

S

Manufacturing services & off‐
farm industry

X

Netherlands

Forestry, Land & Environment

Japan

Agriculture

X

Water & Sanitation

Germany

Energy

S

Transport & ICT

Canada

Youth, Sports & Culture

X

Employment

Health & Population

S

Social Protection

Education

Belgium

X
X

S

UNECA

S
S

S
X

UNCDF
S represents silent partnerships
X represents internal UN Lead

S

22

Annex 7: Use of Trust Funds in Rwanda
1.
Budget support for Government designed programs: Trust funds designed as budget support
operations that directly finance Government priorities have proven successful in Rwanda. Examples
include:
 EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund: Considered to be a good model for the use of a large vertical fund. The
traditional use of the trust fund was adjusted to allow disbursement through country systems (as
budget support). The program was country-owned and financed directly government’s education
plans. Management of the EFA-FTI was taken over by DfID due to the Bank’s stricter requirements
for management of large trust funds, but also due to education being a DfID priority sector.
 Global Food Price Crisis Response Program: Supplemental financing to the PRSG series in order
to support private sector participation in fertilizer distribution.
 Health Results Based Financing: Supplemental Financing to the CLSG DPO, which financed a
pilot to test performance-based financing for interventions with high impact on child and maternal
health at the village level. However, the trust fund proved somewhat inflexible for a proposed
integration into PRSG series and was a key reason why the CLSG DPO had to remain standalone.
2.
Co-Financing for IDA investment projects: Trust funds that co-finance IDA investment
operations can in many cases be pivotal to the viability of the IDA program. Examples include:
 Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF): The trust fund provides crucial financing to the ongoing
Transport Sector Development Project with only US$11 million from the IDA envelope and US$38
million from the ACGF.
 Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Program (MDRP): The MDRP provided vital
co-financing to the IDA program with about 50 percent of resources. The MDRP was one of only
two country-specific multi-donor trust funds in Rwanda (together with the PFM fund). Closed in
2009 and transitioned into the Transitional Demobilization and Reintegration Program (TDRP).
 GAFSP, United States and Canada Co-Financing to LWH: The LWH project was one of the first
Bank operations to benefit from the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) with the
award of US$50 million additional financing in June 2010. The project assisted with the
development of a common framework for engagement, which so far resulted in co-financing
commitments from the United States and Canada.
3.
Financing of Analytic Work and Project preparation: Trust Funds can provide important
resources on top of the available Bank budget to finance analytical work and project preparation.
However, trust funds should not be used to finance analytical work that is not funded from Bank budget
and therefore does not fall within the CAS priorities. Examples (good and bad) include:
 Trust Fund for Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development: The trust fund financed
a study to examine program design and choices to implement the VUP (social protection) agenda.
The work was done simultaneously with the preparation of the IDA CLSG and provided the analytic
foundation for that development policy operation.
 Trust Funds that finance global studies: Bank-executed trust funds for global studies and surveys
do not usually fall within the CAS, require substantial effort by high-level government officials and
are considered to provide no benefits to the country. Missions for these kinds of studies are often
conducted without transparency or knowledge by country management and there is no follow-up incountry about the findings of these studies.
4.
Technical Assistance: Trust funds can be very useful if they provide highly specialized
technical assistance. They are not widely used in Rwanda, but one example includes:
 Financial Sector Reform Strengthening Initiative (FIRST): Six grants were made available to
provide to support the Financial Sector Development Plan, microfinance, supervisory capacity, crisis
preparedness, and banking. FIRST consultants brought expertise and knowledge of the literature and
experience of other countries, combined with high respect for the national perspective.
23

Annex 8: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 1/12/2011

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)

2008

2009

2010

2011

11
4.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
47.4

11
4.1
18.2
13.4
18.2
13.4
30.1

12
3.2
16.7
11.4
16.7
11.4
35.4

9
3.6
11.1
4.6
11.1
4.6
11.9

yes

no

yes

no

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number
51
6
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
1,188.4
223.9
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
45.1
50.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
31.0
44.7

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

24

Annex 9: IDA Operations Portfolio
As Of Date 1/12/2011

Closed Projects

67

IBRD/IDA
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

88.71
0.00
795.49
53.59
884.20
53.59

Total Undisbursed (Active)

136.36

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

2.92

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

139.28

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Disbursements

Active Projects
Last ISR
Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Name

P097818
P112712
P057295
P070700
P066386
P105176
P079414
P114931
P111567
Overall Result

RW - Sustainable Energy Dev. Proj (GEF)
RW Emergency Demob and Reintegration
RW-Compet & Enterprise Dev (FY01)
RW-GEF Integr. Mgmt. of Critl Ecosystems
RW-Pub Sec CB TAL (FY05)
RW-Rural Sector Supt APL2 (FY08)
RW-Transport Sector Development Project
RW:Land Husband,Water Harvest,Hill Irrig
Rwanda Electricity Access Scale-up Proj.

Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

S
MS
S
S
MS
S
MU
S
S

S
MS
S
S
MS
S
MU
S
S

2010
2010
2001
2005
2005
2008
2008
2010
2010

25

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

8.3
8.0
46.8

0.1
4.3

20.0
35.0
11.0
34.0
70.0
224.8

12.6

0.1

Undisb.

Orig.

6.7
5.8
3.2
1.1
7.9
15.3
8.0
31.1
65.1
144.1

1.6
-8.6
1.1
7.0
9.5
6.6
0.8
8.3
24.6

Frm Rev'd

-2.6

3.3
0.7

Annex 10: IFC Program
International Finance Corporation
Statement of IFC's Committed and Outstanding Portfolio
Amounts in US Dollar Millions
Accounting Date as of : 12/31/2010
Committed
Commitment
Fiscal Year
2009/ 2010
2007
2009
2007
2008/ 2010/ 2011
Total Portfolio

Institution
Short Name
Bakhresa Rwanda
Intraspeed
Lake Kivu Energy
Mille Collines
TPS (R)

Loan
10.50
0
0
2.34
4.35
17.19

Undisbursed Outstanding

Equity

Quasi-Equity*

0
0
0
0
2.95
2.95

0
4.40
4.00
0
0
8.40

* Quasi-Equity includes both equity and loan types

26

ALL
10.50
4.40
4.00
2.34
7.30
28.54

Loan
10.50
0
0
2.34
3.20
16.04

Equity
0
0
0
0
2.95
2.95

Quasi-Equity
0
4.40
0
0
0
4.40

ALL
10.50
4.40
0
2.34
6.15
23.39

Annex 11: Rwanda at a Glance

Rwanda at a glance

2/25/10

Rwanda

SubSaharan
A frica

Lo w
inco me

9.7
26
2.9
18

818
24,242
2.5
36

973
19,310
2.1
29

4.7
440
1,010

885
1,082
1,991

510
524
1,407

11.2
8.9

5.0
2.5

6.4
4.2

P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

77
90
50
109
18

51
73
52
89
27

..
..
59
78
28

A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)

..
..
146
149

71
54
103
93

72
55
102
95

150

65
23

58
31

67
38

0

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

Age distribution, 2008

(2008)

Male

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

15-19
0-4
10

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 8 )

A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
250
200

100
50

1990

1995

Rwanda

N e t A id F lo ws
(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2007):
United Kingdo m
United States
Euro pean Co mmissio n

19 8 0

19 9 0

2000

2008

154

288

321

713

0
7
21

1
13
36

53
23
49

95
91
79

13.2
30

11.2
40

18.7
40

21.0
75

2000

2007

Sub-Saharan Africa

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
40
20
0

A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

-20
-40

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds

-60
95

Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)
Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

7.2
3.1

4.2
13.5

3.9
-3.0

15.4
17.4

92.8
..

82.6
78

389.7
100

546.9
69

05

GDP

GDP per capita

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 – 0 8
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

5.2
1,163

7.2
2,584

8.0
1,735

9.7
4,457

3.2
2.2

1.1
-0.2

2.5
6.7

A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

45.8
21.5
15.3
32.6

32.5
24.6
18.3
42.8

37.2
13.6
7.0
49.2

37.4
14.1
4.5
48.5

0.5
2.5
2.6
3.6

2.5
-3.8
-5.8
-0.9

3.5
8.7
5.4
8.9

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n

83.3
12.5
16.1

83.7
10.1
14.6

87.7
11.0
18.3

82.1
10.2
24.1

1.2
5.2
4.3

0.4
-2.6
0.4

..
..
..

Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

14.4
26.4
13.3

5.6
14.1
11.3

8.7
25.7
12.9

14.9
31.2
28.3

3.4
2.6

-6.4
6.1

..
..

(% o f GDP )

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2008 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are no t available.
a. A id data are fo r 2007.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

27

Rwanda
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2008
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2008

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)
Net trade in go o ds and services

90
328
-291

257
881
-727

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

-90
-5.2

-244
-5.5

7

51

191

536

Voice and accountability
Political stability
Regulatory quality
Rule of law

Wo rkers' remittances and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)
Reserves, including go ld

Control of corruption
0
2008

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e

2000

(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

20.2
9.7
13.2

27.1
13.5
15.1

0.8

0.5

25

50

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

..
..

100

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure
Overall surplus/deficit

75

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

..
..

2000
8.3
1

2008
19.0
14

0.6

16.3

68
13.9
..

79
19.5
8.1

1,113
0.2

1,005

0.07

0.07

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)
To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)

1,272
35
908

679
19
225

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Natio nally pro tected areas (% o f land area)

73.3
21.4

15.2
4.9

Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billio n cubic meters)

8
0

103
0

CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)

Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

..

GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

2000

2008

IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

692
37
11

242
41
2

Composition of total external debt, 2008
Private, 0

Short-term, 23
IBRD, 0

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio

Bilateral, 90
IDA, 242

(US$ millio ns)

IMF, 11
Other multilateral, 313

US$ millions

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt
Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
Electricity
Tax rates
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2008

–
–
–

14
108.9
315

2000

2008

..
..

31.8
26.9

..
8.1

..

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt

2
2
0

6
6
3

0

0

M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

–
–

17
17

9.2

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2008 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

28

2/25/10

Millennium Development Goals

Rwanda

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)

R wa nda

G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)
P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)
Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)
P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

19 9 0
..
..
..
24.3

19 9 5
..
51.2
..
..

2000
76.6
60.3
5.3
20.3

2008
..
..
..
18.0

67
37
8
75

..
..
..
..

68
21
10
78

94
53
22
…

..
32
17

96
33
17

100

..
17

G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)
M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)

195
117
83

193
115
84

189
113
74

103
62
90

G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)
Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 15-49)

..
26
21

..
..

..
31
13

540
52
29

G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 15-49)
9.2
Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)
167
Tuberculo sis cases detected under DOTS (%)
..

7.0
241
34

4.7
348
32

2.8
397
25

G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
65
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)
29
Fo rest area (% o f to tal land area)
12.9
Natio nally pro tected areas (% o f to tal land area)
..
CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)
0.1
GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)
..

64
26
13.4
..
0.1
..

65
25
13.9
..
0.1
..

65
23
19.5
8.1
0.1
..

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
Telepho ne mainlines (per 100 peo ple)
M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
Internet users (per 100 peo ple)
P erso nal co mputers (per 100 peo ple)

0.1
0.0
0.0
..

0.2
0.5
0.1
0.1

0.2
13.6
3.1
0.3

G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)
P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)
Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)
Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)
G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)
Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)
P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)

92

14

0.1
0.0
0.0
..

..
56

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125

100

15

100
75
75

10

50

50

25

5
25

0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment ratio
Fixed + mobile subscribers
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

Rwanda

Sub-Saharan Africa

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

29

Internet users

2/25/10

29°30'E

RWAN D A

30°00'E

30°30'E

1°00'S

To
Kafunzo

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

Kagitumba

UGANDA

AKARERE (DISTRICT) CAPITALS

31°00'E

To
Kikagati

INTARA (PROVINCE) CAPITALS
era
Kag

NATIONAL CAPITAL
To
Kisoro

MAIN ROADS
Butaro
Lac
Burera

Kidaho

INTARA (PROVINCE) BOUNDARIES

Burera

Volcan
Karisimbi
(4519 m)

Muhoza

Kirambo

Cyeru

Busogo
29°00'E

To
Rutshuru

Vir

To
Sake

Rubavu

Nemba

Muramba

ts.

2°00'S

Rwumba

To
Cibitoke

HUYE

Kibeho

Butare
Kanzi

Kigembe

JUNE 2008

To
Kayanza

29°30'E

Lac
Nasho

Kibungo

Rilima

NGOMA

Lac
Cywambwe

2°00'S
Lac
Mpanga

KIREHE

Sake

Kirehe

Lac
Rweru

Ka
g

era

To
Lusahanga

Ndora

RWANDA

BURUNDI

To
Ngozi

30°00'E

30°30'E

IBRD 33471R2

To
Cibitoke

29°00'E

TA N Z A N I A

To
Kirundo

GISAGARA

Munini

Kigarama
Lac
Mugesera

Nyamata

Lac
Cyohoha
Sud

To
Bugene

Karaba

N YA R U G U R U
Bugarama

Busasamana

Rusatira

Ngoma
Ruramba

Bicumbi Kigabiro

BUGESERA

Karama

Gikongoro

RUSIZI

To
Nyya-Ghezi

Nyanza

PROVINCE

Kitabi

Ruhango

Lac
Ihema

RWAMAGANA

Gashora

N YA N Z A

Gatagara

Gasaka

To
Walangu

This map was produced by
the Map Design Unit of The
World Bank. The boundaries,
colors, denominations and
any other information shown
on this map do not imply, on
the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the
legal status of any territory,
or any endorsement or
acceptance of such
boundaries.

Masango

N YA M A G A B E

Cyangugu
2°30'S

Bugesera

Lac
Kivumba

K AY O N Z A

KAMONYI

RUHANGO

Bwakira

SOUTH

Kamembe N Y A M A S H E K E

KICUKIRO

30 Miles

Lac
Hago

Mukarange
Gikoro Rwamagana

Gitarama

Ngoma

Rwesero

KIGALI

NYARUGENGE

Nyamabuye

KARONGI

Kagano

Ndera

Kicuro

Rukoma

MUHANGA

Rubengera

Gishyita

Rugenge

Bulinga

Mabanza

Kibuye

KIGALI CITY

20

1°30'S

Rukara

GASABO

n

WEST
Gihingo
P RRutsiro
OVINCE

go

PROVINCE

Lac
Muhazi

Shyorongi

o
ar

Murunda

10

Lac
Mikindi

EAST

Kabarore
Kiziguru
Muhura

RULINDO
Mbogo

ab
Ny

M

Ngororero

G AT S I B O

Gatsibo

Kinyami

Tare

GAKENKE

NGORORERO

40 Kilometers

Lac
Rwanyakizinga
Gabiro

Byumba

PROVINCE

Ngaru

Kabaya

30

N YA G A T A R E

Gakenke

Karago

ga

RUTSIRO

La c K ivu

NORTH

N YA B I H U

un

Gisenyi Nyondo

D E M . R E P.
OF
CONGO

Kagali

20

0

G ICUMBI

Kinihira

Mukamira

RUBAVU

Muvumba

Mulindi Gatunda

BURERA

Lac
Ruhondo

10

yaru

1°30'S

MUSANZA

Ak
an

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

To
Kabale

Ka

AKARERE (DISTRICT) BOUNDARIES

0

Nyagatare
gitumba

RIVERS

