Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 66065-DO

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT

FOR THE
THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Public Disclosure Authorized

December 21, 2011

Caribbean Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
International Bank for the Reconstruction and Development
Latin America and Caribbean Department
International Finance Corporation

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
World Bank authorization.

The Country Partnership Strategy for the Dominican Republic was discussed on 17 September 2009.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective as of November 9, 2011)
Currency Unit
US$1.00

=

Dominican Pesos
38.38

Fiscal Year
January 1 – December 31
SELECTED ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
A&A
AAA
AF
APL
CARCIP

CPS

Accounting and Auditing
Analytical and Advisory Services
Additional Financing
Adaptable Program Loan
Caribbean Advanced Regional
Communications Infrastructure
Program
Conditional Cash Transfer
Clinic Management System
Country Procurement Assessment
Consumer Price Index
Country Portfolio Performance
Review
Country Partnership Strategy

CSO
DPL
EFO
EU

Civil Society Organization
Development Policy Loan
Externally Financed Output
European Union

PFM

FBS
FDI

Fee Based Service
Foreign Direct Investment

SIGEF
SIUBEN

FY
GAC
GDP
IBRD

Fiscal Year
Governance and Anti-Corruption
Gross Domestic Product
International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development

TAL
TF
UNDP
USAID

CCT
CMS
CPAR
CPI
CPPR

Vice President
Country Director
Country Manager
Task Manager

ICT
IDB
IDF
IFC
IMF

Information and communication technology
Inter American Development Bank
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund

IPAC
LCR
MIGA
NLTA
PARSS2

Participatory Anti-Corruption Initiative
Latin America and the Caribbean
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Non-lending Technical Assistance
Health Sector Reform Project (Proyecto de
Apoyo a la Reforma del Sector Salud)
Performance and Accountability of Social
Sectors
Public Financial Management

PASS

RAMP
ROSC

IBRD
Pamela Cox
Françoise Clottes
Roby Senderowitsch
Michael Corlett

Reserve Advisory and Management Program
Report on the Observance of Standards and
Codes
Financial Management Information System
Single Beneficiary Selection System
(Sistema Único de Beneficiarios)
Technical Assistance Loan
Trust Fund
United Nations Development Program
United States Agency for International
Development

IFC
Thierry Tanoh
Paolo M. Martelli
Jun Zhang
Ary Naïm

THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report

Table of Contents
1. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................................... 1
3. CPS PROGRESS, IMPLEMENTATION AND PROPOSED ADJUSMENTS .................................... 4
A. Assessment of CPS progress to date ........................................................................... 4
B. Portfolio Performance and Implementation ................................................................ 9
C. Adjustments to the CPS Program ............................................................................... 10
4. STRATEGY GOING FORWARD AND FUTURE BANK ENGAGEMENT ...................................... 12
5. RISKS AND MITIGATION ...................................................................................................................... 13

Annexes
Annex 1: Revised CPS FY10-13 Results Framework ................................................................................. 14
Annex 2: Dominican Republic Key Economic Indicators 2004-2013 ......................................................... 22
Annex 3 Country at a Glance......................................................................................................................... 23
Annex 4: Standard CPS Annexes .................................................................................................................. 26
CAS Annex B3 - IBRD/IDA Program Summary ......................................................................................... 30
Annex B3 Dominican Republic: IFC Investment Operations Program .................................................... 31
CAS Annex B4 - Summary of Nonlending Services - .................................................................................. 32
8 (IFC) for Dominican Republic .................................................................................................................... 33
CAS Annex B8 - Operations Portfolio (IBRD/IDA and Grants) ................................................................ 34
ANNEX 5: Knowledge Services .................................................................................................................... 35

1. INTRODUCTION
1.
The Board of Executive Directors discussed the FY10-13 Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) for the Dominican Republic in September 2009 (Report No. 49620-DO).
The CPS covers a four year period ending one year after planned elections and inauguration
of a new President in mid 2012. This Progress Report evaluates advances made and how the
Bank will position itself strategically for the remainder of the CPS period.
2.
The CPS is aligned with the National Development Strategy, especially enhanced
social cohesion and improved transparency while dealing with the global economic
downturn. President Leonel Fernandez was elected in 2004 and re-elected in 2008 for a
second four-year term. His Dominican Liberation Party won a landslide victory in
congressional elections in 2010.
3.
The four broad objectives of the CPS remain consistent with the Government’s
agenda where it overlaps with areas of comparative Bank Group advantage: (i)
Strengthen Social Cohesion and Improve Access to and Quality of Social Services; (ii)
Promote Competitiveness in a Sustainable and Resilient Economic Environment; (iii)
Enhance Quality of Public Expenditures and Institutional Development; and (iv) Build
Capacity and Constituencies for Reform. Despite the breadth of the CPS, it focuses the
bulk of new lending (US$480 million of US$500 million) on a program of reforms in social
spending. A series of three sequential DPLs (Public Performance and Accountability of
Social Sectors-PASS- operations) totaling US$370 million seeks to promote and consolidate
a major shift in government’s social sector priorities and capacity toward human capital
formation. Two investment operations (Additional Financing of the Social Sectors
Investment Project-US$10 million, and Health Sector Reform Second Phase APL
(PARSS2)-US$30 million) complement the DPLs. A Municipal Development project
(US$20 million) completes the CPS new lending portfolio. New lending operations are
complemented by lending operations and knowledge services initiated in previous years.
Despite this apparent targeting, the CPS seeks to complement sectoral reforms in social
protection, education, and health with improvements in public expenditure management on
the supply side and initiatives to strengthen transparency and accountability on the demand
side. Regarding the existing portfolio of operations, a redoubled effort would be made to
improve their performance. The CPS also reflects an intensified focus on the provision of
knowledge services, as detailed in Annex 5.
4.
Progress under the CPS to date has been good and has validated its targeted
approach, which remains relevant for the remainder of the CPS period. The Bank’s
quick disbursing assistance has provided critical funding during the global economic crisis,
which has allowed government to better protect spending on social sectors relative to earlier
downturns. In contrast to earlier episodes, both moderate and extreme poverty have declined
through the crisis, though at a decelerated rate. At present, poverty levels fall below preglobal economic crisis rates due to smaller relative crisis impacts, improved crisis
management, and stronger safety net protection. Movement toward more performance
influenced public expenditures reflected in Performance Agreements for some key ministries
is promising, as are a variety of demand side initiatives to strengthen civil society and citizen
beneficiary oversight of government operations. The implementation of investment
operations existing at the time of CPS launch remains measured with largely moderately
1

satisfactory project ratings. International Finance Corporation (IFC) operations have
continued apace, supporting the competitiveness and resilience agenda with investments in
infrastructure, telecom, and natural gas distribution.
5.
Having largely completed planned lending, and with few adjustments envisioned,
the Bank plans to focus its efforts during the remainder of the CPS period on improving
implementation of existing projects and consolidating reform efforts during an electoral
period. Since 2009, the Bank has provided record support to the Dominican Republic
amounting to US$368 million. Only US$70 million of the original US$500 million envisaged
lending remains to be allocated during the next two fiscal years.
2. POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTS
Political Developments
6.
The Dominican Republic has enjoyed marked political stability for the last two
decades, even with notable swings in economic growth. Power has tended to rotate
between two major political parties which have kept taxes and public debt low.
The
Presidency has considerable power, the Congress plays a relatively limited policymaking role,
and the level of transparency and budget openness is low by international standards.
According to various international indicators and corroborated by other national surveys, the
perception of corruption is high. Since the mid 2000’s various reforms have aimed to
improve economic and fiscal management through revision of the legal framework for public
expenditures, extension of an integrated financial management system, and efforts to
consolidate budget formulation and treasury management in the Ministry of Finance, among
other things. But progress has been slow and uneven and major weaknesses remain in
auditing. The Presidency still enjoys a high degree of discretion over spending.
7.
Despite slow progress on the broad governance agenda, the Government has
recently undertaken several institutional reforms to improve the efficiency, effectiveness,
and transparency of government operations. It has notably sought to improve social
cohesion through better targeting of social spending on the poor in return for enhanced “coresponsibilities” in terms of school attendance, health screening, job training, etc. This
approach seems to enjoy broad public acceptance. With the support of the Bank, the
Government has implemented the Participatory Anti-Corruption Initiative (IPAC) that is
already implementing 30 recommendations to reduce corruption and increase transparency.
At this moment, more than half of the recommendations have been fully implemented. A new
Constitution, ratified by Congress in January 2010, grants the legislature the right to appoint
members of the Chamber of Accounts which reviews Government accounts, removing the
group from the Executive's control. The Constitution establishes that annual budget proposals
must be submitted before October 1, allowing for greater public and congressional scrutiny.
8.
The pace of social spending reform, direction of spending, and/or intensity of
revenue efforts (in taxes or electricity) could be impacted by the pending electoral
season. Reform champions in the various ministries appear committed to advancing and
consolidating the gains, but the post election rotation of key reform figures, the volatility of
oil prices, and unforeseeable fiscal demands could threaten the sustainability of several CPS
supported reforms.
2

Economic Developments
9.
Although the Dominican Republic registered a slowdown during the depth of the
global economic crisis, growth has quickly recovered and the country continues to be
one of best performers in the region. Growth increased to 7.8 percent in 2010 from 3.5 in
the previous year. Growth was relatively broad based in all main sectors of the economycommerce, financial services, construction and light manufacturing. External factors
contributed too as the fall in remittances was mild since expatriate Dominican workers tend to
be employed outside construction. Tourist arrivals turned around by the third quarter of 2009
and exports, in part due to reconstruction in Haiti, also resumed growing. Economic growth
in 2011 is projected at 5.5-6 percent. Inflation began to accelerate in 2010, rising to 6.3
percent, stemming largely from food and oil prices, but the CPI remained with the Central
Bank target of 6-7 percent.
10.
With a gradual withdrawal of stimulus spending the fiscal balance improved in
2010. The overall fiscal deficit fell from 3.2 percent of GDP in 2009 to 2.7 percent in 2010.
Nevertheless the 2.3 percent of GDP deficit target was missed due to weak tax performance
and larger than expected transfers to the electricity sector due to high oil prices. During 200710 the growth in public debt was relatively modest and less than anticipated —from 33.4
percent of GDP in 2007 to 36.8 percent in 2010, less than the previously projected level of
39.8 percent of GDP. The external current account deteriorated in 2010 as the increase in
imports exceeded exports. Foreign direct investments (FDI) and external borrowing funded
the deficit though and foreign exchange reserves remained at historically high levels.
11.
The overall economic outlook for the country remains positive, although
challenges remain. Growth is projected at 5 percent over the medium term based on
increasing diversification in FDI, exports, and tourism receipts. However, inflation is
continuing to creep upward and the Central Bank had to raise the overnight policy rate five
times between September 2010 and May 2011 to counter inflationary pressures stemming
from strong domestic demand. Improved revenue performance will require continued efforts
to improve tax administration and policy adjustments to address a high level of exemptions.
The Government‘s financing needs for 2011 are expected to be met through a combination of
investment and budget support loans, as well as the issuance of domestic and international
bonds. Total gross financing requirements are estimated to reach US$2.5 billion (equivalent
to 4.4 percent of GDP) in 2011. This gap is expected to be filled by the issuance of domestic
(US$384 million), and international (US$500 million) bonds, and by borrowing from bilateral
and multilateral creditors (US$1.7 billion). As the fiscal balance improves and amortization
payments decrease gradually, financing requirements are expected to fall to US$2.1 billion in
2012 (equivalent to 3.5 percent of GDP).
12.
Continued structural reforms are needed to close the large electricity sector
deficit (projected at US$690 million in 2011) and improve the reliability of service.
Notable efforts are being made to improve sector management (introducing foreign
managers), increase rates to long term financially justified levels, reduce non-technical (theft)
losses, and transit from an inefficient geographically based subsidy scheme to targeted needs
based subsidies (Bonoluz). The Bank has continued an active dialogue and technical
assistance in the sector, joined by the IMF and IDB, to help advance these important structural
reforms. Nevertheless, the high dependency on imported fossil fuels as well as the inherent
3

difficulties in overcoming legacy behavior in the sector suggests that solid financial
performance is achievable only in the medium term assuming a continued reform effort.
Social Developments
13.
Poverty rates remain high in the Dominican Republic and the levels of social
spending are modest by regional standards, despite economic growth and a relatively
high per capita income. Data from April 2011 estimates poverty at 31.6 percent, showing a
slight decline compared to April 2009 (33.5 percent); extreme poverty decreased from 10.4
percent to 8.8 percent in the same period. Inequality has significantly declined in the past two
years, with Gini coefficient registering at 0.492 (April 2011), below pre-crisis levels. Despite
improvements, challenges remain as a broad subset of the population is still vulnerable.
Unemployment declined to 14 percent in 2010 but massive underemployment affects a large
portion of the population. Women are much more likely to be underemployed than men.
Inflation in food and oil prices is likely to affect poverty rates in the future. Spending on
education is well below regional averages but has remained steady at 2.3 percent of GDP
since 2008 (down from 3.4 percent of GDP in 2002). Schools are overcrowded, with multiple
shifts, and the poor quality of education appears to affect most individuals regardless of
socioeconomic conditions. Boys are more likely than girls to drop out of school. The country
has the lowest performance on the regional standardized exam measuring education quality,
and has declined relative to other countries since the 1990s. Health spending is also low at
1.7 percent of GDP in 2010 resulting in weaknesses in the provision of first level of care
(essential basic health services with adequate quality) through Regional Health Services. The
adolescent fertility rated is extremely high at 106.8 births per 1000 girls age 15-19. After
operating as a de facto unconditional cash transfer program, the program has now become a
full-fledge Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) with improvements in the definition
andverification of co-responsibilities.
14.
Poverty and social indicators, however, would likely have been worse without the
proactive decisions of Government to protect the levels of social spending and reform
social service delivery. In the 2003-4 crisis the poverty rate exploded by 15 percentage
points, unemployment rose 4 percent, and education and health expenditures fell by 34
percent and 36 percent respectively. In contrast, social spending this time has been
maintained by counter-cyclical measures with coordinated actions between the Ministry of
Finance and social sector ministries to reduce supply gaps in health and education. A
significant reform of Solidaridad has been undertaken with the aim of expanding coverage
and tightening enforcement so as to strengthen the impact on human capital formation.
Electricity subsidies are being transformed from blanket geographic areas (which assisted all
residents irrespective of their qualification under poverty level proxies) to a means tested
approach, resulting in significant savings and greater efficiency of public spending. Thus the
Government has used the economic crisis to address some long standing structural issues
affecting social outcomes.
3. CPS PROGRESS, IMPLEMENTATION AND PROPOSED ADJUSMENTS

A. Assessment of CPS progress to date
15.
Progress towards CPS outcomes has been satisfactory and advances are being
made under each of the CPS strategic objectives. The focus of the CPS on providing quick
4

disbursing funding to help maintain counter-cyclical Government spending has been critical
in supporting the Government’s efforts to contain the economic and social repercussions of
the global financial crisis. It has helped maintain the climate for domestic and foreign
investment and private sector economic activity and competitiveness. Moreover, policy
changes, critical institutional strengthening, and transparency and accountability advances
supported by the CPS, if sustained, could pay dividends well beyond the crisis period.
16.
While many poverty challenges remain, the protection of the most vulnerable
contrasts with previous economic downturns when hard won gains in poverty reduction
were lost. Bank’s expertise has been focused on fewer critical goals, with a variety of
specialists mobilized to pursue core reforms in the social sectors through several interrelated
loans, non lending technical assistance, and dialogue where it can support domestically owned
reform initiatives. So far the results are encouraging—the principal PASS lending is
proceeding well, and synergies in public expenditure management and accountability may
multiply the improvements in the performance of social sectors. The Bank’s program of
knowledge services continues to strengthen the analytical basis for Government policy.
Donor coordination has intensified, especially among the multi-lateral financial institutions
(IMF, IDB, and Bank) with positive benefits in terms of coherent policy advice, coordinated
funding programs, and improved collaboration with Government authorities. Further, through
enhanced donor coordination efforts, the Bank has mobilized US$3.5 million in additional
resources from bilateral partners to support the program, including an Externally Funded
Operation with USAID supporting IPAC and civil society initiatives, a Trust Fund on Public
Expenditure Management with the European Union (EU) and a new Fee Based Service (FBS)
on competitiveness to be financed by the EU. While there is room for improvement,
disbursements and effectiveness delays under existing loans have improved compared to
previous years. IFC operations as well have played an important role in providing targeted
support to the private sector with impacts on employment and growth.
Strategic Objective 1. Strengthen Social Cohesion and Improve Access to and Quality of
Social Services
17.
This first strategic objective of the CPS is achieving good results so far in terms
of policy reforms and institutional changes aimed at protecting the most vulnerable and
promoting better social outcomes. This objective has been supported by the PASS DPL
series, four existing investment operations (the Social Protection Investment Project and its
new Additional Financing, Health Sector Reform Second Phase APL (PARSS2), Youth
Development Project, two closed investment operations (Early Childhood Development
project and Health Sector Reform First Phase APL), one closed DPL (Public Finance and
Social Sector DPL), non lending technical assistance (NLTA) including Programmatic Social
Sector NLTA, as well as assistance from other donors.
18.
The Government has advanced reforms to realize the full potential of the
Solidaridad program to promote investment in health, nutrition and education by the
poorest families. The combined effort has entailed an overhaul of the conceptual and
organizational structure of the CCT program, including a revised relationship with the health
and education ministries and improvements in their joint performance. In line with regional
practices for CCTs, the Government has consolidated a redesigned Solidaridad as the primary
axis of the Social Protection System in the country. Its organizational structure and staff
profile have been strengthened, management capacity and internal procedures improved, and
5

coordination with Government ministries mandated and institutionalized. Program operations
are being decentralized to 10 regional offices designed to improve responsiveness and client
contact. The program has contributed to an increase in the percentage of extreme poverty
households participating in Solidaridad from 51 percent in 2002 to 70 percent in November
2010. A first verification in education reached 80 percent of Solidaridad beneficiary students
to validate enrollment, and the verification of co-responsibilities for health covered 70 percent
of beneficiaries. New, fully electronic management information systems to ensure continuous
monitoring of compliance in health and education and strengthen sectoral management
beyond the CCT, have been put in place. The system of debit cards to access benefits,
especially in local grocery stores, has been upgraded by expanding the number of
participating payment institutions and mapping the flow of benefits to ensure adequate
institutional coverage. Solidaridad is also developing alternative mechanisms to transfer
funds electronically to beneficiaries in addition to the existing debit card mechanism, with a
view to promote greater financial inclusion. The Government has made progress in
developing a comprehensive Monitoring and Evaluation system for Solidaridad. The 1.8
million household socioeconomic census to update the beneficiary registry of the targeting
system (SIUBEN) is currently under implementation to strengthen targeting accuracy and
efficiency of social spending.
19.
The supply side for health and education inputs to Solidaridad beneficiaries has
been targeted for improvement. Recognizing that increased co-responsibility demand for
services in health and education requires accessible provision of quality services, the
Government with Bank support has undertaken a series of initiatives. In health the
Government has been improving the supply of services through investments in health
equipment, construction or rehabilitation of new primary health facilities, and the
establishment of a Clinic Management System (CMS) for the electronic registration of
medical visits designed to improve the quality, accountability and management of primary
health services. Household co-responsibilities can be verified, medical records digitized and
appropriate adherence by physicians to medical protocols encouraged by the CMS. In
education the Government is tackling the three main challenges posed by Solidaridad: (i)
reducing the supply gap through classroom construction (160) and school rehabilitation (20);
(ii) improving management information for the verification of education enrollment and
attendance co-responsibilities; and (iii) initiating an assessment of possible differentiated
transfer structures to best compensate for different opportunity costs to schooling. The Youth
Development Project, approved in March 2006 has surpassed the target of 25,000 at-risk
youth trained, 45 percent of whom are women, by building their work experience and life
skills.
20.
Improvements in health and education quality and efficiency extend beyond the
Solidaridad program. Supported by the PASS program, the Government has introduced
results-based management agreements between the ministry and all Regional Health Services
to improve the timeliness and quality of primary care. Building on this, the Bank’s Health
Sector Reform Second Phase APL (PARSS2) is piloting results-adjusted financing in two
regions to provide incentives to health care providers to improve access to and quality of
health service at the first level, emphasizing maternal and infant care and nutrition together
with other essential preventive services. Due to the increasing focus on accountability in the
country and the resulting pressure to improve the quality and efficiency of health programs
and services, the Government is also reorganizing the Ministry of Health to separate the
6

functions of service provision from sector oversight/stewardship. In education the PASS
series has supported validation of student learning standards for the first and second cycles of
Basic Education as well as improvements in school level management and the introduction of
a school monitoring and supervision system. The School Management Information System
creates a powerful online platform to gather information for managing school administration
at all levels. The organic bylaws and operational manual are to be modified. Educational
analyses supported through Programmatic Social Sectors NLTA have identified measures to
eliminate overlaps in roles across the system.
Strategic Objective 2. Promote Competitiveness in a Sustainable and Resilient Economic
Environment
21.
A second strategic objective is to help create the conditions for equitable
economic growth and competitiveness. A variety of outcomes are being sought: (i) a
broader information base for informing policy decisions on macro-financial stability,
competitiveness, and economic relations with Haiti; (ii) improved performance of water and
sanitation corporations in tourist areas; (iii) increased efficiency in power distribution and
generation to improve quality of services, and (iv) mainstreaming disaster risk management
into the planning process and strengthened institutional capacity for risk management in
specific sectors. These objectives would be pursued through five existing investment
operations, five knowledge services efforts, and IFC activities.
22.
Progress toward strategic objectives is moderate. The Financial Sector Technical
Assistance project has contributed to the complete reform and subsequent upgrade of the
payment systems, and as a result the DR has been selected in 2010 as the “hub” for the
Central American Payment Systems. The Water and Sanitation in Tourist Areas Project
has supported the creation of the National Water Council. While the Power Sector TAL
closed in December 2010 with a Moderately Unsatisfactory rating, the Electricity
Distribution Rehabilitation Project is progressing as bidding has been completed and
construction has commenced. The current management for the Dominican Corporation of
State Electrical Enterprises is expected to have a significant impact on sector performance
over the medium term. As a result of slow progress to date, the Bank has redoubled
supervision of the Emergency Recovery and Disaster Management operation. As detailed
in Annex 5 a variety of knowledge services are advancing, including the Dominican
Republic-Haiti Quisqueya Growth and Poverty Report, a Treasury Service NLTA,
Certification in Gender Equity in Firms as Means to Enrich and Promote Competitiveness,
and an Adaption to Climate Change and Disaster Risk NLTA.
23.
IFC commitments over the FY10-FY11 period have reached US$85.5 million, in
addition to US$12 million syndicated from other institutions, increasing the IFC
portfolio in the Dominican Republic to US$214.5 million. IFC's support to the compressed
natural gas distributor Linea Clave, combined with a US$20 million Sustainable Energy credit
line to Banco BHD, will help small industries in DR convert from heavy fuel oil to natural
gas, generating both financial savings and carbon emissions reductions. With US$20 million
support to the expansion of the Punta Cana airport and US$17.5 million support to the
expansion of the Caucedo port, IFC has continued supporting major improvements to the
country's competitiveness in the tourism and trade areas. In the telecommunications sector,
IFC aims to promote increased competition with its support to the expansion of WIND
Telecom (US$16 million subordinated debt plus US$12 million B-Loan). Finally, IFC
7

supported Banco León with a US$5 million trade finance credit line. Since FY06, MIGA has
been guaranteeing the Santo Domingo-Samaná toll road and is exploring other potential
transportation sector projects.
Strategic Objective 3. Enhance Quality of Public Expenditures and Institutional
Development.
24.
The CPS proposed a strategic approach to public sector management and
governance focused on the quality of public expenditure. Rather than tackling a broad
program of public administration strengthening or viewing governance as an “over-arching”
objective, as in the previous CAS, this CPS more strategically seeks: (i) improved budget
management; (ii) progress toward performance-informed budgeting; and (iii) increased
management capacity in poor municipalities. Instead of separate lending operations, these
governance objectives would be integrated as fundamental elements of the CPS and
mainstreamed within the PASS DPL series (multiple reforms to build a culture of results in
the public administration), the Municipal Development Project investment operation
(institutional development activities to strengthen capacity of local governments), and the
second Health Sector Reform Second Phase APL (PARSS2) supporting performance based
management in the health sector. Three knowledge services provide additional analytical
support, including a Quality of Public Expenditures NLTA, the Programmatic Social
Sector NLTA and an Institutional and Governance Review. This approach reflected in
part lessons from the FY2006 CAS where an ambitious program of Bank support for public
sector reform had only limited success. A reduced focus was considered to be in line with
Government priorities at a time of financial and fiscal stress and clearly relevant to the social
sector emphasis of the first CPS strategic objective. Progress has been notable. Specific
details of these NLTAs and additional activities aimed at strengthening capacity of
accountability institutions and fiduciary capacity in general are described in Annex 5.
Strategic Objective 4. Build Capacity and Constituencies for Reform
25.
This strategic objective seeks to strengthen the demand for good governance, and
efforts have expanded during CPS implementation in response to increased demands for
Bank support from Government, civil society, and other international financial agencies.
The Strategic Objective builds on another lesson from the previous CAS—that promoting,
implementing, and sustaining reform requires a strong constituency with enough capacity to
mobilize critical stakeholders and resources. It targets: (i) strengthening congressional budget
oversight capacity; (ii) strengthening civil society capacity for budget analysis and
monitoring; and (iii) enhancing participatory planning at the local level. As in Strategic
Objective 3, no separate lending activity was anticipated but rather the incorporation in other
operations of components related to participation of civil society organizations in monitoring
the implementation of the programs and strengthening social accountability mechanisms.
Two knowledge services (an IDF for congressional oversight of public financial management
and an NLTA for strengthening civil society) are being implemented including activities to
improve access to information and strengthen Congress’ capacity to analyze and monitor
budget execution. In addition, additional activities have commenced under this Strategic
Objective, often funded by third party trust funds and led by the Bank. These programs
concentrate on initiatives to address corruption and improve social accountability
mechanisms. Details are provided in Annex 5. A GAC Note has been prepared to address
8

governance challenges, taking stock of the World Bank engagement in the country GAC
agenda and exploring ways to institutionalize progress to ensure sustainability of reforms.
26.
Progress toward this objective appears solid and will be continued during the
remainder of the CPS period recognizing that tangible results from this somewhat
unconventional approach will take time. The IDF funded effort began in the Congress in
2009, and is improving congressional capacity to analyze and monitor budget execution,
program impact and performance. Congress now has access to budget data online and has
received capacity building on transparency/communication skills needed to engage more
actively with civil society. Supported by the PASS DPL series, the Government developed in
close consultation with civil society and launched the Portal del Ciudadano Dominicano, a
web-based user-friendly tool that provides public access to budget information. The Finance
Ministry has published easy to access budget execution reports on its website and a short note
on the Presupuesto Ciudadano (Citizen Budget), summarizing main budget facts and figures.
Together these two tools will significantly expand the transparency and accessibility of
budget information. Solidaridad is undertaking several initiatives to improve citizen
monitoring and agency accountability. A CCT Community Scorecard has been piloted,
reporting on the availability of service inputs in health, education, grocery store management
of Solidaridad benefits, and Solidaridad operations themselves. Based on the pilot’s results,
the CCT Intersectoral Committee approved the expansion of the community scorecards to
reach nation-wide scale. Particularly notable is the Anticorruption Participatory Initiative
(IPAC), led by Government and the Bank, which has mobilized 11 other international
development agencies and local stakeholders to establish, monitor, and report on the
implementation a wide variety of anti-corruption initiatives. Results so far include: (i) the
publication of a web-based user-friendly tool that will provide public access to budget
information fed by the Financial Management Information System (SIGEF); (ii) a web-based
portal with monthly updates that inform citizens of the expected and actual electricity supply
in each circuit; (iii) a new performance assessment framework for civil servants that will
contribute to the professionalization of the public administration; and (iv) the enactment of a
Presidential Decree for the implementation of the single treasury account. In a promising sign
of its broad public support, IPACs organizing committee, consisting of Government, private
sector, and civil society, recently agreed to continue and assume leadership of the initiative
beyond the mandate of the international community’s support in order to continue the
implementation of the medium-term set of reforms currently under implementation.

B. Portfolio Performance and Implementation
27.
Portfolio performance has shown improvement, but challenges remain. The
disbursement rate increased from 4.9 percent in February 2009 to 19.3 percent in February
2010, although the rate fell to 11.2 percent in May 2011. Similarly the average delay in
effectiveness improved substantially for the twelve-month period ending February 2010 (8.9
months versus 13.9 months during the previous period), but rose to 9.9 months in FY11,
greater than the 8.7 months average for LCR but better than the 11.4 months for Central
America. The progress in improving disbursement rates and reducing effectiveness delays,
though tenuous, are the result of concerted efforts by country staff and Government, including
conducting a mapping exercise of Bank operations and Government loan approval processes,
creation of a Bank-Government working group to follow up on portfolio issues, and enhanced
training and technical assistance provided by financial management and procurement
9

specialists. Most investment operations are extended. Only one of the eight operations have
Implementation Progress ratings of Satisfactory with the remainder considered Moderately
Satisfactory. During Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) consultations in 2011,
the Government recognized that portfolio performance could be improved and committed,
together with the Bank, to take action to improve performance. The CPPR identified
weaknesses in procurement capacity, attributed partially to high rotation of personnel and
understaffing of the procurement function of project implementation units, and to a lesser
extent financial management issues, as the primary contributors to weak portfolio
performance and low disbursement rates. To that end, the Bank and Government are
currently undertaking an assessment of procurement and financial management issues and
will produce an action plan to improve project implementation.

C. Adjustments to the CPS Program
28.
While the CPS has been refined on the basis of evolving circumstances and
continual dialogue with Government, its approach and four strategic objectives remain
valid. The Bank has provided timely, well targeted, and critically needed financial and policy
support to the Government’s stabilization and growth programs during a difficult period.
Enhancing its effectiveness as a partner with the country, Bank support is undergirding the
fiscal effort, providing valuable policy advice and global experience in the social sectors,
reinforcing important Government initiatives in transparency and accountability, and
complementing resources from other institutions. New lending has been complemented with
selected knowledge services activities that have helped further refine a strategic 4-year
program. Challenges remain to increase disbursements under investment operations;
however, the rate has improved while the bulk of Bank resources has been rechanneled
through DPLs.
29.
The Bank responded to the economic crisis with a significant level in
development policy lending. Some US$370 million will be disbursed through three PASS
DPLs. The PASS DPL series will close after the third (of four originally planned) iteration
but would view the possibility of launching a new series or a separate single tranche
operation, pending dialogue with Government. All three planned investment operations are
effective and in execution. While not envisaged in the CPS, a US$150 million Public Finance
and Social Sector DPL was approved in November 2009 and disbursed shortly thereafter.
The Social Protection Project Additional Financing and Health Reform projects complement
the DPLs, and the Municipal Development operation includes a component focused on
improved transparency and accountability.
30.
The Bank complemented its lending program through targeted analytical work
and technical assistance. As indicated above, there have been wide ranging NLTAs (funded
by the Bank, donors, or trust funds) from the Bank providing considerable support for reforms
in social sector performance, public sector management and demand for improved
governance. The Bank has also been able to expand knowledge services beyond that
envisioned in the CPS by leveraging donor resources in areas of mutual interest as is the case
in the USAID EFO and EU TF on public expenditure management.
31.
With the CPS largely delivered, minimal adjustments are envisioned during the
second half of the CPS and will be guided by the need to be strategic in prioritizing
additional support. Remaining lending room in the CPS totals only US$70 million, planned
10

under the original CPS to be committed to the remaining FY13 PASS-related operation.
During Progress Report consultations, the Government requested additional financial and
technical assistance in several priority areas: (i) budget support operations including a
continuation of PASS reforms and/or a policy based lending to support reforms in governance
and transparency; (ii) Education (the Education project closed on August 31, 2011); (iii)
Energy/Electricity Rehabilitation (the existing project will close on December 31, 2012); (iv)
Caribbean Advanced Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (CARCIP); (v) Youth
and Development Additional Financing; and (vi) Technical Assistance to the Supreme Court.
An additional financing of US$20 million of the Emergency Recovery and Rehabilitation
project, which will cover cost over-runs due to inflation and improvements in designs to
ensure the resilience of the rehabilitated infrastructure, was approved by the Board on
November 17, 2011. In addition, the Dominican Republic will participate in CARCIP (IBRD
lending level tentatively estimated at US$27 million), a regional lending project to enhance
ICT infrastructure, which is expected to go to the Board in the first half of 2012. Decisions
on the use of the remaining lending capacity will depend on the results of ongoing dialogue
with the Government.
Table 1 - CPS Lending and AAA Program FY10-13
CPS Progress Report Lending Program
CPS Lending Program
(US$ Millions)
(US$ Millions)
FY 10
FY 10 Actual
Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL
Social Sectors Investment Program
Health Sector Reform 2nd Phase APL (PARSS2)
Municipal Development
Total FY 10

$150
$10
$30
$20
$210

Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL
Social Sectors Investment Program
Health Sector Reform 2nd Phase APL (PARSS2)
Municipal Development
Total FY 10

AAA

$150
$10
$30
$20
$210

AAA

DR-Haiti Quisqueya Growth and Poverty Report

FY 11
Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL II
Total FY 11

FY 11 Actual
$150
$150

Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL II
Total FY 11

AAA

AAA

Influenza Prevention NLTA
Program Institutional & Governance Review
Adaptation to Climate Change and Disaster Risk
Management

Programmatic Social Sectors NLTA
Influenza Prevention NLTA
Program Institutional & Governance Review
Treasury’s Country Banking Services NLTA

FY12
Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL III
Total FY 12

FY 12 Planned
$70
$70

Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL III
CARCIP
Emergency Recovery and Rehabilitation (AF)
Total FY 12
$117

AAA

$70
$27
$20

AAA

IDF for Strengthening Congressional Oversight
Energy Sector and Investment NLTA
Competitiveness NLTA
Treasury’s Country Banking Services NLTA

Programmatic Social Sectors NLTA
IDF for Strengthening Congressional Oversight
Energy Sector and Investment NLTA
Adaptation to Climate Change and Disaster Risk
Management NLTA
Competitiveness NLTA
Treasury’s Country Banking Services NLTA
DR-Haiti Quisqueya Growth and Poverty Report
Strengthening Civil Society NLTA

FY13
Performance Accountability in Social Sector DPL IV

$150
$150

FY13 Planned
$70

Budget Support (To examine PASS related agenda
priorities)

AAA

AAA

11

$70

CPS Progress Report Lending Program
(US$ Millions)

CPS Lending Program
(US$ Millions)
Quality and Efficiency of Public Expenditure NLTA
Social Cohesion Programmatic NLTA
Strengthening Civil Society NLTA

Quality and Efficiency of Public Expenditure NLTA
Programmatic Social Sectors NLTANLTA
Strengthening Civil Society NLTA

Total Lending FY10-FY13

Total Lending FY10-FY13

US$500

US$547

32.
The Results Framework (Annex 1) has been adjusted accordingly to better reflect
expected outcomes in the four strategic areas of the CPS program. Changes are generally
minor and include adjustments to align targets to the CPS cycle (health), reflect changes in
project indicators (e.g. PASS is no longer measuring completion of schooling), and extend
targets out to reflect delays in effectiveness (Municipal Development Project).
4. STRATEGY GOING FORWARD AND FUTURE BANK ENGAGEMENT
33.
Going forward the Dominican Republic faces significant challenges to improve
the efficiency, effectiveness, and level of transparency across the public sector to deliver
social services and promote growth. Fortunately prospects for private sector led economic
growth are good in the medium term. This should provide some fiscal and political space for
continued incremental improvements in Government operations. The capacity building,
policy adjustments, and organizational improvements in social spending, energy,
transparency, and accountability supported by the CPS and other donors, if sustained through
the political transition, could provide momentum for continued progress. Certainly avoiding
the poverty retrogression experienced in 2003-4 is a notable achievement. To protect these
advances the Bank will need to stay engaged with all domestic and external stakeholders,
maintain its presence at the policy table, and reinforce the approach of the CPS to focus on
areas of Government commitment. The portfolio of investment operations, critical as they are
for implementation of several policy reforms linked to DPLs and the CPS, will require
redoubled supervision efforts to regain momentum in implementation and disbursements.
34.
The Bank’s engagement will remain focused on the core issues. The Bank will
continue to provide support under the corresponding four priority CPS areas of more efficient
and effective social spending, competitiveness, improved public expenditures, and building
capacities and constituencies for reform through FY13. It will also prepare necessary
analytical background for an engagement focused on a longer term perspective in the next
CPS period. This could permit the Government, supported by the Bank, to focus on efforts to
consolidate ongoing social policy initiatives, improve competitiveness and productivity, and
advance further in public sector reform. The Bank and Government will continue dialogue on
Government requests for additional support, including additional budget support should
external financing needs arise. Discussions will center on identifying key development areas
where tangible results could be obtained through additional Bank support.
35.
IFC strategy in the Dominican Republic will be better aligned with IFC strategy
for the Caribbean, with 4 strategic pillars: (i) Financial inclusion, through investment and
advisory services to financial institutions to improve access to finance for MSMEs and
households; (ii) Competitiveness, through investments that support infrastructure, trade
logistics, education and regional integration, and advisory services in areas such as Corporate
Governance; (iii) Climate Change, through continued support to the energy sector, direct and
12

through financial institutions; (iv) Resilience to crisis, through the deepening of the local
capital markets and support to the diversification of the country's economy.
5. RISKS AND MITIGATION
36.
Risks presented in the CPS have been well managed, but remain and are coupled
with the risk of policy/institutional backsliding during the electoral or transition period.
Implementation interruptions from poor coordination between core and spending ministries
have not emerged. Close Bank coordination with the ministries, their substantive
commitment to the program (especially the reforms supported by the DPLs), and the general
incentive to resolve issues promptly to secure needed DPL disbursements have prevented or
overcome coordination problems.
37.
Economic risks have been contained as the Government has pursued sound
macroeconomic policies and IMF stabilization program which has been closely coordinated
with the IDB and the Bank. Growth did not turn negative and is high by regional standards.
No significant natural disaster has occurred during the CPS period and indeed the earthquake
in Haiti has spurred Dominican exports. However natural disasters must always be
anticipated in this seismic and geographically vulnerable country.
38.
External risks stemming from the low reserve coverage are currently mitigated by the
IMF program, relatively favorable access to international markets, and important FDI inflows.
However, an external shock could lead to a foreign exchange shortage, amplified by the
absence of a new IMF program (the current program ends in the first quarter of 2012 which
could also stall the reform momentum on the structural front). While these external risks
remain substantial, mitigating factors include strong macroeconomic management, including
growth in the size and sophistication of the domestic debt market and improved financial and
bank supervision.
39.
Operational risks identified in the CPS relate to poor multi-sectoral collaboration in
Government and the Bank as well as counterpart capacity problems in financial management
and procurement. Collaboration across sectors seems to be working remarkably well on both
sides evidenced by the variety of advances in the public sector and civil society spheres in
association with social spending agencies. Fiduciary problems continue to hamper several
investment operations, despite intensified training, and will likely remain a continuing
challenge. The portfolio has been subjected to systematic monitoring and joint annual
reviews.
40.
Political risks may be increasing with the pending elections and transition.
Regardless of the outcome of the presidential election in May 2012, it is likely that key reform
counterparts and champions within the social agencies will be replaced. During the election
period there are always risks of reversals in reforms (return to more clientelism in the
distribution of subsidies, less aggressive pursuit of electricity theft or tax evasion, etc.). The
upcoming presidential elections could impact somewhat the pace and possibly focus of
operations in the country, so the Bank will pursue an intensified program of stakeholder
consultations, including with the opposition, with the aim of building understanding and
support for the operations as critical and non-partisan efforts to promote social and economic
development.
13

ANNEX 1: REVISED CPS FY10-13 RESULTS FRAMEWORK

Dominican Republic
Revised CPS Outcome/Target
Planned Milestones
Progress Towards CPS Outcomes
(If applicable)
Strategic Objective One: Strengthen Social Cohesion and Improve Access to and Quality of Social Services

Original CPS Outcome/Target

Ensuring access to quality health
services
 Improved quality of mother and
child healthcare services in the
target population
Indicator 1: 50% of pregnant women
with a risk evaluation completed
before the 15th week of pregnancy in
at least 2 regions (by 2013) (baseline
to be determined in year 1)
Indicator 2: 60% of children under 15
months with vaccination scheme
completed according to national
protocols (by 2013) – (baseline to be
determined in year 1)

Indicator 1: 30% of pregnant
women with a risk evaluation
completed before the 15th week
of pregnancy in at least 2
regions (by 2013)
Baseline: 0.43% based on
Clinical Management System
data from the two PARSS2
regions

Indicator 2: 40% of children
under 15 months with
vaccination scheme completed
according to national protocols
(by 2012)
Baseline: 0% based on
Clinical Management
System Data from the two
PARSS2 regions)

 Enhance strategic
procurement of medicines
and medical inputs
Indicator 3: Number of regions
producing monthly reports on the
number of poor individuals who
were prescribed a medicine at
the first level of care and actually
received medication within 48
hours
Baseline: No monthly reports
(2009)
Target: Single Management
System of Medicines and Inputs
(SUGEMI) and its
corresponding information
system in place and training
provided to facilitate production
of reports by at least one region
(2013)

Indicator 1. Risk evaluation of pregnant
women. 5.2% (October 2011); Number is
underestimated because the Clinical
Management system is in initial phase of
implementation.1

Indicator 2. Childhood vaccination: less than
1% (October 2011); Number is
underestimated because the Clinical
Management system is in initial phase of
implementation; records readily available
from the Immunization Program have the data
per type of vaccination and not per a
complete vaccination scheme.
Records indicate the following vaccination
rates for children less than 1 year old:
Measles:
Region 6: 69.2 percent
Region 8: 81.4 percent

World Bank Assistance

Lending
 Health Sector Reform II
(FY10) - $30M
 Health Sector Reform I
(FY03) - $30M
 PASS DPL Series (FY10,
FY11, FY12) - $370M
 Public Finance and Social
Sector DPL (FY10) - $150M
AAA
 Avian and Human Influenza
IDF (FY09) - $1M – partner
IICA

DPT3:
Region 6: 77 percent
Region8: 90.6 percent
Indicator 3. Single Management System of
Medicines and Inputs (SUGEMI): Process
has advanced in terms of the development of
common procedures for reporting including
using reporting forms for all the Regional
Health Services

1

The Bank will review the health indicator targets in consultation with the Government next year, after giving some time for the newly introduced Clinical Management System
to be implemented (it was rolled‐out in February 2011). Assuming that the CMS continues to be underutilized, the Bank team will seek other data sources.

14

Original CPS Outcome/Target

Revised CPS Outcome/Target
(If applicable)

Providing access to a better quality
education at all levels
ECD, Basic and Secondary education
 Increased access to and quality of
education
Indicator 1: Increase in the share of
children of CCT program (i) who have
completed at least one year of ECD;
(ii) are enrolled in, attending and
completing basic education; (iii) are
attending secondary education
(Baselines and targets to be
determined)

Indicator 1. CCT and
education: Increase in the
share of children of CCT
program: (i) are enrolled in, and
attending basic education; and
(ii) are attending secondary
education.

Indicator 2: ECD net enrollment of
poorest children increases to 86% by
end of project.

Indicator 2. ECD net
enrollment: Target revised to
69%

Planned Milestones
 80% of CCT beneficiaries
comply with education coresponsibilities by 2013
(baseline to be determined)

Indicator 1: % of households in
extreme poverty participating in CCT
program
Baseline: 51% (01/2009)
Target: 85% (6/2012)

Indicator2: Beneficiaries assessment
of the overall quality of attention and
service of CCT program (1
beneficiary perception survey at the
end of the PASS DPL in 2013)

Indicator 1: % of households in
extreme poverty participating
in CCT program
Target: 85% (12/2013)

Indicator 1. CCT and education: Share of
children 7 to 14 years enrolled in primary or
middle school for the previous school year:
August 2010: 95.2%
July 2011: 93.4%

World Bank Assistance
Lending
 PASS DPL Series (FY10,
FY11, FY12) - $370M
 Early Childhood Education
(ECD) (FY03) - $42M

Indicator 2. ECD net enrollment: 67.87%
(2009);

New student evaluation
standards validated for ECD,
basic and secondary education

Indicator 3. New student evaluation
standards: Target has been achieved as
demonstrated by four signed Resolutions from
the Ministry of Education between 2009 and
2011 validating new student evaluation
standards for: pre-primary education (ECD),
the first cycle of Basic Education, the second
cycle of basic education and secondary
education.

 Government policies for the
social sectors clearly
identified in a policy paper
and reflected in budget
documents.
Indicator 4: Rolling mediumterm plan and budget framework
of 2011 set out medium-term
guidelines for social protection
policy with projections as to the
coverage, estimated budget, and
financing bases
Baseline: Under development
(2009)
Target: For FY2011

Indicator 1. CCT and households in extreme
poverty: As of November 2010, 70% of
households in extreme poverty are
participating in the CCT Solidaridad

New student evaluation standards
validated for ECD, basic and
secondary education

Indicator 3: New student evaluation
standards start being implemented
Protection of the vulnerable
population
Improvement in the standards of living
conditions of the population
 Improve the coverage and quality
of social protection programs
(CCT program)

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes

No longer an indicator of the
PASS DPL results framework
but an initial beneficiary survey
has taken place and another is

15

Indicator 4. Medium term guidelines for
social protection policy. Milestone has been
achieved: Approved Multi-Annual National
Public Investment Plan 2010-2012 as well as
the Multi-Annual National Public Investment
Plan 2011-2014

Lending:
 Social Sectors Investment
Program (FY08) - $19.4M
 AF Social Sector Investment
Program (FY10) - $10M
 PASS DPL Series (FY10,
FY11, FY12 ) - $370M
 Youth Development Project
(FY06) - $25M
AAA:
 Programmatic Social Sectors
(FY10)

Original CPS Outcome/Target

 Improve employability of the poor
at-risk youth
Indicator 3: 60% of youth trained
found a job within six months of
program completion

Enhancement of country
competitiveness
Government has access to broader
information base (data and facts)
for informed policy decisions in
the areas of macro-financial
stability, competitiveness and
economic relations on the
Hispaniola island by 2013
 Development of basic
infrastructure to support a
business enabling environment
 Water: Improved performance of
W&S Corporations in Puerto Plata
region
Indicator 1: Percentage of households
connected to sanitation network
increases from 60% to 80% in Puerto
Plata region in 2013
Indicator 2: Occupancy capacity of
hotels in the Puerto Plata region that is
connected to communal sanitation
networks increases from 50% to 70%
in 2013
 Energy: Increased efficiency in
power distribution and generation
to improve quality of the service
Indicator: Electricity sector average
distribution losses reduced
Baseline: 28.4% (April 30th, 2009)

Revised CPS Outcome/Target
(If applicable)
planned for FY12.

Indicator: At least 65 % of
beneficiaries employed or selfemployed 6 months after
graduation

Planned Milestones

25,000 at risk youth have been
trained

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes
Indicator 3. Youth training: Number of
beneficiaries has been already achieved
 29,000 at-risk youth have been trained as of
April 2011

Strategic Objective Two: Promote Competitiveness in a Sustainable and Resilient Economic Environment
 Completion and
 Dominican Republic-Haiti Quisqueya
dissemination of AAAs, and
Growth and Poverty Report: Decision
policy discussion.
meeting held in November 2011
 Treasury activities have increased Central
Bank’s investment capabilities for the
management of foreign exchange reserves,
training financial managers

Support an enabling
environment for improved
management of the water and
sanitation sector

 Contract for the development
of W&S Sector Strategy
signed

Indicator 1: Adoption of a
National W&S strategy

 Establishment of the Water
Sector Council.

Improved performance of
W&S Corporations in Puerto
Plata region and in two
additional CORRA

 The W&S corporations have
signed performance
agreements
 Technical assistance is
recruited for the three Corras,

Indicator 1: Process for selection and
recruitment of the consultants in charge of
the strategy is being finalized, preparation
and discussion workshops have started
under the leadership of INAPA.
Water Sector Council created in August
2011.
The “Mesa de Agua” is holding regular
substantive meeting with W&S
stakeholders.

Indicator 2 and 3: One performance
contract signed and two being prepared

Indicator 2: Business Plan and
modernization plan completed
for the participating W&S
corporations
Indicator 3: The W&S
corporations comply with the
objectives of the operational

World Bank Assistance

AAA:
 Treasury’s Country Banking
Services
 Competitiveness
 Dominican Republic-Haiti
Quisqueya Growth and
Poverty Report (FY12)
IFC investments and TA:
 Financial and real sectors
Doing business reform
Lending:
 Water and Sanitation in
Tourist Areas Project APL1
(FY09) - $27.5M
 Power TA Project (FY04) –
7.3M
 Public Finance and Social
Sector DPL (FY10) - $150M
 Electricity Distribution
Rehabilitation project
(FY08) - $42M
AAA:
 Energy Sector (partner:
IDB)
 Competitiveness NLTA
 Dominican Republic-Haiti
Quisqueya Growth and
Poverty Report (FY12)
 Treasury’s Country Banking
NLTA
IFC investments and TA:

16

Original CPS Outcome/Target
Target: 16.4% (2013)

Revised CPS Outcome/Target
(If applicable)
and business performance
agreements

Planned Milestones

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes

World Bank Assistance
 energy
 transport and logistics

Indicator 4. Cost Recovery
Indices per company
(EdeNorte, EdeSur, EdeEste)
Baseline (data from Dec.
2010):
EdeNorte: 63%
EdeSur: 53%
EdeEste: 62%

Indicator 4. Cost Recovery Indices per
company (EdeNorte, EdeSur, EdeEste):
While data on progress is unavailable, targets
are considered achievable.

Target:
EdeNorte: 71%
EdeSur:
75%
EdeEste: 75%
Improvement of the capacity for
hazard risk management
Minimize the impact of natural
hazards
 Disaster risk management
mainstreamed into Ministry of
Economy, Planning and
Development
Indicator 1: Disaster Risk
Management. aspects included in
territorial and investment plans
 Strengthened institutional capacity
for risk management in specific
sectors (for example water
resources, electricity)
Indicator 2: Dam safety management
framework updated and operational
Indicator 3: Improved access to more
adequate and reliable weather and
river flow data of decision-makers
with responsibility on risk
management by 2012.

 Prioritized action Plan for
comprehensive Risk
Management at national level
formulated

Indicator 1: Disaster Risk
Management. aspects
included in territorial and
investment plans by end
2013

 Monitoring and prevention of
Avian and Human Influenza
improved through early
warning systems.
Indicator4: Reporting time of
poultry diseases at the local level
reduced from 7 days to 4 days

Indicator 1: Disaster Risk Management.
aspects included in territorial and
investment plans: NLTA launched in FY12.

Indicator 2. Dam safety management
framework: After delays, studies and plans
for strengthening the Dams Management and
Hydrology Departments in INDRHI has been
finalized.

Indicator 3. Improved access to more
adequate and reliable weather and river
flow data of decision-makers with
responsibility on risk management. The
hydro-meteorological weather observation
network is being upgraded. By the end of the
project it is expected to be transmitting data
(weather and flows) in real time.

Indicator 3: Improved
access to more adequate and
reliable weather and river
flow data of decisionmakers with responsibility
on risk management by
2013.

Lending:
 Emergency Recovery Loan
(FY08) $80M
 Emergency Recovery Loan
Additional Financing
(FY12) $20M
AAA:
 Adaptation to Climate
Change and Disaster Risk
Mgt. NLTA
 Avian Flu (FY09) – partner
IICA

Indicator 4: Achieved. Reporting time of
poultry diseases at the local level reduced to 1
day.

Strategic Objective Three: Enhance Quality of Public Expenditures and Institutional Development
Lending:
 PASS DPL Series (FY10,

Enhancement of the quality,
accountability and efficiency of

17

Original CPS Outcome/Target

Revised CPS Outcome/Target
(If applicable)

public resources utilization
Performance informed management in
social sectors
 Improve budget management
Indicator 1: Budget allocations are
adequate to meet entitlements under
social programs and budget in social
sectors is executed as programmed, as
evidenced by PEFA indicators 1 & 2
(Credibility of budget)
Baseline:
Indicator 1: D
Indicator 2: C (2007)
Target: Equivalent to ‘A’ score in
identified sectors (2013) following
assessment of entitlements

2

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes

 Narrow the gap between
budget and actual spending
Baseline: PEFA indicators 1
and 2 score D & C (2007)
Target: Bs by end-2012

Indicator 1: Budget allocations under social
programs: PEFA indicator 1 improved from
D to C in 2010 PEFA; No improvement in
PEFA indicator 2

 Performance agreements
covering the priority social
sectors (including health and
education) signed
Baseline: Under development
(2009)
Target: Agreed for social
sectors (FY2012)

Performance Agreements with the
Ministries of Health and Education have
been signed and established. The
Government approved a Decree regulating
Article 14 of the Budget Law that mandates
the design and implementation of performance
agreements and signed Performance
Agreements with the Ministries of Health and
Education for their priority investment
programs.

 Availability of accurate
statistics to estimate policy
outcomes
Indicator 4: Official and widelyinformed poverty figures
produced at least once by 2012

 Significant progress in the move
toward performance-informed
budget management
Indicator 2: Introduction of a credible
multi-annual plan and budget
framework social sectors (FY2013)
Baseline: Under development
(2009)
Target: Covers social sectors
(FY2013)2
Indicator 3: Accurate and timely
performance information loosely
linking inputs to outputs, outcomes
and entitlements is presented in
budget documents
Target: Coverage for priority
social sectors (FY2013)
Baseline: None in 2008 budget

Planned Milestones

Indicator 3: Accurate and
timely performance
information loosely linking
inputs to outputs, outcomes
and entitlements is
presented in budget
documents
Target: Coverage for
priority health and
education programs
(FY2013)

Indicator 2. Introduction of a credible
multi-annual plan and budget framework
social sectors: Government approved MultiAnnual National Investment Plan in the Public
Sector 2010-2013, aimed at closing gaps in the
supply of education, health, and nutrition
services. This is the first step to developing a
Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.
PEFA indicators 11 & 12 improved from Ds in
2007 to B, C+ respectively, in 2010.
Indicator 3. Performance information
loosely linking inputs to outputs, outcomes
and entitlements presented in budget:
Achieved. Performance agreements covering
priority health and education programs signed
between respective sectoral ministries and the
Ministries of Economy, Planning and
Development; Finance; and Public
Administration on August 31, 2011.

PEFA indicators 11 & 12 (Policy‐based budgeting) improve from Ds (2007) to B scores.

18

World Bank Assistance
FY11, FY12) - $370M
AAA:
 NLTA Quality of Public
Expenditures (FY10)
(partners: IDB, EU)
 Institutional and Governance
Review
 Safeguards Capacity
Activities

Original CPS Outcome/Target

Revised CPS Outcome/Target
(If applicable)

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes

 15 rural municipalities
trained in procurement,
financial management and
human resources
management by December
2012 (revised to 2013).

Strengthening capacity of local
Governments
Decentralization and territorial
development
 Increase rural poor municipalities’
management capacity
Indicator: The 30 participating rural
municipalities demonstrate basic
capacity in procurement, FM and HR
management (survey of a sample of
the municipal population)

Planned Milestones

Indicator: The 15
participating rural
municipalities demonstrate
basic capacity in
procurement, FM and HR
management (revised
number of municipalities to
bring in line with project
document)

Indicator: The 15 participating rural
municipalities demonstrate basic capacity in
procurement, FM and HR management:

The Municipal Development Councils in
the five pilot municipalities have been
formed; training will conclude by the end
of CY2011
 National territorial strategy

Validation of the municipal diagnostics is
developed by December 2011
underway in pilot municipalities;
(revised to 2012).
Institutional Action Plans will be
concluded and agreed by the end of CY
2011

Pilot municipalities have begun to create
the basic units required for compliance
with legal requirements; basic training of
these units is expected to conclude before
the end of CY 2011.

Strategic Objective Four: Build Capacity and Constituencies for Reform

19

World Bank Assistance

Lending:
 Municipal Development
(FY10) $20M

Original CPS Outcome/Target

Revised CPS Outcome/Target
(If applicable)

Enhancement of participatory
policy formulation
 Strengthened congressional budget
oversight capacities
Indicator1: Creation of a
Congressional Advisory Office (OPA)
that is staffed with merit-based
personnel and periodically releases
budget analysis reports (FY13).

Planned Milestones
 Web-based financial
management information tool
“Consulta Amigable”
developed and accessible by
public
Indicator 4: Public access to
web-based interface linked to
Financial Management
Information System (SIGEF)
Baseline: SIGEF not publicly
available (FY2009)
Target: SIGEF web-based,
user-friendly interface
available to the public
(FY13)

 Strengthened civil society’s
capacities for budget analysis and
monitoring

 Enhance participatory planning at
the local level
Indicator:3 All 30 participating
municipalities are using participatory
budgeting procedures to prepare
annual budgets (based on the criteria
of the participatory budgeting law).

Lending:
 PASS DPL Series (FY10,
FY11, FY12) - $370M
 Municipal Development
Project (FY10) - $20M

Indicator 2: Active permanent observatory
of the budget run by coalition of CSOs is in
place: Achieved. The Centro Juan Montalvo
Civil Society Public Budget Observatory
published 3 Reports in cooperation with the
Civil Society Commission on Poverty and
Fiscal Policy of the Foro Ciudadano, which
involves more than 150 CSOs; trained 9 poor
communities groups on budget execution
monitoring.

AAA:
 Institutional Development
Fund for Strengthening
Congressional Oversight
 Strengthening Civil Society
NLTA
 Gender Mainstreaming
Capacity and Advocacy in
DR CSOs Trust Fund
(FY12)

7 poor municipalities established and staffed
with trained personnel Access to Information
Offices and CSOs groups established Social
Audit Commissions for local and national
budget execution monitoring.
Indicator 3: All 15
participating municipalities
are using participatory
budgeting procedures to
prepare annual budgets
(based on the criteria of the
participatory budgeting
law).

 15 municipalities trained in
participatory budget
procedures by December
2012 (revised to 2013).

Indicator. 3: All 15 participating
municipalities are using participatory
budgeting procedures to prepare annual
budgets: Project is being piloted in 5
municipalities: Bayaguana, Padre las Casas,
Las Matas de Farfán, Tamayo y Polo. With
exception of Bayaguana, the others are using
participatory budgeting procedures.

Indicator 4. Public access to web-based
interface linked to Financial Management

20

World Bank Assistance

Indicator 1. Creation of a Congressional
Advisory Office: OPA was created and
staffed with merit-based personnel

A coalition of 15 CSOs established an
Observatory of the Participatory AntiCorruption Initiative (IPAC) and published 2
monitoring reports on the Government’s
progress in the implementation of the
anticorruption action plan.
Participatory budgeting and m-surveys through
mobile technology are piloted in 2
municipalities

Indicator2: Active permanent
observatory of the budget run by
coalition of CSOs is in place
Baseline: 1 CSO running Social
Policies Observatory including
basic public budget and social
expenditures analysis reports
(FY09)
Target: Expanded Public Budget
Observatory including budget
process monitoring and systematic
publication of monitoring reports
as measured by online website and
by number of CSOs trained in
budget analysis and monitoring
(FY13)

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes

Original CPS Outcome/Target

Revised CPS Outcome/Target
(If applicable)

Planned Milestones

Progress Towards CPS Outcomes
Information System (SIGEF): Achieved.
The SIGEF-informed budget transparency
portal, Portal del Ciudadano Dominicano,
launched on August 30, 2011. Government
has also prepared easy-to-access budget
execution reports, ‘Presupuesto Ciudadano’
(Citizens’ Budget)

21

World Bank Assistance

ANNEX 2: DOMINICAN REPUBLIC KEY ECONOMIC INDICATORS 2004-2013
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009*
Act. (Percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
Income and prices
GDP growth (% change)
Inflation (CPI % change)
Exchange rate (% appreciation - or depr. +)
Investment and savings
Gross domestic investment (current prices)
Gross national savings
Gross domestic savings
Non Financial Public sector
Total revenues and grants
Total tax revenues
Total expenditures (incl. interest)
Current expenditures
Capital expenditures
Primary balance
Interest
Overall balance
Public debt Total debt ***
Balance of payments
Current account balance
Trade balance
Exports of goods and services (incl FTZ)
Imports of goods and services (incl FTZ)
Foreign direct investment
Remittances
Memorandum item:
Nominal GDP (billions of US dollars)

2010**

2011
Proj.

2012

2013

1.3
51.5
36.6

9.3
4.2
-27.8

10.7
7.6
11.8

8.5
6.1
0.0

5.3
10.6
4.2

3.5
1.5
4.3

7.8
6.3
2.4

5.7
8.5
4.7

6.0
4.7
4.0

6.0
5.1
3.1

14.9

16.5

18.4

18.9

18.2

15.7

11.0

10.4

9.8

4.6

14.8
9.8
6.9

17.0
8.7
6.1

17.5
7.3
5.1

17.5
10.5
8.4

17.5
11.9
9.3

14.1
12.9
14.7
11.7
3.0
0.1
1.8
-1.8
47.4

15.7
14.5
15.8
12.0
3.9
0.8
1.3
-0.1
34.3

16.2
14.8
16.1
12.9
3.3
1.2
1.4
0.0
36.1

17.7
16.0
17.1
12.9
4.1
2.2
1.6
0.6
33.1

15.9
14.9
19.6
14.5
5.1
-2.1
1.7
-3.8
33.5

13.7
13.1
16.9
13.3
3.6
-1.4
1.8
-3.2
36.6

13.6
12.7
16.3
12.6
3.7
-0.7
1.9
-2.7
36.8

13.8
13.2
15.7
11.9
3.7
0.4
2.2
-1.8
37.6

14.4
13.7
15.7
11.8
3.9
0.9
2.3
-1.3
37.2

14.9
14.3
15.9
11.8
4.1
1.2
2.2
-1.0
37.1

4.8
-9.0
43.7
42.2
4.2
10.3

-1.4
-11.1
30.0
33.8
3.3
7.2

-3.7
-15.6
31.3
38.5
4.3
7.7

-5.3
-15.6
28.9
37.1
3.8
7.3

-9.9
-20.3
25.6
39.1
6.3
7.1

-5.0
-14.6
22.2
30.2
4.6
6.5

-8.4
-16.6
22.3
33.3
3.1
5.8

-10.2
-18.0
23.3
35.7
3.2
5.5

-6.9
-14.9
24.2
33.3
3.3
5.3

-5.6
-14.0
25.0
33.2
3.3
5.0

21.6

33.5

35.2

39.8

45.6

46.8

52.3

56.2

60.7

66.0

Nominal GDP (billions of DR$)
909.0
1020.0
1189.8
1364.2
1576.2
1678.8
1921.9
2163.5
2430.9
2723.6
Source: Ministry of Finance, Central Bank, EIU and IMF and World Bank staff estimates.
*Note: (1) Authorities are still in a process of revising some data for 2009; (2) Authorities are considering alternative ways of reaching the overall fiscal deficit for the projection years, and this table
may thus be subject to revisions; (3) statistics consider public debt as gross debt, i.e., bonds owned by agencies within the government are not net out.
** Estimates adjusted to preliminary data by the DR Central Bank.
*** Consolidated public debt including DR Central Bank dent. Historical and actual debt data from official Crédito Público figures.

22

ANNEX 3 COUNTRY AT A GLANCE

23

24

25

ANNEX 4: STANDARD CPS ANNEXES
Dominican Republic - Key Economic Indicators

Indicator
National accounts (as % of GDP)
a

Actual
2006
2007

2005

Estimate
2009

2008

Projected
2011
2012

2010

2013

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

7

7

7

6

6

6

6

6

6

Industry

32

32

32

32

32

32

32

32

31

Services

60

61

62

62

61

62

62

62

63

89
16
..
..

90
18
..
..

90
19
..
..

95
18
..
..

93
15
..
..

95
16
..
..

94
16
3
14

91
17
3
13

92
16
4
13

30
36

30
38

29
38

25
39

22
30

22
34

24
35

27
35

26
35

11

10

10

5

7

5

6

9

8

..

..

13

8

8

6

8

10

11

34004

35953

41315

45805

46788

51458

..

..

..

2900

3460

4150

4470

4670

5050

..

..

..

Real annual growth rates (%, calculated from 90 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
9.3
Gross Domestic Income
6.0

10.7
10.9

8.5
8.3

5.3
3.0

3.5
6.7

7.8
4.9

5.3
3.5

5.5
4.4

6.0
6.2

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 90 prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
7.7
9.1
Total consumption
13.8
10.4
Private consumption
14.0
10.4

7.0
7.4
7.4

3.8
6.3
6.3

2.1
3.6
3.9

6.3
6.1
6.3

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

Gross domestic product
Agriculture

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment
b

Exports (GNFS)
Imports (GNFS)

Gross domestic savings
Gross national savings

c

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

100

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
b

Exports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB

10058
6145

11153
6610

11958
7160

11670
6748

10295
5483

11671
6598

13837
8367

16308
10542

17430
11353

Imports (GNFS)
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance

11326
9869
-1268
2697
-473

13731
12174
-2579
3144
-1288

15343
13597
-3385
3402
-2166

17953
15993
-6284
3513
-4519

14120
12296
-3826
3216
-2331

17436
15299
-5765
3118
-4435

19939
17629
-6102
3854
-4736

21209
18980
-4901
3545
-4048

22862
20587
-5432
4071
-3709

Net private foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)

1123
84
231
-147
-1652

1528
344
240
104
-853

1667
180
101
78
-307

2870
496
729
-233
1479

2165
759
964
-206
45

1625
1340
832
507
1923

1952
901
66
834
2456

2266
277
-55
332
1934

2300
488
-427
914
1181

918

268

627

-326

-638

-453

-572

-429

-260

-3.7

-7.2

-8.2

-13.7

-8.2

-11.2

..

..

..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

b

Change in reserves

d

Memorandum items
Resource balance (% of GDP)
Real annual growth rates ( YR90 prices)
Merchandise exports (FOB)
Primary
Manufactures
Merchandise imports (CIF)

(Continued)

26

Dominican Republic - Key Economic Indicators
(Continued)

Indicator

Actual
2006
2007

2005

Estimate
2009

2008

Projected
2011
2012

2010

2013

e

Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)
Current revenues
15.4
Current expenditures
12.0
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
3.5
Capital expenditure
3.9
Foreign financing
-0.4
Monetary indicators
M2/GDP
Growth of M2 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR90 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
f

Real exchange rate (US$/LCU)

Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

15.9
12.9
3.0
3.3
2.0

17.3
12.9
4.4
4.1
0.8

15.7
14.5
1.2
5.1
1.6

13.5
13.3
0.2
3.6
2.2

13.4
12.6
0.8
3.7
2.1

13.8
11.9
1.9
3.4
1.9

14.3
11.6
2.7
3.8
1.1

14.8
11.7
3.2
4.4
0.3

27.7
12.2
80.4

25.3
6.6
50.0

25.5
15.6
80.2

27.8
25.9
-21.9

30.0
15.0
59.4

30.4
14.5
162.4

30.0
12.5
100.0

30.0
10.8
100.0

30.0
11.3
100.0

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

65.2

68.5

100.8

101.7

100.9

97.2

95.6

94.4

94.3

4.2
2.7

7.6
5.4

6.1
5.7

10.6
9.8

1.4
3.0

9.4
5.1

10.0
7.9

3.3
5.0

4.1
5.0

a. GDP at factor cost
b. "GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
c. Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
d. Includes use of IMF resources.
e. Consolidated central government.
f. "LCU" denotes "local currency units." An increase in US$/LCU denotes appreciation.

27

Dominican Republic - Key Exposure Indicators

Indicator

2005

Total debt outstanding and

Actual
2006
2007

2008

Estimated
2009

2010

Projected
2012

2011
13152

12598

2013

7072

8553

10142

10119

11046

13045

11478

Net disbursements (US$m)

132

679

500

557

883

1775

..

..

..

Interest payments

248

320

453

547

505

521

446

403

343

1010

1342

1380

1411

1322

1337

1739

..

..

TDO/XGS

54.8

58.6

64.1

64.8

80.1

86.0

75.7

63.1

54.0

TDO/GDP

20.8

23.8

24.5

22.1

23.6

25.4

23.2

20.5

17.3

TDS/XGS

7.8

9.2

8.7

9.0

9.6

8.8

10.0

..

..

22.2

22.1

20.4

25.5

25.1

23.8

24.3

25.4

26.3

a

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)

a

Total debt service (TDS)
a

(US$m)

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
b

Concessional/TDO
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
Preferred creditor DS/public

6.0

4.4

5.2

5.5

6.6

7.7

4.9

5.1

3.9

20.5

25.3

37.0

40.1

28.7

34.4

34.5

27.3

38.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

c

DS (%)

IBRD DS/XGS
d

IBRD TDO (US$m)

405

438

472

449

748

864

845

831

817

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
d

IDA TDO (US$m)

0.3

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.7

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.8

10.7

10.1

9.4

8.7

8.1

7.4

6.7

6.1

5.4

IFC (US$m)
Loans

122

Equity and quasi-equity /c

94

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

79

157

128

126

100

108

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

28

Dominican Republic Social Indicators
Latest single year

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Grow th rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per woman)
POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index
INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2005=100)
INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Low est quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)
SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GNI)
Net prim ary school enrollm ent rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an im proved w ater source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Im m unization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2004-10

Latin
Am erica
& Carib.

Upperm iddleincom e

6.5
2.2
53.9
3.9

7.9
1.9
57.8
3.1

9.9
1.4
70.5
2.6

572.5
1.2
79.0
2.2

1,001.7
0.9
74.9
2.0

..
..
..

..
..
..

34.4
26.2
47.7

..
..
..

..
..
..

1,040
..

1,910
24

4,226
114

7,007
123

7,502
127

..
..
..

51.4
4.3
56.5

49.0
4.5
54.5

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

1.2
..

1.5
2.1

3.9
4.0

3.8
4.3

..
..
..

..
..
..

80
80
80

94
94
93

93
93
92

..
..
..

88
95
78

86
87
84

93
97
80

95
98
86

54
39
..

78
72
8

79
82
3

93
92
4

93
93
..

65
63
67

70
67
72

73
70
76

74
71
77

72
69
75

56
75

40
50

22
27

19
23

19
23

..
..
..
..

..
..
170
93

202
132
100
98

190
103
86
89

201
123
82
96

CAS Annex B5. This table w as produced from the CMU LDB system.
11/01/11
Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in series betw een 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.

29

CAS ANNEX B3 - IBRD/IDA PROGRAM SUMMARY

Dominican Republic
As Of Date 10/27/2011

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal year
2012

2013

Proj ID

US$(M)

DO (AF-C) to Emerg. & Disaster Mgt

20.0

DO-3rd Perform.&Accbilty of SocSctrs DPL

70.0

Result

90.0

DO- Budget Support (To examine PASS
related agenda priorities)
DPL

70.0

CARCIP

27.0

Result

97.0

Overall
Result

187.0

30

Strategic
Rewards b
(H/M/L)

Implementation b
Risks (H/M/L)

ANNEX B3 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: IFC INVESTMENT OPERATIONS PROGRAM
2009

2010

2011

2012*

IFC and Participants

1.07

46.52

51.02

2.76

IFC's Own Accounts only

1.07

46.52

39.02

2.76

100

46.26

13.59

100

Original Commitments (US$m)

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
FINANCE & INSURANCE
INFORMATION

41.56

TRANSPORTATION AND WAREHOUSING

43

UTILITIES

44.84

10.75
100

Total

100.01

99.99

100

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity

7.47

Guarantee

100

3.26

13.59

Loan

85.99

44.84

Quasi loan

10.75

41

Risk product

92.53

0.56
100

Total

* Data as of October 01,2011

31

100

99.99

100

CAS ANNEX B4 - SUMMARY OF NONLENDING SERVICES As Of Date
10/27/2011

Product

Completion FY

Recent completions
FSAP update Dominican Republic
DO Informality and poverty
DO Improving the Perform. of Reg. Hlth S
Dominican Rep - ICR ROSC
DO Policy Notes
DR ROSC A&A - Update
DO Support to the National Dev. Strategy
DO Energy NLTA
DO Poverty Monitoring NLTA

FY09
FY09
FY09
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY10
FY11
FY11

Underway
DO Prog Inst & Governnce Rev
DO-Social Sectors NLTA (multisector)
DO Better Quality of Public Expenditures
Strengthening Public Media in DR

FY12
FY12
FY12
FY12

Cost (US$000)
148
93
61
70
135
10
272
175
109

Planned

a. Government, donor, Bank, public dissemination.
b. Knowledge generation, public debate, problem-solving.

32

Audiencea

Objectiveb

8 (IFC) FOR DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Dominican Repub
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 9/30/2011
(In USD Millions)

Committed

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

FY Approval

Company

2012/12

Adopem

0/03

Banco bhd

2005/07

Basic energy

2010

Cae

2008

Centro fin bhd

2002/11

Cii

28

0

0

0

Cip dominican

4.87

0

0

2004/05

Domicem s.a.

9.25

0

0

2004

Grupo m

2.86

0

0

2010

Linea clave

0

0

5

2005

Occidental ho

0

0

20

2007

Sans souci

11.2

0

8

0/10

Wind

0

0

16

116.63

34.1

59

5.65

Total Portfolio:

Loan

Equity

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Partici
pant

0

1.21

0

0

0

0

1.21

0

0

0

20

0

10

0

0

0

0

10

0

0

20.45

0

0

4.83

0

20.45

0

0

4.83

0

20

0

0

0

0

20

0

0

0

0

0

32.89

0

0

0

0

32.89

0

0

0

0

0

22.26

0

0

0

0

0

0

4.87

0

0

0

0

0

0

9.25

0

0

0

0

0

0

2.86

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

5

0

0

0

0

0

0

20

0

0

0

0

11.2

0

8

0

0

0.82

12

0

0

16

0.78

12

12

90.89

34.1

59

5.61

12

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

33

CAS ANNEX B8 - OPERATIONS PORTFOLIO (IBRD/IDA AND GRANTS)
Dominican Republic
As Of Date 10/27/2011
Closed Projects

42

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of w hich has been repaid

79.32
1.78
823.27
389.70
902.59
391.48

Total Undisbursed (Active)

181.58

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

1.07

Total Undisbursed (Active + Closed)

182.66

Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual

Last PSR
Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Project ID

Project Name

P095863
P106619
P089866
P109932
P078838
P090010
P096605
P054221
Overall Result

DO Municipal DevelopmeS
DO (APL2) Health Ref II MS
DO Electricity Distrib RehaS
DO Emergency Recovery &MS
DO Financial Sector TechnS
DO Social Sectors InvestmMS
DO Youth Development P MS
DO(APL1)Water&SanitatioMS

Disbursements a/

Original Amount in US$ Millions

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal Year

IBRD

S
MS
MS
MS
MS
MS
MS
MS

2010
2010
2008
2008
2004
2008
2006
2009

20
30.5
42
80
12.5
29.4
25
27.5
266.9

34

IDA

GRANT

Cancel.

Undisb.

19.45
26.41
31.24
46.75
1.84
20.65
8.81
26.43
181.58

Orig. Frm Rev'd

2.37
3.26
27.83
46.75
1.84
10.65
8.81
10.76
112.28

6.19
3.74
9.93

ANNEX 5: KNOWLEDGE SERVICES
A notable feature of the CPS is the intensive program of knowledge services (economic and
sector studies, non-lending technical assistance, and grant funding) provided by the Bank to
the Dominican Republic. This reflects the Bank’s global expertise, ability to leverage
resources from other international financiers which value Bank capacities and leadership, as
well as the need to target timely and well focused interventions outside of the normal pace
and character of lending operations.
Strategic Objective 1. Strengthen Social Cohesion and Improve Access to and Quality of
Social Services
The Programmatic Social Sectors NLTA is helping the Government build knowledge and
capacity to enact the reforms supported by the programmatic PASS DPL series. The NLTA
has also supported the Government in assessing and monitoring the social impacts of the
PASS-supported reforms. Finally, the NLTA works to address broader knowledge and
advisory gaps on the performance and quality of social services and the design of a social
protection strategy that builds resiliency to crises.
This NLTA has also leveraged support from a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA)
Trust Fund and a Spanish Fund for Latin American and the Caribbean (SFLAC) Trust
Fund.

Strategic Objective 2. Promote Competitiveness in a Sustainable and Resilient Economic
Environment
The Dominican Republic-Haiti Quisqueya Growth and Poverty Report, which is
exploring the potential opportunities for joint growth and poverty reduction through a deeper
economic relationship, is expected to be finalized by the end of 2011.
Preliminary
conclusions show that the countries could benefit from a stronger economic integration,
including strengthening trade links.
The World Bank Treasury's Reserve Advisory and Management Program (RAMP) is
supporting public debt management and strengthening the Central Bank’s investment
capabilities for the management of foreign exchange reserves, training of a new generation of
university graduates in finance, who now play a significant role in financial management at
the Central Bank.
A Competitiveness NLTA is supporting the design of a logistics and transport national
strategy and support to improve the trade facilitation system in the country. The Certification
in Gender Equity in Firms as Means to Enrich and Promote Competitiveness trust fund is
supporting the National Competitiveness Council’s efforts to mainstream gender in the
country’s development strategies through design and pilot implementation of a Firm
Certification model on gender equality to further attract private sector’s agents into the
implementation of good practices in the workplace.

35

The Adaptation to Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management NLTA was launched
in FY12 and will focus on the assessment of climate impacts on the surface hydrology of the
country.
The Energy Sector NLTA has supported the development of a comprehensive strategy for
energy sector reform in collaboration with the IDB, and an action plan which is currently
under implementation.
Strategic Objective 3. Enhance Quality of Public Expenditures and Institutional
Development.
Performance informed budgeting is being introduced in the social sectors, supported by
the analysis and dialogue under the Quality of Public Expenditures NLTA. As
conditions of the PASS series, performance agreements have been signed between the
Ministries of Finance, Economy, Planning and Development, and Public Administration with
the Ministries of Health and Education. The agreements would cover both institutional and
program targets. Performance indicators will relate to internal processes and systems such as
planning, procurement, monitoring, personnel and organizational structure as well as priority
public programs related to the volume and quality of goods and services delivered by the
agency. The agreements call for programs of self-evaluation, validation of the results, and
dissemination to internal and external users including the public. The Health Sector Reform
Second Phase APL (PARSS2) has made good progress in several key areas: (i) contracts
have been signed between National Health Insurance Authority (SENASA) and two pilot
Regional Health Services outlining a results-based financing mechanism for the first level of
care; (ii) Government is moving to establish an autonomous entity to administer/oversee the
regional network of health services, retaining policy direction in the Ministry of Health; and
(iii) the quality of spending for medicines is targeted through a consultative process among
key stakeholders to design a better integrated supply chain for medicines.
The Quality of Public Expenditures NLTA is supporting the strengthening of financial
management and procurement mechanisms, and the introduction and institutionalization of
performance information by key actors along the budget cycle. The NLTA has supported the
ongoing efforts in the social sector, including the PASS DPL series and Social Sectors NLTA.
The NLTA is serving as a platform for the Government and the Bank to build trust and to
seize political windows of opportunity by providing just in time support to the long-term
trajectory of reform implementation and working closer with development partners to
strengthen continued PFM dialogue. This work is now being expanded with the support of a 1
million euro TF provided by the EU.
The Institutional and Governance Review is currently under preparation. It will analyze
the underlying political economy and governance issues that inhibit the country from
addressing fundamental development challenges in key sectors like education, health, and
energy, and identify potential drivers or opportunities to change those factors. The team will
seek to integrate the lessons emerging from the variety of institutional reforms being pursued
through the CPS as well as to tap the insight of key national and external stakeholders. The
IGR is expected to be completed by late FY12.
Activities to strengthen fiduciary capacity. The Bank actively participated in the 2010
Update of the European Union led Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA)
36

exercise, which has been used as an important source of information in assessing fiduciary
risk of Public Financial Management systems. The Bank’s leading role at IPAC has served
as a coordination platform for PFM donors’ interventions. The renewed interest for the
implementation of the Single Treasury Account; the development of a tool for self-evaluation
of governmental entities for improved accountability; and the institutional strengthening of
the public oversight entities, are some of the recommendations that are being implemented
with Bank support. Following the 2009 Update Report on Observance of Standards and
Codes on Accounting and Auditing, The Bank has provided support, in coordination with
other donor partners, mainly with IDB and the USAD –Transparency and Anti-Corruption
Project, to the Chamber of Accounts (DR Supreme Audit Institution), the General
Comptroller’s Office, the General Accounting Office, the Department of Prosecution of
Corruption (DPCA) to assist in the implementation of the 2009 ROSC A&A Update. The
academy, and the Institute of Certified Public Accounts, the standard setting body for the
private sector, have also participated in training activities to broadly disseminate International
A&A standards.

Strategic Objective 4. Build Capacity and Constituencies for Reform
A Public Budget Monitoring Project (funded by a US$150,000 Global Partnership Facility
grant) aims at strengthening capacities for analysis and budget monitoring in civil society.
The Access to Information Project implemented in seven poor municipalities (financed by
the Japan Social Development Fund for US$420,000) seeks to enhance the capacity of
vulnerable groups in rural areas by making public information accessible and training them on
how to analyze the information and participate in policy discussions and program design in
collaboration with local governments.
A Municipal Participatory Budgeting Project through Mobile Technology (supported by a
Korean trust fund for about US$72,000), linked to the Municipal Development Project, is
piloting the use of mobile technology to enhance citizens’ participation in Participatory
Budgeting and social accountability in two municipalities.
USAID is collaborating with the Bank (with an EFO of US$350,000) in a Capacity Building
Program for Strengthening the Demand for Good Governance in three pilot provinces
training about 540 representatives of small and pro-poor community based organizations in
advocating for public administration accountability and transparency, in policy analysis and
formulation, and in pro-poor service delivery, as well as providing technical assistance to
about 200 grassroots and community based organization to improve their own management
capacity.
Through the Gender Mainstreaming Capacity and Advocacy in DR Civil Society
Organizations’ (CSO) TF about 150 CSOs and 100 Municipalities staff have been trained to
integrate gender equality in local municipal plans and policies by a Bank trained corps of
local trainers. The awareness raising material produced (two videos and two practical guides
on how to integrate gender issues at the municipal level) has been used to reach out to CSOs
and local public administration staff in other five municipalities.

37

IPAC is a broad multi-donor and multi-stakeholder participatory mechanism involving
representatives from civil society, Government, the private sector, and 12 international
development agencies aiming to improve transparency, strengthen institutions and fight
corruption in the Dominican Republic. The Bank’s leading role in coordination and
facilitation of civil society, donors, private sector and the Government has contributed to an
enhanced dialogue and enabled a genuine coordination platform for donors’ interventions.
During its year of existence IPAC has established 10 working groups, developed 30
recommendations, set up milestones to mark implementation progress, named governmental
focal points, and held three accountability workshops to follow up on the recommendations
using a scorecard system. The IPAC represents a new country approach to tackling
corruption.

38

72º W

71º W

70º W

DOM INICAN
REP UBL IC

AT LA NT IC O CEA N
20º N

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

MONTE
CRISTI

Pepillo
Salcedo
To
Fort-Liberté
Fort Liberté

Puerto Plata
Villa Vásquez C

ord

Sep

tent

riona

l
Moca

Jánico

ord

ille

Duarte
r a Pico
(3175 m)
Ce
nt

SAN JUAN

Elías Piña

Rincón

l

Bonao
Constanza

San Juan

EPE
ND

ENCIA
Cabral

e
qu
Ya
Vicente
Noble

Bah
í
Nei a de
ba

Barahona

Si
Polo

er

ra

Pedernales

de

LE
NA

18º N

Neiba
Duverge

ER
P ED

To
Grand-Gosier

Lago
Enriquillo

de
lS
u

IN
D

AZUA
r

Ba

BARAHONA

or

uc

o

S

Oviedo

72º W

71º W

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
Nagua

Azua

Bahía
de Ocoa

Sánchez

DUARTE

Sabana Grande
de Boya

5

MONTE PLATA
Monte
Plata

Yamasa

Villa
Altagracia

Bayaguana

9

8
San Cristóbal

Nigua

Baní

PERAVIA

Samaná
Sabana de la Mar

Cotuí

6

7
San Jose
de Ocoa

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

SAMANÁ

Miches

HATO
MAYOR
Hato
Mayor

19º N

EL SEIBO

Cordillera Orient

al
Higüey

LA
ALTAGRACIA

10
SANTO
Boca
DOMINGO Chica

El Macao

El Seibo

San Pedro
de Macorís

DISTRITO NACIONAL

Boca de Yuma

La Romana

LA ROMANA

Punta Palenque

Isla
Saona

1. DAJABÓN
2. SANTIAGO RODRÍGUEZ
3. VALVERDE
4. HERMANAS MIRABAL
5. SÁNCHEZ RAMÍREZ
6. MONSEÑOR NOUEL
7. SAN JOSÉ DE OCOA
8. SAN CRISTÓBAL
9. SANTO DOMINGO
10. SAN PEDRO DE MACORÍS

18º N

DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC

Car i bbe an S e a
0

0
70º W

69º W

20

40 Kilometers

20

40 Miles

IBRD 33398R

MAY 2009

Isla
Beata

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

ma
za

BAORUCO

Jimaní

na
Yu

Monte Tina
(2830 m)

Neiba

RAILROADS

MARÍA
TRINIDAD
SÁNCHEZ

O

To
Port au Prince
Port-au-Prince

Fantino

LA VEGA

ra

Pimental

Camu

MAIN ROADS

Cabrera

La Vega

El Cercado

Cordillera

4

Rio San
Juan

San Francisco
Salcedo de Macorís

San Jose
de las Matas

Monte Mijo
(2266 m)

ELÍ

Gaspar
Hernández

SANTIAGO

AS

Ñ
PI

RIVERS

ESPAILLAT

Santigo

2
AC

NATIONAL CAPITAL
Sousúa

PUERTO PLATA

Sabaneta

Restauración

To
Lascahobas

3

Mao

1

19º N

Imbert

ille
Yaq
ue el N
or t e r a
d

Dajabón

HAITI

PROVINCE CAPITALS

Luperón

Monte Cristi

20º N

