Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank Group
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No.

60339-BI

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR
THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI

Public Disclosure Authorized

April 21, 2011

Eastern Africa Country Management Unit 1
Africa Region
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department

This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not imply a
presumed outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and the updated
document will be made publicly available in accordance with the Bank’s Policy on Access to
Information.

DATE OF CURRENT COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY
July 8, 2008
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
January 1— December 31
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective as of April 11, 2011)
Currency Unit = Burundi Franc (FBu)
US$1.00 = 1,210 FBU

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADC
AfDB
ART
BCB
CAS
CAS PR
CEM
CPPR
CSOs
DFID
DRR
DSA
EAC
ECF
ESP
EFA-FTI
ERSG
ESW
EU
FBu
FDI
FNLPALIPEHU
TU
FY
GAC
GAVI
GDP
GFRP
GNI
GTZ
HIPC
HIV/AIDS
ICT
IDA
IEG
IFAD
IFC
IMF

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Democratic Alliance for Change
African Development Bank
Antiretroviral Treatment
Banque de Crédit de Bujumbura
Country Assistance Strategy
CAS Progress Report
Country Economic Memorandum
Country Portfolio Performance Review
Civil Society Organizations
Department for International Development (United
Kingdom)
Demobilization, Reinsertion, and Reintegration
Debt Sustainability Assessment
East Africa Community
Extended Credit Facility
Education Sector Plan
Education for All – Fast Track Initiative
Economic Reform Support Grant
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Burundi Franc
Foreign Direct Investment
National Liberation Front – Party for the Liberation of the
Hutu People
Fiscal Year
Governance and Anti-Corruption
Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations
Gross Domestic Product
Global Food Crisis Response Program
Gross National Income
German Agency for Technical Cooperation
Highly Indebted Poor Countries (Initiative)
Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome
Information and Communications Technology
International Development Association
Independent Evaluation Group
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund

Vice President:
Country Director/Director:
Country Manager:
Task Team Leaders:

ISN
ITEKA
MDGs
MDRI
MDRP
MOU
MIGA
MTEF
NGO
NPV
ODA
OLUCOM
E
OTRACO
PBA
PBF
PEMFAR
PER
PIU
PRSP
PSD
RBF
RRI
SDR
SME
SOSUMO
SOE
SWAp
TA
TFGIA
UN
UNDP
UNFPA
UNICEF
US
USAID
WBI
WHO

IDA
Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili
John Murray McIntire
Mercy Tembon
Mercy Tembon
Johannes Widmann

Interim Strategy Note
Burundian League of the Humans Rights
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative
Multicountry Demobilization and Reintegration Program
for the Great Lakes
Memorandum of Understanding
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Medium-term Expenditure Framework
Non-Governmental Organization
Net Present Value
Official Development Assistance
Anti-corruption and Economic Malpractice Observatory
Office des Transports en Commun
Performance Based Allocation
Performance-Based Financing
Public Expenditure Management and Financial
Accountability Review
Public Expenditure Review
Project Implementation Unit
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Private Sector Development
Results Based Financing
Rapid Results Initiative
Special Drawing Right
Small and medium enterprise
Société Sucrière du Moso
State-Owned Enterprise
Sector-Wide Approach
Technical Assistance
Trade Finance Guarantee Insurance Agreement (IFC)
United Nations
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Children’s’ Fund
United States
United States Agency for International Development
World Bank Institute
World Health Organization

IFC
Thierry Tanoh
Jean Philippe Prosper
Aida Kimemia

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.

Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................... 1

II.

Context ................................................................................................................................................................. 1
A. Political and Social Context ............................................................................................................................ 1
B. Economic and Poverty Context ....................................................................................................................... 2

III. Progress toward CAS Outcomes........................................................................................................................... 4
A. Progress on CAS Objective One: Promote Sustainable and Broad-Based Economic Growth ........................ 5
B. Progress on CAS Objective Two: Improve Access to Social Services and Consolidate Social Stability ........6
C. Progress on the Governance Objective............................................................................................................ 9
IV. Adjustments to the CAS and Progress in Implementation .................................................................................. 10
V.

Risks ................................................................................................................................................................... 13

Tables:
Table 1: Performance Indicators in Health and Education Sectors……………………………………………..…… 9
Annexes:
Annex 1: Updated CAS Results Matrix ....................................................................................................................... 14
Annex 2: Revised CAS Outcomes ............................................................................................................................... 19
Annex 3: Division of Labor ......................................................................................................................................... 20
Annex 4: Lending Program ......................................................................................................................................... 21
Annex 5: Analytic and Advisory Activities ................................................................................................................. 22
Annex 6: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management .................................................................. 23
Annex 7: IDA and Grants Operations Portfolio, Regional Projects and Trust Funds.................................................. 24
Annex 8: IFC Operations Portfolio .............................................................................................................................. 25
Annex 9: Burundi at a Glance ..................................................................................................................................... 26
Map of Burundi: IBRD No. 33380………………………………………………………………………………… .29

BURUNDI
COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
This report presents a midterm implementation assessment of the World Bank’s
FY2009-12 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Burundi.1 The CAS is aligned with
priorities of the Government of Burundi’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) (2006-2010).
It assists Burundi’s transition from a post-conflict to a developing economy by selectively
supporting the implementation of its development program. The CAS has two strategic objectives:
(i) to promote sustainable and broad-based economic growth and (ii) to improve access to social
services and consolidate social stability. Improving governance is a cross-cutting objective of the
CAS. The results framework of the CAS program is crafted around six outcomes: (a) increased
productivity of food and high value export crops; (b) improved business environment; (c) improved
infrastructural services and enhanced regional integration; (d) improved reintegration of excombatants and vulnerable groups; (e) more efficient and transparent public financial management;
and (f) improved access to and quality of basic services and decreased vulnerability to HIV/AIDS.
Given the cross-cutting nature of governance, the CAS program envisages improved governance at
the project, sector and macro levels.
2.
The objective of this CAS Progress Report (CAS PR) is to describe any changes in the
country context, show progress toward CAS outcomes, signal remaining challenges and make
any necessary adjustments to the Bank’s program. Section II will provide an update on recent
political, social and economic developments. Section III will, together with the revised results
framework presented in Annex 1, show progress on CAS outcomes and highlight any outstanding
challenges for the rest of the CAS period and beyond. A description of adjustments to the CAS
program and a report on implementation progress is presented in section IV with the perspective of
the pillars, foundation and instruments of the New Africa Strategy. Section V will provide an update
to the risk framework.

II.

CONTEXT

A. POLITICAL AND SOCIAL CONTEXT
3.
There has been mixed progress on both political and security fronts since finalization
of the CAS in 2008. Although the government and the FNL-PALIPEHUTU, the last remaining
rebel group, had signed a cease-fire agreement in September 2006, sporadic fighting continued and
it took two further years of negotiations to reach a cessation of hostilities. In December 2008, the
government and the FNL-PALIPEHUTU signed a power sharing agreement, and in January 2009
the rebel group removed the ethnic connotation "PALIPEHUTU" from its name, making it
constitutionally eligible to register as Burundi's 42nd political party following disarmament,

1

The CAS (Report No. 44193-BI) is dated July 8, 2008 and was presented to the Board of Executive Directors on
August 08, 2008.

1

demobilization, and reintegration efforts. These developments are historic milestones, although
they have been accompanied by bouts of violence and insecurity.
4.
Burundi's second democratic elections in 2010 constituted a milestone in the country's
political transition. The second democratic elections under the new constitution since 2005 took
place from May 24th to September 8th. They tested the strength of the country's institutions and
stability of its democracy. The election process began with local councils, followed successively by
presidential, parliamentary, and senatorial elections, and ending with hillside (local) elections.
According to international observers, the elections conformed to international standards despite
minor observed irregularities during the local council elections. However, thirteen opposition
parties, alleging fraud and vote-rigging, formed a coalition to boycott the presidential election,
leaving President Nkurunziza to stand unopposed. President Nkurunziza was therefore, in June, reelected for a second term, claiming 92 percent of the votes cast. Three political parties, notably the
Union pour le progress national (Uprona) and Front for Democracy in Burundi (FRODEBU)
decided to contest the legislative elections, which took place in July, and are now represented in
parliament.
5.
The security situation remains calm but uncertain. The controversies over the election
results sparked violence that sometimes led to loss of life. The self exile of the FNL president and
former rebel leader Rwasa Agathon along with other opposition leaders in the consortium of
opposition parties, also known as the Democratic Alliance for Change (ADC), has created an
atmosphere of uncertainty. Although Rwasa has denied any intention to return to armed struggle,
sporadic attacks on the population have continued. There are reports of desertions of some officers
from the armed forces with arms, and lingering rumors of a rebellion forming in the Kibira and
Rukoko forests in the west of the country. Although most of the country is at peace with sufficient
security for economic and social activities, fear and skepticism still abound.
6.
Political anxiety is widespread, especially among opposition parties who boycotted the
elections. The ruling party holds an overwhelming majority in the government, parliament and
senate. Opposition parties allege an absence of inclusive political dialogue in public affairs and
persecution of opposition political leaders. Efforts by the ruling party to reach out to other
opposition parties include appointments of opposition party members in government and convening
meetings for political dialogue.
B. ECONOMIC AND POVERTY CONTEXT
7.
The performance of some sectors of the economy has improved, but gross domestic
product (GDP) growth has been lower than expected, while the country has experienced the
impact of the economic crises. In 2008, Burundi’s economy grew by 4.5 percent of GDP, owing
to improved agriculture performance, an expansion of manufacturing and increased donor
financing, and despite increases in fuel and food prices and energy shortages. In 2009, Burundi
experienced the impact of the global economic and financial crisis; economic growth slowed to 3.5
percent, mainly because of lower than expected private transfers and foreign direct investment as
well as continued energy shortages. In 2010, however, as the economy is emerging from the effects
of the global crisis, economic growth is estimated to rise to 3.9 percent. Economic growth remains
volatile due to its dependence on the widely fluctuating agricultural sector, which constitutes about
half of GDP and employs approximately 90 percent of the population.
2

8.
Inflation increased in the wake of the international food and fuel price crisis, but has
subsequently decreased and is expected to remain in the single digits in the absence of new
global shocks. In 2008, inflation rose to 24.4 percent (period average) due to increases in food and
fuel prices and to some extent depreciation of the currency. In 2009, period average inflation
decreased to 10.7 percent and declined further to 6.4 percent in 2010. Due to higher international
food and oil prices, inflation rates are expected to increase slightly in 2011. Nevertheless, inflation
rates are expected to be contained in the single digits owing to government's commitments to
macroeconomic policies, the continuation of reforms under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF)
program with the IMF, as well as the absence of a twin food and oil crisis in the magnitude of the
2008 crisis.
9.
Lack of diversity in exports, and reliance on oil and capital goods imports, continue to
lead to consistent current account deficits. In 2008, the current account deficit (including official
transfers) improved to 12.3 percent (from 15.7 percent in 2007). In 2009, however, the deficit
increased again to 15.9 percent mainly due to lower donor assistance, which represents more than
60 percent of net current transfers. Even though Burundi’s trade balance improved in 2009, after
the negative effects of higher food and fuel prices on the trade deficit in 2008, it still reflects the
country’s narrow range of exports, which consists almost entirely of coffee and tea, and its
dependence on imported oil and capital goods. The external current account deficit is estimated to
have declined to around 12 percent of GDP in 2010, because of higher exports and official transfers.
Gross official reserves represented about 5.2 months of imports in the period 2008-2010.
10.
The private sector’s contribution to growth remains limited. Foreign direct investments
(FDI)—representing less than one percent of GDP—remain low in Burundi, despite a significant
improvement from US$0.5 million in 2007 to US$13.6 million in 2008, as a result of renewed
involvement of foreign firms in the banking and telecommunication sectors. However, in 2009,
FDI is estimated to have declined slightly to US$10.2 million. Domestic private investments
remain at low levels of about 7.6 percent of GDP (on average in 2005-2008).
11.
Burundi’s external debt situation has improved, but remains vulnerable to debt
distress due to the country’s narrow export base. In January 2009, Burundi reached the Highly
Indebted poor Countries (HIPC) completion point and was eligible for US$833 million (in net
present value) in debt relief, including US$425 million from IDA and US$38 million from the IMF.
The most recent Debt Sustainability Assessment (DSA) from July 2010 reveals that Burundi
continues to face debt distress and recommends: (i) acceleration of structural reforms to increase
and diversify the export base; and (ii) continued reliance on grants and highly concessional loans.
12.
Medium-term growth prospects supported by productivity improvements in the
agriculture sector are favorable. Growth is projected to rise from 3.9 percent in 2010 to reach 4.5
percent in 2011 and average 4.9 percent in 2012-2013. Under these projections, growth would be
supported by productivity improvements in the agriculture sector (including coffee) and its linkages
with the secondary sector (mostly agro-industry, mining and energy, and construction). In addition,
a renewed impetus in the service sector, including banking and telecommunications, within the East
Africa Community (EAC) should have a positive effect on growth. Finally, planned investments in
the energy sector should relieve the economy from a significant constraint.
13.
The macroeconomic framework is expected to be stable and the current account deficit
should improve. Inflation is projected to decrease to about 7.0 percent in 2011-2013. Despite the
3

slow recovery of the global economy, the current account deficit will likely decline compared to its
2009 level. Following the liberalization reforms of main export crops, Burundi’s export earnings
will increase, but higher international food and oil prices are expected to exacerbate the trade
deficit. As a result, the current account deficit will deteriorate to about 15 percent of GDP in 201113 from 11.9 percent of GDP in 2010. FDI is expected to continue to rise over the next couple of
years to about US$12.8 million on average in 2010-2013 from US$10.2 million in 2009, due to the
modest recovery of the world economy, as well as continued reforms of the investment climate and
public finance. Gross official reserves will average 5.4 months of imports in 2011-2013.
14.
Burundi’s poverty outlook remains daunting; the country continues to be unlikely to
reach the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. Burundi’s GDP per capita remains
very low, even though it increased from about US$147 in 2008 to US$178 in 2010 according to
IMF estimates. In 2010, Burundi ranked 167th of 169 countries on the UNDP Human Development
Index. The last measured poverty level for Burundi stood at about 67 percent in 2006, still far from
the MDG target of 18 percent in 2015. However, the country achieved progress on some key social
indicators, such as maternal and child health, HIV/AIDS prevalence and in education enrollment.
15.
Burundi’s economic structure and geographic location continues to make the country
vulnerable to various economic, political and climatic shocks. First, as already discussed,
economic growth depends mainly on the performance of the agriculture sector which is very
sensitive to weather shocks. Second, because Burundi is a net food importer and depends heavily
on fuel imports, it is very susceptible to shocks in international markets. Third, recurrent episodes
of conflict have been a huge drag on growth in the past decades. Given Burundi’s landlocked
position, political problems in neighboring countries can have large negative impacts. These
shocks, especially when they are cumulative, can have large welfare consequences. For instance,
because households spend a large share of their income on food, an increase in food prices worsens
poverty. Internal and external conflicts drive prices even higher or delay the delivery of food and
magnify the size of the welfare losses. Moreover lack of adequate safety nets reduces the country’s
ability to protect its population from shocks.
16.
Burundi is in the process of formulating its second PRSP expected to be finalized in
mid-2011. A comprehensive performance and impact assessment of the first PRSP has been
prepared and informs ongoing consultations for the formulation of the second PRSP. The new
PRSP is not expected to deviate from the objectives set forth in the first PRSP, but rather build on
the progress achieved and deepen the reform efforts put in place. It will focus on increasing growth
and employment opportunities though investments in: (i) agriculture; (ii) infrastructure (water,
energy, roads, and ICT); (iii) private sector development; and (iv) tourism. The current CAS
continues to be in line with these objectives, and the new CAS will be designed based on the second
PRSP.

III.

PROGRESS TOWARD CAS OUTCOMES

17.
Burundi’s progress toward CAS outcomes has been mixed. Within the two CAS
objectives (i) Promote sustainable and broad-based economic growth; and (ii) improve access to
social services and consolidate social stability – there has generally been more progress under the
second objective and major challenges remain to achieve more satisfactory outcomes under the first
objective. Among eleven outcome indicators under the first objective, three have been achieved
4

and six are on track albeit with much more work still needed; one indicator (energy) remains off
track (the ICT progress indicator is not available). While agriculture indicators progressed well
with respect to food crops, export crops indicators have lacked behind and proved too ambitious.
Business environment indicators were achieved even though a lot more needs to be done. Roads
and water remain on track, but energy outcome indicators are currently off track. Among thirteen
outcome indicators under the second objective, four have been achieved and five are well on track.
Four indicators are currently off track. Progress toward reintegration of ex-combatants and
vulnerable groups is going well, even though one indicator on effective reintegration is currently off
track. In addition, there has been good progress on public finance management indicators.
Excellent progress has been achieved toward meeting the CAS outcomes in health and HIV/AIDS.
A total of three indicators are currently off track in the education sector, which continues to face
major challenges further described below.
18.
The recent Performance and Impact Assessment of the Growth and Poverty Reduction
Strategy Framework confirmed the good progress on key human development indicators,
particularly in health, albeit with some shortcomings in education. It emphasized the important
challenges that remain on promoting the country’s economic transformation and increasing growth,
especially of exports.
A. PROGRESS ON CAS OBJECTIVE ONE: PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE AND BROADBASED ECONOMIC GROWTH
19.

The CAS outcomes under Objective One are:
1.1:
1.2:
1.3:

Increased productivity of food and high-value export crops;
Improved business environment; and
Improved infrastructural services with enhanced regional integration.

20.
There has been progress in increasing productivity of food crops, but improving the
productivity of export crops and increasing overall agriculture sector growth are key
challenges. While there have been noticeable improvements in the production and yields of rice,
milk and oil palm, production of traditional export crops, such as tea and coffee, was either stagnant
or declining. As already outlined above, sluggish growth of the economy overall during the last
years can be, among other factors, ascribed to limited progress in agriculture production, which
resulted in weak agriculture growth of less than 3 percent from 2006-2009. This also continuous to
severely hamper any progress in poverty reduction given that about 90 percent of Burundians work
in the agriculture sector. Specific key challenges in this regard include the need to further improve
the productivity of agriculture investments through adoption of agriculture technology aimed at
increasing yields, and improved agriculture research and extension efforts, including the production
of seed and the distribution of fertilizer. Additional challenges include the need for further
irrigation development and the rehabilitation of rural feeder roads. Traditional export crops need to
be modernized, but agriculture exports—just like the country’s economy overall—are also in a dire
need for diversification. Finally, an important challenge remains for increased private sector
participation in commercial agriculture. This challenge is evident in the CAS outcome indicator on
a reduction in government ownership of coffee assets, which proved too ambitious and had to be
revised. One specific challenge includes the privatization of coffee washing stations. So far only 13
out of the 117 washing stations have been privatized.
5

21.
Progress in improving the business environment has been good according to the targets
set forth in the CAS, but significant challenges remain in making Burundi a better place to do
business. Arrears to the private sector have been paid and there has been some progress in revising
legislative codes (commerce, corporations, and investments) and improving collaboration between
the public and the private sector. While there has been significant contribution to this outcome from
the Bank’s financing program, certain knowledge products had a significant impact as well. For
example, a 2009 report of the legal and institutional framework for privatization pointed out the
weaknesses of the agency in charge of privatization and its lack of capacity in bringing about
substantial improvements in the performance of the sector and to plan and monitor the privatization
program envisaged by government. In addition, the FY10 CEM recommended improvements in the
regulatory environment to attract domestic and foreign investment. Among other things it pointed
out the need for the implementation of the investment code, the finalization of a revision to the tax
code and the establishment of an export and investment promotion agency. Nevertheless, private
sector activities remain severely hampered by institutional constraints and slow progress with
respect to the development of the formal sector and the restructuring or privatization of public
enterprises. The country’s business climate continues to be uninviting, hampered by its small
domestic market and landlocked position, but also a high cost of doing business, which is due to
high energy and telecommunication costs and poor infrastructure. According to the 2011 Doing
Business report, the country ranks 181st (among 183 countries) in the world and much remains to be
done to improve this situation.
22.
Progress on improving transport and water infrastructure has generally been good.
The country made progress on the roll-out of ICT coverage, but important challenges remain
with respect to energy generation and access as well as in sector governance. Development of
infrastructure in general remains a key growth impediment. Given the landlocked position of
Burundi, regional infrastructure continues to play a key role, but improved domestic infrastructure
to improve market access from rural areas to urban centers, is also key. In the transport sector, there
has been good progress on road rehabilitation and notable efforts have been made to improve road
maintenance for which domestic resources more than doubled between 2007 and 2010. The paved
road network in good and fair condition has improved from 21 percent of 1,100 km to 49 percent in
the same period. IDA contributions in the road sector complemented government’s contributions
and resources by other partners, including the EU. However, Burundi’s international transportation
costs, representing 40 percent of the value of agriculture exports, remain exorbitant. Internet access
increased, as did the expansion of mobile phone services, thanks to the private sector. The
extremely weak levels of electricity generation – currently only about three percent of the
population has access to electricity – remain a key constraint, calling for the mobilization of
increased public and private investments. Infrastructure sectors in general still lack comprehensive
governance frameworks and exhibit the need to streamline and harmonize various efforts in
building their regulatory capacity as a priority going forward.
B. PROGRESS ON CAS OBJECTIVE TWO: IMPROVE ACCESS TO SOCIAL SERVICES
AND CONSOLIDATE SOCIAL STABILITY
23.

The CAS outcomes under Objective Two are:
2.1:

Improved reintegration of ex-combatants and vulnerable groups;
6

2.2:
2.3:

More efficient and transparent public financial management; and
Improved access to and quality of basic social services and decreased vulnerability to
HIV/AIDS.

24.
Demobilization of ex-combatants and reintegration of vulnerable groups has
progressed well. Since the 2008 peace agreement with the FNL to transform the rebel movement
into a political party, the Government of Burundi moved forward with the final phase of
demobilization, reinsertion and reintegration (DRR) and as a result over 6,500 FNL ex-combatants
were demobilized. The Government is now focusing on reintegration efforts for these excombatants and the host communities. On the other hand, there has been slower than expected
progress on the amount of returnees and displaced persons that have been effectively reinserted into
their communities. A key challenge remains the unemployment of ex-combatants. While
opportunities for labor-intensive public works jobs have been created by the Bank-financed public
works program, it is important for the government to develop an environment conducive to private
sector development so that more jobs will be created. Partnerships have been a strong element of
demobilization and reintegration activities in Burundi. The DRR project has brought together, on
one level, collaboration between four bilateral donors and the Government of Burundi. The
effective execution of activities has been realized through the engagement of 15 implementing
partners representing a broad spectrum of civil society actors. These implementing agencies
represent regional CSO’s working on the ground in Burundi, as well as specialized agencies
working in the domain of medical service provision for disabled ex-combatants, as well as psychosocial support services. DRR programming in Burundi is achieved by the successful management of
partnerships at all levels.
25.
Important progress has been achieved in putting in place the framework and systems
for more efficient and transparent public financial management, but the quality of public
spending must be improved. Significant progress was made in the enactment of the 2009 Budget
Framework Law (Loi Organique). In addition, there has been a modernization of the procurement
code and a computerized financial management system has been extended to virtually all financial
management and cash flows. There has also been good progress on the development of central and
sector medium-term expenditure frameworks (MTEF), even though there is still need for the central
MTEF to be used to define the overall budget envelope and allow for inter-sector budget choices
consistent with national priorities. While the percentage of expenditures allocated to priority
sectors increased laudably, from about 41 percent in 2005 to 55 percent in 2009, challenges remain
with respect to improvements in budget planning process and the quality of public spending. A mix
of instruments contributed to progress under this outcome, including an economic management
project and the development policy series, but most notably also various analytic work and technical
assistance. A Public Expenditure Financial Accountability report in FY09 recommended, among
other things the development of an MTEF to improve budget planning as well the implementation
of cash management plans. Other knowledge products included a study on options for pay reform,
the Financial Sector Advisory Program, a debt management performance assessment, as well as
technical assistance for poverty monitoring and quantitative macro-fiscal framework. A FY11
Public Expenditure Review (PER) assessed the state of public expenditure in Burundi, with a focus
on public investment, and recommended specific actions that need to be taken to stimulate growth
and reduce poverty. Another PER is planned for FY12 in addition to technical assistance that will
aim at building capacity to extend the use of MTEFs across ministries.

7

26.
Significant progress has been achieved in the health sector including a major and
successful reform through the introduction of performance-based financing. Significant efforts
have been made to train general practitioners and nurses and increase capacity. Government policy
of free health care for pregnant women and children under the age of five has increased utilization
rates. The number of women giving birth in health facilities is increasing; maternal and child
mortality rates have been declining albeit not significantly. The introduction of performance
contracts with health facilities with support from IDA financing has significantly improved the
utilization and quality of services (including with regard to availability of essential drugs). Burundi
is now only the second country in Sub-Saharan Africa (after Rwanda) to have performance-based
financing (PBF) for all public and private non-profit health facilities nationwide. This is a major
achievement that exemplifies positive changes in the health sector, including: (i) the creation of an
internal market for PBF with IDA financing leveraging funding from other sources; (ii) successful
innovative civil service reform in the health administration at all levels; (iii) introduction of
innovative data management systems, which led to an advanced level of transparency and a
different way of doing business. Key challenges going forward will be to consolidate and enhance
these gains in utilization and quality and to show progress in certain indicators and areas of the
country where progress has been lagging. It will be important to continue to strengthen health
systems, especially with respect to human resources but also regarding the systems for distributing
and managing drugs and medical consumables, planning and budgeting, M&E, enhancing the
autonomy of decentralized structures (e.g. health facilities) and addressing various inefficiencies in
resource use.
27.
Combating HIV/AIDS has made steady progress with respect to several prevention
and screening measures. As of June 2010, 20,307 new HIV/AIDS patients out of a total 63,000
patients (i.e. 37 percent) have been enrolled on antiretroviral treatment (ART); 8,758 out of almost
16,900 HIV+ pregnant women (i.e. 52 percent) were receiving ART prophylaxis for the prevention
of mother-to-child transmission. IDA funding is highly complementary with funding from other
partners, including UNAIDS. Prevalence rates are declining overall. Compared to 2002, the 2008
National serological survey suggests that HIV/AIDS prevalence is stable in urban areas (from 4
percent to 3.8 percent) but moderately increasing in rural areas (from 2.2 percent to 2.9 percent).
The most important challenge will be to not become complacent, but continue to widen efforts,
especially with respect to prevention measures.
28.
The education sector has trouble in providing quality education after the spectacular
growth in enrollment since 2005 (Table 1). Reintegration combined with the abolition of school
fees resulted in gross enrollment growth from about 80 percent in 2005 to 134 percent in 2009. In
order to accommodate this increase, there has been an expansion in the number of classrooms, but
key quality indicators such as completion rates, student-teacher or student-textbook ratios are
improving at a much slower speed than expected by the CAS. Burundi, however, did achieve
gender parity in primary education. A key short-term challenge will be for Burundi to join the
Education for All – Fast Track Initiative (EFA-FTI). One key obstacle for joining the EFA-FTI has
been the absence of an endorsed Education Sector Plan (ESP). The Government had prepared a
plan in October 2009, but Development Partners did not endorse it for various reasons including its
complexity. In October 2010 a new policy of 9-years of Basic Education was introduced.
Government is currently working on updating the ESP to accommodate the new policy. A new plan
is envisaged for November/December 2011, following which the ESP will be reviewed and
endorsed by donors.
8

Table 1: Performance Indicators in Health and Education Sectors
2000
Health
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)

2005

2006

2007

2008

33.5(a)

Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Infant mortality rate (under 1, per 1,000 live births)
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per
100,000 live births)
Maternal mortality ratio (GOB estimate, per
100,000 live births)
Person sick/injured during the last 4 weeks
preceding surveys (%)
HIV/AIDS
Prevalence of HIV, total (% of population aged 1549)
Education
Primary completion rate (GOB, %)
Net school enrollment, primary (GOB, %)
Pupil-teacher ratio, primary (GOB, number)
Pupil-classroom ration (GOB, number)
Girl-boy ratio (GOB, number)

177.6
107.3

176(a)
103.9

1,200

1,100

64.4(f)
170
103.3

168.7
102.6

615
29.9

167.5
101.9

166.3
101.3

970

970

620

620

(e)

3.2(b)
26.8
44.0

23.4(f)

2.97(c)
36.1
69.8
49
76.3
0.86

2009

38.5
72.4
55
86.3
0.91

40.7
82.6

3.0(d)
46
84.6

48
89.7
51.9
82.7
0.97

Notes: (a) estimated by the GOB from the MICS-2005 survey; (b) figure estimated from the 2002 survey; (c) HIV sero-prevalence survey of 2007;
(d)
figure estimated in 2009 from a survey of 63,741 people (in the general population) conducted by Family Health International (FHI); (e)
estimated from CWIQ-2006 survey; (f) estimated from the 2009 baseline Bank-funded health survey. Other data come from the World
Development Indicators database. GOB stands for Government of Burundi.

Source: Various sources assembled/calculated by World Bank staff.

C. PROGRESS ON THE GOVERNANCE OBJECTIVE
29.
Governance is a cross-cutting objective under the CAS, and is addressed at three
levels: (i) at the project level; (ii) at the sector level; and (iii) at the macro level. At the project
level, a recently completed Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) concluded that financial
management and procurement performance of the 14 projects in the portfolio has been generally
satisfactory. Burundi's portfolio has no current projects in problem status, compared to 28 percent
on average for the Sub-Saharan Africa region. Remaining challenges include the need to: (i)
strengthen internal audit capacity in technical ministries; and (ii) train procurement specialists in
Project Implementation Units (PIUs) on procurement issues, such as (a) standardized procurement
documents, (b) procurement software PROCYS, and (c) the preparation of bidding documents. At
the sector level, the IDA-financed health project has introduced results-based financing to
accompany the government's free health care policy for under 5 children and pregnant women at the
time of delivery, helping to ensure that resources reach the intended beneficiaries. In the
infrastructure sectors there has generally been good progress on governance at the project level, but
there is still a lack of more comprehensive governance frameworks at the sector level. This
includes the need to streamline and harmonize various efforts in building regulatory capacity in the
sectors.
30.
At the macro level, progress includes: (i) the revision of the budget framework law, which
has improved the transparency of public financial management; (ii) the revision of the procurement
code to increase transparency; (iii) the establishment of the Financial Management Information
9

System (SIGEFI) to improve the transparency of budget execution; and (iv) the computerization of
payroll management, which was effectively introduced with the January 2011 payroll. The
introduction of the new software in payroll management has already started showing positive
results: data entry mistakes have been reduced, resulting in savings of about US$18,000 in the wage
bill of January 2011. Other measures at the macro level that will be important to reduce corruption
include the need to improve ethics and internal control, internal and external audit, forensic
investigation and improved prosecution and sanctions.
31.
Strengthening governance and fighting corruption remain major challenges. The
government has not yet finalized its Governance Strategy (First draft September 2009) which was
expected to provide the framework and action plan for addressing governance issues. The lack of
consensus around governance reform priorities undermined the ability of government to approve the
Governance Strategy prior to the September 2010 Presidential Elections. Nevertheless, following
the elections, the new administration has expressed a renewed commitment to encourage good
governance and fight corruption, and has taken some steps towards finalization of the strategy—
including during a High Level Cabinet Seminar on governance in March 2011. It is now envisaged
that the strategy will be presented to the Council of Ministers for approval in May 2011.
Furthermore, the Ministry in charge of Good Governance and Privatization, the anti-corruption
Brigade and civil society organizations, such as the Burundian League of the Humans Rights
(ITEKA) and the Anti-corruption and Economic Malpractice Observatory (OLUCOME), are
collaborating to set up local committees of good governance. There have been recent arrests of
officials of public enterprises such as Société Sucrière du Moso (SOSUMO) and Office des
Transports en Commun (OTRACO) accused of embezzlement. However, high profile graft cases
such as the sale of the presidential plane (2007) and Interpetrol (2006) remain unresolved. The
government has not recovered the US$42 million owed by petroleum companies, as identified by a
petroleum sector audit.
32.
The Bank provides knowledge and technical assistance aimed at improving
governance. Three Policy Notes drawn from the findings of a FY10 Country Economic
Memorandum (CEM) on (i) priority areas for economic growth, (ii) creating fiscal space for
productive investment and (iii) improving governance for development effectiveness, served as the
base document for discussion at the High Level Cabinet Seminar on governance held in March
2011. Technical Assistance from the World Bank Institute has provided support to the governance
objective of the CAS, including through the Rapid Results Initiative (RRI) program that has helped
to improve the provision of public services and enhance efficiency and accountability in public
expenditure. So far, 2,764 civil servants have been trained in RRI and 7 of 25 ministries are using
the RRI method.

IV.

ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CAS AND PROGRESS IN
IMPLEMENTATION

33.
Although the implementation period of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP
2006-2010) supported by the CAS has just been completed, its development objectives remain
relevant. The government has recently launched the preparation of a second generation PRSP
(2011-2015). After stakeholder consultations, the objectives of the new strategy will remain similar
given that the country’s economic and social challenges remain broadly the same. The new PRSP
would focus more on the acceleration of economic growth (closing the infrastructure gap and
10

raising agricultural productivity and accelerating private sector development), while consolidating
peace and security, improving governance and the rule of law and enhancing human capital
development. The strategy to promote sustainable and broad-based growth and to improve access
to social services and consolidate social stability as laid out in the CAS therefore remains relevant.
Furthermore, these new PRSP and CAS objectives are also aligned with the two pillars and the
foundation of the new Africa strategy. The instruments of partnerships, knowledge and finance also
remain valid. Therefore, no major changes to the CAS program are proposed.
34.
The Bank’s program in Burundi will continue to address vulnerability issues through a
multi-sectoral approach. Various Bank interventions, across different sectors, aim to address
Burundi’s vulnerability to external shocks mentioned above. For example, agriculture projects aim
to increase food crops productivity, which will make the country less susceptible to rising
international food prices. At the same time, the projects also focus on making sure vulnerable
groups are being effectively integrated into their communities by supporting them in their own
agriculture activities. These efforts synch directly with other projects that promote better and more
equitable local service delivery together with projects that focus on demobilization of excombatants and providing them with socio-economic integration. Furthermore, the Bank’s program
supports short-term employment through public works aimed at providing income and safety nets
outside of agriculture. These efforts are being complemented by transport projects with a focus on
enhancing road maintenance that creates permanent jobs. The Bank’s program will continue and
further elaborate its multi-sector approach to vulnerability in the next CAS in conformity with the
directions outlined in the World Development Report 2011.
35.
Overall delivery of planned projects has been on track, with slight adjustments to
accommodate a few project delays. The delivery of two regional projects (Lake Victoria Project
and Rusumo Falls Project) that were planned in FY10 and FY11 respectively have been moved one
year later. They took a longer time to prepare than anticipated because of national capacity
constraints in project preparation. The regional transport project planned for FY11 has been slipped
to the next CAS period (FY13-17) to allow time to identify a regional transport project that will
involve Burundi, given that Burundi is not likely to be included in the proposed East Africa
Transport Links Project (FY12). To respond quickly to changing circumstances and the energy
crisis, Crisis Response Window resources were used to finance an Emergency Electricity
Infrastructure Project (US$15.4 million) in FY11. In FY09, to respond to the impact of the twin
crisis in fuel and food prices on the 2008 national budget (estimated at about 1.1 percent of GDP),
the Bank granted Burundi with US$10 million under the Global Food Crisis Response (GFRP)
program. The impacts of the crisis were also mitigated by the authorities’ policies, such as revising
the 2008 budget to include a number of measures, notably: (i) suspension of custom duties and
domestic transaction taxes on 13 basic food items, (ii) sustaining and/or extending school feeding
programs (including for girls) in primary schools of vulnerable provinces, and (iii) adding more
resources to the budget for the emergency humanitarian relief to cope with a threat of famine in the
country following the drought.
36.
The combination of development policy and investment lending grants has provided
significant financial support to Burundi’s development program. The IDA portfolio currently
has 13 projects with net commitments of US$414.5 million. Key sectors include: agriculture (22
percent); water and energy (16 percent); roads (12 percent); private sector (11 percent); public
works and urban (11 percent) and health and HIV/AIDS (10 percent). The portfolio has currently no
problem projects and the implementation period averages 3.3 years (see Annex 6). The portfolio
11

also includes three regional projects with a total (national and regional) IDA amount of US$40.4
million of which US$21.4 million remain undisbursed (see Annex 7). Projects planned for the rest
of the CAS period include Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project (FY11), Fourth
Economic Reform Support Grant (FY11), Financial and Private Sector Development -Additional
Financing (FY11), Road Sector Development Additional Financing (FY11), Regional Rusumo Falls
Hydroelectric and Multipurpose Project (FY12), Fifth Economic Reform Grant (FY12) and Public
Works and Urban Management Additional Financing (FY12). The government has asked the Bank
to provide assistance to mitigate the impact of the recent increases in fuel prices and to improve its
trunk road links with its EAC neighbors. In addition, there is a possibility for additional financing
of the results-based financing program for health due to the better-than-expected performance and
rapid increase in utilization. Taking into consideration Burundi’s IDA 16 allocation, the indicative
lending program might need to be revised further.
37.
Trusts funds have complemented IDA resources for Burundi. There are currently 14
trust funds with a total grant amount of US$32 million. Only four trust funds exceed US$2 million,
with the majority providing less than US$0.5 million.
38.
The Bank has played an active role in the aid effectiveness agenda. In October 2009, the
Bank chaired Burundi’s first Consultative Group at which Burundi presented progress on its first
PRSP. Over the past two years the Bank has chaired the sector working group on agriculture and on
HIV/AIDS and has co-chaired the Strategic Forum for donor coordination, which serves as a forum
for dialogue in the coordination of development aid and fosters alignment and harmonization of
development partner programs and projects with the development priorities of the Government of
Burundi. In the health sector, IDA financing contributed to the creation of an internal market for
the purchase of quality health services, which has currently ten fund holders. Government’s own
budget together with HIPC debt relief and IDA financing provide 70 percent. The remaining fund
holders include the European Commission, Belgium, Switzerland, the Global Fund, the Global
Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI) and others.
39.
The Bank also strengthened its working relations with civil society groups, the media
and Parliamentarians during the CAS Implementation period. The Bank meets quarterly with
civil society organizations to discuss issues related to the Bank’s analytic work, project design and
implementation and key issues in policy dialogue. The Bank has also offered training to journalists
on how to report on economic and governance issues. Parliamentarians have had a briefing on the
World Bank project cycle and their role in ensuring efficient project implementation in their
respective constituencies. This has also been useful in building confidence between citizens and the
state and thereby facilitating the transition out of fragility.
40.
IFC investment in Burundi currently consists of one project of US$1.5 million. The
project is an equity participation in Diamond Trust Bank Burundi S.A., a greenfield subsidiary of
Diamond Trust Bank Kenya Limited (DTB-Kenya). The project is expected to have a high
development impact in the following areas: (i) increasing credit availability to small- and mediumsized enterprises (SMEs); (ii) enhancing competition in the banking sector in Burundi; and (iii)
expanding credit availability across all segments of the market. IFC also recently approved a
US$25 million senior loan to help upgrade and expand the telecommunications network of U-Com
Burundi S.A. Commitment is expected in the coming weeks. In addition, IFC is considering a senior
loan of US$6.4 million to Opulent (B) Limited to support the renovation and rebranding of the
former Novotel hotel in Bujumbura, Burundi. A Country Advisory Services (AS) strategy was
12

recently completed and identified access to finance, agribusiness, SME capacity building and
privatization as areas for IFC AS focus. The IFC Investment Climate Team, in cooperation with the
IFC Conflict Affected States in Africa (CASA) program is currently helping the government to
undertake a range of reforms in the areas of (i) Doing Business; (ii) business taxation; (iii) publicprivate dialogue; (iv) support to the implementation of the East African Community Common
Market Protocol and (v) reform communication.
41.
To improve the quality and realism of the CAS results matrix, some indicators have
been updated. Some indicators required updating, due to either: (i) indicators that are not being
monitored by the program and for which there is no indication of progress; (ii) indicators that
proved too ambitious and had to be revised; or (iii) a change in program delivery. Annex 2 provides
an overview of the updated CAS indicators.

V.

RISKS

42.
Most of the major risks identified in the FY 09-12 CAS are still valid. Some of the risks
have materialized in various degrees. Going forward, the Bank’s program will continue to support
the government’s efforts to manage those risks and to reduce their impact.
43.
Macroeconomic stability will continue to be threatened by fiscal pressures. The origins
of those pressures include weak performance of agriculture, due to exogenous shocks including
weather and fuel and food prices, and slow economic growth due to the global economy. These
might lead to the loss of revenue and a weakening of the debt sustainability position as well as
insufficient investment in energy and infrastructure that drive growth. The Bank will continue to
support national investments in agriculture and infrastructure to maintain growth and thereby
improve macro stability.
44.
The weak governance environment remains a risk to the CAS program. As already
noted above, while there has been progress on the project level, important reform efforts are needed
to improve governance in some sectors (e.g. infrastructure). Reforms in public finance management
and procurement supported by development policy grants and policy advice will help mitigate this
risk. The Bank will continue to support the governance strategy once it is finalized.
45.
Burundi’s political and security situation remains stable but fragile. The insecurity
level according to UN security sources has significantly decreased. Movement throughout the
country is relatively free and the implementation of development programs is not hampered. On the
political front, so far the Cabinet Ministers sworn in after the elections in September 2010 are still
in office and there have been few changes in key technical team in ministries working on Bankfinanced projects. Nevertheless there are fears that opposition leaders in exile might return and
incite conflict, and ordinary criminality is high in much of the country.

13

Annex 1: Updated CAS Results Matrix
CAS Outcomes
FY11 Status
Milestones
& Results Indicators
CAS STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE I: PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE AND BROAD-BASED ECONOMIC GROWTH
Aligned with PRSP Axis 2: Promotion of sustainable and broad-based growth
1.1 Increased productivity of food
Food crops
crops and high-value export
- Increase in area under irrigation from 300 ha in 2008 to
crops
1,225 ha by 2010. Achieved (1,475 ha of marshland in
Food crops
the project areas are currently under irrigation)
- Irrigated rice: from 4.0 tons/ha
- On track (4.5 tons/ha in
- At least 10 new agricultural technologies
(2008) to > 5.0 tons/ha by 2012
2010)
developed/disseminated by 2010. Partially achieved (8
- Cassava: from 10 tons/ha (2008) to
- On track (10 tons/ha in
had been disseminated by 2010)
at least 18 tons/ha by 2012
2010)
- At least 1,050 additional productive investment
- On track (6 l/cow/day in
- Milk: from 5 l/cow/day (2008)
subprojects (including for tea and coffee) implemented
2010)
8l/cow/day by 2012
by 2010 (from 2,345 in 2008 to 3,400 by 2010).
Achieved (4,433 subprojects by 2010 of which 3,416
- Palm oil: from 2.2 tons/ha (2008) to - Achieved (3 tons/ha in 2010)
have been implemented)
3.0 tons/ha of oil by 2012
Export crops
Export crops
- At least 30 (of 117) coffee washing - On track (13 coffee washing - Action plan on divestiture in coffee sector implemented
stations have been privatized
stations are sold to private investors
by December 2009. Achieved (Action plan for state
in 2010)
by 2012 (revised indicator)
divestiture was adopted, including the establishment of
the regulatory agency in mid-2009)
- A clear time-bound strategy for state’s divestiture of key
tea sector assets is available by December 2009. Not
achieved (Tea sector reform has been delayed)
Land Management
- Increase in area of selected watershed under SLM
practices from 3,000 ha in 2008 to 9,000 ha by 2010.
Achieved (25,215 ha in 2010)
- Land use plans developed and adopted for 8 provinces
in 2010 up from 2 in 2008. Achieved (10 provinces in
2011)
1.2 Improved business environment
- Tax payment process simplified by end of 2009. Not
- At least 70% of Government arrears - Achieved (All arrears to the
Achieved (Acquisition of tax software still underway)
to the private sector have been
private sector have been
- Updated legal framework (investment code, commercial
cleared by 2012
settled)
code, business and privatization laws) more transparent
- Commercial court cases where the
and in line with international standards by 2009.
- Achieved (Considerable
delays in rendering judgment is
Achieved (Investment code and privatization law,
reduction in delays of court
over 60 days reduced from 40% in
commercial code and private and public business code

14

World Bank and Partner
Support

Ongoing operations:
PRASAB: Agriculture
Rehabilitation and Sustainable
Land Management (FY05) and
Additional Financing (FY08)
PAGE: Economic
Management Support (FY04)
Agro-Pastoral Productivity and
Markets Development Project
(FY10)
Road Sector Development
(FY04)
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)
Planned operations:
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)
Lake Victoria-regional
(FY11)
Ongoing/Planned AAA and
TFs:
Coffee Sector Strategic
Environmental Assessment
Main partners: USAID, FAO,
EU, IFAD
Ongoing operations:
PAGE: Economic Management
Support (FY04)
Financial and Private Sector
Development (FY10)
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)
Burundi Investment Climate

CAS Outcomes
& Results Indicators
2008 to below 25% in 2012

1.3 Improved infrastructural
services with enhanced regional
integration
Roads
- 51% of paved road network in good
and fair condition by 2012 (from
21% in 2008) (revised indicator)

Water
- 363,200 people served with access
to improved water in Bujumbura
(with surroundings) in 2012,
compared to185,000 in 2008

FY11 Status
cases to 10% of cases
beyond the 60 day deadline
by July 2009)

- On track (49% of paved
roads in good and fair
conditions in 2010)

- On track (218,874 in 2010)

Milestones
have been adopted)
- Strategy to clear Government arrears to the private
sector implemented. Achieved (Strategy has been
implemented)
- Computerized business registry operational by 2009.
Not available
- Priority organizational measures to speed up
Commercial court proceedings adopted by 2009.
Achieved (Measures have been adopted and court
proceeding accelerated)
- Action plan for improving the institutional capacity for
public sector reform adopted by 2010. Achieved
(Action plan was adopted)
- Financial Sector Assessment completed and
implementation of recommendations initiated by 2010.
Achieved (Financial Sector Assessment has been
completed)
Roads
- 240 kilometers of paved roads and 300 km earth roads
(including rural access roads) rehabilitated by 2010.
Partially Achieved (Achieved for paved roads; 154 km
of earth roads by 2010)
- National Road Fund Revenues increase from US$3.7
million in 2007 to US$ 5 million in 2009. Achieved
(US$7.5 million in 2010)
- Increased Fuel Levy for road maintenance from 6 Cents
in 2007 to 8 Cents by end-2009. Achieved (8 cents by
end-2008)
Water
- Water production capacity in Bujumbura increased from
66,000 (2008) to 96,000 m3/day in 2010. Not Achieved
(there has been no progress on this indicator)
- Functioning water stand posts in Bujumbura increased
from 35 to 60 in 2010. Achieved (The number of
public stand posts increased from 35 to 65 using largely
internal resources; an additional 85 stand posts are
planned with works started in December 2010 financed
by IDA)

15

World Bank and Partner
Support
Reform Program (IFC/WB)
Planned operations:
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)
Main partners:
US

Ongoing operations:
Road Sector Development
(FY04) and Additional
Financing (FY11)
Multisectoral Water and
Electricity infrastructure
(FY08)
Regional Communications
Infrastructure Project (RCIP)
(FY08)
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)
Planned operations:
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)
Rusumo Falls - regional
Ongoing AAA and TFs:
Tariff study on water and
electricity (FY11)
Planned AAA and TFs:

CAS Outcomes
& Results Indicators

FY11 Status

Milestones

World Bank and Partner
Support
Study on management of
public stand posts (FY12)

Energy
- Thermal generation capacity increased by 11 GWh/year
from 2009, 2010. Achieved (Target exceeded by 6.7
GWh/year through a combination of IDA financing (9.9 Main partners: Germany,
EU, AfDB, China, Belgium
MWh/year) and other GoB resources (7.6 MWh/year )
through power purchase agreement with private
operator)
ICT
ICT
- Not available (no data for
- Annual volume of international
- Number of internet subscribers from 2,000 in 2007 to:
2010)
Internet traffic from 250 (Mbit/s
10,000 in 2010. Not Achieved (4,652 subscribers in
simplex) in 2007 to500 in 2011
2010)
CAS STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE II: IMPROVING ACCESS TO SOCIAL SERVICES AND CONSOLIDATION OF SOCIAL STABILITY
Aligned with PRSP Axis 1: Improved Governance and Security; Axis 3: Development of Human Capital; Axis 4: Fight against HIV/AIDS
- 90% of demobilized ex-combatants participate in
Ongoing operations:
2.1 Improved reintegration of exEmergency Demobilization &
reintegration support programming within one year of
combatants and vulnerable
Transitional Reintegration
discharge. Achieved (about 95% received timely
groups reintegrated
Project (FY09)
reintegration support)
Public Works and Urban
- All irregular armed groups in Burundi are dismantled
- On track (61% of
- 70% of beneficiaries (exManagement (FY09)
by 2010. Achieved (achieved in 2009)
beneficiaries in 2010)
combatants) report being in a similar
- At least 50% of the targeted Communes have integrated Agriculture Rehabilitation and
economic situation to that of their
Sustainable Land Management
the concerns of Vulnerable Groups in their Communal
peers in the community (revised
(FY05) and Additional
Development Plans. Achieved (100% of communes
indicator)
Financing (FY08)
have plans)
- On track (242,000 in 2010;
- 500,000 person-days short-term
Community and Social
- Provision of counseling and juridical assistance to
but 48,000 permanent jobs
employment created through laborDevelopment (FY07)
vulnerable groups in Communes supported by the
created by road
intensive public works by 2012
Road Sector Development
PRADECs. Achieved
maintenance)
(accumulative number) (revised
(FY04) and Additional
indicator)
Financing (FY11)
- Off track (40,000 in 2010)
- 120,000 returnees and displaced
persons have been effectively
reinserted into their communities
Planned AAA and TFs:
Poverty Assessment (FY12)
(from zero in 2005) by 2012
(revised indicator)
Main partners (DDR): EU,
Belgium, Netherlands, Norway
- Up-to-date budget framework law with clear definitions Ongoing operations:
2.2 More efficient and transparent
of tasks and responsibilities of all involved entities by
PAGE: Economic Management
public financial management
- Draft annual budget prepared on the - On track (draft budget
2009. Achieved (the 2009 budget has been developed
Support (FY04)
basis of new Budget law and
presented to the National
based on the new organic law and since then is being
PARSEB: Education Sector
Energy
- Unplanned power interruptions
reduced from 3,100 minutes of
unplanned MV interruptions/quarter
in 2007 to 2,000 in 2012 (revised
indicator)

- Off track (3,100 minutes in
2010)

16

CAS Outcomes
& Results Indicators
presented to National Assembly 3
months before beginning of the
fiscal year from 2009 onwards

2.3 Improved access to and quality
of basic social services and
decreased vulnerability to
HIV/AIDS
Education
- Increase in the primary completion
rate from 40% in 2006/7 to 65% in
2012
- Increase in primary gross
enrollment rate (GER) from 80% in
2005/06 to 100% in 2010 (new
indicator)
- Improvement in student teacher
ratio from 57:1 (2006/07) to 50 (
2012)
- Textbooks per student in French &
Kirundi increase from 3:1 in 2006
to 1:1 in 2012
- Reach parity in ratio of girls to boys
in primary (%) (new indicator)

FY11 Status
Assembly three months
before the beginning of the
fiscal year since 2009, albeit
with some delays.)

- Off track (48% in 2010)

- Achieved (Primary GER
134% in 2009)

- Off track (52 in 2009)

- Off track (3:1 in 2010)

- Achieved (parity reached in
2010)

Milestones
implemented in the sector ministries)
- Public expenditure tracking surveys (PETS) in health,
education and justice sectors and beneficiary
assessments are finalized and published. Partially
achieved (PETS and elements of action plans have
been prepared)
- SIGEFI includes functional models for calculation
payroll and covers complete budgetary execution cycle
by 2010. Partially achieved (SIGEFI is operational
since December 2009, but wage bill is still captured by
interim system)
- Revised accounting and budgetary chart adopted by
2010
- Establishment of the procurement regulatory authority
by end 2009. Achieved (New procurement code
promulgated in February 2008; regulation agency and
central procurement directorate established in July
2008)
Education
- 420 classrooms built or rehabilitated by 2010.
Achieved (431 classrooms built or rehabilitated)
- 2,950 unqualified teachers trained by 2010. Not
achieved (2,343 teachers trained by 2010)
- 1.5 million primary level textbooks distributed by 2009.
Nearly achieved (1.4 million textbooks by early 2010)
- 940,000 lower secondary level textbooks distributed by
2010. Not available (indicator not tracked)
- Burundi joins the EFA-FTI by 2010. Not achieved
(Evaluation and endorsement of EFA FTI sector plan
envisaged for November/December 2011)
- MINEDUC establishes targets for improvements in the
equitable distribution of the teaching force between
schools by 2010. Not achieved (Not yet established)
- 40% of schools distribute de-worming tablets twice a
year. Not available
Child and Maternal Health
- 40 general practitioners and 80 nurses trained in basic
obstetric care and deployed in the country by 2010.
Achieved (46 general practitioners and about 500

17

World Bank and Partner
Support
Recon. (FY07)
Second Multi-Sector
HIV/AIDS (FY08)
Health Sector Development
Support (FY09)
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)
Planned operations:
ERSG DPL Series (Annual)
Public Works Additional
Financing
Planned AAA and TFs:
Annual PERs
Main partners: AfDB, EU,
Belgium, France, IMF,
Netherlands, Norway
Ongoing operations:
PARSEB: Education Sector
Recon. (FY07)
Second Multi-Sector
HIV/AIDS (FY08)
Health Sector Development
Support (FY09)
PRADEC: Community and
Social Dev. (FY07)
Regional Great Lakes Initiative
on HIV/AIDS
Multi-Sector Water and
Electricity Infrastructure
(FY08)
Planned AAA and TFs:
Poverty Assessment (FY12)
Main partners:
Belgium, EU, Japan, France,
Switzerland, UK-DFID,

CAS Outcomes
& Results Indicators

Child and Maternal Health
- % of children covered by
DPT3/pentavalent 3 vaccine before
reaching age one from 63% in 2005
to at least 80% over the CAS period
(revised indicator)
- % of assisted births increase from
37% in 2006 to at least 45% by
2012
- % of pregnant women with at least
three ante-natal care visits increase
from 20% to 40% by 2012
HIV/AIDS
- 20% of HIV-infected pregnant
women receive complete PMTCT
services by 2012 (6% in 2008)

FY11 Status

- On track (87% in 2009)

- Achieved (64% in 2009)

- Achieved (57% in 2008)

- On track (11% in 2009)

Milestones
nurses)
- Performance contracts with health facilities in place to
deliver the basic service package (including ante-natal
care, child delivery and child vaccination) by 2010.
Achieved (All public and private non-profit health
facilities have signed performance contracts since April
2010)
HIV/AIDS
- 70% of people most-at-risk populations who received
an HIV/AIDS test in the last 12 months and came back
for test result by 2010. Not available
- Peer-to-peer education and behavioral change
activities. Not available
- 30% of health facilities offer HIV testing to all
pregnant women by 2010. Partially achieved (20% in
2010)
- Public Sector Organizations include in their annual
action plans or sector strategies HIV/AIDs related
targets. Achieved (12 organizations in 2010)

18

World Bank and Partner
Support
UNICEF, UNFPA, UNAIDS,
UNFPA, OMS, Global Fund,
UN

Annex 2: Revised CAS Outcomes
Original CAS Outcomes and Indicators
Revised CAS Outcomes and Indicators
CAS Outcome 1.1 Increased productivity of food crops and high-value export crops
Export crops
- Revised. At least 30 (of 117) coffee washing stations are
- Reduction in Government ownership of coffee
sold to private investors by 2012.
assets from 90% in 2008 to 40 % by 2012
- First grade coffee: from 65 % 2008 of
- Dropped.
production to 80% by 2012
- Dropped. Indicator not tracked.
- First quality tea: from 75% of production in
2008 to 90% in 2012
CAS Outcome 1.2 Improved business environment
- Simplified small business tax reduces tax
- Dropped. Indicator not tracked.
complexity by consolidating at least 3 taxes into
one
CAS Outcome 1.3 Improved infrastructural services with enhanced regional integration
- 30% of paved road network in good condition by - 51% of paved road network in good and fair condition by
2012 (from 21% in 2008)
2012 (from 21% in 2008)
- 332,00 people served with access to potable
- Updated. 363,200 people served with access to improved
water in Bujumbura (with surroundings) in 2012,
water in Bujumbura (with surroundings) in 2012,
compared to185,000 in 2008
compared to185,000 in 2008
- Unplanned power interruptions reduced from
- Updated. Unplanned power interruptions reduced from
3,100 minutes of unplanned MV
3,100 minutes of unplanned MV interruptions/quarter in
interruptions/quarter in 2007 to 1,000 in 2012
2007 to 2,000 in 2012
CAS Outcome 2.1 Improved reintegration of ex-combatants and vulnerable groups integrated
- 80% of former combatants supported by the
- Revised. 70% of beneficiaries (ex-combatants) report
program are able to access mainstream (regularly
being in a similar economic situation to that of their peers
available) employment and productive
in the community
opportunities
- Increased job creation from public works
- Updated. 500,000 person-days short-term employment
created through labor-intensive public works by 2012
programs to 120,000 man-months from 2009
onwards
(accumulative number) (revised indicator)
- Updated. 120,000 returnees and displaced persons have
been effectively reinserted into their communities (from
- 120,000 beneficiaries capable of producing seeds
zero in 2005) by 2012
and restarting own agricultural activities by
2012(from 71,810 in 2007)
CAS Outcome 2.2 More efficient and transparent public financial management
- Percent of expenditure authorized and executed
- Dropped. No data available.
by exceptional procedures below 1% from 2009
onwards
- Number of days from commitment to payment is - Dropped. No data available.
reduced from 84 to 40 days by 2012
CAS Outcome 2.3 Improved access to and quality of basic social services and decreased vulnerability to
HIV/AIDS
- Increase in primary gross enrollment rate (GER) - New indicator.
from 80% in 2005/06 to 100% in 2010
- Reach parity in ratio of girls to boys in primary
- New indicator.
(%) (new indicator)
- Revised. % of children covered by DPT3/pentavalent 3
- % of children under 1 year fully immunized
vaccine before reaching age one from 63% in 2005 to at
increase from 40% to at least 60% by 2012
least 80% over the CAS period
- Dropped. Indicator not tracked.
- Every province has at least 2 general
practitioners and 4 nurses trained in basic
obstetrics (baseline information available)
- Dropped. No data available.
- 30% increase in female sex workers reporting
use of a condom with their most recent client
(baseline currently being established)

19

X

Economic Governance

X

L

Education

X

Energy

L

X

Environment / Forestry /Land

X

L

Health (incl. HIV/AIDS)

X

X

X

X

L

X

X
X
L

L
X

X

X
L

X

L

X

X

X

ICT

L

Macroeconomics

L

L

X

X

Peace building ‐ Justice, Human
Rights, Reconciliation

X

X

X

X

Private Sector Development

X

Public Administration / Capacity
Building

X

X

X

Regional Integration

X

X

X

Reintegration / Community
Development

L

X

Security Sector
DDR

L

X

Transport

L

L

X

Water and Sanitation

X

X

L

X

L
X

X

X
L

X

X

L

X

X

X

X
L

X

United
Nations

Norway

Switzerland

Germany

L

X

Housing development

L : Lead donor or key player

Netherlands

X

DFID

L

USAID

X

France

Belgium

L

IFAD

Agriculture

AfDB

European
Commission

World Bank

Annex 3: Division of Labor

X
X

X

L

20

L
X

X

X

L

X : Complementing other donors

X

X

Annex 4: Lending Program
Fiscal
Year

Original CAS Program

2009 Economic Reform Support Grant II

Original IDA
Amount
(US$ million)

Revised Program

Revised IDA Amount
(US$ million)
National Regional CRW

30.0

Actual

30.0

-

-

Health Sector Support

25.0

Actual

25.0

-

-

Second Public Works and Urban Management

45.0

Actual

45.0

-

-

Emergency Demobilization and Transitional Reintegration Project

10.0

Actual

10.0

-

-

Total

110.0

-

-

25.0

Actual

25.0

-

-

Agriculture (Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Markets
Development Project)

43.0

Actual

43.0

-

-

Public Enterprise and Financial Sector (Financial & Private Sector
Development Project)
(Regional) Lake Victoria Environment Management

16.0

Actual

19.0

-

-

5.0

Slipped to FY11

Total

89.0

2010 Economic Support Reform Grant III

110.0

87.0

-

-

25.0

Actual

25.0

-

-

Additional Financing: Roads

20.0

Planned

19.0

-

-

(Regional) Transport

15.0

Slipped

-

-

(Regional) Hydropower (Rusumo Falls Hydroelectric and
Multipurpose Project)

10.0

Slipped to FY12

-

15.4

2011 Development Policy Operation (ERSG IV)

Additional Planned
Emergency Electric Infrastructure Project
Additional Financing - Financial and Private
Sector Development Project
(Regional) Lake Victoria Environment
Management
Total
IDA 15 Total
2012 Development Policy Operation (ERSG V)
Additional Financing: Second Public Works

Actual

-

Planned

8.0

Planned

5.0

70.0

57.0

- 15.4

269.0

254.0

- 15.4

25.0

Planned (August 2011)

25.0

-

15.0

Planned (March 2012)

15.0

-

Additional Planned
(Regional) Hydropower (Rusumo Falls
Hydroelectric and Multipurpose Project)
Total

40.0

21

-

Planned (March 2012)

27.0
67.0

Note: The FY12 IDA envelope is indicative only.

-

-

Annex 5: Analytic and Advisory Activities
Fiscal Year

Analytic and Advisory Activities by CAS Theme

2009
Financial Sector Assessment Program (ESW)
Public Expenditure Financial Accountability - PEFA (ESW)
Poverty & PRSP TA BPRP 2 (TA)
Legal and institutional framework for privatization (TA)
Option for pay reform (TA)
Petroleum Sector Technical Advice (TA)
2010
Country Economic Memorandum (Core ESW)
Debt Management Performance Assessment (ESW)
GAC Strategy Development (TA)
TA for Poverty Monitoring (TA)
Quantitative Macro-Fiscal Framework (TA)
Review of Poverty Reduction and Transport Strategies (TA)
Investment Climate Reform Program (WB/IFC Advisory)
2011
Public Expenditure Review (ESW)
Coffee Sector Strategic Environmental Assessment (TA)
Investment Climate Reform Program (WB/IFC Advisory)
2012
Poverty Assessment (Core ESW)
Public Expenditure Review (ESW)
Extending Medium Term Expenditure Frameworks (MTEF) Capacity Building (TA)
Investment Climate Reform Program (WB/IFC Advisory)
TA Technical Assistance
ESW Economic and Sector Work

22

Annex 6: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 3/24/2011

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

2008

2009

2010

2011

9
3.3
0.0
0.0
11.1
15.7
27.1

10
2.8
10.0
14.6
20.0
29.6
20.9

12
3.3
16.7
16.3
16.7
16.3
26.8

13
3.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
25.4

Yes
1107
79

No
913
57

No
1328
89

Yes
698
50

Memorandum Item
Since FY 80 Last Five FYs
Proj Eval by OED by Number
50
5
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
937.5
205.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
30.0
20.0
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt
30.3
12.6

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives(DO) and/or implementation progress(IP)
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the

beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.
** 2011 data is as of March 24, 2011

23

Annex 7: IDA and Grants Operations Portfolio, Regional Projects and Trust Funds
Closed Projects

As Of Date 3/23/2011

59

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active+Closed)
of w hich has been repaid
Total Undisbursed (Active)

225.93
0.00
385.28
103.28
611.21
103.28
188.52

Total Undisbursed (Closed)

0.00

Total Undisbursed (Active+Closed)

188.52
Difference Betw een

Active Projects
Last PSR

Expected and Actual

Supervision Rating
Project ID

Project Nam e

Developm ent Im plem entation
Objectives
Progress

Disbursem ents
Fiscal Year

IDA

Cancel.

Undisb.

Orig.

Frm
Rev'd
0.7

P064558

BI-Agr Rehab & Sustain Land Mgmt (FY05)

S

S

2005

50.0

1.5

-14.3

P095211

BI-Community and Social Dvpt SIL (FY06)

MS

MS

2007

40.0

12.3

-0.1

P078627

BI-Econ Mgmt Supt SIL (FY04)

P064557

BI-Educ. Sector Reconstr. (FY07)

S

S

2004

26.0

5.9

4.2

MS

MS

2007

20.0

4.7

4.1

P122217

BI-Emergency Elect. Infrast. Project

S

S

2011

15.4

15.7

P107851

BI-Finance & Private Sector Development

S

S

2010

19.0

16.3

3.2

P101160

BI-Health Project (FY09)

S

MS

2009

25.0

15.1

-2.1

P097974

BI-Multisectoral Water & Electricity Inf

MS

MS

2008

50.0

32.5

2.7

P064876

BI-Road Sec Dev SIM (FY04)

S

S

2004

51.4

3.4

-23.7

P109964

BI-Second HIV/AIDS MAP (FY08)

MS

S

2008

15.0

2.7

0.8

P113506

BI: Emerg Demob and Transitional Reint.

S

S

2009

15.0

P112998

BI:Public Works and Urban Management

MS

MS

2009

45.0

35.1

P107343

BI-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel.

S

S

2010

43.0

41.1

Overall Result

414.8

Regional Projects

Regional IDA

5.0

5.0

2.1

188.5

National IDA Total Undisb.

P080413

3A-HIV/AIDS Great Lakes Init APL (FY05)

U

MS

2005

20.0

n/a

0

P094103

3A-Telecommunications APL (FY07)

MS

MS

2007

13.4

6.7

17.9

P103298

3A-Lake Victoria Phase II APL1 (FY09)

MS

MU

2009

7.0

n/a

3.5

40.4

6.7

21.35

Overall Result
Trust Funds

Grant Am ount

Undisb.

TF053661

GEF3 FSP BI-Agricultural Rehabilitation and Sustainable Land Management Project

5.0

4.9

TF094010

Salary Expenditure for International and Local ETCS

2.4

0.6

TF094469

GAVI Proposal for Africa HSS Work in Burundi

0.2

0.2

TF095007

Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining in Burundi

0.1

0.1

TF095638

FIRST #9012 Burundi: Development of Financial Sector Strategy

0.3

0.2

TF096384

Emergency Demobilization and Transitional Reintegration Project-Bank executed portion

0.8

0.2

TF096411

Emergency Demobilization and Transitional Reintegration Project-Trust Fund administration

0.1

0.0

TF096439

Emergency Demobilization and Transitional Reintegration Project-Recipient executed portion

12.5

3.0

TF096921

Extending capacity building efforts for Sector Medium Term Expenditure Framew orks

0.2

0.0

TF096986

GAVI Proposal for Africa HSS Work in Burundi

0.2

0.2

TF097438

IDF: Capacity building for the use of sectoral Medium Term Expenditure Framew orks

0.4

0.0

TF098380

Poverty and Social Impact Analysis for Results Based Financing in Health in Burundi

0.1

0.0

TF098638

BI-HRBF Restructuring

0.3

0.0

TF098669

BI-Fourth Economic Reform Support Grant

9.5

0.0

32.0

9.4

Overall Result

24

2.9

3.1
-33.4

3.5

Annex 8: IFC Operations Portfolio
2008

2009

2010

2011*

2.88
2.88

0.03
0.03

0.66
0.66

Original Commitments by Sector (%)- IFC Accounts only
FINANCE & INSURANCE
100
0
100
Total

100
100

100
100

Original Commitments (US$m)
IFC and Participants
IFC's Own Accounts only

Original Commitments by Investment Instrument (%) - IFC Accounts only
Equity
27.99
Guarantee
72.01
100
0
100
100
Total

100
100

* Data as of March 01,2011

Burundi
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 2/28/2011
(In USD Millions)

Committed
FY
Approval

Company

2009/11

Dtb burundi
Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding

**Quasi
Equity *GT/RM

Partici
pant

Equity

0

1.51

0

0

0

0

1.51

0

0

0

0

1.51

0

0

0

0

1.51

0

0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

25

Loan Equity

**Quasi
Partici
Equity *GT/RM
pant

Loan

Annex 9: Burundi at a Glance

Burundi at a glance

2/25/11

B urundi

SubSaharan
A frica

Lo w
inco me

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

8.3
28
2.8
11

819
24,242
2.5
36

828
17,838
2.2
28

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

1.2
150
390

897
1,095
1,981

389
470
1,131

3.5
0.6

5.2
2.7

6.2
3.9

P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

81
93
50
101
..

51
73
52
83
25

..
..
57
77
28

A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)

72
60
139
132

72
54
105
95

73
59
107
100

72
46

60
31

64
35

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

Age distribution, 2009

(2009)

Male

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34
15-19
0-4
10

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 3 – 2 0 0 8 )
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
200

150

A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

100

50

0
1990

1995

Burundi

N e t A id F lo ws
(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2007):
Euro pean Co mmissio n
B elgium
Netherlands
A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

19 8 0

19 9 0

2000

2009

116

263

93

509

12
28
1

36
40
1

9
6
4

85
58
32

12.6
28

23.5
46

12.9
14

43.7
63

2000

2008

Sub-Saharan Africa

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
10
5
0
-5

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds

-10
95

Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)

9.5
16.4

7.0
6.0

24.3
13.2

5.0
13.6

Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

90.0
225

171.3
148

720.7
100

1,230.2
108

05

GDP

GDP per capita

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 – 0 9
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

4.1
920

5.7
1,132

6.5
709

8.3
1,325

3.2
4.4

1.3
-2.9

A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

62.2
12.6
7.4
25.1

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n
Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

2.8
3.0

55.9
19.0
12.9
25.2

40.4
18.8
8.7
40.8

34.8
20.0
8.8
45.1

3.1
4.5
5.7
5.6

-1.9
-4.3
-8.7
-2.8

91.4
9.2
13.9

94.5
10.8
14.5

88.5
17.5
6.1

91.1
28.8
16.4

3.4
3.2
6.9

-4.8
-2.6
-0.5

..
..
..

8.8
23.3
..

7.9
27.8
-5.4

7.8
19.9
0.5

10.7
47.0
1.3

3.4
1.5

-1.2
-1.6

..
..

(% o f GDP )

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2009 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are no t available.
a. A id data are fo r 2008.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

26

-1.5
-6.2
..
10.4

Burundi
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2009
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)
Net trade in go o ds and services

49
127
-96

56
234
-223

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

-50
-7.0

-68
-5.9

Voice and accountability
Political stability
Regulatory quality
Rule of law

Wo rkers' remittances and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)

..

28

Reserves, including go ld

..

..

Control of corruption
0
2009

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e

2000

(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

19.2
18.3
18.8

30.7
17.8
19.2

Overall surplus/deficit

-1.8

-10.4

25

50

..
..

100

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

75

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

..
..

2000
7.1

2008
10.4

1

6

0.0

7.7

88
7.7
..

89
5.2
5.6

1,487
0.3

1,246
..

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)

1,108
22
964

518
19
70

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f surface area)

To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)

156.3
39.0

39.1
21.7

Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billio n cubic meters)

12
0

10
0

Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)

0.05

0.02

GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

2000

2009

IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

600
36
13

147
9
1

0
0
0

1
1
1

0

0

0
0

0
0

Composition of total external debt, 2009
Short-term, 7

Private, 0
IBRD, 0

Bilateral, 98

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio

IDA, 147

(US$ millio ns)

Other multilateral, 175

IMF, 91

US$ millions

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt
Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
Electricity
A ccess to /co st o f financing
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2009

–
–
–

32
151.6
94

2000

2009

..
..

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt

40.7
16.0

..
..

M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

..
..

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2009 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

27

2/25/11

Millennium Development Goals

Burundi

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)

B urundi

G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)
P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)
Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)
P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

19 9 0
84.2
36.4
7.9
..

19 9 5
..
..
..
..

2000
86.4
68.0
5.1
38.9

2008
81.3
..
9.0
..

..

43
25
..
73

85
45
18
76

..
..

..
..
6

91
..
31

189
114
74

184
111
80

178
107
76

168
102
84

1,200
..
..

1,200
..
..

1,200
25
16

970
34
9

G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 15-49)
1.7
Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)
150
Tuberculo sis case detectio n rate (%, all fo rms)
52

5.2
220
24

3.8
320
28

3.0
360
24

G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
70
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)
44
Fo rest area (% o f to tal land area)
11.3
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f surface area)
..
CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)
0.1
GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)
..

71
45
9.5
..
0.1
..

72
45
7.7
..
0.0
..

72
46
5.2
5.6
0.0
..

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
Telepho ne mainlines (per 100 peo ple)
M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
Internet users (per 100 peo ple)
P erso nal co mputers (per 100 peo ple)

0.3
0.0
0.0
..

0.3
0.3
0.1
0.1

0.4
6.0
0.8
0.9

G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)
P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)
Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)
Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

..
41
5
..

50
53
7

G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)
Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)
P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)

79
14
..

80

G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)
M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)
G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)
Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 15-49)

0.1
0.0
0.0
..

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125

100

8

75

6

50

4

25

2

100
75
50
25
0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2008

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment ratio
Fixed + mobile subscribers
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

Burundi

Sub-Saharan Africa

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

28

Internet users

2/25/11

IBRD 33380

BURUNDI
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

MAIN ROADS

PROVINCE CAPITALS

PROVINCE BOUNDARIES

NATIONAL CAPITAL

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

RIVERS

29°E

30°E

Lake
Kivu

31°E
To
Kigali

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

To
Gitarama

R WANDA

To
Cyangugu

Kagera

Lake
Rweru

Lake
Cohoha

KIRUNDO

Kirundo

CIBITOKE

MUYINGA

u
uv
uv

To
Rulenge

Muyinga

To
Nyakanura

Ngozi
Kayanza

Rusiba

Ruvuvu

Musada

Karuzi

BUBANZA
YA

Mwaro

RUYIGI
p un
gu

Mt. Heha
(2,670 m)

To
Kibondo

Rum

U

Cankuzo

Ruyiga

GITEGA

M

JU
B

Gitega

M WA
WA R O

Bukirasazi

TA NZA NIA

Matana

BURURI

Rumonge

4°S

Bururi

si

To
Kakonko

CANKUZO

vu
vu
Ru

L uvironza

V
AM

BU

DEM. REP.
OF CONGO

R

MU

RA

BUJUMBURA

M w eru

KARUZI
Muramvya

To
Uvira

3°S

Buhiga

AYA
K AY
A
YA N Z A

Bubanza

Rus
izi

y

NGOZI

Cibitoke

3°S

an

R

K

ar

u

To
Butare

Mutangaro

R U TA N A
Rutana

Most distant
headwater of
the Nile River

4°S

Makamba

MAKAMBA

Lake
Tanganyika

Mabanda

Mu

BURUNDI

i

Nyanza-Lac

To
Kasulu

0

0

29°E

z
ara
r ag

10

20

10

30°E

30

20

40 Kilometers

30 Miles

31°E
SEPTEMBER 2004

