Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report Number: 60255-RO

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

PROGRESS REPORT
ON THE
COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
ROMANIA
FY09 – FY13

Public Disclosure Authorized

November 28, 2011

Central Europe and the Baltic Countries Country Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region
International Finance Corporation
Europe and Central Asia Department
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance
of their official duties. Its content may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank
authorization.

DATE OF CURRENT CPS
June 12, 2009
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
January 1 – December 31
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective as of November 1, 2011)
Currency Unit
US$1.00

Romanian New Leu
3.17

ABBREVIATION AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ARD
CPRR
CoG
CPS
DPL
EBRD
EC
EIB
EMTN
ESW
EU
FDI
FRs
FY
GDP
GEF
GMI
IBRD
ICT
IDA

Analytical and Advisory Assistance
Agriculture and Rural Development
Country Portfolio Results Review
Center of Government
Country Partnership Strategy
Development Policy Lending
European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development
European Commission
European Investment Bank
Euro Medium Term Note
Economic and Sector Work
European Union
Foreign Direct Investment
Functional Reviews
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Guaranteed Minimum Income
International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development
Information and Communication
Technology
International Development
Association

IFC
IDF
IMF
GoR
IFIs
NBR
NRP
P4R
PEFA
PEIR
PFM
PPP
PR
RSDF
R&D
SBA
SIP
SMEs
SOEs
TA
UPL
VAT
WB

International Finance Corporation
Institutional Development Fund
International Monetary Fund
Government of Romania
International Financial Institutions
National Bank of Romania
National Reform Program
Program for Results Lending
Public Expenditure & Financial
Accountability
Public Expenditure and Institutional
Review
Public Financial Management
Public Private Partnership
Progress Report
Romanian Social Development Fund
Research and Development
Stand-By Agreement
Social Inclusion Project
Small and Medium-size Enterprises
State Owned Enterprises
Technical Assistance
Unitary Pay Law
Value Added Tax
World Bank

IBRD
Vice President:
Country Director:
Team Leader:

Philippe H. Le Houerou
Peter Harrold
François Rantrua

IFC
Vice President:
Regional Director:
Team Leader:

Dimitris Tsitsiragos
Tomasz Telma
Ana Maria Mihaescu

Acknowledgements
This Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report (CPS PR) was prepared under the guidance of Peter
Harrold, IBRD Country Director, and Tomasz Telma, IFC Regional Director, by a team led by
Francois Rantrua, Task Team Leader (TTL) and IBRD Country Manager for Romania. The IFC team
was led by Ana Maria Mihaescu, IFC Chief Resident Representative. The CPS Core Team included:
Corina Grigore, Cornelia Boranescu, Janet Dooley, Catalin Pauna, Mariko Higashi, Richard Florescu,
Daniel Kozak, Manuela Stanculescu, Arabela Aprahamian, Nadia Badea, Gabriel Ionita, Cesar
Niculescu, Mariana Moarcas, Mihaela Dumitrascu and Valentina Martinovic. The following Romania
Country Team Members and other colleagues have also made important contributions to this strategy:
Nina Arnhold, Aziz Bouzauher, Sudharshan Canagarajah, Elisabetta Capanelli, Ruxandra Costache,
Bogdan Constantinescu, Dina Umali-Deininger, Donato DeRosa, Anca Gherman, Charles Griffin,
Anthony Gorman, Isamiddinova, Sereen Juma, Holger Kray, Jean-Francois Marteau, Keith McLean,
Mamta Murthi, Bernard Myers, Lalit Raina, John Daniel Pollner, Paulo Correa, Ana Revenga,
Christine Richaud, Lars Sondergaard, Alexandru Stanescu, Emil Tesliuc, Yvonne Tsikata, Luisa
Masutti, Kari Nyman, Sophie Sirtaine, Penny Williams, Sally Zeijlon from IBRD and Hester Marie
DeCasper, Andreia Radu, Mircea Stoica, Oana Visinescu from IFC. Other members of the Bank-wide
Romania Country Team (including IBRD and IFC) have also contributed.
Special thanks are extended to the counterpart team of the Government of Romania: Mr. Bogdan
Dragoi, State Secretary to the Ministry of Public Finance (MoPF), Angela Carabas, Director General,
and Adrian Baila, Expert in the General Directorate for Treasury and Public Debt and their colleagues
in the Government, Stefan Nanu, Alternate Executive Director at the World Bank, as well as Silvia
Viceconte, Policy Adviser in the General Secretariat of the European Commission.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I.

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

II. DEVELOPMENTS SINCE THE CPS ....................................................................... 2
III. PROGRESS TOWARD ACHIEVING CPS OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES ..... 3
IV. PROPOSED ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CPS ........................................................... 6
V. RISKS ....................................................................................................................... 10

Annexes
Annex 1 Results Framework ............................................................................................ 11
Annex 2 Proposed CPS framework based on strategic pillars and cross-sectoral themes20
Annex 3 CPS Results Summary....................................................................................... 21
Annex 4 Bank Support to the Government’s Public Administration Reform ................. 25
Annex 5 Country needs and World Bank comparative advantage .................................. 29
Annex 6 Summary of Sectoral Consultations .................................................................. 30
Annex 7 Romania at a Glance.......................................................................................... 33
Annex 8 Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management ............. 36
Annex 9 Social Indicators ................................................................................................ 37
Annex 10 Recent Economic and Financial Indicators ..................................................... 38
Annex 11 Romania Key Exposure Indicators .................................................................. 42
Annex 12 Operations Portfolio IBRD and Grants ........................................................... 43
Annex 13 Summary of Analytical and Advisory Activities ............................................ 44
Annex 14 IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio, Romania . 45

Tables
Table 1: Key economic indicators
Table 2: FBS arrangements under themes 1 and 2
Table 3: Proposed IBRD lending

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY09 – FY13
PROGRESS REPORT FOR ROMANIA
This Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report comes at a time when Romania has been emerging from the
global financial crisis, though like other countries, faces risks of contagion from economic volatility in Europe.
Romania is undergoing broad and systemic reform of the public administration to lay the foundations for a more
sustainable growth path and convergence with the EU. The Bank’s approach through the CPS is designed to
support this process and continue to help Romania mitigate risk of further crises. In the first two years of the CPS,
the cornerstone of the Bank’s program was, with the EU and IMF, helping Government overcome the crisis
through DPLs and ongoing portfolio, together with identifying reforms to build a stronger public administration
through Functional Reviews of twelve Ministries. Now at mid-point, the Bank is turning toward helping the
Government implement such public reform through the Modernization of Administration Program and projects in
the social sectors and tax administration, supporting its external issuance program through deferred drawdown
operations and advancing the discussion on growth via a series of growth policy notes, and private sector
development with the IFC. Through this work, the Bank hopes to help the country’s efforts for Romania’s people
to reap the full benefits of EU membership and enjoy a quality of life similar to its EU neighbors.

I.
INTRODUCTION
1.
This Progress Report (PR) covers the implementation at midpoint of the FY09-13
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) between the Government of Romania (GoR) and the
World Bank Group. The CPS was designed around three pillars: (i) reforming the public sector,
(ii) resuming growth and enhancing competitiveness, and (iii) promoting social and spatial
inclusion. The main anchor of the strategy was the EUR1 billion Development Policy Lending
(DPL) 1-3 program complemented by the existing portfolio and a program of Analytical and
Advisory Assistance (AAA). The International Finance Corporation (IFC) investment strategy in
the short term was to provide a crisis response by helping to recapitalize the existing client banks,
supporting financial institutions to continue on-lending and offering trade finance products. IFC
provided long-term credits to banks to co-finance European Union (EU) funded projects and to
foster competitive real sector. Overall, considerable improvements were made under all pillars with
satisfactory and timely implementation of the Bank supported program, as well as proactive efforts
to restructure the portfolio. The Bank program for FY09-13 was clearly defined for the first two
years, and broadly outlined for the outer years. Challenges remain to be addressed in FY12-13, and
greater focus will be given to the growth agenda.
2.
While the strategic focus of the pillars remains relevant, this PR proposes a more
European lens to help frame the Bank’s support to Romania. The midterm review is an
opportunity to adjust the Bank program to current country needs. The original pillars remain
relevant in light of the still fragile economic recovery and the need to strengthen the foundations for
medium-term competitiveness and growth. As Romania’s policies and economy are inevitably tied
with EU membership, this Progress Report tries to more clearly reflect Bank’s activities in this
context through three EU related themes: (i) policy reforms to reap the benefits of EU membership,
(ii) modernization of public institutions to enhance resource allocation and absorption of EU funds,
and (iii) complement to EU funding. The risks outlined in the CPS remain relevant, but this PR
identifies additional ones and proposes mitigation measures.
3.
This Progress Report proposes new lending and AAA work to support Romania’s
convergence to EU living standards. The PR proposes about EUR1.7 billion in new lending,
while the AAA program has been growing with a strong portfolio of Fee Based Services (FBS). The
Bank will, however, remain flexible to address client needs that may arise in the next two years.
While the original CPS envisioned a phased reduction in IFC investment, the ongoing risks
associated with the global economic downturn and worsening European debt crisis require the IFC
to continue play an important counter-cyclical role through selective private sector investments. In
the real sector, this includes supporting projects which create jobs, increase investment in
underserved frontier regions, contribute to the growth and competitiveness of local firms in
promising sectors such as agribusiness, infrastructure and improve resource efficiency.

1

II.
DEVELOPMENTS SINCE THE CPS
4.
The political environment is characterized by some uncertainty. As no party holds a
majority in the Parliament, coalition politics makes unpopular reforms difficult to implement. So
far, the current coalition government has survived multiple no-confidence votes and its stability and
future durability may depend on the timely implementation of reforms and the economic policy
program. This uncertainty is inherent in the case of any coalition government facing a strong and
vocal opposition and in the context of the approaching 2012 local and parliamentary elections.
While there is political will to return to growth by deepening structural reforms, strengthening
public administration and making needed budgetary adjustments, some reforms are unpopular with
a part of the Romanian population and the past year witnessed several public protests.
5.
Faced with an unfavorable international environment due to the global financial crisis,
a slowing economy, and a large fiscal and financial gap, Romania turned to the international
financial institutions (IFIs) for support in early 2009. The International Monetary Fund (IMF),
the European Commission (EC), the Bank, and other international financial institutions (IFIs)
supported the reforms to which the Government committed with a package totaling EUR19.95
billion over 2009-2011, of which the Bank would contribute about EUR1 billion under three DPL
operations1. The package aimed to help the GoR bring down the fiscal deficit in a sustainable way,
improve the efficiency of public spending and strengthen the financial sector. The ultimate goal was
to help Romania emerge from the economic and financial crisis on a stronger footing, so as to
converge to the living standards of more advanced EU economies.
6.
In 2009, the economy was in a recession which continued in 2010. Economic activity
declined by 8.4 percent in 2009 and 2010, largely due to a sharp fall in private consumption,
reflecting a decline in bank credit, the reduction in households’ disposable incomes, and
plummeting investor confidence. Declining domestic demand led to a major current account
contraction to less than half of the 2008 level. Foreign direct investment also declined to less than
half of its pre-crisis level. The fiscal deficit widened to 7.3 percent of GDP in 2009 and 6.5 percent
in 2010 (Table 1) due to the effect on revenues in particular of the crisis, which was deeper than
initially expected. In 2010, strong government measures were undertaken, including a hike in VAT
from 19 to 24 percent and a 25 percent cut in public wages.
Table 1: Key economic indicators, 2008-13 (CPS period: 2009-2013)
2008
2009
2010
2011 20122
Real GDP growth (%)
7.3
-7.1
-1.3
1.5
1.8
Domestic demand (%)
8.3
-14.6
-1.0
0.3
1.5
Consumer price index (%, average)
7.8
5.6
6.1
6.4
2.9
Fiscal balance (% of GDP)
-4.8
-7.3
-6.5
-4.4
-1.9
Structural fiscal balance (% of GDP)
-8.5
-7.0
-5.1
-2.6
0.0
Current account balance (% of GDP)
-11.6
-4.2
-4.1
-4.5
-4.7
FDI balance (% of GDP)
6.7
3.0
1.8
2.2
2.6
Gross external debt (% of GDP)
51.8
69.0
75.7
75.4
77.8

2013
3.2
3.6
3.2
-2.0
-0.5
-5.0
2.2
72.9

7.
Growth has resumed in 2011, but it is expected to linger below potential in the medium
term, while important downside risks remain. Earlier expectations on Romania’s quick
economic recovery and improved macroeconomic outlook have been dampened by the resurgence
of the global economic crisis and the ongoing challenges in the Eurozone. Growth of 1.5 percent is
projected for 2011 from -1.3 percent in 2010, and is currently expected to only modestly increase in
2012 to around 1.8 percent of GDP, and continue at 2-3 percent per annum over the medium term.
Growth depends however on the recovery of the global economic environment, renewed investor
confidence, and a steady increase in domestic demand. The fiscal deficit (in cash terms) is on track
to meet the target of 4.4 percent of GDP (or within 5 percent in ESA3 terms) in 2011 and it is
expected to bring the ESA and cash deficits within 2 percent of GDP in 2012.
1

The DPL1, for EUR 300 million, was disbursed in 2009; the DPL2, for EUR 300 million, was disbursed in June 2011; and the
DPL3, for EUR 400 million, is expected to accompany this Progress Report.
2
Forecasts based on IMF data.
3
European System of National and Regional Accounts in the European Community

2

8.
The IMF, EC and the WB continue to support fiscal stabilization, economic growth
and structural reforms including through a 24-month precautionary Stand-By Agreement
(SBA). This should help Romania weather better the impact of the deepening crisis in the
Eurozone and the risk of contagion. The IMF released seven tranches totaling SDR 10.57 billion
under the SBA which expired in March 2011. The eighth tranche was made available on a
precautionary basis, at the Government’s request. The EC also released in June 2011 the fifth and
last tranche of its EUR5 billion program accompanying the SBA with the IMF. A new SBA of
EUR3.5 billion was approved by the IMF in March 2011, in conjunction with precautionary support
from the EU of EUR1.4 billion. The SBA focuses on boosting growth through structural reforms
and aims at deep-rooted reforms in energy and transport. The IMF and EU precautionary support
helps to reassure the markets and provide a cushion against potential adverse shocks.
9.
Social protection spending made it possible to continue reducing poverty despite the
crisis. The absolute poverty rate decreased from 36 percent in 2000 to 5.7 percent in 2008 and 4.4
percent in 2009. The 2009 decline in the poverty rate has been partially due to increases in the
minimum pension, but this effort proved to be costly and not well targeted. In addition, the rise in
unemployment was partly contained due to strong labor hoarding effect aided by the GoR through a
generous “technical unemployment” subsidy to companies. However, the poverty rate increased to
5.4 percent in 2010 due to the crisis hardship. Social spending rose from 10.15 percent in 2008 to
14.3 percent of GDP in 2010.
10.
The Government National Reform Program (NRP) 2011-13, adopted in April 2011,
indicates a gradual shift of the reform agenda away from crisis management towards reviving
economic growth and enhancing competitiveness. The NRP outlines new reforms derived from
specific objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy. This reinforces the country’s objective of achieving
convergence with the EU in terms of competitiveness, income and living standards. Thus, the NRP
proposes short and medium term priority reforms to close the gap with the EU and fall into three
categories:
i. Measures to consolidate the macroeconomic framework include expenditure and revenue
adjustments, public pay policy reforms, health, state owned enterprises (SOE);
ii. Policy reforms to address root causes of vulnerabilities exposed by the global economic crisis
and improve functioning of markets aim to increase allocational efficiency of public and
private sector resources; reforms are envisaged in: R&D, energy, health, education;
iii. Administrative capacity building measures aim to enable better delivery of public services and
effective strategic prioritization of Government actions, including better policy coordination
and monitoring and evaluation; these target the functioning of the General Secretariat of the
Government, the Ministry of Public Finance and institutional set-up and business processes in
line ministries (i.e. education, social protection, tax administration, EU funds absorption) and
governmental agencies; the measures are derived mainly from the recommendations of the FRs.
11.
Government priorities have been endorsed and supported by key stakeholders. The
multilateral program with the IMF, EC and the Bank supported the established priorities. These
have also been validated by a number of exercises conducted by the Bank such as the benchmarking
exercise, mapping of reforms and stakeholders’ analysis, confirming at the same time the role of the
Bank as a key advisor to the Government in implementing the reforms agenda, building upon its
comparative advantage (as presented in section IV).
III.
PROGRESS TOWARD ACHIEVING CPS OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES
12.
Progress toward achieving the CPS objectives and outcomes is broadly satisfactory
through there remains a significant agenda for the two years ahead. The CPS design was not
overly ambitious in setting the objectives and results of the Bank’s contributions over the CPS
period. With Bank support through DPL 1-2 and technical assistance (TA), the budget process now
relies on tighter discipline, prioritization and monitoring practices. These improvements have been
triggered by a strengthened medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF), a longer-term fiscal
strategy and legislation encouraging fiscal responsibility. More efficient expenditure policies are
implemented in health and education. Comprehensive efforts to rationalize and consolidate social
3

assistance are underway. The CPS contributed to developments in various sectors as described
below, such as: agriculture and rural development, knowledge economy, energy, as well as to
increased EU funds absorption in selected areas. However, the latter remains a major challenge.
13.
During its first two years, the CPS was centered on the DPL program. The DPL series
was the main policy instrument for dialogue with the Government, IMF and EC. They supported a
comprehensive - and probably unprecedented in terms of coverage and depth - reform agenda
including a new pension system, new public pay system, budget reforms, health expenditure
efficiency reform, rationalization of the social assistance system, and reforms to consolidate
financial sector. The policy dialogue was assisted by an array of TA through a joint program of the
Bank, IMF and EC. The DPL and accompanying TA helped the Bank strengthen its collaboration
with the EC, paving the way to the partnership on Functional Reviews (FR) and Modernization of
Public Administration. Progress under pillars is presented below (see also Annex 3).
Pillar 1 - Public Sector Reform
14.
Progress on Public Sector Reform is on track and this pillar has become a primary
focus of Bank support to the GoR. The CPS has supported the fiscal sustainability targets in the
2009-2012 Government’s program, and fiscal reforms critical to Romania’s medium-term agenda.
In the budget area, CPS instruments (DPL1-2, Public Expenditure and Institutional Review,
Education and Health TA) have helped underpin improved budget discipline, accountability,
efficiency and sustainability of the public wage bill. In governance, the Bank continues to support
strengthening the efficiency and accountability of the judiciary. Proactive measures4 by the Ministry
of Justice bode well to meet CPS objectives in the judiciary by 2013.
15.
Over the past year and a half, the Bank carried out functional reviews (FRs) of twelve
public institutions in Romania under the overall framework of an MoU signed in June 2009
between the EU and the GoR. The reviews provide operational recommendations on strategic
management, organizational structure, sector governance, budgeting, and human resources
management to help guide structural reforms. While this possibility was envisaged in CPS, it
materialized in a much stronger way than anticipated and has become a cornerstone of the Bank’s
work program in Romania. Phase 1 (presented to Government in October 2010) covered Transport,
Pre-University Education, Agriculture and Rural Development, Public Finance, the Center of
Government, Competition Council; and phase 2 (presented to Government in March 2011) analyzed
Environment and Forestry, Energy and Economy, Health, Labor and Social Protection, Regional
Development and Tourism, Higher Education, Research, and Innovation). In December 2010, the
Government approved their action plans derived from the recommendations of the first phase, part
of which the Bank may support under the EU financed Modernization of Romanian Public
Administration FBS series (see section Proposed Adjustments to the CPS). The Government has
recently completed Action Plans based on the second phase of the Functional Reviews and
submitted them to the European Commission.
16.
The Bank’s support under Pillar 1 is expected to exceed the CPS original objectives.
Under DPL1, the GoR elaborated a MTEF that, together with the Fiscal Responsibility Law,
represents the basis for a credible medium-term fiscal plan and linking allocations to outcomes and
performance. The MTEF is already being used as a tool to enhance fiscal discipline and improve
resource allocation, resulting in achieving satisfactory outcomes for this CPS pillar. This should be
reflected by a steady reduction of discrepancy between the approved budget and actual expenditures
for major ministries. The implementation of measures to attract and retain skilled public employees
remains to be addressed (under DPL3). The Judicial Reform Project was restructured to better
support the Strategy for the Development of Justice as a Public Service 2010-14 and the needs
resulting from the Cooperation and Verification Mechanism5.

4

"Small Reform Law" to speed up Courts procedures, new strategy 2010-2014 Justice as a Public Service, progress in impact
assessment of four new codes, design and preparation of roll out of Resource Monitoring System for Judiciary
5
This is a safeguard measure of the EC in case a new member or acceding state of the EU failed to implement commitments
undertaken during accession negotiations (freedom, security and justice or internal market policy)

4

Pillar 2 - Growth and Competitiveness
17.
Given the focus of the first two years on the crisis, and given its longer term nature, the
Bank’s support to this pillar is less advanced, despite some important achievements: (i)
financial sector, the Bank contributed mainly via the DPL to maintaining financial stability,
improving governance and the sector’s resilience (i.e. Mortgage and Corporate Debt Resturcturing
Guidelines issued, adopted legislation on political independence and financial autonomy of sector
regulators); (ii) education, the DPL supported the shift to per-student financing; (iii) the Knowledge
Economy project provided access to, and use of the Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) resources for 255 local communities; (iv) hazards mitigation, the related project financed the
development of an Emergency Management Information System and helped mitigate earthquake
and flood risks by retrofitting public buildings and rehabilitating selected large and small dams);
(iv) energy, the internal market opening including the residential market and the development of the
Commercial Operator Power Exchange6); (v) environment, the Municipal Services Project helped
the Ministry of Environment to meet the EU environmental directives). Key challenges that the
Bank could support upon demand on the growth agenda include business environment, R&D and
innovation, skills, competition, digital agenda, transport and climate change.
Pillar 3 - Social and Spatial Inclusion
18.
A number of reforms have been contributing to improved targeting and efficiency of
social spending. The design and funding of the best targeted programs for social assistance, such as
the Guaranteed Minimum Income, were improved. The Social Inclusion Project (SIP) supports the
improvement in social and spatial inclusion of Roma communities (through the Romanian Social
Development Fund) as well as greater participation of Roma children in early childhood education
programs. In addition, the DPL2 promoted reforms to strengthen the fiscal viability, integrity and
equity of the public pension. Similarly, the DPL series has contributed to progress in the financial
sustainability of the health sector as well as in the efficiency and quality of health services through
the reform of provider payment methods and a plan to better align hospital infrastructure with
demand - the national hospital rationalization strategy (approved in March 2011) contributes to
meeting some of the CPS targets. Some 373 hospitals were decentralized and all hospitals
contracted by the National Health Insurance House were assessed and classified or reclassified
following the Hospital Classification. A results-based operation on the modernization of the social
assistance systems was approved end FY11. This EUR500 million project supports the government
efforts to improve overall performance of the social assistance system by strengthening
performance management, improving equity, administrative efficiency, reducing error and fraud.
19.
However, adjustments are needed to make the best use of limited resources in
achieving greater social and spatial inclusion. So far, the main Bank instrument in support of
Roma inclusion has been the Social Inclusion Project. Unfortunately, implementation has been
hampered by the GoR’s long investment approval cycle and institutional capacity of the National
Agency for Roma, and was restructured to enhance the Roma component and accommodate two
new sub-components: (i) the upgrade of the IT system for social assistance benefits and (ii) the
improvement of the cash benefits in the social assistance system. Additional reforms supported by
the DPL 2 aim at increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of income-tested family benefits such
as the Lone Parent Allowance and the Complementary Child Allowance (legislation to this end was
submitted to the Parliament as a DPL2 prior action, to be implemented under DPL3). Less progress
than hoped was made on an Avian Flu project, which closed marginally unsatisfactory during the
CPS against its original development objectives (though marginally satisfactory against its revised
ones) and as a number of project activities were cancelled or transferred.
Overall Portfolio
20.
The IBRD portfolio consists of 12 active projects. While the number of projects is
declining, the AAA program, largely fee based services, is growing. At end October 2011, the
6

the share of electricity supply sourced from the liberalized market accounts for about 50 percent of total electricity supply in
Romania

5

portfolio included 12 investment operations totaling US$1.7 billion; 2 co-financing GEFs; one
Prototype Carbon Fund; one PHRD for policy making for People with Disabilities; 7 AAAs
including one FBS following up to the FRs. In addition, FBS TAs in support of the implementation
of the action plans derived from FRs recommendations are undergoing pre-signing approval
procedures. The AAA portfolio covers public finance, education, health, regional development,
labor and social protection.
21.
Proactive efforts have improved quality of the portfolio. Disbursements are satisfactory
with a ratio of 29 percent at end-FY10 and 19.4 percent in FY11. Projects at risk decreased from 46
percent at end FY10 to 25 percent in FY12. Quarterly portfolio meetings evaluate portfolio
performance and address implementation challenges. An online monitoring system in place since
FY11 tracks portfolio performance and implementation of recommendations. A characteristic of the
Romania portfolio has been a number of old projects unable to complete implementation during the
planned project life resulting in a large number of extensions. Greater efforts to avoid project
extensions will make more room for new projects/loans. Apart from close monitoring, other efforts
include restructuring operations to maintain relevance to the GoR policy agenda by revising project
development objectives, transferring funds toward new sub-components or canceling amounts for
components where time-bound actions were not met.
22.
IFC commitments are approximately US$660 million with the largest share for finance
(67 percent) and infrastructure (20 percent) sectors. IFC’s current committed portfolio is the fourth
largest in Europe and Central Asia. Romania will also benefit from two crisis response regional
funds: the CRG CEE Restructuring Fund and the ADM CEECAT Recovery Fund. These funds aim
to raise a total of EUR500 million to address regionally bad debts and assist local companies facing
financing difficulties. IFC has played an active crisis response role in Romania, investing in FY0912 approximately US$466 million of its own funds and mobilizing an additional US$242 million in
fifteen projects in various sectors. Particular support was provided to financial, renewable energy
and health sectors. The IFC portfolio is performing very well on both loans and equity.
23.
Since FY09, the Bank has carried out AAA to assist Government in designing and
implementing the crisis response, strengthen capacity for improved governance, and provide
detailed advice on key sectoral reforms. Sector notes were produced on power, water, road
maintenance, environment, and agriculture and rural development. In FY10-11 the AAA portfolio
increased significantly with emphasis on TA, reflecting the addition of the fee-based Functional
Reviews (Annex 13) to support structural changes required by the EC. The “regular” AAA portfolio
has continued to inform Bank lending and policy dialogue. IFC advisory services focused on
investment climate reforms, banking sector development, and sustainable energy finance. These
services underpinned Bank interventions and built the capacity of ministries and IFC clients.
24.
The Bank works closely with the IMF, the EU and other donors. Through donor
coordination, the World Bank was able to leverage its portfolio and exercise greater selectivity.
The Bank closely and successfully collaborated on the overall fiscal stimulus package with the IMF,
the European Union, as well as EIB and EBRD, and supported communication and outreach
through various workshops and events.
IV.
PROPOSED ADJUSTMENTS TO THE CPS
25.
The overarching objective of CPS implementation remains to support Romania’s
convergence with the EU through robust, sustainable and equitable growth, and enhanced
competitiveness. To sustain the convergence process with the rest of the EU and boost
competitiveness, attention needs to be paid to unfinished structural reforms in the NRP, and to
further consolidation of the macroeconomic environment, including additional fiscal adjustment.
26.
Over the past two years of the CPS, the Bank has accumulated a more solid knowledge
base on Romania, which will be used to support the Bank’s program going forward, and
Government policy reforms and institutional development, including for strategic planning,
coordination and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of policies. This includes: (i) fee-based
work, namely the twelve FRs; (ii) analytical and advisory activities, including the benchmarking
6

and performance-informed portfolio review, the 2009 sector policy notes, the Policy Notes on
growth and competitiveness, the Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR), the ongoing
mapping of reforms, and other sector work; and (iii) policy-based and investment lending
operations. In particular, the benchmarking exercise and the mapping of reforms (in progress) are
highly germane to performance monitoring and capacity building. The benchmarking provides an
operational M&E tool to help prioritize strategic choices and monitor programs through Key
Performance Indicators. In particular, the work conducted by the Bank through the FRs has
informed the preparation of the 2011-13 NRP and are acknowledged as substantial contributions to
restructuring and modernizing the central and local public administration, enhancing the efficiency
of government expenditures, and improving the quality of and access to public services.
27.
The CPS PR went through a participatory consultative process with stakeholders in
different sectors, including NGOs, think-tanks, private institutions, academia, government and
international organizations. A survey assessed the perceived performance of the Bank in
implementing the CPS in the first two years and eight sectoral roundtables discussed the challenges
and potential Bank role in: agriculture and rural development, climate change, education,
governance, the social sectors, health, public finance and smart growth (focusing on: business
environment, research, development and innovation, competition and the digital agenda). Key
findings from the consultations are included in Annex 6.
28.
The relevance of the CPS areas and the Bank’s comparative advantage in supporting
national priorities were validated through a strategic positioning exercise. The exercise was
based on a perception survey done in February 2010 among high-level representatives of the
Romanian public administration to identify the needs for technical and financial assistance. Data
analysis provided valuable information regarding clients’ perception of the way in which the Bank
comparative advantage matches country needs (see the graph on survey’s results in Annex 5). In
particular, the survey made it possible to determine sectors and sub-sectors in which the country’s
needs for assistance are high and Bank capacity is perceived as good. This, in turn, confirmed the
relevance of the CPS pillars and guided the identification of the main areas for action for 2010-13.
29.
Public sector reform, growth and competitiveness, and social and spatial inclusion
continue to be appropriate pillars for the remainder of the CPS and are complemented by
three EU cross-sectoral themes. While the focus in the first two years was to help Romania deal
with the immediate aftermath of the economic and financial crisis, a transition to a longer term
perspective with a view to achieve convergence with EU standards of living is now possible and the
CPS emphasis will increasingly shift towards this direction. Moreover, given the limited Bank
resources and the collaboration between the Bank, GoR and the EC, the Bank’s role is of a strategic
advisor. Bank contributions are grouped in three cross-sectoral EU related themes. Although
distinctions are made between those sectors that still need policy reforms (under theme 1) and
sectors that have made many of the policy reforms happen and need capacity strengthening (theme
2), the proposed Bank interventions reinforce and complement each other and are subordinated to
the objectives of sustained growth, increased efficiency and transparency of public administration.
Theme 3 groups operations not generally covered by EU funding. While there is no change in
strategic pillars, the idea is to place Bank’s engagement and work clearly within the broad
framework of complementarity and support of the EC program in Romania and to use the themes as
filters to select AAA and lending operations for the remaining CPS period. Ongoing and proposed
activities are reflected under pillars and themes in Annex 2.
Theme 1: Policy reforms to reap the benefits of EU membership and meet the objectives of the
Europe 2020 strategy.
30.
Supporting ongoing structural reforms and new policy actions in line with NRP will be
critical for Romania to achieve greater convergence with EU Member States. Reforms in
health, education, financial sector and budget processes are supported under DPL3. Policy reforms
in social assistance, health, tax administration, energy, transport, SOEs are likely areas for a new
DPL. Additional AAA aligned to theme 1 will be guided by GoR demand and Bank’s comparative
advantage. Issues on macroeconomic stability and building blocks for sustainable growth may be
7

considered. Also, inclusion and participation may demand attention, especially on the enormous
challenges to provide opportunities for the Roma while overcome prejudice and stigma. This is
complemented by a set of Policy Notes on Growth and Competitiveness, which provide a
framework to orient policy dialogue concerning challenges to EU convergence.
Theme 2: Modernization of public institutions to enhance resource allocation and absorption of
EU funds.
31.
The Bank aims to support Government priorities in terms of strengthening
administrative capacity to enable better delivery of public services and effective strategic
prioritization of Government actions, resources allocation and absorption of EU funds,
including better policy coordination and monitoring and evaluation. The Bank has been asked
to provide technical support to the Government to implement its action plans derived from phase 1
FRs recommendations, currently seventeen projects7 under the MAP (Annex 4). The Bank has also
been requested similar assistance in justice, procurement and EU funds absorption, as part of the
MAP8. The MAP package supports several interventions both on policy reforms and institutional
capacity building (Table 2). Government action plans for the second phase have been approved and
the Bank is ready to support their implementation upon request.
32.
Strenghtening the institutional capacity at central level is supported by the Bank. This
theme also requires measures to support the “Center of Government”, including the functioning of
the General Secretariat of the Government, and the Bank aims to support strengthening the
institutional capacity at this level by enhancing the monitoring and evaluation functions in
policymaking through an IDF grant. Strengthening strategic organizational reform areas such as
human resource management, communication and processes including IT systems is expected to
increase administrative capacity in specific sectors covered by the MAP (see Table 2).
Table 2: MAP FBS TAs under themes 1 and 2
Sector
Theme 1 (policy reforms to reap the
benefits of EU membership)
Public
finance
Agriculture
&
rural
development

Education
Transport

Competition

Justice
EU
funds
absorption
Procurement

Treasury/debt
management, improving
capacity in tax policy analysis, strengthening
macro forecasting capacity
developing a vision and strategy for
capitalizing on agri-food production
potential; supporting the strategic planning
for ARD administration
school
network
optimization
and
management
update transport strategy and assist its
implementation, support railway system
with focus on definition and refinement of
public service contracts, support publicprivate partnerships with emphasis on the
road sector
revising Competition Council’s legislative
mandate to promote competition / strengthen
competition advocacy in public institutions

Theme 2 (Modernization of public institutions to
enhance resource allocation & EU funds
absorption )
improving communication with tax payers and
strengthening human resource management
implementing the management information system of
the Ministry, developing and implementing an
integrated IT system for financial management;
conducting a FR of the National Agency for Cadaster
and Real Estate Publicity
developing Ministry’s administrative capacity and
management of information resources

implementing a new business architecture in the
Competition Council and increasing its human
resource capacity on competition matters
functional review of the judicial system
analysis of processes and legislative impediments to
greater EU funds absorption
Review procurement procedures

33.
The Bank has been requested to support capacity building for absorbing EU funds. As
of end October 2011, the absorption rate of EU structural funds for 2007-13 was around 3.7 percent,
7

The MAP consists of 20 projects, out of which 17 are derived from the action plans and 3 are additional requests; the Bank received
formal requests for assistance from all sectors except for the 2 education related projects, still under consideration until the financing
proposals are approved by the Managing Authority
8
Estimated at around USD30M including the education projects under consideration

8

leaving about EUR 20 billion available. The current economic program aims to raise it to 20% in
2012, which is an ambitious agenda. The Plan of Priority Measures for strengthening the capacity
to absorb structural and cohesion funds, was approved by the government in April 2011, and could
significantly reduce barriers to absorption. One of its key components is to identify the 100 top
project priorities, and concentrate counterpart funding and administrative capacity on these projects.
The Government also recently created a dedicated Ministry of European Affairs, with a former EU
Commissioner as Minister. The GoR, in agreement with the EC, requested the Bank to carry out an
analysis of policy impediments constraining EU funds. This work has been requested on a fee for
service basis and the scope of Bank’s support in this area is under discussion with the Government.
Theme 3: Complement to EU funding.
34.
The availability of Structural Funds makes Bank financing a minor instrument for
Romania. However, the Bank can complement EU support by financing activities not planned to be
covered by Structural Funds or alternative instruments. For instance, development policy lending
and results-based operations can support improved outcomes from current budgets. Subnational
activities, access to financial markets via guarantees and areas of national responsibility (i.e.
education, health, justice) for which typically structural funds are not allocated or with EC’s prior
agreement could be explored.
35.
For the CPS remainder, new IBRD lending could reach EUR1.4 billion in FY12 9 and
perhaps EUR325 million in FY13 (Table 3). This potential new lending is indicative and actual
delivery will depend on the GoR's request for IBRD resources, sector needs, Romania's performance,
IBRD's financial capacity, demand from other borrowers, and global economic developments.
Table 3: Potential IBRD lending
Project
Commitment M
Project
Commitment M
Project
Commitment M
FY 2011
FY 2012
FY 2013 (t.b.c.)
DPL2
€300 (US$426) DPL 3
€400 (US$560) Tax Admin
€75 (US$100)
SASM10
€500 (US$710) New DPL (DDO)
€1000 (US$1380) 11 Health
€250 (US$344)
TOTAL €800 (US$1136)
TOTAL
€1400 (US$1940)
TOTAL
€325 (US$444)
FY12-13 after the DPL3 based on exchange rate of EUR 1.377 to US$1

36.
The Bank will support the modernization of social assistance, tax administration and
health systems. In addition to supporting the implementation of the recently approved results-based
operation on the modernization of the social assistance systems, other types of lending activities in
the second half of the CPS period will be guided by GoR’s demand. For FY12, the third DPL is
under preparation. Operations to support improved tax administration and implementation of health
sector reforms are envisaged for FY13 (see Table 3).
37.
The Government has expressed its interest in a new DPL in FY12, possibly with a
deferred drawdown option. This would focus on the Structural Reform program being supported
by the IFIs. While the exact content is not yet determined, several areas have emerged as main
potential candidates: Health, Energy, Transport, SOEs, Tax administration and PFM. These key
structural reforms would follow the current DPL series and be correlated to the EU and IMF
support. As the market volatility and regional uncertainties are persisting, the DDO can help in two
ways: (i) as a buffer that can help Romania accomplish its external issuance program under EMTN
in reasonable terms and conditions; and (ii) if vulnerabilities are persisting and some risks
materialize raising significant challenges in the financing strategy, the Government could draw the
funds.
38.
In light of the crisis, IFC is investing in Romania on a selective basis. IFC has withdrawn
from sectors and business lines where the private sector is ready to take over. In the banking sector,
largely dominated by foreign banks (about 90 percent of banking assets), IFC strategy is to work
with local banks and strengthen their capacity to provide loans to underserved sectors and products
such as local currency, housing finance, agribusiness, renewable and energy efficiency. IFC will
9

To be confirmed with the Government of Romania.
Social Assistance System Modernization
11
The GoR requested EUR1 billion
10

9

assist local companies to become competitive in the domestic market and expand to other countries
in the region, and promote South-South investments. IFC will continue to support projects of high
development impact such as in infrastructure, frontier regions and climate change related projects.
39.
Graduation prospects will be reassessed under the next CPS. Although Romania is over
the income threshold for consideration of graduation, it is proposed that no detailed discussions to
prepare for graduation be held for the remainder of this CPS period given the need to continue the
develop Romania’s institutional capacity. A fuller treatment of this issue would be prepared in the
context of the next CPS beginning in FY14.
40.
The CPS Results Matrix presented in Annex 1 has been updated to reflect the program
for the remaining period. The main pillars have remained unchanged while targets and indicators
have been revised reflecting the progress, changes and restructuring measures taken during the first
two years, and the milestones assessed. The new operations have been added to the matrix .
V.

RISKS

41.
Below is a summary of risks and an update on mitigation measures.
 Institutional capacity risks relate to the uneven quality of policy making and coordination
across various government entities. These risks are currently mitigated by the Bank through
technical assistance (both formal and informal) as well as an IDF grant (FY12) to improve the
capacity for policy formulation, monitoring and evaluation in the central government.
Implementation of the FRs recommendations would help strengthen public administration in
selected sectors and therefore contribute to mitigating institutional capacity risks.
 Economic risks increased with the global economic crisis, and the large external and fiscal
deficits at the onset of the crisis made it all the more difficult to adjust to the severe economic
downturn. The IFIs multilateral support package and the proactive measures taken by the state
institutions have helped contain negative impacts and should enable recovery12. Like other
countries in the region, Romania faces risk of eurozone crisis contagion and exposure to Greek
banks. This risk is mitigated by structural reforms, the proactive stance of state institutions, and
the resource cushion provided by the extension on a precautionary basis of the multilateral
program with the IMF and the EC until Spring 2013, as well as the significant foreign exchange
reserves accumulated during the last three years.
 Social risks are associated primarily with the impact of the Government’s fiscal austerity
measures; new policy reforms including those affecting social assistance and restructuring and/or
privatization of SOEs; and with planned 2012 increases in energy prices that collectively could
impede the implementation of the DPL program and broader policy reforms. These are mitigated
by the acceleration of social assistance reform and the provision of funding.
 Political risks stem particularly from the inherent fragility of a coalition government facing a
strong opposition, and uncertainty from 2012 elections. So far, these risks have been managed
well by the Romanian authorities. Bank dialogue with the parliamentary opposition to explain
the need for reforms and inform on progress in their implementation are helping to build broader
support and mitigate the risk of a change of direction.
 Implementation risks. There will be a risk of implementing the MAP program of FBS until the
legal agreements are signed, however, there is strong support from the highest levels of the GoR,
the IFIs, and particularly the EC. The Managing Authority received the financial proposals for
the six sectors under consideration for the MAP, which represents a strong mitigation measure.

12

Natural disasters and climate change are an area of risk for future study.

10

Annex 1. Results Framework
MILESTONES
WBG INSTRUMENTS13
CAS PILLAR 1: PUBLIC SECTOR REFORM
GOALS: To improve the accountability and responsiveness of the public administration and to enhance predictability and efficiency in public resource management.
Issues and Obstacles as identified in 2009: Pro-cyclical fiscal policies and weak fiscal management have led to serious macroeconomic vulnerabilities. The budget process lacks predictability and transparency,
as well as weak prioritization of public investment. Introduction of an MTEF will require capacity and support to both plan on a multi-year horizon and to link budget with outcomes. Public sector wages have
more than doubled since 2005 contributing to pro-cyclical policies, but without adequately rewarding performance or productivity. Governance is weak and monitored by the EU bi-annually. The court system
has a large back-log of cases. Since CPS approval in 2009 the GoR made significant progress in improving public finance management and reforming the public pay system (see achieved milestones under1.1
PFM and 1.2 public administration reform and Annex 3)
1.1 PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Completed:
Objective: Reduce fiscal vulnerabilities by restoring budget discipline, 
Fiscal Responsibility Law 69/2010 approved & enacted

Policy Briefs (FY09)
improving the effectiveness and efficiency of public expenditures, and
(2010)

PEIR Update (FY09)
improved resource mobilization.

Independent Fiscal Council established (2010)

DPL 1-2 (FY10 - FY11))

TA Fiscal Decentralization (FY11)
Outcome 1.1.1: Medium Term Expenditure Framework operational by 
Mid Term Expenditure Framework approved by Parliament

TA Tax Administration (FY11)
2012 and beyond
with three-years ceilings for major spending ministries

PEIRs updates focusing on opportunities for fiscal savings

Indicator (revised): Reduction in variance between main
(2011 and beyond - in progress)
and efficiency gains in major expenditure categories,
aggregate ceiling (Wage, Goods & Services, Capital) approved by
starting with education and health (FY09-FY10)
Parliament in the MTEF (2011-13) and the actual expenditures. 
Fiscal Strategy 2011-13 approved by Government (Done)

FBS Functional Review on Public Finance (FY11)
Baseline (2008): 27% variance for three largest economic classes
Ongoing
(Wage, Goods&Services, Capital) Target: deviation ≤ 17%

Wage bill increases below inflation rate (Increase in 2010 is

Social Assistance Modernization Project (Results Based)
2% vs. 5.6% inflation rate)
Outcome 1.1.2: Sustainable growth in public wage bill
New
Summary of multi-year public investment program annexed

Indicator: Annual expenditure for personnel (2011-13) 

DPL3 (FY12)
to 2010-2011 budget (Done)
consistent with the limits approved in MTEFs and does not

FBS – TA support to GOR for the implementation of the
increase as a share of GDP above expected 2009 level. Baseline:
action plans drafted by the GoR on the modernization of
9.4% in 2009 In progress: Wage bill: at 8.3% of GDP in 2010
public administration (FY12)
(preliminary data)

PEFA
1.2 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (PA) REFORM

Functional reviews of the public administration undertaken
to identify budget resources that could be realized for Completed
Objective (revised): support GOR effort to improve the organizational
better targeting pay (Done)

Public Sector Pay Practices in Romania (FY08)
effectiveness and transparency of the public administration at central
Recommendations for public administration reform and 
DPL 1-2 (FY10-FY11)
and local levels; and improve the public pay system to enhance 
modernization formulated and shared with Government 
PFM-Civil Service Pay (FY10)
transparency and predictability, motivate performance among public
(Done)

FBS Functional Reviews (FY11) (Agriculture, Transport,
sector employees, attract and retain critical skills.
Competition, Pre-University Education (1-2), Public Finance,
Reform Action Plans for Agriculture, Transport,
Center of Government, Economy & Energy & Business
Outcome 1.2.1 (new): Initiation by GOR of the RO PA Reform - 
Competition, Pre-University Education (1-2), Public Finance,
Environment , Research, Development & Innovation, Higher
approval of Reform Action Plans for selected PA institutions (Done –
Center of Government, Health, Labor, Environment,
Education, Health, Labor and Social Protection, Environment
all Functional Reviews Phase 1 and 2 ministries and agencies)
Regional Development, Economy and Energy, R&DI (Judicial
& Forestry, Regional Development and Tourism)
in progress) developed by the ministries and Government
Outcome 1.2.2 (new): Progress in enacting and implementing the
agencies based on recommendations of the Functional
Ongoing
strategies/ tools/ procedures/ etc. in the Reform Action Plans.
Reviews TA series (Done)

Social Assistance Modernization Project (Results Based)
RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING

13

Results of the potential new DPL (possibly DDO) not included as the program is yet to be designed, however, will be outlined in the program document.

11

RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING



Indicator (new) Favorable assessment by EC of Romania’s
progress in improving the organizational effectiveness and
transparency of its Public Administration ( EC Opinion on the
National Reform Plan and progress under the Memorandum of
Understanding with EU)





Outcome 1.2.3: Alignment of public sector pay system to EU practice
(transparency, equity, ability to attract & retain critical skills in public
administration)

Indicator : Reduction in aggregate allowances and bonuses and
limit amount for any individual
Target: Maximum 30% percent of the total public compensation
by 2011, and maintained (empirical evidence indicates higher
percentages, varying from sector to sector)

Indicator : Align pay structures more closely to actual labor
market conditions (evidence to be provided via salary survey
results of MLFSP) (dropped)
1.3 GOVERNANCE
Objective: strengthen the efficiency, accountability, transparency of
the justice system.
Outcome 1.3.1 : (revised) Improved judicial efficiency in pilot courts

Indicator (revised) 10% increase by 2013 in the number of cases
disposed of or archived in selected pilot courts. Baseline: 11.224
cases in 2008



New salary legislation on public sector pay which limits
non wage expenditures approved (Done - Unitary Pay
Law (UPL) 330/2009 approved.)
A detailed pay reform plan is approved by Government for
implementing (a) a uniform job grading framework for the
public service (Done) and (b) more closely aligning pay for
selected benchmark jobs to actual labor market conditions
(through a salary survey) (Done)
Regulations enforcing compliance with merit based
principles of employment and promotion drafted (Done –
Regulations published in Official Gazette (OMJ
622/C/25.02.2010 and subsidiary pay legislation approved
by Parliament.



Uniform standards for the Courts operational processes
developed and country-wide implementation started.
(In progress- TA contract under implementation)



Recommendations for the optimization of courts’ activity
formulated and adopted by SCM.



Publication by Courts and SCM of courts performance data
and findings from periodic Surveys on access to and
satisfaction with judicial services (Courts financed by JRP)
(in progress- Baseline Survey completed, results posted on
SCM site)



Completion of Impact assessment of the four revised/new
Codes (Civil Code, Civil Procedure Code, Criminal Code and
Criminal Procedure Code) and sharing with SCM and MOJ
(ongoing - contract signed Sep 2010)

Outcome 1.3.2: Enhanced competence, professionalism and integrity
of judiciary staff (Bank contributes via creation of pre-requisites)

Indicator: New qualification examination procedures are
successfully piloted by Nat. Institute of Magistracy (Done) and
maintained
Outcome 1.3.3 (new): Progress in Judicial Reform acknowledged by
EC under the Cooperation and Verification Mechanism (Codes entering
into force area)

MILESTONES
Progress Reporting mechanisms for inform the EC
developed by GSG (Done – first reporting completed).

WBG INSTRUMENTS13
New






DPL 3 (FY12)
FBS TA Functional Reviews on Judicial, Land Administration,
Agency for Coordinating Structural Instruments
FB TA (supplemental) to Government for follow up on FRs
recommendations (Agriculture, Transport , Competition
Council, Center of Government, Public Finance, PreUniversity Education 1-2 (compl.FY13)
IDF Grant

Ongoing:

Judicial Reform Project (cl. FY13)

Country Economic Memorandum (FY12) developed as a
sequence of Policy Notes prepared with the participation of
relevant Romanian specialists

FBS Functional Review Ministry of Justice (FY12)
Working tools developed for Financial Sector strengthening
(stress tests, Strategic Action Plan) assimilated and in
use/updated by the NBR

CAS PILLAR 2: GROWTH AND COMPETITIVENESS
GOALS: in the short-run, put in place crisis-management measures in the financial sector; and in the medium-term, establish the building blocks for sustainable convergence to EU-average living standards
through improved business environment, enhanced skills, better infrastructure and more efficient agriculture.
Issues and Obstacles as identified in 2009: The crisis has revealed weaknesses in financial sector supervision across the region, new, best practices will need to be adopted to strengthen the system. A recovery
in growth will depend both on recovery in key trading partners and on the strength of Romania’s own reforms and policies. All countries are seeking to emerge from the crisis in a strong position, so competition
will be strong. Romania lags international competitors on education, business environment and agriculture productivity indicators. Transport and energy need significant investment and reform to be able to
meet demand.
2.1 Growth Agenda
Objective: (new) support to the Government for identification of
Symposium on Economic Recovery and Growth in Romania Ongoing: Bank AAA – via a series of Policy Notes for growth and

12

RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING
priority reforms for growth
Outcome : 1.3.4 (new) Policy options available to the Government for
informing the update of the National Reform Program14 and reflecting
the EU 2020 Strategy goals in Romania’s national reform agenda
2.2 FINANCIAL SECTOR
Objective: deepen and strengthen the resilience of the financial sector
Outcome 2.2.1: Improved stability and resilience of the financial
system to economic shocks

Indicator: Bank system remains well capitalized (average capital
ratio at 14.2% in June 2011 - IMF assessment) (Done)
Outcome 2.2.2: Improved governance of financial sector supervision.

Indicator: Recommendations of the “de La Rosiere” report
adopted, notably with respect to independence and autonomy of
financial sector supervisors (CSA, CNVM, CSSPP) (Done)

Indicator : Supervision standards, regulations and practices
strengthened, in line with Basel II (Done)

2.3. BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT & COMPETITION
Objective: improve the business environment and (new) the capacity
to enforce competitive business practices in the marketplace
Outcome 2.3.1 (new): Improved competition regulatory framework (in
line with EU practices)

Indicator: Revised regulatory framework enacted (by 2013) in
relation to competition principles
Outcome 2.3.2 (new) Enhanced Competence of the Romanian
Competition Council (RCC)

Indicator: RCC ranking15 in the EU
Baseline: RCC the lowest in EU ranking Target: Improved RCC
ranking by 2013



MILESTONES
(with participation of decision makers, National Bank of
Romania, private sector, academia and specialists from IFIs)
to facilitate the diagnosis of different areas (growth, fiscal
sustainability, labor markets, absorption of EU, etc.) The
Symposium findings will serve to document the CEM (Done
– May 2011)
Stress tests conducted and Strategic Action Plan for
Financial Sector strengthening approved by NBR and
Ministry of Public Finance (MoPF) (DPL1 - 2010)



Out-of-court insolvency proceedings set in place, Mortgage
Debt Restructuring and Corporate Debt Restructuring
Guidelines issued & published by NBR & MoPF (DPL2 - 2010)



Updated legislation on the Political Independence and
Financial Autonomy of the Financial Sector Regulators and
Supervisors approved by Government (Done , 2011)



Assessment and amendments of a) adequacy of definition
of Financial Conglomerates (Done) and b) adequacy of
supervision arrangements (Done- 2011, DPL3 pre-condition)



NBR to issue regulations for Joint supervision of financial
groups by the relevant regulators (Done, 2011-DPL3 )
Specific Policy Recommendations provided to the
Government that support the enforcement of competitive
business practices and improvements in the business
environment (Done-2011)





Development of Protocols of Cooperation between RCC and
other regulated sectors and public agencies (ex. Telecom
regulator, Energy regulator, Procurement Authority) to
jointly implement pro-competitive and non-discriminatory
regulation

WBG INSTRUMENTS13
competitiveness & Conferences, with the participation of
Romanian think-tanks and international experts

Completed

Financial Sector Assessment Update (FY09)

Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy Survey and
Conference (FY10)

IT assessment of National Bank of Romania (FY10)

DPL1-2 (FY10 - FY11)

IFC financing to local financial institutions
New


DPL 3 (FY12)

Completed

FBS Functional Review Competition Council

FBS Functional Review MEC & Business Environment

TA Accounting and Audit (FY11)
New

FBS TA Competition (compl.FY13)
o
Streamlining enforcement of competition policies
o
Strengthening of advocacy activities in the field of
competition
o
Implementing a new business architecture for the
Competition Council
o
Increasing HR capacity of RCC

14

The National Reform Program, an EU requirement, is the national response of member states to the Lisbon Strategy, through which they explain how their development strategies are aligned with
the latter. The NRP is updated annually and reviewed by the EC. Stating with 2011, the NRP has to be aligned with the objectives of the EU 2020 Strategy.
The Europe 2020 Strategy sets the vision for the EU member countries beyond 2013. Five measurable targets for 2020 steer the process of growth in the EU member countries and give them the
direction for reforms in employment, research and innovation, climate change and energy, education, and poverty alleviation. The expression of these reforms in national targets and the adoption of a
National 2020 Strategy require Romania to identify the priorities for intervention and the most appropriate actions for accelerating EU convergence.
15

Ranking reflects RCC staffing for competition enforcement and economic analysis and internal target deadlines to track performance

13

RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING
2.4 K-ECONOMY & DIGITAL AGENDA
Objective: Development of the K-based society and economy
Outcome 2.4.1: Increased participation of K-disadvantaged
communities in K-based society/economy

Indicator: % of Population in disadvantaged communities using
the Local Community e-Networks as tool for education, business,
public administration and are satisfied with the results. Baseline
(2005) 0%. Target (2013) 40%. Actual: 25%.

Indicator: (new) Level of ICT integration in schools Baseline
(2007) 35%. Target 100% by 2013. Actual: 79%
2.5 RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT & INNOVATION (RD&I)
Outcome 2.5.1: (new) Policy Recommendations available to the
Government that support RD&I Sector Reform (Done 2011)
2.6 EDUCATION
Objective (revised): improved organizational capacity in the Education
Sector and access to quality education delivered in a fiscally sound
manner, with improved outcomes
Outcome 2.6.1: Improved efficiency in primary and secondary
education by providing more flexible financing, more autonomy and
enhanced accountability (focusing on results) to local authorities and
school principles

Indicator: Increase in average class size. (Baseline: 19.6 in school
year 2008/09. Target: 23 in school year 2013/14) (in progress - at
21.7 in 2011)











Legislation adopted to enable per capita financing in
education (Done – at country level vs. eight counties
envisaged, starting with school year 2010/11).



Analytical foundation developed, to support the
optimization of the schools network, and was share with the
Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and Science



Student Loan Scheme developed and discussed with
Government & stakeholders (Done)
First disbursements from student loans scheme begin
starting with the school year 2011/12 (On hold because of
crisis constraints)





Proposal for modified organizational structure of the
Ministry of Education, Research, Youth, Science (MERYS)
submitted to the Minister



Integrated agricultural offices rolled out nationwide (pilot
established –MAKIS; roll out delayed because of new
strategy for establishment of Agricultural Chambers)



Systematic survey and registration of land property titles in

Outcome 2.6.3 (new): Analytical Work completed & Conceptual
Frameworks available to Government for development of the
Organizational Capacity in the Education Sector (MERYS) and
improving Romania’s pre-university education system

16

New Agricultural Research Law (Enacted in 2009)
Reform of four agriculture research institutes (Done - 200910)
Functional Review16 of the Research, Development and
innovation sector (Done)



Outcome 2.6.2: Financial support to tertiary students in a more
equitable manner and with better incentives built into the support.

2.7 AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (ARD)
Objective (revised):
provide advisory, technical and financial
assistance to support the strengthening the administrative capacity
and efficiency of ARD sector and the market-based restructuring and
competitiveness of the Romanian agriculture

MILESTONES
Local Community e-Networks established (Done - 255 local
community networks (LCeNs) established in 208 Kdisadvantaged communities and 47 small cities)
Support for EU Funds Absorption: 812 new projects
addressing community needs were developed by LCeNs
users and declared eligible for financing with EU structural
funds (for a total of €240M)
Increased access to quality education through ICT
connectivity, knowledge and use (502 primary and
secondary schools with some 89,000 students – KE Prj)

WBG INSTRUMENTS13
Ongoing

Knowledge Economy Project (KE)

Completed

FBS Functional Review Research, Development, Innovation
(FY11)
Ongoing
MAKIS project (Agricultural research sub-comp) (cl. FY12)
Completed:

Rural Education project (cl. FY09)

HD Policy Briefs (FY09)

TA Decentralization of primary and secondary education
(FY09)

Public Expenditure& Institutional Review update (FY10)

TA Student Loan Scheme (FY11)

FBS Functional Review Pre-University Education (I + II)
(FY11)

FBS Functional Review Higher Education (FY11)
Ongoing:

Knowledge Economy (KE) – Digital Literacy in Schools subcomponent

Social Inclusion Project – Early Childhood Education

IFC financing in private education
New:

FBS TA School Network Restructuring (compl. FY13)

FBS TA Development of the Organizational Capacity of the
Ministry of Education (compl. FY13)

Skills and Competitiveness
Completed:
FBS Functional Review on Agriculture (FY11)
Ongoing

Irrigation Reform & Rehabilitation (cl. FY12)

RD&I sector Functional Review covers legal framework and governance, funding, alignment to national priorities, transmitting RD &Innovation to the private sector, private sector participation

14

RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING
Outcome 2.7.1: Increased capacity of RO advisory and information
systems to provide services to farmers and agro-processors in the
context of EU membership

Indicator : Number of trained and graduated advisors Target
(revised upward) 2000 by 2013 vs. 0 in 2008
Outcome 2.7.2: Improved convergence of Romania toward EU practice
in ARD (in line with the National Rural Development Plan 2007-2013)

Indicator: Handbook of Socio-Econ Guidance based on EU best
practice available to farmers (Volume I completed)
Outcome 2.7.3 (new):
Increased efficiency of operational
management at MADR and selected structures

Indicator: New Internal Management System in use by MARD’s
and subordinated structures’ management

MILESTONES
selected rural areas (in progress)



Piloting of socio-economic advisory services
Training and certification of 300 advisors in socio-economic
advisory services)



Strategies/ tools/ procedures for strengthening the admin
capacity and efficiency of ARD sector (per FB TA Agriculture
program) developed and applied by MARD (by 2013) (new)



Proposal on structure and operation framework for an
Advisory Board on ARD Strategy finalized and delivered to
the Government (new)



Evidence of restructuring the farming sector (partial
progress: reorganization of Romanian extension system,
reform of agric. Research, reform of irrigation subsidy and
tariff setting mechanisms, phasing out of irrigation
subsidies, more participatory approach in irrigation: Water
Users Organizations operational).
Romania and its electricity market and power system
operates with help of ancillary services from Lotru Rrj
(Done)
Privatization of Banat and Dobrogea electricity distribution
companies (Completed with support of a Partial Risk
Guarantee)

Outcome 2.7.4 (new): Increase in EAFRD17 funding to Romanian
beneficiaries. Baseline: 20% of EAFRD allocation. Target: 40% of
EAFRD allocation by 2013

2.8 ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT
Objective: Support Romania in implementing its energy strategy in
line with EU Directives, including EU 20-20-20 targets, and
implementing selected environmental directives
Outcome 2.8.1: Increased security of electricity supply through
integration of regional markets and attracting private sector 18 in the
development of energy markets

Indicator 1: Develop energy transmission services, including
availability of ancillary services for stronger integration into
regional markets, and absorption of energy generated by
renewable sources (Done)









Analytical Work completed (including adaption options and
greenhouse gas emissions management) and available to
the Government for elaboration of a Climate Change
Adaption Strategy



Water and Waste Water Master Plans for 11 counties
completed and adopted by final beneficiaries (Done)

Outcome 2.8.2 (new): Reduction of probability of severe accidental
mine spills in the Tisza basin

Indicator: Risk reduced by at least 70% (via remedial works)
Outcome 2.8.3: Implementation of the EU Water and Nitrate
Directives

Best practice knowledge and procedures on
environmentally friendly mine closure transferred to
Romanian counterparts and implemented (Done Mine
Closure Project)





WBG INSTRUMENTS13
MAKIS project (cl.FY13)
CESAR project (cl. FY13)
IFC direct lending to agribusiness projects and support to
local financial institutions which provides MSMEs lending
and agriculture financing

New

FBS Functional review Land Administration (FY12)

FB TA Agriculture & Rural Development (compl. FY13)
o
Strengthening ARD sector strategy formulation in the
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD)
o
Strategic Planning for the Agricultural Administration
o
Implementation of an Internal Management System at
MARD
o
Creating and Implementing an Integrated Financial
Management IT System at MARD

Completed:

Energy Community in SEE (cl.FY10)

Privatization risk Guarantee Privatization for Banat and
Dobrogea electricity distribution companies (Discoms) (cl.
FY11)

FBS Functional Review Ministry of Economy / Energy
(compl. FY11)

FBS Functional Review Environment and Forestry (compl.
FY11)
Ongoing
Hazards Risks Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness
Project – GEF sub-component (cl.FY12)

Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project and GEF grant
(cl.FY13)

Municipal Services Project (cl.FY12)

Mine Closure and Socio-Economic Regeneration (MCSER)
Project (cl.FY12)

IFC support to local financial institutions which provided

17

European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development
Increasing the participation of the private sector remains below expectations because of potential risks to the functioning of the electricity market - specifically GoR plans to consolidate state-owned power
generation and coal/lignite mining companies into 1-2 integrated mining and power generation companies.
18

15



RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING
Indicator : Favorable EU assessment of Romania's progress
towards meeting EU Nitrates Directive requirements

Outcome 2.8.4 (new): Increasing EU Funds absorption

Indicator 2: EU grant amount attracted with Bank TA Target: €
1bn by 2013

2.9 TRANSPORT , HAZARDS RISKS MITIGATION
Objective (revised): Improve the transport sector’s governance,
operational and financial sustainability, including the efficiency of the
roads and railways sub-sectors
Outcome 2.9.1: Improved road safety (dropped-Transport projects
closed w/out reaching target)

Indicator: Fatalities per 10,000 vehicles. Target: 5 in 2009 vs. 6.7
in 2008 (dropped)
Outcome 2.9.2: (new) Improved Ministry of Transport capacity to
consistently implement a general strategy that links each strategic
item to the overall strategy.

Indicator: New strategy approved and translated into the
approved Investment program for 2014-2020 and in the 2013
and 2014 proposed budgets.
Outcome 2.9.3: Improved emergency preparedness and response
management in Romania

Indicator: An Emergency Communication System is created and
operational (EMIS elaborated)

Indicator: The Emergency Management Information System is
extended to include all central and local administration units (in
progress)

Indicator (revised): Seismic retrofitting of 40 or more public
buildings, flood protection works completed in 10 critical
locations, (significant progress)

MILESTONES


At least 80 percent of targeted Nitrates Vulnerable Zones
show 10 percent reduction in nutrient discharge in water
bodies (work in progress)



Percentage of population in targeted NVZ area adopting
preventive and remedial measures to reduce nutrient
discharge (work in progress)













WBG INSTRUMENTS13
energy efficiency lending.
IFC direct lending to power projects and to renewable
energy projects (wind and/or biomass).

New

TRANSPORT
Road safety activities not done (the Road Agency decided to
implement the activities under an EU financed program,
than re-considered, but no action taken.
Reduction of traffic congestion not achieved – main physical
output-by passes construction program-was not finalized.
Officially approved national transport sector strategy, and
translation into the approved investment program for 20142020 and the 2013 and 2014 proposed budgets.
Public Private Partnership strategy included in the national
transport strategy in line with EU directives
HAZARDS RISKS MITIGATION
Risk assessment of public buildings, dams and waste
deposits is undertaken, based on country regulations to
enable prioritization of investments (Done)




ESW/TA Climate Change (FY12)
New DPL (DDO) TBC

Completed

Transport Restructuring Project (cl. FY10)

Transport Sector Support Project (cl. FY10)

FBS Functional Reviews Transport (compl. FY11)
Ongoing

Hazards Risks Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness
Project (cl.FY12)

IFC support financing of private sector in financing PPPs
New

FB TA Transport Strategy (compl.FY13)

FB TA Public-Private Partnerships (compl.FY13)

FB TA Railway Strategy (compl. FY13)

New DPL (DDO) TBC

Short term investment and financing plans prepared in
accordance with risk assessment & prioritization (Done)

CAS PILLAR 3: SOCIAL AND SPATIAL INCLUSION
GOALS: in the short-term, protect the vulnerable from the adverse effects of the crisis; in the medium-term, promote social inclusion and regional development.
Issues and Obstacles as identified in 2009: The crisis will temporarily increase the number of poor people, especially those involved in service and manufacturing industries. The long-term poor in rural areas
and among some population groups remain hard to reach. Some of the social assistance programs are not well targeted. The pension system can be important for poverty reduction, but is currently running a
deficit and does not reach all those who need it. Romania’s health indicators are lagging the average of those in the EU in important areas.

16

RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING

3.1 SOCIAL INCLUSION
Objective: assist Romania to improve the social inclusion and living
conditions of most disadvantaged and vulnerable people in the
Romanian society
Outcome 3.1.1:Improved social inclusion of Roma living in poor
settlements reduced

Indicator: Gap in living condition index between targeted Roma
settlements and neighboring communities
Baseline: 504 points19 Target: 403 points (20% reduction of gap
2013 vs. 2008 level)
Outcome 3.1.2: Increased inclusiveness of children in disadvantaged
groups in Early Childhood Education services (SIP targeted areas)

Indicator: Percentage point increase in number of children in
disadvantaged groups participating in ECE programs
Target: 5 percent in 2013 vs. almost none in 2007
3.2. SOCIAL ASSISTANCE
Objective: improve the cost effectiveness and targeting of social
assistance programs to mitigate the impact of the crisis on the
vulnerable, and promote activation policies
Outcome 3.2.1: increase the coverage and adequacy of the most
efficient and well targeted social assistance program - the Guaranteed
Minimum Income (GMI)

Indicator : Number of unpaid GMI entitled beneficiaries
Target: 0 by 2013 vs. 25 percent in 2009 (in progress20)

Indicator : Maintain level of benefit adequacy over time (share
of benefits in average household consumption)
Target: 25% in 2008 is maintained
Outcome 3.2.2 (new): Improved Social Assistance equity (targeting of
poorest people) and efficiency (lower admin costs)

Indicator: Share of SA funds going to poorest quintile Baseline:
37.7% in 2009. Target: 45% by 2013

Indicator: Administrative and client participation costs for
means-tested programs. Baseline: TBD Target: Reduction by 20%
Outcome 3.2.3: Consolidate SA programs to better serve poor in most

MILESTONES



79% of the disadvantaged localities in the former mining
areas reached by Socio-Economic Regeneration (SER)
measures extended under the Mine Closure project



Improvements in water and road infrastructure evident in
targeted Roma communities (in progress)



Roma in poor settlements report a closer link (through
annual consultations) with the local authorities, for
addressing community needs. (In progress)

WBG INSTRUMENTS13

Completed

Rural Education Project (cl. FY10)
Ongoing

Social Inclusion Project (cl. FY13)

Mine Closure and Socio-Economic Regeneration (cl.FY12)

FBS Functional Review Regional Development and Tourism
(FY11)
New

Results Based Modernization of Social Assistance Project (cl.
FY13)

(Note: Indicator to be measured when kindergarten works are
completed)



Legislation to improve funding and design of well targeted
social assistance programs (e.g., GMI) is passed (Done)



More transparent and predictable GMI budget allocations &
benefits (Done)



Enactment of legislation on income-tested child
allowances21 that offers higher benefits to households
earning less than 200 RON/month and to Lone Parent
families. (approved by Parliament end 2010 –DPL3).



Harmonized means-testing for GMI, family allowance and
heating benefits (same)



Monthly monitoring reports for 4 programs22 to be
produced by National Agency for Social Benefits starting
2011(in progress)

Completed:

Programmatic Poverty Monitoring Program (FY08)

DPL 1-2 (FY10 / FY11)

FB Functional Reviews Labor and Social Protection (FY11)
Ongoing
Social Inclusion Project (SIP) (cl.FY13)
New

DPL 3 (FY12)

Results Based Social Assistance System Modernization
Project (cl. FY13)

Europe 2020 - Reducing Poverty and Social Protection

19

Gap between targeted settlements and neighboring communities (measured in points) as calculated for 81 pairs of communities by RSDF
Significant progress through combined effect of stronger enforcement of eligibility conditions (which has discontinued GMI payments to 12% of recipients) and increase of the number of families to benefit
by the GMI (by 15%)
21
The income tested allowances are the complementary child allowance (CCA) and the lone parent allowance (LPA)
22
Family Allowance, Child Raising Benefits, Guaranteed Minimum Income, State Child Allowance
20

17

RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING
cost efficient manner

Indicator: One consolidated program for low-income households
Baseline: fragmentation of SA (too many programs) Target: One
consolidated program for low-income households by 2013
3.3. SOCIAL INSURANCE
Objective: strengthen the fiscal viability, integrity and equity of the
multi-pillar pension system
Outcome 3.3.1: Improved fiscal sustainability of the public, pillar 1
pension.

Indicator : Deficit of Pension Pillar 1
Target: Deficit (2.95% in 2011) ≤ by 2013 (target was revised
upward. The consolidation in 2010 of special pension systems –
army, internal affairs- into the public pension system pushed the
deficit to 2.95%. →Deficit decrease by 0.5% is now unrealistic)

Indicator : Retirement age equalized
Target (revised): Gradual increase of retirement age for women
to 63 (vs. 65) (in progress per new Pension Law 263/2010)
Outcome 3.3.2: Improved equity of pension system

Indicator: Introduction of a zero pillar to cover elderly poor
(dropped )
3.4. HEALTH SECTOR
Objective: support the design and implementation of the
Government’s health sector reform program to improve efficiency and
quality of health services; mobilize additional resources for health and
improve health outcomes
Outcome 3.4.1: Better efficiency and quality of health services

Indicator: Annual rate of admission to acute care facilities.
Baseline: 229 per 1,000 people; Target: below 200 by 2013

Indicator : Share of generic drugs in total compensated drug
expenditures (revised and in progress) Baseline: 40% in 2008.
Target: >=45% by 2012

Indicator: 24-hour death rate among patients treated in ER and
then admitted to hospital. Target: Decrease by 10 percent in
2013 vs. 2007 (in progress)

Indicator: Maternal Mortality Ratio
Baseline of 0.24%o in 2004 Target: Reduce by 20 percent by 2013
(in progress)
Outcome 3.4.2: Additional resources for health mobilized in a
transparent and equitable manner

Indicator : Amount of copayment raised

Indicator: Coverage of copayment exemption among eligible
population. Baseline: no compayment legislation. Target: < 50%
by 2012 (upon approval of legislation)



WBG INSTRUMENTS13

MILESTONES
Thematic Inspections of major SA programs being
undertaken annually and remedial action plans produced (in
progress).



Legislation enacted on the public pension unitary system to
gradually link state pension adjustment to inflation (Done DPL2 prior action)



The new adopted legislation on retirement age (DPL2 prior
action), , would gradually equalize through 2030 the
retirement age of women and men at the age of 65

Completed

Policy Briefs (FY09)

Poverty Assessment Series (Phases I and II) (FY08-09)

Rapid Assessment of Impact of Economic Crisis on Poverty
(FY09)

TA Poverty and Social Policy (FY10)

TA Rural Elderly Pension Scheme (FY11)

DPL1-2 (FY10 / FY11)



The TA on Elderly Farmers Pension Scheme completed (and
concluded that a Zero pillar social pension contravenes the
Social Assistance Strategy)

New

DPL 3 (FY12)



Adoption of the updated Hospital Rationalization Strategy
through a Government Decision in/by 2010 -National
Strategy prepared with Bank TA was posted on the MoH site
for public consultations. An updated draft would be
presented for Cabinet approval in 2011

Completed

HD Policy Briefs (compl.FY09)

DPL 1-2 series (FY10 / FY11)

IFC advisory services and financing to support private
sector participation in the health sector

FBS – Functional Reviews Health (FY11)

Health & Education TA support for DPL (compl.FY12)



Adoption of the Rural Primary Care Strategy in/by 2010 Work initiated–TA under procurement (Health APL2)

Ongoing

Health Sector Reform APL2 Project (cl. FY12)



Adoption of the legislation of the revised benefit package,
including (i) the introduction of copayments (pending) and
exemption mechanisms for the poor and (ii) transparent
mechanisms for inclusion of new technology and new drugs
in the benefits package (DPL 3 trigger). Legislation
regarding co-payment mechanism (amending Law 95/2006)
sent to Parliament but not yet approved.



Approval of a new legal framework for drug prescription
management (revised DPL3 prior action).



Adoption of
(dropped)

New

DPL 3 (FY12)

Pipeline Health Project (instrument TBD) (cl. FY14)

New DPL (DDO) TBC

legislation for voluntary health insurance

18



RESULTS AREAS AND OUTCOMES TO WHICH THE CPS IS CONTRIBUTING
Indicator: Percent of households with voluntary insurance.
Baseline: NA; Target: 10 percent (dropped)

MILESTONES

WBG INSTRUMENTS13

Outcome 3.4.3 (new): Rationalization of medical services provision
and integration of the services as nation – wide networks


Indicator : Reclassification of 100% hospitals based on new
Strategy criteria (Done, 2011)



Indicator: Health Networks operational (per new Strategy)
Baseline: None. Target: At least 4 regional or local health
national networks functionally and legally established, including
its Tertiary Hospital by 2013

19

Annex 2: Proposed CPS framework based on strategic pillars and cross-sectoral themes (current and new activities in FY12)
CPS Pillars / crosssectoral themes

Europe
2020

1.Public sector reforms
1.1.Public financial
management
1.2.Public
administration reform
1.3.Governance
2.Growth and competitiveness
2.1.Financial sector
2.2.Business env. and
competition
2.3. K economy Digital
smart
agenda

1. Policy reforms to reap
benefits of EU
membership

2.Modernization of public institutions
to enhance resources allocation and
absorption of EU funds

PREM MAP, DPL2

PREM MAP, CoG MAP

Tax admin, DPL 3, DPL2, PEFA,
policy notes 2, DPLDDO23

PREM MAP

PREM MAP, ACIS TA, ANRMAP TA

IDF

Judicial Reform Project

MAP justice FR

CC TA (MAP)

CC TA (MAP)

3.Complementing EU financing

KE

2.4.Research Devpt
Innovation
2.5.Education

EDU1 MAP, SIP

EDU2 MAP

SIP, KE

2.6.Agriculture and
rural development

ARD MAP, Irrigation
Rehab.

ARD MAP, ANPCI FR, MAKIS,
CESAR

CESAR, Irrigation Rehab.

INPCP, Mine Closure

INPCP, Municipal Serv, Mine
Closure, climate change TA

2.7.Energy and
Environment

sustainable

2.8.Transport, hazards
mitigation
3.Social and spatial inclusion

TRANSP MAP, Hazards
Mitigation

3.1.Social inclusion

Hazards Mitigation

SIP

3.2.Social assistance

SASM

SIP, citizen scorecard ESW
SIP, SASM

inclusive
3.3.Social insurance

SIP

3.4.Health
Legend:
23

APL2
in active portfolio

in pipeline

APL 2, Health
new activity in FY12

Details to be clarified in the upcoming weeks
20

Annex 3 - CPS Results Summary
Pillar 1: Public sector reforms
The CPS has been effective in supporting the fiscal sustainability targets in the 2009-2012 GoR program
as well as fiscal reforms that are critical to the GoR medium-term agenda. The CPS has complemented
the EU and IFM programs and has helped create the premises for improved budget discipline,
accountability, efficiency and sustainability of public wage bill.
The CPS contribution (through the Judicial Reform Project) to strengthening the efficiency and
accountability of the judiciary has been only partially successful (progress still required in optimization
of courts procedures, transparency, etc).
1.1 PF Management : Fiscal sustainability has improved
 MTEF 2009 approved by GOR (DPL1); MTEF 2010-12 submitted to EC through the Convergence
Program 2009-12, including fiscal risk analysis (DPL2); MTEF 2011-13 approved by Parliament
with ceilings for selected spending ministries
 1.1.1 Fiscal Responsibility Law 69/2010 enacted (partnership with IMF)
 1.1.1 Fiscal Strategy 2011-2013 approved by GOR and sent to Parliament and the Independent
Fiscal Council –now operational
 1.1.1 Revenue boosting measures adopted (VAT, social contributions, excises, property taxes)
 1.1.2 Improvement in Wage Bill sustainable growth in 2010: wage bill increased below inflation rate
(2% vs. 5.6%) and has remained below 2009 level as percentage of GDP
 1.1.2 Functional Reviews of the Public Administration on-going and likely to help improve pay
practice
1.2 Public Administration Reform: Public Pay Reform Agenda is in progress, Functional review of
Public Administration in progress
 1.1.2 Unitary Pay Law 330/2009 which reduces non-wage bonuses and allowances approved and
gradual implementation in progress.
 1.1.2 Subsidiary pay legislation approved by Parliament, pay adjustments in 2011 in accordance
with UPL targets, new regulations approved by Government to reduce the use of temporary
appointments for positions in the public administration
 1.1.2 Reduction of non-wage personnel expenditures in progress
1.3 Governance: Limited progress in the area of judiciary efficiency and accountability. Targets
(under JRP) re-designed in line with GoR needs and likely to be achieved
Strengthening the Capacity of Courts
 1.3.0. Development of a Resource Management System for the Justice sector in progress
 1.3.2 Superior Council of Magistracy (SCM) 24 finalized its contribution to the Terms of Reference
for the Optimization of Courts TA (to be contracted by Oct 31, 2011).
 New Civil and Criminal Codes and related procedure Codes adopted by Parliament; TA for
preparation of enforcement ongoing.
Institutional Development and Reform of the Judiciary
 1.3.2 SCM has assumed the function of policy formulation and performance monitoring
 1.3.2 SCM has adopted the new training syllabus for the National School of Clerks
 1.3.2 Magistrates recruitment regulations modified and including qualification examination
procedures
 1.3.3. New/amended Civil and Criminal Codes and related procedure Codes adopted by Parliament;
TA for preparation of enforcement ongoing.
EU2020
 1.3.4 Support to GoR for ensuring the reflection of Functional Reviews into the National Reform
Plan

24

The Optimization of Courts TA is the major Judicial Reform project TA that supports this outcome. The TA will generate
Uniform standards for the Courts operational processes and optimization recommendations for the Courts activity. Contract yet to be
signed (by Oct 31, 2011)

21

Pillar 2: Growth and Competitiveness
Bank assistance was successful in helping maintain the viability and stability of the financial sector. The
CPS envisaged responses to address solvency problems derived from the financial crises by supporting
the preparation of the Guidelines on Corporate Debt Restructuring and Mortgage Debt Restructuring,
as well as the amendment of the Insolvency Law to remove obstacles to out-of-court corporate debt
restructuring. The review of competition policy helped to focus priorities on achieving full integration of
Romanian markets with the EU. The review of the national innovation system set priorities to promote a
knowledge-based economy, in line with the EU2020 strategy. Bank support helped improve the quality
of education in a fiscally sound manner. A mix of AAA and project lending contributed to encouraging
results in agriculture and rural development (ARD), and hazards mitigation. Progress was made in
meeting the energy and environment CPS objectives.
2.1 Financial Sector: all Indicative Milestones achieved. Bank system remains well capitalized,
solvency levels relatively high.
 2.1.1 NBR undertook bank stress test to serve as input into its Strategic Action Plan (TA-FSA)
 GoR prepared (DPL1, TA-FSA) a Strategic Action Plan for strengthening the Financial Sector (incl.
methodology of potential interventions in the resolution of illiquid Banks)
 2.1.1 Regulatory framework for Bank resolution, mortgage and corporate debt restructuring was
improved
 2.1.1 The Law on the Political Independence and Financial Autonomy of Financial Sector
Regulators and Supervisors passed by Parliament.
 2.1.2 Internal regulations for Basel II policy & accreditation decisions adopted by NBR (TA –
Financial Sector Update)
 2.1.2 Improved definitions of “Financial Conglomerates” (Ordinance 98/2006) and supervisory
arrangements (by NBR, Private pension Supervision Commission, Insurance Supervisory
Commission, National Securities Commission)
2.2 Business Environment25 : Improvement of insolvency and bankruptcy regulations
 2.2.1 Improvement of insolvency and bankruptcy regulations (pre-insolvency procedures introduced
in 2010, special insolvency departments created with Romanian courts, rules on out of court
settlements for bankruptcy) (DPL2-prior actions)
 2.2.1. Functional review of the RO Competition Council & Recommendations for its strengthening
(FRs)
2.3 Knowledge Economy and Digital Agenda
 2.3.1Through the Knowledge Economy project, 255 knowledge disadvantaged communities now
have access to and use the Information and Communication Technology (ICT)-based resources in
schools, local public administrations, public libraries and public points of access. Specific assistance
has been provided to increase the digital competencies and for the utilization of ICT resources in
pre-university education.
 2.3.1By July 2011 812 new projects addressing community needs were developed by LCeNs users
and declared eligible for financing with EU structural funds (the total value of the projects declared
eligible is €240M)
2.4 Research, Development and Innovation
 2.4.1. Functional review of the Romanian Research Development and Innovation system &
Recommendations for its strengthening (FRs)
 2.4.2. Reform of agricultural research (legislation, governance and coordination, core financing; four
research institutes have implemented reform plans - MAKIS)
2.5 Education: Significant progress
 2.5.1 GoR, with DPL support, has shifted to per-student financing (starting with 2010-2011 school
year). This is a fundamental structural budget reform that aligns labor and capital in the sector to the
number and location of students.GOR decided to introduce per-capita financing for the entire school
25

However business taxation remains costly and cumbersome and Romania ranks second but last regarding the number of tax payments according to
last Doing Business Report

22



system as of 2010-11 vs. an initial program of piloting reforms in 8 counties
2.5.3 Functional Review Ministry of Education – Recommendations formulated and largely adopted
by GoR for strengthening the organizational structural of the Ministry for Education and improving
the quality and efficiency of pre-university and higher education.

2.6 Agriculture and Rural Development: Overall Progress although some CPS targets delayed
(namely: completion of irrigation sector strategy, systemic registration of land properly titles, delivery
mechanism of socio-economic advisory services )
 Support for EU integration and Convergence
o Functional network of Border Food Safety Inspection Points (MAKIS)
o Improved food safety regulation (EU convergence target - MAKIS);
o Improved information management systems (MAKIS - support to Paying Agency)
o Improved farmers preparedness for the EU environment through delivery of socio-economic
advisory services (MAKIS)
o Revised National Rural Development Plan (2009) in line with EU requirements
 Reform and Rehabilitation of Irrigation System
o Substantial contributions to irrigation sector institutional restructuring & reforms (subsidies,
tariffs setting) (Irrigation Reform and Rehabilitation)
o Rehabilitation of selected irrigation schemes (Irrigation Reform project)
o 2.6.1 Supply of advisory services to farmers, agro-processors, researchers via Training and
Information Centers set under MAKIS project (Bucuresti, Cluj, Timisoarea, Iasi) – thousands of
persons reached. Awareness about the EU Common Agriculture Policy.
 Knowledge services - Functional Review(s) - Discussions ongoing to implement some if the FRs
recommendations under on-going projects – CESAR)
2.7 Energy, Environment:
 2.7.1 Romania’s electricity market operates with ancillary services from the Lotru (Bank financed)
project (Energy community in SE Europe). With support by the Privatization Risk Guarantee two
Electricity Distribution Companies (Banat and Dobrogea) were privatized.
 2.7.3 Knowledge and procedures on mine closure aligned to international best practice; 8 mines
closed in an environmentally friendly manner; 447 ha of rehabilitated land transferred by mining
companies to other parties (Mine Closure and Socio-Econ Regeneration)
 2.7.3 Romania has participated – on a voluntary, non-binding basis – in the 2008 reporting on the
EU Environmental Directives, including the Nitrate Directive. (INPCP)
 2.7.4 TA provided to Ministry of Environment under the Municipal Services project for preparation
of water & waste water projects
2.8 Transport, Hazards Mitigation
 2.8.x Rehabilitation of 11 bridges affected by floods (emergency task added by GOR)
 2.8.x Flood emergency repairs at 50 bridges (emergency task added at GOR request)
 2.8.2 Functional Review & GOR Action Plan Ministry of Transport completed
 2.8.3 Improved emergency preparedness through implementation of specific risk reduction
investment floods protection and dam safety (5 large and small dams retrofitted & reinforced),
earthquake (22 public buildings retrofitted) and landslides (Hazards Risk Mitigation Project).
Pillar 3: Social and Spatial Inclusion
Since CPS inception a number of reforms have been implemented, to improve the targeting and
efficiency of social spending. An example is the improved financing, administration and targeting of the
Guaranteed Minimum Income Instrument. The majority of disadvantaged localities in the former mining
areas benefitted from new socio-economic and employment opportunities. Progress was achieved in
improving the social and spatial inclusion of Roma communities (via community development work and
small investments in partnership with the Romanian Social Development Fund) as well as for the
participation of Roma children in early childhood education programs. In addition, budgetary support
lending (DPL2) promoted reforms to strengthen the fiscal viability, integrity and equity of the public
pension and increased cost-effectiveness in the health sector.
23

3.1 Social Inclusion: Indicative milestones partially met and in progress
 79% of the disadvantaged localities in the former mining areas were reached by Socio-Economic
Regeneration (SER) measures extended under the Mine Closure & SER project
 US$25M in socio-economic regeneration micro projects ( income generation activities, social
services, human development ) for disadvantaged populations of former mining com munities (Mine
Closure & SER Project)
 3.1.1 Sub-projects worth $20M for Roma communities (small infrastructure works, kindergartens)
in various stages of implementation (SIP)
 3.1.1 50% of SIP Roma community members consider their living conditions improved
 3.1.2 The partial impact on improving the lives of Roma communities and including Roma children
in ECE programs already witnessed by various counterparts, incl. EU (SIP)
3. 2 Social Assistance: improved targeting and predictability of social programs
 3.2.1 Legislation enacted (DPL1) to increased the eligibility threshold of GMI by 15%
 3.2.1 More transparent and predictable GMI budget allocations & benefits (DPL2) through (a) 100%
financing of GMI from the state budget; (b) GMI budget transferred to MLFSP; (c) transfer of
benefits payments from local budgets to NASB26
 3.2.1 Revised draft legislation for the income tested family allowances to provide higher benefits to
poorest families
3.3. Social Insurance: Premises for increasing the public pension system sustainability
 3.3.1 Pension legislation introduced to gradually link indexation of retirement benefits to inflation
and equalize retirement age between men and women (DPL2)
3.4 Health Sector: Improving the financial sustainability of the sector
 3.4.1 Legislation adopted to increase of tobacco excise and improved framework for drug pricing
(DPL1)
 3.4.1 Technical work and roadmap finalized for inclusion of new technology and drugs in the
benefits package using evidence based, transparent mechanisms (TA in support of DPLs)
 3.4.2 Hospital rationalization strategy developed and consultations in progress (TA in support of
DPLs)
 Ministerial order issued on drug pricing and joint order to promote generic drugs in framework
contracts.

26

NASB – National Agency for Social Benefits

24

Annex 4. Bank Support to the Government’s Public Administration Reform
via fee-based service activities
Work with the Government of Romania and the European Commission
The Government National Reform Program (NRP27) 2011-13 outlines reforms derived from the
objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy and informed by World Bank recommendations on key
sectors of the economy (the first phase of the Functional Reviews outlined below). The NRP aims
to help achieve the country’s objective of convergence with the EU in terms of income and living
standards. It proposes short and medium term priority reforms grouped in three areas: (i) measures
to consolidate the macroeconomic framework ; (ii) policy reforms to address root causes of
vulnerabilities; and (iii) administrative capacity building measures.
With support from the European Commission and the World Bank, the Romanian
Government has been undertaking far reaching reform to improve the functioning of its
public administration. The Bank has been providing its sector and technical expertise to support
this effort through a series of fee-based services, which has both informed the NRP and is now
supporting its implementation. This evolving program goes well beyond the original scope of the
Bank’s 2009-13 Country Partnership Strategy.
I.

Functional Reviews

Over the past year and a half, the Bank carried out functional reviews (FRs)28 of twelve public
institutions in Romania under the overall framework of the MoU signed in June 2009 between
the EC and the GoR. Phase 1 (presented to Government in October 2010) covered six areas:
Public Finance, Transport, Pre-University Education, Agriculture and Rural Development, the
Center of Government, Competition Council. Phase 2 (presented to Government in March 2011)
covered: Environment and Forestry, Energy/Economy and Business Environment, Health, Labor
and Social Protection, Regional Development and Tourism, Higher Education, Research, and
Innovation). The 12 reviews provide operational recommendations on strategic management,
organizational structure, sector governance, budgeting, and human resource management to help
guide structural reforms.
Cross cutting recommendations of the Functional Reviews
• Improve strategies in Transport, Agriculture, and Education by aligning them to available medium term
resources and identifying programmatic trade-offs required for their implementation.
• Strengthen procedures in General Secretariat of the Government and Ministry of Public Finance to assure that
new policies are approved only when financing is available over the medium term and rationalize existing
public investment portfolio so that projects can be implemented efficiently.
• Develop an annual Government work plan with deadlines for major legislative acts and increase consultation
with external stakeholders to improve the quality of policy analysis before adoption of new laws.
• Modernize Tax Administration through implementation of new technologies and reduce reliance on manual
procedures and regional office network
• Develop a new organization structure of the Ministry of Education so that it can exercise a more strategic role
over the sector and enhance accountability
•
Create a more arms-length relationship between the Ministry of Transport and the state companies, starting
with the introduction of a professional board of directors and increased public accountability for performance
• Strengthen the qualifications for entry into senior civil service positions to assure that experience is wellaligned to the needs of the ministry.

In the public finance sector, the FR covered the Ministry of Public Finance and identified
several key reform areas: (i) improving budget credibility and macro-fiscal discipline, (ii)
27
28

NRP 2011-13 (adopted in April 2011)
EUR 3.2 million received from EU Funds to carry out this work.

25

strengthening the policy basis for budget preparation, (iii) modernizing budget execution and
treasury functions, (iv) improving capacity for absorption of EU funds, (v) modernizing revenue
administration, (vi) organizational reform, (vii) IT modernization, and (viii) developing a more
strategic management of human resources. Budget planning is also covered by the “Center of
Government” Functional Review.
In the agriculture and rural development sector, the FR covered all core functions in central
and regional branches of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, the two
agricultural paying agencies,29 and relevant subordinated and associated agencies. The FR
conclusions related mostly to (i) promoting changes in the sector governance through a bold vision
doubled by a system-wide strategy to set targets for meeting the vision, (ii) addressing the
operational management deficiencies which represent the most pronounced constraint to effective
policy and service delivery, (iii) enhancing performance through increased consolidation and colocation of institutions and through more integration or outsourcing of functions, and (iv) focusing
on the low-performing units to bring them up to speed with the high-performing ones.
In the transport sector, the FR focused on the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure and
the largest land transport state owned enterprises (SOEs). The main conclusions relate to: (i)
promoting changes in the sector governance through an improved transport strategy, a rethinking of
the roles of government and SOEs and a better contracting of services requested by the state; (ii)
improvements in corporate governance of the main transport SOEs; (iii) greater efficiency of SOE
operations, especially to increase the absorption of EU funds; and (iv) the need to review policy for
public-private partnerships in the transport sector. The GoR has started measures to improve the
governance of some SOEs and to increase the efficiency of units responsible for EU funds
absorption for roads.
In the education sector, the FR focused on the Ministry of Education, Research, Youth and
Sport (MERYS) and its main subordinated agencies. Main recommendations included the need
to (i) reorganize the Ministry in the context of decentralization; (ii) improve the management
culture and practices of the sector, with a particular focus on the balance between operational
management and strategic management and on managers’ skills and accountability; (iii) improve
the capacity to absorb Structural Funds; (iv) optimize the school network; (v) improve the
availability, use and management of information; and (vi) enhance research on education.
Following the completion of the Functional Reviews, the Government prepared and approved in
December 2010, its action plans for Modernization of the Romanian public administration.
According to the MOU between the Government of Romania and the EU, the implementation of the
first set of action plans need to show progress.
II.

Modernization of the Public Administration

The Government requested the Bank to support implementation of some of their action plans.
The Modernization of Administration Program of TA FBS program (to be financed from EU
Structural Funds) currently includes seventeen projects in FR Phase 1 ministries, estimated at about
US$30 million30. In addition to the FR related projects, the program includes three requests for
assistance on justice, procurement and EU funds absorption. Together with the DPL program, they
will offer options to advance structural reforms, to inform the NRP and ensure it reflects the thrust
of the Europe 2020 strategy. Line ministries of agriculture and rural development, education, public
finance, transport, justice as well as the Competition Council submitted for approval to the
Managing Authority their proposals for approval to be financed from EU funds. The first MAP TA
29
30

Agency for Payments and Interventions in Agriculture, and Paying Agency for Rural Development and Fisheries.
This may be subject to change depending on the legal agreements to be signed in the end
26

whose financial request was approved in a previous batch of requests was signed on July 22, 2011
and aims to assist the Government at the central level in improving its institutional capacity to
facilitate policy coordination, ex-ante impact assessment, and the monitoring and evaluation of
public policies. Line ministries are expected to sign the contracts for assistance with the Bank by
December 2011/January 2012.
The overall WB assistance package is currently estimated at around US$30 million for a total
of seventeen projects in six sectors - public finance, agriculture and rural development,
transport, education, justice and competition31. Below is a synopsis of the proposed TA services
by sector32.


Public Finance - five TAs. These projects include: (i) treasury/debt management; (ii)
strengthening macro forecasting capacity, (iii) improving communication with tax payers;
(iv) improving capacity in tax policy analysis; (v) strengthening human resource
management.



Agriculture and Rural Development – five TAs. These projects focus on: (i) developing a
vision and strategy for capitalizing on the agri-food production potential; (ii) supporting the
strategic planning for agriculture and rural development administration; (iii) implementing
the management information system of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development;
(iv) developing and implementing an integrated IT system for financial management. Also,
the Ministry of Administration and Interior officially requested for WB support in
conducting a dedicated Functional Review of the National Agency for Cadastre and Real
Estate Publicity (ANCPI) and of the institutions under its supervision, and to develop a
strategy and action plan for strengthening administrative, human resource and financial
capacity to improve efficiency and service delivery of the Agency.



Transport and Infrastructure - three TAs. The three projects aim to, respectively: (i)
update the transport strategy and assist with its implementation, focusing on cost recovery
mechanisms in the transport sector and contracting arrangements with the main SOEs,
including the purchase of services; (ii) support the railway system with a particular focus on
the definition and refinement of public service contracts and increasing capacity for
applying EU policies; and (iii) support the implementation of public-private partnership
projects with a specific emphasis on the road sector.



Education - two TAs33. These projects cover essential areas including: (i) development of
the administrative capacity of the Ministry, strategic management and institutional
leadership; (ii) school network optimization and management; and (iii) management of
information resources. At this stage, the Bank team considers its role in implementing
activities under the first two areas, as they are the most relevant and have the highest
potential impact over the short and medium term.

31

The following ministries have finalized proposals (called “project forms”) that would involve WB assistance: the Ministry of
Public Finance, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, the Ministry of Administration and Interior, the Ministry of
Transportation and Infrastructure, the Ministry of Justice and MERYS. In addition, the Competition Council submitted its own
project form for PODCA financing through the General Secretariat of the Government (GSG). The Competition Council is not
subordinated to the GoR and therefore is not directly eligible for PODCA.
32
It should be noted that the total amount of a project form may be higher than the amount for Bank TA because part of the project
activities may be implemented by the GoR itself or a third party (e.g., administration, or procurement of goods/services not provided
by the Bank). Also, the role of the WB will vary with each project form. In some cases the demand is for the Bank to have
responsibility for overall project management, in other cases for the WB to deliver directly some activities, and in others still for the
WB to supervise firms contracted by the ministry.
33
The Ministry of Education submitted the project proposals for approval to the funding Managing Authority without having
requested yet World Bank support for the implementation of these two projects.

27



Competition - one TA. The areas of probable intervention are the following: (i) revising the
legislative mandate of the Competition Council to promote competition; (ii) strengthening
competition advocacy in public and government bodies; (iii) implementing a new business
architecture in the Competition Council based on high quality and secure infrastructure,
tools and services for information and communication technology; and (iv) increasing
human resource capacity on competition matters in the Council as well as in ministries and
regulatory agencies.



Justice – one TA. The project covers a functional review of the judicial system and the
main areas of WB intervention would cover the analysis and the provision of
recommendations for the following: (i) the organizational and functional design of the main
judicial institutions; (ii) the HR strategy and the making use of the budgetary allocations for
the judicial system; (iii) the IT management system (hardware and software); and (iv)
proposal for the setup of a system and business processes for identifying, mitigating and
solving the risks in the judicial system.

Action Plans were prepared and adopted by the Government based on the Phase 2 Functional
Reviews. The Bank is ready to support implementation of those action plans upon request,
comparative advantage, and ability to deliver.
III.

World Bank support to Absorption of EU Funds

The Bank has also been requested to support capacity building for absorbing EU funds. As of
end 2010, the absorption rate of EU structural funds for 2007-2013 was below 3 percent, leaving
about EUR 20 billion available. The Plan of Priority Measures for strengthening the capacity to
absorb structural and cohesion funds, approved by the Government in April 2011, could
significantly reduce barriers to absorption.
(i)

(ii)

IV.

The Government, in agreement with the EC, has requested the Bank to carry out an
analysis of legislative and policy impediments of EU funds absorption. This work has
been requested on a fee for service basis and the proposal is under discussion with the
Government.
Additionally, in November 2011, a new request has been made by the European
Commission and Government of Romania to IFI (EIB, JASPERS, EBRD, and World
Bank) support for various TAs to improve the absorption of Structural and Cohesion
Funds and to prepare the 2014-2020 programming period. A list of requested TAs has
been provided to the IFIs and is currently under evaluation. Further discussions are
expected in the upcoming months between DG REGIO, the Ministry of European affairs
and IFIs on the possibilities to best respond to the request.
Procurement

The Bank has also been requested to do a Functional Review of procurement and is reviewing this
request with the European Commission, the Government and how it interrelates with the other TA
work.

28

Annex 5. Country needs and World Bank comparative advantage

29

Annex 6: Summary of Sectoral Consultations

General Objective
 Inform WB Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) Progress Report on the perceived stage of CPS
implementation and future role of the WB in selected policy sectors
Specific Objectives






Open a participatory process in drafting the Country Partnership Strategy for 2011-2013
Evaluation of the knowledge on the World Bank activities in Romania
Assessment of the stage of implementation of the Country Partnership Strategy for 2009-10
Identification of main risks and bottlenecks in implementing CPS 2009-2013
Evaluation of the degree to which the directions of action/pillars respond to Romania’s
development needs
 Identification of the main directions for action (pillars, sectors, subsectors and assistance tools)
in implementing CPS for the period of 2011-2013.
Methodology
 Primary and Secondary Stakeholders Surveys34: two main target-groups have been identified
for carrying out the surveys: WB Project Management Units (PMUs), considered as CPS
primary stakeholders and representatives of NGOs, consultants, researchers, financial
institutions, international institutions and organizations, foreign investors, referred to as
secondary stakeholders group. Data collection period is December 2009 - February 2010.
Primary stakeholders’ survey was carried out on a number of WB 31 Project Management Units
(PMUs), while secondary stakeholders’ survey included a sample of 194 persons (mainly NGO
representatives). The response rates are 71% for primary stakeholders’ survey and 43% for the
secondary group.
 Sectoral roundtables35: in order to in-depth grasp the potential WB role in shaping future
development in Romania, eight sectoral roundtables have been conducted. More than 45
participants discussed key policy sectors: agriculture and rural development, climate change,
education, governance, the social sectors, health, public finance and smart growth (including
areas contributing to smart growth, such as: business environment, research, development and
innovation, competition and digital agenda). Participants included Government, private sector,
NGOs, trade unions and academic representatives. Discussion guidelines conducted in AprilMay 2011 covered the following topics: acceleration of EU funds absorption, technical support
for capacity development, implementation of the functional review recommendations, new
policy related to the EU 2020 Strategy and thematic policy notes.
Key findings
 General remark: the consultations process provided a forum for discussing essential needs for
country development among different stakeholders and has been positively appreciated by

34

Online survey for two target groups. For a complete list of methodological notes and results please refer to the
Primary Stakeholders Survey and Secondary Stakeholders Survey Final Reports, February 9, 2011.
35
For summaries of all eight sectoral roundtables please refer to Summary of WB Consultations, June 9, 2011.
30

participants from both surveys as well as roundtables. The World Bank has a very positive image
in Romania, with potential role in various policy fields.
 Primary and Secondary Stakeholders Surveys
o Primary and secondary stakeholders were not involved in consultations for CPS 2009-2013.
o WB Pillars of Growth respond to a great extent to Romania’s development needs.
o Most of the sectors were evaluated as average in achieving the objectives set in the CPS
during the period of 2009-2010.
o For 2011-2013 period, WB should support developments in agriculture & rural development,
public administration, education & labour market, social inclusion and health sector.
o Main obstacles in achieving the objectives set in CPS 2009-2013 are the Political System and
Human Resource Management.


Sectoral roundtables36
o Theme 1: Policy reforms to reap the benefits of EU membership and meet the objectives of
the Europe 2020 strategy
 Strengthen policy coordination. Lack of coordination mainly between different
governmental institutions translates into lack of policy coherence, mentioned by
representatives of various policy sectors, from both public and private sectors. A
programmatic vision accompanied by a suitable institutional set-up should ensure policy
coordination across sectors and institutions, in line with Europe 2020 Strategy and with
national initiatives of programming documents - National Reform Program .
 Strengthen policy-based budget prioritization. The unjustified increased role of MoPF in
expenditure prioritization, as perceived by representatives of line ministries, is, according
to MoPF representatives, a consequence of lack of expertise in budget prioritization in
ministries. In this respect, WB TA programs should address the training needs in MoPF
together with line ministries.
o Theme 2: Modernization of public institutions to enhance resource allocation and the
absorption of EU funds
 Simplifying administrative procedures at the level of all Management Authorities for
structural funds, through a WB Technical Assistance (TA) project. Absorption of European
Funds represents the only viable financial resource, particularly in the context of excessive
deficit procedure. The technical assistance needs in this field are represented by uniform
procedures for Management Authorities (MA) and training for MA personnel.
 Impact assessment of projects financed from structural funds. A potential WB role could be
materialized under a TA on monitoring and evaluating the outcomes produced from
structural funds projects. The project should also include public dissemination activities of
results from European-funded projects.
 Reforming HR Management in the public sector on performance-based. There is a clear
need for amendment of Civil Servants Statute, with the goal of establishing a performancebased recruitment, evaluation, promotion and pay system of public personnel.
 Implementation of Functional Review recommendations. There are high expectations
regarding both accomplishments of WB Functional Reviews (e.g. governance, R&D)
together with implementation of selected operations from Functional Review
recommendations. Moreover, besides the projects already submitted for implementation,
WB should continue the problem-identification part addressed with the functional reviews
with a monitoring & evaluation exercise in order to ensure implementation of the FR

36

The following findings represent a mere selection of cross-cutting issues, grouped under CPS themes for the next period. They do not reflect
entirely all the views and opinions expressed during discussions. For a complete list of WB alternatives for action in different policy sectors, please
refer to Summary of WB Consultations, June 9, 2011.

31

recommendations. This type of exercise clearly needs a strong commitment of behalf of
the Government.
o Theme 3: Support complementing EU funding
 Raising awareness on crucial policy issues. Representatives of different institutions
pointed out the need to bring further on the public agenda crucial topics for Romania’s
future path of development such as smart growth or climate change. WB is perceived with
a competitive advantage on this area, based on its role to streamline coherent policies
across multiple stakeholders from both public and private sectors.
 Support financing gap up to the next period of structural funds implementation. As the
next period of structural funds starts only in 2015 and there are numerous areas not
covered by the current programming period, which need formulation of immediate
response at national level, WB could supplement this financing gap through various
assistance tools.

32

Romania at a glanceAnnex 7. Romania at a Glance
Ro mania

Euro pe &
Central
A sia

Upper
middle
inco me

20.0
238
-0.2
54

405
23,549
0.6
64

994
48,659
0.9
76

158.0
7,901
13,910

2,945
7,269
13,302

7,403
7,423
12,802

-1.3
-1.2

5.6
5.0

4.1
3.2

<2
4
73
10
0

4
9
69
20
..

<2
<2
71
20
0

98
97
100
99

99
97
100
98

95
92
111
110

..
72

95
89

95
84

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

10/25/2011

Age distribution, 2010

( 2 0 10 )

Male

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

Female

75-79
60-64

45-49
30-34

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

15-19
0-4
6

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

4

2

0

2

4

6

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 5 – 2 0 10 )
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
60
50
40

A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

30
20
10
0
1990

1995

2000

2010

Romania
Europe & Central Asia

N e t A id F lo ws

19 8 0

19 9 0

..

243

431

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

0.6
10

1.2
19

(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2007):
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

2000

2 0 10

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

920
..
..
..

10
5
0

A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

1.2
42

-5
-10

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds

-15
90

Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)

..
12.1

..
13.6

..
44.3

6.1
4.2

..
..

0.0
83

2.2
100

3.2
93

Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

00

10

GDP
GDP per capita

19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 – 10
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

22.2
..

23.2
38,299

22.4
37,053

20.0
162,019

0.4
1.3

-0.3
-0.6

-0.5
5.5

(% o f GDP )
A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services and co nstructio ns
Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n
Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

16.4
56.6

23.7
49.9
33.8
26.3

12.5
36.4
14.5
51.1

6.0
26.4
21.9
56.5

1.9
-1.0
..
..

-1.9
-1.2
..
0.9

7.2
5.9
5.6
5.1

53.7
12.3
36.3

65.9
13.3
30.2

78.5
7.2
19.5

61.2
7.2
30.5

..
..
..

1.3
0.8
-5.1

6.2
4.2
11.4

..
..
..

16.7
26.2
20.7

32.7
37.9
15.8

26.5
41.2
35.8

..
..

8.1
6.0

9.5
13.5

..
27.0

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2009 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are no t available.
a. A id data are fo r 2008.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

33

Romania
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2 0 10
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2010

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)
Net trade in go o ds and services

10,366
13,054
-1,930

49,381
57,192
-7,943

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

-1,355
-3.7

-8,101
-5.0

96

3,171

3,396

50,308

Voice and accountability
Political stability

Wo rkers' remittances and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)

Regulatory quality
Rule of law
Control of corruption

Reserves, including go ld

0

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e

25

50

75

100

Country's percentile rank (0-100)
2…
2…

(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

31.1
29.2
31.8

31.3
28.0
33.7

Overall surplus/deficit

-4.0

-2.7

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

..

16
16

25

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

2000
49.5

2 0 10
30.3

29

147

5.5

7.5

65
27.7
..

58
27.7
10.7

1,940
23.2

1,971
23.5

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)

11,160
2,500
–

125,889
17,624
–

30.1
20.1

77.7
23.2

1,037
58

3,839
0

To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)
Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f surface area)
Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billio n cubic meters)
CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)

3.9

4.2

GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

4.2

5.8

1,612

1,799

Composition of total external debt, 2010
Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)
IBRD, 2,803

IDA, 0

IMF, 15,092

Short-term,
25,029

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio

Other multilateral, 7,522

2000

2 0 10

(US$ millio ns)

Bilateral, 860

IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

1,898
384
91
104

2,830
187
262
51

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

0
0
0

0
0
0

284
112
17

656
..
..

5

..

20
0

..
..

Private, 74,583

US$ millions

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt
Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
Tax administratio n
Tax rates
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2 0 10

–
–
–

14
3.0
26

2000

2 0 10

..
..

35.6
34.1

2.9
8.6

22.1
8.0

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt
M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2009 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

10/25/11

34

Millennium Development Goals

Romania

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)

R o m a nia

G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)
P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)
Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)
P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

19 9 0
<2
..
10.0
..

19 9 5
5.0
25.4
8.9
..

2000
3.7
28.9
8.2
3.7

2 0 10
<2
15.9
8.0
3.5

G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)
P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)
Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)
Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

..
96
102
..

87
86
77
..

94
102
81
98

90
96
91
96

G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)
Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)
P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)

98
42
34

101
42
7

100
46
7

99
46
9

G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)
M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)

32
25
92

27
22
93

22
19
98

13
11
97

G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)
Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 15-49)

170
..
..

72
99
57

52
98
64

27
99
70

G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 15-49)
..
Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)
140
Tuberculo sis case detectio n rate (%, all fo rms)
49

0.1
140
72

0.1
170
74

0.1
130
76

G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
..
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)
71
Fo rest area (% o f to tal land area)
27.8
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f surface area)
..
CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)
6.8
GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)
2.9

..
72
27.8
..
5.7
3.5

..
72
27.7
..
3.9
4.2

..
72
27.7
10.7
4.4
6.0

13.1
0.0
0.1
1.3

17.4
11.1
3.6
3.2

23.4
113.7
28.8
19.2

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
Telepho ne mainlines (per 100 peo ple)
M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
Internet users (per 100 peo ple)
P erso nal co mputers (per 100 peo ple)

10.2
0.0
0.0
0.2

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

125

100

150

100
75
75

100

50

50

25

50
25

0
2000

2003

2006

2008

2010

0

0

1990

1995

2000

2010

2000

2002

2004

2006

2010

Primary net enrollment ratio
Fixed + mobile subscribers
Ratio of girls to boys in primary &
secondary education

Romania

Europe & Central Asia

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.

Internet users

10/25/11

Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

35

Annex 8: Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management

36

Annex 9: Social Indicators

Romania Social Indicators
Latest single year

Same region/income group

1980-85

1990-95

2003-09

Europe &
Central
Asia

22.7
0.5
49.6
2.3

22.7
-0.5
54.0
1.3

21.5
-0.2
54.4
1.4

404.2
0.2
64.0
1.8

1,001.7
0.9
74.9
2.0

POVERTY
(% of population)
National headcount index
Urban headcount index
Rural headcount index

..
..
..

..
..
..

13.8
6.8
22.3

..
..
..

..
..
..

INCOME
GNI per capita (US$)
Consumer price index (2000=100)
Food price index (2000=100)

..
..
0

1,470
4
11

8,330
127
184

6,793
141
..

7,502
127
..

INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION
Gini index
Low est quintile (% of income or consumption)
Highest quintile (% of income or consumption)

..
..
..

28.2
8.9
37.2

31.2
8.1
39.3

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

0.0
..

4.3
4.3

3.9
4.1

3.8
4.3

..
..
..

87
87
87

90
91
90

92
93
92

93
93
92

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

95
98
89

95
98
86

88
95
..

93
98
5

97
97
..

96
95
..

93
93
..

70
67
73

69
66
73

73
70
77

70
66
75

72
69
75

25
32

22
27

10
12

19
21

19
22

228
114
..
..

270
119
72
99

192
82
27
99

286
123
32
97

201
122
82
96

POPULATION
Total population, mid-year (millions)
Grow th rate (% annual average for period)
Urban population (% of population)
Total fertility rate (births per w oman)

SOCIAL INDICATORS
Public expenditure
Health (% of GDP)
Education (% of GDP)
Net prim ary school enrollm ent rate
(% of age group)
Total
Male
Female
Access to an im proved w ater source
(% of population)
Total
Urban
Rural
Im m unization rate
(% of children ages 12-23 months)
Measles
DPT
Child malnutrition (% under 5 years)
Life expectancy at birth
(years)
Total
Male
Female
Mortality
Infant (per 1,000 live births)
Under 5 (per 1,000)
Adult (15-59)
Male (per 1,000 population)
Female (per 1,000 population)
Maternal (modeled, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (%)

Upperm iddleincom e

Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit show n. Net enrollment rate: break in series betw een 1997 and 1998 due to
change from ISCED76 to ISCED97. Immunization: refers to children ages 12-23 months w ho received vaccinations before one
year of age or at any time before the survey.
World Development Indicators database, World Bank - 15 April 2011.

37

Annex 10: Recent Economic and Financial Indicators

38

39

40

41

Annex 11 Romania Key Exposure Indicators
Actual
Indicator

2007

Total debt outstanding and

Estimated
2009

2010

2011

88,374

104,943

102,074

116,804

9,316.1

14,390.3

16,269.3

11,721

18,537

48,360

143.0
53.2

149.6
52.3

39.0

Projections
2012

2013

2014

2015

108,394

95,782

82,752

82,752

71,103

4,534.9

-6,739.6

-10,351.6

-14,336.4

-14,378.7

-12,771.2

20,391

19,451.0

17,246.0

13,491

13,490

11,224

269.7
63.4

231.9
72.3

199.6
58.5

166.5

134.1

124.0

98.5

47.1

37.2

34.1

26.8

56.0

127.8

40.5

35.8

30.0

21.9

20.2

15.5

12.7

12.3

10.2

8.4

9.5

8.5

7.5

3.3

1.7

0.6

0.6

0.7

0.6

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

2,106

2,879.63

2,609.63

2,911

3,427

5,293

5,619

5,472

5,228

2

3

3

3

2

2

2

0

0

0

…

…

a

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)

Net disbursements (US$m)

a

Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)

2008

a

Debt and debt service indicators
(%)
TDO/XGS
TDO/GDP

b

TDS/XGS
IBRD exposure indicators (%)
IBRD DS/public DS
IBRD DS/XGS
d

IBRD TDO (US$m)

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)

d

…. ….

3
….

2
….

IFC (US$m)
Loans

269.7

278.8

375.5

384.2

579.5

Equity and quasi-equity /c

192.0

196.1

112.0

65.8

60.8

MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net shortterm capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the
Bank for International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees and effective but undisbursed DPL DDOs.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

42

Annex 12: Operations Portfolio IBRD and Grants

43

Annex 13: Summary of Analytical and Advisory Activities
FY2009
Education Reform
RO FSAP Update
(ESW)

FY2010
Financial Sector TA
IT TA Support to NBR

HD Policy Briefs &
Dialogue (ESW)

Consumer Protection and Students Loan Scheme
Financial Literacy (REG)
PEIR Update (ESW)
Health and Education TA to support DPL
PFM Civil Service Pay
Policy notes on growth and
competitiveness (I)
NEW: Accounting and External Auditing
Poverty & Social Policy

NEW: Sector Notes:
power, water, roads
maintenance,
environment, and
agriculture

FY2011
Fiscal decentralization
Social Protection Coverage to Elderly
Farmers

NEW: Fee Based TA – Functional
Reviews Phase 1 Agriculture, Transport,
Finance, Pre-University Education 1,
Competition, Core of Government
NEW: Fee Based TA – FR 2
Health, Economy/Energy/Business
Environment, Labor and Social
Protection, Regional Dev & Tourism,
Pre-Univ Education 2, Higher Education,
R&D, Cross-cutting

FY2012
Justice Functional Review
Modernization of
Administration Program
(CoG, Public Finance,
Education, Transport,
Agriculture)
ANRMAP Functional
Review (TBC)
ANPCI Functional Review
ACIS TA

FY2013
Tax Administration
TA (TBC)

Policy notes on growth and
competitiveness (II)
Citizen Scorecard/Social
Accountability ESW

Public Expenditure
Framework Assessment

Climate Change
Regional study on Skills and
competitiveness
Note: NEW refers to assistance provided during the period and which was not initially captured under the CPS. The new TAs need to be clearly defined for the
implementation of the Functional Reviews.

44

Annex 14: IFC Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio, Romania
As of 10/31/2011
(In USD Millions)

Committed

FY Approval

Company

2007/08
2005/08/09
0

Arabesque SRL
ATE Romania
Banat Construct
Banca
Comerciala
Bancpost
Cernavoda Power
Credit Europe bk
DomeniaCredit
Garanti Bank Ro
Medlife SA
Pestera
ProCreditRomani
a
Schwarz Group
TransilvaniaBank
Tts romania
Tts sa

2003/04/06/09
2011
2011/12
2007
2004
2012
2007/10/12
2012
2002/03/04/07/10/11
2004/05/10
2004/05/07/09/10/11
2008
2006

Total Portfolio: 660.2, of which:

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/R
M

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/R
M

Partici
pant

36.1
10.0
0.0

0.0
3.5
0.0

0.0
0.0
5.4

0.0
0.0
0.0

33.6
0.0
0.0

36.1
10.0
0.0

0.0
3.5
0.0

0.0
0.0
3.2

0.0
0.0
0.0

33.6
0.0
0.0

107.7
80.7
59.1
20.4
1.6
31.5
19.1
37.2

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.2
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
17.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
21.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
56.1
13.7

107.7
80.7
59.1
20.4
1.6
31.5
19.1
37.2

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.2
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
17.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
21.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
37.0
13.7

3.3
43.8
120.0
0.0
8.8

5.6
0.0
18.1
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
16.8
10.5
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
34.5
0.0
0.0
0.0

3.3
43.8
120.0
0.0
8.8

5.6
0.0
18.1
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
16.8
10.5
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
34.5
0.0
0.0
0.0

579.7

30.3

32.7

17.6

159.3

579.7

30.3

30.5

17.6

140.2

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.
45

22°E

24°E

26°E

UKRA INE

To
Uzhhorod

28°E

ROM ANIA

To
Ivano-Frankivs'k

SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS
COUNTY (JUDET) CAPITALS

ROMANIA

t

Somes

l
d

i a

a

Roman

n

M
u

To
Chisinau

v

i

.
ts

Husi

Bacau

BACAU

VA S L U I

t
re

Si

MiercureaCuic

COVASNA
BRASOV

Sfântu
Sf
ntu
Gheorghe

Birlad

46°N

UK R AI N
UKR
NE
E

VRANCEA

a

is
Tim

Focsani

Brasov

Tecuci

GALATI
GA LATI
Galati

n

Petrosani

a
t

To
Novi Sad

Resita

CARAS SEVERIN

a n
a n i
l v
ARGES
ARGE S A
y
s
VÂLCEA
LCE A
n
a
Râmnicu
mnicu
T r GORJ

l

p

BUZAU

s

B

Braila
Tulcea

BRA ILA
BRAILA

Ploiesti

Târgoviste
rgoviste

u

uza

Buzau

PRAHOVA

Vâlcea
lcea

Târgu
rgu Jiu

TULCEA

Pitesti

25

50

100 Kilometers

75 Miles

DOLJ
Calafat

TELEORMAN

Caracal

a
Da

nube

r

Fetesti

CALAR ASI Calarasi
CALARASI
GIURGIU

j

Slobozia

BUCHAREST

B l ack

u

BUCURESTI

ita
Ialom

b

Craiova
75

ge
s

IALOMITA

Medgidia

o

50

OLT

ILFOV

Ar

Slatina

t

0

25

W a l a c h i a

Ol

0

DÂMBOVITA
MBOVITA

MEHEDINTI

To
Nis
Nis̆

44°N

DrobetaTurmu Severin

CONSTANTA
CONSTA NTA

Navodari

Alexandria

Giurgiu

Sea

Constanta
44°N

D

Orsova

Jiu

Danub
e

30°E

M OL DOVA

Vaslui

M

HARGHITA

Moldoveanu
(2,544 m )

HUNEDOARA

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

Iasi

a

h

Sibiu

ut

o

t

SIBIU

COUNTY (JUDET) AND MUNICIPALITY
(MUNICIPIU) BOUNDARIES

To
Chisinau

NEAMT
Gheorgheni

Medias

Hunedoara

Pr

M

a

B

TIMIS

PiatraNeamt

Onesti

Alba
Iulia

Deva
Lugoj

s
re

ALBA
Brad

Mures

SERBIA

Târgu
rgu
Mures

Turda

ARAD

Timisoara

str
ita

MURES

ClujNapoca

Arad

Bi

Bistrita

CLUJ

Crisul A
lb

IASI

p

SALAJ

RAILROADS
Suceava

a

BISTRITANASAUD

BIHOR

To
Budapest

C

Dej

MAIN ROADS

r

H
U N GA
UN
GA
RY
HUN
ARY

SUCEAVA

Baia Mare

Zalau

Oradea

RIVERS

Botosani

re
Si

MARAMURES

SATU MARE

To
Budapest

48°N

BOTOSANI

Satu Mare

To
Subotica

NATIONAL CAPITAL

To
˘
Balti

FEBRUARY 2008

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

To
Sofiya

24°E

BULGA RIA

To
Veliko Turnovo
˘

To
Shumen

To
Shumen

To
Varna

30°E

IBRD 33469R2

Mangalia

Turnu Magurele

