Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 60980-CR

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
AND
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
(FY2012-2015)
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA

Public Disclosure Authorized

June 10, 2011

Central America Country Management Unit
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not imply a presumed
outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and the updated document will be
made publicly available in accordance with the Bank’s Policy on Access to information.

The date of the last Country Partnership Strategy was September 4, 2008.
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
Currency Unit = Colon
US $ 1.0 = 510.01
Fiscal Year:
January 1 - December 31
ABBREVIATION AND ACRONYMS
AAA

Analytical and Advisory Services

BPIP

Public Investment Projects (Banco de Proyectos de Inversion Publico)

CABEI

Central American Bank for Economic Integration

CAFTA

Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement

CAPRA

Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment Initiative

CASCR

CAS Completion Review

CCSS

Social Security Institution (Caja Costarricense del Seguro Social)

CCT

Conditional Cash Transfer

CEM

Country Economic Memorandum

CER

Certified Emission Reductions

CNE

National Risk Prevention and Emergency Management Commission

CPS

Country Partnership Strategy

DRM

Disaster Risk Management

ERPA

Emission Reduction Payment Agreement

ESW

Economic and Sector Work

FCPF

The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility

FDI

Foreign Direct Investment

FIRST

Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative

FONAFIFO

Costa Rica's National Forestry Financing Fund (Fondo Nacional de Financiamiento Forestal)

FY

Fiscal Year

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

GEF

Global Environment Facility

IBRD

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

ICE

State Electricity Company (Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad)

IDB

Inter-American Development Bank

IDF

Institutional Development Fund

IFC

International Finance Corporation

IMF

International Monetary Fund

INCAE

Regional Business School (Instituto Centroamericano de Administración de Empresas)

INEC

National Statistics and Census Bureau (Instituto Nacional de Estadisticas y Censos)

LAC

Latin American Countries

MDG

Millennium Development Goals

MEP

Ministry of Public Education (Ministerio de Educacion Publica)

MIGA

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency

NLTA

Lending Technical Assistance

PEFA

Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability

PER

Public Expenditure Review

PPP

Public Private Partnerships

PSE

Payment for Environmental Services Program (Pago por Servicios Ambientales)

RAMP

Reserves Advisory and Management Program

REDD

Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation

ROSC

Report on Observance of Standards and Codes

SESA

Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment

SICA

Central American Integration System

SIECA

Secretariat of Economic Integration of Central America

UMI

Upper Middle Income

TA

Technical Assistance

TRE

World Bank Treasury

WBG

World Bank Group

WDR

World Development Report

IBRD
Vice President:

Pamela Cox

Country Director:

C. Felipe Jaramillo

Task Team Leader

Andrea C. Kucey
IFC

Regional Director:

Paolo M. Martelli

Country Manager:

Roberto Albisetti

Task Team Leader

John Barham

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR THE
REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary
I.

Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1

II.

Country Context.............................................................................................................................. 1

Poverty and Gender................................................................................................................................... 2
Recent Economic Developments .............................................................................................................. 4
Economic Outlook .................................................................................................................................... 5
III.

Government Program and Development Challenges .................................................................. 7

IV.

Lessons from Past World Bank Experience ............................................................................... 15

The Last CPS .......................................................................................................................................... 15
Lessons Learned...................................................................................................................................... 15
V.

The Country Partnership Strategy .............................................................................................. 16
Cluster I – Supporting Competitiveness ........................................................................................ 17
Cluster II – Improving Efficiency and Equity in Social Sectors .................................................... 19
Cluster III – Supporting the Environment and Disaster Risk Management................................... 19
Proposed Program of Support ................................................................................................................. 21
Monitoring and Evaluation ..................................................................................................................... 22
Regional .................................................................................................................................................. 22
Partnerships ............................................................................................................................................. 23
Consultations........................................................................................................................................... 24

VI.

Risks ............................................................................................................................................... 24

TABLES AND FIGURES
Figure 1. Poverty levels and changes ........................................................................................................... 2
Table 1. Costa Rica: Key Macroeconomic Indicators and Projections ....................................................... 5
Box 1. Costa Rica Competiveness Diagnostic and Recommendations Report.......................................... 10
Box 2. OECD Global Forum to Implement Internationally Agreed Tax Standards .................................. 14
Box 3. Bank Support for Regional Integration in Central America ........................................................... 23
ANNEXES
Annex 1. Results Matrix
Annex 2. CPS Completion Report
Annex 3. Gender At A Glance
Annex 4. Costa Rica At-a-Glance
Annex 5. Selected Indicators of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
Annex 6. IBRD Program Summary
Annex 7. Social Indicators
Annex 8. Operations Portfolio (IBRD and Grants) and Statement of IFC’s Held and Disbursed Portfolio
Annex 9. Key Economic Indicators
Annex 10. Key Exposure Indicators
Annex 11. Overview of Analytical Work and Trust Funds

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY FY2012-15
REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.
Costa Rica is one of the strongest performers in the Latin American Region. Due in
large part to its political stability, strong institutions, and open export-driven economy, the
country has been successful at attracting high technology firms and developing a sustainable
tourism sector. This has contributed to a diversified economy, and robust economic growth.
Costa Rica also stands out for its environmental policies and determined mission to achieve
carbon neutrality by 2021. Poverty and inequality are lower in Costa Rica than in other Latin
American countries, while social indicators are above regional standards. Inequality increased
somewhat in the second half of the 2000s, but it remains well below most LAC countries.
2.
Growth performance in the years before the crisis was one of the most impressive in
Latin America. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth reached 8.8 percent in 2006 and 7.9
percent in 2007. This compares to Latin American regional averages of 5 percent and 4.5 percent
for the same years. The food and fuel crises of 2008 and the global financial crisis of 2009 hit
Costa Rica hard as the country relies heavily on foreign markets for investment, exports and
fiscal revenue. GDP growth slowed significantly in 2008 to 2.7 percent, with a contraction in
2009 of -1.3 percent. In addition, the expansion of current spending during the crisis, particularly
for wages and salaries, has significantly limited the Government’s fiscal space (the deficit for
2011 is currently projected at 5.6 percent of GDP).
3.
Growth reached 4.2 percent in 2010 and is expected to continue at about the same
level in coming year. Current projections have growth at between 4 and 4.5 percent over 201115 driven by robust private consumption and domestic investment. However, increased fiscal
pressures will limit public capital expenditures, curtailing the plans of the incoming
administration to eliminate important bottlenecks in the infrastructure sector. To address the long
term growth constraints across many sectors, including infrastructure, energy, and education, the
Government is considering alternative financing mechanisms such as PPPs and concessions.
4.
The Government has also articulated a strategy for medium term fiscal
consolidation. The comprehensive fiscal reform includes measures to reduce inefficiencies in
the tax collection system, modernize tax information systems and strengthen the fight against tax
evasion. The Government is also implementing measures on the expenditure side to create fiscal
space. However the prospects for approval of the fiscal reform are uncertain in an oppositioncontrolled Congress. While current debt levels can accommodate deficits in the short-term,
failure to pass the fiscal reform would increase debt sustainability risks.
5.
In the years leading up to the last Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) the country’s
level of engagement with international financial institutions was limited. The FY09-11
World Bank Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, Report No. 43276-CR) was the second strategy
to be prepared for Costa Rica following a nearly 10-year period of very limited Bank
engagement. During the global financial crisis, however, Costa Rica worked closely with the
World Bank and other multilaterals to put in place precautionary programs which served as an
i

important signal to the financial markets, and included a US$500 million Development Policy
Loan with Deferred Draw-Down Option to boost the country’s competitiveness and strengthen
its public finances in response to the global financial crisis.1 This level of responsiveness and
cooperation has set the foundation for a renewed interest from the Government in working with
the World Bank Group (WBG).
6.
Adjustment to the global crisis, however, implied a major change in the structure of
lending with budget support taking the place of investment lending. Despite this shift in the
composition of the program, the CPS maintained a focus on the key results in areas such as
telecommunications, health care, and secondary education. This approach combined with good
quality supporting analytical work shows how a country can adjust to changing circumstances
while maintaining the commitment to deliver results in the areas targeted by the CPS program.
7.
CPS builds on this key lesson of providing responsive and flexible support, and
reflects the Costa Rican authorities’ desire to maintain a strong financial and knowledgebased relationship with the Bank. To provide flexible support and taking into account lessons
learned, the CPS focuses on outcomes, recognizing that in trying to influence results a variety of
instruments will be used. In this way, the CPS program will be better aligned with the
Government’s priorities and tailor made to address key policy issues as well as responsive to the
government’s request that the Bank concentrate its support in areas where it can build on its
extensive knowledge and experience.
8.
The Bank program is focused in three clusters which are closely aligned with the
Government’s strategic view and investment program. The support under these clusters falls
in areas where the WBG has maintained a sustained engagement. The three clusters are: (i)
developing competitiveness; (ii) improving efficiency and quality in the social sectors; and (iii)
supporting environment and disaster management. IFC is also looking to step up its program in
Costa Rica after several years of limited activity in the country, and expects to concentrate on: (i)
renewable energy and energy efficiency projects; (ii) manufacturing and agribusiness sectors
with an emphasis on companies with plans to increase regional expansion and raise exports; and
(iii) private sector educational and healthcare institutions; (iv) financial services; and (v)
advisory engagements to support infrastructure and sustainable agribusiness projects.

1

This loan was drawn down in full by October, 2010.

ii

I.

Introduction

9.
Costa Rica stands out as a strong performer in the Latin American region. Costa
Rica has been able to diversify its economy and post a long record of sustained economic growth
enabled by political stability, strong institutions, and an open export-driven economy. The
country has also been successful at attracting high technology firms and developing a sustainable
tourism sector. Economic growth and pro-active social policies have resulted in one of the lowest
poverty rates in Latin America. Costa Rica also stands out in the international arena for its
environmental policies and determined mission to achieve carbon neutrality by 2021.
10.
The FY12-FY15 World Bank Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) accompanies a
new government, and will cover the full four year political cycle. This will be the third CPS
following a period of limited engagement, and reflects a further strengthening of the country
relationship. Support during the global financial crisis demonstrated the Bank could be a
responsive, flexible and effective partner in a time of crisis. The Bank program during this CPS
period will be demand driven and flexible, in line with the type of engagement in other upper
middle-income countries. In turn, IFC is also looking to step up its program in Costa Rica after
several years of limited activity in the country. IFC’s renewed interest in Costa Rica is consistent
with its increased commitment to Central America.
11.
The framework of the CPS includes a consolidation of activities in a few priority
clusters, in line with the Government’s National Development Plan (NDP). There is
significant continuity in the areas of engagement as the same political party was re-elected and
the new government has maintained the overall strategic direction. The partnership strategy will
also allow the Bank to learn from Costa Rica in areas where the country has been a pioneer and
share its best practice with other neighboring and global clients. At the same time, as the country
starts facing increasingly sophisticated challenges, the Bank can provide technical assistance and
share with Costa Rica lessons learned in other successful countries.
II.

Country Context

12.
Costa Rica has benefited from its long stable democracy and strong system of
constitutional checks and balances. The country abolished its military in 1949, and its strong
democratic tradition relies on a system of gradual consensus building and institutional
accountability. Furthermore, the country has maintained a determined outward strategy for
growth further confirmed by recent developments. In addition to the Dominican Republic
Central America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA), and the Association Agreement with the
EU (whose negotiations were concluded in May, 2010) the country has also negotiated several
bilateral free trade agreements, including with Canada, Chile and most recently China. This well
grounded stability and reliance on an open economy have contributed to the country’s success in
attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) in high value added sectors (e.g., electronics, medical
equipment) as well as becoming a world class tourism destination.

1

13.
The need for democratic consensus building often generates gridlock, and the
political situation is further complicated by the fragmentation of political forces in
Congress. The needed democratic consensus to advance the development programs of the
successive administrations has often delayed implementation of polices and critical programs, as
was the case with the Congressional approval of the DR-CAFTA agreement with the US, which
required protracted negotiations with a referendum becoming effective only in 2009, two and a
half years later than in El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala, and Nicaragua. Given its ambitious
development agenda, the government strategy is to obtain early approval of its core elements,
which includes a substantive fiscal overhaul. However, the fact that the ruling party no longer
heads the Legislative Assembly is likely to make implementing reforms even more difficult.
Poverty and Gender
14.
Poverty and inequality indicators are lower in Costa Rica than in other Central and
South American countries. Since 2004 poverty (headcount, national definition) has been on a
downward trend in Costa Rica, falling from 23 percent in 2004 to 17.7 percent in 2008. Extreme
poverty also decreased to 3.5 percentage points in 2008, in line with the relatively high levels of
growth and effective social transfer mechanisms. Costa Rica’s inequality increased somewhat in
the second half of the 2000s, with the Gini coefficient going from .422 in 2006 to .439 in 2009
(the highest level in the last decade), but still it remains the lowest in the region. This increase is
particularly significant in urban areas, which is where roughly 60 percent of the population
resides.

Percentage of total population

Figure 1 Poverty levels and changes
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
2004

2005

2006
2007
Poverty headcount

2008

2009

15.
The variance in poverty incidence between regions is not considerable. Still poverty
is the lowest in the highland central area of the country; extreme poverty for example is quite
low at 4 percent. In the other areas, the rates of extreme poverty are higher, hovering around 8
percent, with some exceptions. Overall poverty is higher in rural areas. In 2010, urban poverty
was around 4 percent and rural poverty around 8 percent. So while poverty is located outside the
central region, it also coincides with rural and remote areas. Costa Rica’s indigenous population
is relatively small at two percent of the entire population, and includes 24 autonomous
indigenous territories. While the overall population is relatively small, indigenous peoples are

2

key stakeholders in Bank operations.2 In addition Costa Rica recently launched the world’s first
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) workshop which brought together
approximately 120 indigenous stakeholders in the context of the Forest Carbon Partnership
Facility (FCPF).
16.
Overall the poor have larger households, more barriers to access health services,
less schooling, and more underemployment. According to the 2007 Country Poverty
Assessment, female-headed households were more likely to be poor than male-headed
households. In addition, female-headed households tend to possess characteristics associated
with poverty; including high unemployment, high levels of self-employment, and higher than
average incidence of part-time work. Traditionally, governments have placed a great emphasis
on solidarity, and the current Government has highlighted this even further with a commitment
to address concerns of rising inequality as noted above.
17.
Effective social spending, including conditional cash transfers, helped mitigate the
negative impact of the crisis on poverty. Following the food and fuel crisis, poverty increased
to 18.5 percent and extreme poverty to 14.3 percent in 2009. The crisis also increased
unemployment, but for those who remained employed, its impact was relatively small.
Unemployment had been steadily declining since 2006, reaching a low point of 4.6 percent in
2007. However, in 2008 the unemployment rate started rising, reaching 7.8 percent in 2009.
Unemployment rates continue to be higher for women than for men: 6 percent for women versus
4 percent for men (2009), but the gender gap in unemployment was reduced from 2004, when
female unemployment was 9 percent and male unemployment was 5 percent.3 In 2010 poverty
further increased to 21.3 percent, while unemployment began to fall to 7.3 percent.4 It is
expected that with higher economic growth in 2011 and 2012, poverty will revert back to its precrisis trajectory.
18.
Costa Rica’s social indicators rank higher than those of other countries of the
region. Basic education and health indicators are above the regional standard and gender
indicators also compare favorably (Annex 3). Costa Rica has achieved universal primary
education and is making gains in secondary coverage and completion rates. The country is also
closing the education gender gap. At the primary level, the female-male primary gross
enrollment ratio is roughly equal (0.99 for 2008). At the secondary levels, there is even a slight
tendency in favor of girls with a female-male ratio of 1.06 (2008). In health, 99 percent of all
births in 2009 were attended by skilled health staff, which is better than the averages for upper
middle income (UMI) countries (96 percent, 2009) and the LAC region (89 percent, 2009). The
contraceptive prevalence rate of 80 percent (2009) is also better than the average for UMI
countries (75 percent, 2009) and the LAC region (75 percent, 2009). Other important health
achievements include a life expectancy rate of 79, and low infant mortality rates, outcomes that

2

Both in the ongoing Education Effectiveness and Efficiency Project (all schools are being built within
indigenous protected territories) and within the Reduced Emissions from Degradation and Deforestation (REDD)
process.
3
All data up to this sentence were drawn from Genderstats (World Bank).
4
There was a change in methodology for poverty and unemployment figures in 2010. To date only the 2009
figures have been adjusted to allow comparison. The adjusted 2009 figure for poverty is 19.9 percent, and for
unemployment is 8.4 percent.

3

are impressive, not only in a regional context, but at a global level. Not surprisingly, Costa Rica
consistently performs well on the Human Development Index and is ranked 62 of 169 in 2010.
19.
To further improve the quality of service delivery will require the introduction of
new and more sophisticated approaches that respond to emerging challenges in the
country, like the aging of the population. The Government is now considering third
generation reforms that go beyond addressing simply coverage to concentrate on quality,
efficiency and effectiveness. For example, the Government and many stakeholders are
increasingly concerned, not only about the skills of university graduates and the quality of health
services, but also about the need to improve monitoring and cost management in both university
education and health services.
Recent Economic Developments
20.
Costa Rica entered the global crisis in a position of relative strength. Previous to the
crisis GDP growth peaked at 8.8 percent in 2006 and 7.9 percent in 2007, well exceeding the
Latin America regional averages.5 High growth rates and fiscal surpluses combined with sound
debt management contributed to a decline of public debt from 55.2 percent of GDP in 2005 to
45.9 percent in 2007. Costa Rica’s external position remained stable between 2005 and 2007,
with a high import bill financed by growing exports and robust capital inflows, especially FDI.
While the current account deficit was hovering around 5 to 6 percent of GDP in 2005-2007, FDI
inflows alone averaged around 6 percent of GDP, leading to an increase in international reserves
to over US$4 billion by the end of 2007.
21.
Costa Rica’s economy was hit hard by the food, fuel and financial crisis. Costa Rica
relies heavily on foreign markets for investment, exports and fiscal revenue. The global financial
crisis resulted in a contraction of international trade with 2009 exports and imports falling (in
value terms) 7.5 percent and 25.4 percent respectively with respect to values in 2008. The
decline in the volume of imports was the main factor for the current account deficit falling
sharply to 2 percent of GDP in 2009, from 9.3 percent of GDP in 2008. Tax revenues linked to
trade also fell, contributing to a decline in tax revenues from 15.5 percent of GDP in 2008 to
13.7 percent in 2009 and 13.4 percent in 2010. GDP growth slowed significantly in 2008 to 2.7
percent, with a contraction in 2009 of -1.3 percent.
22.
The fiscal space accumulated prior to the crisis provided room for some
expansionary policies. Some of the fiscal space was used to scale-up social transfer programs to
help cushion the impact of higher food prices in 2008 and the economic slowdown in 2009.
Admittedly, a significant share of the fiscal expansion took the form of higher wages. As a result,
the fiscal surpluses of 2007 and 2008 of 1.2 percent of GDP and 0.2 percent of GDP
respectively, turned in 2009 and 2010 into deficits of 4.0 percent of GDP and 5.5 percent of
GDP.
23.
The expansion of current spending during the crisis, particularly for wages and
salaries, increased rigidities in the budget and has significantly limited the space of the
Government to adjust the fiscal stance. Even if growth picked up in 2010 (4.2 percent) which
5

This compares to Latin American regional averages of 5 percent and 4.5 percent for the same years.

4

next to Panama was the highest in the Central American Region, fiscal pressures in 2010 meant
limited capital expenditures, curtailing the plans of the incoming administration to eliminate
important bottlenecks in the infrastructure sector. To address the long term growth constraints
across many sectors, including infrastructure, energy, and education, the Government is pursuing
a fiscal reform and considering alternative financing mechanisms, such as PPPs and concessions,
for many of the infrastructure components in the public investment program.
Table 1 Costa Rica: Key Macroeconomic Indicators and Projections
As percentage of GDP, unless indicated otherwise
2007

2008

2009

2010

2011*

2012*

2013*

2014*

2015*

Growth and Prices (%)
Real GDP (% annual growth)
CPI Inflation (eop)

7.9
10.8

2.7
13.9

-1.3
4.0

4.2
5.8

4.3
7.5

4.4
6.5

4.5
5.5

4.5
4.5

4.5
4.0

Savings and Investment
National savings
Gross Domestic Investment
Public Sector

18.4
24.7
3.2

18.2
27.6
4.0

13.9
15.9
3.6

16.3
20.0
4.2

15.4
20.2
3.6

15.8
20.8
3.7

16.4
21.5
3.7

16.9
22.0
3.8

17.2
22.4
3.8

Public sector
Combined public sector overall
Nonfinancial public sector balance
Revenues
Expenditures
Central Bank balance

1.2
1.9
23.4
21.5
-0.7

0.2
0.4
23.6
23.2
-0.2

-4.0
-3.2
22.5
25.7
-0.8

-5.5
-5.1
22.2
27.3
-0.5

-5.6
-5.1
22.5
27.7
-0.5

-4.2
-3.7
24.3
28.0
-0.5

-4.1
-3.6
24.5
28.1
-0.5

-4.1
-3.6
24.7
28.4
-0.5

-4.2
-3.7
24.9
28.6
-0.5

Public Debt (excluding ICE)
Domestic debt
External debt

42.5
32.8
9.7

36.0
27.4
8.6

38.4
31.2
7.2

39.4
32.3
7.1

41.8
35.1
6.7

42.3
35.6
6.7

43.0
36.1
6.9

43.8
36.6
7.2

44.8
37.3
7.5

External Sector Indicators
Current account balance
Trade balance
Foreign direct investment
Net international reserves (US$m)

-6.3
-11.3
6.2
4,114

-9.3
-16.8
6.9
3,799

-2.0
-7.0
4.6
4,066

-3.6
-10.0
4.1
4,627

-4.8
-11.6
4.6
5,277

-5.0
-12.2
4.5
5,327

-5.1
--13.0
4.1
5,627

-5.2
-13.5
4.2
5,902

-5.2
-13.5
4.2
6,152

Memorandum:
GDP (US$ million)

26,322

29,838

29,241

35,780

40,297

43,170

45,364

47,761

49,944

*Projected. Source: Ministry of Finance, Central Bank of Costa Rica, and IMF & World Bank estimates. Note: REER denotes
Real Effective Exchange Rate.

Economic Outlook
24.
The Government has presented a strategy for medium term fiscal consolidation. The
main element is a fiscal reform that was submitted to Congress in January 2011. The proposal
would extend the current sales tax to services and allow financial deduction of VAT paid on
inputs. It also levels at 15 percent the tax rate on dividends, interest and capital gains. The
Government’s program includes measures to reduce inefficiencies in the tax collection system,
modernize tax information systems and strengthen the fight against tax evasion. In the short
5

term, the Government is implementing expenditure measures which should imply savings of
approximately 0.25 percent of GDP in 2011.
25.
While a comprehensive tax reform is a step in the right direction, important risks
remain in terms of fiscal consolidation. As the timing of the approval of a tax reform package
is still uncertain, it is not clear if the Government has enough space for the ambitious public
investment outlined in the National Development Plan. Even though debt levels can
accommodate the projected deficits in the short-term, the fiscal dynamics are such that the
situation could become complicated if consolidation does not take place.
26.
Growth is expected to continue at about the same level as 2010 in coming years.
Current projections have growth at between 4 and 4.5 percent over 2011-15 driven by robust
private consumption and domestic investment growth. Over this period, the external sector could
contribute negatively to growth by about 1 percentage point per year, as imports growth is
projected to be above exports growth. While Costa Rica is likely to benefit from higher export
demand and increased investment, relatively high unemployment and other domestic factors may
limit the country’s ability to achieve pre-crisis growth levels in the near term.
27.
The Central Bank estimates inflation at the upper band of its target, 6 percent for
2011, and falling to 4 percent for 2012. The slowing down of the economy contributed to a
drop in inflationary pressures that had emerged in 2007 and 2008, driven by the global surge in
food and fuel prices and easing of monetary policy. CPI inflation reached 10.8 percent at end2007 and 13.9 percent by end-December 2008. Inflationary pressures, however, subdued in 2009
and CPI inflation fell to 4 percent (the lowest level in 25 years). In 2010 inflation rebounded to
5.8 percent. The current targets set by the Central Bank for the medium term may need to be
revised upward depending on the evolution of fuel and food prices. As in many other countries,
food price inflation has also increased in Costa Rica recently (from a negative rate in early 2010
to about 8 percent at the end of the first quarter of 2011) but the situation is considerably
different to the one in 2008 when food inflation was above 25 percent.
28.
As the economy recovers and fuel prices continue to increase the current account
deficit is expected to deteriorate slightly. The current account deficit is now projected to
average around 5 percent of GDP over 2011-2015. This represents a modest deterioration with
respect to the 2009 and 2010 outcomes, but it is roughly in line with the 5.2 percent of GDP
average over 2004-2009. It is expected that the deficit will be mostly financed by FDI flows
projected at 4.3 percent of GDP on average over the coming 5 years.
29.
The financial system in Costa Rica remains sound, despite the crisis. After posting
credit growth rates in the range of 30 to 40 percent in 2007 and 2008, credit to the private sector
increased only by 4.8 percent in national currency and declined by 0.3 percent in foreign
currency by year-end 2009. Nonperforming loans, which in September 2009 represented 2.2
percent and seem to have remained stable around this level. However, the risk-adjusted adequacy
ratio of the banking sector increased to 16.3 percent in the first quarter of 2010. Moreover, as a
result of lower intermediation levels and higher funding costs, profitability ratios have been
under pressure. The system’s return on equity went down to 7.6 percent in March 2010, from
12.4 percent in March 2009.

6

30.
On the whole, the Costa Rican growth outlook is positive. The international finance
community has adopted a positive outlook through an upgrading of its credit rating to lower
investment-grade (Baa3/BBB-) by Moody’s and Fitch (BB+).6 Moreover, there is a chance the
fiscal challenges mentioned above do not materialize to the extent forecasted, and that FDI and
growth are higher than expected, particularly if a tax reform package is approved and the
Government is able to control spending and implement its public investment plan. To improve
long term growth prospects, the country is committed to addressing development challenges
across many fronts.
III.

Government Program and Development Challenges

31.
The development plan set forth by the Chinchilla government builds on, and
consolidates achievements to date. The four year National Development Plan (2011-2014)
seeks to position Costa Rica as one of the most developed countries in Latin America, with an
economy driven by innovation and sustainable development and capable of offering a high
quality of life to the population.
32.
The Government’s ambitious reform program addresses not only challenges in the
aftermath of the global crisis, but also existing structural limitations. The development plan
includes improving the country’s aging infrastructure (the last important road was built 30 years
ago), achieving carbon neutrality by 2021, and addressing emerging issues including increasing
levels of crime and violence and challenges of enhancing the country’s competitiveness.
33.
Citizen security is the highest development priority for this administration, as the
country faces rising levels of crime linked to drug trade. The national concern with security
is growing as Costa Rica is increasingly used as a transit point by both Mexican and Colombian
drug cartels. Although crime rates in Costa Rica are significantly below those of other Central
American countries, the steady rise of crime rates in recent years has raised serious concern.
Homicides have increased from 8.2 per 100,000 people in 2008 to 11.8 in 2009; and property
crimes have also increased by more than 263 percent. A recent regional Bank Study (Crime and
Violence in Central America) found the annual economic cost of crime in Costa Rica can be
estimated at about 3.6 percent of GDP.
34.
The Government has launched a comprehensive approach to fighting violence and
crime which includes using preventive and proactive approaches to engage institutions and
civil society, address risk factors and improve the institutional response to crime. Specific
actions include: (i) increasing the strength of the public police force by 50 percent during the
period 2010-2014 through recruitment and training programs; (ii) increasing resources and
equipment for the police; (iii) improving working conditions of officials and personnel and
strictly controlling acts of corruption; (iv) creating a National Anti-Drug Commission to fight
against drug trafficking and organized crime; (v) developing a national policy of public safety
based on a national consensus of the issues at stake and ensuring the sustainability of efforts; (vi)
increasing funding for public safety by at least 50 percent; and (vii) strengthening the municipal
police and promoting community participation in crime prevention efforts. Given the regional

6

Standard & Poor maintains a rating of speculative investment (BB) for Costa Rica.

7

dimension of the problem, better coordination to address this issue within Central America is
also important.
35.
Costa Rica has the main ingredients to compete successfully in the global economy
and increase productivity. The Government has launched a competitiveness strategy to build
on the country’s comparative advantages and which recognizes areas for improvement. The
authorities are aware that while its strong institutions have provided the basis for sustained
growth, severe constraints are limiting what could be an even more outstanding performance. As
a result, the Government has drawn on the successful experience of other countries and
recommendations of a Bank study (Box 1), including putting in place a Competitiveness and
Innovation Council chaired by the President. As a small open economy, the Government
recognizes that to achieve sustained productivity growth the country needs a stable
macroeconomic and political framework, a strong institutional infrastructure to coordinate with
the labor and business community, administrative capabilities of the state to frame and
implement policies, good quality human capital, opportunities for technology, innovation and
research, low cost logistics and supply chain management, and an environment of solidarity that
affords opportunities for all, especially the poor. To address this, the Government’s
competitiveness strategy is organized around five main areas which include human capital and
innovation; trade and external FDI; capital markets development; infrastructure; and business
simplification.
36.
Costa Rica’s human capital strategy recognizes: (a) the need to build a skilled labor
force as a basis for a competitive economy; and (b) the continued role of education in
maintaining an equitable society. While the country has done relatively well in primary
education, close to one-half of Costa Rican workers have not completed secondary education and
can only access low quality jobs. In 2009, only 80 percent of 15 year olds were in school and
most of these would not have been at the age appropriate grade level (9th grade) due to a high
repetition rate. While progress has been made in ensuring that more children start secondary
education, the proportion of young people who had finished secondary education was only 40
percent. Girls are more likely than boys to complete secondary education, which could suggest
some gender-sensitive actions could be useful: (i) continue the efforts to increase completion of
secondary education, particularly among boys, through the Avancemos CCT program, and (ii)
ensure that girls as well as boys are provided guidance and opportunities to go into vocational
and technical training as well as into priority disciplines in tertiary education (see below).
37.
The Government will continue efforts to increase the number of secondary
graduates, with a special focus on the poor. The relatively low completion rates of secondary
education, despite strong labor market signals favoring secondary education completion, point to
structural problems of the education system. Until 2008, the conditions for passing a grade in
secondary education were very strict resulting in a large dropout rate among those students that
were required to repeat grades. The liberalization of these conditions has facilitated progression
through successive grades eliminating an important bottleneck. In addition, in 2006 the
Government introduced the Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) program Avancemos targeted at
those students in the two bottom quintiles (about 125,000 students). The transfer size increases
with the grade to increase incentives for graduation. The impact of these measures has yet to be
proven, but it is expected that they will boost secondary completion rates. In 2010, the
secondary dropout rate improved for the fourth consecutive year from 10.9 percent to 10.2
8

percent. The strong government commitment to education has been reconfirmed recently with
the passage of legislation to increase the budget allocation to the sector from 6 to 8 percent of
GDP.
38.
In addition, the Government has taken steps to increase the number of “technical”
upper secondary schools which expand options for young people who complete lower
secondary education. The Government has committed to further expanding coverage of
technical and vocational schools at the secondary level to provide additional opportunities for
lower secondary graduates to acquire skills and enter the job market. A special emphasis is also
being made to improve employment opportunities for women and vulnerable groups. A
complementary program to achieve this goal includes a "National Network of Care" which
targets children and older adults, especially female heads of households, who are unable to have
full-time jobs and thereby have limited incomes to support their families.
39.
Although private universities account for 30 percent of the enrollment, the system of
accreditation is weak and public universities remain the core of the tertiary education
system. Most private universities offer only a limited number of programs and are also more
liberal in allowing access, as they do not organize entrance examinations, unlike public
universities. Due to high costs, private universities also exclude students from poorer socioeconomic backgrounds. The main issue at the tertiary level is to improve the quality and access
of programs. Fewer than 60 of the over 1,100 programs at the university level are accredited, and
of these, the majority are in the public universities. The Government is focused on increasing the
number of tertiary education graduates by expanding access to public universities, encouraging
universities to improve quality and relevance of programs, promoting university research and
collaborative projects with industry.
40.
Costa Rica’s emergence as a knowledge economy, with the ability to generate good
quality jobs, will depend not only on how it addresses the problem of universal coverage
and quality in secondary education, but also how it develops scientific and technological
capabilities. Moving from a selective development of technological capabilities to a
comprehensive approach, the country has to develop the technological capabilities of its entire
workforce to improve productivity, as well as create the capacity for technological innovation by
producing or applying new knowledge. The country’s selective development of science and
technology since the early nineties, focusing primarily on electronics, has positioned it to make
this leap. FDI played a major role, starting with Intel’s sizeable investment in Costa Rica’s
electronics industry in the mid 1980s. This impacted the education system through the creation
of new programs in Universities. The Ministry of Science of Technology has also been
instrumental in creating partnerships with the private sector, for example with technological
institutions such as Hewlett Packard’s ProCurve Research Laboratory. Electronic parts for
microprocessors is the highest single export category in Costa Rica and accounts for about a
third of industrial exports.
41.
There is a strong government commitment to improving the business environment
and reducing red tape, and an ambitious reform program is underway to streamline
processes and procedures. The World Bank Competitiveness Study (Report No. AAA39 - CR)
and follow up Non Lending Technical Assistance (NLTA) found removing burdensome red tape
for businesses could have the potential to dramatically improve the investment climate. The
9

Government is pursuing improvements to facilitate business start-up, and the recent
implementation of DR-CAFTA and new trade agreements with China and the EU offer
opportunities to further expand and diversify export markets.
Box 1: Costa Rica Competiveness Diagnostic and Recommendations Report
The report outlined a program to address critical bottlenecks that hamper Costa Rica growth prospects in diverse
fields including infrastructure, technological innovation, human capital and access to credit. The top five priority
actions identified by the report with the potential for the greatest impact are:
 First, make competitiveness a high priority: a “política de estado”, by establishing a competitiveness
ministry by law, rather than by decree.
 Second, award a concession of the Limon-Moin Port, transforming it into a best-practice operation, logistic
center, and the anchor of Costa Rican exports.
 Third, transform the current Ministry of Science and Technology into an effective champion of knowledge
transfer, innovation, and articulation of SMEs by revamping their programs and procedures.
 Fourth, address the dramatically high attrition rate of secondary education by improving the curriculum,
strengthening teacher training programs, and expanding currently successful technical and scientific
education programs.
 And fifth, establish an encompassing deregulation initiative to revise the somewhat obsolete and costly
procedures that govern daily business life in Costa Rica.
Source: Costa Rica Competitiveness Diagnostic and Recommendations, The World Bank (2009)

42.
Efforts to increase competitiveness should also address outdated and overly
restrictive business regulations. For Costa Rica to become more competitive in the global
economy, reform efforts should stretch beyond reducing bureaucracy to improving the outdated
legislation currently governing much of the country’s economic activities. This includes, among
other things, legislation and regulatory practices affecting access to credit, restructuring and exit
of insolvent companies, and the protection of the rights of shareholders. A reduction in
inefficiencies for tax collection would also limit the burden on firms and increase revenue
collection.
43.
Further progress in financial sector reform, including passage of legislation to
strengthen supervision and prudential regulations, should strengthen the financial system’s
capacity to finance investment. Implementation of the recommendations from the 2008 FSAP
has been slow. The main challenges for the financial sector in the country relate to the
introduction of a risk based and consolidated supervision, to the adherence to the Basel Core
Principles, the establishment of a deposit insurance scheme (which is underway) and to introduce
improvements to the credit information system. Additional concerns relate to the level of
dollarization of the economy.
44.
The country faces a major challenge in improving the quality of infrastructure
services and reducing critical logistic bottlenecks. According to the Global Competitiveness
Index, international business executives perceive Costa Rica to have the worst overall quality of
roads and ports among the six countries of Central America (World Economic Forum, 2010).
The country’s overall infrastructure score is closer to that of Honduras and Nicaragua than to the
regional infrastructure quality leaders, Panama and El Salvador. The impact of a lack of adequate
infrastructure is increasing the costs of logistics and hampering exports; for instance, key
10

agricultural exports from Costa Rica, not only face poor quality rural roads connecting with
Puerto Limon, but a lack of storage facilities for refrigerated containers, as well as limited
capacity to handle high volumes of containers. These factors and cumbersome customs
procedures combined, increase transport times, costs, and losses of perishable goods. Not only
has the level of public sector investment in infrastructure been low but the involvement of the
private sector has been low as well. Of over US$1 billion invested through Public Private
Partnerships in infrastructure from 2000 to 2009 in Central America, Costa Rica was responsible
for securing little more than 10 percent – a smaller proportion than every other country in the
region with the exception of Nicaragua.
45.
The incoming Government has made a commitment to investing in infrastructure to
improve competitiveness in global markets. Significant investments are envisioned in
infrastructure, transport, and telecommunications. Given the sizable investments required to
address the aging fiscal infrastructure and the tight fiscal situation, government investments will
be complemented with the private sector and FDI. To this end, the Government is actively
seeking to create the institutional conditions to engage the private sector in the financial
construction and management of infrastructure projects (PPPs). Already the Government has
begun to open insurance, electricity and telecommunications to the private sector. In addition, to
stimulate innovation the Ministry of Science and Technology is working across sectors to
develop priority actions to create mechanisms that promote the adoption and use of new
technologies.
46.
The Government is committed to improve border management. There is a need to
modernize customs to improve trade facilitation and duty collection. The system of Information
Technology for Customs Control (TICA) operated by Customs allows all customs transactions to
be processed electronically, however, coordination with other institutions is not smooth and
control is not automated. This often leads to long delays in release of goods for both imports and
exports. The problem is compounded at land borders, as the infrastructure is deteriorating, and
coordination with neighboring countries is poor. Also, the complexity of the transit of goods and
the above mentioned weakness in infrastructure, increase opportunities for irregularities such as
smuggling.
47.
Costa Rica is well-positioned to build on its strength as a global leader on
environmental issues, and is the first country to pledge to reach carbon-neutrality by 2021.
The country has been pioneering incentive-based environmental programs since 1976, and this
unique experience now provides the foundation for piloting performance-based Reducing
Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) payments and serves as an
example for other countries. Once known as having one of the world’s highest deforestation
rates, Costa Rica achieved negative net deforestation in the early 2000s, due in part to the
program (Pago por Servicios Ambientales, PSA), which financially compensates the owners of
forests and forestlands who carry out conservation, natural regeneration and reforestation
projects. Over the past decade the PSA has supported forest conservation on privately-owned
and community-owned lands in priority watersheds and key areas within Costa Rica’s portion of
the Mesoamerican Biological Corridor. Costa Rica is also a front runner in the 50-country Forest
Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) and will receive a US$3.4 million preparation grant from the
FCPF Readiness Fund. Testifying to its global leadership is Costa Rica’s willingness to share its
expertise in the environment and climate change with other countries. For example, Costa Rica
11

has participated since 2002 in a program supporting South-South Knowledge Exchange with
Benin and Bhutan in sustainable biodiversity practices, natural resource management, energy
efficiency, and other topics.7
48.
After introducing PSA, Costa Rica has continued to lead in environmental
innovation. The country also pioneered efforts at introducing financial incentives for the
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, promoting the Certified Tradable Offsets, or carbon
credits, which subsequently, within the Clean Development Mechanism of the Convention on
Climate Change, served as a source of inspiration for the development of Certified Emission
Reductions (CERs). The new administration is continuing to implement programs in support of
carbon neutrality and has established a National Environmental Council. The Government is
also developing its low carbon growth strategy to help prioritize key actions across sectors.
Building on its experience with the FCPF Readiness Fund, Costa Rica might also pilot the new
FCPF Carbon Fund, preparing a first-of-its-kind Emission Reduction Payment Agreement
(ERPA) of about US$40 million, which would provide valuable experience for other countries
worldwide. In line with the Carbon Fund rules of operations, the signature of an ERPA under the
FCPF Carbon Fund is contingent upon an Emission Reductions Program from Costa Rica being
selected by the Carbon Fund Participants, and upon a positive assessment of the Country’s
Readiness Package by the FCPF Participants Committee.
49.
Despite these significant advances the country still faces environmental challenges.
Solid waste is a serious problem with the main destination for waste disposal being unregulated
dumps. The country’s sanitary landfill is already at capacity, and river contamination is an issue
with rivers being used as a dumping site for raw sewage and industrial effluents. In addition, the
capital, San José, does not have a centralized sewage collection system. Addressing these
challenges would ensure a comprehensive approach to reaching the country’s climate change
goals and help position the country to maintain its global leadership in this area.
50.
Expanding access to clean energy is also a challenge. Even though Costa Rica is doing
well in implementing a clean energy agenda with a 90 percent share of the power generation total
coming from renewable sources, in the last few years most of their power generation expansion
came in the form of fuel-based thermal generation. In accordance with its development plan,
Costa Rica (and its vertically integrated power utility - ICE) must develop new clean, renewable
power resources. While the Government is pushing to forbid any development of non-renewable
resources and continues to protect many of the areas where hydro and geo-thermal could be
developed, the country faces the challenge of identifying sources for the additional generation
required to meet growing demand. A new Electricity Law proposal has been sent to Congress
which would open the market to some degree of competition (at a wholesale level) and promote
the development of renewable energy resources, not only by ICE but also by private investors.
51.
The Government is recognized as one of the best in the region for its efficient and
effective response to natural disasters. Costa Rica is particularly exposed to natural disasters,
including seismic events, volcanoes and seasonal hydro-meteorological events. A recent study
from the Ministry of Planning estimated that between 1988 and 2009 the country suffered

7

See http://www.south-southcooperation.org/

12

economic losses representing US$1.8 billion, and in 2009 alone of US$450 million. To address
this vulnerability, Costa Rica was the first country to adopt the innovative World Bank financed
Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT DDO), which acts as a source of bridge financing
if a country declares a state of emergency as a result of a natural disaster. This proved to be an
extremely effective tool in responding to the aftermath of the January 2009 earthquake. The
country also has a comprehensive legal and institutional framework for disaster risk management
(DRM). In the event of a national emergency, the National Risk Prevention and Emergency
Management Commission (CNE) acts as the highest ranked coordinating authority.
52.
Rapid demographic changes in Costa Rica will require significant public sector
investments in quality health care and continuing efforts to improve efficiency. The
population is aging rapidly. It is expected that by 2050 over 20 percent will be over 65 years of
age, compared to almost 6 percent today. This demographic transition will put pressure on the
health system given the emergence of new risk factors and non-communicable diseases among
large groups of the population such as hypertension and diabetes, as well as multiple concurrent
chronic conditions among the elderly. Past patient satisfaction surveys suggest that the
population is relatively satisfied with services provided by the Social Security Institute (Caja
Costarrisence de Seguridad Social) which covers almost 90 percent of the population. However,
there is evidence that increased demand is creating pressure at all levels of care, particularly
diagnostic and therapeutic interventions in outpatient, inpatient and hospital emergency services.
This situation has given rise to inequities as mid and low-income groups only have access to
public services while higher income individuals can access private health services. To address
these challenges, it is important to modernize management systems for decision-makers and
develop sustainable policies and interventions with evidence-based medicine and principles of
cost-efficiency, as well as to increase capacity.
53.
The immediate challenge for the Government is to improve public sector health
infrastructure and meet the expansion of demand for quality secondary and tertiary
services. To respond to the challenges, the government is taking stock of the sustainability of the
main health institution, la Caja de Seguridad Social, and is exploring options to rehabilitate and
build new public health infrastructure. In addition, other options under consideration include: (i)
establishing a center to guide the adoption of the public health sector of clinical protocols based
on international standards of evidence-based medicine and cost-effectiveness; (ii) moving to
information-based decision making to better monitor quality of care, costs and health outcomes;
and (iii) improving responsiveness of health care networks.
54.
To ensure not only delivery on its commitments, but their sustainability, the
Government has begun to focus on strengthening the role of the state and bridging the gap
with OECD countries. The Government is seeking to improve public sector capacity in key
areas, including public expenditure management, regulatory capacity, ability to carry out
extensive PPP arrangements, procurement and revenue mobilization. In some areas the process
of identifying gaps with OECD countries is well advanced. For example, an issue of particular
importance for Costa Rica is to reassure its partners of the commitment to bring the tax system in
line with OECD countries and establish the necessary mechanisms of cooperation for a thorough
enforcement of the tax legislation (see Box 2).

13

Box 2 OECD Global Forum to Implement Internationally Agreed Tax Standards
Following the G20 Summit in London in April 2009, Costa Rica has sought to improve the exchange of tax
information to meet the OECD standards. The country is committed to reform its legislation to improve access to
financial information and sign tax information exchange agreements. In April 2010, Costa Rica signed a
Memorandum of Understanding with the Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange Information for Tax
Purposes, confirming its membership. Efforts towards tax information exchange agreements include:
· On April 14, 2010, Costa Rica submitted to the National Assembly new legislation (Transparency Bill) to improve
access to financial information and facilitate the signing of bilateral tax information exchange agreements. New
additions include access to information and stock information. This Bill is in the advanced stages of approval in
Congress, and is expected to enter into force in the second half of 2011.
· As of May 2010 Costa Rica has made progress on 23 bilateral tax treaties, including signed agreements with
Argentina, France, Mexico and The Netherlands. Negotiations with Australia, Canada, Korea (Rep.), India,
Indonesia, Italy and South Africa have been finalized and agreements are expected to be signed soon. Costa Rica is
scheduled to sign on June 29, 2011 bilateral tax information exchange agreements with Denmark, Finland, Faeroes,
Greenland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
· On October 4, 2010 Congress approved a tax treaty with Spain to avoid double taxation, which facilitates the tax
information exchange. This agreement entered into force on January 1, 2011.
· Negotiations with Germany have been finalized and the tax treaty is being officially translated prior to its
signature.
· Costa Rica is working to adjust an existing tax information exchange agreement with the Unites States to conform
to OECD standards.
· The Convention for Mutual Assistance and Technical Cooperation among Central American Tax and Customs
Administration signed by Costa Rica, Honduras, Guatemala, El Salvador and Nicaragua has been recognized by the
OECD Global Forum on Transparency as one which complies with international standards providing an effective
exchange of information. A technical note setting forth how the international standards are to be interpreted
regarding this convention has to be approved by COSEFIN and COMIECO. Costa Rica is currently working on a
final draft of this note along with Guatemala.
. Costa Rica expressed its interest in the May-June 2011 Global Forum Meeting in joining the Multilateral
Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance on Tax Matters. It is expected to sign on officially before the next
G20 Summit in November 2011.
Source: Ministry of Finance

55.
The Government’s four year National Development Plan addresses the key
development challenges mentioned above, but it may be overly ambitious. The Government
will require significant resources to build and rehabilitate key infrastructure, develop the energy
sector in a sustainable manner, as well as to increase spending on education and welfare, and
tackle health care for a rapidly aging population and citizen security. Given the limited fiscal
space it will be challenging to find alternative options to move forward in all of these areas

14

simultaneously. These investments are necessary, however, to set the country on the right
trajectory to compete on a global scale.
IV. Lessons from Past World Bank Experience
The Last CPS
56.
The FY09-FY11 CPS was the second strategy to be prepared for Costa Rica
following a nearly 10-year period of very limited Bank engagement. The preceding FY04-07
CPS, presented to the Board in mid-2004, established a framework for a closer partnership
between the World Bank Group and Costa Rica based on mutual learning and knowledge
sharing, rather than significant resource transfer via lending operations. The FY09-FY11 CPS
took a similar approach and its design focused on three sets of challenges the country faced,
namely to improve competitiveness to maintain and improve long-term growth prospects; build
on advances in health and education service delivery, social security and social assistance to
improve the conditions of the poor; and to enhance environmental sustainability and mitigate
vulnerability to natural disasters.
57.
The FY09-FY11 CPS included four operations that were under implementation and
four new operations to be approved under the CPS for an estimated US$258 million. In
addition, in line with an emphasis on knowledge, the CPS program proposed a new AAA
program that included both reimbursable and non-reimbursable activities. However, at the height
of the crisis the Government requested a US$500 million Public Finance and Competitiveness
Development Policy Loan with deferred Draw-down Option (DPL-DDO) which was approved in
FY09 to help the country build buffers that might have allowed the country to react to
unanticipated fiscal deterioration. The loans which were originally envisaged were not prepared
due to the change in government priorities.
Lessons Learned
58.
Keep a focus on results but be flexible on the use of instruments. Adjustment to the
global crisis meant a major change in the structure of lending with budget support taking the
place of investment lending. Despite this drastic shift in the composition of the program, the CPS
maintained a focus on the key results in areas such as telecommunications, health care, and
secondary education. This approach combined with good quality supporting analytical work
shows how a country can adjust to changing circumstances while maintaining the commitment to
deliver results in the areas targeted by the CPS program. Maintaining a focus on results is
facilitated by designing a results framework that is aligned with the country’s strategic priorities,
such as competitiveness, education, health insurance, environment and social assistance.
59.
The results framework of the CPS should be consistent with the time period of CPS
implementation and the size and scope of the supporting program. The design of the results
framework of the CPS did not take appropriate account of the limited implementation period
(two and a half years) and rather followed a standard format. While the idea of aligning the
period of the CPS with the political cycle was appropriate, the team could have considered other
options in the circumstances of Costa Rica at the time of design. One option could have been the

15

extension and updating of the previous strategy for a two year period; or, alternatively, the
results framework could have been adapted to the shorter period of implementation.
60.
Simplification of project design in future operations is critical to avoid
implementation delays. The previous CPS Completion Report addressed the high
implementation risks in Costa Rica (beginning with long delays in achieving effectiveness) by
suggesting the design of larger operations to minimize the costs of effectiveness. While this
remains a valid lesson, the experience during this CPS is that larger is only better if care is taken
to simplify design and minimize risks to implementation. For example, introducing heavy
demands on coordination, as in the case of the Limon Project, leads to implementation delays.
Further efforts to prepare projects for prompt implementation once effective are also needed to
maximize opportunities for success. As suggested under the previous CPS, given the
effectiveness and implementation challenges, preparation and delivery of new projects should
preferably take place at the early part of the CPS period. Experience has demonstrated that
preparation of projects towards the end of the political cycle has led to longer delays, both in
effectiveness, as well as delays related to political transitions.
61.
The effectiveness of Bank programs in middle-income countries should be enhanced
by aligning design with a greater emphasis on knowledge and South-South cooperation.
Costa Rica is a middle income country at the cutting edge of several development initiatives and
with a solid demand for knowledge products. Partnerships in such cases require responding to
the client demand for high quality, timely analytical products that deliver results without the
traditional institutional support found in technical assistance operations. So far, the experience
shows that continued engagement through substantive analytical work, well disseminated and
accompanied by complementary notes as needed, can have an impact. However, as the
knowledge relationship develops into the main area of engagement, its effectiveness demands
aligning the design of the strategy with the characteristics of knowledge products, including
developing ways to measure effectiveness. One possible opening for the future could include
developing a fee for service technical assistance program. In fact, the Government has proposed
this approach for World Bank Group (WBG) technical assistance to improve the business
environment. Lastly, the innovative experiences in Costa Rica (e.g., environment, institutional
readiness for managing natural disasters) could help other countries address similar concerns. In
turn, this intensified South-South cooperation could also allow Costa Rica to benefit from the
experiences of similar countries in the region or further abroad.
V.

The Country Partnership Strategy FY2012-2015

62.
Building on the lessons learned during CPS implementation, the new strategy
proposes a selective program of engagement with a realistic framework of results. The
Bank program is concentrated in three clusters which are closely aligned with the Government’s
strategic view and investment program. The support under these clusters falls in areas where the
WBG has maintained a sustained engagement. The three clusters are: (i) developing
competitiveness; (ii) improving efficiency and quality in the social sectors; and (iii) supporting
environment and disaster management. In Costa Rica, IFC expects to concentrate on: (i)
renewable energy and energy efficiency projects; (ii) manufacturing and agribusiness sectors
with an emphasis on companies with plans to increase regional expansion and raise exports; and
16

(iii) private sector educational and healthcare institutions; (iv) financial services; and (v)
advisory engagements to support infrastructure and sustainable agribusiness projects.
63.
The CPS builds on the Costa Rican authorities’ desire to maintain a strong financial
and knowledge-based relationship with the Bank, based on the need for increasingly
flexible, on-demand services. To provide flexible support and taking into account lessons
learned, the CPS focuses on outcomes, recognizing that in trying to influence results a variety of
instruments will be used. As a result, the composition of instruments will be revisited if
circumstances change, as they did during the previous CPS period. The instruments will include
investment lending, analytical work, just in time policy advice, and trust funded activities. In all
cases, however, the CPS proposes an enhanced focus on analytical work, including moving to an
annual programming exercise. In this way, the CPS program will be better aligned with the
Government’s priorities and tailor made to address key policy issues as well as responsive to the
government’s request that the Bank concentrate its support in areas where it can build on its
extensive knowledge and experience. The CPS is also aligned with the political cycle and,
consistent with the lessons learned, proposes a frontloading of the lending program to minimize
risks of delays given the often lengthy approval processes in Congress.
64.
The CPS also proposes fewer, larger operations to facilitate approval and
implementation. Given the high transaction costs related with National Assembly approval, the
Government has requested that the CPS consider fewer, larger operations. However, it is possible
that if circumstances change, the Government may request a shift to budget support. Should this
become necessary and appropriate, the design of such an operation would be aligned with the
results framework of the CPS. Two possible investment operations being considered are in
higher education and health, following the Government’s decision to articulate a clear division of
labor among donors, whereby the Bank would continue to focus investment support in the social
sectors where there has been a sustained level of engagement over time.
65.
To avoid the undue complexity in the design of large investment operations, the
Bank would explore alternative design options that have proven effective in delivering
results in other countries in the region. This could include results-based investment lending
for example. In addition, project design would emphasize innovation and create added value, in
line with Costa Rica’s profile as a sophisticated middle income country. As the proposed
operations under consideration would be larger and innovative, additional effort would need to
be made during design and prior to effectiveness, to maximize the opportunities for success. This
strategic approach of larger, well thought out operations should minimize the risk of
implementation issues in future operations and maximize the impact of relatively limited Bank
resources.
Cluster I – Supporting Competitiveness
66.
The Bank will support the Government’s efforts to give more prominence to the
competitiveness agenda, including strengthening human capital and skills development,
logistics, private sector involvement in infrastructure and improvements in the quality of
the business environment. The Bank’s engagement to support improved quality and access to
higher education builds on extensive analytical work on the links between education,
employment and competitiveness. The CPS program expects to contribute to the national goal of
17

improving human capital as the basis of maintaining solidarity in society and improving
competitiveness. The specific focus of WBG engagement would be the Government’s reforms of
higher education that seek to increase the number of tertiary education students and graduates in
priority disciplines, to strengthen accreditation and quality assurance and the quantity and quality
of university research. Outcomes include increasing the share of students obtaining tertiary
education that come from poor and under-privileged households and putting a system of higher
education accreditation in place.
67.
The Bank will support the Government’s plans to scale up investments in public
infrastructure. This would include carrying out a diagnostic of the current PPP framework and
providing complementary technical assistance to build capacity, as well as possible advisory
services for specific sectors. The IFC is exploring potential opportunities in promoting PPP
projects, including in the urban transport sector. Throughout the CPS, the Bank and IFC will
work together to help build capacity so that by the end of the CPS period the country will have in
place the institutions and personnel capable of negotiating, monitoring and improving
performance of PPPs. MIGA has also received interest for new projects in infrastructure, owing
to a closer relationship between MIGA and some of the lenders interested in participating in
these deals. The actual deals and amount of coverage, however, will depend on the pace at
which these PPPs are procured and the composition of the winning consortia. MIGA continues to
look forward to supporting investments into Costa Rica, as well as partnering with Costa Rican
firms interested in cross-border investments to other developing countries.
68.
The Government and the Bank are under significant pressure to deliver the results
expected from the Puerto Limon Project. The project was conceived as a regional
development initiative around a port that handles approximately 80 percent of the goods entering
the country. The expected results include revitalizing the Caribbean port and related
infrastructure as a means of improving the logistics of the country and its competitiveness as
well as reducing the region’s relatively high poverty rates and improving the access of its
population to basic services. The project has suffered delays in reaching effectiveness and its
complex design has led to a slow start in implementation. However, the authorities maintain a
strong commitment to the project, which has recently been restructured to the extent allowed by
the law. Further support on logistics could include working with the customs agency in revising
and streamlining procedures to reduce transaction costs. This would include an evaluation of
performance through the Customs Assessment Tool for Trade, as well as support for strategic
planning and auditing.
69.
The Bank will support the Presidential Competitiveness and Innovation Council.
The Council was created in line with the recommendations of the World Bank Study, and its
agenda will be supported through a variety of instruments that may include follow up analytical
work on the Competitiveness study, as needed. The WBG will provide technical assistance on a
fee for service basis to improve the business environment and simplify red tape in strategic areas,
as well as to improve business regulation affecting key areas. Specifically, IFC advisory services
may also expand its Investment Climate and Sustainable Business operations to Costa Rica
which focus on Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME).
70.
In addition, the IFC is ready to support competitive companies that are seeking to
expand regionally. IFC may support small and micro enterprises by providing dedicated lines
18

of credit through the formal banking system. IFC support would also include women
entrepreneurs in areas such as access to finance and creation of new companies.
71.
The Bank will also support efforts to strengthen the financial system. As a first step
the Bank will carry out a financial crisis simulation exercise (funded by FIRST) in June 2011,
which may lead to further actions of the Bank in support of the country's financial sector.
72.
Instruments: Puerto Limon Project (US$72.5 million) and proposed Higher Education
Project, Competitiveness ESW and follow-up NLTA and ongoing AAA on PPPs.
Cluster II – Improving Efficiency and Equity in Social Sectors
73.
The Government has requested a strong Bank presence in the social sectors,
building on its experience to date. The ongoing Education Project is expected to contribute to
a further improvement in the efficiency and equity of primary and secondary education,
particularly in expanding access to poorer populations in rural and indigenous communities.
74.
Building on past engagements in the health sector, the CPS program will support a
major institutional effort to rationalize delivery of health care through the introduction of
best practices. Innovations would enhance the continuum of care and the performance of health
networks to better serve the poor and other vulnerable populations. In this regard, results of a
proposed operation could include strengthening infrastructure to meet new accreditation
standards for health facilities and improving the efficiency and quality of inpatient care through,
for instance, the expansion of ambulatory procedures, and improving capacity of secondary
hospitals to allow more costly tertiary hospitals focus on the more complex care.8 IFC may also
finance, or provide advisory support, for private sector health and diagnostic services.
75.
Instruments: Equity and Efficiency of Education ($30 million) and proposed
Innovations to Enhance Performance of Health Care Networks loan, recently completed regional
AAA on pharmaceutical drugs.
Cluster III – Supporting the Environment and Disaster Risk Management
76.
Selected strategic CPS interventions will support Costa Rica’s efforts to consolidate
its position as a global leader in the environment and strengthen its disaster management
institutions. CPS work will be geared to support the long-term country goal of reaching carbon
neutrality by 2021. First, the Bank will continue to support the Government’s commitment to
including more land under the System of Payments for Environmental Services (PSA), which
compensates owners of forest and forestlands for carrying out conservation, natural regeneration
and reforestation. Second, the Bank will contribute to the capitalization of the Biodiversity
Endowment Fund through a GEF facility already approved, once matching resources come
available. The expectation is that the capitalization of the Biodiversity Endowment Fund by the
end of the CPS period will contribute to ensuring the sustainability of the PES. Third, in support
of the implementation of the REDD initiative, the Bank will provide technical assistance for the
development of a comprehensive policy framework for the reduction of emissions across sectors,
and, engage multiple stakeholder groups. This support will extend to include assistance, as
8

Targets and results will be refined in the context of a proposed intervention in the health sector.

19

requested, with the US$3.4 million Grant from the FCPF Readiness Fund and the preparation of
an ERPA for up to US$40 million within the framework of the new FCPF Carbon Fund.9 To
reinforce Costa Rica’s international leadership in addressing environmental challenges, the CPS
may also support Costa Rica’s participation in a Pilot program coordinated by the World Bank
Institute to document the country’s successes in developing and expanding the PES program, and
sharing these experiences with other countries through South-South Knowledge Exchange.
77.
Following the opening of the energy sector to private sector involvement, the IFC
would like to be an active participant in helping engage private agents in the sector. IFC’s
participation could help address challenges Costa Rica faces in finding sources for additional
generation. In this regard, IFC could mobilize resources that finance new renewable generating
capacity IFC could also support projects that enhance energy efficiency in the industrial and
commercial real estate sectors.
78.
The Bank will help further strengthen Costa Rica’s institutional set-up to respond
to natural disasters, which are prevalent in the region and often have devastating impacts.
The CPS supports the lines of action of the Costa Rica’s 2010-2015 Disaster Risk Management
National Plan, particularly on: (i) disaster risk reduction, (ii) probabilistic risk modeling through
the Central American Probabilistic Risk Assessment Initiative (CAPRA), (iii) disaster risk
financial protection strategy, and (iv) legal and institutional strengthening. Results include the
implementation of a multi-hazard disaster risk analysis tool that supports the decision-making
process in risk reduction, public and private investments, emergency management, and financial
risk transfer strategies, among others. As part of the Bank’s assistance the Government will also
carry out a pilot project to estimate seismic risk for the country’s critical drinking water
infrastructure using CAPRA, an innovative knowledge product that uses open-source
information to create a comprehensive approach to risk management. Findings from this pilot
will help authorities design and implement preventive and mitigation measures. The Bank, also
supports the incorporation of disaster risk financing and insurance10 as part of its national
disaster risk management strategy by providing capacity building and technical assistance for the
design and implementation of a disaster risk financing and insurance program.
79.
Instruments: Ecomarkets Project (US$30 million) and accompanying GEF (US$10
million). Grant from the FCPF Readiness Fund (US$3.4 million), and preparation of an
Emission Reduction Payment Agreement (ERPA) with the new FCPF Carbon Fund (up to
US$40 million). Proposed analytical work and trust funded activities, and the possibility of Bank
support to design a government-issued green bond.
80.
As foundational support towards the achievements of results in all clusters, the
Bank will maintain its support to strengthen the fundamentals of the public sector. The
specific support will be targeted towards helping the Government achieve its goal of aligning
public sector practices with OECD standards. The policy dialogue and technical assistance will
be based on the recently completed Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA)
9

Targets and results from this initiative will be introduced in the Progress Report.

10

Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance (DRFI) can be broadly defined as financial protection against
natural
disasters.
Global
Facility
for
Disaster
Reduction
and
Recovery
(GFDRR).
http://www.gfdrr.org/gfdrr/node/337 accessed on March 20,2011

20

exercise and an Accounting and Auditing ROSC, both undertaken jointly with the authorities.
Special attention will be placed on improving the efficiency of public finance management
through better linking procurement and budget execution. Results in this area include
developing information standards that would capture and link procurement processes and results
to the financial management system. The resulting information system would enable the
authorities to monitor public procurement performance, identify bottlenecks and constraints in
the system, and develop strategies to address them. The agenda on improving public sector
management practices will remain open and could include revenue mobilization issues, should
the Government request such support.
Proposed Program of Support
81.
Given the strong degree of continuity from the previous CPS, implementation of the
ongoing portfolio will be crucial to achieving CPS outcomes for the FY12-15 period. The
current Bank portfolio of investment lending includes three operations and a GEF grant for a
total of US$197.5 and is 90 percent undisbursed. Systemic issues include long delays in
congressional approval, and cumbersome national procedures once approved. Portfolio
performance has been improving as the projects move past issues related to early implementation
delays. The previous CPS did not properly anticipate the impact of these delays and was overly
ambitious in terms of the results it could expect to achieve through recently approved projects.
For example, the Puerto Limon Project in particular suffered long delays in terms of readiness
for implementation, and is only just now beginning to disburse. All three projects are in the
process of being restructured to maximize opportunities for success.
82.
IFC’s current committed portfolio in Costa Rica is US$41.4 million composed of loans,
equity, and guarantees. The portfolio is concentrated in financial markets (67 percent) and
infrastructure (33 percent).
83.
As of December 31, 2010 MIGA’s gross exposure in Costa Rica was US$158.5 million,
equivalent to 1.9 percent of MIGA’s gross portfolio, with exposure net of reinsurance of
US$71.0 million (1.5 percent of MIGA’s net portfolio). This exposure represents one
outstanding project, the San José-Caldera toll road, which was one of the first PPPs in the
infrastructure sector to achieve financial closing.
84.
Country demand for the CPS period FY12-15 is estimated at US$600 million in
investment lending and is expected to be front loaded. No lending is foreseen for the second
half of the CPS (FY14-15) given the high risk in Costa Rica of projects not becoming effective
towards the end of a political cycle. Instead the Bank would increase its focus on implementing
operations which will then be at the end of their life cycle, and on undertaking the necessary
analytical work to support the ongoing policy dialogue and prepare for new operations with the
incoming administration. The indicative IBRD lending program for FY12 is US$400 million.
The lending program in FY13 will depend on how government demand and performance evolves
in the course of the CPS period, and on IBRD’s lending capacity and demand from other
borrowers. In line with the principle of flexibility, if circumstances change, demand for a fast
disbursing instrument could be considered but would require a trade off vis-a-vis the amount of
investment lending currently under consideration.

21

Monitoring and Evaluation
85.
This CPS proposes a streamlined approach to monitoring and evaluation. Taking
into account the limited size and selective nature of the engagement outlined in the CPS period,
and recognizing that the WBG has a focused and selective engagement in Costa Rica, the CPS
proposes a realistic framework and mechanisms to track the modest outcomes of the program
and its impact.
86.
The results matrix reflects primarily the ongoing portfolio, which after some delay,
is beginning to pick up the pace of implementation. The results framework reflects long term
government development goals in areas where the Bank is engaged; however, as it is difficult to
be able to directly attribute the Bank program with higher level results, an effort has been made
to keep Bank-influenced outcomes modest. Given that the first year of the CPS will focus on
approval of the lending operations, the results matrix will not yet capture the proposed lending
and analytical work envisioned beyond this current fiscal year. As a result, the CPS Progress
Report will be updated to expand the current results framework. Finally, in order to measure the
continued relevance of the WBG as a knowledge broker, the CPS proposes to track the impact of
the analytical program, including quality and strategic dissemination. To the extent possible, the
impact of Bank operations on gender issues will be monitored as part of the results indicators of
individual projects and analytical work.
Regional
87.
The regional dimension is an important area to be considered as part of this CPS.
The Bank is providing support for regional approaches in a number of cross-cutting areas which
are relevant for Costa Rica, including improving intraregional trade and addressing crime and
violence (see Box 3). On trade, the Bank will work with Costa Rica as part of a regional effort to
facilitate trade by reducing barriers between countries, for example customs procedures and
border crossing standards. More broadly the Bank is supporting several regional initiatives
which include: (i) support for the creation of a Central American Private Sector Task Force; (ii)
support to strengthen the public sector through a Regional Integration Training Program
(launched in January 2011) and a Central American Leadership program (to be launched in late
2011); (iv) support to the Central American Council of Ministers of Finance (COSEFIN) for the
preparation of a Central America-DR Regional Investment Plan and a trade facilitation window;
and (v) support for the preparation of a Central American Disaster Risk policy. The Bank is also
supporting the organization of a second Presidential Summit on Regional Integration to take
place in the second half of 2011.
88.
Crime and violence is a particular area where a regional solution is needed. Bank
support in this area centers on the Bank’s convening power, including analytical work and
technical assistance, as well as participation and co-organization of high level events in the
region. In addition, the 2011 Security Conflict and Development World Development Report
(WDR) and the regional study on Central America Crime and Violence are informing the
regional debate on the topic with analytical work. The Bank is also contributing to the
institutional strengthening of the regional institution responsible for the citizen security agenda in
Central America (i.e., SICA) with financial resources from the Institutional Development
Facility (IDF). Similarly the Bank, together with the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)
22

and other bilateral donors, is providing technical assistance to the region’s efforts to prepare a
Central America citizen security strategy. Finally, the Bank is also making significant efforts to
improve donor coordination efforts as an integral member of the Group of Friends of Central
America (Grupo de Amigos de Centroamérica), which was created to support the preparation of
the International Conference on Citizen Security that will take place in Guatemala on June 2223, 2011.
Box 3. Bank Support for Regional Integration in Central America
The Bank has stepped up its efforts to support Central American integration following the Presidential Summit in
July, 2010. To advance this agenda, the Bank is collaborating with key regional partners including the Secretariat of
Economic Integration of Central America (SIECA) and INCAE (the regional business university) to: strengthen the
region’s institutions and work with the private sector to address important regional development issues such as trade
integration and rising levels of crime and violence.
Specifically, the Bank is working with INCAE on a public sector training program for trade integration, as well as a
Leadership Training Program to address regional capacity constraints more generally.
The Bank is also supporting INCAE’s initiative to create a Central American Private Sector Task Force. Following
a first meeting in March 2011, two Executive Committees have been established to: (i) improve the flow of
merchandise (particularly basic foodstuffs) across regional borders, extend hours and enhance capabilities at border
inspection posts, as well as strengthen key aspects of the regional institutional trade framework; and (ii) identify
areas the private sector could help address crime and violence, including through creating jobs for young people.

Partnerships
89.
The Government has taken a lead in promoting an efficient division of labor among
key development partners. This has traditionally been the approach in Costa Rica where there
are few external partners. The President hosted a full day event in July 2010, to present the
country’s development challenges and outline financing priorities for various multilateral
organizations. In an effort to minimize duplication, a division of labor was suggested which
leverages each institutions’ comparative advantage and experience working in Costa Rica. The
main active partners in the country are the Central American Bank for Economic Integration
(CABEI), IDB, the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the United Nations agencies
and the World Bank Group (WBG).
90.
The WBG program is selective and focuses on the social sectors, as well as the
environment, areas where it has a history of engagement and can bring global best practice
to bear. There is a high degree of complementarity between the Bank and IDB program,
particularly in the area of competitiveness where the IDB program is heavily concentrated in
transportation and energy, areas where it has traditionally played a lead role. IDB has three
operations pending legislative ratification: a program for water and sanitation, a cantonal road
network program, and a sustainable tourism program. Most recently, IDB approved a multi
sector project to address citizen security. IDB has also taken the lead on providing technical
assistance on tax reform. The Bank and IDB work together closely on the crime and violence
agenda at the regional level. The Bank has worked closely with the IDB during the preparation
23

of the respective country partnership strategies and will continue to coordinate regularly in areas
of joint concern, for example regional integration efforts and competitiveness as mentioned
above, as well as poverty monitoring. The Bank is also keeping a close dialogue with the IMF in
the context of macroeconomic monitoring activities. The IMF is taking the lead on the financial
sector, monetary policy and macro-fiscal issues. The Bank is coordinating with the IMF who in
the area of customs and tax policy and administration.
Consultations
91.
During the week of May 4, 2011, the Bank held a series of CPS consultations. These
consultations included meetings with government representatives, the private sector, Non
Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and Congressmen and women from five of the eight
political parties of the country. The purpose of the consultations was to solicit views on the
Bank’s role in Costa Rica and discuss key development challenges facing the country.
Participants raised some priorities for the Bank to consider, primarily in the areas of enhancing
competitiveness, reducing inequality, addressing rising levels of crime and violence, and
providing support for higher education and innovation. There was also a sense conveyed that
state modernization and decentralization were key themes that needed careful reflection to ensure
efficient use of resources.
VI.

Risks

92.
The most important risks to the CPS are economic in nature and are related to
sharper-than-anticipated acceleration in food and oil prices, slower than anticipated
recovery in the United States, and the timely approval of a tax reform package. These
potential events could negatively affect economic activity and fiscal performance therefore
further limiting the fiscal space to implement the public investment plan. The growth outlook
could also be affected by an appreciating real exchange rate, which could put a dent in the
country's competitiveness. In turn these risks could also be compounded by delays with the
approval of the Government’s fiscal reform proposal. The plans of borrowing from the Bank and
other multilaterals is contingent on having the fiscal space to accommodate an increase in
investment projects. Given the loss of control of the Government’s party in Congress, and the
past difficulties in passing tax reform packages, this could result in a shift in priority of
government demand for Bank services. The Bank will seek to mitigate this risk through
continuous macroeconomic policy dialogue, in close coordination with other developing
partners, and will adjust its program accordingly.
93.
A pertinent risk to implementation of the CPS lending program derives from
portfolio implementation delays, due in part to the lengthy legislative approvals process
which applies to externally funded operations. During the previous CPS, lags in project
implementation contributed to delays in expected results. Part of the issue stems from a
protracted approval process, which continues to be a risk given the divided Congress (see
paragraph 13). The CPS attempts to minimize the risk of delays by: (i) focusing operations on
areas of high strategic importance to a wide range of political actors and consulting with all
stakeholders, including Congress; (ii) ensuring that the size of operations is adequate to ensure
high level political commitment within the executive; and (iii) building wide consensus on the
24

content of the operations throughout the development phase. Once approved, execution will also
be a challenge, due in part to the need to comply with national procedures set by the Contraloria.
To mitigate this risk, the CPS is proposing that any new lending be focused in areas where the
Bank is actively engaged with counterparts that have a reasonable track record of
implementation. To minimize the impact of delays, efforts will continue during the approval
process to ensure implementation readiness. The design of operations will also take lessons
learned and implementation challenges into account.
94.
Costa Rica has been a leader among Central American countries in deepening the
regional dialogue on risk management (including both economic and natural disaster
risks). While the country remains highly vulnerable to natural disasters, Bank support through
the CAT DDO, the CAPRA platform and assistance to the National Commission for
Emergencies, has helped the country to better prepare itself for future natural hazards.

25

Annex 1. CPS Results Matrix
Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

Bank Program

Cluster 1. Supporting Competitiveness
Increase level of FDI in
US$m
Baseline: 1,300 (2009)
Target: 1,800 (2014)
Source: NDP
Simplify red tape in
strategic areas
Target: Simplify 41 processes

Reduce red tape and
strengthen business
regulation to promote
competitiveness and attract
investment, including foreign
but also to improve the
business environment for
local firms and add to
diversification, productivity,
innovation and employment
generation

Improvement in business
environment as measured
by a reduction in red tape
and improvement in Doing
Business rankings
Days to start a business
Baseline: 60 (2011)
Target: 35 (2015)

Red tape reduction Action
Plan with a timetable for
implementation of reforms
articulated (note: outcome
indicators may be adjusted
depending on final Action
Plan)

Ongoing Puerto Limon
Project (US$72.5 million)

Firms' increased access to
finance using movable assets
as collateral in place
Baseline: 0 (2011)
Target: > 0 (2015)

New secured transactions law
enacted

Ongoing NLTA on Public
Private Partnerships

Study prepared to strengthen
corporate financial reporting
aligned with international
accounting and auditing
standards prepared

Proposed WBG Investment
Climate Advisory
engagements

Improved investor protection
Strength of investment
protection index
Baseline: 3 (2011)
Target: 5 (2015)

Improve access to economic
opportunities and services in
Limon
Improve competitiveness
through better logistics as
measured by the Logistics
Performance Index (LPI)

This is a multi sector effort
which requires strong
government leadership,
coordination and extra
support to remove potential
roadblocks

Improved insolvency regimes
Closing a business
Baseline: 3.5 years (2011)
Target: 2.5 years (2015)
SME growth in Limon
(baseline: 0 new SMEs in
2007)
Score in city’s image in
tourists’ perception
Baseline: Survey TBD

26

Proposed Higher Education
Project (US$200 million)
Completed competitiveness
ESW and follow-up NLTA

Report on the Observance on
Standards and Codes (ROSC)
- Accounting and Auditing
IFC financing for corporate
with regional integration and
export-led strategies

Business training provided to
SMEs in the tourism and
cultural sectors.
Public Relations firm
contracted to implement
surveys and communication
plan

IFC support for in private
sector technical and
vocational education
institutions

Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles

Baseline: 2.91 (2010)

Reduce waiting times of
trucks, lengths of queues to
Port as measured by Gate
Dispatch Time Indicator
Baseline and Target: [Study
to be prepared]

Successful completion of the
Moin concession

Increase number of
graduates from public
universities in science and
technology disciplines
Baseline (2009):
Engineering: 957 students
Basic Sciences: 940 students
Source: Estado de la
Educacion

CAS Outcomes

Enrollment in public
universities has remained
relatively flat since 2002

An institutional system in
place that facilitates efficient,
transparent and accountable
PPP arrangements, as
evidenced by at least one PPP
in place under the new system
Increase in percentage of
students from first and second
quintile enrolled in public
universities
Baseline: 6% and 12%
(2009) Source: Estado de la
Educación
Improve the quality and
relevance of the higher
education curricula as
measured by the number of
professions accredited and
reduction in the dropout rates
*Baseline and targets to be
confirmed when project
approved

27

Milestones

Bank Program

Study Prepared

Customs Assessment Tool for
Trade Report prepared
Provide recommendations to
improve the structure of the
PPP management unit within
the Government.

Strategy and performance
agreements put in place for
each of the four public
universities

Proposed Higher Education
Project

Technical study on options
for science and technology
clusters (software,
biotechnology and advanced
manufacturing) completed

Ongoing WBI Technical
Assistance

Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

Bank Program

Cluster 2. Improving Efficiency and Equity in Social Sectors
Increase primary level
completion rate
Baseline: 95.7% in 2009
Lower secondary level
completion rate (grade 9)
Baseline: 77.1 % in 2009

Promote greater investment
in poorer areas to stimulate
equitable growth

Improve quality and costeffectiveness of services
provided by the CCSS
health care networks

Investments have been
concentrated in San Jose,
limiting growth opportunities
in regional cities and poorer
areas.

Antiquated tools to generate
and manage public health and
clinical information, and
limitations of existing
hospital infrastructure,
impede continuous
improvements in quality and
efficiency to meet
epidemiologic and
demographic challenges

Increase primary school
completion rate in the
targeted areas
Baseline 95.5 % in 2009
Target 99 % in 2014 (end of
project)

Number of primary and
secondary schools built in
rural areas
Baseline: 9 schools (2010)
Target: 81 schools

Ongoing Equity and
Efficiency of Education
Project

Improved access to
sewerage in Limon
Baseline: 38% of pop. with
access (2007)
Target: 80% (2015)

Designs completed and works
initiated for sewage and flood
control infrastructure in
Limon.

Ongoing City-Port of Limon
Project (FY08)

Center for adoption of new
technology and health care
excellence established and
protocols for management of
most prevalent chronic
conditions adopted
* Baseline and targets to be
confirmed when project
approved

28

Policy dialogue on financial
sustainability of the health
services of la Caja.
Individual health care cost
information available for
primary health care
interventions.

IFC finance or advisory
support for private sector
health and diagnostic services
IFC dedicated lines of credit
for SMEs
Sustainable Business
operations focus on MSMEs
Proposed Innovations to
Enhance Performance of
Health Care Networks Project

Country Development
Goals

Issues and Obstacles

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

Bank Program

Cluster 3. Supporting the Environment and Disaster Risk Management
Maintain global leadership
in sustainable
environmental practices
All new generation of
electric power to be from
renewable sources
Baseline: 95%
PES initiative is financially
sustainable

The financial sustainability of
this fund, including through
fuel tax revenues and donor
support is not clear in the
longer term

Land incorporated into the
PES increased
Baseline (2007): 230,000 Ha
Target (2014): 288,000 Ha
The number of small and
medium land owners (<100
Ha) participating in the
program increases by 50
percent
Baseline (2007): 1,900
Target (2014): 2,850
Increased contribution to
mitigating climate change
through verified reductions of
carbon emissions from forest
management. [Baseline
TBD at Progress Report]
Improved local livelihoods in
forest areas as measured by
increases in the income of
small farmers and indigenous
communities from the REDD
payments under the ERPA.
[Baseline and Target TBD at
Progress Report]
Capitalization of the
Biodiversity Endowment
Fund
Baseline: US$7.5 million
Target: US$30 million (total)

29

Articulate a multi-sector
Action Plan to reduce
emissions and move towards
carbon neutrality

Ongoing Mainstreaming
Market-Based Instruments for
Environmental Management
Project/GEF grant
Ongoing REDD and FCPF

Costa Rica having designed
its national Readiness
Package (emissions baseline,
reduction strategy,
measurement system, and
safeguards) and having
signed a first performancebased REDD payment
agreement with the
FCPF/international
community, all meeting
UNFCCC standards. (The
payment agreement would be
called Emissions Reduction
Payment Agreement (ERPA).

IFC financing for renewable
energy generation projects.
IFC financing for energy
efficiency projects

Country Development
Goals
Integration of disaster risk
assessments in
MIDEPLAN’s investment
projects selection processes

Issues and Obstacles

CAS Outcomes

Milestones

An increase in the number of
projects recorded in the
public investment projects
(BPIP) that include a hazards
assessment component
Baseline (2011): 22.9 percent
of projects recorded in the
BPIP include a hazard
assessment component
Target (2015): 75 percent

Ten methodological training
guides for project preparation
and assessment by sectors,
including: drinking water and
sanitation; solid waste
management facilities;
hospital facilities; educational
facilities; irrigations; safety;
and transport infrastructure
projects)
Enactment of Executive
Decree ordering the adoption
of “Technical Norms,
Guidelines and Procedures
for Public Investments”
applicable to government
agencies members of the
National System of Public
Investments. The abovementioned norms include the
specific valuation of disaster
risk on public investments.

30

Bank Program
Ongoing CAT DDO
Ongoing IDF Mainstreaming
Disaster Risk Management in
the Costa Rica Investment
Process

Annex 2. CPS Completion Report
1.
The Costa Rica FY09-FY11 CPS, the second strategy after the Bank resumed operations
in Costa Rica following a 10 year hiatus, was designed for a two and a half year period to
coincide with the term remaining in the previous administration and align with the political cycle
thereafter. This CPS, similar to the previous strategy, sought to position the Bank as a knowledge
partner rather than simply a provider of resources. The CPS focused on supporting the country’s
efforts to continue the path of steady increases in income through higher productivity as well as
to enhance the leadership position of the country in sustainable development and improve the
capacity of the country to deliver quality social services for all.
2.
The global crisis affected the implementation of the program and the Government
requested support from the multilateral organizations to manage its impact. In December, 2008,
the IDB approved a contingent line for US$500 million under its Liquidity Program for Growth
Sustainability Program. In April 2009, The IMF approved a 15-month, US$735 million Stand-By
Arrangement to support the country’s strategy to cope with the adverse global economic
environment. The resources for these two programs were treated as precautionary and were not
drawn-down, however served as important signals for financial markets. Also in April 2009, the
Bank approved a US$500 million Development Policy Loan with Deferred Draw-Down Option
to boost the country’s competitiveness and strengthen its public finances in response to the
global financial crisis.11 The DPL design proposed to mitigate the social impact of the crisis by
supporting continued expansion of the Avancemos program in order to reduce the likelihood of
children dropping out of schools. Preliminary evidence suggests positive results in terms of
cushioning the impact of the crisis. For example, secondary enrollment improved from 2009 to
2010 (see paragraph x).12The size of the budget support operation—almost twice the volume of
intended new commitments under the CPS—plus the Catastrophic Risk Deferred Draw-Down
Operation, that was approved in 2009 exhausted the available IBRD envelope. The remaining
proposed operations (telecommunications, education, the Puntarenas port) were dropped as a
result of this shift in government priorities. Thus, as in the previous CPS, albeit for different
reasons, the bulk of the intended operations were not delivered.
3.
Despite the fact that the instruments used during the CPS period were different than what
was outlined in the CPS, the alignment of the results framework of the Competitiveness DPL and
the use of alternative support instruments (TA, AAA) enabled delivery of most results expected
under the CPS, including: (a) setting the analytical basis for a new competitiveness strategy; (b)
revising the institutional framework in telecommunications and property rights to better compete
in a WTO world; (c) developing (and testing) effective institutions to respond quickly to natural
disasters; (d) advancing the higher education agenda to meet the demands of a more
sophisticated and competitive economy; and, (e) maintaining Costa Rica’s position as a leader in
environmental innovation. The fiscal agenda was strengthened as a result of the crisis and the
DPL resources went to help improve the debt profile. The Competitiveness DPL ICR has rated
achievement of development outcomes and Bank performance as satisfactory. The shortcomings
came with the delays in the implementation of Bank supported investment projects as the CPS
did not properly account for the often long congressional delays as was the case with the Limon
11

This loan was drawn down in full by October, 2010.

12

IDB is preparing an impact evaluation of the Avancemos program.

31

Port Project. Because of the mixed performance, the team rates the program performance as
moderately satisfactory.
4.
Similarly, Bank performance is considered to be moderately satisfactory because, despite
a rapid response to the crisis and substantive delivery of outcomes in a difficult environment, the
implementation of investment operations remains slow and the results framework was not only
overly ambitious but inappropriate for such a short period of time.
Progress towards Costa Rica Long-term Development Outcomes
5.
In tracking progress towards the long-term development outcomes during a short period
of time dominated by the impact of the crisis, the completion report would like to highlight three
points. First, a key achievement of the country has been to the containment of the impact of the
global crisis, which hit Costa Rica hard. In 2009, merchandise exports dropped 7.5 percent and
tax revenues came down two points of GDP leading to a reduction of public revenues from 23.6
in 2008 to 22.5 percent of GDP in 2009. In an effort to protect economic activity, the
government maintained the rhythm of public expenditures which contributed to driving the
primary fiscal balance from positive to negative (2.4 to -1.3 percent of GDP from 2008 to 2009)
jointly with the overall fiscal balance (-0.3 in 2008 to -3.6 percent of GDP in 2009). GDP
growth slowed down from 7.9 percent in 2007 to 2.7 in 2008 and then dropped to -1.3 percent in
2009. As a result, the stock of public debt to GDP will increase from 36.0 percent in 2008 to an
expected 39.4 percent in 2010. However, the ratio of external public debt to GDP will remain
around 7 percent of GDP. The economy is recovering and the estimate is that it has grown by
4.2 percent in 2010 and is back on track to resume a trend of around 4 percent over the medium
term.
6.
Second, before the global crisis poverty, extreme poverty and unemployment were
declining. However as the economy slowed in 2009, unemployment increased markedly from
4.6 percent in 2007 and 4.9 percent in 2008 to 7.8 percent in 2009. Poverty increased from 16.7
percent in 2007 to 18.5 percent and in 2009 and extreme poverty increased from 13.4 percent to
14.3 percent during the same period. With growth of 4 percent in 2010 and roughly the same
levels projected for 2011 and 2012 it is expected that the poverty trend will revert back to is precrisis trajectory. The limited information available suggests that the social programs of the
government softened the impact of the crisis on the poor.
7.
Third, the country has continued building the institutions for competitiveness and the
country remains a leader in the environment sector. The process of revamping the nation’s
approach to competitiveness continued throughout the period of the crisis, with a specific focus
on trade and investment.
Program Performance
8.
The Completion Report focuses on: (a) the intended results and the milestones as
presented in the original CPS document; and (b) the development outcomes expected under the
Public Finance and Competitiveness DPL under the respective clusters. Since the design of the
2009 DPL included results areas that had featured in the CPS, the spirit of the original results
framework was maintained even if the intended support operations were not delivered. Thus, this
32

Completion Report incorporates the results under the CPS and the findings of its ICR.
Presentation of the results follows the organization of the CPS programs around two areas. The
first covers programs that are intended to promote sustainable growth and the second area covers
programs that directly or indirectly would have an impact on poverty. An effort is made to
identify the key result clusters in each pillar. Results lacking any supporting instrument have
been dropped.
Promoting sustainable growth
9.
To promote sustainable economic growth, the CPS focused on the following results
clusters: (a) revamping the competitiveness strategy; (b) modernizing the telecom sector and
updating of intellectual property legislation; (c) promoting regional development around key port
areas; (c) modernizing the telecommunications sector; (d) regional development around main
ports; (e) strengthening fiscal institutions, (f) secondary education and skills, (g) environment
and disaster risk management.
10.
Revamping the Competitiveness Strategy. The CPS delivered the promised analytical
work in support of launching a revamped competitiveness strategy. The CPS Country
Economic Memorandum (CEM) examined the main constraints to rapid productivity increase in
Costa Rica.13 The Competitiveness CEM emphasized buttressing the institutional foundations
around the most critical bottlenecks—logistics, education and skills, technology and
deregulation. The CEM was amply disseminated to the outgoing and incoming governments,
civil society and private sector institutions. At the Government’s request, follow-up analytical
work developed CEM themes in the areas of: (i) innovation; (ii) business regulation; and (iii)
harmonization of free trade agreements. The new administration (in office since May 8, 2010)
has taken the analysis and several of the recommendations of the CEM into account in the design
of its own competitiveness agenda: A Consejo Presidencial de Competitividad e Innovación has
been established (which was one of the recommendations of the Competitiveness ESW) to
elevate the importance of innovation within the Government and coordinate across ministries.
This body is chaired by the President and meets monthly to discuss the competitiveness agenda.
The Government has defined several concrete deadlines for regulatory improvements over the
next several months, including legal reforms, catalogues of regulations, and reform proposals in
the five institutions most responsible for regulations. The first regulatory improvement steps
were timed to coincide with the Government’s first 100 days in office. The Government has also
requested fee-for-service technical support from IFC to improve the business environment.
11.
Enabling Competition in a WTO framework. The bulk of the telecommunications
agenda was delivered, even if the Telecommunications Reform Project (FY09, US$13 million)
that was intended to bring global experience to bear on the opening up of the
telecommunications sector in Costa Rica was not delivered. Technical assistance ongoing from
the preceding CPS, together with the prioritization of the telecommunications agenda under the
2009 DPL, supported an institutional overhaul of the telecommunications sector through
legislation (Law No. 8642 and Law No. 8660) that provided the basis for the creation of a new
regulatory authority (SUTEL) and a Universal Service Fund (FONATEL). In December 2010 an

13

Costa Rica: Competitiveness Diagnostic and Recommendations, World Bank July 1, 2009.

33

international bidding process took place to open the cellular market and, as a result SUTEL and
FONATEL have the resources to operate satisfactorily. In addition to a legal framework for
telecommunications, the 2009 DPL supported a revision of the intellectual property laws and the
update of the insurance institutions through the passage of Law 8660 as part of an effort to
increase the depth of the non-banking financial sector. Revision of these legislative frameworks
strengthened the DR-CAFTA Free Trade Agreement, which had been approved in a national
referendum in 2008, and enhanced the attractiveness of the country for investment, especially in
knowledge-based activities.
12.
Promoting Regional Development. The CPS regional development has advanced
slowly because of delays in implementation. The proposal under the CPS was combining
improvements in sea port logistics with regional economic and social development in the
surrounding areas. Thus the Puerto Limon Project is seeking the revitalization of the port and
urban environment, while leveraging the interface and synergies between the port and the city.
The Puerto Limon Project is just beginning its implementation due to delays in achieving
congressional approval, meeting the effectiveness conditions and the political transition between
the previous and the current government. In hindsight, the design of the project is unduly
complex, requiring coordination among several ministries and agencies. However, developing
Puerto Limon remains a high priority for this administration and is a key recommendation of the
Bank’s Competitiveness Study. The CPS proposed the Puntarenas Integrated Infrastructure
Development Project (FY10 US$100 million.), with a similar objective in mind, however this
project was dropped due to the shift in government priorities.
13.
Aligning Education and Competitiveness. Progress in enhancing the relevance of
secondary education to the competitiveness demands of the country continued despite being
unable to deliver the Secondary Education and Skills Development Project (FY10, US$80
million). In its place the Bank provided non-reimbursable technical assistance and maintained
the corresponding results agenda under the 2009 DPL. The expectation is that the development
outcomes under the budget support operation (and thus the CPS) have been met.
14.
In addition, the Bank also undertook two pieces of analytical work/technical assistance:
(i) Strengthening the Role of the Education Sector in Enhancing Competitiveness and Social
Cohesion’ and (ii) Country Note prepared under the Regional Study on Job Creation. Under the
former, the Bank shared international experience to improve the quality and relevance of
technical education in the area of competency-based curricula and teacher training strategies.
Moreover, as part of Bank-wide studies on education, the Bank undertook case studies on the
governance of university education and equity in public spending of education which also
provided useful in the preparation of new lending. The Government has requested Bank support
for tertiary education as part ofthe new CPS.
15.
Enhancing capacity to respond quickly to natural disasters. The CPS program
contributed to building an institutional set-up that allows Costa Rica to respond promptly to the
impact of natural emergencies. Costa Rica, like all Central American countries, is heavily
exposed to natural calamities, which in the past have stretched the capacity of governments. The
CPS supported implementation of comprehensive mitigation measures through the Catastrophic
Risk Deferred Draw-Down Operation (DPL with CAT DDO) (FY09 US$65 million) that built
on ongoing and previous AAA. Costa Rica was the first country to use this World Bank
34

instrument, which has since proven to be a popular option for mitigation among disaster-prone
countries. Following the earthquake that took place in January 2009, the authorities promptly
approved and drew some of the funds available from this operation to finance the corresponding
emergency expenditures. Implementation of the institution building program supported by the
project is on track in support of two key policy initiatives of the Costa Rica Disaster Risk
Management Program: (a) strengthening the institutional and legal framework and (b)
mainstreaming disaster risk in the National Development and National Development and
Investment Programs.
16.
Promoting a sustainable fiscal profile. The CPS focus on improving fiscal institutions
was further highlighted by the crisis, which showed the fragility of government revenues to the
global economic slowdown and hence the need to maintain a strong fiscal and external position
to weather external shocks. The 2009 DPL supported the government efforts of bringing back the
ratio of public revenues as a percentage of GDP to the pre-crisis level in 2007. Although this
goal has not been achieved by the end of 2010 as had been foreseen; the new government has
launched an ambitious fiscal reform that would strengthen revenue collection and facilitate
compliance. The crisis also brought attention to improving public expenditure practices, mainly:
(a) achieving a better alignment between national priorities and budgetary allocations; and (b)
improving the capacity for monitoring and evaluation. Under the 2009 DPL new budget
guidelines for the preparation of results-based budgets were put into place and technical
assistance was provided to train personnel in ministries to enable them to apply the new
budgetary procedures. The analysis presented by the 2007 Public Expenditure Review outlined
options that contributed to the design of the new budgetary procedures. The first phase of
intended technical assistance on debt management (Public Debt Management and Domestic
Debt Market) enhanced the technical capacity for risk evaluation of the central government debt
resulting in a general debt management policy (published on the MoF website) and in clear
annual borrowing plans of central government domestic debt. The second phase did not take
place. However, upon DPL effectiveness the authorities drew all of the eligible resources
(US$500 million) as part of a strategy to improve the quality of the public debt profile of the
country.
17.
Maintaining a leadership position in sustainable development. During the CPS
period, Costa Rica enhanced its position as leader in the protection of biodiversity and natural
resources through innovative methods. Contribution to improved environment outcomes has
relied on the Mainstreaming Markets-based Instruments for Environment Management Project
and accompanying GEF Grant, both of which were already under implementation. Progress
under the Mainstreaming Markets-based Instruments for Environment Management Project and
GEF Grant is satisfactory with the governance structure and the capitalization strategy developed
for the Biodiversity Endowment Fund in place; in addition, and in the context of REDD+
(Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation), the
Payment for
Environmental Services Program (PSA) has fostered the development of a local market for
environmental services produced from avoided deforestation and the maintenance and
enhancement of carbon stocks. Costa Rica continues to innovate with new instruments: it offers
Environmental Service Certificates in forest, water and transport modalities. Disbursements
under the Mainstreaming Project have proceeded at a pace slower than programmed as the
government has opted to use its own resources for the implementation of the program for
calendar year 2010.
35

Reduce Poverty and Improve Service Delivery
18.
To help the Government’s efforts at reducing poverty and improving service delivery this
CPS relied on two operations already underway: the Health Sector Modernization Project and the
Equity and Efficiency in Education Project. In addition, the CPS foresaw technical assistance on
poverty monitoring and included potential reimbursable technical assistance to improve the
governance and operations of the Caja Costarricense de Seguro Social (CCSS) pension assets.
19.
Monitoring poverty trends The CPS envisioned follow-on technical assistance
supporting improvements in the capacity of the government to monitor poverty trends and to
target public resources to the poorest and most vulnerable groups in the population. This TA did
not materialize during the CPS period due to a change in counterpart at the Ministry of Housing
and then the subsequent political transition. However, the DPL focus on poverty alleviation in
the context of the crisis support resulted in the expansion of the Avancemos program. Intended
support to improve the governance and investment management of CCSS’ pension assets
through reimbursable technical assistance was delayed at the request of CCSS in view of
impending national elections. Discussions resumed after completion of these elections, and the
new Executive President of CCSS has responded favorably to this proposal.
20.
Expanding secondary education. Secondary level indicators have improved in the last 3
years: the dropout rate decreased from 13.2 percent in 2006 to 10.2 percent in 2010, and the
secondary level net enrollment rate (13-17 age group) increased from 71.5 percent in 2006 to
75.1 percent in 2010. About half of the secondary students are beneficiaries of the cash transfer
program “Avancemos”. The number of beneficiaries increased from 156,909 in 2008 to 189,740
in 2010. The Bank is also supporting the education sector through the Equity and Efficiency in
Education Project approved by the Board on March 29, 2005, which became effective on
December 21, 2006, but execution began only in 2009. Since the beginning of 2010 the pace of
implementation has picked up reaching 30percent of the total amount by June 30, 2010.
21.
Strengthening the institutions that deliver Primary Health Care. The Health Sector
Modernization Project completed during the CPS period helped achieve improvements in the
delivery and quality of primary health care. The ICR for this project rated the achievement of
outcomes as moderately satisfactory. A key institutional achievement has been the consolidation
of the separation of functions in the Costa Rican Health System between with the Caja
Costarricense de Seguro Social (CCSS) and the Ministry of Health. The accreditation of
hospitals has been launched with pilots for three public and one private hospitals. Dispersion of
allocation of resources has been reduced with a more strategic vision to move towards a more
cost-effective and equitable provision of services. The ICR stressed the need for more intense
monitoring and supervision during project implementation.

36

Results Rating
22.
The CPS Completion Report rates the achievements of results foreseen in the CPS as
moderately satisfactory. The CPS results framework was overly ambitious for an implementation
period of two and a half years. In addition, efforts to help the country soften the impact of the
global crisis led to the delivery of a program significantly different from the one that had been
initially envisaged. Still, because the design of the DPL was aligned with the CPS objectives and
use was made of alternative supporting instruments, the partners managed to deliver on a
substantial part of the results program: (a) setting the analytical basis for a new competitiveness
strategy; (b) revising the institutional framework in telecommunications and property rights to
better compete in a WTO world; (c) developing (and testing) effective institutions to respond
quickly to natural disasters; (d) advancing the higher education agenda to meet the demands of a
more sophisticated and competitive economy; and, (e) keeping Costa Rica as front-runner in
environmental innovation. The shortcomings came with the delays in the implementation of
investment projects as was the case of regional development. The fiscal agenda was strengthened
as a result of the crisis and the DPL resources went to help improve the debt profile, even if the
envisaged technical assistance was not delivered.
Bank Performance
Design and Relevance
23.
The FY09-FY11 CPS focused on three sets of challenges. The first challenge was to
enhance the competitiveness of the country in order to maintain and improve on the long-term
growth trend of the previous 25 years. The second challenge was to build on the advances made
in health and education service delivery and social security and social assistance to improve the
conditions of the most poor and vulnerable. As a third set of challenges the CPS identified: (a)
enhancing the sustainability and extending the reach of the pioneering program of Payments for
Environmental Services (PSA) that had been successfully promoting forest and biodiversity
conservation; and, (b) putting in place institutions that would help mitigate the country’s
vulnerability to natural disasters by moving away from reactive action to pro-active readiness.
The FY09-FY11 CPS organized the program to help Costa Rica meet these challenges in two
groups: (a) promote sustainable economic growth; and (b) reduce poverty. The program
proposed to rely on four operations that were under implementation and four new operations to
be approved under the CPS for an estimated US$258 million. In addition, in line with an
emphasis on knowledge, the CPS program included AAA that had been completed or was
underway, and proposed a new AAA program that included both reimbursable and nonreimbursable activities.
24.
The design of the FY09-FY11 CPS was aligned with the political cycle. As the Arias
Administration was already well into its term, the FY09-FY11 CPS adopted a short timeframe—
August 2008-December 2010—covering the remainder of its term and an additional seven
months following the presidential transition in May 2010 to enable development of the next CPS
with a new, incoming government. Because of the shorter timeframe envisaged, just over two
and a half years of implementation, the CPS did not foresee a Progress Report. While the idea of
linking the CPS period to the political cycle was appropriate, the design of the CPS was not fully
37

adequate, as it posted a full standard result framework that included milestones (usually assessed
at the time of the Progress Report) and results in some cases associated to operations not yet in
place, meaning that the strategy design left a short time for the partnership to achieve its results.
The result was an overly ambitious design for a two-year period, especially when at the
beginning of the CPS few projects were under implementation.
25.
In hindsight, the implications of linking the CPS timing and design to the political cycle
could have been fleshed out or discussed more thoroughly. The CPS was designed and approved
during the second half of the previous (Arias) administration, which meant that with two and a
half years remaining the CPS had a transitional character. Perhaps the transitional character of
the CPS did not warrant a traditional design structure; agreement on new operations could have
been left to the follow-up strategy with the priority given to developing more fully the role of the
Bank as a knowledge institution and the implementation of the operations in place, which a twoyear extension of the CPS could have delivered without engaging in a full-fledged strategy.
Implementation
26.
The Bank response to the Government’s call for support to enable the country to handle
the challenges of the global crisis was timely; the volume of resources transferred increased
significantly the volume of Bank lending during the CPS period. The results framework of the
DPL maintained the focus of the CPS agenda and allows the country to improve its debt profile
strengthening its fiscal position. Arguably, the design could have placed greater emphasis on the
impact of the crisis on the poor.
27.
The delivery of AAA followed the intended objective to emphasize knowledge sharing
rather than exclusively the transfer of financial resources. The AAA work during this CPS
period continued on setting in place platforms to deliver cutting-edge technical assistance based
on high absorptive capacity of the country as has been the strategy since the Bank reengaged in
Costa Rica in 2003. The AAA covered priority areas of the national agenda that cut across
political parties and the core set of AAA products on competitiveness, skills and education,
public expenditure, and poverty monitoring are having an impact through their contribution to
the new Government’s strategy. The fact that the expectations of building a fee-for-service
portfolio proved premature highlights the fact that works remains to be done to fully consolidate
the role of the Bank as a knowledge partner.
28.
The partners failed to improve the pace of implementation of investment projects. The
slow speed of project implementation constrains the ability of the Bank to commit to the timely
delivery of results. During the CPS under review the challenge to deliver on results was partially
addressed by relying on policy dialogue and the results framework of the DPL. The previous
CPS CR had already emphasized the need to address the time-consuming effectiveness periods
by concentrating on larger operations. The experience under this CPS is that additional facts
need attention, such as complexity of project design and the client’s limited experience with
Bank operations in the country. A complex design heavy on inter-institutional cooperation is
likely to be difficult to implement given the country context which includes a tradition of
consensus building and cumbersome national procedures.

38

Bank Performance Rating
29.
The Completion Report rates Bank performance as moderately satisfactory. Positive
aspects of bank performance included: (a) delivery of quality AAA in line with the intended
objective of the CPS; and (b) the rapid response of the Bank to the call of the authorities for
support during the crisis. The DPL ICR rated Bank performance as satisfactory. Although the
original design of the CPS was over optimistic, efforts in implementation through AAA and the
DPL-DDO managed to deliver a good part of the results. Performance fell short in two key
areas: (i) project preparation of the City-Port Limon project was overly protracted while failing
to incorporate best practice design principles and, more broadly; (ii) implementation issues in the
ongoing portfolio were addressed only half heartedly.
Summary Findings and Recommendations
30.
Keep a focus on results but be flexible on the use of instruments. Adjustment to the
global crisis meant a major change in the structure of lending with budget support taking the
place of investment lending. Despite this drastic shift in the composition of the program, the CPS
maintained a focus on the key results in areas such as telecommunications, secondary education,
etc. This approach combined with good quality supporting analytical work shows how a country
can adjust to changing circumstances while maintaining the commitment to deliver results in the
areas targeted by the CPS program. Maintaining a focus on results is facilitated by designing a
results framework that is aligned with the country’s strategic priorities, such as competitiveness,
education, environment and social assistance in Costa Rica.
31.
The results framework of the CPS should be consistent with the time period of CPS
implementation and size and scope of the supporting program. The design of the results
framework of the CPS did not take appropriate account of the limited implementation period
(two and a half years) and rather followed a standard format. While the idea of aligning the
period of the CPS with the political cycle was appropriate, the team could have considered other
options in the circumstances of Costa Rica at the time of design. One option could have been the
extension and updating of the previous strategy for a two year period; or, alternatively, the
results framework could have been adapted to the shorter period of implementation.
32.
Simplification of project design in future operations is critical to avoid
implementation delays. The previous CPS Completion Report addressed the high
implementation risks in Costa Rica (beginning with long delays in achieving effectiveness) by
suggesting the design of larger operations to minimize the costs of effectiveness. While this
remains a valid lesson, the experience during this CPS is that larger is only better if care is taken
to simplify design and minimize risks to implementation. For example, introducing heavy
demands on coordination, as in the case of the Limon Project, leads to implementation delays.
Further efforts to prepare projects for prompt implementation once effective are also needed to
maximize opportunities for success. As suggested under the previous CPS, given the
effectiveness and implementation challenges, preparation and delivery of new projects should
preferably take place at the early part of the CPS period. Experience has demonstrated that
preparation of projects towards the end of the political cycle has lead to longer delays, both in
effectiveness, as well as delays related to political transitions.
39

33.
The effectiveness of Bank programs in middle-income countries should be enhanced
by aligning design with a greater emphasis on knowledge and South-South cooperation.
Costa Rica is a middle income country at the cutting edge of several development initiatives and
with a solid demand for knowledge products. Partnerships in such cases require responding to
the client demand for high quality timely analytical products that deliver results without the
traditional institutional support found in technical assistance operations. So far, the experience
shows that continued engagement through substantive analytical work, well disseminated and
accompanied by complementary notes as needed, can have an impact. However, as the
knowledge relationship develops into the main area of engagement, its effectiveness demands
aligning the design of the strategy (selection of areas of engagement, results framework, etc.)
with the characteristics of the knowledge products. In particular, it is important to develop ways
to measure the effectiveness of the Bank in delivering knowledge products in the country. Lastly,
the innovative experiences in Costa Rica (e.g., payment for environmental services, institutional
readiness for managing natural disasters) can help other countries address similar concerns. In
turn, this intensified South-South cooperation would allow Costa Rica to benefit from the
experiences of similar countries in the region or further abroad.

40

Table 1. Summary of CPS Program Self-evaluation
CPS Outcome and
Outcome Indicators
(baselines and targets)

Status and Evaluation
Summary

CPS Objective 1. Promote sustainable economic growth
Govt. has begun
Achieved.
Competitiveness Study
implementation of its
completed
and
competitiveness and growth
strategy, with an emphasis on disseminated in a high
infrastructure, the investment level event in June 2009
with the Minister of
climate, and skills
Finance. Gov requested
development.
follow up NLTA to go
further in detail in three
areas:
innovation,
business regulation, and
harmonization of free
trade agreements which
was presented to the
Cabinet in June 2010.
The new administration
has implemented some
recommendations of the
Bank’s study.
Achieved. FDI reached

Increase in
1.5 billion at end 2010
expression of interest by
compared to 1.3 billion
foreign investors in
collaborative FDI projects of 2009. About 70
percent of the FDI is
in technology intensive
directed
to
high
sectors.
technology projects in
manufacture
and
services.

Lending and Nonlending Activities that
contributed to the
outcome

Lessons for the new
CPS

Competitiveness Study
(FY09)

Analytical work aligned
with clients’ priorities
and that engages their
cooperation can serve to
deliver knowledge
platforms. The new
CPS can build on these
platforms to deliver
follow-up targeted
notes, as has already
happened.

Follow
(FY10)

up

NLTA

US$500 m DPL with
DDO


The GDP share of
tax revenues is maintained
at or above the level
achieved in 2007 (15.2
percent of GDP)

Not achieved. Given
the impact of the
international financial
crisis the targets
established for 2009 and
2010 were revised.

US$500 m DPL with
DDO



Achieved

US$500 m DPL with
DDO

Achieved
The exports regime is
fully incorporated to the

US$500 m DPL with
DDO

No. of users of
ebased taxation increases
to represent at least 50
percent of all central
government tax revenues
on of the exports regime
TICA project in all customs

41

The one-tranche DPL
highlighted the
relevance of a strong
fiscal system. The new
Government has set
fiscal reform at the top
of its policy agenda.
The new CPS should
stand ready to continue
that support bringing to
bear relevant
international
experience.

CPS Outcome and
Outcome Indicators
(baselines and targets)


The new regulatory
authority SUTEL is in the
process of hiring the
necessary staff (expected
to be fully staffed in
2011) to be completely
operative. This will also
ensure the provision of
staff for the functioning of
FONATEL


Approval of
implementation plan,
including rules and
regulations, of the
Universal Service Fund
(FONATEL) has been
done (November 2010)

The opening of the
telecommunication sector
has started. The bidding
process to choose new
operators will finalize
December 14, 2010. Five
international companies
are participating in the
bidding process .The
outcome will be known in
the first term of 2011.

Status and Evaluation
Summary

TICA project since end
2009 in all customs
agency posts. Since
April 2010 the Free
Zones regime is fully
operative under the
TICA project in all
customs agency posts.
Achieved . In December
2010 an international
bidding process took
place to open up the
cellular phone market.
As a result, FONATEL
has the resources and
institutional capacity to
function satisfactorily,
SUTEL is also operating
within the established
parameters.

Lending and Nonlending Activities that
contributed to the
outcome

Lessons for the new
CPS

US$500 m DPL with
DDO

DPL DDO results
framework design
helped achieve results
that were expected from
operations (telecom)
that were not delivered.
This experience shows
the importance of
flexibility in the use of
instruments to deliver
results. The new CPS
should maintain this
flexible stance on how
best to support the
country in the areas of
engagement that will
included in the
partnership.

Achieved. The staffing
of FONATEL is pending
the transfer of financial
resources to SUTEL
from the Executive and
ICE.

US$500 m DPL with
DDO

Partially achieved

US$500 m DPL with
DDO

42

CPS Outcome and
Outcome Indicators
(baselines and targets)

Status and Evaluation
Summary

Reforms to modernize the
telecom sector and to
strengthen its regulatory
authority (ARESEP) are
producing:
- Greater private sector
participation in the sector
(baseline: state-owned ICE is
the only cellular provider in
2007)
- Increased telecom service
penetration and investments,
particularly in rural and
isolated poor areas (baseline:
telephone density 60% in
2007; target 100% by 2012)

Achieved.
SUTEL has issued
concessions for new
mobile phone operators
– ICE returns spectrum
to Gov, to be used by
private companies in the
provision of cellular
services; SUTEL issued
concessions to private
companies to provide
Internet, international
leased line and other
telecom services.
-In 2010, the density of
cellular telephones is 68
% having increased from
40% at end 2008. Fixed
lines the density remains
around 30 percent.
Not Achieved.
Implementation Delayed.
Project is being
restructured and outcome
indicators will be
revised.

Improve
economic
competitiveness
and
opportunities
in
Limon
through:
- SME growth in the tourism
and cultural sectors (baseline:
0 new SMEs in 2007)
- Improved access to
sewerage
in
Limoncito
(baseline: 38% of pop. with
access in 2007).
- Reduced port handling costs
(baseline: US$ 0.08/ton in
2007)
Participatory strategic plan
developed for Puntarenas.
National education plans
initiated
improving
the
relevance of the curriculum
to labor market demands,
facilitating school to work
transitions, and improving
efficiency and management
within the sector.
(baseline: secondary school
completion rate 33% in
2007)

Secondary drop-our
rate falls from 13.2% in
2006 to less than 10%

Net Secondary
enrollment rate (13-17

Lending and Nonlending Activities that
contributed to the
outcome
Telecom
Sector
modernization program
(FY09) – DROPPED

Lessons for the new
CPS

Strategy for Telecom
Sector Reform (FY07)
FIAS
Study
on
Competition Issues in
Telecom Sector (FY06)
Study on Radio
Spectrum Issues: Dutch
Trust Fund (FY06)

Limon

Slow project
implementation, due to
complex design,
hasaffected the capacity
of the Bank to deliver
results. The new CPS
should (a) sharpen the
focus on
implementation and (b)
ensure design is
straightforward and
innovative.

Dropped

City-Port of Puntarenas
Project (FY10) DROPPED
Secondary Education
Quality &
Competitiveness (FY10)
- DROPPED

It is not prudent to
include results from
projects that have not
been approved. The text
of the CPS can be used
to describe possible
areas of engagements,
with the updating of the
results framework
taking place once the
supporting program is
in place.

Achieved. Drop out rate
fell to 10.2% in 2010.

US$500 m DPL with
DDO

DPL DDO results
framework design
helped achieve results
that were expected from
operations that were not

Dropped

Achieved.
Secondary

Net
enrollment

43

City-Port of
Project (FY08)

CPS Outcome and
Outcome Indicators
(baselines and targets)
year olds) increases from
71.5% in 2006 to at least
74%.

Participation in the
PISA and publication of
results.

MOF and BCCR are issuing
debt
according
to
a
coordinated strategy.

Regulatory
framework
supports the implementation
of a risk-based debt strategy
and the development of a
domestic debt market.

A unified IT architecture is
capturing information on
external and domestic debt as
well as guarantees.

Risk reduction strategies for
emergency response and
diversified risk management
instruments developed.

Status and Evaluation
Summary

Lending and Nonlending Activities that
contributed to the
outcome

delivered. This
experience shows the
importance of
flexibility in the use of
instruments to deliver
results. The new CPS
should maintain this
flexible stance on how
best to support the
country in the areas of
engagement that will
included in the
partnership.

rate (13-17 year olds)
increased to 75.2% 14
Achieved. Following the
pilot survey of 2009
to750 students, Costa
Rica participated for the
first time (June 2010) in
PISA together with more
than 5000 students of
184 secondary education
institutions of the world.
The
publication
of
results will take place in
2011.
Not Achieved. More
recently, with increase in
fiscal deficit each entity
is focusing more on its
own objectives, and
there is less
coordination.
Dropped after the
scandal regarding
government contracts in
2008.
A new Debt
Management Law
unlikely; instead,
reforms to Law 8131
being proposed.
Partially Achieved.
Credito Publico is
considering contracting
IT consultants to create
interfaces between the
MoF and Central Bank
debt databases.
Achieved. Costa Rica
has made substantial
progress
toward
implementing a robust
disaster risk management
framework, focusing on
actions
to
mitigate
natural disaster risks and
lower the country’s

1414

Lessons for the new
CPS

Completed:
Public
Debt
Management
and
Domestic Debt Market
Development Project First Phase (FY07)
Public
Debt
Management
and Domestic Debt
Market - DROPPED

The lack of Progress
Report, due to the short
CPS period, prevented
adjusting the results
framework. Annual
reviews can be used to
update the results
framework to take
account of new
developments and
efforts to deliver results
with alternative
instruments.

DPL with CAT-DDO
(FY09)
Conferences on MacroIssues (FY09/10)
CA
Macroeconomic
Monitoring
Report
(FY10)

In 2008 the total population figure was adjusted following the census. All data series were adjusted which
explains the change in the base year 2006.

44

CPS Outcome and
Outcome Indicators
(baselines and targets)

Land under Costa Rica’s PES
program increased. (270,000
ha. in 2007).
PES financial sustainability
improved through:
- Increased allocation of
water tariff revenue to the
PES (0% in 2007)
- Full capitalization of the
Biodiversity
Endowment
Fund.

Status and Evaluation
Summary

vulnerability. The DPL
with
CAT
DDO
enhances
the
government’s capacity to
implement its Disaster
Risk
Management
Program for natural
disasters
as
it
complements
other
instruments
in
the
country as part of a
comprehensive
framework for disaster
risk management and
emphasis on disaster
prevention, as opposed
to only disaster response.
Achieved.
700,000 in 2009

US$2.47 million by 2010
In final discussion with
outside donors. Expected
FY11 at the latest.

Lending and Nonlending Activities that
contributed to the
outcome

Lessons for the new
CPS

Ecomarkets I (FY06)

The results were
achieved even if
disbursement under the
Bank project were
lower than expected as
the government
financed program
implementation with
alternative sources.
The lesson for the new
CPS in the achievement
of results is the
importance of financing
priority activities, while
maintaining flexibility
in the use of resources
overtime.

Mainstreaming MarketBased Instruments for
Environmental
Management
Project/GEF
Grant
(FY06)
COOPEAGRI (FY06)
(Carbon Sequestration)

Achieved.
PES targeting improved
through:
- increased participation
of small farmers and
landowners (1,900 in
2007).
- Application of
differentiated payments
among farmers.
-

Increased reforestation
of degraded agricultural
land in Perez Zeledon
(241 ha. in 2007)

-

9,293
2009

families

in

-

Being implemented

-

907 ha by February
2010

CPS Objective 2. Reduce Poverty
Government capacity to
monitor poverty trends and

Poverty
(FY07)

Dropped

45

Assessment

The lack of Progress
Report, due to the short

CPS Outcome and
Outcome Indicators
(baselines and targets)

Status and Evaluation
Summary

target resources enhanced
through:
- Introduction of improved
poverty measurement and
policy tools across ministries.
- Development of a new
poverty targeting system in
Ministry of Housing and
Human Development with a
unified registry of social
program beneficiaries.


Number of
beneficiaries of the
Avancemos program
reaches 200,000
Baseline 156,909 in 2008
Primary school completion
rates increase in four targeted
areas
(Norte,
Atlantico,
Puntarenas, Guanacaste) with
high indigenous populations.
Baseline: 69.3% in 2004
Over-age and drop-out rates
decrease in the four targeted
regions:
Baselines:
Over-age rate: 11.8% in 2007
Drop-out rate: 5.3% in 2007
Increased percentage of low
income students in four
targeted areas served by
poverty-targeted programs.
Baseline: 10% in 2007
Delivery and quality of
primary healthcare services
improved though:
- Expansion of primary care
coverage
15

Lending and Nonlending Activities that
contributed to the
outcome
Poverty Measurement &
Targeting AAA (Phase
II) (FY08)
TFSCB Support for the
National
Statistical
Development Strategy
(FY08)

Partially Achieved.
Number of beneficiaries
of the Avancemos ´
program reached
180.740 below the target
of 200.000.15
Indicators dropped as
part of project
restructuring. New
indicators include
national completion
rates. Primary
Completion Rates
increased from 93.5 % in
2006 to 96% in 2010;
and lower secondary (9th
grade) increased from
19.9 percent to 82.7
percent in the same
period.
The revised indicators
will also track impact in
areas of influence,
however this data is
under preparation.
Achieved.
- Increased access to
integrated networks of
health services. About 92
% of the population is

Poverty Measurement
and Targeting AAA
(Phase III) (FY09) dropped
US$500 m DPL with
DDO

Lessons for the new
CPS

CPS period, prevented
adjusting the results
framework. Annual
reviews can be used to
update the results
framework to take
account of new
developments and
efforts to deliver results
with alternative
instruments.

Public
Expenditure
Review (included a
public
expenditure
tracking survey on the
MoE’s school lunch
program) (FY08)
Equity & Efficiency in
Education (FY06)

Public
Expenditure
Review (included a
public
expenditure
tracking survey on
integrated child care

The Project ICR
stresses the importance
of design and
implementation to
deliver results on time.

The delay in incorporating more secondary students is related to the analysis that the Ministry of Education, in
coordination with IMAS, has been doing to ensure that the program (Avancemos) is well targeted. In 2009 the
program´s evaluation revealed that 5 percent of the beneficiaries did not need the financial support. The national
scholarship fund (FONABE)is working towards a synchronization of data so that those students that have
scholarships in the primary education continue with the support in the secondary.

46

CPS Outcome and
Outcome Indicators
(baselines and targets)

Status and Evaluation
Summary

- Strengthened compliance of
primary care services with
MOH standards.
- Greater equity in funding
allocations across regional
health districts
- Modernization of the
pharmaceutical system,
including reductions in
procurement time.

covered
by
health
insurance that finances
access and continuity of
care for primary health
care services as well as
secondary and tertiary
level of care
- 100 % of performance
agreements
between
central authorities and
social security health
care providers include
outcome indicators in
line
with
priorities
established by the MOH
- The establishment of a
new management unit
devoted to improve
procurement
and
distribution
of
pharmaceuticals along
with development of
some new electronic
tools have increased
efficiency
of
management
from
purchasing to delivery at
the health center units
Dropped

CCSS has taken actions to
improve the financial
sustainability of its pension
and social security schemes


Oversight agency
supervising the
insurance sector is fully
staffed and operating.

Achieved. SUGESE is
fully staffed and
operating.
 The participation of
6 new operators
(fully authorized)
and 4 operators
(finalizing process
of approval) in the
insurance sector, has
resulted in improved
insurance services at
a lower cost to
consumers.

47

Lending and Nonlending Activities that
contributed to the
outcome
centers under the MoH)
(FY08)
Health
Sector
Modernization Project
(FY02) – now closed
Regional
Pharmaceutical
(FY09)

Study

Health
sector
modernization (fee for
service TA for CCSS)
(FY09) - dropped

Pension
Investments
Partnership
Program
(fee for service TA for
CCSS)
(FY09)
Dropped
US$500 m DPL with
DDO

Lessons for the new
CPS

In addition, it calls for
making monitoring and
evaluation an integral
part of project
implementation.

Table 2. Planned Lending Program and Actual Deliveries
CPS Plans
(August 2008 to December 2010)
FY
2009

Project

CPS Completion Report
(as of January 2010)
US$m

Status

Telecom Sector Modernization US$

27

Dropped

CAT DDO

65

Delivered

US$m

65

Additional Actual Projects:
DPL DDO
Subtotal
2010

92

Subtotal

Secondary Education Quality &
Competitiveness

80

Dropped

Port of Puntarenas

100

Dropped

Subtotal

180

Total FY09-FY10

500

Subtotal

372

565

0
565

Table 3. Planned Non lending services and Actual Deliveries
CPS Plans
(August 2008 to December 2010)
FY
2009

2010

CPS Completion Report
(as of January 2010)

Products

Status

Competitiveness Study

Delivered FY09

Conference on Macro-Issues

Dropped

Development Policy Notes

Dropped

Poverty Measuring & Targeting Phase III: FY08

Dropped

Health Sector Modernization (fee for service
TA for CCSS)

Dropped

Pension Investments Partnership Program (fee
for service TA for CCSS)

Dropped

Conferences on Macro-Issues

Dropped

CA Macroeconomic Monitoring Report

Dropped
Additional Actual Products:
Competitiveness Follow-up NLTA

2011

Additional Actual Products:
NLTA Public Private Partnerships
Strengthening the Role of the Education Sector in
Enhancing Competitiveness and Social Cohesion
NLTA (P116002)
PEFA

48

Annex 3. Gender At A Glance
Costa Rica has made impressive gains in addressing gender disparities. The country is closing
the education gender gap. At the primary level, the female-male primary gross enrollment ratio
is roughly equal (0.99 for 2008). At the secondary levels, there is even a slight tendency in favor
of girls with a female-male ratio of 1.06 (2008), which points to an issue for males.
In health, 99 percent of all births in 2009 were attended by skilled health staff, which is better
than the averages for upper middle income (UMI) countries (96 percent, 2009) and the LAC
region (89 percent, 2009). The contraceptive prevalence rate of 80 percent (2009) is also better
than the average for UMI countries (75 percent, 2009) and the LAC region (75 percent, 2009).
Female life expectancy at birth is about 5 years higher than for males (2008), approximating the
difference prevailing in high income countries. However, the adolescent fertility rate (67 percent,
2009) deserves policy attention because it is higher than the UMI average (49 percent, 2009),
although the rate fell in recent years, from 82 percent in 2000. The Bank is also working on a
LAC regional study for FY12 on teen pregnancy that will try to better understand the reasons
behind high pregnancy rates and explore possible policy options.
In terms of economic opportunities, female participation in the labor force is still comparably
low. Although it improved from 40 percent in 2000 to 49 percent in 2009, it was much lower
than male labor force participation in the same year, 84 percent, and than the average for LAC
countries (56 percent in 2009). Unemployment rates continue to be higher for women than for
men: 6 percent for women versus 4 percent for men (2009), but the gender gap in unemployment
was reduced from 2004, when female unemployment was 9 percent and male unemployment was
5 percent.16 With regards to the quality of women’s labor force participation, women are
somewhat more likely than men to work in the informal sector: 49 percent of working women
and 43 percent of working men are in the informal sector in Costa Rica.17 This is consistent with
findings for other countries in Central America, with the exception of Honduras, where men are
more likely to work in the informal sector than women.18 In addition, sectoral gender segregation
still persists, with very little changes over the last decade: The Duncan Index for sectoral gender
segregation is 0.37. The highest segregation in the Central America region is observed for
Nicaragua with a Duncan Index of 0.5419. However, there were almost no wage gaps in 1997 and
in 2007. Women’s contribution to national income has been increasing at an annual rate of 1.12
percent over the last decade: women currently earn 35 percent of total income in Costa Rica.
When it comes to poverty and gender, an issue of concern is the connection between femaleheaded households and poverty in Costa Rica. According to the 2007 Country Poverty
Assessment, the poverty headcount is higher for female-headed households than for male-headed
households. This is important because, with a rate of 30 percent in 2007, Costa Rica was the
country with the second-highest rate of female-headed households in the region (after
Honduras).20
16

All data up to this sentence were drawn from Genderstats (World Bank).
Vakis, Renos, Ana Maria Munoz and Barbara Coello: A gender (r)evolution in the making? Expanding women’s
economic opportunities in Central America: A decade in review, World Bank 2011.
18
Ibid.
19
Ibid.
20
Ibid.
17

49

Thus, female headship in Costa Rica seems to be correlated to poverty. While the share of
households headed by women (FHH) increased from 16 percent in 1987 to 27 percent in 2004,
the share of poor households headed by women increased even more.21
The Poverty Assessment also found that, in 2004, two-thirds of female-headed households were
composed of single mothers with young children. Except for education levels, female-headed
households disproportionately possessed characteristics associated with poverty, including high
unemployment, high levels of self-employment, and higher than average incidence of part-time
work. The evidence suggested that single mothers with young children lack the ability to work
full-time jobs with standard working hours due to lack of affordable child care options.22
In terms of political participation and representation Costa Rica is doing better than most
other countries in LAC: Parliamentary seats occupied by women during the 2000-2008 period
increased from 19 percent to 37 percent. This stands out as more than twice the average for UMI
countries (18 percent, 2008) and also much higher than the average for LAC countries (22
percent, 2008).23

Selected Gender Indicators: Costa Rica vs Upper Middle
Income Countries vs Latin America
Births attended by
skilled health staff %
1.0
0.8
0.6

Proportion of seats
held by women in
national parliaments
%

Contraceptive
prevalence %

0.4
0.2
0.0

Female labor force
participation rate (%
of population ages 15‐
64)

Adolescent fertility
rate (births per 1,000
women ages 15‐19)

Costa Rica

UMI

21

LAC

Gender as a Barrier for Shared Growth: The Case of Costa Rica Poverty Assessment. Presentation at PREM
Learning Week -2007 (Lucia Fort, Andrew D. Mason, Maria Beatriz Orlando, and Carlos Sobrado).
22
Costa Rica Country Poverty Assessment 2007.
23
Genderstats.

50

Annex 4. Country-At-A-Glance

51

Annex 4. Country-At-A-Glance

52

Annex 5. Selected Indicators* of Bank Portfolio Performance and Management
As Of Date 5/11/2011
Indicator

2008

2009

2010

2011

4

6

5

4

Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years)

b

3.7

3.5

3.8

5.5

Percent of Problem Projects by Number

a, c

50.0

50.0

40.0

50.0

Percent of Problem Projects by Amount

a, c

28.1

16.1

14.5

49.4

Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d

50.0

50.0

40.0

50.0

a, d

28.1

16.1

14.5

49.4

4.0

2.7

10.5

7.4

CPPR during the year (yes/no)

No

No

No

tbd

Supervision Resources (total US$)

256

419

594

619

Average Supervision (US$/project)

64

84

99

103

Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount
Disbursement Ratio (%)

e

Portfolio Management

Memorandum Item

Since FY 80

Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

Last Five FYs
27

2

611.5

5.2

8.0

0.0

10.6

0.0

a. As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
b. Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
c. Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
d. As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
e. Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

53

Annex 6 - IBRD Program Summary – Costa Rica as of 06/02/2011

Proposed IBRD/IDA Base-Case Lending Program a
Fiscal
year
2012

Proj ID

US$(M)

Proposed Higher Education Project
Proposed Innovations to Enhance
Performance of Health Care
Networks Project (APL 1)

Overall Result

200

Implementation
b Risks
(H/M/L)
H

H

H

200
400

54

Strategic
Rewards b
(H/M/L)
H

Annex 7. Social Indicators

55

56

IFC Costa Rica
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 06/10/2011
(In USD millions)

Disbursed Outstanding

Committed

FY Committed

Company

Loan

2010/2011
2011

Equity

Quasi-Equity** GT/RM* Participant

Loan

Equity

Quasi-Equity** GT/RM* Participant

Banco Improsa
Banco LAFISE CR
CH de Escazu SA
2009/2010/2011 Promerica CR

10.00
3.58
5.33

0.98
-

10.00
-

3.00
4.99
3.14

-

10.00
3.58
5.33

0.98
-

10.00
-

3.00
4.99
3.14

-

Total Portfolio

18.91

0.98

10.00

11.13

-

18.91

0.98

10.00

11.13

-

*Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products
**Quasi- Equity includes both loan and equity types

57

Annex 9. Key Economic Indicators
Actual
Indicator

2005

2006

2007

Projected
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

National accounts (as % of GDP)
Gross domestic producta

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

9

9

8

7

7

6

6

6

Industry

29

29

29

29

27

24

25

25

Services

62

62

62

64

66

69

69

68

Total Consumption
Gross domestic fixed investment
Government investment
Private investment

81
19
1
18

80
20
1
19

80
22
1
20

75
30
2
28

17
5
0
5

86
16
2
14

85
18
1
17

85
18
1
17

Exports (GNFS)b
Imports (GNFS)

49
54

49
55

49
54

42
51

87
9

40
43

39
43

39
43

Gross domestic savings

19

20

20

25

83

14

15

15

c

16

19

19

24

83

13

14

14

19965

22526

26322

35780

40167

43112

4660

5030

5540

6240

8890

17240

95520

..

Real annual growth rates
Real GDP growth
Gross Domestic Income

5.9
3.2

8.8
6.9

7.9
6.0

2.7
1.2

-1.3
488.0

4.2
-81.5

4.3
2.9

4.4
-1.3

Real annual per capita growth rates (%, calculated from 91
prices)
Gross domestic product at market prices
Total consumption
Private consumption

4.1
2.1
2.6

7.0
3.7
4.0

6.3
5.3
5.9

1.2
2.8
3.0

-2.9
-0.2
-2.8

2.0
3.7
-14.0

2.7
-1.6
-2.1

3.1
2.7
4.0

Agriculture

Gross national savings

Memorandum items
Gross domestic product
(US$ million at current prices)
GNI per capita (US$, Atlas method)

58

29838

29241

Indicator

2005

2006

Actual
2007

2008

2009

Projected
2010
2011

2012

Balance of Payments (US$ millions)
Exports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Imports (GNFS)b
Merchandise FOB
Resource balance
Net current transfers
Current account balance
Foreign direct investment
Long-term loans (net)
Official
Private
Other capital (net, incl. errors & ommissions)
Change in reservesd
Public finance (as % of GDP at market prices)e
Current revenues
Current expenditures
Current account surplus (+) or deficit (-)
Capital expenditure
Foreign financing

9721
7099

11044
8068

12851
9299

13700
9555

12659
8838

14248
9417

15519
10382

16464
11220

10757
9252
-1037
270
-985

12451
10836
-1407
349
-1060

14103
12285
-1252
470
-1646

16462
14569
-2761
442
-2787

12605
10875
54
359
-574

15271
13004
-1023
368
-1299

16991
15024
-1472
382
-1936

18114
16479
-1651
507
-2156

904
..
..
..
..

1371
..
..
..
..

1634
..
-167
..
..

2072
138
-211
349
905

1339
218
158
59
-1087

1450
102
-25
127
247

1841
-143
88
-231
664

1936
-139
37
-176
765

-393

-1034

-839

315

-59

-561

-400

-300

13.9
14.9

14.2
14.4

23.4
21.5

23.6
23.2

22.5
25.7

22.2
27.3

22.5
27.7

24.3
28.0

-1.0
1.1
..

-0.1
0.9
..

-0.2

-2.8

-6.1

-8.5

-8.1

-6.7

2.1
-0.1

3.2
-0.3

2.9
-1.1

3.4
1.3

2.9
0.0

3.0
0.5

59

Indicator

Monetary indicators
M4/GDP
Growth of M4 (%)
Private sector credit growth /
total credit growth (%)
Price indices( YR91 =100)
Merchandise export price index
Merchandise import price index
Merchandise terms of trade index
Real effective exchange rate (eop; depreciation -)
Real interest rates
Consumer price index (% change)
GDP deflator (% change)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Actual
2006

2005

2007

..
..

..
..

..

..

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

13.8
10.6

11.5
11.0

GDP at factor cost
"GNFS" denotes "goods and nonfactor services."
Includes net unrequited transfers excluding official capital grants.
Includes use of IMF resources.
Combined Public Sector Operations

60

Estimate
2008

Projected
2010
2011

2009

2012

54.8

55.1

56.5

51.0

52.0

..

17.9
25.5

16.1
28.0

9.6
28.4

1.3
28.2

12.6
29.1

..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

10.8

13.9

4.0

5.8

7.5

6.5

10.8
9.4

13.9
12.4

4.0
8.2

5.8
7.8

7.5
5.8

6.5
7.2

Annex 10. Key Exposure Indicators – Costa Rica
Indicator

2005

Total debt outstanding and

Actual
2006
2007

Estimated
2009

2008

Projected
2011
2012

2010

6487

6994

8341

8812

8826

8402

8941

9567

0

0

0

0

21

350

521

626

274

293

368

557

1240

1199

1306

1316

TDO/XGSb

62.2

57.9

58.8

59.9

64.6

54.9

53.4

59.6

TDO/GDP

32.5

31.0

31.8

27.1

6.2

..

..

..

TDS/XGS

2.6

2.4

2.6

3.8

9.1

7.8

7.8

8.2

Concessional/TDO

5.8

5.8

5.5

6.4

7.0

7.7

7.8

7.3

IBRD DS/public DS

..

..

..

..

1.7

2.6

1.5

1.4

Preferred creditor DS/public

..

..

..

..

26.6

50.0

30.5

27.6

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

59

53

45

41

164

73

91

110

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

124.2

98.7

75.2

192.3

158.5

158.5

158.5

152.5(e)

disbursed (TDO) (US$m)

a

Net disbursements (US$m)a
Total debt service (TDS)
(US$m)

a

Debt and debt service indicators (%)

IBRD exposure indicators (%)

DS (%)

c

IBRD DS/XGS
d

IBRD TDO (US$m)

Of which present value of
guarantees (US$m)
Share of IBRD portfolio (%)
IDA TDO (US$m)

d

IFC (US$m)
Loans
Equity and quasi-equity /c
MIGA
MIGA guarantees (US$m)

a. Includes public and publicly guaranteed debt, private nonguaranteed, use of IMF credits and net short- term capital.
b. "XGS" denotes exports of goods and services, including workers' remittances.
c. Preferred creditors are defined as IBRD, IDA, the regional multilateral development banks, the IMF, and the Bank for
International Settlements.
d. Includes present value of guarantees.
e. Includes equity and quasi-equity types of both loan and equity instruments.

61

Annex 11. Overview of Analytical Work and Trust Funds
Project

Grant
Amount

Uncommitted
Balance

Closing
Date

Financial Crisis Simulation Program (FIRST)

169,900

158,060

6/30/11

Disaster Risk Management for Water and Sanitation
Systems
Integration of Disaster Risk Information in Planning
(IDF)
Pilot Project on Early Warning Systems for Hydrometeorological Hazards
Building the Capacity of Procurement Institutions to
Achieve Development Outcomes Project (IDF)

90,000

50,865

12/30/11

450,000

0

10/18/13

264,000

264,000

6/14/13

300,080

300,080

Total

973,900

472,925

Trust Funds

TBD

Analytical Work
FY09

Competitiveness Study ESW

FY10

Competitiveness NLTA

FY11

Education NLTA

FY11

PEFA

62

