Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No. 65273-TV

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

COUNTRY ASSISTANCE STRATEGY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Public Disclosure Authorized

FOR
TUVALU
FOR THE PERIOD FY 2012-2015

November 4, 2011

Papua New Guinea, Pacific Islands and Timor-Leste Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective as of 21 October, 2011)
Currency Unit: Australian Dollar (AUD)
US$1 = AUD 0.98
FISCAL YEAR
Tuvalu’s Fiscal Year: January 1-December 31
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
AAA
ACP-EU
ADB
ADF
CAS
CEWG
CIF
DPO
EDF
EU
FY
GDP
GNI
IBRD
IDA
IFC
IFRC
IMF
JICA
MDG
ODA
PAIP
PNA
PRIF
PV
SDR
TANGO
TMTS
TTF
RSE

Analytical and Advisory Activities
Africa Caribbean Pacific – European Union
Asian Development Bank
Asian Development Fund
Country Assistance Strategy
Core Economic Working Group
Consolidated Investment Fund
Development Policy Operation
European Development Fund
European Union
Fiscal Year
Gross Domestic Product
Gross National Income
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
International Development Association
International Finance Corporation
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
International Monetary Fund
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Millennium Development Goal
Overseas Development Assistance
Pacific Aviation Investment Program
Parties to the Nauru Agreement
Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility
Present Value
Special Drawing Rights
Tuvalu Association of Non-Governmental Organizations
Tuvalu Medical Treatment Scheme
Tuvalu Trust Fund
Recognized Seasonal Employment
World Bank

Vice President
Country Director
Task Team Leader

James W. Adams
Ferid Belhaj
Piers Merrick

TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

i

I. INTRODUCTION

1

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES
Sociopolitical Context
Economic Context
Recent Economic Developments and Issues
Government Priorities and Development Framework: Te Kakeega II
Development Partner Engagement

1
1
3
5
6
6

III. WORLD BANK ENGAGEMENT IN THE PACIFIC
Transforming World Bank Engagement in the Pacific Region
Translating the Pacific Themes into the Tuvalu Program
Implementation: Coordination, Selectivity and New Ways of Doing Business
Financing Terms and Sources

8
8
9
12
13

IV. MANAGING RISKS

14

ATTACHMENTS
Attachment I: Tuvalu CAS Results Matrix

16

ANNEXES
Annex A2:
Annex B5:
Annex B6:

Tuvalu at a glance
Millennium Development Goals
Key Economic Indicators

Map (IBRD 33503)

18
20
21

23

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i.
This is the first Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Tuvalu, the World Bank’s 187th
Member. The World Bank has been scaling up its assistance throughout the Pacific and has
decided to transition from the previous umbrella approach characterized by a regional strategy, to
individual country strategies that permit a more detailed analysis of a country’s specific
development challenges. This CAS aims to assist Tuvalu in: (i) mitigating the effects of
economic isolation; and, (ii) building resilience against exogenous shocks. The CAS
accompanies the country’s first IDA investment and initiates the World Bank’s relationship with
Tuvalu.
ii.
Tuvalu is one of the world’s smallest, most isolated and most vulnerable nations and is
already beginning to experience the impact of climate change. Tuvalu, comprised of 9 islands
and atolls, has a total land area of just 26km2 although this is spread across an area of ocean
around 757,000 km2. With a population estimated at less than 10,500, only the sovereign states
of Vatican City and Nauru are less populous. At its highest point, the country is just 4.5 meters
(15ft) above sea level making it the second lowest-lying nation in the world after the Maldives
and highly vulnerable to sea level rise. Few atolls are more than 800m wide. The country has
already begun to experience “king tides” that raise the normal sea level and cause flooding in
low-lying areas, and it suffers regularly from severe water shortages.
iii.
To help address the country’s geographic isolation, the World Bank will seek to assist
Tuvalu in taking fuller advantage of the opportunities from closer regional and global
integration. Tuvalu will participate in a regional IDA operation designed to rehabilitate the
country’s aviation infrastructure, bring the facilities into compliance with international safety
regulations and safeguard Tuvalu’s principal connection to the outside world. The World Bank
will also focus on measures to help Tuvaluans take full advantage of temporary employment
opportunities in New Zealand and Australia.
iv.
Tuvalu is on the margins of the global economy, heavily reliant on external assistance
and volatile sources of revenue. Fishing licenses, external assistance, income from the Tuvalu
Trust Fund and the lease of the country’s “.tv” internet domain name make up the majority of
government revenues but are, by their very nature, prone to volatility and often determined by
factors outside the control of the Government. Tuvalu’s fiscal position is parlous and the country
faces uncertain prospects in 2012. The Government has requested budget support to help
strengthen fiscal management and undertake urgent fiscal adjustment and the World Bank has
been in initial dialogue with development partners, to outline the coordinated interventions that
will anchor the World Bank’s program in this CAS period.
v.

World Bank support to Tuvalu will require an adaptive and flexible approach that is
closely aligned with aid effectiveness principles. The application of Paris Declaration
principles in Tuvalu poses a formidable challenge. The 2009 Cairns Compact committed the
Pacific countries and their development partners to coordinate their resources more effectively
and to accelerate progress towards the MDGs. A recognition of these principles and an
appreciation of the country’s extraordinary capacity challenges will guide all World Bank
interventions in Tuvalu.
i

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
The World Bank has been scaling-up analytical and financial support throughout the
Pacific and is now well-positioned to provide IDA support to Tuvalu. Tuvalu joined the World
Bank (IBRD and IDA) in June 2010, becoming the World Bank’s 187th and smallest member.
Despite a GNI per capita that exceeds the IDA operation cutoff, Tuvalu is characterized by many
of the factors that warrant the country’s access to IDA16 under the small island economies
exception and will receive IDA-only resources with effect from FY12. This Country Assistance
Strategy (CAS) will be presented together with the first phase of a regional aviation safety
investment program in which Tuvalu, Tonga and Kiribati will participate, and which is supported
with regional IDA resources and by the Government of Australia through the Pacific Regional
Infrastructure Facility (PRIF)1.
2.
This country strategy outlines a World Bank program that is directly responsive to
Tuvalu’s needs and that is informed by the broader themes guiding the World Bank’s
engagement in the Pacific. The decision to move to individual country strategies in the Pacific
reflects an acknowledgement that while Pacific island countries face many common challenges,
development performance across this region is mixed. Through this CAS, the World Bank aims
to adapt its program and instruments carefully to Tuvalu’s singular country context and to signal
the institution’s long-term commitment to supporting Tuvalu’s development. Notwithstanding
the World Bank’s recent expansion across the Pacific, strategies for “micro-states” such as
Tuvalu will necessarily be concise, highly flexible and will draw upon the range of available
instruments—but the future program cannot be detailed with the same level of precision as that
might be expected of the World Bank’s larger clients. The Government of Tuvalu is strongly
supportive of the preparation of an individual CAS and of the program outlined.
3. As the World Bank deepens its knowledge of Tuvalu’s context and priorities, the CAS
and the program proposed will draw on the analytical work and operational experience of
Tuvalu’s more established development partners. Tuvalu’s application for IMF and World
Bank membership has initiated a close collaboration with all missions to date having been
undertaken jointly. Similarly, the World Bank program has been shaped through consultations
with the Asian Development Bank (ADB), AusAID, the New Zealand Aid Program, the
Government of Japan, the European Union, the UN System and others.
II.

COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

Sociopolitical Context
4.
Tuvalu is a Polynesian Island nation with a history of settlement stretching back 3,000
years when the islands were first inhabited by Samoan and Tongan voyagers. The country was
first sighted by a Spanish explorer in 1568, but was not claimed for Great Britain until 1819
when the Captain of an armed brigantine sailing under British colors named it the Ellice Islands
after the Member of Parliament Edward Ellice who owned the vessel’s cargo.
1

PRIF is a Regional partnership whose main development objective is to provide a framework for better
engagement of countries and development partners to ensure more effective use of available funding and deliver
better infrastructure service.

1

5.
Tuvalu became fully independent in 1978, since which time it has been governed as a
Parliamentary democracy. From 1892-1916, Tuvalu was administered as a British protectorate
and later as part of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands (1916-1974). In 1974, Ellice Islanders voted
for separate British dependency status and to separate from the Gilbert Islands (now the
independent Republic of Kiribati). There are just 15 Members of Parliament in the unicameral
legislature, each serving a four-year term. There are no formal political parties and floor
crossing by MPs is always possible.
6.
Tuvalu is one of the world’s smallest, most isolated and most vulnerable nations and is
already beginning to experience the impact of climate change. Located in the Pacific Ocean
between Australia and Hawaii and neighboring Kiribati, Samoa, and Fiji, the country is
comprised of 9 islands (4 reef islands and 5 atolls). Tuvalu has a total land area of just 26km2
although covers an ocean area of 757,000 km2. With a population estimated at less than 10,500,
only the sovereign states of Vatican City and Nauru are less populous. About half the population
lives on the main atoll, Funafuti. At its highest point, the country is just 4.5 meters (15ft) above
sea level making it the second lowest-lying nation in the world (after the Maldives) and highly
vulnerable to sea level rise. Few atolls are more than 800m wide. The country has already
begun to experience “king tides” that raise the normal sea level and cause flooding in low-lying
areas. It is estimated that a rise in sea level of between 8-16 inches over the next century might
submerge the nation entirely2. Drinking water is primarily collected from rainwater and stored in
tanks. In September 2011 the Government declared a state of emergency after “la Niña” weather
patterns resulted in severe water shortages. In October 2011 desalination plants and water
supplies were airlifted to the country to help alleviate the situation.
7.

Tuvalu’s development outcomes are mixed:



Poverty. Tuvalu’s Gross National Income (GNI) per capita of $4,6703 identifies the country
as one of the more prosperous Pacific island countries, but does not acknowledge the sharp
differences in income that exist between the main population center (Funafuti Atoll) and the
less-developed outer islands where formal employment opportunities are extremely limited.
While extreme poverty remains a rare phenomenon, the 2010 Household Income and
Expenditure Survey, indicates that the proportion of the population living in poverty has risen
significantly from 17.5 percent in 2005 to 25 percent.



Education. Despite substantially meeting the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of
universal primary education (99%), significant issues of educational quality persist. Lack of
basic skills and insufficient opportunities for vocational skills development are constraining
the competitiveness of young Tuvaluans and their ability to access seasonal employment
opportunities overseas. Moreover, recent analysis indicates that government spending on
tertiary level scholarships (AUD2.1m; US$2.1m equivalent) is not cost-effective, not always
applied strategically, and is generating uneven results. The emphasis on scholarships has
significantly reduced the level of government resources available for early childhood,
primary (AUD1.3m) and secondary education (AUD1.5m).

2
3

Patel, S.S.2006.“A sinking feeling”, Nature: 440. pp.734-736.
(2010; Atlas method).

2



Health. The Tuvalu Medical Treatment Scheme (TMTS) that provides Tuvaluans with
access to critical care overseas when unavailable domestically, has expanded rapidly in
recent years. Expenditure has increased substantially from AUD0.5m in 2005 to AUD2.8m
in 2010 (53 percent of the total health budget) and is acknowledged by Government and
donors to be unsustainable at its current level. TMTS expenditure is placing a substantial
fiscal burden on Government and will need to be addressed as a matter of urgency.



Gender. Tuvalu is a signatory to the Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, and the Constitution provides equal opportunities for men
and women to contest elections. This notwithstanding there is currently just one female MP,
only the second woman have ever won in Tuvalu’s Parliament. Gender Parity Index(GPI)4
scores for the period 2000-2009 indicate parity in terms of girls’ enrolment at the primary
and secondary levels (long-term average 1.07) and is even more pronounced in favor of
women at the tertiary level (long-term average 1.46). 5 Women account for 47 percent of the
civil service cadre, but hold only 19 percent of senior positions and make up only 11 percent
of Board Members in Public Enterprises, Boards and Government Committees.6 Of
particular concern is the high level of violence against women recorded in the Demographic
Health Survey (2007) which indicated as many as 4 out of every 10 women have been the
subject of physical abuse and 1 in 5 the victim of sexual violence.7

Economic Context
8.
Like other small, remote economies, Tuvalu has a relatively undiversified economic base,
and has experienced uneven economic growth. In the past five years, real GDP growth ranged
from -1.7 percent to +7.6 percent. Agriculture contributes approximately 23.5 percent of GDP8.
Subsistence farming and fishing are the main economic activities, although these are constrained
by poor soil quality, limited access to fresh water and the high cost of imported fuel. The recent
drought situation (September 2011) is expected to have a significant negative effect on crop
yields. The services sector dominates the economy, with retail trade and the public sector
services accounting for the remaining two-thirds of GDP, as well as a majority of formal sector
employment.
9.
Expenditure by the Government is a key driver of economic activity. Government
expenditure has averaged 90 percent of GDP in the past five years. On average, total expenditure
is split 1:7 between capital and non-capital expenditure. Of the non-capital expenditure, 40
percent is spent on wages and salaries, 30 percent is used to purchase goods and services (mostly
imported), and 25 percent spent on subsidies and transfers. Subsidies and transfers in particular,
doubled from around 12 percent of GDP in 2006 to an estimated 25 percent of GDP in 2010.
This can partly be explained by the expansion of the TMTS.
4

Gender Parity Index is calculated by dividing the Gross Enrolment Rate (GER) for females by the GER for men. A
score of less than 1 indicates a gender disparity against females and a score of above 1 indicates a disparity in favor
of females.
5
Government of Tuvalu. 2010. Tuvalu: Millennium Development Goals Progress Report 2010/2011. pp. 41-46
6
Ibid.
7
Ibid.
8
IMF estimates Tuvalu’s GDP (2009) at US$27.1m; GDP per capita at US$2,447.

3

10. Government revenue is dependent on a few volatile sources. Total revenue and grants
represented on average 76.5 percent of GDP in the past five years. Of this, 22 percent came from
tax revenues, 50 percent from non-tax revenues, and 28 percent came from aid. Fishing license
fees contributed to over two-thirds of non-tax revenue (or a quarter of non-capital expenditure).
Income from the Tuvalu Trust Fund (TTF; see Box 1) and the lease of the country’s “.tv” internet
domain name are other sources of non-tax revenue. By their very nature, these revenues are
prone to volatility and often determined by factors, such as exchange rates (much of Tuvalu’s
offshore revenue is US dollar denominated) and catch volumes that are beyond the control of the
Government.
Box 1: The Tuvalu Trust Fund
Established in 1987, the Tuvalu Trust Fund (TTF) is considered one of the better managed
national trust funds in the Pacific. The TTF was set up by the government to contribute to
Tuvalu’s financial stability by providing an additional source of revenue for recurrent
expenditures and to set the country on a path towards greater financial autonomy. The fund’s
capital initially came from donors (Australia, New Zealand, Japan, the Republic of Korea and
the United Kingdom), and the Government. In subsequent years, the TTF also benefited
from contributions from windfall revenues, such as those from the lease of the “.tv” internet
domain and fishing license sales.
The TTF’s capital is held in the primary trust fund, which aims to generate a real rate of
return of 4.5 percent in excess of the Australian Consumer Price Index. In years when the
market value of the TTF exceeds its real maintained value, the surplus is transferred to the
Consolidated Investment Fund (CIF). The CIF, which also serves as a repository for
windfall revenues, can be used for budget financing as well as capital reinvestments that
are back-transferred to the primary trust fund. In the past five years, the CIF has financed
on average 1/5 of non-capital expenditure. The CIF targets a minimum balance equivalent
to 16 percent of the TTF’s real maintained value (or approximately 45 percent of GDP).
This target aims at covering up to four years without transfers from the TTF.
To date, in line with the international deed that governs the TTF, no capital withdrawal has
been made by the Government. The TTF’s market value is projected to fall to 235 percent
of GDP at the end of 2011, down from around 288 percent of GDP at the end of 2010. The
TTF’s market value has been below its real maintained value since 2008. In addition, the
CIF balance as a percentage of GDP fell from 46 percent in 2009, to 21 percent in 2010
and, without corrective measures, faces depletion by 2012.

11. Tuvalu faces a structural trade deficit and is vulnerable to international price
fluctuations. Merchandise exports amount to 1.7 percent of GDP, and prospects for increasing
these are limited. Given very limited domestic production, Tuvalu is heavily dependent on
imports (48 percent of GDP). All petroleum products and a very high proportion of food are
imported, leaving the country extremely vulnerable to international commodity price shocks.
The trade deficit in the past five years averaged 37 percent of GDP. Tourist arrivals, unlike many
4

other Pacific island countries, are very low (just over 300 visitors per year) due to poor
infrastructure and very limited passenger capacity. The trade deficit is largely financed by
seafarer remittances, investment income from the TTF, fishing license fees, as well as official
grants. In the last five years, grants have amounted to nearly 36 percent of GDP. Reserves have
remained adequate, above 8 months of imports.
Recent Economic Developments and Issues
12. Despite its remoteness, the global economic crisis has affected Tuvalu’s economy. The
impact of the crisis was felt most acutely through falling external income. Remittances from
seafarers, traditionally one of the most important sources of household income, fell sharply from
around 10 percent of GDP to 6 percent of GDP since the onset of the global crisis. The TTF lost
an estimated 9 percent of its value in 2009 following a slump in international financial markets
and, as a result, investment income fell from 15 percent of GDP in 2008 to 9 percent of GDP in
2009. The overall economy contracted by 1.7 percent in 2009, followed by a further 0.5 percent
contraction in 2010. Annual inflation on the other hand has been negative since mid-2009 due to
lower global food prices and the strong Australian dollar (the national currency).
13. The Government has supported the economy by increasing spending, but the fiscal
situation is becoming precarious. Spending pressures were exacerbated by the Government
having to make payments on guaranteed debt for an airline company. Owing to weak domestic
revenue and offshore income, as well as increased spending, the fiscal deficit increased sharply
from 3 percent of GDP in 2009 to almost 38 percent of GDP in 2010. As a result, CIF resources
(see Box 1) were substantially reduced, bringing it to the verge of exhaustion. In 2011,
expenditure as a percentage of GDP is expected to remain elevated, but the fiscal deficit is
estimated to narrow to 23 percent of GDP due to increased aid flows.
14. Tuvalu requires continued access to grants to finance key development expenditures. A
debt sustainability analysis suggests that in the absence of substantial grant financing, Tuvalu
faces a high risk of debt distress. The Present Value (PV) of external public debt stood at 28
percent of GDP as at the end of 2010, close to the indicative threshold of 30 percent. It is
projected that, by 2021, the PV of external public debt will exceed the threshold were grant
financing to be substituted by concessional debt. In particular, given Tuvalu’s negligible export
base, the PV of external public debt as a percentage of exports is currently more than twice the
indicative threshold and likely to remain above this level for the foreseeable future.
15. In order to ensure sustained increases in living standards, Tuvaluans need to be better
prepared for overseas job opportunities. With limited domestic employment opportunities and
demand for Tuvaluan international maritime seafarers declining in the face of greater
competition from other countries, education and vocational training systems need to be
strengthened to enable Tuvaluans to compete effectively.
16. Assessments of the quality of governance in Tuvalu present an uneven picture.
Compared against its 11 Pacific neighbors and 8 other East Asian economies on the six broad

5

dimensions of governance9 measured in the latest World Governance Indicators10, Tuvalu rates
in the 90th-100th percentile in two indicators (political stability, a metric that measures the
likelihood of government overthrow, and the rule of law); in the 50th-75th percentile for two other
indicators (voice and accountability; control of corruption); in the 25th-50th percentile for one
indicator (government effectiveness), and in the lowest percentile (0th-10th) for regulatory
quality. The relatively weak performance on the measure of regulatory quality is not surprising
as this is intended to assess perceptions of a government’s ability to formulate and implement
sound policies and to promote private sector development. In this comparison, of Tuvalu’s
Pacific neighbors, only the Solomon Islands and Kiribati are rated lower.
Government Priorities and Development Framework: Te Kakeega II
17. The Government of Tuvalu’s vision for achieving sustainable development and “a
healthy, educated, peaceful and prosperous Tuvalu” is outlined in Te Kakeega11 II: National
Strategy for Sustainable Development 2005-2015. The strategy was endorsed in 2005 and is
rooted in a commitment to attaining the MDGs. Te Kakeega II provides the basis for this CAS.
The strategy is underpinned by eight strategic areas: (i) good governance; (ii) economic growth
and stability; (iii) social development; (iv) Falekaupule12 and outer islands development; (v)
employment and private sector development; (vi) education and human development resources;
(vii) natural resources; and, (viii) infrastructure and support services. A wide ranging review of
the implementation progress of Te Kakeega II is underway and is scheduled to be completed at
the end of November 2011. In discussions with the World Bank and development partners, the
Government has identified economic growth and stability and infrastructure development as
priorities for World Bank assistance.
Development Partner Engagement
18. Given the geographic and economic constraints the country faces, development
assistance is unlikely to be a transitional phenomenon in Tuvalu. Tuvalu, in common with
other small island states, is heavily reliant on overseas development assistance with net flows to
Tuvalu in recent years reaching slightly under US$13m13 per annum equivalent to about 40
percent of GDP. The objective for the World Bank should be to support and sustain a strong
policy environment in which well-targeted and predictable levels of foreign assistance help
enhance living standards and service delivery. Of equal importance will be assisting Tuvalu in
harnessing the benefits of closer economic integration with the metropolitan countries in the
region, increasing the returns from the sustainable management of Tuvalu’s pelagic fish stocks,
and by providing greater opportunities for young Tuvaluans to access overseas employment
opportunities. The World Bank has collaborated closely with Tuvalu’s development partners and
hopes to continue to draw on their expertise and experience as the Bank looks to align its
assistance with existing programs and Tuvalu’s development priorities.
9

These are: Voice and accountability; political stability and absence of violence; Government effectiveness;
regulatory quality; rule of law; and, control of corruption.
10
2010. http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.asp.
11
Te Kakeega is defined as the “act of climbing or scaling upwards”.
12
Falekaupule refers to traditional meeting houses, literally “the house in which the Chiefs make decisions”.
13
Source: OECD.StatExtract, 2006-2009, total ODA disbursement.

6



Asian Development Bank. The Country Operations Business Plan for Tuvalu (2012-2014)
maintains the strategic focus of ADB assistance to Tuvalu on strengthening public sector
management. Tuvalu’s 2012-2014 Asian Development Fund (ADF) grant allocation will
total US$2.35m, which includes a carryover of US$1.36m from the previous period and will
be provide in the form of budget support. In addition, Tuvalu is expected to receive an
allocation of around US$300,000 for technical assistance that is likely to focus on
strengthening public financial management and the implementation of public enterprise
reforms supported through previous ADB assistance.



Australia. Australia is one of Tuvalu’s larger development partners whose 2011-2012
country program is estimated at AUD7.4m, (US$7.5m equivalent). Tuvalu also benefits
from a proportion of the AUD2.5m that AusAID provides in regional assistance. The
priorities for Australia’s assistance to Tuvalu are set out in the Partnership for Development
signed with the Government of Tuvalu in August 2009. The Partnership identifies three
areas of priority: economic governance, education and human resources, and climate change
and the environment. Australia has also contributed approximately AUD6.93m to the Tuvalu
Trust Fund over the period 2008-2010. Australia provides substantial support for tertiary
education through a program of overseas scholarships to institutions in the Pacific and in
Australia, as well as emergency assistance in response to natural disasters such as the 2011
drought emergency. In 2010, Australia established Tuvalu’s first Women’s Crisis Center to
provide shelter and counseling to victims of domestic violence. Australia has also taken a
lead role in assisting the Government to outline a Policy Reform Matrix that will inform
future budget support operations by development partners.



European Union (EU). The European Union has been active in Tuvalu since the country’s
independence in 1978. The current program under the ACP-EU 9th European Development
Fund (EDF; 2003-2007) totaled €5.2m (US$7.2m equivalent) and reflected the EU’s
longstanding focus on outer islands development. Activities supported included: primary
school construction and provision of equipment and supplies, waste collection and disposal
in Funafuti, and household and municipal water storage improvements. Under EDF 10, EU
assistance will focus on water and sanitation with an indicative allocation of €5m. In
recognition of the impact of the global financial slowdown, the EU’s Vulnerability FLEX
program is providing an additional €1.5m in general budget support tied to the ADB’s
ongoing program of public enterprise reform.



Government of Japan. Japan provides development assistance to Tuvalu on a rolling basis.
The current program (2009-2014), envisages providing support through regional and national
programs and focuses on areas including: climate change and disaster risk management;
environmental conservation; health and education services; economic development; and,
governance. Japan provides Tuvalu Electricity Corporation (the state-owned electricity
utility) with an annual fuel grant that in 2011 was equivalent to three months fuel supply.
JICA is the largest single donor in education through its support for the rehabilitation of the
national secondary college.



New Zealand. New Zealand is one of Tuvalu’s longstanding development partners and has a
2011/2012 allocation for Tuvalu totaling NZ$5m (US$2.8m equivalent), which includes
7

NZ$1m carried over from the previous fiscal year. Assistance identified under Tuvalu and
New Zealand’s Joint Commitment for Development focuses on sustainable economic
development (SED) and human resource development (HRD). Within the scope of the SED
focus, emphasis will be given to improving the efficiency and safety of inter-island shipping,
increasing renewable energy use, and better management of fisheries resources. HRD
encompasses workforce skills development. Tuvalu also receives assistance through New
Zealand funded regional health, environment and disaster risk reduction and management
programs – usually delivered by regional agencies. New Zealand (along with Australia, the
United Kingdom, Japan, South Korea, and Tuvalu) was an original contributor to the Tuvalu
Trust Fund (see Box 1) and has made periodic contributions to the Trust Fund. In recognition
of the impact of the global financial crisis, New Zealand provided NZ$4.4m in direct budget
support to the Government for the period 2009-2012.


Taiwan, China. Taiwan, China is a longstanding donor partner of Tuvalu and provides a
range of technical assistance including in the areas of household agriculture and medical
assistance. Financial assistance is provided in the form of general budget support at an
annual level of US$5m. Taiwan, China provided an additional US$1.5m in 2011 in response
to a government request, although support is expected to revert back to US$5m in 2012.



United Nations. UN System agencies continue to provide support to Tuvalu in a range of
areas. In response to the recent drought situation, OCHA and UNICEF have provided
Tuvalu with emergency assistance. UNDP is providing support to implement the National
Adaptation Plan of Action with a GEF-funded project that aims to increase the resilience of
coastal areas and communities to the impact of climate change.



Civil Society. In addition to Church groups that have a traditional and important role in their
communities, the Tuvalu Association of Non-Governmental Organizations (TANGO) is also
active throughout Tuvalu in such areas as: promoting good governance; assisting
communities in managing conservation and coastal areas, fauna and reef preservation;
supporting regional HIV/AIDS initiatives at the community level; and acting as a focal
organization for the Global Environment Facility. TANGO is affiliated with the Pacific
Island Association of NGOs (PIANGO) which has members in 21 Pacific countries and
territories. PIANGO receives funding from New Zealand and Australia among other
development partners.
III.

WORLD BANK ENGAGEMENT IN THE PACIFIC

Transforming World Bank Engagement in the Pacific Region
19. The World Bank’s engagement in the Pacific island countries reflects the fact that these
clients’ development trajectories will be shaped – perhaps more than any other nations in the
world – by their economic geography. The World Bank’s Pacific island member countries14
have a total population of about 2 million, spread across hundreds of islands, and scattered across
an area equivalent to 15 percent of the globe’s surface. Given their extreme vulnerability to
14

Fiji, Kiribati, Palau, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.

8

economic shocks, natural disasters and the effects of climate change, achieving sustained
development progress is a long-term proposition requiring collaboration with international
partners.
20. The World Bank has significantly expanded its presence and program throughout the
Pacific as a part of a renewed commitment to the region. In recent years, IDA (as well as IFC –
although Tuvalu is not currently a member) has expanded its engagement and activities in
established clients (for example Samoa and Tonga) and has been placing particular emphasis on
deepening engagement in new or less-established clients such as Tuvalu. Reflecting the common
challenges faced by many Pacific countries, World Bank engagement across the Pacific has been
tightly focused on four overarching themes: (i) strengthening regional/global integration; (ii)
building resilience to economic shocks, natural disasters and climate change; (iii) encouraging
economic reform and private sector development; and (iv) improving education, health and the
social services. The way in which these objectives are interpreted will vary according to country
circumstances, the government’s development priorities and the extent to which World Bank
assistance can complement existing development programs. Translating these themes into a
program that responds to Tuvalu’s needs is the purpose of this CAS.
21. The World Bank is committed to the Cairns Compact agreed by Pacific leaders to ensure
better use of all development resources, and will work closely with clients and partners to
improve development effectiveness. The total level of aid from all donors to the Pacific is
increasing substantially, a fact that underscores the need for effective coordination (in terms of
co-financing as well as in coordinating mission schedules) and collaboration between clients and
donors. As part of Cairns Compact monitoring, Tuvalu benefitted from a peer review (by other
Pacific Islands Forum members) of MDG progress that has helped identify target areas for future
assistance. Tuvalu, although small, has not been immune to aid fragmentation. A recent
assessment of donor support to the health and education sectors in Tuvalu15 reports a total of
nearly 90 projects, indicating considerable scope for further harmonization and alignment. The
value of the World Bank’s engagement in Tuvalu is not principally defined in terms of its size,
but rather by the extent to which the World Bank can bundle its expertise and funding,
collaborate with other development partners, transfer global knowledge, develop capacity and
support changes that will improve the lives of Tuvaluans.
Translating the Pacific Themes into the Tuvalu Program
22. Reflecting the Government’s development priorities and the themes underpinning the
World Bank’s engagement in the Pacific, the program in Tuvalu will focus on:



Strategic Area 1: Mitigating economic isolation by encouraging regional and global
integration; and
Strategic Area 2: Building resilience against exogenous shocks

23. Tuvalu’s extreme vulnerability to climate change and sea level rise makes the systematic
consideration of these issues an imperative in all World Bank activities.
15

Government of Australia study prepared for the Government of Tuvalu. June 2011. Medium Term Expenditure
Framework for Education and Health 2009-2014.

9

Strategic Area 1: Mitigating economic isolation by encouraging regional and global
integration
24. The initial focus of the World Bank’s program will be Tuvalu’s inclusion in a regional
Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP). Whereas many other Pacific island countries’ air
links serve to bring tourists to their country, Funafuti International Airport provides a critical
lifeline for Tuvaluans whose strategic significance is hard to overstate. A shortage of
employment opportunities in Tuvalu has resulted in a migrant work culture where Tuvaluans
travel overseas for extended periods and a significant proportion of Tuvalu’s tertiary students
receive their education in overseas institutions. Critically ill patients that cannot be offered
treatment in Tuvalu depend on reliable air travel to access specialist care in Fiji or New Zealand.
Air travel also serves a Tuvaluan Diaspora that extends through the Pacific and beyond, as
Tuvaluans seek employment, education and other opportunities overseas. This intervention
responds directly to the CAS objective of facilitating Tuvalu’s deeper integration with their
larger Pacific trading partners.
25. The investments proposed under PAIP, which mobilizes regional and national IDA
resources, will safeguard Tuvalu’s principal connection to the outside world. These
investments are expected to promote regional integration (with additional funding provided by
the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility, PRIF), expand markets for goods and services, and
facilitate trade and labor mobility. The program will also support the Government in
strengthening their aviation regulatory oversight and operations. Mindful of the technical
complexity of the operation and Tuvalu’s unfamiliarity with World Bank processes, particular
care has been given to simplifying project design and to ensuring an appropriate level of
implementation support – considerations that will be applied to all future World Bank operations
in Tuvalu.
26. Across the Pacific, the World Bank Group will work with clients and partners to help
island states derive greater benefits from regional cooperation and from closer integration
with larger metropolitan countries. In common with its Pacific neighbors, there are significant
potential benefits from closer regional cooperation in improving the sustainable management of
pelagic fish stocks and opportunities for temporary labor migration.
27. A fisheries management strategy for the Pacific is being developed, following a request
for support from the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA) Office. Tuvalu and the other
seven Pacific island members of the PNA collectively account for approximately 40 percent of
the world’s tuna stocks. This group, for whom fisheries remain their primary resource, is
undertaking measures to improve the management of the tuna resource and to ensure that
members receive a more equitable share of benefits. These include: agreements to cut licensed
fishing days by 30 percent in 2011; the closure of high seas pockets that previously complicated
the control of fishing activities in the Pacific; improved vessel monitoring systems to reduce
illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing; and preferential treatment for domestic vessels or
those that comply with specific requirements for local crew and unloading. In formulating a
fisheries strategy, the Bank will work closely with the existing regional architecture managing
fisheries in the Pacific, including the Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), Secretariat of the Pacific

10

Community (SPC) and the Western Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC), as well as
other donor partners (including Australia and New Zealand who are already active in the sector).
28.
The World Bank will continue to work closely with Tuvalu, other Pacific island
countries and partners, to help expand seasonal and other international employment
opportunities. Labor is one of Tuvalu’s few viable exports. New Zealand’s Recognized
Seasonal Employment (RSE) scheme, for which Tuvalu is eligible, has already provided over
9,000 Pacific islanders with opportunities to work for up to nine months in the horticultural
industry. Tuvalu’s participation in the RSE scheme has been limited to date with around 200
workers having been recruited in the first three seasons of the scheme – a reflection of the higher
barriers to participation that Tuvaluans face. Transportation costs are high (often by Government
vessel to Fiji and then by air to New Zealand), and made more so as the Government seeks to
provide Tuvaluans in the outer islands with these opportunities. More than a logistical challenge
however, Tuvaluans have little experience of formal employment and are less competitive than
applicants from other countries. In September 2011, the Australian Government announced the
eligibility of Tuvaluans to participate in an expanded Pacific Seasonal Workers pilot scheme.
The World Bank will work closely with donors already working on education and skills
development programs to help enable Tuvaluans – particularly women – to take full advantage of
this and similar schemes.
Strategic Area 2: Building resilience against exogenous shocks
29. Tuvalu has requested budget support to help strengthen fiscal management and
undertake urgent fiscal adjustment. Despite its isolation, Tuvalu continues to feel the effects of
the global slowdown and remains highly vulnerable to exogenous shocks. Tuvalu’s fiscal
position is parlous. With the CIF likely to be exhausted in 2011, and with few additional sources
of external financing anticipated, the country faces uncertain prospects in 2012. The World
Bank has been in initial dialogue with both the Government and development partners (several of
whom have valuable experience with budget support operations in Tuvalu), a reform program
that will likely anchor the World Bank’s program in this CAS period. The Australian High
Commission in Suva, Fiji will host a meeting of Government and development partners in
December 2011, the first such meeting since 2008, to discuss a policy matrix prepared by
Government with Australian support. Policy actions might include measures to: reduce
government expenditure on tertiary education; reorient expenditures to correct underinvestment
in primary, secondary and post secondary skills development; reducing unsustainable
expenditure on the TMTS; rebalance investment in national primary and preventative health
services; contain budget expenditures and manage public debt more efficiently; and increase
levels of revenue collection. Wherever possible, the monitoring the achievement of prior actions
will be linked to existing processes and development partner missions.
30. Tuvalu faces an existential threat from the impact of climate change and will need
sustained and coordinated assistance to mitigate these challenges. Climate change concerns
cut across all aspects of Tuvalu’s development. A majority of Tuvalu’s established development
partners identify climate change as a central focus of their programs of support. Australia and
the European Union have provided water storage tanks throughout Funafuti and in communities
in the Outer Islands. Tuvalu’s National Adaptation Plan of Action provides the framework for
11

coordinated development assistance for climate change around which the ongoing multi-donor
program supported by UNDP, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community, Australia, and the
Global Environment Facility is organized. The Government of Japan is pioneering technology to
increase foram sand production to help island formation and to prevent sea level rise, and the
Asian Development Bank is including Tuvalu in its regional climate change interventions. The
scope of the challenge will require the World Bank to develop an appreciation of the
Government’s priorities before undertaking more complex activities. The World Bank will also
seek to work with other partners to mobilize grant financing for climate change investments. All
planned World Bank activities will incorporate climate resilience measures such as the
introduction of efficient water resource management practices, rain water harvesting and water
storage measures as integral elements of project design.
31. The frequency of drought conditions in Tuvalu underscores the need for a systematic
assessment of water resource management practices. The World Bank aims to support the
preparation of a drought management plan that will identify practical mitigation measures at
government and household levels. These might include maximizing rainwater capture and
storage, improving weather forecasting, and to outline local planning measures such as water
rationing and securing alternative water supplies. The World Bank would seek to coordinate and
collaborate with technical agencies already active in this area such as the Secretariat of the
Pacific Community Applied Geoscience and Technology Division (SPC/SOPAC) an approach
that would also facilitate exchange with Kiribati and other countries that are confronting similar
challenges. If identified by the Government as a priority, the World Bank and development
partners could include broader disaster risk management and climate change measures in future
development policy operations.
Implementation: Coordination, Selectivity and New Ways of Doing Business
32. In Tuvalu, the operational experience of established development partners argues for
coordinated dialogue. Pacific clients have required development partners to reassess and adapt
their conventional operational approaches. In the Solomon Islands, the Core Economic Working
Group (CEWG), established in 2009 and led by the Ministry of Finance, has brought together
government officials across ministries with representatives of the ADB, AusAID, New Zealand
Aid Program, European Union, the Regional Assistance Mission, IMF and the World Bank.
Originally convened to support the Government’s efforts to improve spending, promote
economic growth and sound public financial management, the CEWG has provided a forum in
which Government and partners have jointly developed a three-year reform matrix that is
effectively aligned to the Government’s budget processes. The Government of Tuvalu is seeking
to establish a model for donor coordination similar to the CEWG that should assist both
Government and donors to make progress in fulfilling their Paris, Accra and Cairns Compact
commitments.
33. While World Bank experience with Development Policy Operations (DPO) in the Pacific
is limited, the instrument has been shown effective in supporting reform and in strengthening
Pacific countries’ resilience. The successive impacts of the food and fuel crises together with
those caused by a prolonged global economic downturn have placed severe strains on highly
vulnerable Pacific countries. In this context, budget support operations have helped to provide
12

predictable resources in a relatively rapid manner while sustaining reform momentum that might
otherwise have stalled in the face of further economic and fiscal stresses. The Government of
Tuvalu has welcomed the proposal to develop a coordinated budget support operation, and to
work together with the World Bank and existing development partners, to structure a DPO that,
if successful, could lead to further operations.
34. In providing support to Tuvalu, the World Bank will exercise a high degree of selectivity.
As Tuvalu’s newest development partner, the World Bank does not yet have the depth of country
experience that would enable it to contribute equally to all Tuvalu’s development priorities. The
program outlined in this CAS is, thus, closely focused on activities that are either directly
relevant to the themes guiding the World Bank’s engagement in the Pacific (for example
strengthening regional and global integration through the PAIP), or that aim to replicate
successful experience elsewhere in the region (such as the experience with budget support
approaches in the Solomon Islands, Tonga and Samoa). Acknowledging the risks of aid
fragmentation or overreach, initial activities will be carefully designed and sequenced with the
aim of building credibility with the Government.
35. Selectivity will be accompanied by close collaboration with development partners.
Development partners have asked the World Bank to provide an overview of experience with
budget support in the Pacific as this is being considered in Tuvalu. In particular, the World Bank
has been invited to outline the processes, approaches and principles that have characterized
successful budget support operations elsewhere in the Pacific. The World Bank also expects to
make available its regional analyses where these can inform and enhance overall support to
Tuvalu. Equally, the World Bank will also look to draw on or contribute to analysis being
undertaken by other partners in areas where the World Bank may have a useful role to play.
36. A targeted program of World Bank analytical work is proposed in sectors where the
World Bank is initiating engagement and in collaboration with the analysis being undertaken
by other partners. Analytical and technical assistance anticipated during the first part of the
CAS period is set out below:
Tuvalu: Proposed Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) - FY12-FY15
FY12
 (Regional) Fisheries Engagement Strategy: Support to the PNA Secretariat
 Drought Risk Management Strategy
FY13
Participation in the IMF 2012 Article IV

37. With deeper understanding of the country context, the World Bank will be able to play a
more active role collaborating closely with donors in areas where it has a comparative
advantage. This is likely to be particularly significant in addressing the existential threat that
Tuvalu faces from climate change. Whereas in the 2011 drought crisis, donors such as Australia,
New Zealand, United States, the IFRC and UN system have been well-placed to respond to the
humanitarian needs, the World Bank is exploring possible interventions in the area of water
resource management that may serve to address the structural and medium-term challenges

13

Tuvalu faces and to complement the ongoing work of AusAID, SOPAC and the European Union
(among others).
38. Developing leadership and institutions in Tuvalu capable of successfully implementing
reform demands the World Bank’s commitment to a long-term capacity enhancement effort.
Tuvalu—and governments throughout the Pacific—face significant challenges in recruiting and
retaining domestic expertise. In micro-states such as Tuvalu the absolute size of the population
and the pull of overseas opportunities only increase this challenge. By being selective and by
adopting a pragmatic approach to these constraints, the World Bank will place a premium on
coordination, intensive implementation support, and on projects whose design is carefully
calibrated to the country’s capacity.
39. Anticipated outcomes of the World Bank engagement in Tuvalu are set out in the results
matrix in Attachment 1. Given the initial nature of the World Bank’s dialogue with Tuvalu, the
results matrix will be augmented and revised as implementation proceeds, and updated in the
CAS Progress Report.
Financing Terms and Sources
40. The indicative IDA resource envelope under the FY12-FY15 CAS amounts to SDR9.6
million (equivalent to US$14.4 million). The CAS covers the three years of IDA16 (FY12-14)
and the first year of IDA 17 (FY15). It is assumed that the allocations to Tuvalu for FY13-FY15
will be equivalent to the FY12 level. The amounts for these fiscal years are indicative only.
Actual allocations will depend on: (i) the country’s own performance; (ii) its performance
relative to that of other IDA recipients; (iii) the amount of overall resources available to IDA;
(iv) changes in the list of active IDA-eligible countries; (v) terms of financial assistance provided
(grants or loans); and (vi) the amount of compensatory resources received for MDRI.
Tuvalu: Proposed IDA and Trust Fund Operations - FY12-FY15

IDA-16 Period
Pacific Aviation Investment Program
Development Policy Operation

IV.

Year

IDA

FY12
FY12




Co-financed/Trust Fund

PRIF
(ADB, EU, Australia, NZ) 16

MANAGING RISKS

41. Risks to the success and impact of the World Bank’s engagement in Tuvalu are high.
Belying its small size, Tuvalu is confronting a complex range of development challenges that
threaten the country’s sustainability, and for which there are few precedents. These risks are
magnified by the extreme limitations on capacity that exist when engaging in a sovereign state
with a population of fewer than 11,000 people.

16

To be confirmed.

14

42. Institutional capacity could constrain program implementation.
World Bank
interventions will be informed by the pace of reform and designed to account for the present
level of institutional capacity. As an example, arrangements have been made for a Technical and
Fiduciary Service Unit, located in Tonga to assist with PAIP procurement recognizing its limited
familiarity with World Bank procurement guidelines. This experience will help build capacity in
Tuvalu to undertake future Bank-financed interventions. The initial experience with PAIP and
budget support operations may also provide entry points for dialogue on public procurement and
as a means to mitigate risks stemming from anticipated weaknesses in the public financial
management system.
43. Tuvalu remains extremely vulnerable to external shocks and subject to many factors
outside the country’s control. Tuvalu is highly reliant on imported food and the country’s
electricity supply also depends upon imported petroleum products and has been significantly
affected by recent global price shocks. While Tuvalu’s economic geography cannot be fully
overcome, the World Bank will assist Tuvalu in reaping the benefits of closer regional and global
integration. Confronting climate change will require sustained and coordinated support. All
World Bank activities will incorporate climate resilience measures.
44. To mitigate the above risks, the World Bank will draw on the experience and expertise of
longstanding partners and find ways of adapting its approaches and operational models to the
realities on the ground. The World Bank is proposing a pragmatic and flexible program that
will draw on global and regional experience as well as that of partners with a longer track record
in Tuvalu. Risks will also be managed through use, wherever possible, of regional approaches
and replication of successful experience from elsewhere in the Pacific. Given development
partners’ limited in-country representation, donor coordination also presents a challenge that will
need to be carefully and creatively managed.
45. Given the potential difficulties of sustaining reform commitment in Tuvalu, new
activities will be carefully sequenced and linked to areas where there is demonstrated reform
momentum. Decisions on subsequent operations will only be taken after an analysis of the
World Bank’s initial interventions. The Government’s expressed support for this CAS and the
program outlined will be critical in ensuring effective implementation.

15

Attachment 1: Tuvalu CAS Results Matrix17

Medium-Term Country
Goals

Key Issues

Expected CAS
Outcomes

Milestones

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

Strategic Area 1: Mitigating economic isolation by encouraging regional and global integration
Improved operational
safety and oversight of
critical air transport
infrastructure.

 Given Tuvalu’s extreme
geographical isolation,
investments in aviation
safety will safeguard its
citizens’ principal
connection to the outside
world.

 ICAO certification of
airport

 Implementation of a
AUD5 “safety levy” for
each departing
international passenger
to cover costs of
additional safety.
 Introduction and
operation of PASNet
regional air traffic
monitoring and
communications system.

 Pacific Aviation
Investment Program
(World Bank,
Government of Australia
through the Pacific
Regional Infrastructure
Facility).

Greater opportunities for
Tuvaluans to benefit from
overseas temporary labor
migration.

 Tuvalu’s participation in
the RSE scheme has been
limited to date with
around 200 workers, a
reflection of the higher
barriers to participation
that Tuvaluans face such
as high transport costs.

 80 Tuvaluan workers
participating annually
in temporary labor
schemes in New
Zealand and Australia.
 Increase in share of
women participating
by 30%.

 World Bank,
Government and
development partners to
provide training
opportunities to 100
Tuvaluans annually
enhancing their
competitiveness.

 Development Policy
Operation prior actions
addressing labor
migration (World Bank,
development partners).

17

The Tuvalu CAS Results Matrix reflects the initial scope of the World Bank’s program in Tuvalu and adjusted as additional activities are defined over the CAS
period.

16

Medium-Term Country
Goals

Key Issues

Expected CAS
Outcomes

Milestones

WBG Instruments and
International Partners

Strategic Area 2: Building resilience against exogenous shocks
Strengthened fiscal
management and
improved fiscal position.

 Tuvalu continues to feel
the effects of the global
slowdown and remains
highly vulnerable to
exogenous shocks.
 With few additional
sources of external
financing anticipated, the
country faces a potential
fiscal gap.

 Reduced fiscal
pressure and improved
economic outlook
through reorientation
and rationalization of
Government
expenditure.

 Government expenditure
lowered to reduce fiscal
gap
 Tuvalu Consumption
Tax increased from 3%
to 6%
 Reduce Government
expenditure on TMTS to
2005 levels (17% of
health budget) and
increase non-salary
expenditures for Primary
and Preventative Health
care by 5%.

 Coordinated DPO series
addressing key areas of
Government expenditure
(World Bank,
development partners).
 (Regional) Fisheries
Engagement Strategy
AAA.
 Participation in 2012 IMF
Article IV.

Improved resilience to
climate change and
natural disasters.

 Tuvalu is highly
vulnerable to the effects
of climate change and sea
level rise.
 Tuvalu is experiencing
regular severe water
shortages.

 Effective mediumterm planning and
sustainable water
resource management
practices implemented.

 Development of a
medium-term Drought
Risk Management
strategy
 Introduction of rain
water harvesting and
storage.

 GFDRR support; potential
follow-on investment
supported by European
Union.
 Drought Risk
Management Strategy
AAA.

17

Tuvalu at a glance

10/21/11

Tuvalu

East
A sia &
P acific

Lo wer
middle
inco me

0.01
0.0
0.2
50

1,944
16,302
0.7
45

3,811
31,898
1.2
41

0.0
4,530
..

6,149
3,163
6,026

8,846
2,321
4,784

-1.9
-2.1

7.4
6.6

7.1
5.9

..
..
..
27
2

17
39
72
21
9

..
..
68
43
24

..
..
102
98

96
91
111
112

87
74
109
105

97
84

88
59

86
50

Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs

Age distribution, 2009

( 2 0 10 )

Male (..)

P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
Surface area (tho usand sq. km)
P o pulatio n gro wth (%)
Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)

Female (..)

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34

GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)
GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )
GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )

15-19
0-4
0

GDP gro wth (%)
GDP per capita gro wth (%)

0

0

1

1

1

percent of total population

( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 4 – 2 0 10 )
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , %)
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)
A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)
Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)
Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)

Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1990

Tuvalu

N e t A id F lo ws
(US$ millio ns)
Net ODA and o fficial aid
To p 3 do no rs (in 2008):
Japan
A ustralia
New Zealand

19 8 0

19 9 0

2000

2 0 10

5

5

4

18

0
1
0

1
2
1

1
2
1

9
5
1

..
610

..
562

..
428

40.8
1,785

1995

2000

2009

East Asia & Pacific

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
100
80
60

A id (% o f GNI)
A id per capita (US$ )

40
20
0

Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds

-20
95

Co nsumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)

..
..

Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )
Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)

..
..

..

..
14.5

..
4.0

1.3
..

1.7
..

1.1
..

2.6

05

GDP

GDP per capita

2 0 0 0 – 10
19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0
(average annual gro wth %)
P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)
GDP (US$ millio ns)

0.0
..

0.0
9

0.0
14

A griculture
Industry
M anufacturing
Services

..
..
..
..

25.6
14.5
3.1
59.8

18.0
13.6
3.3
68.4

Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure
General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure
Gro ss capital fo rmatio n

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

Expo rts o f go o ds and services
Impo rts o f go o ds and services
Gro ss savings

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

0.0
31

1.1
..

0.5
3.2

0.4
9.0

..
..
..
..

0.4
5.5
-2.3
3.7

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

(% o f GDP )
21.8
8.7
1.1
69.5

16.7
-9.5
-2.4
13.4

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2010 data are preliminary. Gro up data are fo r 2009. .. indicates data are no t available.
a. A id data are fo r 2009.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

18

Tuvalu
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2 0 10
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2009

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)
Net trade in go o ds and services

0
..
..

1
..
..

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

..
..

..
..

Wo rkers' remittances and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)

..

..

Reserves, including go ld

..

..

Voice and accountability
Political stability
Regulatory quality
Rule of law
Control of corruption
0

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e
(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

..
..
..

74.6
..
91.4

Overall surplus/deficit

..

-33.4

25

50

..
..

100

2009

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

2000

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

75

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

..
..

2000

2009

..
..
27.8

..
21
15.0

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)

..
..
–

..
..
–

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f land area)

To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)

..
..

..
..

Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billio n cubic meters)

..
..

..
..

Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

..
..

..
..

CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)

..

..

GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

Composition of total external debt, 2009
(data are not available)

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio

67
33.3
..

60
33.3
..

2000

2009

IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–
–

–
–
–

–

–

–
–

–
–

(US$ millio ns)

US$ millions

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt
Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000
–
–
–
2000

2 0 10
..
..
..

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt

2 0 10

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2010 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.

19

10/21/11

Millennium Development Goals

Tuvalu

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)

T uv a lu

G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)
P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)
Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)
P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)

19 9 0
..
..
..
..

19 9 5
..
..
..
..

2000
..
..
..
..

G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)
P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)
Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)
Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

..
110
80
..

G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)
Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)
P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)

..
..
8

..
..

112
34

2009
..
..
..
1.6

..
99
..
..

0

..
..
0

44
35
81

33
27
90

..

..
98
31

..
155
120

8

G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)
M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)

57
44
95

50
39
94

G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)
Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 15-49)

..
..
39

..
..
..

G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 15-49)
..
Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)
296
Tuberculo sis case detectio n rate (%, all fo rms)
87

..
250
160

..
211
79

G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
90
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)
80
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
33.3
Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f land area)
..
CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)
..
GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)
..

92
81
..
..
..
..

94
83
33.3
..
..
..

97
84
33.3

..
..
..
..

..
..
..
..

8.5
12.5
23.9
8.0

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
Telepho ne mainlines (per 100 peo ple)
M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
Internet users (per 100 peo ple)
P erso nal co mputers (per 100 peo ple)

Education indicators (%)

..
..
..
..

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

125

100
32

..
..
..

ICT indicators (per 100 people)
30

100

100
75

20

75
50

50

25

10
25

0
2000

2005

2009
0

0
1990

1995

2000

2009

2000

2005

2009

Primary net enrollment ratio (..)
Fixed + mobile subscribers (..)
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education

Tuvalu

East Asia & Pacific

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

20

Internet users (..)

10/21/11

Key Economic Indicators -- Tuvalu
Tuval u: Selected Economic Indicators 1/
2006
2007

Real sector
Real GDP growth
Consumer pri ces (period average)

Structure of economy
Agriculture
Manufacturi ng and construction
Services

2008

2009

2010

2011
Proj.

2.9
4.2

5.5
2.3

(Percent change)
7.6
‐1.7
10.4
‐0.1

‐0.5
‐1.9

1.0
0.5

21.2
7.4
71.4

21.7
9.0
69.3

(In percent of total)
21.2
22.4
12.9
11.6
65.9
66.0

23.5
9.7
66.8

…
…
…

(In percent of GDP)
Government finance 2/
Revenue and grants
Current Revenue
Grants
Expenditure and net l ending
Current Expenditure
Capi tal Expenditure and net lendi ng
Overal l balance
Tuvalu Trust Fund
Consoli dated Investment Fund

70.8
53.8
17.0
84.5
80.1
4.4
‐13.7

69.2
51.2
18.0
80.0
70.3
9.7
‐10.8

75.2
57.4
19.9
78.9
70.6
8.3
‐1.5

93.3
61.6
31.6
96.5
80.3
16.1
‐3.2

74.0
54.5
19.5
112.0
92.8
19.1
‐38.0

85.2
51.8
33.5
107.9
91.7
16.2
‐22.7

330.5
20.3

321.5
39.4

267.5
35.5

273.1
45.7

287.4
20.5

234.8
0.0

(Percent change, unl ess otherwise i ndicated)
Money and credi t
Deposits 3/
Credit to non‐government 3/
Lending interest rate 4/

21.2
‐2.1
10.5

‐10.5
4.0
10.5

21.7
14.0
10.5

‐9.5
‐9.6
10.5

6.2
0.8
9.5

…
…
…

(In mi llions of Australi an doll ars, unless otherwise indi cated)
Balance of payments
Current account balance
(In percent of GDP)
Trade bal ance
Exports
Imports
Services balance
Income balance
Current transfers (net)
Gross offici al reserves 5/
(In months of imports of goods and services)

4.3
14.3
‐12.3
0.6
12.9
‐13.7
20.2
10.0
17.4
7.7

0.1
0.4
‐11.2
0.5
11.7
‐23.5
25.3
9.5
20.3
7.8

‐10.9
‐31.4
‐18.3
0.6
19.0
‐26.9
24.1
10.3
30.7
10.3

5.0
14.9
‐16.0
0.6
16.6
‐21.8
27.3
15.5
30.3
10.0

‐5.3
‐15.5
‐18.6
0.5
19.1
‐22.4
21.3
14.3
25.6
8.2

‐5.9
‐16.9
‐18.9
0.6
19.5
‐23.0
21.3
14.7
27.0
8.5

20.3
67.6
13.9
46.5
…
…
…
0.5
14.1

19.7
61.2
13.6
42.3
…
…
…
0.5
16.1

21.7
62.5
16.8
48.4
…
…
…
0.6
17.2

15.6
46.7
12.3
36.7
10.2
29.4
285.7
0.8
22.8

15.1
44.3
10.8
31.6
8.6
24.7
221.0
1.6
39.4

19.1
54.9
9.9
28.4
8.2
23.2
199.2
0.8
17.9

Exchange rates
Australian dollars per U.S. dollar
Period average 6/
End‐peri od 6/
Real effective exchange rate (2005=100) 6/

1.328
1.272
99.4

1.195
1.146
105.2

1.192
1.493
103.5

1.282
1.110
100.7

1.086
1.007
115.2

1.0
0.9
81.7

Nominal GDP
Nominal GNI per capita (Atlas method, U.S. dollar)

30.0
4,110

32.2
4,780

34.6
5,100

33.5
5,210

34.2
4,670

34.8
…

Debt i ndicators
Total government debt (includi ng guarantees)
(In percent of GDP)
Of which: External
(In percent of GDP)
NPV of external debt
(In percent of GDP)
(In percent of exports of goods and services)
External debt servi ce
(In percent of exports of goods and servi ces)

21

Sources: Tuvalu authorities, PFTAC, Asian Development Bank, UNDP, CIA World Factbook, World Bank, and IMF staff estimates.
1/ Tuvalu uses the Australian dollar as its currency. It has no central bank operations.
2/ Data for 2011 are Tuvalu authorities and staff estimates.
3/ Data for 2010 are provisional estimates.
4/ Rates for personal and business loans.
5/ Defined as sum of foreign assets of the National Bank of Tuvalu, the Consolidated Investment Fund, and SDR holdings. Excludes the Tuvalu
Trust Fund.
6/ Data for 2011 are as of end-June.
7/ Gross domestic product plus net compensation of employees, and investment income.

22

IBRD 33503
176°E

Lolua

177°E

178°E

179°E

180°

Nanumea

6°S

6°S

Kua
Tonga

TUVALU

Niutao

Nanumanga

7°S

7°S

Tanrake

Nui Atoll
Asau

SOUTH

PACIFIC

8°S

Savave

Vaitupu

Nukufetau

8°S

OCEAN
Funafuti

VAIAKU

9°S

9°S

Fangaua

Nukulaelae

10°S

0

0

10°S

50 Kilometers

25

25

176°E

50 Miles
177°E

TUVALU
COUNCIL CAPITALS
NATIONAL CAPITAL

Niulakita
11°S

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

178°E

11°S

179°E

180°
MARCH 2005

