Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No. 59674-CF

THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND

Public Disclosure Authorized

THE MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR
THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Public Disclosure Authorized

MAY 26TH, 2011

Central Africa Department - Country Management Unit (AFCC1)
Africa Region
The International Finance Corporation
Africa Department
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

DATE OF CURRENT COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
JULY 31, 2009
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective February 16, 2011)
Currency Unit = CFA Franc
US$1.00 = 487.34
GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
January 1–December 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AAA
ADF
AFD
AfDB
AICD
BEAC
CAADP
CAB
CAR
CASA
CASPR
CEMAC
CFA
CPJP
CPS
CRN
CRW
DDR
DPO
ECF
EFA/FTI
EITI
EMGRG
ENERCA
EU
FCFA
FLEGT
GDP`
GoCAR
GFRP
GSM
HIPC
IDF
IFC
IMF
ITBN
JISN

Analytical and Advisory Activities
African Development Fund
French Agency for Development (Agence Française de Développement)
African Development Bank
African Infrastructure Country Diagnostics
Bank of Central African States (Banque des Etats d’Afrique Centrale)
Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Program
Central African Backbone project
Central African Republic
Conflict-Affected States in Africa
CAS Progress Report
Monetary and Economic Community of Central Africa (Communauté Economique et
Monétaire des Etats d’Afrique Centrale)
African Financial Community (Communauté Financière Africaine)
Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la paix
Country Partnership Strategy
Country Re-Engagement Note
IDA’s Crisis Response Window
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Program
Development Policy Operation
Extended Credit Facility
Education for All/Fast Track Initiative
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
Economic Management and Governance Reform Grant
National Electric Utility
European Union
CFA Franc
Forest Law Enforcement and Governance Trade support process
Gross Domestic Product
Government of CAR
Global Food Crisis Response Program
Global System for Mobile Communications (Groupe Spécial Mobile)
Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative
Institutional Development Fund
International Finance Corporation
International Monetary Fund
Insecticide-Treated Bed Nets
Joint Interim Strategy Note

JSDF
LICUS
MDG
MDRI
MDTF
MIGA
NGO
ODA
PARCPE
PBC
PCDAGV
PEFA
PFM
PPP
PRGF
PRSP
SME
SPF
TDRP
TTL
UA
UN
VCT
VPA
WB
WBG
WFP

Japan Social Development Fund
Low Income Countries Under Stress initiative
Millennium Development Goals
Multi-lateral Debt Relief Initiative
Multi-Donor Trust Fund
Multilateral Guarantee Agency
Non-Governmental Organization
Official Development Assistance
Economic Planning Capacities Rehabilitation Support Project
United Nations Peace Building Commission
Community Project for the Development and Support of Vulnerable Groups
Public Expenditure Financial Assessment
Public Financial Management
Public Private Partnership
Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
Small and Medium Enterprises
State and Peace-building Fund
Transitional Demobilization and Reintegration Program
Task Team Leader
Unit of Account
United Nations
Voluntary Counseling and Testing
Voluntary Partnership Agreement
World Bank
World Bank Group
World Food Program

Vice President
Country Director
Country Manager
Task Team Leader

IDA
Obiageli Katryn Ezekwesili
Gregor Binkert
Midou Ibrahima
Louise Davidson

IFC
Thierry Tanoh
Justin K. Kouakou
-

MIGA
Izumi Kobayashi

Conor Healy

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

1

OVERVIEW ......................................................................................................................................... 1

2

COUNTRY CONTEXT........................................................................................................................ 2

3
A.
B.

PROGRESS TOWARD CAS OUTCOMES ........................................................................................ 3
Strategic Theme 1: Consolidation of Economic Governance and Institutional Capacity ................. 3
Strategic Theme 2: Rehabilitation and Development of Basic Socio-Economic Infrastructure ....... 5

4

CPS RELEVANCE, IMPLEMENTATION AND ADJUSTMENTS .................................................. 7
A. CPS relevance ................................................................................................................................... 7
B. Implementation and adjustments ...................................................................................................... 8

5

RISKS ................................................................................................................................................. 10
TABLES

Table 1: Strategic Theme 1 - Deliverables Summary ................................................................................... 4
Table 2: Strategic Theme 2 - Deliverables Summary ................................................................................... 6
Table 3: FY11 and FY12 Lending and AAA plan ........................................................................................ 9
FIGURES
Figure 1: Portfolio Composition as of December 31, 2010 .......................................................................... 2

ANNEXES
Annex 1: Results Matrix for CAR CPS (FY09-FY12) ............................................................................... 12
Annex 2: Updated and Revised CAS Outcome Indicators ......................................................................... 23
Annex 3: IDA Operations Portfolio (Excluding Regional Portfolio) ......................................................... 24
Annex 4: Analytical and Advisory Activities ............................................................................................. 25
Annex 5: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management ................................................. 26
Annex 6: IFC Program ................................................................................................................................ 27
Annex 7: Country at a Glance Central African Republic ........................................................................... 28
Map IBRD: 33384

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY PROGRESS REPORT
FOR THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
1

OVERVIEW

1.
This Country Partnership Strategy Progress Report (CASPR) assesses the
implementation of the World Bank’s FY09-12 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the Central
African Republic (CAR). The CPS was prepared jointly by the World Bank Group (WBG) and the
African Development Bank (AfDB) and discussed by the Board on September 3rd, 2009 (Report No.
49583-CF). The CPS builds upon the Country Re-Engagement Note of mid-2004 which marked the reestablishment of the WBG’s relationship with CAR, following a period of suspension due to CAR’s
extended instability and accumulation of arrears, and the subsequent Joint AfDB/WBG Interim Strategy
(JISN). 1 Given its emphasis on conflict, security and development, the current CPS also represents many
of the key elements that are emerging from the Bank’s new corporate framework for Fragile States,
including focusing on partnerships and responding flexibly to emerging needs while also helping to
develop institutional capacity to ensure sustainability.
2.
In line with the new Africa Regional Strategy, the CPS has emphasized partnerships to
help meet huge unmet needs regarding reconstruction and development. While the total volume of
aid has increased since 2006, CAR still remains a donor orphan (its ODA per capita is US$41 compared
to US$91 for Sierra Leone, US$104 for Cameroon and US$186 for Liberia). Significant collaborative
efforts have been undertaken with partners such as the AfDB, the European Union (EU), the United
Nations (UN) and the French Development Agency (AFD) to advance support at all levels. Examples
include (i) the preparation of the CPS with the AfDB, (ii) the establishment of a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) between the Government, the Bank, the EU and the AfDB to provide budget
support, and (iii) donor coordination at the sector level to facilitate implementation including in transport,
energy, community development, and urban development. The new IFC presence in the Country Office
has resulted in an effective joint Bank/IFC collaboration with respect to improving the investment
climate. Finally, a high level side event of the MDG summit in September 2010 also enabled the
Government of CAR, the United Nations, the European Union, and the World Bank to focus international
attention towards the peace building and development needs in CAR. This meeting laid the foundation for
a donor Roundtable that is planned for June 2011.
3.
Frontloading resources in the early years of the CPS and leveraging the relatively small
IDA 15 allocations to access alternative funding sources have spurred portfolio growth. As reflected
within the World Development Report 2011 (WDR), the CPS balances the short-term need for results
with longer-term investments to help institutions emerge. As a consequence, the World Bank’s
commitments to CAR have grown rapidly from re-engagement in 2006 at around US$17 million to
US$230 million in 2010 (see Figure 1 below). This amount is significantly higher than what was forecast
in the CPS, and is all the more striking given CAR’s total IDA 15 allocation was $33 million. To respond
quickly and flexibly to CAR’s emerging challenges, varied funding sources were tapped, including
regional IDA, various World Bank-administered trust and vertical funds, and from exceptional IDA
including the Crisis Response Window (CRW). This strategy has allowed for the initiation of almost all
of the planned lending operations and knowledge activities, with the exception of one health project
scheduled for FY12. All IDA financed operations were processed under OP 8.0 (Rapid response to Crises
and Emergencies) in order to quickly support the Government’s response to the food, fuel and financial
crises.

1

Joint Interim Strategy Note (JISN) for FY2007-2008 (Report No.37974-CF).

1

Figure 1: Portfolio Composition as of December 31, 2010

2

COUNTRY CONTEXT

4.
The CAR authorities continue to focus on efforts to strengthen political stability and
consolidate the peace process throughout the country. An Inclusive Political Dialogue (IPD) organized
in December 2008 in Bangui resulted in the adoption of a road map for full reconciliation. Its main
recommendations included: (i) formation of a coalition government, including members of the opposition;
(ii) implementation of a Disarmament, Demobilization and Rehabilitation (DDR) program; and (iii)
setting up of an independent electoral commission to organize general elections in 2010. After three
postponements, the presidential and legislative elections were held on January 23rd 2011 and results were
certified by the Constitutional Court on February 12th, with the incumbent president declared the victor
with 64 percent of the vote. A second round of legislative elections took place on March 27th 2011.
Success going forward will depend upon effective internal political dialogue and an inclusive
Government that represents the citizens’ interests.
5.
The security situation outside the capital remains tenuous. The Government faces continued
insecurity outside of its capital, reflecting weak control over their territory and disagreements with rebel
factions. The main areas of concern are the extreme north-east, where the CAR rebel group, Convention
des patriotes pour la justice et la paix (CPJP), continues to attack the army, and the extreme south-east,
where the Ugandan rebel group, the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), continues to terrorize local
communities. The withdrawal of the UN mission in Chad and the CAR, MINURCAT, effective since
mid-November 2010, has further weakened the presence of security forces in remote areas of the country.
The DDR process has also been slower than expected, further undermining the consolidation of peace.
6.
Since the end of conflict in 2003, economic growth has remained at an average of 2.5
percent per annum, and poverty remains pervasive. CAR still has one of the highest poverty rates in
Sub-Saharan Africa2, and is unlikely to meet any of the MDG targets3. In addition to the security
2

The 2009 UNDP Human Development Report ranks CAR near the bottom of its Human Development Index
(179th out of 182 countries). The overall poverty headcount ratio is 62 percent, with large socioeconomic and
regional variations.
3

The proportion of Central Africans living on $1 a day has decreased slightly to 62% but it needs to be half of that
in order to reach the 2015 goal, and the prevalence of underweight children under-five has increased since 2003 to
nearly 30 percent, a rate nearly three times the MDG target.

2

situation, low public investment in physical and social infrastructure and an unfriendly business climate
remain major impediments to sustained growth. In 2008, CAR was also hit by a series of shocks,
including the breakdown of the major hydro-power plant, followed by the worldwide price hike for food
and fuel, and the global financial crisis. These events led to an overall reduction of real GDP of 1.5
percentage points compared to the period 2006-2008. Nevertheless, preliminary estimates show a
recovery in 2010 with real GDP growth of 3.3 percent and an inflation rate at 1.8 percent (down from the
9.3 percent observed in 2008).
7.
Despite this difficult context, CAR has remained committed to implementing its reform
program and has made good progress in stabilizing the economy and establishing a consistent
record of satisfactory macroeconomic performance. In June 2009 CAR reached the completion point
under the enhanced Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative (HIPC) which, together with the
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI), provided significant debt relief (59 percent of GDP)4.
Achievement of the HIPC completion point in June 2009 was based on consistent and sustained
governance efforts: CAR was the first country to move from decision point to completion point in less
than two years, meeting twenty-one completion point triggers across eight sectors. The Bank’s
Development Policy loans and technical assistance projects played an important role by: (i) providing
space in the government budget for priority sector spending; (ii) strengthening overall public financial
management and effectiveness of public spending; (iii) supporting transparency and accountability; and
(iv) promoting institutional development, including enabling mechanisms for improving government
efficiency. In 2006 CAR also embarked upon a three year program with the IMF. This was completed in
September 2010 with all the reviews concluded – a first in its history with the Fund.

3

PROGRESS TOWARD CAS OUTCOMES

8.
The CPS is showing results. A November 2010 Country Program and Portfolio Review
assessed that four out of the eight CPS outcomes are on track, and are expected to be met by the end of
the CPS period. The following section provides a broad account of progress to date, focused on results
derived from the roll-out of the planned activities in each of the CPS’ strategic themes.
A. Strategic Theme 1: Consolidation of Economic Governance and Institutional Capacity
9.
Considerable strides have been made in terms of improving Public Finance Management
(PFM) (Outcome 1). As a result of efforts undertaken through the Bank’s Economic Management and
Reform Grant (EMGRG III), the fourth in a series of Development Policy Operations (DPOs) as well as
the AfDB’s Economic Reform Support Program, recent reforms include the review by the Court of
Accounts of the use of the 2008 budget; the establishment of a single treasury account (down from 73
accounts); and the publication on the Government website of all tax exemptions, which has led to an
increase in tax revenues (from 8 percent of GDP to 8.7 percent). Civil servant salaries are now paid
regularly and domestic revenues are collected through commercial banks and transferred to the central
bank (BEAC). The Government has also started to apply the new procurement code, but efforts are still
needed to strengthen the deployment of the investment budget using competitive bidding. These efforts
have also been supported by technical assistance provided from the Bank-administered LICUS Trust
Fund and the Institutional Development Fund (IDF), which have focused on strengthening capacity in
PFM and public procurement (See Table 1).

4

Total debt reduction granted to CAR amounted to around Central African CFA 560 billion (US$1 billion
equivalent) in nominal terms.

3

Table 1: Strategic Theme 1 - Deliverables Summary
WBG Lending /Grants
Business Climate Improvement and the Development of SMEs
LICUS (EGEMAS)- Economic Management and Improved Accountability
- US$2 m
Economic Management and Governance Reform Grant (DPO III)
- US$5 m
Economic Management and Governance Reform Grant (DPO IV)
- US$8.8 m *
Financial Sector – CEMAC Regional Institutions Support - US$5m
WBG Non-Lending Support
PRSP (2008-2010) Technical Assistance

Planned
2009
2009

Actual
TBD
Ongoing

Source
IFC
LICUS TF

2009

IDA 15

Mining Sector Assessment

2009

Diamond Sector Assessment

2010

Delivered
2009
1st Tranche
disbursed
Ongoing
Actual
Delivered
2008
Delivered
2009
2011

BB

Improving National Procurement Systems
EITI Implementation Support

2009
2010

2009
Ongoing

IDF
MDTF

Public Expenditure Review

2010

2012

BB

Understanding Access to Justice and Local Dispute Resolution at the
Community level in the CAR and Chad
TA on “ CAR Towards Sustainable Urban Management”

Additional

Ongoing

BNPP

Additional

Ongoing

Cities Alliance

2011
2009
Planned
2008

IDA CRW
Regional IDA
Source
BB
LICUS TF

*Note: The Economic Management and Governance Reform Grant (DPO IV) was not envisaged within the CPS. The Bank was able to extend its
support as a result of funds received through IDA’s Crisis Response Window.

10.
Good progress is noted with respect to transparency and accountability in natural
resource management (Outcome 2). Technical assistance from the World Bank helped CAR become
‘EITI Compliant’ in March 2011, a tremendous accomplishment for a country still emerging from crisis.
Bank-financed budget support has also focused on strengthening the regulatory framework in the mining,
forestry, and petroleum sectors in order to boost growth and employment. A new Mining Code was
adopted by the Parliament in April 2009, and a revised forestry code has been formulated that calls for the
return of a percentage of revenues to forest communities. Finally, the GoCAR recently signed a Voluntary
Partnership Agreement (VPA) with the EU as part of the Forest Law Enforcement and Governance Trade
support process (FLEGT) in December 2010.
11.
Establishing the institutional framework necessary to strengthen administrative planning
and management capacity at central and local level is advancing, but from a very low base
(Outcome 3). For rural areas, the Community Development Project Targeting Vulnerable Groups (US$20
million) represents the Bank’s efforts to strengthen support beyond Bangui. After some initial delays,
emergency funds have begun to be deployed to 102 communes to rehabilitate basic social infrastructure.
In urban areas, the Emergency Urban Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project has focused
capacity development efforts on strengthening the institutions responsible for the delivery of urban
services including monitoring and evaluation, procurement, financial management, and community
participation. These efforts have also been complemented by additional technical assistance, including
‘CAR towards Sustainable Urban Management’, funded by the Cities Alliance Trust Fund. Relevant
technical assistance and training has also been provided through the AfDB’s Economic Planning
Capacities Rehabilitation Support Project (PARCPE).
12.
Initial efforts to improve the investment climate are showing results, but significant
challenges remain (Outcome 4). CAR’s private sector is small, hampered by insecurity, low capacity of
SMEs, a weak business environment and poor infrastructure including unstable electricity. In addition,
CAR was ranked 182nd out of 183 countries in the 2010 Doing Business Report. To address CAR’s

4

serious investment climate challenges, IFC helped establish the Joint Committee for the Improvement of
the Business Environment, presided by the Prime Minister, and mandated to implement priority
Investment Climate reforms. The Bank and the IFC also collaborated to include some private sector
development related triggers within the latest DPO (EMGRG III). To date these efforts have resulted in
reforms designed to reduce the cost of creating businesses (e.g., a reduction by more than half of the
current business registration tax; from 150.000 to 70.000 CFA, (US$300 to US$140 equivalent) as well as
in the cost of transferring properties (reduction by 50% of the transfer tax; from 15% to 7.50 %). The
provision of political insurance through the issuance of MIGA’s guarantee to S.A. Orange in 2008 also
contributed to helping the company to develop a global system for mobile communications (GSM)
network and to provide internet services.
B. Strategic Theme 2: Rehabilitation and Development of Basic Socio-Economic Infrastructure
13.
Good progress is being made with respect to improving infrastructure for regional
economic integration from a very low base, though challenges remain on energy (Outcome 5). In
transport, the Bank provided additional financing (US$67 million) to the ongoing CEMAC Transport and
Transit Facilitation Project5 to fund the Boua/Garoua-boulaï road paving works on the border with
Cameroon, which is the main component of the project in CAR; as well as to strengthen the road
maintenance component. Despite delays, this outcome is largely on track; the proportion of road in good
condition on the Douala - Bangui corridor increased from 50 percent in 2007 to 57 percent in 2010. In
telecommunications, the Bank recently supported the launch of the US$215 million Central African
Backbone project (CAB) to increase the geographical reach and usage of regional broadband network
services and to reduce prices to all CEMAC countries. Work is now underway to prepare the second
phase of the program that will support infrastructure investments to connect the CAB network to Chad,
Cameroon and CAR. The energy sector presents significant challenges. Through the Emergency Power
Response Project (US$8.0 million), the Bank, in partnership with the French Development Agency, has
been working to support the national electric utility company (Enerca) to partially restore the electricity
supply to its essential customers, by focusing on the rehabilitation of the Boali 1 and 2 hydropower
facilities and to improve its financial and operational performance. Project efforts are advancing but the
infrastructure remains in a critical state, the current generation capacity of 15 MW is insufficient to meet
demand and electricity supply outside of the capital is minimal.
14.
Satisfactory progress has been made in relation to improving access to basic urban and
community infrastructure (Outcome 6). In urban areas, an IDA exceptional allocation and Crisis
Response Window (CRW) resources of US$24 million towards the Bank’s Emergency Urban
Infrastructure Project helped to protect 46,600 people against periodic flooding, to provide access to yearround passable roads to 290,000 people, and provide access to an operational solid waste management
system to 112,000 people. In the aftermath of the floods, the Bank led an assessment that proposed a
medium-term flood reduction and mitigation program. IDA is helping to implement this through an
exceptional allocation of US$5 million aimed at natural disasters. In rural zones, efforts will be supported
through the Bank’s Community Development Project Targeting Vulnerable Groups (see paragraph 9) as
well as the planned Community Reintegration Project (FY11). The latter is designed to strengthen
community capacity in northern CAR, with particular focus on those areas with a high concentration of
returning ex-combatants.

5

This is an ongoing project financed by the AfDB, the French Development Agency and the EU.

5

Table 2: Strategic Theme 2 - Deliverables Summary
WBG Lending /Grants

Planned

Actual

Source

Emergency Energy project - US$8 m

2009

Ongoing

IDA 15

Safe and Reliable Public Electricity - US$2.5 m

2009

Ongoing

SPF

Regional fiber optic infrastructure project - US$7.3 m

2010

Ongoing

Regional IDA

Additional Financing for Regional Trade & Transport - US$67 m

2010

Ongoing

Regional IDA

Community development support for vulnerable groups - S$8m

2009

Ongoing

IDA15

Community Recovery Project, Northern CAR - $8.5 m

2011

Ongoing

TDRP and JSDF

Urban Infrastructure Project – Additional Financing - US$24 m

2010

Ongoing

IDA 15/CRW

Food Response Project - US$ 6.7 m

2009

Ongoing

GFRP

Emergency Agro-Pastoral Recovery Project - US$24 m
Education Project - US$38 m

2012
2009

2011
Ongoing

IDA 15
EFA/FTI

Health Project - US$15 m

2012

FY12

IDA 16

WBG Non-Lending Support
Power Utility Reform Study

Planned
2009

Actual
dropped

Source
-

Strengthening capacity in the Telecommunications and IT sector

2008

Ongoing

IDF

Country Environmental Assessment

FY11

Delivered

BB

Health Sector Status Review

FY11

Pipeline

BB

Floods Assessment

Additional

Delivered

GFDRR

TA on CAR Flood Recovery and Resiliency Program

Additional

Delivered

GFDDR

TA on “ CAR Towards Sustainable Urban Management”

Additional

Ongoing

Cities Alliance

TA on solid waste management in Bangui

Additional

Ongoing

PPIAF

South-South Experience Exchange on Social Water connections
between Burkina Faso and CAR
Public Expenditure Review of Water and Sanitation Sector

Additional

Ongoing

SEETF

Additional

Ongoing

WPP

Study on reconnecting isolated vulnerable rural populations in CAR
into socio-economic structures

Additional

Ongoing

TFESSD

15.
Emergency assistance responded to the food crisis in 2008; efforts are under preparation
to improve agriculture and livestock productivity (Outcome 7). The World Bank and the AfDB
responded to the 2008 food crisis with emergency support of US$7 million and UA3.0 million
respectively to support a school feeding program implemented by the World Food Program (WFP) and to
prepare for further investments in sustainable food security. All food rations have now been distributed by
WFP; 120,000 students in 397 primary schools and pre-schools benefited from two meals daily in 2008
and 2009. Work has recently commenced to advance the second and third components of the grant,
namely to support activities to increase agricultural production and productivity in targeted zones through
two field-based NGOs, and to undertake key agricultural studies that will monitor food security, nutrition
and vulnerability, develop a livestock census methodology, and identify environmentally and socially
friendly agricultural practices. These studies will inform the new Emergency Agro-Pastoral Recovery
Project, which is under accelerated preparation in FY11 thanks to the granting of an exceptional IDA 15
allocation of US$20 million.
16.
Good progress has been made in improving the access and quality of education and health
services but capacity-related challenges remain (Outcome 8). The Education For All-Fast Track
Initiative Catalytic Fund (US$37.8 million) has supported the Government to finance the first phase of its
National Education Strategy and to meet its respective MDG goals by 2020. Gross primary enrollment

6

now stands at 84 percent, surpassing the target of 77.4 percent. The number of textbooks to be distributed
has doubled and the pupil to textbook ratio of 1 to 1 is expected to be met by 2011. In health, the
HIV/AIDS project has recently been extended in order to allow for the distribution of equipment to clinics
and the distribution of the 250,000 bed nets. To date 100,000 have been distributed (from a zero baseline).
A Health Sector Status Review (FY11) is being launched to provide the appropriate analytical
underpinnings for the forthcoming IDA funded intervention in FY12.
17.
Concerted efforts have been undertaken to support the CPS’ four cross cutting themes.

State and Peacebuilding: The World Bank and the AfDB are also supporting the consolidation of
peace through development efforts at the community level. These include the IDA-funded Support to
Vulnerable Groups Community Development Project and TDRP- financed Community Recovery Project
in the north of the country. The Bank is closely collaborating with the United Nations system, which is
supporting the Inclusive Political Dialogue and security sector reform.

Environment and climate change: Work to date includes: (i) a Country Environmental
Assessment, (ii) a medium-term flood reduction and mitigation program and (iii) a Readiness Preparation
Proposal, including a national REDD (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation)
strategy that will enable CAR to participate in the GEF-supported REDD Project for the Congo Basin.

Capacity development: Support has been provided to strengthen the implementation of lending
operations. Examples include analytical work aimed at improving national procurement systems,
implementing EITI, strengthening flood recovery and improving sustainable urban management.

Gender: Several studies are underway to support the Government to update its national gender
strategy; including a gender profile, supported by the AfDB, and a UNDP- supported national strategy to
promote female entrepreneurs. The thematic analysis that is being undertaken as part of the PRSP 2
process will guide the Bank’s support to future interventions on gender equity and economic
empowerment.

4
A.

CPS RELEVANCE, IMPLEMENTATION AND ADJUSTMENTS

CPS relevance

18.
The country’s reform agenda that is supported by the CPS program remains relevant,
and will contribute to the country’s development goals. The baseline PRSP (PRSP 1), on which the
CPS was prepared, is built upon four pillars: (1) security, peace and conflict prevention; (2) good
governance and the rule of law; (3) economic reconstruction and diversification; and (4) human
development. While the reform agenda remains unchanged, PRSP 2 is expected to be directed towards
more growth - enhancing structural reforms to address the new challenges emerging from the global
slowdown. The four pillars are likely to be consolidated into two principal themes that also reflect the
foundation and pillars of the Africa Strategy, namely: (i) consolidation of peace and security, governance,
rule of law and human rights (ii) and inclusive growth and human development. Rural development is at
the core of the PRSP 2 strategy. The Government plans to focus on alleviating extreme poverty, including
food security, by identifying solutions with rapid results and that will translate into more sustainable
growth within the agricultural communities. The monitoring and evaluation process, including the
management information system, will also be improved, based upon a more participatory approach and
with greater focus on the MDG targets and indicators.
19.
The overall objectives as set out in the CPS remain valid and relevant. The CPS’ two
strategic themes remain priority areas for the Government of CAR: (i) to consolidate economic
governance and institutional capacity to ensure an effective management of the country’s resources and
create an enabling environment for private sector development; and (ii) to rehabilitate and develop
infrastructure to sustain economic growth and improve basic service delivery and the living conditions of
the population. In keeping with the Africa Strategy’s primary instrument of partnership, selectivity led the

7

World Bank and the AfDB to commit to sustain and deepen their support to areas where the Banks had
comparative advantage, including public finance management, transparency and accountability in natural
resource management, strengthened economic infrastructure, and human resource development.
20.
CAR is still seeking support in the priority areas as set out in the CPS. The Government
continues to signal its full agreement with the areas of support provided by the World Bank and it is
expected that PRSP 2 will reconfirm the relevance of the existing priority areas of Bank intervention.
Consolidation of efforts around the government’s reform agenda will be critical for CAR’s economic and
social development. This agenda includes plans to increase priority spending in MDG-related sectors
including health, education, water and sanitation, agriculture and rural development, social protection,
and infrastructure. Emphasis will be placed on priority investment projects, removing key bottlenecks on
the budget execution chain, enhancing government capacity to implement investments, and improving
spending efficiency by strengthening the public financial management system and improving governance.
21.
The CPS’ lending and knowledge instruments have proven to be appropriate given the
need to respond quickly to CAR’s emerging development challenges. The CPS chose a blend of
instruments that focus on achieving tangible results from rapidly disbursing interventions, complemented
by robust knowledge products to strengthen public policy dialogue and to build capacity. As previously
indicated, 100 percent of the IDA-funded priority sector investment loans were processed as emergency
operations in order to provide just-in-time support to emerging needs. DPOs have been critical in
allowing the GoCAR to sustain critical public expenditures during the global crisis. The IDA and CRWfinanced operations have helped to provide the fiscal space to maintain the public expenditure program.
Knowledge products have been important to strengthen public policy dialogue and to build capacity, and
efforts are underway to consolidate the sector based analytical and advisory studies. For example, a PER
is being prepared to advise the authorities on how to improve the growth and poverty impact of
government expenditures. Its recommendations will draw upon analytical work recently undertaken
including the draft Water Supply and Sanitation Sector PER report, analysis of public financial
management carried out by the IMF, and the forthcoming Health Sector Assessment.
22.
Thanks to creative leveraging of the national IDA allocation, regional IDA, trust funds,
and exceptional IDA allocations--another theme of the Africa Strategy--the financial envelope
available to CPS implementation has been adequate to date. Resources available to CAR may
stagnate for the remainder of the CPS period, as significant alternative sources of financing beyond the
country’s IDA 16 allocation are not evident at this time. The team will, however, continue to selectively
seek out trust fund resources that complement ongoing or planned activities, including SPF funding to
maintain the Bank’s critical support to public finance management, and TFESSD to complement the new
community recovery program in the north of the country.
B.

Implementation and adjustments

23.
CPS delivery is on track, and in many cases is progressing quicker than anticipated. As
Tables 1 and 2 demonstrate, program delivery has largely proceeded as planned, with new lending
deliverables totaling US$210 million during the CPS period. Planned Analytic and Advisory Activities
are advancing well, with all activities having either been delivered or under preparation. As described
above, these activities are beginning to yield tangible results both in the policy sphere and on the ground.
24.
Portfolio performance is strong. Despite capacity constraints within the public administration,
the Bank’s engagement with the government has been robust. There is a strong commitment to
development. This translates into an impressive degree of political will to move the reform agenda
forward at the policy level, and to ensure progress that yields tangible results at the project level. It is
therefore not surprising that CAR’s average annual disbursement rate has stood at over 30 percent during

8

the CPS period. While there are three projects that are at risk, there are none in problem status. In general,
the government’s teams responsible for project implementation have been proactive in both identifying
implementation bottlenecks and solving them in a timely manner.
25.
Going forward, the CPS will maintain its overall objectives, but will continue to respond
flexibly to CAR’s emerging needs. The overall objectives as set out in the CPS remain valid and
relevant. The Government also continues to signal its full agreement with the areas of support provided
by the World Bank. Nevertheless, as the PRSP 2 is finalized, the CPS will continue to maintain a flexible
approach with respect to its strategic direction, including, as specified in the second pillar of the Africa
Strategy (“vulnerability and resilience”), the ability to respond to shocks. The Bank’s focus during the
remainder of the CPS will be on: i) the selective roll out of new lending in agriculture and health, ii)
implementation and quality of portfolio performance, iii) and expanding support beyond Bangui to more
remote areas of the country.
26.
The Fiscal Year 2011 work program deliverables are broadly on track, though there have
been some slippages into FY12. Preparation of the proposed US$24.0 million Emergency Agro-Pastoral
Recovery Project was advanced to FY11 thanks to a US$20 million exceptional IDA allocation. The
project will increase production and marketing of selected food crops and livestock products. It represents
an important shift in project design in CAR, wherein the proposed project offers a medium- to long-term
framework for strengthening food production and marketing on a sustainable basis, as opposed to
providing just-in-time emergency support. Phase 1 (B) of the Central Africa Backbone Project is under
preparation and will likely be delivered in FY11.The Health Sector Assessment has slipped to FY12 in
order to allow for the completion of the Multiple Cluster Survey (MICS-4) report in May 2011. The
review will document key dimensions of the sector, focusing on service delivery, finance and impact on
the health status of the nation, in order to identify challenges and opportunities for policy dialogue and the
new lending in FY12. The PER, the flagship AAA, has also been pushed to FY12 in order to allow
additional time for the task team to undertake analysis that will underpin the report.

Table 3: FY11 and FY12 Lending and AAA plan
FY11

Planned
Planned

Actual/Revised
Actual/Revised

Source
Source

Emergency Agro-Pastoral Recovery Project –US$24m

2012

2011

IDA 15 &
Exceptional IDA

Central Africa Backbone – 1B –US$9.9m

N/A

2011/12

IDA – Regional

Technical Assistance for Public Finance Management and
Governance – US$2m

N/A

2011

SPF

Health Sector Status Review

2011

2012

BB

FY12
Health Project -US$10m forecast – front load to US$15m

2012

2012

IDA-16

Public Expenditure Review

2011

2012

BB

27.
Fiscal Year 2012 will focus on the delivery of an important new health project, which will
support the implementation of the Government’s National Health Plan (2010-2014). The operation will
aim at increasing utilization and improving the quality of basic health services with a particular focus on
child and maternal health. The project will support the Ministry of Health to implement a performance
based financing system to deliver health services to under-served areas. This operation will be in the

9

range of US$15 to US$20 million, depending on the final IDA 16 allocation to CAR, and the extent of
frontloading desired by the Government that will be based on the menu of proposed activities.
28.
The IFC will be scaling up its SME development operations and other Advisory Services
activities, funded mainly through IFC’s Conflict Affected States in Africa (CASA) Program (US$ 25
million for the four CASA countries). In addition, IFC’s SME Ventures Program will be providing risk
capital finance to SMEs (US$ 2.5 million) and strengthening SME management skills (Business Edge
training Program). In November 2009, IFC also received government support to issue a medium-to-long
term CFA Franc bond in the CEMAC countries. The proceeds from the bond issuance will be invested in
projects in the CEMAC region. IFC's objective is to establish its credit in the market through this
issuance of the bond and follow this up with Structured Finance Transactions that will allow it to
efficiently mobilize local currency financing for the private sector in collaboration with local financial
institutions (i.e., ECOBANK in CAR). MIGA also remains open in CAR, offering its political risk
product for investors who are keen to invest in the country, but who remain apprehensive because of
political risks or governance issues.
29.
Where possible, the CPS will try to grow support beyond Bangui. Poverty incidence in
CAR varies substantially across regions, with the lowest concentration in Bangui, and the highest
incidences in the most remote, rural areas of the country. Bank support is evolving, and is shifting its
emphasis to these underserved, albeit difficult to access, areas. The ongoing Support to Vulnerable
Groups Community Development Project, the recently launched Community Recovery Project and
planned new investments in agriculture and health signal this geographic reorientation of Bank-supported
activities in the field. While responding to the country’s most chronic needs related to development, this
transition also presents challenges to implementation and related Bank support.
30.
The portfolio quality will be important to monitor during the remainder of the CPS
period. As explained earlier, the current portfolio is performing well. On the client side, strong leadership
and a commitment to development at all levels have led to impressive results under challenging
circumstances. Bank task teams have been proactive in supporting the government to identify and
overcome implementation obstacles, including capacity constraints, limited data availability, and
unexpected cost overruns due to a lack of competition. This joint effort to ensuring development results
will be critical to sustain for the remainder of the CPS period, particularly given the large increase in
commitments over the past two fiscal years.
31.
The revised CPS results framework (Annex 1) reflects minor changes to reflect
adjustments in the lending and analytical work programs. Changes to the outcome indicators, as
summarized in Annex 2, reflect revised project targets in relation to the Emergency Power Response
Project (Outcome 5), and updated indicators in relation to the water and sanitation components of the
Emergency Urban Infrastructure Project (Outcome 6).

5

RISKS

32.
The risks highlighted in the FY2009-2012 CPS remain valid. The following section updates
certain key risks (political, security, macroeconomic), and identifies two new risks (food security and
portfolio management) that relate to the remainder of the CPS period.
33.
Political risk. After three postponements, presidential elections were conducted on January 23rd
2011. Following the successful re-election of the incumbent president, a new government was formed
and officially recognized on April 22nd 2011. The new Government will be tasked with addressing the
10

challenges associated with peace and security that are essential for political stability and to build upon
that which has been developed during the first years following the transition. While support to the
political process and associated transition are outside of the mandate of the World Bank, collaboration is
underway with the Peace Building Commission to ensure that peace building reforms and investments are
sufficiently addressed in the PRSP 2 and the upcoming Round Table.
34.
Security risk. As outlined in paragraph 5, the Government continues to face insecurity in
outlying areas, with ongoing rebel attacks in the North-East and South-East. While the election outcome
may lead to a reduction in security risks on Bangui, the slow implementation of the DDR process
continues to undermine the consolidation of peace. The President is currently overseeing a second
campaign to advance the process, including the setting-up of local DDR committees and the distribution
of food allowances, financed through the national budget. While the DDR program is implemented by the
government and UNDP, the Bank and AfDB will continue to focus their efforts on community recovery
in the north to help foster peace building at the local level and mitigate some of the security risk.
35.
Macroeconomic risk. CAR continues to remain vulnerable to shocks. While preliminary
estimates show a recovery in 2010 with real GDP growth of 3.3 percent, a prolonged impact of the global
economic crisis on exports could lead to slower growth, lower revenue, and deterioration in debt
indicators. Critical resources available to CAR may also stagnate from donors for the remainder of the
CPS period, due to concerns relating to the uncertain political situation. Moreover, inadequate progress
relating to domestic revenue mobilization could cause delays in private sector investment projects that are
needed to boost CAR’s economy and create jobs. Mitigating factors are CAR’s recent track record in
macroeconomic management, which has been strong in response to exogenous shocks. The Government’s
focus on growth enhancing structural reforms as part of its poverty reduction strategy, and support
provided by the Bank and other donors on this, should help build macroeconomic resilience in the face of
any new exogenous shocks.
36.
Food Security risk. About 30 percent of the population of CAR is currently food insecure, and
even small internal and external shocks can cause many more to face hunger. Productivity gains for
small-holder farmers will become critical to any mitigation strategy for this. These productivity gains are
within reach for the majority of Central African farmers, but strategic investments are needed to make this
happen. The new Emergency Agro-Pastoral Recovery Project and the associated Emergency Food
Response Project will provide critical mitigation support through focused efforts to sustainably increase
production.
37.
Portfolio management risk. Supervision of a relatively young and significantly larger
portfolio (currently at US$230 million in commitments) presents significant challenges. As the portfolio
expands its geographic scope, supervision remains costly and difficult given the insecurity. Most TTLs
are not based in the country office, and there are limited flights into the country (there is only one flight
per week from Europe). Further efforts will be made to decentralize key staff to the country office,
including TTLs, fiduciary and safeguards staff, and additional resources will be made for implementation
support. The new Fragile States hub in Nairobi is also expected to provide a complement of expert
support to the country team and office.

11

Annex 1: Results Matrix for CAR CPS (FY09-FY12)6
Selected
CAR PRSP
objectives &
indicators7

Stabilization of public
finances


Improving the security
of tax revenue collection
systems.

Reinforcing budgetary
control.
Indicator: Tax burden 9.5%
in 2006 (no target)

Key Issues



World Bank
Progress to Date
Group/AfDB
(in relation to CPS
Instruments
Outcomes)
Axis 1: Consolidation of Economic Governance and Institutional Capacity
(Aligned with PRSP Pillar 2: Promote Good Governance and Rule of Law)

Tax level, while
increasing is still very low
(around 10%)

Inadequate
enforcement of rules and
procedures within state
financial bodies

Absence of
regulatory framework for
procurement

Poor financial
management and planning
capacity

Absence of
automation and
computerization of
procedures in state
financial bodies

CPS Outcome
& Indicators

CPS
Milestones

1. Improved public
finance management
and revenue
mobilization
Public finance management
1.1
A single treasury
account is in place by end
2010 (WB and AfDB)
1.2
Percentage of
investment budget using
competitive procedures
(Baseline: <20% by end
2008, Target: >70% from
2010 on-wards) (WB and
AfDB)
Revenue mobilization
1.3
Exemption
conventions management
reviewed by Inter-ministerial
Committee in charge of Tax
and Customs Duty
Exemptions and made public
(Baseline: 0 in 2008, target:
100% from 2010 on-wards)
(WB and AfDB)

Public finance
management
All non-donor
mandated accounts in
commercial banks are
closed by end 2010
(WB)
The Procurement
Regulatory Agency
and Directorate are
fully operational by
end 2010 (WB)
Comprehensive budget
execution reports
using harmonized
nomenclatures
prepared and reviewed
by external oversight
bodies by end 2010
(WB and AfDB)
Networking of the
Budget Directorate
and the Treasury
completed by end
2010 (WB and AfDB)
MTEF used for key
sectors (health,
education,

6

1.1 Achieved: In 2009, the
Government closed all but
three of the 70 accounts
that were necessary to carry
out Treasury activities with
the commercial banks.
Reconciliations between
fiscal and cash accounts
have improved substantially
and are now undertaken
daily.
1.2 Partly achieved: of the
31 contracts issued in 2009,
about 29% followed the
new procurement
procedures using
competitive bidding, of
these about 10% were
based on single source
procurement approved by
the Procurement
Directorate.
1.3 Largely achieved. The
CICEFD reviews the tax
and customs exemption
requests submitted to it by
the Minister of Finance.
The CICEFD's quarterly
and annual reports on

For each result measurement, the name of the accountable agency is noted. In some instances, both WBG and AfDB
have selected the same results measurement.
7
This is a subset of the CAR PRSP Objectives taken directly from the final PRSP document.

12

Completed Projects:
 DPO III - Economic
Management and
Governance Reform Grant
II (EMGRG II) $5m
(FY09) (WB)
 Economic Reforms
Support Program (ERSP)
phase II for UA 9.5m FY08
(AfDB)
On-going Projects:
 LICUS III Project – $2.0
m for Ec. Management and
Improved Accountability
(FY09) (WB)
 CEMAC Regional
Financial Institutions
Project $5.0 m(FY09)
(WB)
 DPO IV - $8.8 m
((FY11) (WB)
Pipeline:
 Economic Reforms
Support Program (ERSP)
phase III (PARE III) for
UA 10m in 2011 (AfDB)
AAA:
 Public Expenditure
Review FY12 ($0.25m)

Selected
CAR PRSP
objectives &
indicators7

Key Issues

CPS Outcome
& Indicators

CPS
Milestones
infrastructure and
agriculture) for
budgeting by end 2010
(WB and AfDB)

Progress to Date
(in relation to CPS
Outcomes)
approved and rejected
exemptions are posted on
government website.
However, discretionary
exemptions continue.

Revenue mobilization
A revised National
Investment Chart
regulating exemptions
is operational by end
2010 (WB)

World Bank
Group/AfDB
Instruments
(WB)
TA:
 TA for PRSP
Implementation (CMU
request to Fragile State
Initiative) FY10 (WB)
 TA on Strategic
Communication for
Development FY11(WB)
 Partners: AFD, EU

Network installed
between CICEFD unit
and customs systems
(ASYCUDA) and tax
directorate database
(SYSTEMIF) by end
2011
(WB)

Stabilization of public
finances


Fighting corruption.

Exploit Natural
Resources


Actively involve the
public in sustainable
forestry management and
maximize the benefits of
forestry for poor people

Improve where needed
the institutional and fiscal
framework surrounding
mining activities

Strengthen the
capacity of regulatory
bodies in the mining sector
and increase civil society
involvement



Weak institutional
framework and poor
implementation of
regulatory provisions

Weak capacity of the
sector’s public institutions
due to staff and equipment
shortages

Lack of involvement
of local people in the
management of mining
resources.

2. Improved
transparency and
accountability in natural
resource management
Mining
2.1
Investment permits
in compliance with the new
Mining Legislation
(Baseline: 0 in 2008, Target:
100% from 2011 onwards)
(WB)
2.2
CAR fulfils all
criteria and submits its
official request for
Compliant Status to for
consideration by the EITI
Secretariat Board (WB)

Mining
New standard Mining
Agreement is adopted
by end 2009 (WB)
Publication of the
2007-9 EITI revenue
accounts by end 2011
(WB)
EITI work plan
executed by end 2010
(WBG)
Forestry
The remaining three
forest concessions are
awarded in compliance
with the revised

13

2.1Partly achieved.
Parliament adopted the new
Standard Mining
Agreement in April 2009.
However, at least one
Mining License has been
issued in 2010 under the
old Mining Code.
2.2 Completed. CAR was
certified as EITI compliant
on March 22 1011. This
was based upon its EITI
reports for 2007, 2008, and
2009 covering revenues
from the production of
diamonds, gold and
uranium, which involves all
stakeholders. The report is

Closed Projects:
 DPO III - Economic
Management and
Governance Reform Grant
II (EMGRG II) for $5m
(FY09) (WB)
On-going Projects:
 LICUS III Project – $2.0
m for Ec. Management and
Improved Accountability
(FY09) (WB)
 DPO IV - $8.8m (FY11)
(WB)
Pipeline Projects:
 Economic Reforms
Support Program (ERSP)
phase III for UA 10m
FY11 (AfDB)

Selected
CAR PRSP
objectives &
indicators7

Key Issues

CPS Outcome
& Indicators

CPS
Milestones

Forestry
2.3
Forest revenues
transferred to local
communities
(Baseline: not recorded,
Target: 35% of Stumpage
fees and 25% of forest
regenerating taxes by end
2010) (WB)

Indicators: Share of
earnings from wood in tax
revenue (%) (baseline,
target: not available)
Share of earnings from
mining in tax revenue (%)
(Baseline: 3% in 2006,4%
by end 2011)

Progress to Date
(in relation to CPS
Outcomes)

Forestry Code by end
2010 (WB)

expected to be disseminated
worldwide.

CAR’s AFLEG action
plan is implemented
by end 2011 (WB)

2.3 Achieved. 30 percent of
stumpage fees and 25
percent of reforestation tax
were allocated to
communities in line with
the revenue distribution
mechanism

2.4
CAR becomes an
AFLEG member by end
2011(WB)

2. 4. Achieved. CAR is
expected to adopt by end
2010 a framework
document for a national
tracking system and for a
system of verification of the
legality of timber
production in the context of
the FLEGT process.

World Bank
Group/AfDB
Instruments
TA:
 TA on Strategic
Communication for
Development FY11 (WB)
 TA for PRSP
Implementation (CMU
request to Fragile State
Initiative) (WB) – ($0.30m)
 EITI support (FY10)
(WB)
AAA:
 Mining Sector
Assessment ($0.03m) FY09
(WB)
 Country Environmental
Assessment ($0.05m) FY10
(WB)
 Diamond Sector
Assessment (FY10) (WB)
 REDD Project (Reducing
Emissions and Forest
Degradation (WBG- GEF
grant)
Partners: AFD, EU,
UNDP

Improvement of the
quality of public
services
Decentralization and
reorganization of
public administration
Improvement of
community
participation

 Inefficient public

administration system
 Dilapidated public
office infrastructure
 Weak human and
technical capacity

3. Strengthened
administrative planning
and management
capacity at central and
local levels

30% of targeted
villages have received
capacity building
support by end 2010
(WB)

3.1
Observable
improvement in the
implementation and
monitoring of PRSP in Line
Ministries (WBG and AfDB)

20% of targeted
communes have
functioning and
representative
coordination bodies
with regular meetings

14

3.1 Partly Achieved. Since
August 2009, all sectoral
committees have used a
standard format to report
their poverty activities,
which facilitates evaluation
of progress and any
problems. However, several
committees are facing
capacity constraints to
report on progress.

On-going Projects:
 Economic planning
capacities rehabilitation
support project (PARCPE)
for Euro 1,963m (AfDB)
FY06
 LICUS III Project – $2.0
m for Ec. Management and
Improved Accountability
(FY09) (WB)
 Community
Development Project

Selected
CAR PRSP
objectives &
indicators7
Indicators: Satisfaction
index of public services
users

Key Issues

CPS Outcome
& Indicators

CPS
Milestones

3.2
40% of targeted
communes have Local
Development Plans
developed through a
participatory process by end
2011 (WB)

(WB)
350 (40% of women)
experts of key
ministries involved in
the implementation of
the PRSP trained by
end 2012, including
(AfDB-PCDAGV)

Progress to Date
(in relation to CPS
Outcomes)
3.2 Not yet achieved.

World Bank
Group/AfDB
Instruments
targeting vulnerable groups
for $8m (WB) FY09
Pipeline Projects:
 Multi-sector institutional
support program for UA
2.5m in 2010 (AfDB) FY10
 Secondment program
(technical assistance)
(AfDB) FY09
 TA for PRSP
Implementation (CMU
request to Fragile State
Initiative) (WB)
 TA on Strategic
Communication for
Development FY09-10
(WB)
 Water and sanitation
sector institutional support
project (AfDB)
 Community
Development Project
targeting vulnerable groups
for UA 8m (AfDB) FY09
 State and Peacebuilding
Fund support to Local
Governance ($3.5 m) (WB)
 Fragile States Facility
($2 m) (AfDB)

AAA:
 Growth diagnostic study
(AfDB) FY09-10
Partners: EU, AFD,
UNDP

15

Selected
CAR PRSP
objectives &
indicators7
Private sector and
business environment


Establish a legal and
institutional framework and
incentive structure
conducive to private
enterprise

Build the capacity of
institutions servicing the
private sector and develop
business support services

Strengthen
partnerships between the
public and private sectors

Key Issues


Low capacity of
SMEs

Weak business
environment (CAR is
ranked 180th out of 181 in
the 2009 Doing Business
Report)

High internal debt of
the Government vis-à-vis
private companies

CPS Outcome
& Indicators

CPS
Milestones

4. Improved investment
climate and more
business opportunities
for local SMEs

Support to reforms to
facilitate business
registration (IFC)
Venture capital
provided to more than
50 enterprises by end
2010 (IFC)

4.1
Chamber of
commerce fully functional
and active (IFC)
4.2
Time to register a
business reduced (IFC)

Financial
intermediaries
supported to develop
products adapted to
SMEs (IFC)

Progress to Date
(in relation to CPS
Outcomes)
4.1 Partial progress; The
chamber of office is on its
way to becoming fully
functional and active.
4.2 Achieved. Car has
reduced its current business
registration tax from
150.000 CFA to 70.000
CFA (US$300 to US$140
equivalent)

(No Indicators)

World Bank
Group/AfDB
Instruments
On-going Projects:
 IFC Conflict Affected
States in Africa (CASA)
Program
 IFC Ventures Program
 MIGA guarantee FY08 –
telecomm. Project
Pipeline Projects:
 Trade Financing
Initiative and the
Emergency Liquidity
Facility (AfDB)
 IFC Support to
improvement of business
climate and to the
development of SMEs
(FY09)
AAA:
Growth Diagnostic Study
(AfDB) (FY10)

Axis 2: Rehabilitation and Development of Basic Socio-Economic Infrastructure
(Aligned with PRSP Pillar 3 Rebuild and Diversify the Economy and Pillar 4 Develop Human Capital)
Promote the energy
sector


Continue with the
restructuring of the sector

Diversify energy
sources

Improve hydrocarbon
management capacity
Indicator: Proportion of
population with access to
electricity (Baseline: 5% in
2006, no target)



Dilapidated
infrastructure

Frequent power
outages

High transmission
and distribution losses

Weak financial
performance of the power
utility due in part to low
bill collection

5. Improved
Infrastructure for
Regional Economic
Integration
Energy
5.1 Number of hours of
load shedding decreases
from 8 hours per day
currently to 3 hours per day
by end 2012 (WB and
AfDB)
5.2 ENERCA generates
enough cash for operations
and maintenance of its
system in Bangui from 4.5bn
CFA to 2.7bn CFA by end

16

Energy
An additional firm
generation capacity of
about 3 MW is added
to the system by end
2011 (WB)
About 10,000
consumers use
efficient lamps by end
2010 (Baseline: 0)
(WB)
Bill collection
improves from 65% in
2008 to 80% by end
2010 (WB)

5.1 Not on track. For 2010,
the target is 6 hours per day
(not achieved). The current
number of hours is 10.
5.2 Not on track. Estimates
of sales (recovered) are
currently estimated at 5.6bn
With respect to milestones,
Enerca limited generation
capacity was temporarily
reduced by almost 2 MW,
out of about 18 MW.
Actions for replacement
and reinforcement are
underway.

On-going Projects:
 Emergency Energy
Response Project (US$8m)
FY09 (WB)
 Safe and Reliable Public
Electricity Project
(US$2.5m – SPF grant)
FY09 (WB)
 Boali 2 and 3 project
(UA 23m) (AfDB)
AAA:
 PPIAF Power Utility
Reform Study ($0.5m)
(WB)
 RIAS II (WB) FY09
 ECCAS Reg. Integration

Selected
CAR PRSP
objectives &
indicators7

Key Issues

CPS Outcome
& Indicators

CPS
Milestones

Progress to Date
(in relation to CPS
Outcomes)

2012 (WBG).

Strategy (AfDB) FY09
 National Electrification
Master Plan study and
institutional support
(AfDB)

Overall electricity
losses are reduced
from 50% in 2008 to
40% by end 2011
(WB)

Develop
telecommunications


Promotion of
competition

Strengthen the legal
framework

Full coverage of the
population

Improve internet
utilization



Weak legal,
regulatory and
institutional framework;

Dilapidated basic
infrastructure

Lack of a dynamic,
competitive climate
conducive to the
development of ICT sector

Poor coverage of ICT
services

Telecommunications
5.3 Coverage of mobile
network increase from
19.3% in 2008 to 40% by
end 2011 (WB)

Telecommunications
Three operators and
service providers
buying capacity from
the Regional
Infrastructure by end
2011 (WB)
Secondary legislation
related to broadband
developed by end
2010 (WB)

Indicators: Proportion of
mobile phone subscribers
among the urban
population (11 in 2006, no
target)

Frequency spectrum
management
regulatory tools
designed by end 2010
(WB)
Deploy the Central
African Backbone
infrastructure in CAR
to link Bangui to the
neighboring countries
by end 2011 (WB)

World Bank
Group/AfDB
Instruments

Partners: AFD

5.3 Not yet achieved –
project under preparation
and data not yet available

On-going Projects:
 MIGA guarantee FY08
– telecommunication
project
 Technical study for the
Central Africa backbone
(WB-PPIAF)
Pipeline Projects:
 Central African
Backbone / Regional Fiber
Optic Cable project FY10
(Total IDA $17m – but
only $2.5m CAR country
allocation (WB)
 Regional Fiber Optic
Cable project FY11 (AfDB)
 RIAS II (WB) FY09
 ECCAS Reg. Integration
Strategy (AfDB) FY09
AAA:
 Feasibility study national
fiber optic infrastructure
(AfDB)
 Technical study for the
Central African Backbone
(WB – PPIAF)
Partners: CEMAC,
CEEAC, African Union
Commission and

17

Selected
CAR PRSP
objectives &
indicators7

Key Issues

CPS Outcome
& Indicators

CPS
Milestones

Progress to Date
(in relation to CPS
Outcomes)

World Bank
Group/AfDB
Instruments
International
Telecommunications Union

Develop transport
infrastructure


Secure the
international access to the
sea

Strengthen the
institutional framework

Mobilize existing
departmental resources

Seek finance for the
2008-2010 period

Repair transport
infrastructure



Access to the
international market
through Douala

Poor maintenance of
road network

Few roads that are
passable during the rainy
season

Transport
5.4 Proportion of road in
good condition on the
Douala – Bangui corridor
increases from 50% in 2007
to 70% by end 2012 (WB
and AfDB)
5.5 Average transit time in
days for imports from arrival
in port of Douala to Bangui
decreases by 20% by end
2012 (from 10 days in 2008)
(WB and AfDB)

Indicator: Mileage of roads
and tracks that have been
repaired or maintained
(km) (Baseline: 700 in
2006, no target available)

Transport
Construction of 78 km
of road by end 2012
on the Douala-Bangui
corridor (WB and
AFDB)
1200 kms of roads
maintained by end
2010 (government as a
commitment)
800 kms of earth roads
rehabilitated by end
2012 (WB and AfDB)
Budget of the road
fund increases to 4
billion CFA by end
2012 (from 2 billion
CFA in 2006)
Unpaved network
under routine
maintenance exceed
1,200 km by end 2012
(from 700)

5.4: On track; the
proportion of roads in good
condition on the DoualaBangui corridor has
increased from 53% to
57%.

On-going Projects:
 CEMAC - Regional
project Transport Transit
Facilitation
(CMR/CHD/CAR) (FY07)
(WB)
 Regional Project on
Transport-Transit
Facilitation
(CMR/CHD/CAR)
Additional financing for
$55 m in CAR– FY10
(WB)
Pipeline Projects:
 Ouesso (Congo), BanguiNdjamena Transport project
(FY12) (AfDB)
AAA:
 RIAS II (WB) FY09
 ECCAS Reg. Integration
Strategy (AfDB) FY09
 Feasibility study for
Ouesso (Congo), BanguiNdjamena corridor FY09
(UA4m) (AfDB)
 Feasibility study for
Obangui-Congo-Sangha
river Transport project
FY09-10 (UA 4m) (AfDB)
Partners: AFD, US, EU

18

Selected
CAR PRSP
objectives &
indicators7
Water treatment and
sanitation


Establish an
appropriate institutional and
regulatory framework

Nation-wide capacity
building for the sector in
relation to management and
planning

Construct and renovate
supply works and adequate
treatment plants

Finance the sector
from diverse sources which
are stable and reliable
Indicators: Households
with access to drinking
water (Baseline: 28.2% in
2006, no target)

Key Issues


Urban infrastructure
is destroyed and in
disarray

Financial and
institutional weakness of
service providers

Poor city planning

CPS Outcome
& Indicators

CPS
Milestones
Water
10 boreholes
constructed by end
2011 (WB)

6. Improved Access to
Basic Urban and
Community
Infrastructure (Urban,

Replaced by:

Water Supply, Sanitation,
Drainage and Roads)
Water
6.1
Number of people
in urban areas provided with
access to improved water
sources under the project is
38,000 in 2014 (WB)
6.2
Access to potable
water in 3 “Chefs Lieux de
Prefectures” increase from
32% to 100% (AfDB)
Sanitation / Solid Waste
/Drainage

Improved community
water points
constructed or
rehabilitated under the
project
Price of cubic meter of
water in public water
point decrease from
FCFA 1,250 FCFA to
FCFA 500 in 3 ‘Chefslieux de Préfectures’
(AfDB)

Sanitation / Solid
Waste / Drainage

6.3
Number of people
in urban areas provided with
access to a regular solid
waste collection under the
project increases to 390,000
by 2014.
6.4
People with access
to improved drainage in
areas served by the project
increases from 6000 in 2007
to 70,000 in 2014. (WB)
6.5
Number of people
in urban areas provided witih
access to all-season roads
within a 500 meter range
under the project is 420,000
in 2014 (WB)

19

Solid waste collected
as a percentage of
solid waste produced
in Bangui increase
from 6% in 2007 to
40% by end 2010
(WB). (Milestone to be
dropped)
Seven kilometres of
primary drainage
constructed by end
2011 (WB)
66 kilometers of urban
roads rehabilitated in
Bangui by end 2011
(WB).

Progress to Date
(in relation to CPS
Outcomes)
6.1 Not achieved. However,
Ten boreholes have been
drilled, awaiting water
towers and kiosks to be
built in the coming months
to provide access to water
supply.
6.2 Not yet achieved. The
project has just started
disbursements (AfDB)
6.3.
112,000 additional people
got access to an operational
solid waste management
system (compared to
incremental end of project
target of 227,000).
6.4.
46,600 additional people
are protected against
periodic flooding
(compared to incremental
end of project target of
52,000);
6.5. 290,000 additional
people got access to yearround passable roads
(compared to incremental
end of project target of
420,000);
43 kilometers of urban
roads were rehabilitated,
although some of the roads
were damaged during the
2009 floods.

World Bank
Group/AfDB
Instruments
On-going Projects:
 Water and Sanitation
Project (UA 7m) (AfDB)
 Emergency Urban
Infrastructure FY07 for
US$ 18 m. (WB)
 Additional financing for
Emergency Urban
Infrastructure (FY10) (WB)
 Water and sanitation
sector Institutional Support
Project for Euro1.96m
(AfDB)
TA:
 Secondment
Program/Technical
Assistance for $2m (AfDB)
AAA
 Urbanization Master
Plan study for Bangui
(AfDB)
Partners: EU, AFD,
UNDP

Selected
CAR PRSP
objectives &
indicators7
Improving Community
Participation
(No indicators)

CPS Outcome
& Indicators

CPS
Milestones

Progress to Date
(in relation to CPS
Outcomes)

Community Development
and Services
6.6
40% of financed
village level projects achieve
their targets in terms of
increased access to social
and infrastructure services
by end 2012 (WB)

Community
Development and
Services
30% of targeted
villages have received
capacity building
support by end 2010
(WB)

6.7
Average distance
in targeted villages from a
health center or a water point
decrease by 2/3 by end 2013
(AfDB)

20% of targeted
communes have
functioning and
representative
coordination bodies
with regular meetings
(WB)

Not yet achieved. Baseline
studies undertaken by the
Central African Institute for
Statistics and SocioEconomic Sciences
(ICASEES) have recently
completed. Consultant
support is now being
provided during the initial
phase of the data entry
process.

Key Issues


Low physical
security for the population

Weak capacity of
state institutions

Profound social and
economic divisions

Limited access to
basic social and economic
services in rural areas

Rehabilitate and build
200 (AfDB) + 80
(WB) basic
infrastructure/microprojects by end 2012




Support rural people
Build the capacity of
institutions

Intensify and diversify
agriculture
Indicators:
- Food production in tons



Low agricultural
productivity

Lack of access to
certain insecure areas

Lack of producer
access to inputs and tools

7. Improved
Agriculture and
Livestock Productivity
7.1
70% of targeted
farmers adopt at least one
improved technology by end
2010 (WB)
7.2

Additional 12,000

20

50,000 agricultural
producers receive
improved inputs (seeds
and tools) by end 2010
(WB)
2000 agricultural
producers receive
training by end 2010
(AfDB)

On-going Projects:
 LICUS grant for
Community-Driven
Development and Social
Sector Project (US$2.7
million) (WB)
 Community
Development Project
(FY09) (WB)
 Japanese Social
Development Fund (JSDF)
Grant for $1.8m (WB)

Pipeline Projects:
 Community
Development Project
targeting vulnerable groups
(UA8m) (AfDB)
 Community Recovery –
Northern CAR Project (SPF
grant) $3.5 m in FY10
(WB)
 Transitional
Demobilization &
Reintegration Program
(TDRP) 09 (AfDB/WB)

40% of targeted
communes have Local
Development Plans
developed through a
participatory process
by end 2011 (WB)

Promote and
modernize agriculture

World Bank
Group/AfDB
Instruments

Partners: UNDP, France,
European Union, Japan
7.1 Partially achieved. 1800
beneficiaries have received
improved seeds, or cuttings;
1500 have received tools
and 1100 have received
training.

On-going Projects:
 Emergency Food
Response ($7.0 million)
FY09 (WB)
 Emergency Food
Response for UA3.0m
FY08 (AfDB)

.
Pipeline Projects:
 Rural infrastructure

Selected
CAR PRSP
objectives &
indicators7

Key Issues

(Baseline: 3017 in 2006, no
target)
- Production of cash crops
(cotton, coffee) in tons
(Baseline: 5500 in 2006,
no target)
- Number of heads of
livestock (Baseline: 13841
in 2006, no target)

CPS Outcome
& Indicators

CPS
Milestones

tons of food products, 1,000
tons of cotton and 1,000 tons
of meat commercialized by
end 2012 (AfDB)

Progress to Date
(in relation to CPS
Outcomes)

World Bank
Group/AfDB
Instruments
rehabilitation Project (UA4
m) FY09 (AfDB)
 Agriculture / rural
development project for
US$10 m in FY12 (WB)

250km of rural roads
rehabilitated by
end2012 (AfDBPARIR)
2 abattoirs, 2 livestock
markets, 2 provincial
markets, and 1 rural
market built by end
2012(AfDB-PARIR)

AAA
 Food Security study
FY09 (AfDB)
Partners: FAO, EU

2 training centers, 2
laboratories and
livestock food factory
rehabilitated and
equipped by end 2012
(AfDB-PARIR)

Education


Increase the range of
education on offer

Increase the proportion
of pupils completing
primary school

Increase retention rates

Raise awareness and
mobilize all partners
Indicators:
- Registration in primary
education, basic level
1(Baseline: 60% in 2006,
Target: 73% in 2010)
- Rate of completion of

Education

One child out of four
have never attended
school

The conditions of
instruction are extremely
poor with degraded and
inadequate number of
classrooms and
insufficient textbooks.

Lack of trained
teachers.
Health and HIV/Aids

Health service

8. Improved access and
quality of education and
health services
Education
8.1
Gross enrolment in
primary education increase
from 73.7% in 2007 to
81.7% by end 2011 (WB)
8.2
Pupil – teacher
ratio decrease from 90.5 in
2007 to 80 by end 2011
(WB)
8.3
Pupil-reading
textbook ratio decreases

21

300 (70% of women)
agents of the Ministry
of Agriculture, 50
groups (1000
members) trained by
end 2015 (AfDBPARIR)
Education
284 primary
classrooms
constructed by end
2010 (WB)
480 000 French and
mathematics textbooks
delivered to targeted
schools by end 2010
(WB)
300 teachers embark
on 1st year of initial
training at ENI and

Achieved
8.1 Targets for gross
enrollment in primary
education have been
surpassed to 84%.
8.2. The Pupil teacher ratio
is now at 81.
8.3. The number of
textbooks to be distributed
has doubled; 670,000
textbooks are currently
under distribution which
will allow the ratio of 1:1 to

On-going Projects:
 Multi-sectoral
HIV/AIDs, Health,
Education ($17.0 million)
project FY02 (WB)
 EFA/FTI Catalytic Fund
($38m) (WB)
Pipeline Project:
 Health sector project
(FY12) (WB)
AAA:
 Health Sector Finance
Assessment (FY11) (WB)

Selected
CAR PRSP
objectives &
indicators7
primary education, basic
level 1 (Baseline: 30% in
2006, Target: 53% in 2015)
- Ratio of literacy among
10 to 24 year olds
(Baseline: 57.3% in 2003,
No Target)

Health and HIV/Aids


Regenerate and
strengthen the health care
system

Finance scaled
implementation of priority
child and maternal
healthcare programs

Combat HIV/Aids,
tuberculosis and malaria
Indicators:
- Deliveries assisted by a
medical worker (Baseline:
44% in 2006, no target)
- Rate of use of condoms
among 15-24 year olds
(Baseline: 41% in 2006, no
target)

Key Issues
provision is very poor

Under-funded and
short-staffed public health
institutions constrain
service delivery

Public health staff
concentration in Bangui is
excessive, leaving health
posts and hospitals in the
rest of the country understaffed

HIV/Aids infection
rates are thought to be on
the increase

UNAIDS estimates
HIV prevalence in CAR at
about 6.3 percent among
persons aged between 15
and 49 years, which is
above the 3 to 5 percent
rates in neighbouring
countries

CPS Outcome
& Indicators

CPS
Milestones

from 7 in 2007 to 2 by end
2011
8.4
Pupil-math
textbook ratio decreases
from 6 in 2007 to 2 by end
2011
Health and HIV/Aids
8.5
200,000 men and
women accepted VCT and
received test results in
targeted health centers by
end 2010 compared to 0 in
2007 (WB)
8.6
300,000 additional
households using ITBNs by
end 2011 (WB)

22

Progress to Date
(in relation to CPS
Outcomes)

450 teachers at the 8
CPRs by end
2010(WB)

be met in relation to pupilreading textbook ratio by
2010-2011.

More than 1500
teachers contracted by
end 2010 (WB)

Other milestones are also
on track, in particular the
construction of primary
classrooms, and number of
teachers trained.

Health and HIV/Aids
20,000 blood
transfusion pockets
tested for HIV and
other blood borne
infections in targeted
health centers by end
2010 (WB)
5,000 pregnant women
reached by PMTCT
during the last 12
months in targeted
health centers by end
2010(WB)

8.5Health- partially
achieved. 90,241 men and
women have accepted VCT
and received test results in
targeted health centers by
end 2011 (compared to 0 in
2007).
8.6. To date 100,000 have
received InsecticideTreated Bed Nets (ITBNs).

World Bank
Group/AfDB
Instruments

Partners: The Global
Fund, German cooperation,
France, UNESCO, China
and USAID

Annex 2: Updated and Revised CAS Outcome Indicators
Original CAS Indicators
Updated and Revised Indicators
CAS Outcome 5. Improved infrastructure for Regional Economic Integration
Energy: ENERCA increased its cash generation and
Updated: Energy: ENERCA generates enough cash for
expenditure on operations and maintenance from 2
operations and maintenance of its system in Bangui
billion CFA in 2008 to 2.7 billion CFA by end 2012.
from 4.5bn CFA to 2.7bn CFA by end 2012 (WBG)
(WBG)
CAS Outcome 6. Improved access to Basic Urban and Community Infrastructure
Updated:
Water
People with access to improved drainage in areas served
Number of people with access to potable water
increase from 10,000 in 2007 to 110,000 by end 2011 by the project increases from 6000 in 2007 to 70,000 in
2014.
(WB)
Sanitation / Solid Waste /Drainage
Number of people in urban areas provided with access
to improved water sources under the project is 38,800 in
Number of people with access to a sustainable solid
2014
waste management system in Bangui increase from
30,000 in 2007 to 257,000 by end 2011 (WB)
Number of people in urban areas provided with access
to all-season roads within a 500 meter range under the
Number of people in Bangui protected against
project is 420,000 in 2014
periodic flooding increases from 6,000 to 58,000 by
end 2011 (WB)
Number of people in urban areas provided with access
Number of people in Bangui with access to year round to regular solid waste collection under the project
increases to 390,000 by 2014.
passable roads increases from 50,000 in 2007 to
470,000 by end 2011 (WB)

23

Annex 3: IDA Operations Portfolio (Excluding Regional Portfolio)
As of Date 1/27/2011
Closed Projects

29

IBRD/IDA *
Total Disbursed (Active)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Closed)
of which has been repaid
Total Disbursed (Active + Closed)
of which has been repaid

38.05
0.00
96.26
76.91
134.31
76.91

Total Undisbursed (Active)

50.37

Total Undisbursed (Closed)
Total Undisbursed (Active +
Closed)

0.00
50.37
Difference
Between
Expected and
Actual
Disbursements

Active Projects
Last PSR
Original Amount in US$
Millions

Supervision Rating
Development
Objectives

Implementation
Progress

Fiscal
Year

IDA

MS

MS

2009

S

S

2011

MS

MS

2009

CF-Emergency Urban Infrastruct ERL (F07)

S

S

2007

P073525

CF-HIV/AIDS (FY02)

S

S

P111679

CF-Supp to Vulnerable Grps Community Dev

MS

MS

Project ID

Project Name

P114111

CF-Emergency Power Response Project

P120534

CF-EMGRG III DPO IV (FY11)

P113221

CF-Food Response Project

P104595

Overall Result

Undisb.

Orig.

8

6.9

3.8

8.8

4.5
7

Cancel.

2.8

0.6

41.9

25.3

-1.9

0.6

2002

17

6.5

3.1

-2.2

2009

8

7.2

2.4

52.8

5.7

7

0.3

Frm
Rev'd

2.4

83.7

24

GRANT

a/

0.3

-1.0

Annex 4: Analytical and Advisory Activities
Fiscal
Year
2008
2008
2009
2009
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2011

2010

2011
2013

2012
2012

2011
2012

2011
2011
2011

Analytic and Advisory Activities
PRSP TA
Strengthening capacity in the
Telecommunications Sector
Mining Sector Assessment
Improving National Procurement
Systems
Public Expenditure Review
Diamond Sector Assessment
EITI Support
Country Environmental Assessment
Power Utility Reform Study
Understanding Access to Justice and
Local Dispute Resolution at the
Community level in the CAR and Chad
Floods Assessment ( “Recurrent Urban
Flooding in Bangui, - Assessment of the
current situation and measures to reduce
future frequency of floods and mitigate
floods impacts”)
TA on CAR Flood Recovery and
Resiliency Program
TA on “ CAR Towards Sustainable
Urban Management: Improving Bangui
City Performance through Capacity
Building and Planning Tools
Development
TA on solid waste management in
Bangui
South-South Experience Exchange on
Social Water connections between
Burkina Faso and CAR
Public Expenditure Review of Water and
Sanitation Sector
Study on reconnecting isolated
vulnerable rural population in CAR into
socio-economic structures
Communications for Development
PRPS Technical Assistance
Health Sector Status Review

Planned
in CPS
Planned
Additional
Planned
Planned
Planned
Planned
Planned
Planned
Planned
Additional

Actual
Delivered
2008
Ongoing
Delivered
2009
Ongoing
2012
2010
Ongoing
Delivered
2011
Dropped
ongoing

Source
BB
IDF
LICUS TF
IDF
BB
BB
MDTF
BB

BNPP

Additional

Delivered
2010

GFDDR

Additional

GFDDR

Additional

Delivered
2011
Ongoing

Cities Alliance

Additional

Ongoing

PPIAF

Additional

Ongoing

SEETF

Additional

Ongoing

WPP

Additional

Ongoing

TFESSD

Planned
Planned
Planned

Dropped
Dropped
2012

BB
BB
BB

25

Annex 5: Selected Indicators of Portfolio Performance and Management
As of Date 1/27/2011

Indicator
Portfolio Assessment
Number of Projects Under Implementation a
Average Implementation Period (years) b
Percent of Problem Projects by Number a, c
Percent of Problem Projects by Amount a, c
Percent of Projects at Risk by Number a, d
Percent of Projects at Risk by Amount a, d
Disbursement Ratio (%) e
Portfolio Management
CPPR during the year (yes/no)
Supervision Resources (total US$)
Average Supervision (US$/project)

Memorandum Item
Proj Eval by OED by Number
Proj Eval by OED by Amt (US$ millions)
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by
Number
% of OED Projects Rated U or HU by Amt

2008

2009

2010

2011

3
2.6
0.0
0.0
66.7
81.6
15.4

5
2.2
20.0
12.1
80.0
86.2
48.8

5
3.2
0.0
0.0
60.0
39.3
30.6

6
3.2
0.0
0.0
16.7
8.9
13.7

Since FY
80

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Last Five
FYs

26
498.4

2
83.3

61.5
66.9

0.0
0.0

As shown in the Annual Report on Portfolio Performance (except for current FY).
Average age of projects in the Bank's country portfolio.
Percent of projects rated U or HU on development objectives (DO) and/or implementation progress (IP).
As defined under the Portfolio Improvement Program.
Ratio of disbursements during the year to the undisbursed balance of the Bank's portfolio at the
beginning of the year: Investment projects only.
* All indicators are for projects active in the Portfolio, with the exception of Disbursement Ratio,
which includes all active projects as well as projects which exited during the fiscal year.

26

Annex 6: IFC Program
2008

2009

2010

Commitments (US$m)
Gross
Net**

2011*

2.84
2.84

Net Commitments
by Sector (%)
LOAN
Total

0

Net Commitments by Investment Instrument (%)
Loan
0
Total

0

100
100

0

0

100
100

0

* As of March 31, 2011
** IFC's Own Account only

Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 12/31/2010
(In USD Millions)

Committed

FY Approval

Company

2010

Ecobank-car

Total Portfolio:

Disbursed Outstanding

Loan

Equit
y

**Quas
i
Equity

*GT/R
M

Partic
i pant

Loan

Equity

**Quasi
Equity

*GT/RM

Partici
pant

3.06

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

3.06

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

* Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
** Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

27

Annex 7: Country at a Glance Central African Republic
Central
African
Republic

Key Development Indicators

SubSaharan
Africa

2/25/10

Low
income

Age distribution, 2008

(2008)

Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

4.4
623
1.8
39

818
24,242
2.5
36

973
19,310
2.1
29

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

1.8
410
730

885
1,082
1,991

510
524
1,407

2.2
0.4

5.0
2.5

6.4
4.2

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

62
82
45
113
..

51
73
52
89
27

..
..
59
78
28

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

..
..
86
61

71
54
103
93

72
55
102
95

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

66
31

58
31

67
38

Female

75-79
60-64
45-49
30-34
15-19
0-4
10

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

5

0

5

10

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2003–2008)
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
250
200
150
100
50
0
1990

1995

2000

Central African Republic

Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2007):
France
European Commission
United States
Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

1980

1990

2000

2008

2007

Sub -Saharan Africa

a

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

110

249

75

176

69
11
1

71
33
3

19
6
1

54
30
18

10

13.8
47

17.0
83

8.0
19

10.4
41

0

Long-Term Economic Trends

5

-5
-10
95

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

14.7
18.3

-0.2
2.3

3.2
3.2

2.6
6.2

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

211.3
..

272.3
110

712.0
100

447.8
92

05

GDP

GDP per capita

1980–90 1990–2000 2000–08
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

2.3
797

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

40.0
20.1
7.2
39.9

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation
Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

3.0
1,488

3.9
959

4.4
1,988

2.6
1.4

2.5
2.0

(% of GDP)
47.6
19.7
11.3
32.7

53.1
15.8
7.0
31.0

52.9
14.2
7.6
32.9

1.6
1.4
5.0
1.1

3.8
0.7
-0.2
0.2

0.3
-0.4
-0.1
-2.5

93.7
15.1
7.0

85.7
14.9
12.3

80.8
14.0
9.5

94.4
6.6
11.6

..
..
..

..
..
..

-0.9
-1.3
-0.1

25.2
41.1
1.6

14.8
27.6
-0.4

19.8
24.1
8.2

10.8
23.4
1.4

..
..

..
..

-3.6
-3.9

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. 2008 data are preliminary. .. indicates data are not available.
a. Aid data are for 2007.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

28

1.7
0.5

Central African Republic
B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de

2000

2008
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2008

(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)
Net trade in go o ds and services

159
162
-42

147
239
-250

Current acco unt balance
as a % o f GDP

-12
-1.3

-196
-9.9

Wo rkers' remittances and
co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)

..

..

Reserves, including go ld

..

..

Voice and accountability
Political stability
Regulatory quality
Rule of law
Control of corruption
0
2008

C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e

2000

(% o f GDP )
Current revenue (including grants)
Tax revenue
Current expenditure

13.7
7.8
9.2

15.1
7.9
11.0

Overall surplus/deficit

-1.8

-0.4

25

50

..
..

100

higher values imply better ratings

Source: Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi, World Bank

T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Co rpo rate

75

Country's percentile rank (0-100)

P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)
Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
High techno lo gy expo rts
(% o f manufactured expo rts)

..
..

2000

2008

2.7

..
0

3

0.1

0.0

8
36.8
..

8
36.5
15.2

35,273
0.0

32,463

0.07

0.06

E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
To tal debt service
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)

858
14
611

949
35
..

A gricultural land (% o f land area)
Fo rest area (% o f land area)
Natio nally pro tected areas (% o f land area)

To tal debt (% o f GDP )
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)

89.4
7.3

47.8
11.7

Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (billio n cubic meters)

1
0

121
0

Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)

CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)

..

GDP per unit o f energy use
(2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)

..

..

2000

2008

IB RD
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
P rincipal repayments
Interest payments

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

IDA
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
To tal debt service

391
13
9

390
2
16

–
–
–

–
–
–

–

–

–
–

34
38

Composition of total external debt, 2008

Short-term, 71

IBRD, 0

Private, 31

Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio
(US$ millio ns)

Bilateral, 207
IDA, 390

Other multilateral, 187

IMF, 63

US$ millions

P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt
Time required to start a business (days)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)
Time required to register pro perty (days)
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business
(% o f managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)

2000

2008

–
–
–

22
237.6
75

2000

2008

..
..

..
..

..
..

..
..

IFC (fiscal year)
To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio
o f which IFC o wn acco unt
Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt
P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt
M IGA
Gro ss expo sure
New guarantees

No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. 2008 data are preliminary.
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

29

2/25/10

Millennium Development Goals

Central African Republic

With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)

C e nt ra l A f ric a n R e public

G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n
P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1.25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)
P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)
Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)
P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)
G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)
P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)
Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)
Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 15-24)
G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)
Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)
P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)

19 9 0
..
..
..
..

19 9 5
82.8
..
2.0
23.3

2000
..
..
..
21.8

2008
62.4
..
5.2
..

52
29
11
48

..
..
..
..

..
..
12
59

56
30
..
..

60

..
47
11

..
4

..
..
4

..
..
7

171
113
82

193
123
46

186
120
36

172
113
62

..
..
..

..
46
15

..
44
28

980
53
19

G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 15-49)
1.8
Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)
145
Tuberculo sis cases detected under DOTS (%)
..

4.9
209
62

6.4
302
8

6.3
345
71

G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)
58
A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)
11
Fo rest area (% o f to tal land area)
37.2
Natio nally pro tected areas (% o f to tal land area)
..
CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)
0.1
GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)
..

59
15
37.0
..
0.1
..

63
22
36.8
..
0.1
..

66
31
36.5
15.2
0.1
..

G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
Telepho ne mainlines (per 100 peo ple)
M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 100 peo ple)
Internet users (per 100 peo ple)
P erso nal co mputers (per 100 peo ple)

0.2
0.0
0.0
..

0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2

0.3
3.5
0.4
0.3

G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)
M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)
G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)
Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 15-49)

0.2
0.0
0.0
..

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

75

100

4

50

75

3

50

2

25

1

25

0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

0

0
1990

1995

2000

2007

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Primary net enrollment ratio
Fixed + mobile subscribers
Ratio of girls to boys in primary & secondary
education (..)

Central African Republic

Sub-Saharan Africa

Internet users

30
No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.
Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).

2/25/10

16E

18E

20E

22E

This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

24E

Aoukal

é
To
Nyala

CHAD

Birao

To
Am Timan

10N

Ba

h

ulo u
rO

CENTRAL
AFRICAN
REPUBLIC

VA K A G A

Bahr A ouk

To
Kafia Kingi

Ouanda
Djallé

To
Sarh

BAMINGUI-BANGORAN
an

B

Maïkouma

go
ra

Ndélé

Ch

Bong

des
aîne

10N

os

n

ta

i

ns

Mt. Ngaoui
(1,420 m)

Ou

Bozoum

Bouca

Ippy

Djéma

Mb
aé
Lo

Kad
éï
Nola
Tomori

Mbaïki

ba
Mingala

Rafaï

Mobaye

To
Monga

Ouango

To
Libenge

DEM. REP.
O F CONGO
CO NGO

Obo
Zémio

Mb

omo
u

CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
SELECTED CITIES AND TOWNS

0

40

80

120

160

200 Kilometers

PREFECTURE CAPITALS

Sangh
a

NATIONAL CAPITAL
0

40

80

C ONG
ONGO
O

120 Miles

RIVERS
MAIN ROADS
RAILROADS

o
ng
Co
18E

PRFECTURE BOUNDARIES
20E

22E

INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES

IBRD 33384R

AUGUST 2010

2N

16E

To
Naandi

Bangassou

Mongoumba

SANGHAMBAÉRÉ
Salo

AM
E RO O
CA
ME
ON
N

BASSEKOTTO

Bimbo

L O B AY E

ba
ye

Damara

i
ngu Kouango
ba

O uarr a

Bakouma

BANGUI

Boda

ré

Gamboula

Grimari

6N

MBOMOU

Bambari

ri

OMBELLAM’POKO

e
ay

Berbérati

To
Yokadouma

H A U TMBOMOU

Yalinga

M

a

ré

MAMBÉRÉ-KADÉÏ
To
Batouri

Bria

OUAKA

ko

M

Bossembélé

Lo
b

Sibut

M
’p
o

O
u

NANAMAMBÉRÉ
bé

t

ink
o

Baoro

m

Ko

KÉMO

Carnot

4N

Dékoa

Bouar

To
Bétaré Oya

Yangalia

h

Bossangoa

S UDAN
UD AN

HAUTE-KOTTO
i

Kaga
Bandoro

am

PENDÉ

gu

8N

Ch

6N

OUHAM

Bocaranga

un
Mo

Paoua

OUHAM-

Ka

rre

To
Melganga

NANAGRÉBIZI

Batangafo

in

Markounda

Ba
m

Kaouadja

Ouadda

Pata

to

To
Baïbokoum

Oua
ka

8N

Gribingui

To
Doba

